Characterization of nanostructured hybrid and organic solar cells by impedance spectroscopy   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CP02249G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CP02249G
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083-9118Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCharacterization of nanostructured hybrid and organic solar cells by impedance spectroscopy†

        
          
            Francisco 
            Fabregat-Santiago
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Germà 
            Garcia-Belmonte
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Iván 
            Mora-Seró
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Juan 
            Bisquert
          
          
        
      *
      Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group, Departament de Física, Universitat Jaume I, 12071 Castelló, Spain. E-mail: bisquert@fca.uji.es
Received 
      23rd October 2010
    , Accepted 2nd March 2011First published on 6th April 2011AbstractWe review the application of impedance spectroscopy in dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells and organic bulk heterojunction solar cells. We emphasize the interpretation of the impedance parameters for determining the internal features of the device, concerning the carrier distribution, materials properties such as the density of states and/or doping of the semiconductors, and the match of energy levels for photoinduced charge generation and separation. Another central task is the determination of recombination mechanisms from the measured resistances, and the factors governing the device performance by combined analysis of resistances as a function of voltage and current–voltage curves.
Francisco Fabregat-Santiago
Francisco Fabregat Santiago (Bsc in Physics 1995, PhD in 2001) is Associate Professor in the Department of Physics at the University Jaume I in Spain and an active member of the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group. He is an expert in electro-optical characterization of devices and particularly known by his works in the use of impedance spectroscopy to study the electrical properties of devices and films including ZnO and TiO2 nanostructured films, dye sensitized solar cells, electrochromic materials and liquid and solid state hole conductors.
Germà Garcia-Belmonte
Germà Garcia-Belmonte received his PhD degree at Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, in 1996. He worked from 1988 at CIEMAT, Madrid, on experimental as well as theoretical research in the area of digital processing of nuclear signal. He joined the Universitat Jaume I, Castelló, in 1992 and currently works as Professor of Applied Physics (2010) at the Department of Physics (Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group). Recently he follows researches in various topics within the field of Organic Electronics and photovoltaics as electronic mechanisms in organic light-emitting diodes, organic photovoltaics, and plastic and thin-film solar cells. Device physics using impedance spectroscopy (including modeling and measuring) is his main subject.
Iván Mora-Seró
Iván Mora-Seró received his PhD at Universitat de València (Spain) on the crystal growth of semiconductors II–VI with narrow gap. He joined the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group at Universitat Jaume I (Spain) in 2002. Since then he has specialized in research on the characterization of the injection, transport, and recombination in sensitized electrodes using as absorbing materials both dye and especially semiconductor quantum dots.
Juan Bisquert
Juan Bisquert is professor of Applied Physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló and leads the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group (www.elp.uji.es) at the Physics Department. Recent research activity is focused on nanoscale devices for production of clean energies, in particular dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells and quantum-dot sensitized solar cells. Bisquert is a specialist in theoretical modelling and interpretation of impedance spectroscopy techniques that have shown to be very useful to understand fundamental electronic phenomena and device properties in dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells, nanowire structures, organic LEDs, and solid-state photovoltaic devices.
1. Introduction
With the increasing demands for clean energy, solar cells have become a foremost device for energy production. The use of solar cells to convert sunlight energy to electricity is becoming rapidly extended but the cost of the existing technologies is far too high to compete on a large scale with the traditional carbon dioxide-producing energy sources. Therefore, the research to improve the efficiency of existing solar cells and to develop new cost-effective technologies has become a major focus of scientific and industrial activities. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs)1–3 and organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ)4,5 solar cells have evolved to viable devices, with efficiencies above 12% and 8%, respectively, and increasing stability on outdoor conditions.6–8 Nanostructured solar cells based on inorganic absorber materials with a quantum confinement regime, usually termed quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs), have also experienced a notable progress.9–14 Since DSC and BHJ devices of sufficient quality are now widely available, techniques that determine the device properties, to assist the improvement of the performance based on rational design of materials and control of interfaces, are required. Impedance Spectroscopy (IS) consists in the frequency analysis of ac behaviour and is widely applied in a broad class of material systems and devices, including inorganic, organic and biological systems. IS has been applied very widely to investigate the properties of a variety of kinds of DSCs,15–22 most recently with high performance dyes,23,24 modified electrolytes,25 solid hole conductors,26,27 plastic or metal substrates,28,29 and with Co and outer-sphere redox couples.30,31 IS has been shown to be useful for the determination of diffusion lengths.32–34 Recently IS has been also applied in QDSCs35–37 and organic BHJ solar cells.38–42 In this work we summarize the application of IS for the characterization of these photovoltaic systems, emphasizing the generality of the models and methods as well as the differences and particularities.
We first provide in Section 2 an overview of the basic properties of solar cells, what factors determine in general the performance of the device under sunlight, and in Section 3 we derive the models and methods that allow for a combined analysis of the steady state performance (current–voltage curves) and the internal mechanisms of the device by impedance spectroscopy. The methods take the general approach that has been successfully applied in DSC. From the general diffusion–recombination model15,21 we focus on the determination of internal device features such as the disorder in the density of states (DOS) of the semiconductors, and the impact of recombination on the open-circuit voltage. Thereafter in Section 4 we review the main experimental features of IS measurements of DSC, and in Section 5 we discuss a broad variety of IS results for different configurations of DSC, emphasizing the interpretation of materials and device properties. Section 6 describes the recent advances in the understanding of QDSC by IS. Section 7 provides an overview of our current understanding of the device properties of organic BHJ solar cells, based on the general features of capacitance as a function of voltage that have been established in a variety of cases.
2. Solar cell characterization and the physical limits to the performance
There are strong connections between many features of the IS measurements of several kinds of solar cells, including DSC, BHJ and inorganic Si43 and CdTe solar cells.44 Therefore it is convenient to start at a very general standpoint, Fig. 1, from which to elaborate both the current–voltage curve, Fig. 2(a), and the IS parameters. The simple model of Fig. 1(b) contains the basic elements of the photovoltaic conversion process. The key point of the efficient solar-cell energy conversion is the combination of carrier generation by the light absorption and charge separation.45 In the absorber material of Fig. 1(a) electrons are promoted from the valence band to the conduction band by light excitation. The solar cell is completed with selective contacts to electrons and holes, Fig. 1(b), which consist of n- and p-type materials, respectively, both in contact with the light absorber.
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption of light in a semiconductor (1) produces electrons and hole carriers that rapidly relax (2) to the lowest lying energy levels of the conduction band (EC) and highest levels of the valence band (EV). The excess photogenerated carriers produce a splitting of the Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp) that is marked as a “Fermi level voltage” VF. Electrons decay to valence band levels by recombination with holes (3). (b) Scheme of a solar cell, formed by the absorber material supplemented by two selective contacts. These are formed by an electron transport material (ETM) that is transparent to electrons and rejects holes, and by a hole transport material (HTM) that accepts and transports the holes with no impedance, and blocks the electrons. Such arrangements allow the Fermi level in the metal contacts to equilibrate with the separate Fermi levels of electrons and holes, producing an external voltage, and to extract the carriers giving a photocurrent in the external circuit. 
 Fig. 2  Theoretical calculation of the current–voltage curve (a) and power output (b) of a solar cell with jsc = 25 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.8 V, and diode factor m = 1. In (b) the left vertical axis is normalized to the incident power of 1 sun and gives the conversion efficiency, and the right axis normalization gives the fill factor. Comparison of the current–voltage curve (c) and power output (d) for two solar cells with the same jsc and Voc, but with different FF characteristics. The diode curve has FF 0.86 and conversion efficiency of 17% while the straight curve (“ohmic solar cell”) has an efficiency of less than 5%. 
The characteristic spectrum of sunlight irradiating the Earth’s surface is given by the ASTM Standard G159 and named Air Mass 1.5 (AM1.5). The so-called AM1.5G, the overall reference for solar-cell characterization (http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/), shown in Fig. 3, cumulates an integrated power density of ϕAM1.5GE,tot = 1000 W m−2 (100 mW cm−2), and an integrated photon flux of ϕAM1.5Gph,tot = 4.31 × 1021 s−1 m−2 distributed over a large range of wavelengths (280–4000 nm). The photon flux emitted by a blackbody (BB) at temperature T is (1)Here E = hν is the photon energy, h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light and kB is Boltzmann's constant, and ϕbbph is given in units m−2 s−1 eV−1. The energy flux has the expression ϕbbE(E) = Eϕbbph(E)(2)
The solar AM1.5G spectrum is approximately similar to a blackbody spectrum at temperature T = 5800 K shown in Fig. 3 (a dilution factor FS is included in eqn (1) to match the total power of the photon distribution). We use such a BB spectrum for a qualitative discussion of current generation in solar cells.
 Fig. 3  Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM1.5G) solar spectrum (energy as a function of wavelength) and the spectrum of a blackbody at temperature 5800 K with a dilution factor 1.56 × 10−5 (blue line). 
The generated electron–hole pairs produce an electrical current density, j, and voltage, V, and we have the electrical power output Pel = jV(3)The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the solar cell is given by the expression (4)
According to eqn (4) an analysis of the efficiency requires to consider the current density of the solar cell as a function of voltage. This is the jV characteristic and is shown in Fig. 2. This characteristic determines the main aspects of the production of electrical power with a solar cell. We consider in turn the main features of jV characteristics.
2.1 The photocurrent
The first aspect is the photocurrent, which is basically the extraction of the photogenerated electrons and holes, and is quantified by the short-circuit current of the solar cell, jsc. The primary limitations to the photocurrent are given by the absorption properties of the absorber. The absorber material can be an organic or inorganic semiconductor, or a dye molecule, and in general it is characterized by the absorptance a(E). It is useful to assume as a reference case a semiconductor that absorbs all photons of energy larger than the semiconductor bandgap (a(E) = 1 for E ≥ Eg), as indicated in Fig. 4. Once the photon is absorbed (process 1 in Fig. 1(a)), there is a rapid relaxation of the exciton, or separated electron and hole carriers, to the lowest energy configuration which is Eg in this example (process 2 in Fig. 1(a)). Meanwhile, the photons with energy lower than Eg are not absorbed. Therefore, after the fast thermalization of photogenerated carriers in the absorber, the energy available is Eg for each photon absorbed. The loss of unabsorbed photons and reduction of energy of the absorbed ones are the main factors governing the efficiency of sunlight energy conversion into electricity with an absorbing material. The conversion efficiency of the absorber, from photons to thermalized electrons and holes, can be written as (5)
This conversion efficiency, where no recombination is considered, is plotted in Fig. 4(b), which shows that more than 50% of the energy of BB radiation at TS is lost even in the most favourable condition, which is an absorber of Eg = 1.1 eV.46 This value is almost the same as that of silicon (1.12 eV). We remark that eqn (5) is an efficiency of production of energy of carriers, not of electrical power, which is described below (and given in Fig. 5(b)).
 Fig. 4  (a) Photon flux emitted by a blackbody at temperature 5800 K with a dilution factor FS = 1.56 × 10−5 (blue line). The shaded area indicates the photons absorbed by a semiconductor of bandgap Eg = 1.5 eV and absorptance a = 1. (b) The “absorption efficiency” is a count of the photons absorbed above the bandgap energy Eg, each photon contributing an energy Eg. This energy is divided by the total energy flux of the BB radiation. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Integrated current as a function of the bandgap energy of the absorber, for incident blackbody radiation at temperature TS = 5800 K, with total energy flux JE,tot = 1000 Wm−2. (b) The maximal photovoltaic efficiency of the absorber, assuming FF = 0.83. The thin lines are the current and Shockley–Queisser efficiency for actual AM1.5G solar irradiance. 
The maximal current that can be obtained as a function of the bandgap of the absorber is given by (6)where q is the positive elementary charge. The maximal current is shown in Fig. 5(a), both for the AM1.5G spectrum and for the blackbody spectrum at T = 5800 K. Note that the conversion efficiency of eqn (5) corresponds to (7)
Organic absorbers do not absorb equally at all wavelengths. For example chlorophyll a has very strong light absorption around 430 and 660 nm but relatively weak absorption bands in the visible region between these wavelengths. In practice the optical absorption properties of organic absorber material can depend on specific conditions and combination of materials of the solar cell. The photocurrent in a DSC is also affected by factors, such as the transparency and reflectance of the transparent electrode material, electron and hole transport layers, etc.,47 and in general the optical properties of the device may be complex.48,49 In this sense, it is very important to check that measured photocurrents have reasonable values, and are never above the value that is obtained by integrating the absorptance a(E) and AM1.5G spectrum.50 A useful approach to make sure about the measured photocurrent is to measure the short-circuit current under monochromatic light as a function of the wavelength, divided by the theoretical current associated with the incident photon flux: (8)
This magnitude is termed the external quantum efficiency (EQE) or incident-photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE). Having determined the IPCE, the short-circuit photocurrent under a given light source should correspond to the value (9)where λmin and λmax are the wavelengths where the IPCE vanishes. An example of the measured IPCE of a DSC is shown in Fig. 6, in combination with the photon flux of the AM1.5G spectrum. The integration of eqn (9) gives in this case 13 mA cm−2, in good agreement with the measured photocurrent. Currents up to 19 mA cm−2 can be obtained with N719 dye in a DSC. The current obtained with N749 (black) dye under standard conditions is close to 22 mA cm−2.2 For the P3HT:PCBM BHJ solar cell, we show the IPCE of a solar cell with 7 mA cm−2 photocurrent. High performance cells of this type give about 11 mA cm−2.4
 Fig. 6  Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM1.5G) solar spectrum (photon flux as a function of wavelength) and the measured IPCE of a DSC with N719 dye and a BHJ solar cell formed by P3HT/PCBM. 
2.2 The photovoltage
The second important aspect is the maximal voltage produced by the solar cell, the open-circuit voltage Voc. The excitation by light produces excess electrons and holes in the carrier bands, which causes the separation of the Fermi levels, of the two states in the absorber.51 As shown in Fig. 1(a) we can define a Fermi level (or internal) voltage VF as the difference of electrochemical potential of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp) in the materials VF = (EFn − EFp)/q(10)
As mentioned above such an internal voltage is converted to an actual, useful voltage by selective contacts that transfer only one kind of carrier with minimal loss of free energy. The selective contacts have the function of taking the carriers, from a state of non-equilibrium Fermi level in the absorber to a material (normally a metal) in which the carrier is at the equilibrium Fermi level.52 With ideal, reversible selective contacts, the quasi-Fermi level (which we hereafter denote simply as the Fermi level) is continuous at the interfaces between both n- and p-type materials and the absorber, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
It must be remarked that the picture in Fig. 1(b) is rather idealized. It gives a good measure of the fundamental limitations of solar cells according to the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) model46 which is entirely based on the properties of the absorber, but in practice the mechanisms of selectivity are varied and the electron and hole transport materials play important additional roles. For example, in crystalline silicon solar cells electrons and holes are selectively directed by strong fields in extremely localized regions at the edges of a thick absorber.43 Electrons and holes are therefore separated, accumulated and transported in the absorber medium itself.
In contrast to this, the DSC is formed by 3 distinct materials. Energy levels for the material components of dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells are shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 7(a) shows the energy levels of standard absorber dyes, the nanostructured TiO2 is the electron transport material, and a redox carrier53,54 is the hole transport material. Fig. 7(b) is the energy picture for a set of inorganic quantum sized absorbers. In the DSC the photoexcited electrons are preferentially injected to TiO2 and the hole is thus transferred to the redox carrier, while the opposite pathway is kinetically and energetically forbidden for each carrier. The picture of Fig. 1(b) holds, because the available voltage is related to the separation of chemical potential of electrons and holes in the dye.55 However, the dye contribution is small in terms of the volume of the materials and the residence time of the photoexcited carriers. Therefore, carrier accumulation occurs in the TiO2 nanostructure and in the redox carrier. This is directly probed by the chemical capacitance as described later and is furthermore very relevant for the recombination mechanism. In consequence the photovoltage is produced by the difference of the Fermi level of electrons in TiO2 and the redox level of the ionic carriers.
 Fig. 7  Schematic energy diagrams of the material components of dye solar cells. Standard energy levels are given in the energy scale, while the origin of the electrochemical scale is taken at −4.4 eV. EFn is the Fermi levels of electrons, EFp is the Fermi level of holes, and the difference relates to Voc as indicated. Energy levels of TiO2 and dyes are dependent on the solution components, and dye levels may also depend on criteria for the onset of absorption. Energy levels of QDs from ref. 177. 
Returning to the benchmark SQ model, the fundamental limitation to the photovoltage is recombination. When the cell is at an open circuit, and irradiated at 1 sun, the photoexcitation is counteracted by recombination of electrons and holes and the corresponding split of the Fermi levels gives the open-circuit voltage, Voc. Minimal recombination, which provides maximal possible Voc, is determined by reciprocity of light emission with respect to light absorption, i.e. recombination is entirely associated with luminescence. It is therefore possible to elaborate a connection between maximal solar cell PCE and electroluminescence.56 In a single semiconductor solar cell this model works well,57 and in addition the Fermi levels cannot reach the band edges at 1 sun. In fact the SQ model is based on the assumption that minority carrier concentration does not exceed the majority carrier level.58
In the three materials DSC, and similarly in the organic BHJ, which is a two-material solar cell (although with an additional barrier layer for improved selectivity of contacts), the situation is different. Charge separation from the absorber requires a downhill driving force, and therefore, for the energetically favorable electron transfer, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level (or more correctly, the electron affinity) of the absorber material has to be about 0.3 eV higher than that of the conduction band (CB) of the electron transporter, i.e. TiO2 in a DSC, see Fig. 7(a), or the LUMO level of the fullerene in a BHJ.59 In principle it is thus possible that EFn raises up to the CB edge, where a very large density of states (and effectively infinite chemical capacitance) prevents the Fermi level from further raise. On the hole transporter side, a driving force for the regeneration of the oxidized dye is required as well. This is up to 500 mV with the best carrier, an I3−/I− redox couple in organic solvent. The combination of the two energy steps for charge separation produces a limitation of the Voc below recombination in the absorber. One can therefore modulate the DSC components to move up the CB of TiO2 to increase Voc, but this has a price in the photocurrent, as it appears that less states in the TiO2 surface are able to accept electrons from the excited state of the dye.60
In addition, the Voc is determined by the number of electrons stored in TiO2, and this is in turn set by recombination of the thermalized electrons in the electron transport nanostructure. Such electrons transfer mainly to holes in the redox carrier, and this is another salient difference in the SQ approach. It means that recombination is disconnected from generation. In fact the luminescence of the DSC is a very small quantity. Nonetheless it is possible to reconstruct the IPCE from the electroluminescence by reciprocity.61 Furthermore, in some metal-free dyes with long organic chains the recombination seems to take place via the dye molecule to a large extent.60 However, there is still a general question as how much EFn approaches Ec in TiO2, and our recent observations62 indicate that this is still controlled by recombination, not by the Fermi level entering the conduction band.
2.3 The fill factor (FF)
The third crucial aspect of the solar cell performance is the shape of the jV curve, which determines at which voltage we extract the electrons as electric current. As observed in Fig. 2, here is a tradeoff between current and voltage. At low voltage, extraction is easy, and the current is determined by the quantum yield (conversion of photons to electron carriers) of the absorber, as explained before. On the other hand, a high voltage produces a current that is opposed to the photocurrent, and eventually the power decreases. In general if we extract the electrons at high useful energy (voltage), there is a price in the lowering of the number we can extract. In between the extreme cases of low power lies the maximum power point, at which voltage Vmp the solar cell should be operated for electricity production. The electrical power provided by the solar cell at the maximum power point is Pel = jsc × FF × Voc(11)
If the fill factor is high the drop in current at high voltage is delayed, and we can extract the electrons at high voltage while the current is still close to jsc. For a good diode characteristic the power P increases linearly at low voltage, Fig. 2(b), and decreases abruptly at V > Vmp.
Combining eqn (4) and (11) the PCE can be obtained. Maximal efficiency for a solar cell that consists of a single bandgap absorber with ideal diode characteristic (see below eqn (24) and (26)) is given by the SQ limit and shown in Fig. 5(b).46 In real, AM1.5G, conditions Eg = 1.35 eV is the optimal, very close to the gap of GaAs (1.42 eV).63,64
As an example, a low quality solar cell with ohmic characteristic, which is straight instead of diode-like, is shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d). In this case, the photocurrent at maximum power is: jmp = jsc/2, Vmp = Voc/2, FF = 0.25, and the efficiency is very low. The comparison of two extreme cases in Fig. 2(c) shows that the shape of the jV curve has a major impact on the conversion efficiency.
3. Models and methods
It is clear that the experimental characterization of a solar cell involves a slow scan of the bias voltage from the short-circuit condition to the open-circuit condition (at least), at one or more fixed illumination level. The standard illumination condition is 1 sun (AM 1.5 G), but sometimes it is useful to apply 1/3 sun, for example, that represents the average outdoor operation conditions. By these means we obtain the main characteristics of the solar cell: the photocurrent, photovoltage, and fill factor.
However, the characterization by jV curves provides limited resources for the analysis of the mechanisms governing the performance. A thorough analysis requires discriminating several factors concerning series resistance, recombination parameters, carrier energetics, etc. These factors are not usually available simply by the analysis of jV curve data, notably because jV curves are “elastic” with respect to models and can be equally described by many different frameworks. A systematic analysis is possible however, by a combined analysis of current–voltage data and impedance data. The measurement of IS at each point allows us to separate resistances and capacitances providing detailed information about the electronic process at that point. Separation of different components of the resistance using IS, and their distinct analysis as a function of voltage, is a very valuable tool to determine the properties of the solar cell. Resistance generally describes electron transfer or transport events, whereas capacitances relate to electronic carrier accumulation and distribution in the device. Models, explained in the following section, allow us to determine the IS parameter and to plot them correctly in a voltage scale, so that a great deal of information about the operation of the solar cell is obtained. A recent overview of these methods has been presented recently65 and additional tools of interpretation are provided here. A simultaneous description of the jV curve, recombination resistance, and capacitance as a function of the voltage in the solar cell provides a sound foundation for interpretation of the solar cells mechanisms.
3.1 The diode model
We consider first the simple model shown in Fig. 1 and further elaborated in Fig. 8. The carrier transport limitations are neglected in a first approximation, and the Fermi levels are homogeneous. Considering a possible internal potential drop Vs at series resistance Rs, the voltage measured at outer contacts, i.e., the applied voltage, is given by Vapp = VF + Vs = VF − jRs(12)More generally, if the Fermi levels are not homogeneous, the output voltage of the active layer consists in the difference of Fermi levels at the contacts. For a layer of thickness L, with the electron-extraction contact at x = 0 VF = [EFn(x = 0) − EFp(x = L)]/q(13)Let us assume that EFp remains stationary under illumination, at the equilibrium Fermi level in the semiconductor EF0 (this means that hole carriers are much more abundant initially than electron carriers). In a DSC EF0 = Eredox, the redox level in the electrolyte. Therefore we focus on the concentration of electrons in the conduction band at energy Ec with effective density of states Nc, which is nc = Nce(EFn−Ec)/kBT(14)where kB is Boltzmann's constant and T is the temperature. We call nc the free electrons, since the electron carriers may also be located in trap states in the bandgap. The density of free electrons can also be expressed as nc = n0e(EFn−EF0)/kBT(15)in terms of the dark equilibrium concentration n0 = Nce−(Ec−EF0)/kBT.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of a DSC device. (b) Basic energy diagram indicating voltage injection of electrons (1) and holes (2) and recombination (3) processes in a DSC. Also shown are the transport energy levels and Fermi levels of electrons and holes, and the potential associated with separation of Fermi levels. Note that the electron injection contact is blocking for holes, and vice versa. (c) The basic equivalent circuit for ac electrical perturbation. 
Without much loss of generality we consider that the n-material is nanostructured TiO2, and the p-material is a redox electrolyte, as in the characteristic configuration of a DSC.

Eqn (13) and (15) give the relationship of free electron density with the voltage nc = n0eqVF/kBT(16)In the absence of illumination this system is a diode where voltage injection of electrons and holes causes recombination current, as shown in Fig. 8(b). In addition to eqn (16) the ideal diode requires full selective boundary conditions for both kinds of carriers that are detailed below in eqn (59) and (60).
If the absorbed photon flux is , the carrier generation by incident light occurs at a rate G = ϕabs/L per unit volume, L being the thickness of the absorber layer. The concentration of electrons is governed by the conservation equation (17)where Un is the recombination rate, and Un0 is a term that provides equilibrium at G = 0. We assume the following empirical model of recombination, Un = krecncβ(18)where krec is a constant with units cm−3(1−β) s−1 and 0 < β ≤ 1. We call this model β-recombination32 to imply that β is a constant.
We now apply eqn (17) and (18) to obtain the current density j withdrawn from the solar cell at steady state. By integration over the active film thickness65 we obtain j = qϕabs − qkrLncβ + qkrLn0β(19)which may be rewritten in the form of the diode equation j = jsc − j0(eqβVF/kBT − 1)(20)with jsc = qϕabs the short-circuit photocurrent, and m = 1/β the diode quality factor. The constant j0 determines the diode dark current and is defined as follows j0 = j0ke−βEc/kBT(21)where j0k determines the recombination rate, independently of the conduction band position j0k = qkrLNcβeβEF0/kBT(22)so that finally j = jsc − j0ke−βEc/kBT(eqβVF/kBT − 1)(23)Eqn (23) follows directly from the specific assumption of eqn (18). However, it should be emphasized that eqn (18) simply represents the empirically observed properties of recombination in a DSC with respect to the voltage.32 The full form of the recombination current arising from charge transfer via a distribution of surface states is given in ref. 21 and 66. This model coincides with eqn (18) for the voltage dependence but has a large number of parameters (see below eqn (45) and (46)). Eqn (21) simplifies the treatment of empirical data by separation in the conventional “dark current” parameter (j0) of two effects that frequently have an important influence on the behaviour of DSC: Ec, that tracks possible changes of the position of the conduction band of the n-semiconductor, and j0k, that represents changes in the charge transfer rate, e.g. by blocking the TiO2 surface. As a result in eqn (23) we have introduced a model based on the set of parameters, jsc, Ec, j0k, and β, that determine the jV characteristic, according to the diode model described above. Later on it is explained that these parameters can be actually retrieved by combined analysis of jV curves and impedance data, although Ec can usually be given only in a comparative basis.
At the open circuit the carrier concentration is determined by the kinetic balance between photogeneration and recombination. From eqn (23) at j = 0 we obtain the open-circuit voltage (24)Eqn (24) stresses the effect of the four parameters defined in the model, jsc, Ec, j0k, and β, in the final Voc. The voltage of maximum power Vmp is obtained by the solution of the equation dPel/dV = 0, which can be expressed as (25)The fill factor takes the form (26)Note that FF is again a function of the four parameters of the model and it can be expressed as only a function of Voc and β. The fill factor is also well described by the analytically closed expression67 (27)where the reduced voltage is Vr = βqVoc/(kBT).
The lines in Fig. 9 give the FF as a function of Voc for different values of m = 1/β, following eqn (27) where it is considered the ideal case in which the series resistance is zero. The FF of DSC and BHJ are given in Fig. 9, in comparison with record cells of several inorganic technologies.
 Fig. 9  The fill factor of a Shockley diode as a function of the open-circuit voltage, according to the value of the ideality factor, m. The points are values corresponding to characteristics of DSC with dyes Z991 (η = 12.2%),173 C106 (η = 11.3%),104 D131 (η = 5.1%)174 and N719 (η = 7.7%); the record cells in several inorganic technologies,175 and an organic bulk heterojunction.176 Series resistance effects are removed only for DSC N719. 
As a first approximation we will discuss the effect on the solar cell performance of the variation of one of the four parameters while the others remain unchanged. The most straightforward cases are the variation of jsc and Ec. Both the increase of jsc or Ec, keeping the other three parameters constant, produce an enhancement of cell performance as this increment produces an increase of Voc, see eqn (24). Fig. 10(a) shows the influence of the β parameter on the shape of current–voltage curves (keeping the other three parameters constant), and the corresponding efficiencies are given in Table 1. Note in Table 1 that the change of β alone changes drastically the dark current j0. Finally, comparing samples B and C in Fig. 11, the effect of the variation of j0k is highlighted. A decrease of j0k produces an increase of performance. Note that the parameter j0k is the most difficult one to analyze as it is dependent on the recombination rate krec and β, see eqn (22). Obviously, the analyzed cases are not the most general ones and variations of more than one parameter at the same time can be expected. But in any case, the analysis in terms of the four parameters of the diode model will help to optimize the solar cell performance.
 Fig. 10  Theoretical calculation (diode model) of the current–voltage curve (a) and recombination resistance (b) of several solar cells differing only in the recombination exponent β, see the parameters used in the calculation in Table 1. 
Table 1 Simulation parameters for current–voltage curves in Fig. 10





β

1.0
0.80
0.50



E
c − EF0/eV
1.0
1.0
1.0



j
sc/mA cm−2
15.0
15.0
15.0



j
0k/mA cm−2
104
104
104



j
0/mA cm−2
1.98 × 10−13
4.33 × 10−10
4.45 × 10−5



V
oc/V
0.83
0.79
0.66


FF
0.86
0.83
0.74



η

10.7
9.8
7.3




 Fig. 11  Theoretical calculation (diode model) of the current–voltage curve (a) and recombination resistance (b), see the parameters used in the calculation in Table 2. (c) Calculated capacitance using the expression Cμ = qNL/kBT0exp[(EFn − Ec)/kBT0], with parameters NL = 1020 cm−3, T0 = 1000 K. (d) The resistances plot at the same equivalent position of the edge of the conduction band, taking A as a reference. 
Table 2 Simulation parameters for current–voltage curves in Fig. 11






A
B
C





β

0.60
0.70
0.70



E
c − EF0/eV
1.00
0.80
0.80



j
sc/mA cm−2
14.0
16.0
16.0



j
0k/mA cm−2
1000
10000
100



j
0/mA cm−2
9.50 × 10−8
4.42 × 10−6
4.42 × 10−8



V
oc/V
0.82
0.56
0.7319


FF
0.80
0.76
0.80



η

9.12
6.88
9.43





Fig. 11(a) illustrates that changes of internal parameters of the DSC, indicated in Table 2, produce modifications of the performance. If the conduction band level is lowered, the Fermi level of electrons in TiO2 can raise less and the photovoltage decreases. However, at the same time the charge injection from the dye becomes facilitated and the photocurrent, jsc, increases, see curves A and C in Fig. 11(a). Together with the modification of the conduction band, it is important to consider the recombination rate, since this determines the number of electrons that can effectively be accumulated. Thus lowering the conduction band (from A to B) decreases the efficiency if a simultaneous increase of recombination rate (j0k) occurs. But the modification of the conduction band (A to C) increases the performance if j0k decreases. In addition, changes of the conduction band may also produce changes of the β-parameter,68 which has an important influence on the FF, as discussed in Fig. 9.
We should emphasize that these representations are intended to show the effects of recombination in the jV curve and the effect of series resistance is not included (i.e., we use the potential related to the separation of Fermi levels, VF). Of course the effect of series resistance is very important, especially for large area cells, and this is further discussed below.
Finally we remark two important points about the analysis of experimental data.
First, we have explained in detail that the model of eqn (23) attempts to distinguish the critical factors governing recombination, as represented by parameters that describe the energetic and kinetic components (Ec, j0k, and β), which are separated from the variable electron density. An important aspect of graphical analysis is therefore to plot measured parameters as a function of Fermi level (the internal voltage VF), and in addition, to provide the appropriate shift of energetics, as outlined in Fig. 11.
Second, it should be recognized that the model developed in eqn (23) is restricted for application at a forward bias, i.e. at a voltage larger than zero voltage (Fig. 2(a)). Obviously the model provides the result j = j0 at reverse in the dark, but in practice, the current in these conditions in DSC and probably also in BHJ is related to the behaviour of contacts and not to the mechanism of bulk recombination which is represented in eqn (23). In the remaining part of this review we often describe the capacitance at a reverse bias, but not the current, which is often not related to recombination in the operation conditions of the solar cell.
3.2 The fundamental ac equivalent circuit
In the previous section we have presented the basic model describing steady state performance of a solar cell. Let us summarize the derivation of the ac impedance behaviour corresponding to this model.65 In IS the solar cell is set at a certain steady state of illumination, , and applied voltage, , with the corresponding current  given in eqn (20). A small amplitude, harmonic time-dependent perturbation of voltage is applied, so that , with the associated change of current, j =  + ĵ(t). The time-dependent behaviour of the solar cell is described by eqn (17). The carrier density dependence on time takes the form n(t) =  + (t)(28)The variation of voltage applied in the solar cell produces a variation of the electron Fermi level, which changes as (29)Expanding to first order eqn (14) we obtain (30)The derivative in eqn (30) consists of a chemical capacitance69,70 that is defined (per unit volume) as (31)The macroscopic capacitance of the film is given by (32)where veff is the effective volume of the film veff = LA(1 − p)(33)Here A and L are the cell area and thickness, respectively, and p is the porosity. For the free electrons in the conduction band level, defined by eqn (14), we have (34)If there are abundant trap states that produce a density of localized electrons nL, the chemical capacitance per unit volume is associated to the DOS in the bandgap, g(E)69,71 (35)In nanostructured metal-oxides the DOS is usually given by (36)being NL the total number of states below the conduction band and α a parameter that describes their distribution.
Next we expand the recombination term in eqn (6) and we obtain (37)Let us introduce the macroscopic recombination resistance16,21 (38)where jrec is the recombination current, jrec = qL(1 − p)Un, and we apply the relationship qdVF = dEFn that follows from eqn (13). The specific recombination resistance per unit volume rrec can be written as (39)Therefore we find that the second term on the right of eqn (37) relates to the recombination resistance rrec. Taking into account the definition of the free electron lifetime72 (40)we obtain the relationship rrecccbμ = τ0(41)
This brief discussion illustrates the derivation of chemical capacitance and recombination resistance from fundamental considerations. Applying a small perturbation in eqn (17), it can be shown65 that the equivalent circuit representing the impedance  of the solar cell is given by the parallel combination of cμ and rrec, as indicated in Fig. 8(c). In terms of IS the resistance Rrec records recombination in the solar cell, while Cμ relates to the carrier accumulation and splitting of the Fermi levels.
3.3 The recombination resistance
In general the resistance measured in IS is a derivative of the current–voltage curve, see Fig. 2(a) and eqn (38). With the spectral resolution of the different components commented later, it is possible to obtain the recombination resistance as a function of the voltage. For the recombination model of eqn (18) we obtain from eqn (39) (42)
The recombination resistance, therefore produces a rather direct view of the recombination process. This can be appreciated in the simulations of Fig. 10(b) and 11(b). First we note that the derivative procedure, intrinsic to the measurement of small perturbation resistance, removes the photocurrent, so that Rrec shows directly the exponential variation of the recombination rate, depending on Ec, j0k, and β. And secondly, small changes in the recombination mechanism become visible in the measurement, e.g. a change in the slope due to the modification of the parameter β, see Fig. 10(b).
The simulation of Fig. 10 shows a situation that is often found in practice, as commented above. Changes of the materials combination of a DSC produce sometimes large changes, and sometimes subtle modifications, but even the latter may provide a significant improvement of about 1% efficiency, and it is important to determine the origin of the gain.
Let us discuss the frequently observed modifications using the four parameters of the model jsc, Ec, j0k, and β. The most characteristic variation that occurs in experiments is a change of the conduction band of titania, Ec, with respect to the redox electrolyte. This change can be read from the chemical capacitance, which describes the density of states of TiO2 as indicated in Fig. 12, and is consequently shifted along the voltage scale.16,71 An upwards displacement of the TiO2 conduction band produces a shift to higher VF, as can be seen from the comparison between the chemical capacitance of samples B and C and Cμ for sample A, see Fig. 11(c). A change of the conduction band may be caused by the change of the dye, or the coabsorbents, or other factors. The modification of the surface may induce additional changes of both the rate constant for recombination, j0k, and the parameter β. As commented previously, comparison of curves A and C in Fig. 11(a) illustrates the fact that a lowering of Ec produces a decrease in Voc but a gain in jsc. Comparing curves B and C the critical factor for the larger efficiency of curve C is that for similar β, recombination has been slowed down in C as observed in parameter j0k, see Table 2. Such a type of change is rather difficult to determine from the current–voltage curve. In the recombination resistance shown in Fig. 11(b) we see that Rrec is similar for curves A and C, and since Ec is lower for curve C, it means that j0k must also be lower for C. This fact is difficult to unveil from the representation plotted in Fig. 11(b), as the combination of two effects are considered at the same time Ec position and cell recombination, represented by j0k.
 Fig. 12  Electron energy diagram illustrating the behavior of a nanostructured TiO2 electrode (shown in the top scheme) when a variation dV of the electrochemical potential of electrons EFn (Fermi level) is applied, assuming that the conduction band energy (Ec) remains stationary with respect to the redox level, Eredox. Changes of occupancy both of conduction band, dnc, and trapped electrons in localized levels, dnL (shaded region of the bandgap), are indicated. This drawing shows that the chemical capacitance is a measure of the density of states in the bandgap, when dnL ≫ dnc. 
An important tool to correctly evaluate the recombination rate is therefore to plot the recombination resistances of different devices at the same equivalent value of the position of the conduction band. Therefore we define a suitable potential, Vecb = VF − ΔEc/q(43)where “ecb” stands for “common equivalent conduction band” and ΔEc = Ec − Ec,ref(44)is the shift of the conduction band with respect to a reference sample. We introduce eqn (43) and (44) in eqn (42), and we, obtain the following expression for the recombination resistance: (45)Therefore, when plotted with respect to Vecb, differences in the recombination resistance correspond exactly to the variation of the reciprocal of the kinetic parameter j0k, removing the influence of the conduction band position. The analysis is more complicated if the samples present different values of the DOS parameter α or recombination exponent β.
Using the shift evaluated from the capacitance, we replot the recombination resistances in the Vecb scale in Fig. 11(d), taking A as reference and displacing the voltage scale by ΔV = +0.2 V for B and C, see Table 2. Now we see clearly that the recombination flux is much less in the cell C than in both A and B, observing a higher recombination resistance for cell C. We also observe that the recombination flux is similar in A and B. Although j0k is higher in B, the higher rate of charge transfer is compensated by a higher β than in A. In this way the analysis of the recombination resistance provides detailed information on the causes of performance of DSC. This approach has been applied to DSC with different types of molecular60,62 and quantum dot sensitizers,36,73 and has been implemented in specific software for data treatment (www.istest.eu).
Charge recombination in the DSC is the recombination of the electrons from the TiO2 surface to the acceptor species in the electrolyte. A number of papers have formulated the theories for charge transfer from a distribution of surface states defined by a temperature parameter, T0.21,66,68,72,74 It was shown that the recombination resistance is described by the expression21 (46)with the prefactor (47)Here λ is the reorganization energy of the redox couple, and (48)We observe that eqn (46) is more general than (45), but eqn (45) is obtained in the voltage range qVF ≪ λ, and in this range β-recombination model holds.32,72 Furthermore, eqn (45) produces a detailed view of the empirical parameter j0k introduced above in terms of a microscopic model. In addition, eqn (46) provides an interpretation of the parameter β in terms of the distribution of surface states.
3.4 Depletion capacitances
Apart from the chemical capacitance, which is associated to the displacement of the Fermi level in the bandgap, in many solar cells a Schottky barrier exists at the contact of the semiconductor with a metal, or at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. The barrier produces a variable capacitance that is dielectric in origin. When the cell is reverse biased the space-charge region in the barrier increases and the capacitance decreases. And vice versa, a forward bias reduces the extent of the barrier and the capacitance becomes larger. The thickness of the depletion layer relates to the voltage across the layer as75 w = w0Vsc1/2(49)where (50) (51)ε0 being the permittivity of free space, εr the permittivity of the material, and NA and NB the doping concentration of p and n regions respectively. For p-type material N ≈ NA. The depletion capacitance is given by (52)If Vapp is the applied voltage, then Vsc = Vapp − Vbi, where Vbi is the built-in potential between the two materials in contact (corresponding to the flat-band potential Vfb). It follows from eqn (49) and (52) that C−2sc depends linearly on Vsc (the Mott–Schottky relationship): (53)
In Fig. 13 we show the combination of two capacitances as is found in many cases.38,43 At a reverse bias, the overall capacitance is dominated by the dielectric barrier capacitance of eqn (52) at one contact, while the chemical capacitance becomes very large as the forward bias increases and finally governs the cell capacitance.
 Fig. 13  Theoretical calculation of (a) capacitances in a silicon solar cell: chemical capacitance Cμ (calculated at two different temperatures, as indicated), capacitance in the depletion layer Csc, and total capacitance (thick line). (b) Width of the space charge region. (c) Mott–Schottky plot. Parameters used in the simulation: L = 300 μm, T = 300 K, Vbi = 0.65 V, εr = 1, NA = 1016 cm−3, n0 = 108 cm−3. 
In many situations we find an additional constant capacitance at the surface of the semiconductor that takes a part of the voltage (and causes a displacement of the edge of semiconductor band, or electron affinity). The physical origin of the capacitance may be a thin dielectric layer, or the double layer capacitance at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. It is usual to simplify the treatment of the double layer capacitance in terms of a constant Helmholtz capacitance, CH (although this is strictly correct only for a concentrated electrolyte so that the potential drop in the diffuse layer can be neglected). The presence of such a constant capacitance due to either a dielectric layer or the Helmholtz capacitance produces a displacement of the Mott–Schottky (MS) plot. For example, for p-type material in contact with an electrolyte, one obtains the relationship76,77 (54)An additional effect must be considered for cylindrical semiconductors of small size, such as nanowires and nanotubes, since the depletion layer obtains a circular form,78,79 see Fig. 14. This effect is more prominent if the doping density is very low, in which case the depletion region penetrates towards the center of the wires. Solving the Poisson equation, the potential difference across the semiconductor space-charge region can be calculated as (55)The capacitance may be found using C = dQ/dVsc, with Q = qNDπ(R2 − x2)Ldnw, dnw being the density of nanowires per flat surface unit, R the radius of the wire, and x the flat potential region, see Fig. 14. Thus we obtain79 (56)
 Fig. 14  Schematic energy diagram of a nanowire indicating the depletion layer at the surface and the quasineutral (conducting) region of radius x in the center. Vs is the potential at the surface, EC is the lower edge of the conduction band, and EF is the Fermi level. 
3.5 Carrier generation, collection and distribution in the diffusion–recombination model
We have described above the derivation of the jV curve in a simple diode model based on homogeneous photogeneration and fast transport. This is useful to illustrate the basic meaning of the parameters derived in IS, and for a first approximation to the connection between impedance parameters and shape of the jV curve. A more complete analysis requires detailed consideration of the photoexcitation along the active thickness, efficiency of injection and regeneration, and the distribution of both the electron and hole carriers. It has been established that the characteristics of nanocrystalline photoelectrochemical cells are well described by a model considering generation, diffusion and recombination of electrons along the nanostructured metal oxide.80,81 Detailed description of these methods has been provided recently in papers by Barnes,82,83 Halme,84 Gagliardi85 and their coworkers. We briefly summarize these methods here.
To describe in a general situation the current–voltage relationship, and the small signal amplitude transference functions, it is necessary to solve a diffusion–recombination model for electrons of the type (57)here Jn is the electron flux that is given by Fick's diffusion law with diffusion coefficient D0 (58)
These equations consider both the free electron density nc that can be transported by diffusion, eqn (58), and localized (trapped) electrons nL,86,87 see ref. 88 for an extension that considers multiple trapping electron transport. Taking the contact of the active layer with the collecting substrate at x = 0, the boundary conditions are nc(0) = n0eqVF/kBT(59) j = −qJn(0); Jn(L) = 0(60)
The generation term G(x) is the position-dependent volume photogeneration rate, which is typically given by an exponential term for Beer–Lambert light absorption that is proportional to the incident photon flux but depends on a number of factors. Thus for illumination from the substrate/electrode (SE) interface GSE(x) = ηsep(1 − SSE)αde−(αd+αh)ϕ0(61)and for light incident from the electrolyte/electrode (EE) side GSE(x) = ηsep(1 − SCE)Thαde−(αd+αh)(L−x)ϕ0(62)Here ϕ0 is the incident photon flux, ηsep is an efficiency of charge separation, αd and αh are the absorption coefficients of the dye molecule and redox carrier in the porous matrix, respectively, S is the incident light loss at the indicated contact, for example, the reflection loss at interfaces, and Th is the transmittance of the bulk of the hole conducting medium.
The recombination term Un has been already discussed above. As an example we write the β-recombination model as Un(x) = krecchnc(x)β(63)We have included the concentration of the hole carrier, ch, in the recombination term of the transport equation. A hole or redox carrier can be subjected to transport limitations and additional equations on ch are then needed to complete the model.
In steady state, time-dependent terms in eqn (57) play no role and the resulting equation is (64)By combining with eqn (58) we obtain the equation (65)

Fig. 15(a) shows the profile of electron concentrations in dark and light for illumination from the substrate side at voltages close to Voc, by steady-state solution of this model with ch constant and β = 1. In this example the diffusion length is half the thickness of the sample and other examples (for shorter and longer diffusion length) are shown in ESI.†Fig. 15(b) shows the corresponding distribution of the Fermi level of electrons. Solving the electron distribution, the current and voltage in the external circuit are obtained from eqn (59) and (60). The jV curve determined in this example is shown in Fig. 15(c).
 Fig. 15  (a) Carrier distribution by diffusion–recombination of electrons and photogeneration profile in a nanostructured film with L = 10 μm, in dark and under incident photon flux ϕ0 = 1.45 × 1017 cm−2 s−1, at the indicated voltages at the contact. Parameters: absorption coefficient αabs = 500 cm−1, diffusion coefficient D0 = 10−5 cm2 s−1, diffusion length Ln = 0.5L, T = 300 K, EF0 = 0 eV, Ec = 1 eV, Nc = 1020 cm−3. (b) The Fermi level of electrons and (c) current density–voltage for the same model system. 
The ac impedance model requires solving the linearized equations (66) (67)Note that the free carrier lifetime τ0 depends on the position as indicated in eqn (40).32,72 The term of the trapped electrons in eqn (57) and (66) may require additional kinetic equations to describe the processes of trapping and release.87,89 However if such processes are fast, the traps remain in equilibrium with free electrons at all times and nL is simply a function of the free electrons Fermi level (this is termed as the quasistatic approximation).86 If we define an equivalent local ac current density as ĵn(x) = −qĴn(x)(68)we can write eqn (66) and (67) as (69) (70)Here rtr is a transport resistance defined as (71)The quantity in the denominator of eqn (71) corresponds to the electron conductivity88 (72)
Applying Kirchhoff rules, it can be shown that eqn (69) and (70) lead to a distributed equivalent circuit which can be represented as a transmission line.15,90,91 The impedance model can be therefore formulated in terms of the specific elements ccbμ, ctrapμ, rrec and rtr. In addition to the circuit cμ − rrec, associated to the chemical capacitance in parallel with recombination resistance, shown in Fig. 8(c), the diffusion process introduces another component in the equivalent circuit, which is the transport resistance, see Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  (a) Electron energy diagram of a nanostructured metal oxide electrode in contact with a redox electrolyte (or hole conducting medium), illustrating the electrochemical potential of electrons EFn (Fermi level) when a voltage V is applied to the substrate, and assuming that conduction band energy (Ec) remains stationary with respect to the redox level, Eredox. (b) The equivalent circuit (transmission line model) for a small periodic ac perturbation that contains the resistance for electron transport along the metal oxide nanoparticles, rtr; the resistance in the hole transport medium (hole or ion conduction) rHTM; the recombination resistance at the metal oxide/electrolyte interface, rrec; and the chemical capacitance for charge accumulation in the metal oxide particles, cμ. 
All these elements are a function of the free electron density (or Fermi level EFn), and it follows that in a situation as in Fig. 15(a) the elements in the transmission line are a function of the position. The solution to the ac problem requires to solve first eqn (63) and then to calculate the impedance by summation of the equivalent circuit elements. Note that differences between dark and light are expected, a problem that has been recently treated with other methods by Barnes et al.92 However the difference of carrier density between dark and light is small if the diffusion length is long, see ESI.†
The presence of the trap capacitance in eqn (69) has important consequences, as it affects the measured kinetic parameters. If we introduce the trapping factor86 (73)the measured diffusion coefficient and lifetime are72 Dn = D0/δL(74) τn = δLτ0(75)
3.6 Diffusion–recombination impedance model for homogeneous carrier distribution
The derivation of the impedance of the diffusion–recombination model15 and application in DSC16,21 has been reviewed in a book chapter.65 The impedance model described here is the solution of small ac perturbation for homogeneous conditions of carrier distribution,15 and for situations in which the carriers are not homogeneous, a numerical solution is required, as mentioned before.90 The impedance in the homogeneous model has the expression (76)and can be described by a transmission line model as shown in Fig. 16(b).15,93 In eqn (76)Rtr is the total transport resistance in the transport channel (while rHTM = 0, transport resistance of the hole conductor material, in the other channel), and Rrec is the recombination resistance across the surface of the nanoporous solid. The transmission line indicated in Fig. 16(b) is more general than eqn (76) as it includes the transport in two channels.27,93 Furthermore in eqn (76)ωrec is the radian frequency of the charge transfer process, ωrec = (RrecCμ)−1, related to electron lifetime94 by τn = ωrec−1, as indicated in eqn (41).
We denote Ctot as the total capacitance in the solid phase and the solid–electrolyte interface. Ctot has several possible contributions.69
(1) The chemical capacitance of the semiconductor, Cμ.
(2) The depletion capacitance of the semiconductor surface, Csc.
(3) The Helmholtz capacitance of the surface, CH.
The total film capacitance in a DSC has an additional contribution from the exposed surface of the substrate of the nanostructured metal-oxide, as discussed later.
The transit time of carriers across the thickness of the active layer is obtained as (77)If Ctot is a chemical capacitance, Cμ, then the chemical diffusion coefficient95 can be calculated by means of eqn (77) with the relation15,88 (78)Characteristic impedance spectra of eqn (76) are shown in Fig. 17. The case, in which the recombination rate is low with respect to the electron transport rate, is given by the condition Rrec > Rtr93 or equivalently, transport characteristic time is shorter than recombination time, i.e. τnd ≪ τn. For frequencies higher than ωndeqn (76) reduces to: (79)Eqn (79) is often termed the “Warburg” impedance, appearing as a 1-slope line in the complex impedance plot shown in the left of Fig. 17(b). It should be emphasized that, in contrast to semi-infinite diffusion, in the transmission line model the 45° characteristic appears only in the high frequency part of the impedance spectrum. As the frequency decreases (ω < ωd) the charge-transfer resistance gives rise to a semicircle at low frequency, consisting of the parallel combination of Rrec and Ctot as shown in Fig. 17(a). The total low frequency resistance for the active layer inferred from eqn (76) is RAL = ⅓Rtr + Rrec (Rrec ≫ Rtr)(80)However, when the recombination flux is large we have the situation Rrec < Rtr, and a different spectrum is obtained, see Fig. 17(d). From eqn (76) we obtain the Gerisher impedance, (81)In the Gerisher impedance Rtr and Rrec cannot be distinguished by inspection, and the active layer resistance is RAL = (RtrRrec)1/2 (Rtr ≫ Rrec)(82)The collection efficiency of the solar cell is closely related to the shape of the impedance spectra. We note the expression15,32 (83)that relates the diffusion length to the recombination and transport resistances.34 Therefore, the spectrum in Fig. 17(a) indicates the solar cell in which the diffusion length is many times larger than the thickness of the layer, hence with a high collection efficiency, while the observation of the Gerischer impedance indicates strong recombination and low collection efficiency.
 Fig. 17  Simulation of the diffusion–recombination impedance with reflecting boundary condition at the back contact and Ln = 3.1L. Parameters Rtr = 102 Ω cm−2, Rrec = 103 Ω cm−2, Cμ = 5 × 10−6 F cm−2. Shown are the characteristic frequency of the low frequency arc (square point), related to the angular frequency ωr = τ−1n = 1/RrecCμ, where τn is the carrier lifetime; the low frequency resistance; and the characteristic frequency of the turnover from Warburg behaviour to low frequency recombination arc (square point), related to the angular frequency ωtr = Dn/L2 = 1/RtrCμ, where Dn is the minority carrier diffusion coefficient. 
The effect of diffusion of the redox species in the electrolyte is described by96,97 (84)where Rd is the diffusion resistance of ions (holes) in the electrolyte and ωpd the characteristic frequency of diffusion, related to the diffusion coefficient of the ions through Dp = l2ωpd, with l being the effective diffusion length (l = L/2).
3.7 Reconstruction of current–voltage curves from the resistances
We have explained above the derivation of the recombination resistance from the diode characteristic in the β-recombination model. This model is very useful as a first approximation to IS measurements of DSC and is obeyed in many cases. However, the recombination resistance may show more complex features, such as a curvature98 and even peaks and valleys.99–101 In addition, the steady state performance of DSCs is also influenced by other resistive contributions associated to contacts, transport, etc. Therefore, in general it is important to determine a procedure whereby the jV curve is obtained from the measured resistances (as a function of voltage), so that each factor determining the performance of the solar cell can be separately treated.
We describe the method to obtain the jV curve of a DSC from the IS data.97 First we consider the total resistance obtained from impedance Rdc. Note that in a real device Rdc has two contributions: one arising from the active layer, RAL, that corresponds to the transmission line (eqn (80) and (82) depending on the impedance pattern), and the other one arising from the other elements connected to the active layer (contacts, electrolyte, counterelectrode) that introduces a series resistance Rseries. Then, Rdc = Rseries + Rrec + ⅓Rtr (Rrec ≫ Rtr)(85) Rdc = Rseries + (RtrRrec)1/2 (Rtr ≫ Rrec)(86)depending on the relation between Rtr and Rrec, as it has been explained in the previous section.

R
rec accounts for the overall recombination resistance associated with the charge losses in the cell. Rrec has two main contributions in parallel, the charge transfer resistance from the back layer (see below), RBL, and from the TiO2 nanoparticles surface, Rrec,np. Rrec = RBL||Rrec,np.(87)Rseries accounts for the series resistance that is related to the sum of all the resistances that produce a loss in the electrochemical potential of the cell outside the active layer, which are Rseries = RS + RCE + Rd.(88)Here RS is the series resistance due to contributions from wires, collecting electrodes and contacts, RCE is the charge transfer resistance at the counterelectrode, and Rd is the diffusion resistance in the electrolyte. As indicated in Fig. 2(a), the reciprocal of Rdc is defined as the slope of the jV curve, thus (see also eqn (24)) (89)Rearranging this equation and with an integration over the voltage, we obtain the current crossing the cell as a function of the voltage (90)The analysis of the resistance values obtained from the impedance is a key step to understand the origin of the limitations in the performance of the DSC. Once the injection determines the maximum current attainable, recombination resistance determines the open circuit voltage and maximum attainable efficiency, while the series resistance will reduce this maximum by decreasing the fill factor.
In a simplified approach as that adopted in eqn (12), the transport resistance term Rtr/3 that appears in eqn (85) can also be included in Rseries to account for the reduction of useful voltage.
4. General features of the IS of dye-sensitized solar cells
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) based on mesoporous titania and liquid electrolytes are a promising device for solar energy harvesting.102 Upon illumination, the sensitizer is excited by absorption of a photon and injects an electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor. Electron transport through the titanium oxide framework can be described with a trapping/detrapping model, where an electron moves via conduction band transport states from trap to trap until its collection at the transparent conducting oxide (TCO).86 The electrolyte or solid hole conductor transports the hole remaining in the oxidized dye to the cathode. At present there are many efforts to improve the performance,1e.g., by design of ordered semiconductor architectures,103 new Ru-based dyes with a wider absorption range104 and metal-free dyes.105–107 There are also across the world several initiatives for large scale production of DSC. The progress in these areas depends upon the availability of accurate tools that may describe the processes controlling the behavior of the device. IS is particularly well suited for the study of charge accumulation, transport and recombination under the different operating conditions of DSC, as well as to make a general assessment of device electrical properties.
In this section we will describe the characteristic impedance spectra obtained under different measurement conditions of illumination or applied voltage and the models used to study them. The typical behavior of the resistances and capacitances that describe the IS will be explained and related with the theoretical models introduced above. Finally it will be analyzed the influence of these parameters on the performance of the DSC.
4.1 Impedance spectra of DSC

Fig. 18 shows examples of the most characteristic patterns of the impedance spectra that are usually found for the DSC and the equivalent circuits required to fit them. In all the cases, experimental data are plotted as dots while the fits to the model are plotted as lines. Parameters from the fits are included in Table S1 of ESI.†
 Fig. 18  Experimental impedance spectra of a DSC with an ionic liquid based electrolyte under 50 mW cm−2 illumination at (a) 0.40 V and at (b) open circuit conditions, 0.65 V. (c) The Gerischer impedance spectra appearing in a defective cell, with presenting lower values of recombination resistance than transport resistance. Data are taken at 0.45 V under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (d) The complete equivalent circuit model to fit experimental data of (a) and (c). (e) Simplified equivalent circuit model that is valid for the spectra measured at high voltage as in (b). In (a) to (c) experimental data are represented by dots and fits to models (c) and (d) are represented by lines. 
In Fig. 18(a), the IS spectrum is plotted at an intermediate voltage (0.4 V) and in Fig. 18(b) at an open circuit (here at 0.65 V), for a DSC with an ionic liquid as an electrolyte under 50 mW cm−2 power illumination.
In the case of 0.4 V, the high frequency limit of the spectrum shows the Warburg impedance (see the inset), followed by a recombination arc, in the middle frequency region, which is the typical transmission line pattern characterized by Rtr, Rrec and Cμ as described above and shown in Fig. 17(a).
The low frequency feature observed in the impedance spectrum of Fig. 18(a) is due to diffusion in the electrolyte as described by eqn (84). At this voltage the characteristic shape of the diffusion impedance (for diffusion in electrolyte) may not be observed due to the overlap with the recombination arc.

Fig. 18(c) shows the IS spectrum obtained for a low performance DSC under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. The plot follows the trend of Fig. 17(d) indicating that the low efficiency (2%) of the cell is caused by high recombination (Rtr > Rrec). As mentioned above, the observation of a spectrum with the shape of Fig. 17(d) and 18(c) will indicate strong recombination and consequently, according to eqn (83), diffusion lengths smaller than the active film thickness. On the contrary, the shapes of Fig. 17(a) and 18(a) indicate that the film is able to extract efficiently the charge injected from the dye as Ln > L.

Fig. 18(d) represents the complete transmission line model that may be used to fit the impedance of Fig. 18(a) and (c).16,21,97 The model includes the effect of the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, described by the parallel combination of the charge-transfer resistance, RPt, and the interfacial Helmholtz capacitance, CPt. We have used the suffix Pt to stress the fact that platinum coated counterelectrode is the most employed for DSCs. The model also contains RBL and CBL elements for the recombination through the substrate uncovered by the colloids of TiO2 (or back layer).
At high voltages, and in particular at the open circuit voltage, the impedance spectrum usually shows the pattern indicated in Fig. 18(b). The high frequency arc is due to the counter-electrode charge transfer resistance and the associated CPt. The second arc is due to the recombination resistance at the TiO2/electrolyte interface and the chemical capacitance of the TiO2. The low frequency arc is due to the impedance of diffusion in the electrolyte. The width of each of these arcs corresponds to RPt, Rrec and Rd, respectively, while the initial displacement of the arcs from the origin corresponds to the contribution from the FTO resistance RS.
At these voltages the effect of the back layer is negligible. The Fermi level of electrons approaches the conduction band of TiO2 and a very high concentration of electrons is present in the semiconductor. As a consequence, the resistance of TiO2 becomes negligible, Rtr ≈ 0, which reduces the complexity of the impedance spectrum. The equivalent circuit of Fig. 18(d) can then be simplified as shown in Fig. 18(e), with the transmission line reduced to a simple R–C parallel combination, which is the model shown in Fig. 8(c).
It has to be noted that the term Zd includes the diffusion of the electrolyte both in a porous matrix and in the bulk of the electrolyte layer between the TiO2 film and the counterelectrode. As for most electrolytes, ωpd ≪ ωrec, it is possible to decouple the IS response of diffusion both from the semiconductor and the counterelectrode responses, avoiding the use of Randles like equivalent circuits84 or more complex transmission lines,27,93 as the one proposed in Fig. 16(b). In good electrolytes, Rd may reach small enough values so that the third arc becomes negligible.
4.2 The recombination resistance
The behavior of the overall recombination resistance Rrec usually follows the trends shown in Fig. 19(a). At low voltages, charge transfer from the back layer dominates. The back layer may have different responses depending on the treatments received: precoating with sputtered layers of dense TiO2, TiCl4 treatments, polymeric coatings after film formation, etc.108,109 The slope of RBL, generally small, is a function of both the presence of coatings and electrolyte composition. At higher voltages the dominant mechanism of charge recombination in the DSC is the recombination of the electrons from the TiO2 large surface to the electrolyte. In the case presented here, the recombination follows the linear trend as described by eqn (42),21,32,72 with characteristic parameters β = 0.47 and j0 = 3.8 × 10−5 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 19  Recombination resistance (a) and cell capacitance (b) of a DSC with an acetonitrile-based electrolyte. At low voltages the measured values are dominated by the characteristics of the back layer at the bottom of the TiO2 film (RBL and CBL). At voltages above 0.4 V, recombination through the porous film and chemical capacitance of TiO2 dominate the measured parameters. 
4.3 The capacitance
The behaviour of the capacitance in a DSC in a characteristic measurement is shown in Fig. 19(b). At low voltages the dominant capacitance is the combination of the capacitances at the contacts: the counterelectrode, and the exposed surface of the conducting substrate where the nanoporous TiO2 is deposited (either if the substrate is coated with a thin insulating layer or not).16,21,77,97 Additional contributions may appear due to TiO2/TCO contacts or residual charge accumulated in the initial layers of TiO2 colloids.77,103
At high voltages, the dominant capacitance is the chemical capacitance of TiO2, which shows a characteristic exponential variation with the voltage. Eventually, at very high voltages, the capacitance of the DSC may tend to reach the surface Helmholtz capacitance of the TiO2/electrolyte interface, CH. This would lead to a saturation in the capacitance value.71
As mentioned before, the chemical capacitance describes the density of states in the bandgap. Fig. 19(b) reveals the shape of the DOS, which is an exponential trap distribution below the conduction band of the nanostructured TiO2, compare Fig. 11(c).69,71
Quite frequently, in between the two main regimes, there appears a small peak in the capacitance which is attributed to a localized surface state in the TiO2. If these surface states are blocked (i.e. by a coating) their contribution to recombination is small, but in some cases they may produce a pronounced valley in the recombination resistance,71,110 and this is often the case in aqueous electrolytes.100
Another effect that is found often at low frequencies is a negative capacitance contribution that makes the impedance spectrum to enter the fourth quadrant.111 The negative capacitance sometimes complicates the interpretation of resistances.112

Fig. 20(a) and (b) show the characteristic features of negative capacitance observed at a forward bias in some types of nanostructured solar cells.111,113 The negative capacitance decreases the charge accumulation ability of the solar cell, reducing its performance.111Fig. 20(c) shows an equivalent circuit that can be employed to fit the negative capacitance, even though the physical meaning of the inductor is not straightforward.113
 Fig. 20  (a) Characteristic results of solar cells showing negative capacitance at a forward (negative) bias: extremely thin absorber (ETA) cell based on rough TiO2, dye-sensitized solar cell (defective) with solid OMeTAD hole conductor, and normal P3HT/PCBM bulk heterojunction organic solar cell. (b) Same data as in (a) in logarithmic scale, including the standard (positive) chemical capacitance of two dye-sensitized solar cells (nanostructured TiO2/N719/iodide electrolyte) with both liquid and viscous electrolyte, and a regular DSC with OMeTAD hole conductor. (c) Model used to fit negative capacitance.111 
4.4 The series resistance
The different contributions to the series resistance in the measurement of a DSC are plotted in Fig. 21(a). The figures reveal that the greater contribution to Rseries has its origin in the conductive glass, which is twice larger than the values of diffusion and counter electrode resistances. Note that the transport resistance term Rtr/3 that appears in eqn (85) can also be included in Rseries to account for the reduction of useful voltage, as it has been previously commented. At the laboratory level, the presence of relatively high series resistances in small area cells (Rseries ≈ 14 to 23 Ω for this 0.23 cm2 cell) does not represent a major shortcoming since the current passing through the cell is small, and therefore the potential drop associated to Rseries will not be large. However in order to build large current panels a major effort is needed to diminish this resistance as competitor technologies have succeeded in obtaining Rseries < 0.5 Ω cm2.
 Fig. 21  (a) The separate contributions to the total series resistance obtained by impedance spectroscopy at the different voltages in an acetonitrile based DSC under 1 sun illumination. (b) The measured current–voltage curve (red line) obtained for the same cell and measurement conditions. The jV curve is characterized by parameters Voc = 0.73, jsc = 14.4 mA cm−2, FF = 0.66, η = 6.9%. Green line shows the simulated jV curve after removing the series resistance effect. After the correction it is obtained FF = 0.74 and η = 7.7%. The void circles show the values obtained by integration of resistances measured by IS. 
4.5 The jV curve
As explained before, using integration procedures, eqn (90), it is possible to analyze the components of the current–voltage curve of a DSC. In Fig. 21(b) it can be observed a good match between the jV curve obtained for a DSC with liquid electrolyte (line) and the curve generated through eqn (90) (dots). In this case the moderate fill factor found (0.66) is due to the relatively high values of the series resistance as described above.
To obtain the potential drop in the TiO2 film, the active layer, corrected from the series resistance, it is possible to use the integral expression97 (91)the resistance of the active layer RAL depends on the impedance of the transmission line, i.e. the relation between Rtr and Rrec, see eqn (80) and (82). Note that for good performing solar cells, especially under illumination, Rrec ≫ Rtr then RAL ≈ Rrec. V0 is the potential drop at the series resistance at short circuit conditions. V0 represents the electrochemical potential difference between the photoactive film and the contacts at short circuit (when the applied voltage to the DSC is fixed to zero).84 Note that at Voc (92)Thus the parameters Voc, jsc and the variable RAL are the elements that determine the jV curve with the maximum efficiency attainable by the cell, which further on will be called internal jV curves and efficiency.
The internal jV curve of the sample provided after obtaining the corrected voltage (VF) is plotted in Fig. 21(b). It provides a 12% increase in the efficiency of the cell to a 7.7% through the improvement of the FF to a value 0.74.
These data show the importance of optimizing the design of the DSC to minimize the series resistance contribution, specially in the high efficiency and large area cells where the currents are large and therefore, in which the effect of series resistance is more important.
4.6 Comparison of IS parameters of a set of DSCs
For a collection of samples it is important to identify which are the factors that determine the differences in their efficiencies, concerning the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and fill factor. As described previously, jsc is determined by the absorption of the dye and the internal quantum yield, while the shape of the jV curve depends on a combination of factors that can be identified with the analysis of IS parameters. We report here the summary of the analysis of a number of DSC devices using different dyes, electrolytes and TiO2 pastes. The characteristics of these solar cells are given in Table 3, the impedance parameters are shown in Fig. 22, and selected jV curves are shown in Fig. 23. The main features observed are the following.
Table 3 Experimental parameters obtained from the fits and characteristics of samples shown in Fig. 22. Internal FF and η are the values obtained after subtracting the potential drop at the series resistance and the calculated FF is the value obtained from eqn (27). The short name of the dyes refer to the following: K19 is Ru-(4,4′-dicarboxylic acid-2,2′-bipyridine)(4,4′-bis(p-hexyloxystyryl)-2,2′-bipyridine)(NCS)2 and it was coadsorbed with phenylpropionic acid (PPA); N719 is cis-di(thiocyanato)-N,N′-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4-carboxylic acid-4′-tetrabutylammonium carboxylate) ruthenium(II); ZnPc is 2,3-dicarboxyanhydride-9,10,16,17,23,24-[4′-(1″,1″,3″,3″-tetramethylbutyl)phenoxy] phthalocyaninate Zn(II); H2Pc is 2,3-dicarboxyanhydride-9,10,16,17,23,24-[4-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)phenoxy] phthalocyanine; BG1, 3,6-di-tert-butyl-9H-carbazole; BG2 3,6-di-tert-butyl-9-(4-iodophenyl)-9H-carbazole. The short name of the electrolytes stand for: Z380 is N-methylbenzimidazole 0.5 M, guanidinium thiocyanate 0.12 M and iodine (I2) 0.2 M in a mixture of 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide & 1-methyl-3-ethylimidazolium thiocyanate, 65%∶35% volume ratio; Z300 is 0.60 M butylmethylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.10 M guanidinium thiocyanate and 0.50 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile, 85%∶15% volume ratio; Z325 is 0.6 M methylpropylimidazolium iodide, 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine, and 0.03 M I2 in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile, 75%∶25% volume ratio; E100 is 0.7 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in 3-methoxypropionitrile; E105 is 0.5 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in 3-methoxypropionitrile




Sample name
K19
N719a
N719b
N719c
ZnPc
H2Pc
BG1
BG2





V
oc/V
0.68
0.80
0.73
0.45
0.44
0.35
0.45
0.39



j
sc/mA cm−2
14.00
17.96
18.80
10.90
3.48
5.71
8.22
10.40


FF
0.71
0.74
0.61
0.50
0.66
0.57
0.58
0.54



η(%)
7.00
10.53
8.43
2.50
1.01
1.14
2.14
2.18


Internal FF
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.71
0.68
0.65
0.67
0.67


Calculated FF
0.81
0.82
0.79
0.71
0.63
0.56
0.67
067


Internal η (%)
7.70
11.58
10.96
3.47
1.04
1.21
2.47
2.73



β

0.78
0.69
0.62
0.64
0.44
0.40
0.50
0.60



j
0/mA cm−2
1.7 × 10−8
1.0 × 10−8
4.8 × 10−7
1.6 × 10−4
2.0 × 10−3
25.5 × 10−3
1.3 × 10−3
1.2 × 10−3



j
0k/mA cm−2
604
230
11164
8363
980
68
3928
21417



α

0.51
0.45
0.26
0.47
0.34
0.40
0.41
0.41



E
c − EF0/eV
1.00
1.06
0.99
0.66
0.78
0.68
0.77
0.74


−ΔEc/V
0.06
Ref
0.08
0.40
0.28
0.38
0.29
0.32


Avg. Rseries/Ω
29
23
23
27
17
19
20
25



R
series/Ω cm2
8.12
2.94
6.44
11.61
5.61
6.84
5.50
6.25


Area/cm2
0.28
0.13
0.28
0.43
0.33
0.36
0.28
0.25



L/μm
10.80
14.00
10.80
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00
10.00


Porosity
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50



T/K
300
300
300
300
300
300
300
300


Electrolyte
Z380
Z300
Z325
E100
E100
E100
E105
E105


Dye
K19
N719
N719
N719
ZnPc
H2Pc
BG1
BG2




 Fig. 22  Chemical capacitance (a) and recombination resistance (c) of a collection of DSCs with different dyes and electrolytes as described in Table 3, plotted against VF. The effect of different conduction band positions has been removed by plotting the chemical capacitance (b) and recombination resistance, (d) and (e), vs. Vecb. 
 Fig. 23  (a) Experimental jV curves (dots) and regenerated jV curves obtained from impedance data (lines) for a collection of samples from Table 3. (b) Internal jV curves for the same samples. 

4.6.1 The total series resistance of the cell. 

Fig. 21(a) shows the different contributions to series resistance. The conducting glass substrate and counterelectrode charge transfers are determined externally by the choice of the appropriate geometry of the cell, the sheet resistance of the conductive glass or the amount and area of the catalyzer at the counter and remain nearly constant. With the appropriate protocols, these elements may be standardized to obtain cells with the same values of RS and RPt.
The contribution of the diffusion resistance depends on factors such as the electrolyte composition, the type of hole conductor, the size of the pores and the current crossing the cell. This last dependence produces a diffusion resistance that changes upon the applied voltage.
From Table 3 we observe that although the absolute value of the average series resistance is quite similar for all the samples, the normalized series resistance (in Ω cm2) differs largely as the active area of each sample is quite different. The greater the normalized resistance, the larger the difference between measured FF and efficiency and their internal values. This difference peaks for samples such as N719a and N719b that have large values of jsc, as the potential drop at the series resistance is larger.


4.6.2 The position of the conduction band of the semiconductor with respect to the redox of the hole conductor. 
The shifts observed in the Cμ plotted in Fig. 22(a) indicate a displacement in the conduction band. Therefore, the higher the Ec the larger the displacement of the capacitance towards positive potentials. These shifts have their origin in different dyes, electrolytes and TiO2 pastes used to build the samples. Making the assumption that the Nc is the same for all the TiO2 samples it is possible to estimate the ΔEc through eqn (43). If the values of α are similar, this ΔEc is simply the displacement of the capacitance normalized to the volume. Taking one sample as reference (Ref), the capacitances of the other samples are shifted until they overlap, see Fig. 22(b). This shift removes the effect of the different conduction band positions, plotting the capacitance vs. Vecb, the common equivalent conduction band potential, as explained in Section 3.3. In Fig. 22 sample N719a has been used as a reference sample. The approximate value of the position of Ec has been estimated using NL = 2 × 1020 cm−3,62 see Table 3.
In terms of the performance, for samples with similar photocurrents, a raise in the conduction band produces an increase in the Voc, see Table 3.
Note that the difference in the composition of the different samples shown in Fig. 22 also produces a change in the value α which indicates differences in the distribution of subbandgap states in the TiO2, see the slope of Fig. 22(b).


4.6.3 The recombination resistance. 
Variations in Ec also affect the recombination resistance values. A raise in Ec increases the value of j0, as indicated in eqn (21), which decreases Rrec, as given by eqn (42), and this can be seen in Fig. 22(c). As a consequence Rrec is also shifted depending on the Ec position, see Fig. 22(c). The effects on Rrec are key in the performance of the cell. It was already pointed out in previous sections that for a given jsc the lower absolute values of Rrec and β determine, respectively, a lower Voc and internal FF. In practice the different cells provide variations in jsc, therefore small modifications are expected to occur. For the same Rrec increasing current provides higher Voc and, according to eqn (27), larger internal FF.
In order to remove the effect of the Ec position, as in the case of Cμ, Rrec has to be plotted vs. Vecb, see Fig. 22(d) and (e), applying exactly the same shift as the one applied for the chemical capacitance. We have split the plots of Rrecvs. Vecb for clarity reasons. The representation vs. Vecb allows us to analyze the cell performance in terms of recombination. In Fig. 22(d) the samples, from Table 3, with the highest β have been plotted. Sample N719a presents the highest recombination resistance (lower recombination), and in consequence it presents the highest Voc, see Table 3. Note that in terms of the diode model sample N719a presents the lowest j0k. Comparing samples N719, among them the added effect of lower recombination, higher β and higher conduction band makes the cell N719a the highest performing cell. In addition, in the case of the internal FF the values obtained have an excellent agreement with eqn (27), see calculated FF in Table 3, using the practical β and Voc obtained for the different samples. The changes in the actual FF obtained from the cell and the corresponding reduction in efficiency are thus attributable exclusively to the effect of Rseries.
In Fig. 22(e) the cells, from Table 3, with the lowest β and the reference cell N719a are represented. Again the sample with the lowest j0k, H2Pc, presents the highest recombination resistance. However, H2Pc presents the lowest β, suggesting that finally this cell presents the highest j0 and consequently the highest recombination. See for comparison in Table 3 that cell N719a presents the lowest j0. In this sense the recombination can be easily evaluated in terms of j0k and β, if the effect of the conduction band is removed. It is interesting to point out that for samples ZnPc and H2Pc there is a discrepancy between the internal FF and the calculated FF, which means that the reduced FF observed in these cells is not due exclusively to the effect of series resistance, and other effects are contributing to this FF reduction.
Note that the representation plotted in Fig. 22 of Cμ and Rrecvs. VF and Vecb, and the jsc obtained from jV curves, permits a proper characterization of DSCs in terms of photocurrent, conduction band and recombination, allowing us to determine the main limiting factors in the cell performance. There are many examples in the literature of the use of IS for comparing different cells, but using only one applied voltage data point. It is important to remark that this analysis cannot discriminate the origin of differences observed between samples, revealing whether a change in the position of the band or different recombination took place. Impedance analysis at varying applied voltage is required to determine the shift in conduction band, by the displacement observed in Cμ. In addition, this analysis, sweeping different forward applied voltages, allows to calculate the β parameter and compare properly Rrec, in order to evaluate the recombination term.
In Fig. 23 the jV curves of a collection of samples from Table 3 are plotted. Experimental jV curves are represented as dots while the lines represent the jV curves obtained from the parameters given in Table 3 and eqn (90), see Fig. 23(a). In Fig. 23(b) the internal jV curves, removing series resistance effect, are plotted.

5. Materials and processes in dye-sensitized solar cells
5.1 Energetics
As we have just seen, the use of different dyes and electrolytes and also the preparation procedure of the TiO2 may produce displacements in the conduction band position that affect the overall performance of the cell. Drawing the energy position of Ec together with the position of the LUMO and the HOMO of the dye and the redox of the electrolyte and considering the energetic distribution of these levels is a helpful tool in the description and interpretation of some of the main limitations of the solar cells.3,62,114 A detailed view and analysis of the dye excited state and dye regeneration are provided in the work of Meyer and coworkers.115–117
In Fig. 24 it has been plotted this detailed energetic diagram for several samples using the same TiO2 paste, electrolyte and different dyes, Zn phthalocyanine, (ZnPc), an unsubstituted phthalocyanine (H2Pc) and N719 as an example. In this diagram the HOMO and LUMO of the dye have been obtained from cyclic voltammetry and light absorption measurements. The distribution of these levels has been approached using light absorption measurements and considering the broadening effects of absorption onto the TiO2 and solvation by the electrolyte. To simplify the scheme a Gaussian has been used to describe the distribution of the dye levels. The acceptor and donor states in the redox have been also approximated to a Gaussian distribution with a reorganization energy of 0.5 eV. For the TiO2, the conduction band edge is represented as a horizontal line and the distribution of the states below it as the diagonal line pointing the upward increase of the DOS in the semiconductor. The dots over this line represent the values obtained from the measured capacitances.
 Fig. 24  Energy diagrams of the active components in some DSC samples prepared with the same electrolyte, E100 (0.7 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in 3-methoxypropionitrile), and different dyes, ZnPc, H2Pc and N719. To represent acceptor and donor states of the I3−/I− redox couple (dashed line), it has been taken a reorganization energy of 0.5 eV. For the HOMO and LUMO states of the dyes it has been considered the effect of absorption and solvation (continuous lines). The density of electron states below the conduction band of the TiO2 has been obtained from capacitance measurements (dots). The shape of the DOS has been estimated, also from the values of capacitance, up to the conduction band (blue line). 
From the scheme of Fig. 24 we may derive the following conclusions. In all the samples it is observed that the major loss of voltage is produced by the mismatch between the HOMO of the dye and the redox couple. The higher recombination resistance found for ZnPc is attributed to the higher position of its Ec. This is interpreted in terms of the charge transfer features in the Marcus model. The recombination takes place between levels at the same energy in TiO2 and the redox couple, hence, for the cell with a higher conduction band, at a certain voltage (EFn) there are less states full of electrons in the TiO2 able to recombine with the I3− acceptor in the redox.
In terms of injection, the position of the conduction band relative to the position of the LUMO of the dye may limit the efficient injection of electrons in the semiconductor if Ec is above the LUMO. This is not the case in the samples of Fig. 24 owing to the use of an electrolyte with high contents of Li and no other additives such as tert-butyl-pyridine that raise the conduction band in TiO2.
5.2 The hole conductor
The choice of the right hole conductor is an important aspect conditioned by the final purpose of the dye solar cell. In liquid electrolyte cells, the ideal situation would be to use a low viscosity nonvolatile solvent which combines low diffusion resistance for the transport of holes towards the counterelectrode and stability at high temperatures. Unfortunately, obtaining both properties at the same time is not possible and therefore a compromise needs to be taken. If record cells are to be obtained very low viscosity electrolytes are used, as this reduces the series resistance contribution from the hole conductor to a minimum. Typically combinations of acetonitrile and valeronitrile are used for this purpose.3 If the objective is to obtain cells with high stability avoiding the problems caused by leakages due to high volatile solvents, electrolytes based on methoxypropionitrile or ionic liquids97 are used. As it is shown in Fig. 25, the price to pay is a larger RHTM due to their higher viscosity.
 Fig. 25  Comparison of the transport resistance for different hole conductors. 
Some advances have been shown recently by the addition of clays to electrolytes.118,119 These both produce a gel phase that diminishes the volatility of solvents and keep very high mobility in the electrolyte with little changes in RHTM.
In solid state hole conductors, such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) or poly-3-hexylthiophene (P3HT), the characteristic transport time in the electrolyte or hole conductor is close or even larger than the electron lifetime, in terms of their characteristic frequencies, ωpd ≥ ωrec. Then it is required the use of the transmission line model that considers resistance both for electron and hole transport,27,93 as it is suggested in Fig. 16(b).
By using this model, it was possible to measure the RHTM (=rHTM × L) in spiro-OMeTAD of a 4% efficient cell27 finding that it presents larger values than the liquid electrolyte cells, see Fig. 25. Therefore apart from the pore filling problems typically reported for solid DSCs3 and the higher recombination typically found in them,17,120–122 doping of the hole conductor material needs to be raised to obtain larger conductivities and thus lower RHTM.
5.3 Substrates
The functions of the substrate over which the TiO2 layer is deposited are to: (i) provide a physical structure to which the active film adheres firmly, (ii) provide good electrical contact with the TiO2, (iii) evacuate efficiently the photogenerated electrons and (iv) allow the light to pass through.
The most common material used as a substrate in DSC is a glass with a thin layer of fluorine doped tin oxide (SnO2:F) commonly known as FTO. FTO beats other transparent conductor oxides such as the solid solution of indium oxide and tin oxide (known as ITO) or doped zinc oxides (ZnO:Ga, ZnO:Al, etc.) due to its superior thermal and mechanical stabilities. In the case of ITO, the cost is also an issue despite its superior sheet resistance, while in the case of ZnO based electrodes the main limitation found is the chemical stability of the electrode in the electrolyte.
The resistance of the substrate is given by (93)with dL the length of the substrate electrode and dw its width. As may be seen in Fig. 21(a), RS contribution to the total series resistance of the cell is usually the largest, thus for high efficiency devices it should be minimized. Diminishing the sheet resistance of the conducting substrate has the counter effect of limiting the total transmittance of the SnO2:F layer and thus the charge generation. Thus, transparency typically takes values between 75–90% for sheet resistances that oscillate between 7 and 100 Ω/□. The alternative is to minimize dL and maximize dw to obtain low resistance geometries, which may be combined with the use of metallic grids to efficiently collect the charge as used in other solar technologies.123,124
The use of FTO glass as a substrate presents advantages as stable, tight and rigid material for outdoor applications, but also some drawbacks as weight, fragility and cost for large area panels or, with other purposes, its lack of flexibility. Flexible transparent materials such as ITO coated polyethylene teraphthalate (PET),29 ITO coated polyethylene naphthalate (PEN),125 or, more recently, metallic wired fabrics have been proposed as alternatives.126 However these substrates present two main drawbacks: by one side the semiconductor needs to be adhered to the plastic substrate at low temperatures, which produces poorer TiO2 connection between colloids and at the substrate/colloid contact, and by the other these substrates present certain permeability to contaminants such as water which limits their long term stability.
Another approach consists in the use of metallic foils such as titanium127 and incomel.128 Attempts to use a stainless steel foil have not been successful as it degrades in the presence of the iodine based electrolyte.128
The use of metallic substrates has the advantage of providing higher conductivity than the transparent films but as light cannot be collected from the photoelectrode side, some photons are lost due to absorption in both the counterelectrode and the layer of electrolyte on top of the TiO2. Incomel presents also the inconvenience that the thick oxide layer formed between TiO2 and the foil produces an extra contribution to series resistance.128
5.4 Counterelectrodes
From the electrical point of view, the main functions of the counterelectrodes are (i) to collect the holes carried by the hole conductor and (ii) to evacuate them efficiently.
Typical counterelectrodes used in DSCs consist of a FTO glass, in charge of facilitating the evacuation, coated with a small amount of Pt to facilitate the charge transfer of holes from the redox, by a catalytic effect. To reduce the cost of DSCs for industrial production, the Pt typically used in the counter electrode is substituted by different forms of carbon: carbon black, graphite and carbon black mixtures, carbon nanotubes and nanofibers, etc. Apart from cost, the advantages of using carbon are high stability and good conductivity.
However, charge transfer efficiency of carbon is in general lower than in the case of Pt-based counter electrodes, therefore two approaches are used: thick layers of porous carbon electrodes, incrementing the surface to transfer the charge129 and the combination of carbon counter electrodes with small amounts of Pt. However, the increase of the film thickness has a general consequence of an increase of the series resistance of the cell due to the transport resistance of the carbon.
Recently, carbon nanofibers have been used presenting excellent photocatalytic response (low Rce) but poor conductivity130 yielding to a total contribution to series resistance higher than standard Pt-based counterelectrodes.
Monolithic cells131 completely substitute FTO glass and Pt by carbon counterelectrodes with the double advantage of eliminating those relatively costly materials.
Organic hole conductors poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) alone or combined with carbon nanotubes132,133 are also being studied as possible alternatives to Pt in the counter electrode, presenting promising results with charge transfer resistances slightly higher than platinized electrolytes.134
If flexibility is a need, Pt–Ti foil, Pt–ITO PEN and PEDOT:PSS may be used as counterelectrodes.125,135,136 Until now, the best performance is attained by those containing Pt.
5.5 Ordered metal oxide architectures
With the aim of obtaining DSCs with improved electrical properties, ordered nanostructures such as nanowires and nanotubes have raised considerable interest. The ordered material architecture offers the benefits of: (i) more direct transport pathways uninterrupted by inter-particle connections; (ii) the possibility to form surface electrical fields that should reduce recombination by confining the injected electrons in the central zone of the wires78,79 and (iii) superior void penetration of the organic hole conductor in preparation of solid-state DSCs due to the less intricate shape of the nanostructure.137 Several metal-oxide nanowire and nanotube architectures deposited on a conducting substrate for DSC application have been reported, with the majority of studies focusing on the use of TiO2138 and ZnO.78,79

5.5.1 TiO2 nanotubes. 
A scheme of the application of the transmission line model in semiconductor nanotubes or nanowires is shown in Fig. 26. Concerning the electronic conductivity and the effect of the applied bias voltage in nanowires, we can distinguish two basic situations. The first one has been already explained in Fig. 14: if the nanowire is relatively highly doped, it has a surface depletion layer and a conducting core formed by the neutral region. But in a second case, we consider a thin wire or tube in which doping is low, then we can get a homogenous increase of the Fermi level upon application of the voltage. These two situations are in principle distinguished by the behaviour of capacitance and resistance that are obtained in Fig. 27 using the model of Fig. 26. In the highly doped case, the capacitance should obey Mott–Schottky characteristics, see Fig. 28, and the transport resistance should vary relatively slowly with bias (unless full depletion is obtained). In the low-doped case we should record a chemical capacitance and a strong variation of the carrier density, and consequently of the transport resistance, by variation of the voltage.
 Fig. 26  (a) Scheme of the equivalent circuit (transmission line) describing IS measurements of a semiconductor nanotube. (b) Impedance spectrum of a nanotube film in an aqueous solution adjusted at pH 11 with KOH at Vapp = 0.35 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (c) The impedance results of a DSC made with the same type of films, at Vapp = 0.4 V. 
 Fig. 27  (a) The transport resistance and (b) the capacitance of a 5.0 μm long nanotube before and after electrochemical doping. Note that transport resistance values below 10 ohm present a large uncertainty, however they are plotted as a reference. Note that the sign of the potential is changed to preserve the same notation as in the text. 
 Fig. 28  Mott–Schottky plots of doped nanotubes in aqueous solution at two different values of pH. Note that the sign of the potential is changed to preserve the notation as in the text. 
IS measurements of nanotube arrays of TiO2 shown in Fig. 26 indicate that the transmission line model is suitable for the description of the IS characteristics.103 The fresh nanotubes present the normal diffusion–recombination pattern that consists of the high frequency Warburg-like impedance and the recombination arc at low frequency, see Fig. 26(c).103 By analysis of the IS parameters, shown in Fig. 27, we see that the transport resistance and the capacitance of the film follow in this case the same behaviour as in the case of TiO2 samples formed of random nanoparticulate networks described above. An exponential decrease of the transport resistance is observed when raising the voltage. A nearly constant value of the capacitance is obtained at low voltages, followed by an exponential increase due to the chemical capacitance when the Fermi level of electrons in TiO2 raises up.
However, a different behaviour of the parameters is observed when the TiO2 film is maintained at high voltage for certain time in the presence of protons or Li ions, as observed in Fig. 27. These ions diffuse inside the TiO2 material, which becomes doped.103,139,140 In nanotubes, this doped situation is very stable in time.140 As a consequence, the transport resistance becomes much smaller and nearly constant, Fig. 27(a). Eventually, the values of transport resistance become so low that the impedance spectrum of the nanotube becomes a single arc accounting for charge accumulation and recombination. The effect of doping on the capacitance, Fig. 27(b), is also very relevant. The chemical capacitance change with voltage disappears as the TiO2 is kept with a large concentration of electrons independently of the voltage.
The high level of doping allows the bending of the conduction band inside the nanotubes, as indicated in Fig. 14, a situation that is not possible in low doped materials.141 From the data in Fig. 27 and eqn (54), we have determined ND = 1.6 × 1021 cm−3, with a depletion width, given by eqn (49), of value w < 1.5 nm, see Fig. 28.


5.5.2 ZnO nanorods. 
The electrodeposited synthesis procedure of ZnO nanorods and nanotubes provides highly doped films (up to 1020 cm−3). This doping level may be reduced to a value of nearly 1017 cm−3 by using thermal treatments.78,79
ZnO wires of relatively large diameter (100–300 nm) can sustain internal band bending at the surface, and are characterized by a depletion layer at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface with a highly conducting central region, providing a dielectric capacitance as indicated in eqn (56).69,78,79 Capacitance data and fits to the model of eqn (55) and (56) are shown in Fig. 29. For the sample measured as prepared, the standard Mott–Schottky plot is obtained, with a donor density of 6.2 × 1019 cm−3. For the annealed sample the Mott–Schottky is bent due to the fact that the donor density has decreased to 5.5 × 1017 cm−3.
 Fig. 29  Mott–Schottky plots of a ZnO nanowire sample before (dots) and after (triangles) thermal annealing at 450 °C. The solid lines represent the fits to the model explained in the main text. 
Thin ZnO layers deposited at the surface on an insulating framework exhibit a very large conductivity.142 For thick wires the resistance of the core conducting region (Fig. 14) is very small and it is difficult to measure. However, He et al.143 succeeded in obtaining the diffusion–recombination patterns of IS in ZnO nanorods, which allows us to obtain all transport and capacitance parameters.

6. Quantum dot sensitized solar cells
The use of inorganic semiconductors as light absorbing materials, instead of organic dyes, in metal oxide nanostructured sensitized cells has attracted increasing attention.9–11,13,14,136,144 Semiconductor sensitized solar cells (SSCs) are also commonly known as quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSCs), when the semiconductor absorbing material demonstrates a quantum confinement regime or extremely thin absorber cells (ETA) if the absorber is distributed continuously on the surface of the electron conducting medium. Inorganic semiconductor materials are specially interesting as light absorbing materials as they present higher extinction coefficients than molecular dyes and a tunable band gap (tuned, for example, changing the QD size and consequently the quantum coefficient).145 In addition, semiconductor QDs can be prepared in a relatively easy way in a colloidal form or grown directly on the wide band gap nanostructured matrix (i.e. TiO2, ZnO).100 Although currently SSCs have efficiencies lower than DSCs (5.13% being the highest reported value146 under 1 sun illumination), their efficiencies are experiencing a rapid growth in recent years. In order to obtain a further increase in the performance of QDSCs, coherent models of the device performance are needed and the power and versatility of IS will undoubtedly contribute to attain this goal.
6.1 Impedance spectra of QDSCs
QDSCs are formally analogous to DSCs, in this sense, the impedance models developed for DSC, Fig. 16 and 18, can be employed in the analysis of QDSCs, but the special characteristics of QDSCs must be taken into account, as electrolyte, counterelectrode or QD deposition mode. Currently one of the most important limiting factors for the development of QDSCs is the hole conductor material.11,13 The iodine redox couple, commonly used in DSCs, has to be avoided in QDSCs (unless QDs are protected),147 and alternative redox couples are used to avoid photocorrosion. The pattern of the IS will depend on the redox used, as different redox have different transporting properties and different charge transfer behavior with the counterelectrode.
Co-redox presents good charge transfer properties between an electrolyte and a platinized counterelectrode, consequently IS similar to the ones depicted in Fig. 17 is obtained, where the transmission line is perfectly recognized.37 On the other hand, Co-redox presents a photocurrent limitation due to the electrolyte diffusion, as demonstrated through impedance measurements.148 A polysulfide electrolyte has been employed to avoid this photocurrent limitation, and the energy level of this redox couple as well as a number of CdSe QDs of varying sizes are indicated in Fig. 7(b). Charge transfer between the polysulfide electrolyte and platinized counter electrode is low, producing a problem of high counter electrode resistance that strongly reduces the cell performance.54 This increase of the counter electrode resistance is reflected in the impedance pattern as an increase of the size of the first arc observed in Fig. 18, obtained at high frequencies. The overlap of the first (counterelectrode) and second arcs (active layer) does not allow us to distinguish the transmission line pattern (the straight line), and the impedance spectra can be fitted using the simple model plotted in Fig. 18(e),100 but the information about electron transport is lost. The use of alternative counter electrodes with the polysulfide electrolyte can solve partially this problem. Cu2S presents lower charge transfer resistance with the polysulfide electrolyte,149,150 reducing the device series resistance and increasing consequently the cell FF. From the point of view of impedance analysis the complete pattern of the sensitized solar cell is recovered, distinguishing clearly the transmission line behaviour,35,36 when Cu2S is employed.
One of the strongest points of the SSCs is their versatility. Different kinds of inorganic semiconductors can be employed9,10 whenever their conduction bands lie above the conduction band of the nanostructured electron transporter, in order to allow the electron photoinjection. The sun spectra can be matched varying either the semiconductor employed or the semiconductor confinement that allows a band gap tuning to higher values than the bulk band gap. In addition, a specific semiconductor material can be deposited in several ways.100 The cell performance is influenced by the deposition mode and its effect can be analyzed by impedance spectroscopy. As an example, we have shown that QDSCs using colloidal CdSe QDs present lower recombination resistance than CdSe QDs grown by chemical bath deposition (CBD), inducing a higher Voc in the latter cells.100 CBD samples allow the deposition of a larger amount of light absorbing semiconductor material, producing a more effective covering of the TiO2 surface than in the case of colloidal QDs. Thus, QDs themselves act as blocking layers, hindering the recombination of electrons in the TiO2 with the acceptor species in the electrolyte. Then, the covering of TiO2 improves, generally, the recombination resistance that becomes higher.
6.2 Surface treatments on QDSCs
Surface treatments have a dramatic effect on QDSC performance73 as it is reflected in Fig. 30(a). The origin of this behavior can be understood by analyzing the data extracted from impedance measurements, specially taking into account the chemical capacitance, Fig. 30(b), and the recombination resistance, Fig. 30(c). The different surface treatments performed on CdSe sensitized electrodes produce a downwards shift of the TiO2 conduction band, see Fig. 30(b). In addition, the use of molecular dipoles shifts the QD bands up.147 Both effects contribute to increase the photogenerated electron driving force151,152 and consequently the photocurrent, see Fig. 30(a). The downwards movement of TiO2 bands is associated commonly with an increase of the photocurrent and a diminution in photovoltage. But, this is not the case observed in Fig. 30(a), where an increase of photovoltage is observed after the treatments. This increase of the photovoltage is due to an increase of the recombination resistance for the treated cells, see Fig. 30(c). This result points out to the important role of the surface treatment in the enhancement of QDSCs performance,73 and how IS characterization can help to attain this goal.
 Fig. 30  Analysis of different quantum dot sensitized electrodes with various surface treatments, using polysulfide as electrolyte and platinized FTO as counter electrode. The sample after QD growth by chemical bath deposition with no treatment is taken as the reference sample (Ref). Two configurations with only one treatment have been analyzed: with ZnS coating (ZnS sample) and with dipole grafting (DT sample, using 4-methoxybenzenethiol as molecular dipole). In addition, samples with two treatments: first DT and second ZnS coating (DT + ZnS) and first ZnS coating and second a dipole treatment (ZnS + DT) have been explored. (a) j–V curves. The cells presented an efficiency of Ref (η = 0.23%), DT (η = 0.63%), ZnS (η = 1.25%), ZnS + DT (η = 0.71%) and DT + ZnS (η = 1.60%); (b) capacitance vs. VF and (c) recombination resistance vs. Vecb.73 
It is also interesting to highlight the peak observed in the chemical capacitance and in the recombination resistance. This behavior is commonly associated with the recombination through TiO2 surface states.72,99,100,153,154
6.3 Semiconductor light absorbing material for QDSCs
Although the basic configuration of QDSCs and DSCs is similar, there are important points of departure of the specific mechanisms. Multiple layers of absorbing semiconductor on the oxide and charge traps in the absorbing semiconductor originate important differences that influence the solar cell performance.13 The existence of surface states in the semiconductor light absorbing material introduces an alternative recombination pathway, through these states, non-existent in conventional DSCs.13 The nature of the surface states depends not only on the semiconductor preparation method but also on the semiconductor material. QDSCs using three different semiconductor materials: PbS with bulk band gap Eg = 0.41 eV, CdSe Eg = 1.73 eV and CdS Eg = 2.42 eV, grown by successive ionic layer deposition and reaction (SILAR) are compared in Fig. 31. The semiconductor light absorbing material influences the TiO2 conduction band position, see Fig. 31(b). The differences in photocurrent observed, see Fig. 31, are originated in one hand on the different semiconductor gaps, but recombination also plays a remarkable role in cell performance. PbS presents the narrowest gap and the higher photocurrent should be expected. In contrast low photocurrent and photovoltage are obtained for PbS QDSCs, see Fig. 31(a), due to an important recombination observed when this semiconductor is employed, Fig. 31(c). CdS exhibits a significant lower recombination, as the high recombination resistance reflects. Thus, CdS is an especially attractive sensitizer from the point of view of recombination. The recombination of PbS QDSCs can be significantly reduced if PbS is coated with CdS, see Fig. 31(c), and photocurrent and photovoltage considerably enhanced, see Fig. 31(a), by the combination of both materials. In addition, the CdS avoids the photocorrosions of PbS with the polysulfide electrolyte stabilizing the cell.35 QDSC of CdSe prepared with three SILAR cycles presented an intermediate recombination between PbS and CdS. The recombination decreases with the number of CdSe SILAR cycles, see Fig. 31(c), while the downwards shift of the TiO2 conduction band increases, see Fig. 31(b). Both effects could be attributed to the effect of the blocking layer performed by the QD absorber, as it has been previously commented.36
 Fig. 31  Analysis of different quantum dot sensitized electrodes using different semiconductor light absorbing materials, using polysulfide as an electrolyte and Cu2S as a counter electrode. All the samples have been coated with two SILAR cycles of ZnS. The different semiconductors have been grown by SILAR,35,36 the number after the name of the semiconductor material indicates the number of SILAR cycles performed. (a) j–V curves. The cells presented an efficiency of PbS2 (η = 0.51%), PbS2/CdS5 (η = 2.21%), CdS5 (η = 1.22%), CdSe3 (η = 0.73%) and CdSe7 (η = 3.83%); (b) capacitance vs. VF and (c) recombination resistance vs. Vecb, solid lines are the linear fits of the experimental data. Using eqn (26) the β parameter of each cell has been obtained and indicated on the graph. 
On the other hand, CdS5, PbS2/CdS5 and CdSe3 present values of β relatively close to 0.5, commonly observed in conventional DSCs, see Fig. 31(c). The β value decreases for CdSe QDSCs as the number of SILAR cycles increases. This fact could indicate a change in the recombination pathway from a recombination of electrons in the TiO2 with the acceptor states in the electrolyte, process RHC in Fig. 32, for low number of SILAR cycles, to a recombination through the QDs for a high number of SILAR cycles, process RSC in Fig. 32. The recombination pathways in QDSCs could be mediated by trapping events, see Fig. 32. The role of QD traps in the recombination is an important issue that needs a deeper analysis in order to increase the QDSCs performance.11,13 CdSe7 and CdS5 present Rrec values very close, but a β value for CdSe7 is 0.32, while for CdS5 is 0.49. Then, the CdS5 sample presents lower recombination than the CdSe7 sample, as discussed in Section 4.6.3. In addition the β value, higher than one, obtained for PbS2 QDSCs is an indication of a degradation process.
 Fig. 32  Charge transfer and transport processes for photogenerated electron (green arrows) and hole (blue arrow) in QDSCs. Injection (solid arrow), trapping (dashed arrow), recombination (dotted arrow) and transport (dash-dotted arrow) are indicated. Photogenerated electrons (green) are injected from the QD conduction “band” (CB) to the electron conductor CB, Ie. The injected electron is transported in the electron conductor media, Te. Holes (grey) are injected into the hole conducting media Ih. For efficient cell operation charge transfer and transport processes have to be faster than recombination. There are different recombination pathways in QDSCs. Electrons in the CB of the electron conductor can recombine with acceptor species in the hole conductor, RHC. In addition, there is an alternative recombination pathway through the semiconductor, RSC, this recombination could be mediated by trapping events, Tr, either in the electron conductor or in the light absorbing semiconductor. This representation provides a simplified view of the system, more complete cartoons can be consulted in ref. 11. 
7. Organic bulk heterojunction solar cells
Organic conducting materials are at the heart of BHJ solar cells, a promising alternative to silicon-based solar cells due to their optical, electronic and mechanical properties.4,7 BHJ are formed by an interpenetrating blend of an optically active polymer and electron accepting molecules. At the optically active polymer, excitons are created by light absorption. These excitons dissociate at the polymer/molecule interface, thus spatially separating the electrons and holes which therefore can be transported to the electrodes by hopping. Hence the absorbing blend forms an effective transporting medium in which electrons occupy electronic states of the LUMO of the acceptor fullerene, and holes populate the HOMO of the donor polymer. The absorbing blend is sandwiched between two contacting materials, usually metallic cathodes and highly-doped organic transporting layers.
The archetypical BHJ structure uses polythiophene and fullerene derivatives to form the active blend as ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M (P3HT: 3-hexylthiophene, PCBM: phenyl C61–butyric acid methyl ester, and M: a metallic cathode). Solution-processed polymer:fullerene cells achieved between 6% and 8% power conversion efficiency by the use of novel compounds, substrates and contacting materials as well as additives optimizing the phase separation.155,156 In particular a new class of PTB polymers with low bandgap has provided the highest efficiencies.5,157
It is widely agreed that the open-circuit voltage is given by the separation of Fermi levels of electrons in the fullerene and holes in the polymer. Therefore the basic scheme in Fig. 1 applies well in the BHJ. However there are many uncertainties concerning the explanation of the jV curve and the generation of photocurrent and the transport mechanism in general. The literature heavily emphasizes the dissociation of excitons (and charge transfer states) as a predominant factor for the photocurrent and fill factor. This approach usually relies on the dependence of the dissociation factor (or suppression of recombination) on a macroscopic electrical field in the device that would be regulated by the applied voltage.158,159 It has even been suggested that the photocurrent is space-charge limited.160 Elsewhere we will present a critique of these models that are largely based on earlier models for photoconduction in insulators. Here we provide our view on charge distribution and energetics in standard BHJ devices, as obtained from the interpretation of the measured capacitances. As this model is markedly different from the prevalent picture in the literature, we first explain the properties of the device and then we show some evidence from capacitance results.
7.1 Energetic picture of the BHJ device
The basic device model is shown in Fig. 33. First, Fig. 33(a) shows central properties of the polymer/fullerene blend. The equilibrium Fermi level of electrons and holes is shown close to the HOMO level of P3HT, and this means that from the beginning we assume that the blend is not an insulator, rather it contains hole majority carriers, with characteristic densities (in our measurements) of 1015–1017 cm−3, which is a significant concentration, as the photogenerated carrier density at 1 sun can barely exceed these numbers. The origins of these majority carriers are negatively charged defects that cause p-doping of P3HT when exposed to air or moisture,161,162 or caused by structural defects induced during blend processing.163
 Fig. 33  Band structure of the P3HT:PCBM heterojunction. (a) Separate representation of the blend and the cathode metal. (b) Equilibrium after contact (Vapp = 0). Band bending appears near the cathode and holes can occupy HOMO states of the P3HT within the neutral region. (c) Forward voltage lower than flatband condition at the cathode. (d) Open circuit condition under illumination. 
When the blend is contacted with the electron extracting contact with a low work function ϕc a Schottky barrier is formed at this contact. The height of the barrier, which is the flatband potential, is given by the difference of the Fermi level of the blend, ϕs = EF0, and the cathode workfunction Vfb = [EF0 − ϕc]/q(94)as shown in Fig. 33(b) (neglecting interfacial dipole). Consequently, a depletion zone at the P3HT/M contact is formed which entails bending of the transporting bands, and this is indicated also in Fig. 33(b). On the other hand, the anode contact is regarded as ohmic because of the practical alignment between the PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer at the contact and P3HT HOMO levels.
This model implies that in equilibrium (zero bias voltage in the dark) the depletion zone occupies a large portion of the active layer. The width of the depletion zone obviously depends on the layer thickness and the doping level. At a low forward bias the depletion zone decreases and is confined to the cathode contact, Fig. 33(c). At Vapp = Vfb (flat-band conditions), which is about Vfb = 0.3−0.5 V, the depletion layer adjacent to the P3HT:PCBM/M contact disappears and the neutral, doped region extends along the whole diode bulk.
One important consequence of this model is that there is no overall electrical field in the device associated with the difference of the work functions of the contact materials at the two sides of the blend. Instead, each contact has its own equilibration, due to the starting number of electronic carriers in the blend.
If a reverse voltage is applied, then all the carriers are removed from the blend region, and in this case there is an overall field and the blend becomes a dielectric. But according to our model, this situation is restricted to the reverse voltage. In forward, the raise of the Fermi level of the electrons first removes the barrier at the contact with the cathode, as already explained. Then, at even higher forward voltage, the Fermi level continues to raise. This is shown in Fig. 33(d), corresponding to the open-circuit condition under illumination, and is indeed similar to the basic and general model given in Fig. 1(b).
7.2 Interpretation of the measured capacitance as a function of voltage
Now we describe how the model of Fig. 33 allows the interpretation of the measured capacitance as a function of voltage. A characteristic measurement is shown in Fig. 34(a) and the following four feature regions can be distinguished.
 Fig. 34  (a) Characteristic capacitance response (100 Hz) of a BHJ device with structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al, as a function of bias voltage. Vertical lines separate voltage regions for which capacitance is determined by the geometrical value Cg (zone I: Vapp ≪ Vfb), depletion layer modulation Csc (zone II: Vapp < Vfb), the storage of excess carriers Cμ (zone III: Vapp > Vfb), and limitation mechanisms (zone IV: Vapp ≫ Vfb). (b) Mott–Schottky curve (100 Hz) which exhibits a straight line from which the values Vfb = 0.49 V and NA = 3.8 × 1015 cm−3 are determined, assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM. 
(i) At a large reverse bias, the sample is a dielectric capacitor with a constant capacitance.
(ii) At a moderate reverse and low forward bias (Vapp < Vfb) the applied voltage modulates the width of the depletion zone, which results in the capacitance–voltage relationship which approaches a Mott–Schottky expression given in eqn (52). This behaviour is shown in Fig. 34(b). The charge coming from negatively charged defects is distributed along the depletion zone, whose width is variable with the applied voltage. More generally the spatial charge distribution along the layer thickness gives rise to a wide variety of capacitance–voltage behaviors. Because organic active layers are usually thin (∼100 nm) full depletion is reached at a relatively low reverse bias, and the measured capacitance corresponds to the geometrical value, as mentioned in (i).
(iii) At a forward voltage in excess of the flat-band potential (Vapp ≥ Vfb) the depletion zone collapses so that the capacitance is governed by a chemical capacitance due to the excess carriers Cμ69,164 that is related to the change of the occupancy of charge carriers in the fullerene LUMO and polymer HOMO. This is shown in Fig. 33(d).
(iv) At a larger forward bias it is usually observed that the capacitance saturates and eventually decreases giving even negative values.113
We show in Fig. 34(a) results of the measurement of capacitance using aluminium contacts that satisfy eqn (54) and exhibit a straight line over a bias voltage range between approximately zero and Vfb, Fig. 34(b). From the fit to Mott–Schottky curve we obtain Vfb = 0.49 V and NA = 3.8 × 1015 cm−3, assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM.38,165
In Fig. 35 two extreme examples of the behaviour of the capacitance in a BHJ are shown. On one hand is the case of a thick P3HT:PCBM layer (200 nm) in which the linear Mott–Schottky relationship extends to a large reverse bias. In this case the depletion region for a reverse bias voltage between 0–1 V results to be varying between 63−115 nm, compatible with an active layer thickness of 200 nm. This behaviour occurs because of a relatively high p-doping, NA = 3.5 × 1016 cm−3. The second example exhibits a nearly full depletion of the active layer even at a positive bias, as derived from the saturation in reverse of the Csc−2vs. Vapp plot [Fig. 35(b)]. The reduced doping level (NA = 1.3 × 1016 cm−3) and thinner films (90 nm) make the linear Mott–Schottky part confined into a narrow voltage range.
 Fig. 35  Examples of (a) capacitance–voltage and (b) Mott–Schottky curve measured at 1 kHz of structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M which exhibits a straight line in a wide or narrow voltage region depending on the doping level and active layer thickness. Curve A: NA = 3.5 × 1016 cm−3, and 200 nm thick layer. Curve B: NA = 1.3 × 1016 cm−3, and thinner films (90 nm), assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM. Full depletion is achieved for curve B even at positive bias. 
Additional examples are shown in Fig. 36. These Mott–Schottky plots correspond to solar cells of structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Ag of different polymer/fullerene weight ratios, and active layer thicknesses around 100 nm.166 Energetics and density of impurity, defect, or trap levels in BHJ have been recently determined based on analysis of capacitance spectra Csc(f).167–169 The technique consists in calculating the junction capacitance derivative with respect to the angular frequency of the small voltage perturbation.170
 Fig. 36  (a) Capacitance and (b) Mott–Schottky curve (100 Hz) of structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Al which exhibits a straight line yielding Vfb = 0.35–0.40 V and NA = 1–2 × 1016 cm−3, assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM. Full depletion is achieved at a reverse bias and a linear relationship, eqn (53), at low forward bias (0.0–0.3 V). Different polymer/fullerene weight ratios are explored. The active layer thickness was approximately 100 nm. 
7.3 Interpretation of the impedance spectra
The primary goal of our measurements so far has been the understanding of the photovoltage in connection with the energy picture drawn in Fig. 33. In order to force the photovoltaic device to mainly operate under recombination conditions, one can perform IS measurements at the open-circuit. Under such conditions no direct current is allowed jdc = 0, so that transport mechanisms play a secondary role.
Typical impedance responses in open-circuit conditions by varying the illumination level can be seen in Fig. 37 and 38.171 The spectra are characterized by a major RC arc plus additional minor features at high frequency. The high-frequency part of the spectra may contain information of transport and series resistance elements, as well as dielectric contributions.38 The low frequency arc is attributed to recombination in the photoactive blend.72 The capacitance, resistance, and lifetime values, as a function of open-circuit voltage, are shown in Fig. 39.
 Fig. 37  Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in open-circuit conditions under varying illumination. Experimental points (symbols) and fitting results (solid line). Open-circuit voltage is marked in each spectrum. 
 Fig. 38  Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in the dark at different biases as indicated. Experimental points (symbols) and fitting results (solid lines). An additional inductive element has been included in series accounting for the wire induction. 
 Fig. 39  Parameters extracted from impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in open-circuit conditions under varying illumination. (a) Capacitance and (b) recombination resistance values from fits of the low-frequency arc of the impedance spectra as a function of varying illumination levels (0.01 to 1 sun). (c) Recombination time (effective lifetime) as a function of Voc calculated from the RC time constant. 
At increasing Voc the capacitance in Fig. 39(a), corresponding to the region III of Fig. 34, records the density of states of the LUMO level of the acceptor fullerene. The DOS shows a broad disorder, it can be usually described by a Gaussian distribution but as we can only observe the lower tail of the DOS, in some cases the capacitance is well approximated by an exponential distribution.
The resistance of the main arc is the recombination resistance, Fig. 39(b). Rrec shows an exponential decrease with the bias voltage as stated before in β-recombination model, eqn (42).
The presence of the negative capacitance should be remarked. In Fig. 40(a), which corresponds to the C–V curve of a P3HT:PCBM-based structure, it is observed a reduction in capacitance that develops negative values for Vapp > 0.75 V. This negative capacitance effect can be identified either as a crossing point at low-frequencies in a Z′–Z″ plot, Fig. 40(b), or as a singularity in the capacitance spectra of Fig. 40(c). As discussed elsewhere, several electronic mechanisms have been proposed in order to explain it, related to either outer interfacial phenomena, or limitation of charge storage at the device bulk.113
 Fig. 40  (a) C–V curve exhibiting the negative capacitance effect at large forward bias. (b) Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in dark conditions at large forward bias. At low-frequencies points describe the negative capacitance effect. (c) Spectra of the capacitance modulus showing the change of quadrant around 100 Hz. 
7.4 Main characteristics of BHJ solar cells according to IS results
In general we obtain the picture of Fig. 41. In IS we measure electrons and holes that are thermalized in the respective materials and provide the respective Fermi levels that ultimately produce the measured voltage. There is clear evidence for a wide distribution of the electron states in the fullerene, and we assume that the polymer states are equally broadened in energy (though there is no direct evidence for this). In any case, the number of carriers after charge separation is regulated by recombination. In our view, recombination is produced by separate electrons and holes, there is a probability of a charge transfer as described in ref. 171. In addition to the kinetics of charge transfer of electrons and holes, the actual value of Voc is strongly influenced by the shape of the DOS (that determines the position of the Fermi level).172 The comparison of the DOS of different fullerene acceptors provides an explanation to the observed differences of the photovoltage in BHJ solar cells.42 The β-recombination model holds well, as attested by the exponential shape of the resistance. Therefore the methods based on the recombination diode described in Section 3 of this paper will account for the jV curve of BHJ solar cells.
 Fig. 41  Energy scheme suggesting the broad density of states (DOS) in both the polymer and fullerene materials forming a bulk heterojunction solar cell. Thermalized electrons in the fullerene and thermalized holes in the polymer are located predominantly, respectively, in the lower and upper tails of the DOS. The distribution of charges determines the Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp) whose difference gives the open-circuit voltage Voc (q is the elementary charge). Recombination of an electron in a localized state in the fullerene with a hole in the polymer is indicated by an arrow. 
8. Conclusion
Impedance spectroscopy has become a very useful tool for device characterization and model developing. The technique is versatile because it applies to complete devices while allowing for a distinction among different operating processes. Doping amount, transport features, charge storage, recombination kinetics, and contact effects are some of the functioning mechanisms which can be addressed.
Acknowledgements
We thank financial support from Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación under project HOPE CSD2007-00007, and Generalitat Valenciana under projects PROMETEO/2009/058, ACOMP/2009/056 and ACOMP/2009/095.
References
T. W. Hamman, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. V. Ryswykac and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and L. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Goldstein, I. Yakupov and B. Breen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 638 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, 
            et al.
          , Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1968 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Yi, N. Zu, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6032 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290 CrossRef .
I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3046 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares and J. R. Durrant, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034510 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14945 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hoshikawa, R. Kikuchi and K. Eguchi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 588, 59 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, M. Sakamoto, J. Jiu, Y. Ogata and S. Isoda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13872 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19406 CrossRef .
L. Han, N. Koide, Y. Chiba and T. Mitate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2433 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Y. Bai, J. Zhang, N. Cai, M. Su, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 816–822 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, R. Li, X. Si, D. Zhou, Y. Shi, Y. Wang, X. Jing and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1924 RSC .
L. Andrade, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. A. Ribeiro, A. Mendes and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 1117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, P. Chen, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 290 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 558 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miettunen, J. Halme, M. Toivola and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4011 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, T. Saukkonen, M. Toivola and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B876 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14040 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ondersma and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 638 .
J. Bisquert and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 450 Search PubMed .
J. Villanueva-Cab, H. Wang, G. Oskam and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 748 Search PubMed .
J. R. Jennings, F. Li and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14665 CAS .
A. Braga, S. Giménez, I. Concina, A. Vomiero and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 454–460 Search PubMed .
V. Gónzalez-Pedro, X. Xu, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5783 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, M. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 847 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, M. Sessolo, A. Soriano and H. J. Bolink, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 465, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Glatthaar, M. Riede, N. Keegan, K. Sylvester-Hvid, B. Zimmermann, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch and A. Gombert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 390 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuwabara, Y. Kawahara, T. Yamaguchi and T. Takahashi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2107 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, J. Bisquert, M. Lenes, H. J. Bolink, A. La Rosa, S. Filippone and N. Martín, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2566 Search PubMed .
I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, M. A. Vázquez and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 678 RSC .
Y. Y. Proskuryakov, K. Durose, M. K. Al Turkestani, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, V. Barrioz, D. Lamb, S. J. C. Irvine and E. W. Jones, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 0044507 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, S. Rühle, G. Hodes and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CAS .
Y. Tachibana, K. Hara, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2527 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, A. Sakamoto, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lozano, S. Colodrero, O. Caulier, M. E. Calvo and H. n. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3681 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Smestad, F. C. Krebs, C. M. Lampert, C.-G. Granqvist, K. L. Chopra, X. Mathew and H. Takakura, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 371 CrossRef .
P. T. Landsberg and T. Markvart, Solid-State Electron., 1998, 42, 657 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Honsberg, S. P. Bremmer and R. Corkish, Physica E (Amsterdam), 2002, 14, 136 CrossRef .
J. García-Cañadas, F. Fabregat-Santiago, H. Bolink, E. Palomares, G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 944 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Seró, S. Giménez, T. Moehl, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Lana-Villareal, R. Gómez and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424007 CrossRef .
T. Trupke, S. Baumgärtner and P. Würfel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2009, 205, 2737 .
T. Kirchartz, A. Helbig, W. Reetz, M. Reuter, J. H. Werner and U. Rau, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 394 Search PubMed .

          L. D. Partain, Solar cells and their applications, Wiley, Weinheim, 1st edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, C. Zafer, B. Gultein, B. Aydin, S. Koyuncu, S. Icli, F. Fabregat-Santiago and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19840 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke, P. Würfel, I. Uhlendorf and I. Lauermann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1905 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, J. Ortiz, F. J. Payá, F. Fernández-Lázaro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, A. Sastre-Santos and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1985 RSC .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .

Dye-sensitized solar cells, ed. J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago and K. Kalyanasundaram, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8774 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Green, Solar Cells: Operating Principles, Technology, and System Applications, Prentice Hall, New Jersey,  1981 Search PubMed .
J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1715 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360 RSC .
J. Jamnik and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 1668 RSC .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, E. M. Barea and E. Palomares, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 684 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Giménez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, M. Shalom, S. Giménez, I. Hod, I. Mora-Seró, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6834 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salvador, M. González-Hidalgo, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15915 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .
R. de Gryse, W. P. Gomes, F. Cardon and J. Vennik, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 125, 711 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, P. Bogdanoff and A. Zaban, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 150, E293 .
I. Mora-Seró, F. Fabregat-Santiago, B. Denier, J. Bisquert, R. Tena-Zaera, J. Elias and C. Lévy-Clement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 203117 CrossRef .
R. Tena-Zaera, J. Elias, C. Levy-Clément, C. Bekeny, T. Voss, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16318 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3136 CAS .
S. Södergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S. E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552 CrossRef .
P. R. F. Barnes and B. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19134 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5798–5816 RSC .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gagliardi, S. Mastroianni, D. Gentilini, F. Giordano, A. Reale, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and V. S. Vikhrenko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2313 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235203 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3175 RSC .
J. Bisquert and V. S. Vikhrenko, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3977 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pitarch, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2983 RSC .
J. Bisquert, M. Grätzel, Q. Wang and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11284 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, M. Juozapavicius, L. Liu, X. Li, E. Palomares, A. Forneli and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547 RSC .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, N. S. Ferriols, P. Bogdanoff and E. C. Pereira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Seró, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2323 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, R. Caballero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, P. de la Cruz, F. Langa and J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 11, 245 .
I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 945 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Seró, S. Giménez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, R. Gomez, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1848 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 646, 43 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, G. K. Mor, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Q. Yu, Y. Cheng, S. Liu, D. Shui, F. Gao and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6290 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J. H. Yum, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, D. Di Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. M. Liang, F. Cai, P. Chen, B. Peng, J. Chen and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4465 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. D. P. Hagberg, K. M. Karlsson, K. Nonomura, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9550 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, F. Pichot, S. Ferrere and C. L. Fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1422 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7392 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. de Vries, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9082 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Zoppi, K. Durose, Y. Y. Proskuryakov, I. Oja, A. Belaidi, T. Dittrich, R. Tena-Zaera, A. Katty, C. Lévy-Clement, V. Barrioz and S. J. C. Irvine, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 640 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Li, M. S. Góes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, P. R. Bueno, C. Prasittichaia, J. T. Hupp and T. J. Marks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4679 RSC .
U. B. Cappel, A. L. Smeigh, S. Plogmaker, E. M. J. Johansson, H. Rensmo, L. HammarstroÌm, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4345–4358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
W. B. Heuer, H.-L. Xia, M. Abrahamsson, Z. Zhou, S. Ardo, A. A. N. Sarjeant and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 7726 CrossRef CAS .
D. Achey, S. Ardo, H.-L. Xia, M. A. Siegler and G. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 2, 305 Search PubMed .
J. H. Park, B.-W. Kim and J. H. Moon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11(10), B171 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Uchida, T. Inoue, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, 4th International Conference on the Industrialization of Dye Solar Cells (4th DSC-IC), Colorado Springs, USA,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, L. Schmidt-Mende, C. Orizu, S. Ogier, K. Carr, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1832 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kron, T. Egerter, J. H. Werner and W. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3556 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Spath, P. M. Sommeling, J. A. M. Von Roosmalen, H. J. P. Smit, N. P. G. Burg, D. R. Mahieu, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 207 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Hu, S. Dai, L. Guo, N. Jiang and D. Kou, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2338 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka and M. Ikegami, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2010, 23, 269 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Castro, P. Chabrecek, R. Hany and F. Nuesch, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2009, 3, 278 Search PubMed .
S. Ito, N. L. Cevey-Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Péchy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC .
K. Miettunen, X. L. Ruan, T. Saukkonen, J. Halme, M. Toivola, G. S. Huang and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B814 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hinsch, S. Behrens, M. Berginc, H. Bönnemann, H. Brandt, A. Drewitz, F. Einsele, D. Faßler, D. Gerhard, H. Gores, R. Haag, T. Herzig, S. Himmler, G. Khelashvili, D. Koch, G. Nazmutdinova, U. Opara-Krasovec, P. Putyra, U. Rau, R. Sastrawan, T. Schauer, C. Schreiner, S. Sensfuss, C. Siegers, K. Skupien, P. Wachter, J. Walter, P. Wasserscheid, U. Würfel and M. Zistler, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2008, 16, 489 Search PubMed .
Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 153 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Angelo and R. R. Farnood, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2010, 24, 643 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toivola, J. Halme, K. Miettunen, K. Aitola and P. D. Lund, Int. J. Energy Res., 2009, 33, 1145 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikegami, K. Miyoshi, T. Miyasaka, K. Teshima, T. C. Wei, C. C. Wan and Y. Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 153122 CrossRef .
T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 262–269 Search PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, S. Yoriya, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 065707 CrossRef .
N. Kopidakis, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11307 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3437 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte and F. Fabregat Santiago, J. Solid State Electrochem., 1999, 3, 337 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, M. S. Góes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4015 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Z. Zheng, H. Tang, L. Zhao and F. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10322 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dittrich, A. Belaidi and A. Ennaoui, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011 DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2010.12.034 .
W. Yu, L. H. Qu, W. Z. Guo and X. G. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Chang, J. H. Rhee, S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shalom, S. Dor, S. Rühle, L. Grinis and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3895 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, P. Chen, S.-J. Moon, F. Sauvage, K. Sivula, T. Bessho, D. R. Gamelin, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S. I. Seok, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7602 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giménez, I. Mora-Seró, L. Macor, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, R. Gómez, L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295204 CrossRef .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 544 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chakrapani, K. Tvrdy and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4136 CrossRef .
G. Boschloo and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2228 CrossRef CAS .
T. Berger, T. Lana-Villarreal, D. Monllor-Satoca and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marsh, J. M. Hodgkiss and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3672 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 126602 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. A. Abdou, F. P. Orfino, Y. Son and S. Holdcroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoshino, M. Yoshida, S. Uemura, T. Kodzasa, N. Takada, T. Kamata and K. Yase, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 5088 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, A. Nardes, D. Wang, J. J. Berry and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4914 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mora-Seró, Y. Luo, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, D. Muñoz, C. Voz, J. Puigdollers and R. Alcubilla, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 505 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, M. Sessolo, A. Soriano and H. J. Bolink, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 465, 57 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Boix, G. Garcia-Belmonte, U. Muñecas, M. Neophytou, C. Waldauf and R. Pacios, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 233302 CrossRef .
L. C. Kimerling, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 1839 CrossRef CAS .
I. Balberg, J. Appl. Phys., 1985, 58, 2603 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Hegedus and W. N. Shafarman, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 155 Search PubMed .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Müller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, P. P. Boix, J. Bisquert, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 366 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte and J. Bisquert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 113301 CrossRef .

          M. Grätzel, 2009, presented at MRS Fall Meeting in Boston.
R. Y. Ogura, S. Nakane, M. Morooka, M. Orihashi, Y. Suzuki and K. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073308 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2003, 17, 320 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Shim and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Science, 2001, 291, 2390 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cp02249gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

Francisco Fabregat-Santiago
	Francisco Fabregat Santiago (Bsc in Physics 1995, PhD in 2001) is Associate Professor in the Department of Physics at the University Jaume I in Spain and an active member of the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group. He is an expert in electro-optical characterization of devices and particularly known by his works in the use of impedance spectroscopy to study the electrical properties of devices and films including ZnO and TiO2 nanostructured films, dye sensitized solar cells, electrochromic materials and liquid and solid state hole conductors.

Germà Garcia-Belmonte
	Germà Garcia-Belmonte received his PhD degree at Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, in 1996. He worked from 1988 at CIEMAT, Madrid, on experimental as well as theoretical research in the area of digital processing of nuclear signal. He joined the Universitat Jaume I, Castelló, in 1992 and currently works as Professor of Applied Physics (2010) at the Department of Physics (Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group). Recently he follows researches in various topics within the field of Organic Electronics and photovoltaics as electronic mechanisms in organic light-emitting diodes, organic photovoltaics, and plastic and thin-film solar cells. Device physics using impedance spectroscopy (including modeling and measuring) is his main subject.

Iván Mora-Seró
	Iván Mora-Seró received his PhD at Universitat de València (Spain) on the crystal growth of semiconductors II–VI with narrow gap. He joined the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group at Universitat Jaume I (Spain) in 2002. Since then he has specialized in research on the characterization of the injection, transport, and recombination in sensitized electrodes using as absorbing materials both dye and especially semiconductor quantum dots.

Juan Bisquert
	Juan Bisquert is professor of Applied Physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló and leads the Photovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group (www.elp.uji.es) at the Physics Department. Recent research activity is focused on nanoscale devices for production of clean energies, in particular dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells and quantum-dot sensitized solar cells. Bisquert is a specialist in theoretical modelling and interpretation of impedance spectroscopy techniques that have shown to be very useful to understand fundamental electronic phenomena and device properties in dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells, nanowire structures, organic LEDs, and solid-state photovoltaic devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption of light in a semiconductor (1) produces electrons and hole carriers that rapidly relax (2) to the lowest lying energy levels of the conduction band (EC) and highest levels of the valence band (EV). The excess photogenerated carriers produce a splitting of the Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp) that is marked as a “Fermi level voltage” VF. Electrons decay to valence band levels by recombination with holes (3). (b) Scheme of a solar cell, formed by the absorber material supplemented by two selective contacts. These are formed by an electron transport material (ETM) that is transparent to electrons and rejects holes, and by a hole transport material (HTM) that accepts and transports the holes with no impedance, and blocks the electrons. Such arrangements allow the Fermi level in the metal contacts to equilibrate with the separate Fermi levels of electrons and holes, producing an external voltage, and to extract the carriers giving a photocurrent in the external circuit.	 

 	Fig. 2  Theoretical calculation of the current–voltage curve (a) and power output (b) of a solar cell with jsc = 25 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.8 V, and diode factor m = 1. In (b) the left vertical axis is normalized to the incident power of 1 sun and gives the conversion efficiency, and the right axis normalization gives the fill factor. Comparison of the current–voltage curve (c) and power output (d) for two solar cells with the same jsc and Voc, but with different FF characteristics. The diode curve has FF 0.86 and conversion efficiency of 17% while the straight curve (“ohmic solar cell”) has an efficiency of less than 5%.	 
	(1)
ϕbbE(E) = Eϕbbph(E)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM1.5G) solar spectrum (energy as a function of wavelength) and the spectrum of a blackbody at temperature 5800 K with a dilution factor 1.56 × 10−5 (blue line).	 
Pel = jV	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photon flux emitted by a blackbody at temperature 5800 K with a dilution factor FS = 1.56 × 10−5 (blue line). The shaded area indicates the photons absorbed by a semiconductor of bandgap Eg = 1.5 eV and absorptance a = 1. (b) The “absorption efficiency” is a count of the photons absorbed above the bandgap energy Eg, each photon contributing an energy Eg. This energy is divided by the total energy flux of the BB radiation.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Integrated current as a function of the bandgap energy of the absorber, for incident blackbody radiation at temperature TS = 5800 K, with total energy flux JE,tot = 1000 Wm−2. (b) The maximal photovoltaic efficiency of the absorber, assuming FF = 0.83. The thin lines are the current and Shockley–Queisser efficiency for actual AM1.5G solar irradiance.	 
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Air Mass 1.5 Global (AM1.5G) solar spectrum (photon flux as a function of wavelength) and the measured IPCE of a DSC with N719 dye and a BHJ solar cell formed by P3HT/PCBM.	 
VF = (EFn − EFp)/q	(10)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic energy diagrams of the material components of dye solar cells. Standard energy levels are given in the energy scale, while the origin of the electrochemical scale is taken at −4.4 eV. EFn is the Fermi levels of electrons, EFp is the Fermi level of holes, and the difference relates to Voc as indicated. Energy levels of TiO2 and dyes are dependent on the solution components, and dye levels may also depend on criteria for the onset of absorption. Energy levels of QDs from ref. 177.	 
Pel = jsc × FF × Voc	(11)
Vapp = VF + Vs = VF − jRs	(12)
VF = [EFn(x = 0) − EFp(x = L)]/q	(13)
nc = Nce(EFn−Ec)/kBT	(14)
nc = n0e(EFn−EF0)/kBT	(15)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme of a DSC device. (b) Basic energy diagram indicating voltage injection of electrons (1) and holes (2) and recombination (3) processes in a DSC. Also shown are the transport energy levels and Fermi levels of electrons and holes, and the potential associated with separation of Fermi levels. Note that the electron injection contact is blocking for holes, and vice versa. (c) The basic equivalent circuit for ac electrical perturbation.	 
nc = n0eqVF/kBT	(16)
	(17)
Un = krecncβ	(18)
j = qϕabs − qkrLncβ + qkrLn0β	(19)
j = jsc − j0(eqβVF/kBT − 1)	(20)
j0 = j0ke−βEc/kBT	(21)
j0k = qkrLNcβeβEF0/kBT	(22)
j = jsc − j0ke−βEc/kBT(eqβVF/kBT − 1)	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)

 	Fig. 9  The fill factor of a Shockley diode as a function of the open-circuit voltage, according to the value of the ideality factor, m. The points are values corresponding to characteristics of DSC with dyes Z991 (η = 12.2%),173 C106 (η = 11.3%),104 D131 (η = 5.1%)174 and N719 (η = 7.7%); the record cells in several inorganic technologies,175 and an organic bulk heterojunction.176 Series resistance effects are removed only for DSC N719.	 

 	Fig. 10  Theoretical calculation (diode model) of the current–voltage curve (a) and recombination resistance (b) of several solar cells differing only in the recombination exponent β, see the parameters used in the calculation in Table 1.	 

β
	1.0	0.80	0.50

E
c − EF0/eV	1.0	1.0	1.0

j
sc/mA cm−2	15.0	15.0	15.0

j
0k/mA cm−2	104	104	104

j
0/mA cm−2	1.98 × 10−13	4.33 × 10−10	4.45 × 10−5

V
oc/V	0.83	0.79	0.66
FF	0.86	0.83	0.74

η
	10.7	9.8	7.3

 	Fig. 11  Theoretical calculation (diode model) of the current–voltage curve (a) and recombination resistance (b), see the parameters used in the calculation in Table 2. (c) Calculated capacitance using the expression Cμ = qNL/kBT0exp[(EFn − Ec)/kBT0], with parameters NL = 1020 cm−3, T0 = 1000 K. (d) The resistances plot at the same equivalent position of the edge of the conduction band, taking A as a reference.	 


β
	0.60	0.70	0.70

E
c − EF0/eV	1.00	0.80	0.80

j
sc/mA cm−2	14.0	16.0	16.0

j
0k/mA cm−2	1000	10000	100

j
0/mA cm−2	9.50 × 10−8	4.42 × 10−6	4.42 × 10−8

V
oc/V	0.82	0.56	0.7319
FF	0.80	0.76	0.80

η
	9.12	6.88	9.43
n(t) =  + (t)	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
veff = LA(1 − p)	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
	(40)
rrecccbμ = τ0	(41)
	(42)

 	Fig. 12  Electron energy diagram illustrating the behavior of a nanostructured TiO2 electrode (shown in the top scheme) when a variation dV of the electrochemical potential of electrons EFn (Fermi level) is applied, assuming that the conduction band energy (Ec) remains stationary with respect to the redox level, Eredox. Changes of occupancy both of conduction band, dnc, and trapped electrons in localized levels, dnL (shaded region of the bandgap), are indicated. This drawing shows that the chemical capacitance is a measure of the density of states in the bandgap, when dnL ≫ dnc.	 
Vecb = VF − ΔEc/q	(43)
ΔEc = Ec − Ec,ref	(44)
	(45)
	(46)
	(47)
	(48)
w = w0Vsc1/2	(49)
	(50)
	(51)
	(52)
	(53)

 	Fig. 13  Theoretical calculation of (a) capacitances in a silicon solar cell: chemical capacitance Cμ (calculated at two different temperatures, as indicated), capacitance in the depletion layer Csc, and total capacitance (thick line). (b) Width of the space charge region. (c) Mott–Schottky plot. Parameters used in the simulation: L = 300 μm, T = 300 K, Vbi = 0.65 V, εr = 1, NA = 1016 cm−3, n0 = 108 cm−3.	 
	(54)
	(55)
	(56)

 	Fig. 14  Schematic energy diagram of a nanowire indicating the depletion layer at the surface and the quasineutral (conducting) region of radius x in the center. Vs is the potential at the surface, EC is the lower edge of the conduction band, and EF is the Fermi level.	 
	(57)
	(58)
nc(0) = n0eqVF/kBT	(59)
j = −qJn(0); Jn(L) = 0	(60)
GSE(x) = ηsep(1 − SSE)αde−(αd+αh)ϕ0	(61)
GSE(x) = ηsep(1 − SCE)Thαde−(αd+αh)(L−x)ϕ0	(62)
Un(x) = krecchnc(x)β	(63)
	(64)
	(65)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Carrier distribution by diffusion–recombination of electrons and photogeneration profile in a nanostructured film with L = 10 μm, in dark and under incident photon flux ϕ0 = 1.45 × 1017 cm−2 s−1, at the indicated voltages at the contact. Parameters: absorption coefficient αabs = 500 cm−1, diffusion coefficient D0 = 10−5 cm2 s−1, diffusion length Ln = 0.5L, T = 300 K, EF0 = 0 eV, Ec = 1 eV, Nc = 1020 cm−3. (b) The Fermi level of electrons and (c) current density–voltage for the same model system.	 
	(66)
	(67)
ĵn(x) = −qĴn(x)	(68)
	(69)
	(70)
	(71)
	(72)

 	Fig. 16  (a) Electron energy diagram of a nanostructured metal oxide electrode in contact with a redox electrolyte (or hole conducting medium), illustrating the electrochemical potential of electrons EFn (Fermi level) when a voltage V is applied to the substrate, and assuming that conduction band energy (Ec) remains stationary with respect to the redox level, Eredox. (b) The equivalent circuit (transmission line model) for a small periodic ac perturbation that contains the resistance for electron transport along the metal oxide nanoparticles, rtr; the resistance in the hole transport medium (hole or ion conduction) rHTM; the recombination resistance at the metal oxide/electrolyte interface, rrec; and the chemical capacitance for charge accumulation in the metal oxide particles, cμ.	 
	(73)
Dn = D0/δL	(74)
τn = δLτ0	(75)
	(76)
	(77)
	(78)
	(79)
RAL = ⅓Rtr + Rrec (Rrec ≫ Rtr)	(80)
	(81)
RAL = (RtrRrec)1/2 (Rtr ≫ Rrec)	(82)
	(83)

 	Fig. 17  Simulation of the diffusion–recombination impedance with reflecting boundary condition at the back contact and Ln = 3.1L. Parameters Rtr = 102 Ω cm−2, Rrec = 103 Ω cm−2, Cμ = 5 × 10−6 F cm−2. Shown are the characteristic frequency of the low frequency arc (square point), related to the angular frequency ωr = τ−1n = 1/RrecCμ, where τn is the carrier lifetime; the low frequency resistance; and the characteristic frequency of the turnover from Warburg behaviour to low frequency recombination arc (square point), related to the angular frequency ωtr = Dn/L2 = 1/RtrCμ, where Dn is the minority carrier diffusion coefficient.	 
	(84)
Rdc = Rseries + Rrec + ⅓Rtr (Rrec ≫ Rtr)	(85)
Rdc = Rseries + (RtrRrec)1/2 (Rtr ≫ Rrec)	(86)
Rrec = RBL||Rrec,np.	(87)
Rseries = RS + RCE + Rd.	(88)
	(89)
	(90)

 	Fig. 18  Experimental impedance spectra of a DSC with an ionic liquid based electrolyte under 50 mW cm−2 illumination at (a) 0.40 V and at (b) open circuit conditions, 0.65 V. (c) The Gerischer impedance spectra appearing in a defective cell, with presenting lower values of recombination resistance than transport resistance. Data are taken at 0.45 V under 100 mW cm−2 illumination. (d) The complete equivalent circuit model to fit experimental data of (a) and (c). (e) Simplified equivalent circuit model that is valid for the spectra measured at high voltage as in (b). In (a) to (c) experimental data are represented by dots and fits to models (c) and (d) are represented by lines.	 

 	Fig. 19  Recombination resistance (a) and cell capacitance (b) of a DSC with an acetonitrile-based electrolyte. At low voltages the measured values are dominated by the characteristics of the back layer at the bottom of the TiO2 film (RBL and CBL). At voltages above 0.4 V, recombination through the porous film and chemical capacitance of TiO2 dominate the measured parameters.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Characteristic results of solar cells showing negative capacitance at a forward (negative) bias: extremely thin absorber (ETA) cell based on rough TiO2, dye-sensitized solar cell (defective) with solid OMeTAD hole conductor, and normal P3HT/PCBM bulk heterojunction organic solar cell. (b) Same data as in (a) in logarithmic scale, including the standard (positive) chemical capacitance of two dye-sensitized solar cells (nanostructured TiO2/N719/iodide electrolyte) with both liquid and viscous electrolyte, and a regular DSC with OMeTAD hole conductor. (c) Model used to fit negative capacitance.111	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The separate contributions to the total series resistance obtained by impedance spectroscopy at the different voltages in an acetonitrile based DSC under 1 sun illumination. (b) The measured current–voltage curve (red line) obtained for the same cell and measurement conditions. The jV curve is characterized by parameters Voc = 0.73, jsc = 14.4 mA cm−2, FF = 0.66, η = 6.9%. Green line shows the simulated jV curve after removing the series resistance effect. After the correction it is obtained FF = 0.74 and η = 7.7%. The void circles show the values obtained by integration of resistances measured by IS.	 
	(91)
	(92)


V
oc/V	0.68	0.80	0.73	0.45	0.44	0.35	0.45	0.39

j
sc/mA cm−2	14.00	17.96	18.80	10.90	3.48	5.71	8.22	10.40
FF	0.71	0.74	0.61	0.50	0.66	0.57	0.58	0.54

η(%)	7.00	10.53	8.43	2.50	1.01	1.14	2.14	2.18
Internal FF	0.82	0.82	0.80	0.71	0.68	0.65	0.67	0.67
Calculated FF	0.81	0.82	0.79	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.67	067
Internal η (%)	7.70	11.58	10.96	3.47	1.04	1.21	2.47	2.73

β
	0.78	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.44	0.40	0.50	0.60

j
0/mA cm−2	1.7 × 10−8	1.0 × 10−8	4.8 × 10−7	1.6 × 10−4	2.0 × 10−3	25.5 × 10−3	1.3 × 10−3	1.2 × 10−3

j
0k/mA cm−2	604	230	11164	8363	980	68	3928	21417

α
	0.51	0.45	0.26	0.47	0.34	0.40	0.41	0.41

E
c − EF0/eV	1.00	1.06	0.99	0.66	0.78	0.68	0.77	0.74
−ΔEc/V	0.06	Ref	0.08	0.40	0.28	0.38	0.29	0.32
Avg. Rseries/Ω	29	23	23	27	17	19	20	25

R
series/Ω cm2	8.12	2.94	6.44	11.61	5.61	6.84	5.50	6.25
Area/cm2	0.28	0.13	0.28	0.43	0.33	0.36	0.28	0.25

L/μm	10.80	14.00	10.80	10.00	10.00	10.00	10.00	10.00
Porosity	0.68	0.68	0.68	0.50	0.50	0.50	0.50	0.50

T/K	300	300	300	300	300	300	300	300
Electrolyte	Z380	Z300	Z325	E100	E100	E100	E105	E105
Dye	K19	N719	N719	N719	ZnPc	H2Pc	BG1	BG2

 	Fig. 22  Chemical capacitance (a) and recombination resistance (c) of a collection of DSCs with different dyes and electrolytes as described in Table 3, plotted against VF. The effect of different conduction band positions has been removed by plotting the chemical capacitance (b) and recombination resistance, (d) and (e), vs. Vecb.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Experimental jV curves (dots) and regenerated jV curves obtained from impedance data (lines) for a collection of samples from Table 3. (b) Internal jV curves for the same samples.	 

 	Fig. 24  Energy diagrams of the active components in some DSC samples prepared with the same electrolyte, E100 (0.7 M LiI and 0.05 M I2 in 3-methoxypropionitrile), and different dyes, ZnPc, H2Pc and N719. To represent acceptor and donor states of the I3−/I− redox couple (dashed line), it has been taken a reorganization energy of 0.5 eV. For the HOMO and LUMO states of the dyes it has been considered the effect of absorption and solvation (continuous lines). The density of electron states below the conduction band of the TiO2 has been obtained from capacitance measurements (dots). The shape of the DOS has been estimated, also from the values of capacitance, up to the conduction band (blue line).	 

 	Fig. 25  Comparison of the transport resistance for different hole conductors.	 
	(93)

 	Fig. 26  (a) Scheme of the equivalent circuit (transmission line) describing IS measurements of a semiconductor nanotube. (b) Impedance spectrum of a nanotube film in an aqueous solution adjusted at pH 11 with KOH at Vapp = 0.35 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (c) The impedance results of a DSC made with the same type of films, at Vapp = 0.4 V.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The transport resistance and (b) the capacitance of a 5.0 μm long nanotube before and after electrochemical doping. Note that transport resistance values below 10 ohm present a large uncertainty, however they are plotted as a reference. Note that the sign of the potential is changed to preserve the same notation as in the text.	 

 	Fig. 28  Mott–Schottky plots of doped nanotubes in aqueous solution at two different values of pH. Note that the sign of the potential is changed to preserve the notation as in the text.	 

 	Fig. 29  Mott–Schottky plots of a ZnO nanowire sample before (dots) and after (triangles) thermal annealing at 450 °C. The solid lines represent the fits to the model explained in the main text.	 

 	Fig. 30  Analysis of different quantum dot sensitized electrodes with various surface treatments, using polysulfide as electrolyte and platinized FTO as counter electrode. The sample after QD growth by chemical bath deposition with no treatment is taken as the reference sample (Ref). Two configurations with only one treatment have been analyzed: with ZnS coating (ZnS sample) and with dipole grafting (DT sample, using 4-methoxybenzenethiol as molecular dipole). In addition, samples with two treatments: first DT and second ZnS coating (DT + ZnS) and first ZnS coating and second a dipole treatment (ZnS + DT) have been explored. (a) j–V curves. The cells presented an efficiency of Ref (η = 0.23%), DT (η = 0.63%), ZnS (η = 1.25%), ZnS + DT (η = 0.71%) and DT + ZnS (η = 1.60%); (b) capacitance vs. VF and (c) recombination resistance vs. Vecb.73	 

 	Fig. 31  Analysis of different quantum dot sensitized electrodes using different semiconductor light absorbing materials, using polysulfide as an electrolyte and Cu2S as a counter electrode. All the samples have been coated with two SILAR cycles of ZnS. The different semiconductors have been grown by SILAR,35,36 the number after the name of the semiconductor material indicates the number of SILAR cycles performed. (a) j–V curves. The cells presented an efficiency of PbS2 (η = 0.51%), PbS2/CdS5 (η = 2.21%), CdS5 (η = 1.22%), CdSe3 (η = 0.73%) and CdSe7 (η = 3.83%); (b) capacitance vs. VF and (c) recombination resistance vs. Vecb, solid lines are the linear fits of the experimental data. Using eqn (26) the β parameter of each cell has been obtained and indicated on the graph.	 

 	Fig. 32  Charge transfer and transport processes for photogenerated electron (green arrows) and hole (blue arrow) in QDSCs. Injection (solid arrow), trapping (dashed arrow), recombination (dotted arrow) and transport (dash-dotted arrow) are indicated. Photogenerated electrons (green) are injected from the QD conduction “band” (CB) to the electron conductor CB, Ie. The injected electron is transported in the electron conductor media, Te. Holes (grey) are injected into the hole conducting media Ih. For efficient cell operation charge transfer and transport processes have to be faster than recombination. There are different recombination pathways in QDSCs. Electrons in the CB of the electron conductor can recombine with acceptor species in the hole conductor, RHC. In addition, there is an alternative recombination pathway through the semiconductor, RSC, this recombination could be mediated by trapping events, Tr, either in the electron conductor or in the light absorbing semiconductor. This representation provides a simplified view of the system, more complete cartoons can be consulted in ref. 11.	 

 	Fig. 33  Band structure of the P3HT:PCBM heterojunction. (a) Separate representation of the blend and the cathode metal. (b) Equilibrium after contact (Vapp = 0). Band bending appears near the cathode and holes can occupy HOMO states of the P3HT within the neutral region. (c) Forward voltage lower than flatband condition at the cathode. (d) Open circuit condition under illumination.	 
Vfb = [EF0 − ϕc]/q	(94)

 	Fig. 34  (a) Characteristic capacitance response (100 Hz) of a BHJ device with structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al, as a function of bias voltage. Vertical lines separate voltage regions for which capacitance is determined by the geometrical value Cg (zone I: Vapp ≪ Vfb), depletion layer modulation Csc (zone II: Vapp < Vfb), the storage of excess carriers Cμ (zone III: Vapp > Vfb), and limitation mechanisms (zone IV: Vapp ≫ Vfb). (b) Mott–Schottky curve (100 Hz) which exhibits a straight line from which the values Vfb = 0.49 V and NA = 3.8 × 1015 cm−3 are determined, assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 35  Examples of (a) capacitance–voltage and (b) Mott–Schottky curve measured at 1 kHz of structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/M which exhibits a straight line in a wide or narrow voltage region depending on the doping level and active layer thickness. Curve A: NA = 3.5 × 1016 cm−3, and 200 nm thick layer. Curve B: NA = 1.3 × 1016 cm−3, and thinner films (90 nm), assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM. Full depletion is achieved for curve B even at positive bias.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Capacitance and (b) Mott–Schottky curve (100 Hz) of structures ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Al which exhibits a straight line yielding Vfb = 0.35–0.40 V and NA = 1–2 × 1016 cm−3, assuming ε = 3 for P3HT:PCBM. Full depletion is achieved at a reverse bias and a linear relationship, eqn (53), at low forward bias (0.0–0.3 V). Different polymer/fullerene weight ratios are explored. The active layer thickness was approximately 100 nm.	 

 	Fig. 37  Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in open-circuit conditions under varying illumination. Experimental points (symbols) and fitting results (solid line). Open-circuit voltage is marked in each spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 38  Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in the dark at different biases as indicated. Experimental points (symbols) and fitting results (solid lines). An additional inductive element has been included in series accounting for the wire induction.	 

 	Fig. 39  Parameters extracted from impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in open-circuit conditions under varying illumination. (a) Capacitance and (b) recombination resistance values from fits of the low-frequency arc of the impedance spectra as a function of varying illumination levels (0.01 to 1 sun). (c) Recombination time (effective lifetime) as a function of Voc calculated from the RC time constant.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) C–V curve exhibiting the negative capacitance effect at large forward bias. (b) Impedance spectra of BHJ devices of structure (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al) measured in dark conditions at large forward bias. At low-frequencies points describe the negative capacitance effect. (c) Spectra of the capacitance modulus showing the change of quadrant around 100 Hz.	 

 	Fig. 41  Energy scheme suggesting the broad density of states (DOS) in both the polymer and fullerene materials forming a bulk heterojunction solar cell. Thermalized electrons in the fullerene and thermalized holes in the polymer are located predominantly, respectively, in the lower and upper tails of the DOS. The distribution of charges determines the Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (EFp) whose difference gives the open-circuit voltage Voc (q is the elementary charge). Recombination of an electron in a localized state in the fullerene with a hole in the polymer is indicated by an arrow.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0cp02249g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
