A small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy: a powerful tool to enhance the device efficiency and thermal stability of ternary polymer solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC00329H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC00329H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11223-11238A small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy: a powerful tool to enhance the device efficiency and thermal stability of ternary polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Pan 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Linqiao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingtang 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yufu 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Weng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chaohua 
            Cui
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ping 
            Shen
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Green Organic Synthesis and Application of Hunan Province, Key Laboratory of Environmentally Friendly Chemistry and Application of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan 411105, China. E-mail: shenping802002@163.com
bLaboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials, College of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China
Received 
      18th January 2020
    , Accepted 3rd July 2020First published on 8th July 2020AbstractAlong with the rapidly increasing power conversion efficiency (PCE) of polymer solar cells (PSCs), the stability of PSCs has become one of the crucial issues for the commercial application of this technology. Ternary PSCs exhibit great potential in improving the device efficiency and stability. However, the main cause behind the improvement in the efficiency and stability has been a lack of in-depth investigation. Moreover, the basic working mechanism of ternary solar cells is still ambiguous and it is urgently necessary to further understand it. Here, a small-molecule acceptor (SMA) IDT-OT was developed and introduced into a binary system containing polymer donor PBDB-T (donor) and fullerene acceptor (FA) PC71BM to construct donor/FA/SMA ternary PSCs. The results reveal that the incorporation of IDT-OT into the PBDB-T/PC71BM binary system can improve the PCE up to 9.09% and enhance the thermal stability of the ternary PSCs relative to all the binary systems. In-depth investigations indicate that the enhanced device performance and stability are closely related to an intermixed small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy formed by IDT-OT and PC71BM in which the structural nature of the two acceptors is remarkably different. This distinctive alloy system is verified via investigating the dependence of the LUMO energy level and open-circuit voltage on the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend and the miscibility of the two acceptors by morphological characterization and water contact angle measurements. This small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy phase is beneficial for improving charge dissociation, collection and transport as well as the carrier mobility, and suppressing bimolecular recombination, thus leading to the increase of Jsc and FF of the ternary PSCs. Interestingly, photoluminescence and donor-free device performance studies demonstrate that there exists not only efficient charge transfer but also Förster resonance energy transfer between PC71BM and IDT-OT, which has rarely been found in previously reported ternary PSCs. Moreover, we suppose the stable active layer morphology benefitting from the formation of this small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy as the main reason behind the observed improvement in the thermal stability of the ternary PSCs. This work suggests that introducing an SMA into an FA to form a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy could be a powerful tool to realize high-performance and stable PSCs.
1 Introduction
At present, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have become a hot research topic in academia and industry not only due to the advantages of low cost, light weight and flexibility but also the steadily improving power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), which have reached the commercialization benchmark value of 15%.1–6 The key part of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) PSCs is the photoactive layer, which usually is composed of a polymer donor and a fullerene acceptor (e.g. phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester, PC71BM, see Fig. 1) to form an interpenetrating nanoscale network for effective exciton disaggregation and charge transfer.7 Nevertheless, the PCE of such donor/acceptor binary PSCs is generally restricted by their inadequate light absorption because of the intrinsically weak light absorption of fullerene acceptors (FAs) in the visible spectral region. To circumvent this problem, adding a third component, either a polymer donor (donor) or acceptor (A), into the host binary system to construct ternary PSCs has been widely explored and proven as a useful strategy to extend the spectral absorption region in a single-junction device.8–12 Through cautiously selecting the third component and tailoring the blend composition ratio, the optical absorption, electronic energy levels, charge transport, exciton separation and blend morphology can be well controlled, resulting in an enhancement of the photovoltaic performance of ternary PSCs. Owing to the rapid development in photovoltaic materials, especially for nonfullerene small-molecule acceptors (SMAs), and device engineering optimization, the PCEs of ternary PSCs are now exceeding 14%.13–21 Encouragingly, a very new report presented a new ternary PSC with a high PCE up to 17% using liquid exfoliated WS2 as the charge transport interlayers.22
 Fig. 1  (a) Device architecture of the ternary PSCs used in this work. (b) Molecular structures of PBDB-T, PC71BM and IDT-OT. (c) Absorption spectra of PBDB-T, PC71BM and IDT-OT as thin films. (d) Absorption spectra of the binary and ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1/1.5/0.2) blend films. (e) Schematic energy level diagram for PBDB-T, IDT-OT, and PC71BM and the proposed working mechanism of these ternary PSCs based on a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy model in this study. 
Fullerene acceptors (FAs) have some intrinsic shortcomings in spectral absorption and energy level manipulation, but this kind of classical acceptor has many merits, like high electron mobility, large electron affinity and isotropic charge transport. On the other hand, nonfullerene SMAs display some superior characteristics to FAs, for instance, strong absorbility in the visible range, low energy losses, and easily tunable frontier molecular orbital (HOMO/LUMO) energy levels, and thus the associated devices can realize high PCEs up to 16%.3–6 To integrate the advantages of FAs and SMAs, one common approach is to add a certain amount of FA into the donor/SMA host binary blend to form donor/FA/SMA type ternary devices.14,21–32 An alternative strategy is that a certain amount of SMA as the third component combines with the donor/FA-based host binary blend to result in the corresponding ternary PSCs.33–39 In the second case, the resulting ternary PSCs usually exhibited excellent PCEs because the added SMAs are beneficial for improving the light absorption, optimizing the morphology and achieving energy level alignment for favorable charge separation, transport and collection.33–39 In spite of these benefits, tuning the photovoltaic parameters, such as the short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF), independently or even synchronously demands a basic understanding of the working mechanism of BHJ ternary blend PSCs. In fact, the research community has made important investigations to understand the fundamental processes governing ternary PSCs, for example, charge transfer,40,41 energy transfer,42–44 parallel-like45,46 and alloy models14,33,37,47–51 as well as combinations of those as relevant working mechanisms. In terms of alloy models, either two donors or two acceptors can create a kind of electronic alloy if the two donors or two acceptors have similar chemical structures or energy levels.47–49 Nevertheless, some distinctive alloy systems where the structural nature of the two acceptors is remarkably different have also been observed in recent reports.14,33,37,47–51 It is demonstrated that in the alloy concept, Voc of ternary PSCs is linearly related to the blend ratios of the components forming the alloy as opposed to fixing it based on the difference in energy levels of the donor (HOMO) and acceptor (LUMO).14,33,37,47–51 This provides a good opportunity for obtaining more efficient ternary PSCs by adding a third component to improve Voc compared with its host binary device, which has been widely verified in SMA-based ternary PSCs.14,33,37,51
In view of the rapid improvement of PCEs, which have reached the commercialization threshold, more attention should shift to several other factors, such as a larger area and thick active layer, reproducibility and stability of these devices.52–54 Among them, stability including thermal, light radiation, mechanical stress and long-term stability, etc., is crucial for commercial application. Many previous reports have suggested that FA-based PSCs commonly have poor stability with evident efficiency losses under high temperature or light radiation due to the thermally induced fullerene aggregation and photo-induced fullerene dimerization.55–59 However, the practical applications and manufacturing of PSCs require inevitable demands on the thermal stability. The temperature inside a PSC could reach as high as 80 °C or even higher.60 Moreover, during high-throughput printing and coating techniques for solution-processed PSCs, a higher temperature (>120 °C) is required to quickly remove the processing solvent, which means that the active layer must be able to tolerate at least a short period of time under such a high temperature. Accordingly, it is of great importance to produce PSCs with excellent thermal stability.
Some research has demonstrated that PSCs based on nonfullerene acceptors (SMAs or polymer acceptors) possess good thermal and light radiation stability due to their better chemical and morphological stability, as well as greater resistance to photo-induced electronic trap state formation, with respect to FAs.61–63 Though the studies on the stability of PSCs based on nonfullerene acceptors are still at an early stage, these positive results reveal the great potential for using these acceptor materials to construct more stable PSCs. One powerful concept that is emerging as a promising tool to enhance the photostability and thermal stability of PSCs is the addition of a nonfullerene acceptor into an FA-based binary device to form the relevant ternary blend devices.14,20,26,27,30,38,45,64 Donor/FA/SMA type ternary PSCs as mentioned above can be very efficient for improving the device performance. Only a few reports have truly tried to understand the stability issues related to this type of PSCs.14,20,26,27,30,38,45,64 The Doumon30 group and Yip64 group paid attention to the role of fullerene-based acceptor PC71BM in the photostability of donor/FA/SMA type ternary PSCs of PBDB-T/PC71BM/ITIC and J52/PC71BM/IEICO-4F, respectively. It was found that the ternary PSCs exhibited much better photostability than that of the corresponding binary devices. Very recently, Ding and He et al. reported high performance and photostability ternary PSCs by introducing a third component FA (PC61BM) into the host binary system donor/SMA (PTB7-Th/COi8DFIC).14 The results demonstrated that PC61BM and COi8DFIC formed an ordered alloy co-acceptor, resulting in an improvement in both the performance and photostability of the ternary device. It is worth noting that this is one rare example to deeply elucidate the mechanism of the ternary device concerned with the increased stability and efficiency. Besides the photostability of ternary blends, the ambient long-term stability based on a high-performance ternary system PBT1-C/IT-2F/PC71BM was tested by Sun et al.27 On the other hand, just limited studies involved the thermal stability of donor/FA/SMA type ternary blends.20,38,45 For example, Sun and co-workers noticed that the high-performance ternary PSCs based on PDBT-T1/PC71BM/ITIC-Th displayed good thermal stability, but no details or comparative studies were given.45 Soon after, Wang et al. demonstrated thermostable ternary PSCs with the blend of PTB7-Th/PC71BM/COi8DFIC.20 It was found that the PCE of ternary devices only changed slightly at high thermal annealing temperatures (90–160 °C) and a high PCE up to 14.62% was achieved at an annealing temperature of 80 °C. Meanwhile the ternary devices still showed a slightly reduced PCE after being heated at 80 °C or 130 °C for 20 h. These results suggested that this donor/FA/SMA ternary PSC (PTB7-Th/COi8DFIC/PC71BM) has very good thermal stability. In addition, our group recently achieved efficient thick active layer and large area ternary PSCs (PBDB-T/PC71BM/DTCFOIC) by incorporating a fused heptacyclic SMA (DTCFOIC) as the third component.38 Apart from the promising device efficiency with a thick active layer and large area, the ternary device exhibited both good thermal stability and long-term stability, which indicated that the PBDB-T/PC71BM/DTCFOIC ternary system is a promising candidate for application in the commercialization of PSCs in the future. However, there is no more detailed and in depth understanding of the fundamental cause promoting the enhancement of the thermal stability of these above-mentioned ternary systems after adding the third component.
On the basis of these aforementioned considerations, in this work, we construct new donor/FA/SMA type ternary PSCs by introducing an SMA (IDT-OT) based on the indacenodithiophene (IDT) unit into an FA-based host binary device comprising a medium bandgap polymer donor PBDB-T (donor) and PC71BM (FA), as shown in Fig. 1. The ratio of IDT-OT to PC71BM was controlled to investigate the key role of the added third component (IDT-OT) in the device efficiency and thermal stability. Morphological characterization by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and miscibility analysis via water contact angle measurements demonstrated that the SMA IDT-OT has good compatibility with PC71BM and the two classes of acceptors can form a small-molecule/fullerene type acceptor alloy with molecular scale. The acceptor alloy enables the effective manipulation of Voc and efficient exciton separation, charge transfer and gathering, resulting in the increase of Jsc and FF of the relevant ternary PSCs. It is demonstrated that the photovoltaic performance of the ternary PSCs is remarkably dependent on the IDT-OT content in the acceptor alloy. The optimized ternary PSC exhibits an obviously higher PCE (9.09%) than that of the binary systems of PBDB-T/PC71BM (7.78%) and PBDB-T/IDT-OT (3.32%), owing to the simultaneous improvements of Jsc and FF. Meanwhile, the thermal stability of the ternary device is explored by varying the thermal treatment temperature (60–160 °C) and thermal treatment at one high annealing temperature (120 °C) with a long time. The PCE of the ternary device remains over 90% and 85% of the initial efficiency upon annealing at 100 °C and 160 °C for 10 min, respectively, while the corresponding PCE just maintains 85% and 78%, respectively, for the FA-based binary device (PBDB-T/PC71BM). On the other hand, the PCE loss is 18% for the ternary device, which is obviously lower than that of the binary PBDB-T/PC71BM (33%) and PBDB-T/IDT-OT (30%) devices after annealing for 60 h at 120 °C. These results reveal that for both thermally stressed conditions the ternary device incorporating a small amount of SMA is much more stable than the two binary devices. The enhanced thermal stability could be ascribed to suppressing the aggregation tendency of PC71BM by the formed small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy, and as a result stabilizing the blend film morphology. This finding can help us to better understand the essential working mechanism and the main reason behind the enhancements in the efficiency and thermal stability of donor/FA/SMA type ternary systems. Our work also suggests that incorporating a small amount of SMA with an FA to form a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy is a powerful tool to improve the performance and thermal stability of ternary PSCs.
2 Results and discussion
2.1 Materials synthesis and optoelectronic properties
In this study, the host binary blend system comprises the polymer donor PBDB-T and FA-based acceptor PC71BM. A new nonfullerene SMA denoted IDT-OT is employed as a third component, which integrates the host binary blend to produce PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary PSCs (see Fig. 1a). The molecular structures of the materials (PBDB-T, PC71BM, and IDT-OT) used in this study are depicted in Fig. 1b. The new SMA IDT-OT possesses an A–π–D–π–A type molecular skeleton with an alkoxylpheneyl substituted IDT unit as a central core (D), 3,4-methoxylthiophene as a π-conjugated bridge, and 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydroinden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (IC) as end-accepting A units. The alkoxylpheneyl substituted central D unit and 3,4-methoxylthiophene π-bridge are different from some previously reported analogs,65,66 leading to a broadened absorption spectrum, a reduced optical bandgap and up-lifted HOMO/LUMO energy levels. Notably, selecting 3,4-methoxylthiophene as the π-conjugated bridge could form noncovalent conformational locking within the molecular backbone (see Fig. 1b), which endows this SMA with good planarity and rigidity in the solid state, resulting in a broad absorption spectrum and high carrier mobility.67 The synthetic route of IDT-OT is illustrated in Scheme S1 in the ESI.† The experimental details and structural characterizations of the as-synthesized compounds including the target SMA are provided in the ESI.† This SMA is readily soluble in chloroform, dichloromethane, chlorobenzene (CB), and so on, thanks to the four 4-hexyloxyphenyl bulky substituents and existence of noncovalent conformational locking.67 As shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurement revealed a good thermal stability of IDT-OT with a high degradation temperature (Td) corresponding to a 5% weight loss over 350 °C. There is no obvious crystallization thermal transition observed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements (see Fig. S2, ESI†). However, this SMA shows a weak melting phase transition at about 200 °C during the second heating process. The result means that this IDT-based small molecule has a certain trend of crystallization.
The absorption spectra of PBDB-T, PC71BM, and IDT-OT as thin films were measured by ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy. As depicted in Fig. 1c, the medium bandgap polymer donor PBDB-T presents an absorption range mainly covering the region of 450–700 nm. The strong absorption band of the host acceptor PC71BM is mainly located in a shorter wavelength range (<500 nm). Whereas, the additional acceptor IDT-OT possesses a wide absorption character with a main absorption band between 500 and 900 nm, owing to the intramolecular charge transfer effect occurring between the IDT unit and IC groups. From these results, one can find that the three materials have complementary absorption outlines overlapping the full UV-vis region and extending to the near infrared region (800–900 nm), suggesting high probability for achieving a high Jsc in the ternary PSCs based on these three materials. Furthermore, we also measured the UV-vis absorption spectra of the two binary systems (PBDB-T/PC71BM and PBDB-T/IDT-OT) and ternary system (PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT, 1:1.5:0.2, by weight) as described in Fig. 1d. The ternary blend film exhibits a distinctly broader light-harvesting region than that of the host binary blend film (PBDB-T/PC71BM), reflected in a relatively weak absorption band in the range of 700–900 nm, whereas it shows a similar absorption profile to PBDB-T/IDT-OT in the range of 500–850 nm regardless of the absorption strength. The newly appeared absorption band of the ternary blend film can be attributed to the third component of IDT-OT, indicating that the addition of a small amount of IDT-OT has a non-negligible effect on the absorption spectrum and it would benefit the photocurrent.
Electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were carried out to assess the redox property of SMA IDT-OT and further find the HOMO and LUMO energy levels. For a fair comparison, CV curves of polymer donor PBDB-T and PC71BM were also measured, as shown in Fig. S3 in the ESI.† According to the onsets of the oxidation and reduction potentials in the CV curves (Fig. S3, ESI†), the HOMO/LUMO energy levels of PBDB-T, IDT-OT, and PC71BM are found to be −5.29/−3.41, −5.11/−3.46, and −5.97/−3.93 eV, respectively, as described in the Experimental section in the ESI.† The energy levels of these materials are arranged in Fig. 1e. The LUMO energy levels of the three materials depict a cascade alignment, which guarantees electron transfer from the donor to the acceptors. Meanwhile, the HOMO energy level of IDT-OT is higher than that of the donor PBDB-T, which will be unfavorable for hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor, thus harming the photovoltaic performance based on the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT blend system. However, in view of the formation of the acceptor alloy, the energy levels of the alloy phase will be tunable by varying the IDT-OT/PC71BM blend ratio, which could enable efficient cascade charge transfer from PBDB-T to the alloy acceptor (see Fig. 1e). This will be verified in detail in the following sections. Therefore, the small-molecule/fullerene (IDT-OT/PC71BM) acceptor alloy can be expected to realize high-performance ternary solar cells. In addition, the higher-lying LUMO energy level of IDT-OT relative to PC71BM supposes that the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT device would obtain larger Voc than that of the PBDB-T/PC71BM device because the Voc of a BHJ device is commonly determined by the HOMO energy level of the polymer donor and the LUMO energy level of the acceptor.
2.2 Photovoltaic performance
Binary and ternary PSCs were fabricated with an inverted device structure of ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag in consideration of the fact that the inverted configuration is known to be much more stable due to its robust metal-oxide (e.g. MoO3) interfacial layers.26 We initially explored the photovoltaic performance of the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary device and detailed performance data are arranged in Table S1 in the ESI.† The PBDB-T/PC71BM binary device exhibits the highest PCE of 7.78% under the optimized conditions of a donor:acceptor weight ratio of 1:1.5 and 3 vol% 1,8-diindooctane (DIO) as an additive, along with a Voc of 0.826 V, a Jsc of 14.1 mA cm−2, and an FF of 66.8%, which is comparable with and even higher than previously reported results (PCE = 6.50–7.63%).25,30,38,68,69 However, the reference binary device based on PBDB-T/IDT-OT (1:1 by weight and thermally annealed at 160 °C for 10 min) delivers a low PCE of 3.32%, due to a lower Jsc of 8.27 mA cm−2 and reduced FF of 43.4% even with a higher Voc of 0.927 V (see Table 1 and Table S2, ESI†), which would be related to the unmatched HOMO energy levels between PBDB-T and IDT-OT as mentioned before. Comparing the two binary PSCs, we can find that the host binary device (PBDB-T/PC71BM) shows a remarkably higher Jsc and FF, whereas the SMA-based binary device (PBDB-T/IDT-OT) presents a higher Voc. The former are caused by the better carrier mobility and charge transfer properties as well as the superior active layer morphology of the PBDB-T/PC71BM blend, while the latter benefits from the higher-lying LUMO energy level of SMA IDT-OT relative to PC71BM.
Table 1 Photovoltaic properties of PSCs based on the binary PBDB-T/PC71BM and PBDB-T/IDT-OT, and the ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT systems




PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT [weight ratio]

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF [%]
PCEmax (Ave ± Dev.)a [%]
DIO [vol%]





a The average (Ave.) PCEs and deviations (Dev.).





1:1.5:0
0.826
14.10
66.8
7.78 (7.75 ± 0.12)
3.0


1:0:1.5
0.927
8.27
43.4
3.32 (3.28 ± 0.09)
0


1:1.5:0.1
0.845
13.53
68.2
7.79 (7.70 ± 0.16)
0


1:1.5:0.2
0.869
15.35
68.1
9.09 (9.03 ± 0.05)
0.5


1:1.5:0.3
0.872
14.43
66.5
8.35 (8.28 ± 0.22)
0.5


1:1.5:0.5
0.908
13.12
58.4
6.96 (6.92 ± 0.08)
0.5


1:1.5:1
0.913
11.83
53.9
5.82 (5.81 ± 0.03)
0.5


1.2:1.5:0.2
0.882
16.20
62.6
8.95 (8.86 ± 0.17)
0.5


1.5:1.5:0.2
0.872
15.62
65.4
8.78 (8.76 ± 0.05)
0.5


2:1.5:0.2
0.886
14.70
63.8
8.31 (8.04 ± 0.26)
0.5




Then, the photovoltaic performance of the PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary PSC device was also assessed and optimized by varying the mixing ratio of the three components and the concentration of the DIO additive. When the mixing ratio of PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT is kept at 1:1.5:0.2, the ternary PSCs show a slightly reduced PCE of 7.26% with respect to the host binary device, mainly due to both the lower Jsc (12.98 mA cm−2) and FF (62.8%), even with an improved Voc of 0.891 V (see Table S3 in the ESI†). In the light of the positive effect of additive DIO on the photovoltaic performance of the host binary device, we scanned the concentration of DIO (0.2, 0.5, and 1 vol%) to further improve the device performance. From Table S3 (ESI†), an obviously improved PCE up to 9.09% is obtained after 0.5 vol% DIO was added. For donor/FA/SMA type ternary PSCs, it is found that there are two methods to control the ratio of the donor to the acceptor: one is that the ratio of the total content of acceptors (FA and SMA) to the donor is controlled to be constant and the ratio between FA and SMA is varied;25,33,36,37,51 the other is that the ratio of the donor to one acceptor (e.g. FA) is controlled to be constant and the content of the other acceptor (e.g. SMA) is varied.14,23,27,34,38 In our ternary system, we adopted the second method to control the content of the three components by fixing the ratio of donor PBDB-T to PC71BM and changing the SMA IDT-OT content as shown in Table 1. Accordingly, to systemically inspect the impact of the third component content (IDT-OT) on the device performance, the mixing ratio of PBDB-T/PC71BM was fixed to be 1:1.5 and the proportion of IDT-OT relative to the host acceptor PC71BM was carefully scanned. One can find that the Jsc and FF values of the ternary PSCs reach the maximum when the mixing ratio of PC71BM/IDT-OT is 1.5:0.2, and begin to reduce with a further increase of the IDT-OT content. Meanwhile the Voc value of 0.845 V (1.5:0.1) continuously improves up to 0.913 V (1.5:1) with the increase of the content of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend, which agrees with the higher-lying LUMO energy level of IDT-OT relative to PC71BM. As shown in Fig. S4a in the ESI,† the onset reduction potential of the acceptor blend (PC71BM/IDT-OT) gradually decreases with the increase of the IDT-OT content in the acceptor blend, corresponding to the gradually up-shifted LUMO energy level of the acceptor alloy (PC71BM/IDT-OT). Finally, a quasi-linear relationship between the LUMO level and the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend can be observed as displayed in Fig. S4b (ESI†). This indicates that the two functional components of FA (PC71BM) and SMA (IDT-OT) should form an alloy whose properties can be tuned by its composition. This will be further verified in the following sections. Accordingly, the optimized blend ratio of PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT is concluded to be 1:1.5:0.2. Ultimately, the ternary PSCs achieve a maximum PCE of 9.09% at the optimized conditions, accompanied by a Voc of 0.869 V, a Jsc of 15.35 mA cm−2, and an FF of 68.1%. The best current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the ternary PSC and two binary PSCs under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) are depicted in Fig. 2a. The related performance parameters (Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE) and more detailed data are provided in Table 1 and Table S3 in the ESI,† respectively. Interestingly, we also found that the photovoltaic performance of the ternary PSCs features excellent tolerance to the content of polymer donor PBDB-T. When the feed ratio of PBDB-T is the same as the host acceptor PC71BM (1.5:1.5) or even when it is more than PC71BM (2:1.5), the resultant ternary PSCs still exhibit a higher PCE (8.78% and 8.31%) than that (7.78%) of the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary devices (see Table 1). It suggests that this dual acceptor system based on small-molecule/fullerene (IDT-OT/PC71BM) has excellent compatibility with the polymer donor of PBDB-T. Herein, we would like to point out that this phenomenon has not been reported in previous ternary solar cells. Moreover, a wide composition tolerance is highly desired for large-scale industrial production of PSCs in the future.
 Fig. 2  (a) The J–V curves and (b) the EQE curves of the two optimized binary PSCs and ternary PSCs. (c) Measured Voc of the ternary PSCs as a function of the proportion of IDT-OT in the acceptor alloy. 
External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the two binary devices and the optimized ternary device are displayed in Fig. 2b. The reference PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary device shows a broader photoresponse range of 300–850 nm relative to the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary device, whereas the latter has significantly higher EQE values across the spectral range of 300–675 nm, which contributes to an apparently higher Jsc value of the host binary system. Compared with the two binary devices, the optimized ternary device exhibits higher EQE values almost covering the whole spectral response range (300–850 nm), which is responsible for the improvement in the photocurrent of the ternary system. Overall, these EQE results are generally in accord with the UV-vis absorption spectra (Fig. 1c). It should be noted that the addition of a small amount of IDT-OT led to an enhancement in the entire EQE spectra, not only in the absorption range of the third component, suggesting that more photo produced excitons in the active layer were dissociated to free charges and gathered by the two electrodes. This could be related to the improved morphology and the formation of a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy when IDT-OT is incorporated in specific functional domains of PC71BM, verified by the following research results. The Jsc values integrated from the EQE spectra are in accordance with the Jsc ones gained from the J–V curves.
Another interesting fact from Fig. 2c, also listed in Table 1, is that Voc in the ternary devices is dependent on the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend. When the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend increases up to 40% (PC71BM/IDT-OT = 1.5:1), the ternary PSCs show an obviously reduced PCE of 5.82% but a slightly improved Voc of 0.913 V. In view of the sharply decreased PCE, it seems that it is unnecessary to further increase the content of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend. One can find that the relationship between Voc and the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend is quasi-linear. Some similar results have been reported in other ternary blend systems, in which Voc showed a linear or quasi-linear relationship with the weight fraction of a component in several donor or acceptor alloy systems composed of two materials with analogous16,48,49,70 or quite different14,29,33,37 molecular structures. Here, when IDT-OT is added into the ternary system, the corresponding Voc gradually improves with the increase of the weight ratio of IDT-OT in the acceptor blend, implying that the two acceptors form an alloy because it is accord with the physical properties of the alloy.47 The change trend of Voc is consistent with the LUMO levels of the acceptor alloy (Fig. S4b, ESI†). The formation of an acceptor alloy means that the two acceptors of IDT-OT and PC71BM have strong electronic interactions and good miscibility and can be well mixed with the molecular scale,14,37 which is shown by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and water contact angle measurements. The AFM images of donor-free films, including the pristine PC71BM and IDT-OT films, and the acceptor alloy blend film (PC71BM/IDT-OT, 1:0.2) are presented in Fig. S5 (ESI†). It is revealed that the pristine PC71BM film shows a smooth surface morphology with a root-mean-square roughness (Rq) of 0.903 nm (Fig. S5a, ESI†), but some small strains appear (Fig. S5d, ESI†) owing to the aggregation of PC71BM. In contrast, the acceptor alloy blend film displays a more smooth and uniform surface with an obviously reduced Rq of 0.200 nm (Fig. S5b, ESI†) and there is no crystal grain formation (Fig. S5e, ESI†). Moreover, this morphology characteristic is very similar to the pristine IDT-OT film (Rq = 0.177 nm) as displayed in Fig. S5c and f (ESI†). These observations indicate that the aggregates of PC71BM were restrained after incorporating a small amount of IDT-OT. Thus, it can be deduced that the SMA IDT-OT and FA-based acceptor PC71BM are miscible and can form an intermixed alloy state with mixed energy states despite their distinctly different molecular structures.14,29,33,37 To further verify the miscibility of the two acceptors, we measured water contact angles on the polymer donor and two acceptors, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The water contact angles of the pristine PBDB-T, PC71BM, and IDT-OT films are obtained to be 95.7°, 78.5°, and 84.3°, respectively. Clearly, the water contact angle of the IDT-OT film lies in between those of PBDB-T and PC71BM, and is nearer to that of the PC71BM film, which is indicative of the good miscibility of IDT-OT and PC71BM.29,37 This implies that the IDT-OT may be located in the PC71BM domain. Additionally, the two well mixed acceptors will be beneficial for the overlap of wave functions and this will result in charge transfer and/or energy transfer with each other as will be discussed in the next section.
 Fig. 3  Water contact angle images of the pristine films: (a) PBDB-T, (b) PC71BM, and (c) IDT-OT. 
2.3 Charge transfer and working mechanism study in the ternary system
To investigate the photoinduced charge transfer process in this ternary system, photoluminescence (PL) quenching spectra of the pure IDT-OT film and the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT (1:1) blend film as well as ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) blend films were measured. As shown in Fig. S6 in the ESI,† the pure IDT-OT film displays a strong PL emission spectrum when excited at 750 nm. For the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT blend film, the intensity of the PL emission is just quenched about 40% with respect to the pure IDT-OT film, but the profile of the PL spectrum of the binary blend film is similar to the pure IDT-OT film, implying the occurrence of incomplete charge transfer from SMA IDT-OT to polymer donor PBDB-T. This is responsible for the relatively low Jsc of the PBDB-T/IDT-OT-based binary PSCs. In contrast, more effective PL quenching (∼85%) appears in the ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT blend film processed with 0.5 vol% DIO, suggesting that the ternary system exhibits more efficient charge dissociation and transfer at the polymer/acceptor blend interface from the alloy acceptor to PBDB-T in comparison with the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT. On the other hand, the pure PC71BM film gives a strong PL emission peak at about 710 nm with an excitation wavelength of 500 nm, as depicted in Fig. 4a. In terms of the host binary PBDB-T/PC71BM blend film, the intensity of the PL emission is quenched about 57%, indicating that there is an incomplete quench after mixing with PBDB-T, while the incorporation of a small amount of IDT-OT into PBDB-T/PC71BM to form the ternary blend system (PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT) could further quench the PL of PC71BM (∼68%). These results suggest that SMA IDT-OT could facilitate charge separation and transfer at the PBDB-T/PC71BM blend interface, thus resulting in the enhanced EQE in the entire absorption region of the ternary system as discussed above. Overall, the stronger PL quenching for the ternary blend film with respect to that of the binary blend films (PBDB-T/IDT-OT and PBDB-T/PC71BM) demonstrates that well scattered IDT-OT is formed, which is related to the changed aggregate state as discussed in the following section. This is helpful for the increase of the photocurrent, agreeing well with the improved Jsc in the ternary PSCs.
 Fig. 4  (a) PL spectra of the pure PC71BM and PBDB-T/PC71BM and ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) blend films excited at 500 nm. (b) The normalized absorption spectrum of the pure IDT-OT film and PL spectrum of the pure PC71BM film with an apparent overlap. (c) PL spectra of the IDT-OT, PC71BM, and binary PC71BM/IDT-OT (1.5:0.2) blend films excited at 500 nm. 
Furthermore, the PL quenching spectrum of the blend film based on the two acceptors of IDT-OT and PC71BM was also investigated to elaborate the working mechanism in this ternary system. As depicted in Fig. 4c, for the PC71BM/IDT-OT blend film, the PL peak of PC71BM (∼710 nm) is almost completely quenched, which is obviously a greater degree of quenching than that of the binary PBDB-T/PC71BM system (∼57%), indicating that the excited charge carriers in PC71BM can be more efficiently transferred toward IDT-OT than toward PBDB-T. We suppose that the IDT-OT/PC71BM acceptor alloy with a low IDT-OT content could produce an effective charge cascade energy landscape allowing charge flow from PBDB-T to IDT-OT and PC71BM in view of the tunable HOMO/LUMO energy levels of the acceptor alloy (Fig. S4a, ESI†). Notably, relatively weak emission appears in the range of 750–870 nm for both the PC71BM/IDT-OT binary blend and the ternary blend, which might originate from the IDT-OT emission rather than PBDB-T.36 To further test the possibility of charge transfer between PC71BM and IDT-OT, two donor-free devices were fabricated and the photovoltaic properties were measured, where the active layers contained IDT-OT or PC71BM/IDT-OT without the donor material (PBDB-T). As displayed in Fig. S7 in the ESI,† the donor-free solar cell based on the PC71BM/IDT-OT (1.5:0.2) blend delivers a larger Jsc value (0.66 mA cm−2) than that of the solar cell (0.30 mA cm−2) using the IDT-OT neat film, indicating that there is charge transfer between PC71BM and IDT-OT. Notably, the PL spectrum of the PC71BM film evidently overlaps with the absorption spectrum of the IDT-OT solid film (see Fig. 4b). This suggests that efficient energy transfer from PC71BM to IDT-OT could occur according to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) theory.18,27,29,71–73 To confirm the occurrence of FRET in the acceptor alloy, the PL spectra of the pure IDT-OT film, PC71BM film and the PC71BM:IDT-OT (1.5:0.2) blend film were compared and described in Fig. 4c. When excited at 500 nm, the PL peak of PC71BM (∼710 nm) in the PC71BM:IDT-OT blend is almost totally quenched. In contrast, the emission intensity of IDT-OT in the PC71BM:IDT-OT blend is enhanced as compared with the pure IDT-OT film, implying that FRET from PC71BM to IDT-OT did occur. A similar observation was found in previous reports.18,72,73 Moreover, we changed the excitation wavelength (480, 550, and 600 nm) to where PC71BM still could be excited as shown in Fig. S8 in the ESI.† It can be easily found that the emission intensity of IDT-OT in the PC71BM:IDT-OT blend was enhanced to a different degree compared with the pure IDT-OT film, which further confirms the existence of the FRET process from PC71BM to IDT-OT. According to these results, we can conclude that there exist both efficient charge transfer and energy transfer (FRET) between PC71BM and IDT-OT. This feature has not been reported in previous studies involving a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy, in which only energy transfer or charge transfer had been proposed.14,33,37 Based on the above analysis, the proposed working mechanism of these ternary PSCs can be schematically depicted, as displayed in Fig. 1e.
2.4 Charge generation, dissociation and recombination dynamics
As given in Table 1, the Jsc and FF values of the ternary PSCs are higher than those of the two binary PSCs. To seek the cause behind the improvements of Jsc and FF in the ternary PSCs, we explored the charge generation and separation process of the PBDB-T/PC71BM (1:1.5), PBDB-T/IDT-OT (1:1) and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2, 0.5 vol% DIO) devices by measuring the saturation current density (Jsat) and charge separation probability (P(E,T)). Fig. 5a depicts the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) curves for the three devices used in this work.74 As presented in Fig. 5a, Jph of the PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary device can not reach Jsat even at a bias voltage higher than 3 V, implying that there is serious charge recombination in this binary device.51 In contrast, for the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary device and the ternary device, Jph reaches Jsat at a low bias of about 2 V, indicating that all the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in these devices are effectively separated into free charge carriers and then transported and gathered by the two electrodes. Jsat of the PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary device is 16.0 mA cm−2, which is higher than that of the host PBDB-T/PC71BM device (13.92 mA cm−2) and reference PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary device (9.68 mA cm−2), according well with the variation tendency of the Jsc values provided in the J–V plots (see Table 1). Moreover, the improved Jsat value of the ternary device shows that the small amount of IDT-OT incorporated as the third component actually assists the photo-harvesting of the host PBDB-T/PC71BM blend and benefits exciton generation and separation in the ternary system. The exciton separation efficiency and charge collection ability can be further evaluated by the charge gathering probability (P(E,T)) as shown in Fig. 5a. Under short-circuit conditions, the P(E,T) value for the ternary device is 0.833, which is higher than that of both the host PBDB-B/PC71BM binary device (P(E,T) = 0.827) and the reference PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary device (P(E,T) = 0.50). This result implies that the addition of a minute amount of IDT-OT can also effectively promote the charge separation and gathering in the ternary PSCs, thus contributing to a higher Jsc and FF of the ternary PSCs compared with the two binary PSCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) curves. Dependence of Voc on the light intensity (b) and dependence of Jsc (c) on the light intensity for the PBDT/IDT-OT, PBDB-T/PC71BM, and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) devices. J1/2–V characteristics for the measurement of the hole mobility (d) and electron mobility (e) of the PBDT/IDT-OT, PBDB-T/PC71BM, and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) blend films by the SCLC method. 
In addition to the generation and separation properties in the BHJ active layer, the Jsc and FF are also closely related to the charge recombination. We subsequently thus examined the dependent relationship of both Voc and Jsc on the light intensity (Plight) for both the binary and ternary PSCs to further investigate the impact of the third component of IDT-OT on the charge recombination dynamics. The dependent relationship of Voc on Plight can be described as: Voc ∞ lnPlight with a slope of nkT/q.75 As illustrated in Fig. 5b, a slope of 1.22kT/q is found for the PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary device, which is lower than that of the host binary PBDB-T/PC71BM (1.25kT/q) and the reference PBDB-T/IDT-OT device (1.26kT/q). This suggests that trap-assisted recombination can be efficiently inhibited by the incorporation of IDT-OT into the host PBDB-T/PC71BM blend, thus contributing to the improved Jsc and FF values in the optimized ternary device. To further examine the extent of bimolecular recombination in these devices, we next measured the dependence of Jsc on Plight, described as Jsc ∞ Pαlight, where the exponential factor α means the extent of bimolecular recombination.75,76 On the basis of Fig. 5c, the calculated α values are 0.855, 0.894, and 0.942 for the two binary and the optimized ternary PSCs, respectively, indicative of weak bimolecular recombination appearing in the ternary PSCs. These results reveal that the introduction of IDT-OT into the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary blend can reduce bimolecular recombination and it thus helps to elucidate the higher Jsc and FF in the ternary device. This is also coincident with the charge carrier mobility results for the binary and ternary devices, measured by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. The hole mobility (μh) and electron mobility (μe) in these blend films were determined with single-carrier device structures of ITO/PEDOT/PSS/active layer/MoO3/Al and ITO/ZnO/active layer/Ca/Al, respectively. As displayed in Fig. 5d and e, and Table 2, the μe value of the PBDB-T/PC71BM binary blend film (3.23 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is higher than that of the reference PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary film (1.07 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), mainly because of the superior electron-transport ability of fullerene-based acceptor PC71BM to SMA IDT-OT. On the contrary, the μh value of the PBDB-T/PC71BM blend (1.19 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is lower than that of the PBDB-T/IDT-OT system (2.69 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), which should benefit from the good planarity and rigidity in IDT-OT due to the formation of noncovalent conformational locking within the molecular backbone,67 resulting in better hole mobility of IDT-OT relative to PC71BM. After a small amount of IDT-OT is incorporated into the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary system, μh (3.29 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and μe (3.95 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) of the PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary blend film increase synchronously. We suppose that this is related to the form of an SMA/FA acceptor alloy system, which is beneficial to improve the active layer morphology and embody a synergistic effect of small-molecule acceptors (IDT-OT) with high hole mobility and fullerene acceptors (PC71BM) with high electron mobility, thus leading to a simultaneous improvement of both electron and hole mobilities. This observation is different from some previously reported donor/FA/SMA ternary systems, in which the added third component (FA or SMA) had a main effect on only the hole mobility or electron mobility.27,29,30,51 Moreover, as a result the hole and electron mobilities become relatively balanced (μe/μh = 1.20) in the ternary system as compared to the two binary blend films (see Table 2). The increased and more even charge carrier properties partly contribute to the higher FF in ternary PSCs with a low IDT-OT content, and also demonstrate that combining an FA and SMA to form an acceptor alloy is an effective strategy to improve and balance the charge transfer properties of the ternary devices. This increased charge transfer property could be the result of the improved blend film morphology, as discussed in the following section.
Table 2 Carrier mobility, charge collection probability, and charge recombination parameters of the binary blend films based on PBDB-T/PC71BM and PBDB-T/IDT-OT and the ternary blend film processed under optimal conditions




Blend films

μ
h (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e (cm2 V−1 s−1)

μ
e/μh

P(E,T)
Slope (kT/q)

α





PBDB-T/PC71BM
1.07 × 10−4
3.23 × 10−4
3.02
0.827
1.25
0.894


PBDB-T/IDT-OT
2.69 × 10−4
1.19 × 10−4
0.44
0.50
1.26
0.855


PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT
3.29 × 10−4
3.95 × 10−4
1.20
0.833
1.22
0.942




2.5 Film morphology characterization and microstructure analysis
It should be noted that the photovoltaic performance of PSCs is strongly dependent on the active layer morphology. After incorporating a third component, the active layer morphology of a ternary blend must become more complicated because intermixing and interactions between the third component and the host binary system may cause unpredictable changes in the three phase microstructure. Therefore, we inspected the surface and bulk morphology of the binary and ternary blends by AFM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) tests, respectively. In terms of the morphologies, the different performance of the binary and ternary systems as collected in Table 1 can thus be readily understood. The AFM and TEM topographies of these blends are illustrated in Fig. 6. From Fig. 6a, the IDT-OT-based binary blend film shows a large-length scale phase separation morphology with a large Rq of 4.70 nm, but featuring a fibrous texture due to PBDB-T polymer crystals27,77 along with some small grains (Fig. 6d) owing to the aggregation of IDT-OT, which is shown as some black domains in Fig. 6h.27 Whereas the PC71BM-based host binary blend film exhibits a rather uniform texture with a significantly reduced Rq value of 2.40 nm (see Fig. 6b), indicative of a well-intermixed nanoscale morphology (Fig. 6e and h). After adding a small amount of IDT-OT into the PBDB-T/PC71BM blend, the ternary blend film presents a similar morphology feature to the PC71BM-based binary system with a further decreased Rq of 2.32 nm (Fig. 6c), indicating a weak impact on the intermixed PBDB-T/PC71BM morphology after the incorporation of a small amount of IDT-OT. A fairly uniform and fibrous film morphology is observed and the closer packed and tinier fibrils become more remarkable as shown in Fig. 6f and i. This means that the SMA IDT-OT could reduce the aggregation of PBDB-T to some degree to further optimize the active layer morphology. The homogeneous film could be helpful for the contact between the active layer and electrodes, which benefits the exciton separation, and charge transport and gathering, and hence contributed to the higher Jsc and FF in the PBDB-T/PC71BM-based binary PSC and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT-based ternary PSC when compared to the PBDB-T/IDT-OT one (Table 1).
 Fig. 6  AFM height images (a–c) and phase images (d–f), and TEM images (g–i) of the binary films based on PBDB-T/IDT-OT and PBDB-T/PC71BM and the ternary blend film of PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT processed under the optimal conditions. 
2.6 Thermal stability of PSC devices
Besides high performance, device stability is also a crucial issue for the commercial application of organic solar cells. However, the stability, especially thermal stability, is seldom considered for previously reported ternary PSCs.28,45,59 In this work, we paid more attention to inspect the thermal stability of the optimal ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2, 0.5 vol% DIO) device featuring a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy. Moreover, for comparison the thermal stability of the two binary devices (PBDB-T/PC71BM and PBDB-T/IDT-OT) was also tested under the optimal conditions. At first, the thermal stability of these devices is evaluated at various annealing temperatures from 60 °C to 160 °C with an interval of 10 minutes inside a nitrogen-filled circumstance to exclude the influence of oxygen and/or moisture on the device stability. The J–V plots and corresponding performance data of the binary and ternary devices are described in Fig. S9 and Tables S4–S6 (ESI†) respectively, and the normalized PCE at different annealing temperatures is displayed in Fig. 7a. For the PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary system, the PCE first improves up to 3.46% under an annealing temperature of 60 °C, and then decreases continuously to a minimum value of 2.48%; next it gradually increases up to 3.01% upon annealing at 160 °C (see Fig. S9a and Table S4, ESI†). The change of the PCE is mainly attributed to the Jsc and FF values. This result indicates that the annealing temperature has an obvious effect on the device performance. As shown in Fig. S9b and Table S5 (ESI†), the PBDB-T/PC71BM binary system also exhibits a complicated change tendency with the increase of the annealing temperature. Finally, the PCE preserves up to 78% of the initial efficiency upon annealing at 160 °C (see Fig. 7a). In terms of the ternary device, the PCE slowly declines with the increase of the annealing temperature from room temperature to 160 °C (see Fig. S9c and Table S6, ESI†). Notably, the PCE (8.48%) maintains over 90% of the initial efficiency (9.09%) upon annealing at 100 °C (see Fig. 7a) and furthermore it still can retain 85% of the original value (7.68%) of the PCE even when the temperature further increases up to 160 °C (see Fig. 7a). The relatively simple and little change of the PCE for the ternary device compared to the two binary devices reveals that the ternary device has better thermal stability than that of the two binary devices. Additionally, from Fig. 7b, one can find that the annealing temperature has a visible impact on the Jsc and FF values of the ternary device, whereas the Voc value just shows a little change during the rise of the annealing temperature. Finally, the Voc losses are almost negligible (around 2%), while Jsc and FF drop evidently with a loss of 6% and 9% respectively, after annealing at 160 °C (see Fig. 7b and Table S6, ESI†). These observations indicate that the PCE degradation mainly comes from the Jsc and FF losses. In view of the fact that Jsc and FF of solar cells are closely related to the active layer morphology, here we investigated the blend film morphology via AFM to seek the cause of thermally induced degradation of the device performance. The AFM height and phase images of the ternary blend film under various thermal treatment conditions (60 °C, 100 °C, and 120 °C) are exhibited in Fig. S10 in the ESI.† In comparison with the initial blend film without thermal-annealing treatment (Fig. 6c), the blend film becomes coarser gradually with a slightly increased Rq value from 2.31 nm to 2.48 and 2.51 nm when the annealing temperature rises up to 60 and 100 °C, respectively. After the temperature is further elevated up to 120 °C, the morphology changes distinctly and a larger scale phase separation can be observed with an obviously increased Rq of 4.73 nm. This result is in accord with the great change of the Jsc and FF values when the temperature is raised from 100 to 120 °C. Overall, we can conclude that the thermal inducement caused the coarse blend film morphology with large scale phase separation, and it became more serious after proceeding from 100 to 120 °C (Fig. S10b and c, ESI†), which damaged the excition dissociation and charge transfer in the device and eventually led to a great variation of Jsc and FF in the ternary blend film treated at 120 °C.
 Fig. 7  (a) Changes of the normalized PCE of the binary and ternary devices at various annealing temperatures. (b) Changes of the normalized Voc, Jsc, and FF of the ternary device at various annealing temperatures. (c–f) Changes of the normalized PCE, Voc, Jsc and FF of the binary and ternary devices with different annealing times at 120 °C. 
On the other hand, the thermal stability of the binary and ternary devices is also assessed by testing the device performance at one high annealing temperature (120 °C for this study) with a time interval of 12 h, as displayed in Fig. 7c–f. The related J–V plots are presented in Fig. S11 (ESI†) and the device performance is summarized in Tables S7–S9 in the ESI.† From the normalized PCE (Fig. 7c), it can be found that the ternary device is more thermally stable than the two binary devices. Over the first time interval (12 h), there exists obvious performance degradation and the PCEs retain over 82% for all the three devices. Then the two binary devices show a relatively faster PCE decay than that of the ternary device. After continuing to anneal for 60 h at 120 °C, the PCEs of the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT and PBDB-T/PC71BM maintain 2.33% and 5.05%, respectively, corresponding to 70% and 67% of the initial values, while the PCE (6.46%) of the ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT device retains 82% of the original value. For all three devices, the PCE degradation can mainly be ascribed to the reduction of Jsc and FF (see Tables S7–S9, ESI†). In detail, the Jsc and FF losses are 16% and 11% for the binary PBDB-T/IDT-OT device and these are 15% and 17% for the binary PBDB-T/PC71BM device (see Fig. 7d and e). For the ternary device, a similar Jsc loss of 18% can be found, whereas the FF value shows various degrees of improvement with extending the annealing time. In particular, the FF is increased by about 7% at the point of 48 h (see Fig. 7f). As a result, the ultimate PCE of the ternary device still preserves over 80% of the initial value. According to these results, it can be found that the ternary device possesses much superior stability to that of the two binary devices under the two abovementioned test conditions. The improved thermal stability could be closely related to the relatively stable film morphology of the active layer compared to the binary devices due to the well-defined small-molecule/fullerere acceptor alloy structure formed by IDT-OT and PC71BM. We suppose that this kind of acceptor alloy can firm the blend morphology via PC71BM interacting with the end group (IC) of IDT-OT and linking adjacent IDT-OT to enhance the thermal stability of the ternary device.14
3 Conclusions
In conclusion, we have developed a donor/FA/SMA type ternary PSC by introducing a new SMA IDT-OT into an FA-based host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary blend system in view of their complementary absorption and the proper electronic energy levels of these three materials. The incorporation of IDT-OT has a great effect on the device performance and thermal stability of the resultant ternary PSCs. By optimizing the feed ratio of IDT-OT and content of additive DIO, the PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT ternary PSCs exhibit an enhanced PCE of 9.09% as compared to the host PBDB-T/PC71BM binary device (PCE = 7.78%) and the control PBDB-T/IDT-OT binary system (PCE = 3.32%). The improved efficiency is closely related to the well-defined small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy formed by IDT-OT and PC71BM, which has been confirmed via scanning Voc of the ternary device and the LUMO energy levels of the acceptor blend (PC71BM/IDT-OT) and investigating the miscibility of these two acceptors by morphological characterization and water contact angle measurements. The addition of IDT-OT to create this acceptor alloy structure is beneficial for reducing bimolecular recombination and improving exciton separation, charge transfer and gathering, resulting in the higher Jsc and FF of the ternary device. The results based on PL quenching spectra and donor-free device performance confirm that there exist both efficient charge transfer and energy transfer (FRET) between PC71BM and IDT-OT, which has not been reported in previous studies containing small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy systems. More importantly, the thermal stability of the binary and ternary devices examined at various annealing temperatures (60–160 °C) and at one high annealing temperature (120 °C) for 60 h reveals that the ternary device possesses much superior stability to that of the two binary devices under the two test conditions. We suppose that the improved thermal stability could be ascribed to this small-molecule/fullerere acceptor alloy structure, which can fix the blend morphology via PC71BM interacting with the end group (IC) of IDT-OT and linking adjacent IDT-OT. This work can help us to better understand the primary working mechanism and the main cause behind the enhancements in the efficiency and thermal stability of a donor/FA/SMA type ternary system. Meanwhile, our finding also has evidenced that incorporating a SMA with a fullerence acceptor PC71BM to form a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy is an effective strategy to achieve both high-performance and stable PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21574111), and the Program for Innovative Research Cultivation Team in University of Ministry of Education of China (Grant No. 1337304).
References
D. D. C. Rasi and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806499 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Xu, K. Xian, B. Gao, J. Qin, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808356 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fan, D. Zhang, M. Li, W. Zhong, Z. Zeng, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Feng, Z. Bi, W. Ma, G. Zhang and Q. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901872 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, H. Yao and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702814 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Yan, Y. Yao and Z. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802004 CrossRef .
J. Lee, S. M. Lee, S. Chen, T. Kumari, S.-H. Kang, Y. Cho and C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804762 CrossRef .
W. Xu and F. Gao, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 206–221 RSC .
P. Bi and X. Hao, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800263 CrossRef .
R. Geng, X. Song, H. Feng, J. Yu, M. Zhang, N. Gasparini, Z. Zhang, F. Liu, D. Baran and W. Tang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Z. Xiao, J. Qu, L. Liu, H. Richter, W. Chen, L. Han, M. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Xie, L. Ding and F. He, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1106–1114 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Toudert, T. Li, M. Kramarenko, G. Martínez-Denegri, L. Ciammaruchi, X. Zhan and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900463 CrossRef .
T. Liu, Z. Luo, Q. Fan, G. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Gao, X. Guo, W. Ma, M. Zhang, C. Yang, Y. Li and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3275–3282 RSC .
B. Gao, H. Yao, J. Hou, R. Yu, L. Hong, Y. Xu and J. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23644–23649 RSC .
Y. Dong, Y. Zou, J. Yuan, H. Yang, Y. Wu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. An, X. Ma, J. Gao and F. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 504–506 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Xiao, L. Ding and J. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 340–342 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1562–1564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, B. Adilbekova, Y. Firdaus, E. Yengel, H. Faber, M. Sajjad, X. Zheng, E. Yarali, A. Seitkhan, O. M. Bakr, A. El-Labban, U. Schwingenschlögl, V. Tung, I. McCulloch, F. Laquai and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604059 CrossRef .
S.-L. Chang, F.-Y. Cao, W.-C. Huang, P.-K. Huang, C.-S. Hsu and Y.-J. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24797–24803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Feng, Y. Liu, S. Ming, H. Lu, D. Ma, X. Xu, Y. Wu and Z. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6854–6859 RSC .
Y. Zhu, A. Gadisa, Z. Peng, M. Ghasemi, L. Ye, Z. Xu, S. Zhao and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900376 CrossRef .
H. Fu, C. Li, P. Bi, X. Hao, F. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Wang and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807006 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, M. A. Uddin, P. Bi, B. Fan, Y. Cai, X. Hao, H. Y. Woo, W. Li, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803045 CrossRef .
Z. Liang, J. Tong, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Wang, J. Li, C. Yang and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15841–15850 RSC .
N. Y. Doumon, F. V. Houard, J. Dong, P. Christodoulis, M. V. Dryzhov, G. Portale and L. J. A. Koster, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5104–5111 RSC .
D. Huang, F. Bian, D. Zhu, X. Bao, C. Hong, P. Zhou, Y.-Y. Huang and C. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14976–14984 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, Z. Liu and N. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8483–8495 RSC .
Y. Chen, P. Ye, Z.-G. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu, X. Wu, T. Dong, H. Zhang, J. Hou, F. Liu and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603154 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W.-D. Xu, J.-D. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Lei, C.-F. Liu, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2460–2465 RSC .
C. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, S. B. Dkhil, X. Meng, X. Liu, O. Margeat, A. Yartsev, W. Ma, J. Ackermann, E. Wang and M. Fahlman, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 24–31 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Tian and X. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701691 CrossRef .
M. Kim, J. Lee, D. H. Sin, H. Lee, H. Y. Woo and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25570–25579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yin, T. Zheng, Y. Wu, G. Liu, Z.-G. Zhang, C. Cui, Y. Li and P. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20313–20326 RSC .
L. Zhang, N. Yi, W. Zhou, Z. Yu, F. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900565 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. An, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Wang, L. Li, Z. Xu, F. Teng and Y. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 118, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, W. Zhong, X.-F. Jiang, Q. Yin, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602127 CrossRef .
L. Yang, L. Yan and W. You, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1802–1810 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, V. Bharti, M. Kumar, S. Chand and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4398–4404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Benten, T. Nishida, D. Mori, H. Xu, H. Ohkita and S. Ito, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 135–140 RSC .
T. Liu, X. Xue, L. Huo, X. Sun, Q. An, F. Zhang, T. P. Russell, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2914–2920 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5432–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Fang, K. Lu, Z. Wang, W. Ma and Z. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8176–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, H. Yang, Y. Zou, Y. Dong, C. Cui and Y. Li, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800060 CrossRef .
P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart and B. C. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9074–9077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, S. Zhang, H. Yao, B. Guo, S. Li, H. Zhang, M. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700437 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lu, J. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Liu, X. Gong, S. Feng, X. Xu, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9559–9566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, D. Baran, I. McCulloch and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703298 CrossRef .
G. Wang, M. A. Adil, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805089 Search PubMed .
A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, A. Marks, M. S. Little, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1596–1625 RSC .
T. Heumueller, W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, K. Vandewal, J. A. Bartelt, T. M. Burke, T. Ameri, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2974–2980 RSC .
K. P. Meletov, J. Arvanitidis, D. Christofilos, G. A. Kourouklis and V. A. Davydov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 654, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wong, Z. Li, C. H. Tan, H. Zhong, Z. Huang, H. Bronstein, I. McCulloch, J. T. Cabral and J. R. Durrant, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1297–1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Toudert, F. Liu, P. Mantilla-Perez, M. M. Bajo, T. P. Russell and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701201 CrossRef .
C. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2740–2754 CrossRef .
L. Fernandes, H. Gaspar, J. P. C. Tomé, F. Figueira and G. Bernardo, Polym. Bull., 2018, 75, 515–532 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cha, J. Wu, A. Wadsworth, J. Nagitta, S. Limbu, S. Pont, Z. Li, J. Searle, M. F. Wyatt, D. Baran, J. S. Kim, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701156 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C. H. Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Speller, A. J. Clarke, J. Luke, H. K. H. Lee, J. R. Durrant, N. Li, T. Wang, H. C. Wong, J.-S. Kim, W. C. Tsoi and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23361–23377 RSC .
H. Shi, R. Xia, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803438 CrossRef .
B. Xiao, M. Du, X. Wang, Z. Xiao, G. Li, A. Tang, L. Ding, Y. Geng, X. Sun and E. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1094–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ming, Y. Liu, S. Feng, P. Jiang, C. Zhang, M. Li, J. Song and Z. Bo, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 163, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, S. Feng, M. Li, L. Wu, R. Hou, X. Xu, X. Chen and Z. Bo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3356–3359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, P. Jiang, X. Zhou, H. Liu, Q. Guo, X. Xu, Y. Liu, Z. Tang, W. Ma and Z. Bo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2123–2130 RSC .
P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart and B. C. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14534–14537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, S. B. Jo, X. Shi, L. Nian, M. Zhang, Y. Kan, F. Lin, B. Kan, B. Xu, Q. Rong, L. Shui, F. Liu, X. Peng, G. Zhou, Y. Cao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807842 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wan, L. Zhang, Q. He, S. Liu, B. Huang, L. Hu, W. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909760 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Jiang, G. Huang, J. Zhang, M. Cai, X. Wan and R. Yang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800101 CrossRef .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123509 CrossRef .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, W. L. Leong, L. Ke, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4569–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xia, Y. Cai, H. Fu and Y. Sun, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 662–669 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc00329hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Device architecture of the ternary PSCs used in this work. (b) Molecular structures of PBDB-T, PC71BM and IDT-OT. (c) Absorption spectra of PBDB-T, PC71BM and IDT-OT as thin films. (d) Absorption spectra of the binary and ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1/1.5/0.2) blend films. (e) Schematic energy level diagram for PBDB-T, IDT-OT, and PC71BM and the proposed working mechanism of these ternary PSCs based on a small-molecule/fullerene acceptor alloy model in this study.	 


1:1.5:0	0.826	14.10	66.8	7.78 (7.75 ± 0.12)	3.0
1:0:1.5	0.927	8.27	43.4	3.32 (3.28 ± 0.09)	0
1:1.5:0.1	0.845	13.53	68.2	7.79 (7.70 ± 0.16)	0
1:1.5:0.2	0.869	15.35	68.1	9.09 (9.03 ± 0.05)	0.5
1:1.5:0.3	0.872	14.43	66.5	8.35 (8.28 ± 0.22)	0.5
1:1.5:0.5	0.908	13.12	58.4	6.96 (6.92 ± 0.08)	0.5
1:1.5:1	0.913	11.83	53.9	5.82 (5.81 ± 0.03)	0.5
1.2:1.5:0.2	0.882	16.20	62.6	8.95 (8.86 ± 0.17)	0.5
1.5:1.5:0.2	0.872	15.62	65.4	8.78 (8.76 ± 0.05)	0.5
2:1.5:0.2	0.886	14.70	63.8	8.31 (8.04 ± 0.26)	0.5

 	Fig. 2  (a) The J–V curves and (b) the EQE curves of the two optimized binary PSCs and ternary PSCs. (c) Measured Voc of the ternary PSCs as a function of the proportion of IDT-OT in the acceptor alloy.	 

 	Fig. 3  Water contact angle images of the pristine films: (a) PBDB-T, (b) PC71BM, and (c) IDT-OT.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) PL spectra of the pure PC71BM and PBDB-T/PC71BM and ternary PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) blend films excited at 500 nm. (b) The normalized absorption spectrum of the pure IDT-OT film and PL spectrum of the pure PC71BM film with an apparent overlap. (c) PL spectra of the IDT-OT, PC71BM, and binary PC71BM/IDT-OT (1.5:0.2) blend films excited at 500 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff) curves. Dependence of Voc on the light intensity (b) and dependence of Jsc (c) on the light intensity for the PBDT/IDT-OT, PBDB-T/PC71BM, and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) devices. J1/2–V characteristics for the measurement of the hole mobility (d) and electron mobility (e) of the PBDT/IDT-OT, PBDB-T/PC71BM, and PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT (1:1.5:0.2) blend films by the SCLC method.	 

PBDB-T/PC71BM	1.07 × 10−4	3.23 × 10−4	3.02	0.827	1.25	0.894
PBDB-T/IDT-OT	2.69 × 10−4	1.19 × 10−4	0.44	0.50	1.26	0.855
PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT	3.29 × 10−4	3.95 × 10−4	1.20	0.833	1.22	0.942

 	Fig. 6  AFM height images (a–c) and phase images (d–f), and TEM images (g–i) of the binary films based on PBDB-T/IDT-OT and PBDB-T/PC71BM and the ternary blend film of PBDB-T/PC71BM/IDT-OT processed under the optimal conditions.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Changes of the normalized PCE of the binary and ternary devices at various annealing temperatures. (b) Changes of the normalized Voc, Jsc, and FF of the ternary device at various annealing temperatures. (c–f) Changes of the normalized PCE, Voc, Jsc and FF of the binary and ternary devices with different annealing times at 120 °C.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc00329h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
