Merging plasmonics and metamaterials by two-dimensional subwavelength structures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00440K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00440K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4361-4378Merging plasmonics and metamaterials by two-dimensional subwavelength structures

        
          
            Mingbo 
            Pu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoliang 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiong 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yinghui 
            Guo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiangang 
            Luo
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Optical Technologies on Nano-Fabrication and Micro-Engineering, Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, 610209, China. E-mail: lxg@ioe.ac.cn
Received 
      26th January 2017
    , Accepted 31st March 2017First published on 31st March 2017AbstractAs one of the major fields of photonics in the last few decades, plasmonics takes advantage of the coupling of light and free electrons in noble metals, and allows the localization of light beyond the diffraction limit. Recently, plasmonics has been introduced into the newly emerging metamaterials, which are artificially structured effective materials with unique physical properties that do not exist in natural materials. Based on the strong light–matter interaction below the diffraction limit, the plasmonic metamaterials have found important applications in various photonic devices, such as color filters, flat lenses and perfect absorbers. In this review article, we focus on the planar plasmonic metamaterials that rely on the patterned arrangement of metallic and dielectric inclusions in the two-dimensional (2D) space. The interesting optical effects, underlying physical principles and the practical applications in functional devices are outlined, with a brief discussion of their future development trends.
1. Introduction
Plasmonics and metamaterials are two emerging branches of modern optics and nanophotonics.1,2 Although they have been developed in parallel during the last one hundred years, the discoveries of extraordinary optical transmission and perfect imaging properties of structured metal films by Thomas Ebbesen and John Pendry respectively have linked them together.3,4 Since then, the exotic properties of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) were taken into account to design various metamaterials with unnatural optical parameters such as the negative refractive index,4,5 biological and chemical sensors6–9 and perfectly matched absorbers.10–15
One of the most important and interesting aspects of the combination of plasmonics and metamaterials is the naissance of 2D metamaterials, or the so-called metasurfaces.16–23 Different from the definite permittivity and permeability in metamaterials, these bulk properties are less important or even meaningless in many metasurfaces.11,24 As an alternative, sheet impedance is often exploited in the characterization of light–matter interactions. The plasmonic circuit models can also be used as useful tools for impedance analysis.25 Compared with previous metamaterials, metasurfaces have much smaller thickness and thus are far easier to fabricate. As a result, it was expected that the first generation of practical metamaterial devices would utilize metasurface implementations.18
The core of the problem in designing plasmonic metasurfaces is to arrange various chemical materials with various types of topological structures. In essence, almost all the associated electromagnetic phenomena can be understood by using Maxwell's equations. Nevertheless, the numerical solutions of Maxwell's equations ignore the physical meanings and are troublesome in many cases, and thus an analytic or quasi-analytic approach would help the further understanding of these light–matter interactions. In the past few years, many analytical methods such as the transfer matrix method (TMM) and rigorous coupled wave analysis (RCWA) have been provided. By utilizing the boundary conditions and the superposition principle, many problems, such as the grating diffraction, multilayer filter, etc., can be simplified but other complicated issues are still difficult to solve.26
As an alternative, here we use a phenomenological approach to describe these electromagnetic behaviors. Without the loss of any generality, all EM waves can be classified into two categories: the freely propagating waves and bound waves. In free space and common homogeneous materials, all waves are propagating without any limitations and physical boundaries. These waves can be easily decomposed into a series of plane waves through the superposition theorem and Fourier theory.27 According to the Fourier principle, the free waves have an upper limit of spatial frequency, which is the product of the material refractive index and the free space wavenumber k0. This limited wavenumber is also the key of the diffraction limit,28 which means that the resolution of optical microscopy and lithography technology cannot exceed one half of the working wavelength.29
Different from the free waves, the waves bound at the boundaries between different materials may have very large spatial frequency. For instance, the wavenumber of the SPP excited at the metal–dielectric interface has an effective wavelength much smaller than that in vacuum.30,31 Such a short-wavelength property has made the SPP a promising candidate to construct sub-diffraction imaging/lithography systems and integrated optical circuits.19,32,33 In the infrared and microwave frequencies, the use of similar phenomena such as spoof surface plasmon in complex metallic structures can also boost the obtainable high spatial frequency.34,35 Furthermore, the wavenumber of waves bound in a thin film of high refractive index can also be very large, and thus could also produce many exotic optical phenomena such as structural colors and ultra-broadband absorption.36–38
This review paper describes the optical phenomena and practical applications regarding the plasmonic light–matter interaction in the 2D space. The role of high-k bound surface waves as well as the exchange between free and bound waves in various functional devices, such as color filters, flat lenses and perfect absorbers, is discussed with detail. At the end of this paper, the potential applications of new nano-materials such as doped semiconductors, graphene and phase-change materials are also envisioned.
2. Local modulation of bound surface waves
2.1 The short wavelength properties of the SPP
As electromagnetic waves do not exist in bulk metals, the bound surface states at metal-dielectric interface have attracted much research interest for many decades. In particular, the SPP has shown its great potential in the area of nanophotonics.1 One most interesting property of the SPP is its ability to localize electromagnetic waves in area with dimensions much smaller than that defined by traditional optical theory. The key of this ability is attributed to the dramatically reduced effective wavelength.
Following a simple method to match the boundary conditions,19 the effective wavelength for the SPP propagating along the metal–dielectric interface can be written as: (1)where εm and εd are the permittivities of the metal and the dielectric. Obviously, when the condition εm = −εd is satisfied, the propagating constant, which is proportional to the spatial frequency, would be greatly increased. Considering the ohmic loss of the electrons inside the metal, the maximal obtainable spatial frequency is limited to some extent. To increase the local field confinement, two configurations including the metal–dielectric–metal (MIM) and dielectric–metal–dielectric (IMI) have been proposed. The dispersion equations for the fundamental modes are:30 (2)where ε1 and ε2 are the permittivity of the metal and dielectric, or vice versa. Fig. 1a shows the dispersion diagram of surface plasmons at a single metal–dielectric surface and a metallic thin film (the IMI configuration).30 Clearly, the horizontal wave vector increases when the thickness of Ag film decreases. As shown in Fig. 1b, the mode refractive index increases dramatically for slit widths smaller than 20 nm.39
 Fig. 1  Dispersions and applications of SPPs. (a) Dispersion of SPPs on semi-infinite silver and silver films with different thicknesses.30 (b) Dependence of the effective refractive index of SPPs on the silver slit width at a wavelength of 650 nm.39 (c) Theoretical modeling of the plasmon coupling, propagation and enhancement in a fabricated tapered groove.42 (d) A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a typical V-groove cross-section.42 (e) A tapered section of a gold film on a sapphire substrate.43 (f) Simulation of the near field distribution on a metal film with periodic perforations.44 (g) Schematic diagram of the plasmonic cavity lens.48 (h) SEM image of the resist pattern with a half pitch of 22 nm.48 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2004 Optical Society of America,30 (b) Copyright 2005 Optical Society of America,39 (c and d) Copyright 2009 Optical Society of America,42 (e) Copyright 2008 Optical Society of America,43 (f) Copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics,44 (g and h) Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics.48 
The extremely small effective wavelength makes it possible to localize light with critical dimensions far beyond the diffraction limit.40,41Fig. 1c and d show a metallic groove, where light fields can be compressed by gradually reducing the gap width.42Fig. 1e shows a metallic taper with two-dimensional light localization ability.43
One important application of the SPP is the plasmonic nanolithography (PNL) system. Fig. 1f shows the initial configuration of PNL.44 Light originating from a source somewhere above the mask couples with surface plasmon modes to form a kind of plasmon polariton on one side of the metal, which is subsequently tunneled through the mask to establish the plasmon polariton modes on the other side, and the patterns on the mask are then imaged on the photoresist layer.45 Note that this imaging process can also be attributed to the negative refraction and evanescent wave amplification effect.4,46 During the last decade, several methods have been proposed to increase the resolution, areal coverage, and uniformity, which are the most vital aspects for the practical application of the nanolithography system.47–50 One of the newest improved configurations is shown in Fig. 1g, where the superlens is combined with the silver reflective layer to form a MIM cavity.48 Such an approach can make the resolution smaller than 22 nm (see Fig. 1h) and even 16 nm at the working wavelength of 365 nm.48
It should be noted that by stacking metal and dielectric thin films together, effective metamaterials can be constructed with exotic properties such as selective absorption13,51 and hyperbolic dispersion,52–56 which have enabled the ray-like subdiffraction propagation of coupled plasmons in hyperlenses.57–60 Recently, the hyperbolic dispersion was also extended into the regime of the metasurface to realize sub-diffraction control of the plasmons at the surfaces.61
2.2 The local modulation of photons with plasmonic structures
Once the freely propagating wave is coupled to an SPP, the SPP would be localized and/or propagate along the surface. As can be seen in Fig. 2, the localization of the SPP and similar bound waves has found applications in areas such as sub-diffraction waveguiding, imaging, lithography, and recording systems, etc. Besides the direct utilization of the localized waves, the exchange of free and bound waves is also very useful in many practical applications, enabling new methods to manipulate the freely propagating waves with deep-subwavelength spatial resolution. According to the reciprocal principle, SPPs can be scattered and re-emitted as freely propagating waves by the same subwavelength structures that act as couplers.
 Fig. 2  Interactions of light and SPPs in complex nanostructures. 
Depending on the characteristics of propagating waves, the SPP-enabled functionalities can be divided into the following main categories: the amplitude modulation, phase/polarization modulation and the frequency modulation. On the one hand, the amplitude, phase and polarization at each single frequency should be tuned following rules that depend on the exact applications.22 On the other hand, the dispersion properties should be elaborately controlled to realize multi-frequency or broadband functionalities.62–65 In addition, the interaction of multi-frequency light waves in subwavelength structures is essential for nonlinear nanophotonic devices.66–68

2.2.1 Color filtering. 
Since the SPP coupling efficiency and the amplitude of the re-emitted light are directly related to the wavelength, the SPP coupling structures are natural candidates to form structural colors, where colors emerge when white light interacts with structured materials.69–71
The very first realization of SPP-based color filters can date back to the extraordinary optical transmission (EOT) effect discovered by Thomas Ebbesen et al. in 1989.3,72 As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the optical transmission of an array of nanoholes in a metallic screen is much larger than the prediction of traditional theory at some wavelengths.73 By spatially varying the holes’ geometric parameters, the transmitted wavelength can be arbitrarily tuned. Similarly, using the enhanced transmission effect of bull's eye structures, a simple multicolor detection scheme can be realized. Fig. 3c shows that three different colors are separated as they couple to different gratings and are redirected towards distinct photodetectors through apertures in the metal film.74
 Fig. 3  Plasmonic color filters. (a) Transmission spectrum of hole arrays. The triangular hole array was milled in a 225 nm-thick Au film on a glass substrate with an index matching liquid on the air side.73 (b) Holes in a dimple array generating the letters ‘hv’ in transmission.73 (c) Sketch of the spatial filtering process for the incoming white light through three overlapping bull's eye structures.74 (d) Schematic diagram of the plasmonic nano-resonators based on the MIM configuration.75 (e) Plasmon dispersions in the MIM stack array. Red, green and blue dots correspond to the case of filtering primary RGB colors.75 (f) Schematic of the color filter based on metallic grating on a glass substrate.76 (g and h) Color display based on space-variant absorption.77 (i) Sketch of the selective absorber using an ultra-thin lossy layer on a reflecting substrate.38 (j) Interference colors generated by Si films of thickness from 0 to 30 nm (I–IX) on top of an opaque Au film, deposited on a smooth, polished wafer.38 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group,73 (c) Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group,74 (d and e) Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited,75 (g and h) Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited,77 and (i and j) Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag.38 
The MIM configuration is also a good candidate for color filtering. As shown in Fig. 3d and e, the period of the metallic stacks for any preselected wavelength is directly determined by using the almost linear dispersion curve.75 The plasmonic antisymmetric modes can be used as intermediates to couple the incident plane wave selectively in and scatter the confined modes out to the farfield. Following a similar way, simpler but less vivid color filters (Fig. 3f) can also be obtained using metallic gratings on glass substrates.76 These artificial structures provide an opportunity for display and imaging devices with a higher spatial resolution, as well as much smaller device dimensions than those currently available.77–80 As demonstrated in Fig. 3g and h, the pixels of plasmonic color displays can be reduced to only 3 or 2 unit cells in each directions.77
It should be noted that the lossy and high-index thin films (Fig. 3i) have also been used to create frequency-dependent absorption and structural colors.36,38 Although it is difficult to obtain space-variant colors, the fabrication cost is dramatically reduced, which forms a big advantage for the practical implementation of these technologies.


2.2.2 Wavefront and polarization engineering. 
The recent years have witnessed the rapid development of flat optical devices. A major part of these works is associated with engineering of the wavefronts and beam shapes.16,33 One initial motivation to design flat optical devices at the nanoscale is to circumvent the diffraction effect, which makes the nanoscale light beam diffract rapidly when leaving the radiating structures.
Many novel surface structures are found to be able to create collimated light. The first type is the so-called bull's eyes. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, when a metallic screen is milled with a central hole and periodically grooves at both the input and output surfaces, the incoming light can be transmitted and excite SPPs at the output surfaces,73 which are then collectively scattered into the farfield.81 Under appropriate resonant conditions, the transmitted light could be collimated with a very small divergence angle. Owing to the collective response of the SPPs, this scheme is not only valid for normal laser beams,82 but also useful for fluorescence emissions83 (Fig. 4c) and light beams carrying orbital angular momentum.84
 Fig. 4  Wavefront engineering based on plasmonic surface structures. (a) SEM image of a single hole surrounded by periodic corrugations prepared by focused ion beam (FIB).73 (b) Schematic illustration of redirecting beam by a single-slit aperture surrounded by grooves of different periodicities on the input (P1) and output (P2) surfaces.73 (c) Configuration to enhance and control the fluorescence emission of molecules diffusing in the central aperture.90 (d) Beam focusing structure using a nano-slit array with different widths.64 (e) Experimental demonstration of a planar lens based on nanoscale slit arrays in a metallic film.88 (f) Pseudocolor intensity map of the planar lens based on hole arrays.89 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group,73 (c) Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society,90 (e) Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society,88 (f) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.89 
More recently, the extraordinary transmission and beaming effect based on groove structures have been expanded to other frequency bands. Pendry et al. demonstrated that even a perfect electric conductor can support surface-plasmon-like electromagnetic waves.34 In order to distinguish it from traditional SPPs, this surface plasmon supported by groove structures at low frequency is termed the spoof surface plasmon (SSP). Akarca-Biyikli et al. experimentally validated the abnormal transmission and beaming effect in the 1D groove structure.85
Besides the plasmonic leaky-wave-based beam collimator, flat plasmonic lenses can also be designed by utilizing the width-dependent propagation constant of MIM waveguides. Based on the gradient phase realized by propagation delay, the metasurface-assisted law of refraction and reflection (MLRR) can be constructed to change the light propagation defined by traditional Snell's law.19,86,87 When the gradient phase follows Φ(r) = k0(r2 + f2)1/2, where r is the radius and f is the focal length, traditional bulky aplanatic lenses can be shrunk into the 2D plane.

Fig. 4d shows the schematic of lens configuration based on an array of nanoslits on a thin metallic film,19 which was experimentally demonstrated by Verslegers et al.,88 as shown in Fig. 4e. Since the optical performance of nanoslit arrays is dependent on light polarization, many works have been done to extend the 1D design to 2D polarization-independent lenses.89 As can be seen in Fig. 4f, an array of circular nanoholes can achieve the similar phase-modulation effect to focus light with an arbitrary focal length. Owing to the negligible coupling between adjacent holes, such structures can manipulate the local phase with deep-subwavelength resolution, which may enable much better optical performance and even completely new functionalities.
Another newly proposed class of plasmonic phase-modulating structures are associated with the polarization transformation in anisotropic subwavelength structures (Fig. 5a).91 Such a phase is mainly determined by the geometric rotation of the local optical axis, which is also referred to as optical spin–orbit interaction if the incident light is circularly polarized.92 When a circularly polarized point source is placed at the focal plane of a chiral flat lens as shown in Fig. 5b, a collimated optical vortex beam can be generated (Fig. 5c).93 Similar phenomena have also been observed in other structures.94,95
 Fig. 5  Plasmonic metasurfaces for wavefront engineering. (a and b) SEM images of the V-shaped and elliptic antenna arrays.91,93 (c) The intensity of the electric fields in the yz plane when a circularly polarized point source is placed at the focus of the metasurface shown in (b).93 (d) SEM image of a single catenary aperture perforated in a 120 nm-thick gold film.97 (e) Simulation of the cross-polarized electric intensity for the catenary in the xz plane.97 (f) The amplitude of the farfield angular spectrum in the k-space.97 (g) Sketch of the measurement setup for the ultra-realistic color holography.100 (h and i) Holographic images for the China map and the Sun Phoenix pattern.100 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2011 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.91 
The optical spin–orbit interaction is also related to the angular spin Hall effect of light (SHEL), i.e., a handedness-dependent beam steering effect. As illustrated in Fig. 5d, a catenary aperture was fabricated via FIB milling on a 120 nm-thick gold film deposited on a SiO2 substrate. The catenary aperture was obtained by connecting two adjacent “catenary of equal strength” curves:92,96–98 y = Λ/πln(|sec(πx/Λ)|),(3)where Λ is the horizontal length of the catenary. According to the definition of the geometric phase, there is a linear and dispersion-free phase distribution of Φ(x) = −2σπx/Λ, where σ = ±1 denotes the left-handed and right-handed circular polarization. Intuitively speaking, a single element of the catenary aperture can act as an artificial bias for the incident circularly polarized light, and show a dramatic angular SHEL. The deflection angle of the cross-polarized light (at normal incidence) is θ = −σ sin−1(λ/Λ), corresponding to an additional horizontal momentum of Δk = −2σπ/Λ. Fig. 5e and f show the cross-polarized near-field electric fields and far-field scattering of this aperture, which correspond well to the theoretical expectation.
It should be noted that the geometric phase is naturally not dependent on the wavelength, although the amplitude may vary. Thus broadband achromatic phase modulation can be easily obtained, which has been utilized in multispectral imaging, wavelength-selective beam manipulation and full-color holography.63,99,100Fig. 5g and h illustrate a full-color holography based on the geometric phase.100 By implementing different lasers illuminating at various angles, highly pure colors can be well reconstructed. A 7-color holography for the Sun Phoenix pattern is also shown in Fig. 5i, showing an increase of the color gamut by 1.39 times.
In addition to the spin angular momentum, the optical vortex beam carrying orbital angular momenta (OAM) has attracted great interest owing to its numerous applications in telecommunications and optical tweezers.92,95,101–104 The practical applications of OAM require the generators and detectors to be much smaller, which can be realized by taking advantage of the plasmonic metasurfaces. Fig. 6a and b show two kinds of vortex plates based on the V-shaped antennas and catenary apertures,91,92 while Fig. 6c and d depict the intensity and interference maps of an ideal optical vortex beam. Fig. 6e shows a metasurface that utilizes the holography principle for producing multiple vortex beams.105Fig. 6f and g show a class of plasmonic surface structures for the detection of OAM beams,103 which can be exploited as on-chip OAM demultiplexers. Note that the angular-momentum-dependent plasmonic coupling can also be understood in the framework of the spin Hall effect and the angular momentum Hall effect.106–108
 Fig. 6  Plasmonic metasurfaces for OAM generation and detection. (a and b) SEM images for the OAM generators based on V-shaped nanoantenna arrays and catenary nanoapertures.91,92 (c and d) Intensity and interference pattern for the OAM beam.91 (e) Schematic of the multi-channel vortex beam generation using a metasurface.105 (f) SEM image of the chip-scale OAM multiplexer based on double concentric and spatially-shifted nano-ring slits.103 (g and h) The simulated and measured total intensity distributions of the OAM beams in the transverse planes.103 Adapted with permission. (a–d) Copyright 2011 the American Association for the Advancement of Science,91 (e) Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag,105 (f–h) Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.103 
Transmissive plasmonic metadevices are sometimes characterized by low efficiency, owing to the ohmic as well as the reflection loss. To overcome this problem, reflective devices are widely investigated.109–113 Since these devices look like mirrors yet behave differently, they are often called meta-mirrors.114 While the all-dielectric metamirror has the advantage of low absorption loss, its overall thickness is often much larger and its bandwidth is narrower.115 As a result, the plasmonic metamirrors are more intensively investigated. In general, there are two main kinds of plasmonic gradient metamirrors: the first is based on the variation of geometric sizes and the second is based on the geometric phase, where only the local rotation angle is modulated. Fig. 7a shows a typical metamirror with one-dimensional variation of the geometric size.116Fig. 7b and c illustrate an broadband metamirror for virtual shaping,112 which is an alternative technique117,118 for the cloaking technology based on transformational optics.119 By making the reflective beam to follow a Bessel function, the backward scattering cross section is dramatically reduced in the range between 500 nm to 3 μm.112 Following the same mechanism, the geometric-phase-based metamirrors can be used to realize highly efficient holograms.120 As illustrated in Fig. 7d–f, a circularly polarized incident beam is converted from a linearly polarized one by passing through a quarter wave plate (QWP). Through the optical spin–orbit interaction on the metasurface, the reflected beam forms the holographic image in the far field. The measurements show a relative high optical efficiency above 50% for the image beam over the range 630–1050 nm.120
 Fig. 7  Plasmonic metamirrors based on the resonant phase delay and geometric phase. (a) Schematic of the designed sample with a unit cell (inset) consisting of a Au nanorod and a continuous Au film separated by the MgF2 spacer.116 (b) Schematic of the three dimensional model for virtual shaping. The incident wave is scattered in the desired directions.112 (c) Calculated RCS of a sample with dimensions of 8 μm × 8 μm.112 (d) Illustration of the reflective nanorod-based CGH under a circularly polarized incident beam.120 (e) SEM image of the fabricated nanorod array.120 (f) Experimentally obtained optical efficiency for both the image and the zeroth-order beam.120 (g–i) SEM image, targeted object and reconstructed holographic image of an infrared metamirror made of gold. The pixel, period and thickness of the gold grating are 30 μm, 4 μm and 2.65 μm, respectively.87 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society,116 (d–f) Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.120 
The geometric phases can also be obtained through space-variant gratings.121 As shown in Fig. 7g–i, an all-metallic space-variant grating has been demonstrated to generate infrared holography with an efficiency larger than 95% at a wavelength of 10.6 μm.87

2.3 From Mie resonance to dielectric metamaterials
Besides plasmonic interactions in metal–dielectric composites, recent years also witnessed a rapid development of dielectric metamaterials. In particular, the dielectric materials with high refractive indices such as silicon, germanium and TiO2 have attracted much attention owing to their strong Mie-type resonances and low optical loss.122–125 The Mie theory for the scattering and absorption of spherical particles was developed by Mie in 1908.1 In general, the Mie theory can deal with both dielectric and metallic problems. The localized plasmon resonance of spherical metal particles can be well understood by using this approach.
One important problem of the Mie-type dielectric metamaterial is the validity of the effective medium theory, which assumes that deep-subwavelength features cannot be distinguished by the electromagnetic waves, thus structured materials behave the same like suppositional homogeneous materials. Although effective materials approach is valid in the deep-subwavelength scale, the accuracy would deteriorate as the size of unit cell increases. In particular, when the period is larger than λ/2, the high order diffraction may take place at oblique incidence. For Mie-type metamaterials, the period is usually not much smaller than the operating wavelength, and thus transition from photonic crystals to dielectric metamaterials typically occur owing to the interplay between Bragg and Mie resonances.126 In order to handle this problem, it is necessary to apply different theories in different frequency regimes, as demonstrated in the broadband terahertz absorber based on doped silicon.127,128
Although dielectric metamaterials and metasurfaces provide a new route to realize low-loss functional devices, the thicknesses are a bit larger than their plasmonic counterparts,129,130 while the energy efficiencies are dependent on the wavelength and angle of incidence. Furthermore, low-loss high refractive materials are hard to find in some frequency bands, thus limiting their wide-spread utilization.
3. Critical coupling to bound surface waves and perfect absorption
In many plasmonic applications, the ohmic loss in noble metals is not desired and much effort has been devoted to the research of low-loss plasmonic materials and loss-compensation techniques.131–133 Nevertheless, it is still interesting that the plasmonic loss can be utilized to enhance the absorption of electromagnetic energy. The intuitive idea to create a plasmonic absorber can be found in the old concept of the blackbody. As shown in Fig. 8a, when light is transmitted into a lossy cavity through a small hole, almost all energy would be converted into heat by multiple reflection and absorption. A plasmonic blackbody absorber composed of a metallic cavity is shown in Fig. 8b. When the metallic loss is relatively weak such as that in gold, the blackbody can still work well in a narrowband.15 However, when the metallic loss is increased by reducing the conductivity, broadband blackbody absorber can be constructed.134 Owing to the hexagonal lattice, such an absorber could absorb light coming from all directions with all polarizations. The metallic cavity absorber can also be transformed into a simpler configuration.11,135 As depicted in Fig. 8c, such a structure is similar to the MIM waveguide and has many variations in geometric shapes.135–138
 Fig. 8  Plasmonic blackbody absorbers based on free-bound wave exchange and critical coupling. (a) Schematic of a simplified blackbody, where a small hole is perforated on one side of the cavity. (b) Schematic (left) and SEM image of plasmonic blackbody absorber composed of void cavities in metal films.15 (c) Variation of the plasmonic cavity absorber and the typical electric field distribution in the dielectric layer.11 (d) Effective medium model for the wide-angle perfect absorber. Since the effective refractive index is rather large, light wave propagates approximately along the normal axis of the material surface. (e) The dual-band wide-angle absorbance as a function of the incidence angle and frequency.11 Adapted with permission. (b) Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group,15 (c and e) Copyright 2011 Optical Society of America.11 
The plasmonic perfect absorber can be interpreted using the free-bound wave exchange principle19 and the concept of critical coupling. In general, the reflected wave from a structured surface can be treated as a superimposition of the directly reflected and re-emitted waves of the bound oscillations. When these two components interfere destructively, all the incident waves can be converted to bound waves, and finally be converted to heat or other kinds of energy. We note that the coherent perfect absorption effect36,37,139,140 can also be understood using the two-wave exchange and the critical coupling mechanism.
Plasmonic cavity absorbers have three superiorities over traditional absorbers: first, the absorption is almost independent on the incident angle and thus a true omnidirectional absorber can be achieved;15,134 secondly, the thickness of the absorber can be greatly reduced using the magnetic resonance that occurred in the cavity;136 thirdly, the absorption bandwidth can be tuned on demand by utilizing the dispersion of these resonances,141,142 which will be discussed in the following section.
The angle-independent absorption phenomenon can be explained using the effective medium theory. Considering the resonant characteristics, the effective refractive index is very large at the resonant frequency, which leads to the fact that the critical coupling conditions are independent of the incident angle. As depicted in Fig. 8d, when the refractive index of the dielectric spacer in a Salisbury absorber is very large, the absorption bandwidth as well as the angle-sensitivity would decrease. Using the Snell's law, it is easy to see that waves in the high-index material propagate approximately perpendicular to the surface, regardless of the incident angle. More precisely, the phase delay between adjacent reflection waves can be written as 2nkd(1 − (sinθ/n)2)1/2, which is almost independent of the angle θ when n ≫ 1. By engineering the resonances, one can further achieve dual-band (Fig. 8e) or wide-band absorption within a wide range of incident angles.11,143
One important application of the plasmonic absorber is the photovoltaic solar cells,144 which convert light into electricity or other kinds of useful energy. Although the solar energy is transformed into heat for common noble-metal-based absorbers, it has been shown that such an absorption mechanism can also be extended to photovoltaic cells by exchanging the ohmic loss and with useful optical absorption in semiconductor layers.24 Following the competition mechanism of the dielectric and metallic absorption, one can decrease the ohmic absorption by increasing the metal thickness to be much larger than the skin depth (Fig. 9a). By gradually increasing the absorption strength of the semiconductor layer, the photons that reflected originally due to impedance mismatch can be shifted to and absorbed in the semiconductors (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  Plasmonic enhancement of solar absorption. (a and b) Exchanging ohmic loss with useful loss in semiconductors by gradual incorporation of the complex permittivity of the semiconductor spacer with (a) Im(ε) = 0.1, (b) Im(ε) = 1.23.24 (c) Schematic of the fabricated organic solar cell. The SEM image shows the cross-sectional view of the fabricated device.145 (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) enhancement of the nanowire device with reference to the ITO device.145 Adapted with permission. (c and d) Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag.145 
Besides the energy exchanging mechanism, the plasmonic field enhancements can also boost the efficiency of solar cells. As can be seen in Fig. 9c and d, the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) is enhanced about 35%145 when a silver grating is used to replace the common indium tin oxide (ITO) as a transparent electrode.
Different from the direct conversion from photons to photo-current, the ohmic loss induced heat can also be converted into narrowband thermal emission and reused in thermo-photovoltaic systems.146,147 Wang et al. demonstrated a solar thermo-photovoltaic device that reaches experimental efficiencies of 3.2%.146 By using vertically aligned multiwalled carbon nanotubes as absorbers, a near-complete absorption over a broad solar spectrum was achieved. One-dimensional photonic crystals were optimized to provide a cut-off in the thermal emission right at the bandgap of the semiconductor, thus strongly suppressing sub-bandgap thermal radiation.
4. Dispersion and bandwidth engineering
As mentioned in the above discussions, the dispersion of electromagnetic modes plays an important role in almost all plasmonic devices. On the one hand, the short wavelength and directive propagating properties of bound surface waves can be directly observed in the dispersion diagram of single metal–dielectric interfaces and metal–dielectric multilayers. On the other hand, the frequency dispersion of these modes makes multi-wavelength, broadband and ultra-narrowband applications become possible.138,141,148–150
When designing broadband plasmonic devices, it is useful to retrieve the ideal frequency dispersion of a perfect device using theoretical approaches. For perfect absorbers and polarization converters with only one metasurface layer, the corresponding dispersion curves can be given using the transfer matrix method.114,141 Feng et al. demonstrated that the absorption bandwidth can be enlarged dramatically through utilizing the metasurface to mimic the dispersion of the ideal absorbing sheet.141 By introducing a specific dispersion relation in the form of the Lorentz model,151 a nearly perfect absorber was obtained with absorption greater than 97% over a one-octave bandwidth (Fig. 10a and b). It was noted that the Lorentz form is just one type of dispersion that mimics that of an ideal absorbing sheet, and thus further engineering of the dispersion may lead to an even larger bandwidth.
 Fig. 10  Broadband meta-devices based on dispersion engineering. (a) Schematic of the broadband absorber based on metasurface dispersion engineering.141 (b) Absorption at normal incidence as a function of frequency. The Salisbury absorption curve is shown as a reference.141 (c) Perspective view of the polarizing metamirror based on split ring resonators.150 (d) Simulated polarization conversion ratio (PCR) from LCP to LCP (blue line) and measured polarization conversion ratio from x- to y-polarization (red asterisk).150 (e) Schematic of the metamaterial linear polarization converter in transmission mode.152 (f) PCR obtained through experimental measurements and numerical simulations.152 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2012 Optical Society of America,141 (e and f) Copyright 2013 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.152 
Guo et al. implemented two-dimensional dispersion engineering in the metasurfaces to obtain high efficiency broadband polarization conversion.150 Lorentzian resonances were exploited as building blocks in both dimensions to construct the expected dispersion. An achromatic circular polarization converter with a 5:1 bandwidth (two times of previous broadband converters) was numerically and experimentally demonstrated (see Fig. 10c and d).
The dispersion engineering for reflective devices can also be expanded to transmissive applications. Grady et al. used a metal grating that transmits the cross-polarized waves while still acting as a ground plane for co-polarized waves.152 To retain the backward propagating cross-polarized waves without blocking the incident ones, they added an orthogonal metal grating in front of the cut-wires (Fig. 10e). This ultrathin device serves as a high-performance linear polarization converter in transmission with reduced co- and cross-polarized reflections.152
There are also many methods to realize narrow band plasmonic devices.6,138,153Fig. 11a and b show the narrowband absorbers based on lattice resonance,138 which have a strong dependence on the incident angle and can be attributed to the excitation of SPPs.137 Indeed, this kind of absorption has been observed as early as 1902 when the Wood's anomaly was discovered.154
 Fig. 11  Dispersion engineering for narrowband devices. (a) A schematic image of a 2D periodical nanohole array absorber.138 (b) Calculated absorption spectra as a function of in-plane wave vector kx (normalized to π/a) and photon energy (in eV) for TM polarization of the nanohole absorber.138 (c) Schematic of the wire pairs with perturbed periodicity. The grey, orange, and red colors depict different widths.157 (d) Measured amplitude transmission spectra for symmetric and asymmetric split ring arrays. The inset shows the E and H field orientations.156 (e) Scattering parameters of dielectric cylinder arrays for TE polarization.158 (f) Side view of the electric field distributions.158 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag,138 (c) Copyright 2013 Optical Society of America,157 (d) Copyright 2011 Optical Society of America,156 and (e and f) Copyright 2014 the Japan Society of Applied Physics.158 
Recently, the symmetry of surface structures was widely utilized to realize ultra-sharp Fano resonance. As depicted in Fig. 11c and d, both the mirror symmetry inside a unit cell155,156 as well as the translational symmetry between adjacent unit cells157 can reduce the resonance line width. Fedotov et al. demonstrated a planar metamaterial with sharp trapped mode resonance,155 where a dark mode at microwave frequency was formed by utilizing an asymmetric split ring resonator. Singh et al. extended this concept to the terahertz regime,156 with a Q factor of 50 for the lowest degree of asymmetry.
Although the line width of plasmonic resonance can be reduced by the above methods, the inherent absorption limits the obtainable quality factor. As an alternative, it has been shown that the all-dielectric approach can greatly enhance the Q-factor, when the dielectric constant is large enough to support Mie-type resonances.158 As shown in Fig. 11e and f, an ultrahigh Q factor (larger than 10000) can be achieved with an array of dielectric cylinders,158 based on the mode interference between the broadband Fabry–Perot (FP) resonance and the narrowband guided mode stemming from coupled quadrupoles (here the effective medium theory is not a good choice to explain this effect). Since a wide gap region for field enhancement is formed between adjacent rods, such a structure may be an ideal platform for related applications such as biological sensing and nonlinear devices.
5. The promise of new plasmonic materials
The optical and electric properties of constitutive materials are critical for the performance of all plasmonic devices. Unfortunately, noble metals used in most plasmonic applications have many drawbacks such as relatively high ohmic loss and limited operating wavelength ranges. In recent years, a lot of new plasmonic materials have been proposed to reduce the loss, extend the frequency bands and realize special functionalities.131,159–161 According to the origins of free electrons, plasmonic materials can be classified into metals (Au, Ag, Al, etc.) and doped semiconductors (including graphene). Based on the different chemical compositions, these materials bear a variety of physical and chemical properties, making them suitable for respective applications. An exhaustive survey of alternative plasmonic materials and a detailed discussion of the chemical compositions and preparation processes can be found in previous literature reports.131,162,163 Nevertheless, it should be noted that these new plasmonic materials still possess their disadvantages compared to noble metals, which means that a compromise in the design must be made in general cases.
5.1 Doped semiconductors
Traditional plasmonic materials based on noble metals are limited by the natural plasmonic resonance frequencies. Over the past few years, several approaches have been proposed to tune the plasmonic resonances. Besides the metallic wire arrays proposed by Pendry in 1996,164 heavily doped oxide semiconductors such as doped silicon,36 indium tin oxide (ITO) and aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) can be used as alternative plasmonic materials, which offer both functional and fabrication advantages in the near-infrared wavelength range.165,166 The plasmonic performance can be well designed by the carrier density, damping rate and effective mass in doped semiconductors.127 By properly tuning the chemical composites, the optical and electric properties may be further improved for plasmonic applications.131
5.2 Graphene
As a one-atom-thick carbon material described by the two-dimensional (2D) Dirac-like equation, graphene has attracted much attention in recent years because of its extraordinary electronic and optical properties.167 Graphene has a rather high quantum efficiency for light–matter interactions and supports plasmons with extremely small effective wavelength compared to that in vacuum.168 Furthermore, the performance of graphene can be modified by gating, by doping, by chemical means and through conventional plasmonics based on noble metals.169 Based on the electric tunable electromagnetic properties of graphene, various functional devices have been proposed in the last decade. Among these demonstrations, the tunable absorbers are of particular interest, as a result of the fact that a single sheet of homogeneous graphene has a limited optical absorption of A ≈ πα ≈ 2.3%, where α ≈ 1/137 is the fine structure constant.170 When a single layer of graphene is placed above a metal plate and separated by a dielectric layer, a tunable Salisbury type absorber is obtained.171,172 As shown in Fig. 12a and b, by applying a voltage bias, one can tune the Fermi energy of graphene up to 1 eV and achieve a critical coupling condition at 2.8 THz with an absorption of 99%.172
 Fig. 12  Graphene-based plasmonic devices. (a) Schematic of the graphene absorber. The inset depicts the optical transitions between hole and electron bands in monolayer graphene.171 (b) Reflectivity spectrum from the device at different bias voltages. The thickness of the spacer is 20 μm.172 (c) The measured (symbols) and calculated (line) coherent absorption of the graphene monolayer with R = 310 Ω. The inset shows the photo of the experimental setup.175 (d) The calculated coherent absorption of the graphene monolayer with different sheet resistance values.175 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2013 Optical Society of America,171 (b) Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society,172 (c and d) Copyright 2015 AIP Publishing LLC.175 
In the Salisbury-type graphene absorber, the absorption peak positions do not change with the bias voltage. Yao et al. showed that a widely tunable metasurface composed of optical antennas on graphene can be incorporated into a subwavelength-thick optical cavity to tune the absorption peak positions.173 By switching the absorber in and out of the critical coupling conditions via the gate voltage applied on graphene, a modulation depth of up to 100% can be achieved. In particular, ultrathin high speed (up to 20 GHz) optical modulators over a broad wavelength range (5–7 μm) were demonstrated. Another method to use graphene as an optical modulator is to cover the graphene above the waveguide. By electrically tuning the Fermi level of the graphene sheet, Liu et al. modulated the guided light at frequencies over 1 GHz with a broad operation spectrum that ranges from 1.35 to 1.6 μm.174
The single layer graphene can also be used as an ultra-broadband absorber,175 by taking advantage of the concept of coherent perfect absorption or time-reversed current radiation.36 As illustrated in Fig. 12c and d, the absorption in the frequency range of 7 to 13 GHz can be larger than 90%. Considering that the thickness of graphene is only about 0.34 nm, such an absorber has unparalleled performance regarding the thickness and bandwidth.
5.3 Refractory materials
Refractory materials bear high melting point and strong chemical stability at high temperatures, and thus have many applications in areas including industrial furnaces and space shuttle shields.176 However, common refractory materials are usually nonmetallic and the optical properties of refractory metals were not good enough. Since refractory materials that exhibit reasonably good plasmonic behavior would enable new devices and boost existing applications such as heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) and solar/thermophotovoltaics (S/TPV), there have been many research studies on these problems during the recent years.160,176,177
Among the various refractory materials, Titanium nitride (TiN) has a melting point as high as 2930 °C and exhibits a plasmonic resonance in the visible-NIR range. Li et al. have designed, fabricated and characterized a broadband TiN-based absorber with an average absorption of 95% over the range of 400–800 nm (Fig. 13a).176 In contrast with noble metal optical absorbers, the TiN absorber enables one to combine both the intrinsic loss of the material and the plasmonic resonances. As a result, the reflection is greatly suppressed and efficient, broadband absorption can be achieved. Due to its high melting point and the combined absorption mechanisms, the TiN absorber can work at high temperatures and endure strong light illumination, which has been verified by experimental testing (see Fig. 13b and c). Besides TiN, tungsten (W) and molybdenum (Mo) also possess high melting temperatures and have been used in various solar absorbers.153,177
 Fig. 13  Refractory-material-based absorbers. (a) The measured absorption of the TiN absorber after annealing at 800 °C for 8 h, as well as the reference measured absorption of TiN before annealing.176 (b and c) The SEM image of the TiN and Au absorbers after annealing.176 (d) Photography and SEM image of the NiCr absorber.19 (e) SEM image of the NiCr surface before and after heating.19 (f) Measured absorbance of the NiCr absorber at various temperatures.19 Adapted with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag,176 (d–f) Copyright 2015 Science China Press and Springer-Verlag.19 
As can be seen in Fig. 13d–f, the refractory-material-based high-temperature absorbers can also be extended to the microwave band.19 Through the dispersion engineering technique, the absorption bandwidth can be enlarged to cover the entire X band with a constant high absorption up to 30 dB (∼99.9%). Owing to the utilization of refractory materials such as NiCr and SiC, the absorber could maintain its high efficiency absorption at high temperatures. In principle, the working temperature can be increased to as high as 2000 K and beyond.
5.4 Phase-change materials
The performance of plasmonic and photonic devices such as planar lenses and absorbers has been optimized through many sophisticated designs; however, most of these devices so far lack the tunability once being fabricated. Recently, phase-change materials have emerged as promising candidates for dynamic tuning, due to their extreme phase switching speeds and the drastic changes in their optical properties upon phase change.178
Among the various phase-change materials, the chalcogenide compound Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) is widely exploited in rewritable optical disk storage technology and non-volatile electronic memories due to its good thermal stability and high switching speed.179 As illustrated in Fig. 14, two basic approaches have been applied in the GST-based active optical devices. First, as in the optical disk, a designed pattern can be written with high accuracy in the chalcogenide glass phase-change film by trains of femtosecond pulses (Fig. 14a). Chen et al. proposed an approach to engineer the phase front at 1.55 μm in the conventional telecom band.180 By introducing GST into a metallic slit array as shown by the schematic drawing in Fig. 14b, they were able to achieve different focusing patterns from a geometrically fixed planar lens. By constructing twenty one such slits into a planar lens, the phase front of a plane wave can be further shaped with various curvatures.
 Fig. 14  Flat optical devices based on phase-change materials. (a) Artistic impression of reconfigurable photonic devices in a phase-change film.179 (b) SEM image of the plasmonic slit lens filled by GST.180 (c) Light intensity patterns measured in the xz-plane by confocal scanning optical microscopy when GST is crystallized in selected slits to construct various phase fronts. From left to right: directive propagation, focus and deflection.180 The insets show the corresponding simulation results. (d) Schematic illustration of the electrically induced color changes in phase-change-based electronic displays.181 (e) Electrically constructed image on a continuous ITO/GST/ITO/Pt stack with a 50 nm-thick ITO spacer.181 (f) Representative reflectance spectra of the dynamic absorber with the GST-326 layer in the amorphous (solid line) and crystalline (dashed line) phases. The peak detection temperature is calculated from the resonance wavelength using Planck's law.14 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited,179 (d and e) Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.181 (f) Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag.14 
Besides the optical tunability with pulsed laser, Hosseini et al. demonstrated a unique optoelectronic framework based on GST films.181 The integration of GST as an active switching layer in displays paves the way for a new class of “smart” devices that are electrically active. Very thin layers of GST materials can display very high optical contrast upon switching between the amorphous and crystalline phases when layered in appropriately designed thin film structures. As illustrated in Fig. 14d, patterns were generated by converting a selected greyscale image into a spatially resolved voltage pattern. An atomic force microscope was used as a nanoscale tip to electrically render several images on both films and pixels. To demonstrate the high optical contrast, the Oxford Radcliffe Camera building was electrically drawn as shown in Fig. 14e on films with an ITO spacer thickness of 50 nm. GST can also be integrated in perfect plasmonic absorbers to achieve tunability in the optical regime (Fig. 14f). Tittl et al. demonstrated a wavelength- and temperature-selective switchable mid-infrared perfect absorber with multispectral thermal imaging capability by integrating a GST-326 spacer layer.14
Although phase-change materials are promising in tunable meta-devices, several challenges still exist. First, it is difficult to change the local phase state when the size of arrays becomes very large; secondly, the optical and electric properties are not ideal for practical applications. For example, the electrical conductivity of VO2 is 140 S m−1 and 5 × 105 S m−1 before and after the phase transition,182 which are not small and large enough to behave as a pure dielectric and conductor.
6. Fabrication of plasmonic structures
The high-precision fabrication of nanostructures (characterized by optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, etc.) is essential for the optical performance of plasmonic metamaterials and metasurfaces. Chemical synthesis was the primary means of growing different shaped metal nanoparticles by controlling the reaction conditions such as temperature, surfactants, and precursors. However, the uniformity of these nanostructures is very bad and it is a challenge to fabricate nanostructure arrays with well-defined orders.183
In order to fabricate artificially designed periodic and quasi-periodic metamaterials and metasurfaces, mechanic and optical approaches (including lithography and laser direct writing) are needed. As the working frequency range goes into the near-infrared and visible spectra, the characteristic dimensions typically decrease to sub-100 nanometers, which could not be realized by traditional mechanical or optical methods. Instead, electron beam lithography (EBL) and focused ion beam milling (FIB) are frequently adopted for experimental demonstrations.184 Recently, some novel techniques such as plasmonic lithography and nanosphere lithography (NSL) have been proposed for the fabrication of plasmonic structures.44,49,185,186 While plasmonic lithography and other near-field-based optical lithography are promising alternatives to traditional expensive lithography techniques,48,187 the NSL is particularly suited for the creation of large-area, single-layer metasurfaces.
Besides the fabrication technologies aforementioned, some other methods are also introduced in some special situations. The capacities of nanoimprint, multiple photon polymerization and microsphere lithography have been demonstrated for making various subwavelength structures.80,188,189
7. Conclusions
In summary, we have reviewed the basic principles and recent progress of 2D photonic devices based on plasmonic effects in complex metal–dielectric structures. In general, there are two main research directions: how to break the diffraction limit and how to control light at the deep subwavelength scale. On the one hand, the short wavelength effect of SPPs and their application in light localization and super-resolution imaging/nanolithography are highlighted. On the other hand, the exchange of the freely propagating and bound waves assisted by the subwavelength inclusions is found to be of particular importance. By locally tuning the bound waves’ complex propagation constants and scattering behaviors, their optical properties including the phase, amplitude and polarization of the re-emitted waves could be arbitrarily controlled, and therefore many traditional rules such as Snell’ law and Fresnel's equations could be revised or reversed.19,23 In particular, when the directly reflected and re-emitted waves interfere destructively, all incident waves would be completely converted into bound waves and finally absorbed by the lossy materials. Under such critical coupling conditions, the corresponding devices could be termed perfect absorbers. At the end of this review, some promising techniques and materials such as dispersion engineering, doped-semiconductor-based plasmonic devices, refractory materials, and phase-change materials are introduced, which we think will open a new avenue for both fundamental and practical applications across the areas of nanophotonic and plasmonic metamaterials.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the 973 Program of China under contract No. 2013CBA01700 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract No. 61622508 and 61575201.
References

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
N. I. Zheludev, Science, 2010, 328, 582–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio and P. A. Wolff, Nature, 1998, 391, 667–669 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 3966–3969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Burgos, R. de Waele, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 407–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luk'yanchuk, N. I. Zheludev, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, H. Giessen and C. T. Chong, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 707–715 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Liu, M. Mesch, T. Weiss, M. Hentschel and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2342–2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kabashin, P. Evans, S. Pastkovsky, W. Hendren, G. A. Wurtz, R. Atkinson, R. Pollard, V. A. Podolskiy and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 867–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, Y. Sonnefraud, P. Van Dorpe, S. A. Maier, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3983–3988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aydin, V. E. Ferry, R. M. Briggs and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 517 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pu, C. Hu, M. Wang, C. Huang, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, Q. Feng and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 17413–17420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Watts, X. Liu and W. J. Padilla, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP98–OP120 CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. He, Y. Jin, F. Ding, L. Yang, Y. Ye, S. Zhong, Y. Lin and S. He, Laser Photonics Rev., 2014, 8, 495–520 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tittl, A.-K. U. Michel, M. Schäferling, X. Yin, B. Gholipour, L. Cui, M. Wuttig, T. Taubner, F. Neubrech and H. Giessen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4597–4603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. V. Teperik, F. J. García de Abajo, A. G. Borisov, M. Abdelsalam, P. N. Bartlett, Y. Sugawara and J. J. Baumberg, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 299–301 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2013, 339, 1232009 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Meinzer, W. L. Barnes and I. R. Hooper, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 889–898 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2015, 58, 594201 CrossRef .
D. Costantini, A. Lefebvre, A.-L. Coutrot, I. Moldovan-Doyen, J.-P. Hugonin, S. Boutami, F. Marquier, H. Benisty and J.-J. Greffet, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 14023 CrossRef .
A. E. Minovich, A. E. Miroshnichenko, A. Y. Bykov, T. V. Murzina, D. N. Neshev and Y.
S. Kivshar, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015, 9, 195–213 CrossRef .
S. B. Glybovski, S. A. Tretyakov, P. A. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar and C. R. Simovski, Phys. Rep., 2016, 634, 1–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, Sci. Bull., 2016, 61, 112–113 CrossRef .
A. Vora, J. Gwamuri, N. Pala, A. Kulkarni, J. M. Pearce and D. Ö. Güney, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4901 CAS .
N. Engheta, Science, 2007, 317, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Moharam and T. K. Gaylord, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1981, 71, 811–818 CrossRef .
A. Ciattoni, B. Crosignani and P. Di Porto, Opt. Commun., 2000, 177, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. K. Stelzer and S. Grill, Opt. Commun., 2000, 173, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo and L. Yan, IEEE Photonics J., 2012, 4, 590–595 CrossRef .
X. Luo and T. Ishihara, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 3055–3065 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Mater. Today, 2005, 8, 56 CrossRef .
W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lee, S. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Lim, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2010, 34, 47–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Pendry, L. Martin-Moreno and F. J. Garcia-Vidal, Science, 2004, 305, 847–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pors, E. Moreno, L. Martin-Moreno, J. B. Pendry and F. J. Garcia-Vidal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 223905 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pu, Q. Feng, M. Wang, C. Hu, C. Huang, X. Ma, Z. Zhao, C. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 2246–2254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, J. Luo, S. Anwar, S. Li, W. Lu, Z. H. Hang, Y. Lai, B. Hou, M. Shen and C. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 220301(R) CrossRef .
M. A. Kats and F. Capasso, Laser Photonics Rev., 2016, 10, 735–749 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, H. Shi, C. Wang, C. Du, X. Luo, Q. Deng, Y. Lv, X. Lin and H. Yao, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 10795–10800 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel and A. A. G. Requicha, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 229–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, D. F. P. Pile, S. Nam, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 7519–7524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verhagen, A. Polman and L. (Kobus) Kuipers, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 45–57 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Luo and T. Ishihara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4780–4782 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo and T. Ishihara, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 4017 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun and X. Zhang, Science, 2005, 308, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ozbay, Science, 2006, 311, 189–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, N. Yao, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Luo, Y. Wang, G. Gao, K. Liu, C. Zhao and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 93110 CrossRef .
J. Luo, B. Zeng, C. Wang, P. Gao, K. Liu, M. Pu, J. Jin, Z. Zhao, X. Li, H. Yu and X. Luo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18805–18812 RSC .
X. Chen, F. Yang, C. Zhang, J. Zhou and L. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4039–4045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Nature, 2014, 515, 540–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jacob, L. V. Alekseyev and E. Narimanov, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 8247–8256 CrossRef PubMed .
H. N. S. Krishnamoorthy, Z. Jacob, E. Narimanov, I. Kretzschmar and V. M. Menon, Science, 2012, 336, 205–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov and Y. Kivshar, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 948–957 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Yao, P. Gao, Y. Luo, G. Gao, Q. Zhao and X. Luo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1248–1256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, P. Gao, K. Liu, W. Kong, Z. Zhao, M. Pu, C. Wang and X. Luo, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 290–296 RSC .
W. Wang, H. Xing, L. Fang, Y. Liu, J. Ma, L. Lin, C. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21142–21148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, Y. Xiong, D. Genov, Z. Liu, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4243–4247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, K. Liu, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, P. Gao and X. Luo, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 95973–95978 RSC .
J. Sun, T. Xu and N. M. Litchinitser, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7905–7909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. High, R. C. Devlin, A. Dibos, M. Polking, D. S. Wild, J. Perczel, N. P. de Leon, M. D. Lukin and H. Park, Nature, 2015, 522, 192–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Aieta, M. A. Kats, P. Genevet and F. Capasso, Science, 2015, 347, 1342–1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, M. Pu, H. Gao, J. Jin, X. Li, X. Ma, Y. Wang, P. Gao and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Li, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, X. Ma, Y. Wang and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, M. Pu, X. Ma, X. Li and X. Luo, Opto-Electron. Eng., 2017, 44, 3–22 Search PubMed .
S. Palomba, H. Harutyunyan, J. Renger, R. Quidant, N. F. van Hulst and L. Novotny, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2011, 369, 3497–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alabastri, A. Toma, M. Malerba, F. De Angelis and R. Proietti Zaccaria, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
E. Almeida, G. Shalem and Y. Prior, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zi, X. Yu, Y. Li, X. Hu, C. Xu, X. Wang, X. Liu and R. Fu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 12576–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu, T. Fan, S. Lou and D. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 825–873 CrossRef .
M. Keshavarz Hedayati and M. Elbahri, Plasmonics, 2016, 1–17 Search PubMed .
H. A. Atwater, Sci. Am., 2007, 296, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Genet and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2007, 445, 39–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Laux, C. Genet, T. Skauli and T. W. Ebbesen, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 161–164 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, Y.-K. Wu, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 59 Search PubMed .
B. Zeng, Y. Gao and F. J. Bartoli, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2840 Search PubMed .
K. Kumar, H. Duan, R. S. Hegde, S. C. W. Koh, J. N. Wei and J. K. W. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 557–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, Z.-K. Zhou, Z. Wei, R. Su, J. Lai, J. Li, C. Li, T. Zhang and X.-H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Vannahme, E. Højlund-Nielsen, N. A. Mortensen and A. Kristensen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 325–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. James, P. Mulvaney and A. Roberts, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lezec, A. Degiron, E. Devaux, R. A. Linke, L. Martin-Moreno, F. J. Garcia-Vidal and T. W. Ebbesen, Science, 2002, 297, 820–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, J. Fan, Q. J. Wang, C. Pflugl, L. Diehl, T. Edamura, M. Yamanishi, H. Kan and F. Capasso, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 564–570 CrossRef CAS .
H. Aouani, O. Mahboub, E. Devaux, H. Rigneault, T. W. Ebbesen and J. Wenger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2400–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, X. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Li, Y. Wang, H. Gao, C. Hu, P. Gao, C. Wang and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12108 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Akarca-Biyikli, I. Bulu and E. Ozbay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1098–1100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Fu and H. Chen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16067 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, M. Pu, Y. Wang and X. Luo, Opto-Electron. Eng., 2017, 44, 129–139 Search PubMed .
L. Verslegers, P. B. Catrysse, Z. Yu, J. S. White, E. S. Barnard, M. L. Brongersma and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 235–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ishii, V. M. Shalaev and A. V. Kildishev, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 159–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aouani, O. Mahboub, N. Bonod, E. Devaux, E. Popov, H. Rigneault, T. W. Ebbesen and J. Wenger, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 637–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, F. Capasso and Z. Gaburro, Science, 2011, 334, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Hu, P. Gao, C. Huang, H. Ren, X. Li, F. Qin, M. Gu, M. Hong and X. Luo, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500396 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, M. Pu, X. Li, C. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Pan, B. Zhao, J. Cui, C. Wang, Z. Zhao and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rui, D. C. Abeysinghe, R. L. Nelson and Q. Zhan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2237 Search PubMed .
D. Hakobyan, H. Magallanes, G. Seniutinas, S. Juodkazis and E. Brasselet, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 306–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, X. Ma, J. Jin, Y. Wang, P. Gao and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, M. Pu, X. Li and X. Ma, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16276 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2016, 59, 614202 CrossRef .
K. Yang, M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma, J. Luo, H. Gao and X. Luo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12267–12271 RSC .
X. Li, L. Chen, Y. Li, X. Zhang, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, X. Ma, Y. Wang, M. Hong and X. Luo, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601102 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, J.-Y. Yang, I. M. Fazal, N. Ahmed, Y. Yan, H. Huang, Y. Ren, Y. Yue, S. Dolinar, M. Tur and A. E. Willner, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 488–496 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, J. Wang, M. J. Strain, B. Johnson-Morris, J. Zhu, M. Sorel, J. L. O'Brien, M. G. Thompson and S. Yu, Science, 2012, 338, 363–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, X. Li, Q. Zhang and M. Gu, Science, 2016, 352, 805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Jin, P. Gao, X. Li, X. Ma and X. Luo, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2022–2029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, M. Pu, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Ma, J. Luo, Z. Zhao, P. Gao and X. Luo, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600201 CrossRef .
K. Y. Bliokh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 43901 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Y. Bliokh, Y. Gorodetski, V. Kleiner and E. Hasman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 30404 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yuan, X.-C. Yuan, J. Bu, P. S. Tan and Q. Wang, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 224–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pors, M. G. Nielsen, G. D. Valle, M. Willatzen, O. Albrektsen and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 1626–1628 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, S. Xiao, B. Cai, Q. He, T. J. Cui and L. Zhou, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 4940–4942 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pu, P. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Hu and X. Luo, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 52136 CrossRef .
M. Pu, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Ma, C. Hu, C. Wang, C. Huang and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Esfandyarpour, E. C. Garnett, Y. Cui, M. D. McGehee and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, P. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Huang, C. Wang, X. Ma and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 131906 CrossRef .
V. Asadchy, M. Albooyeh and S. Tretyakov, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2016, 33, A16–A20 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, K. Y. Yang, C. M. Wang, T. K. Juan, W. T. Chen, C. Y. Liao, Q. He, S. Xiao, W. T. Kung, G. Y. Guo, L. Zhou and D. P. Tsai, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6223–6229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ni, Z. J. Wong, M. Mrejen, Y. Wang and X. Zhang, Science, 2015, 349, 1310–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. Yan, W. Pan and L. Shao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig and D. R. Smith, Science, 2006, 312, 1780–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zheng, H. Mühlenbernd, M. Kenney, G. Li and S. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 308–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hasman, V. Kleiner, G. Biener and A. Niv, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 328–330 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. Zhou, F. Zhang and D. Lippens, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, S. M. Hanham, P. Albella, B. Ng, H. T. Lu, Y. Gong, S. A. Maier and M. Hong, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1010–1018 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Wang, P. Moitra, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs and J. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1394–1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, P. Fan, E. Hasman and M. L. Brongersma, Science, 2014, 345, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Rybin, D. S. Filonov, K. B. Samusev, P. A. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar and M. F. Limonov, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, M. Wang, C. Hu, C. Huang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 25513–25519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zang, C. Shi, L. Chen, B. Cai, Y. Zhu and S. Zhuang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8091 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lalanne, S. Astilean, P. Chavel, E. Cambril and H. Launois, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 1081–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khorasaninejad, W. T. Chen, R. C. Devlin, J. Oh, A. Y. Zhu and F. Capasso, Science, 2016, 352, 1190–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. West, S. Ishii, G. V. Naik, N. K. Emani, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadatgol, Ş. K. Özdemir, L. Yang and D. Ö. Güney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 35502 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Adams, M. Sadatgol, X. Zhang and D. Ö. Güney, New J. Phys., 2016, 18, 125004 CrossRef .
M. Wang, C. Hu, M. Pu, C. Huang, Z. Zhao, Q. Feng and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 20642–20649 CrossRef PubMed .
T. D. Dao, K. Chen, S. Ishii, A. Ohi, T. Nabatame, M. Kitajima and T. Nagao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 964–970 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Landy, S. Sajuyigbe, J. J. Mock, D. R. Smith and W. J. Padilla, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 207402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, Z. Zhao, X. Chen and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 11039–11044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu, Q. Li, H. Gong, K. Du, S. Bai, D. Zhao, H. Ye and M. Qiu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 480–486 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, Y. Chong, L. Ge, H. Noh, A. D. Stone and H. Cao, Science, 2011, 331, 889–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Wong, Y.-L. Xu, J. Kim, K. O’Brien, Y. Wang, L. Feng and X. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 796 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, M. Pu, C. Hu and X. Luo, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 2133–2135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ye, Z. Wang, K. Xu, H. Li, J. Huangfu, Z. Wang and L. Ran, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 187402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Chen and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 16745–16749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lenert, D. M. Bierman, Y. Nam, W. R. Chan, I. Celanovic, M. Soljacic and E. N. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Jiang, W. M. Yang, Y. J. Liu, H. L. Liu and J. H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3552–3558 RSC .
Z. Zhang, J. Luo, M. Song and H. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 241904 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, P. Zhou, H. Chen, H. Lu, J. Xie and L. Deng, J. Opt., 2015, 17, 105105 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y. Wang, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, X. Wu, X. Ma, C. Wang, L. Yan and X. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Dirdal and J. Skaar, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2013, 88, 33834 CrossRef .
N. K. Grady, J. E. Heyes, D. R. Chowdhury, Y. Zeng, M. T. Reiten, A. K. Azad, A. J. Taylor, D. A. R. Dalvit and H.-T. Chen, Science, 2013, 340, 1304–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, M. De Zoysa, T. Asano and S. Noda, Optica, 2015, 2, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Wood, Proc. R. Soc. London, 1902, 18, 269 Search PubMed .
V. A. Fedotov, M. Rose, S. L. Prosvirnin, N. Papasimakis and N. I. Zheludev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 147401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh, I. A. I. Al-Naib, M. Koch and W. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 6320–6327 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pu, C. Hu, C. Huang, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 992–1001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Pu, M. Song, H. Yu, C. Hu, M. Wang, X. Wu, J. Luo, Z. Zhang and X. Luo, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 32002 CrossRef .
G. V. Naik, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3264–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Guler, A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2014, 344, 263–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, Q. Song, L. Yan, W. Zhang, P.-C. Wu, L. K. Chin, H. Cai, D. P. Tsai, Z. X. Shen, T. W. Deng, S. K. Ting, Y. Gu, G. Q. Lo, D. L. Kwong, Z. C. Yang, R. Huang, A.-Q. Liu and N. Zheludev, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4739–4743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, C. M. Gilmore, A. Piqué, J. S. Horwitz, H. Mattoussi, H. Murata, Z. H. Kafafi and D. B. Chrisey, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 6451–6461 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370–4379 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pendry, A. Holden, W. Stewart and I. Youngs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 4773–4776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Naik, J. Liu, A. V. Kildishev, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 8834–8838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Alam, I. De Leon and R. W. Boyd, Science, 2016, 352, 795–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vakil and N. Engheta, Science, 2011, 332, 1291–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Grigorenko, M. Polini and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 749–758 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pu, P. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Huang, C. Hu and X. Luo, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 11618–11627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kakenov, O. Balci, T. Takan, V. A. Ozkan, H. Altan and C. Kocabas, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1531–1535 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, R. Shankar, M. A. Kats, Y. Song, J. Kong, M. Loncar and F. Capasso, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6526–6532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, X. Yin, E. Ulin-Avila, B. Geng, T. Zentgraf, L. Ju, F. Wang and X. Zhang, Nature, 2011, 474, 64–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Duan, S. Li, Q. Yin, W. Lu, L. Li, B. Gu, B. Hou and W. Wen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 181112 CrossRef .
W. Li, U. Guler, N. Kinsey, G. V. Naik, A. Boltasseva, J. Guan, V. M. Shalaev and A. V. Kildishev, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7959–7965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kohiyama, M. Shimizu and H. Yugami, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 112302 CrossRef .
Y. G. Chen, T. S. Kao, B. Ng, X. Li, X. G. Luo, B. Luk'yanchuk, S. A. Maier and M. H. Hong, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 13691–13698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, E. T. F. Rogers, B. Gholipour, C.-M. Wang, G. Yuan, J. Teng and N. I. Zheludev, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sonnefraud, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, X. Luo, M. Hong and S. A. Maier, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hosseini, C. D. Wright and H. Bhaskaran, Nature, 2014, 511, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Gong, L. Jian, T. Venkatesan, C.-W. Qiu and M. Hong, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Henzie, J. Lee, M. H. Lee, W. Hasan and T. W. Odom, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 147–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, M. Pu, X. Ma and X. Li, Int. J. Antennas Propag., 2015, 2015, 204127 Search PubMed .
M. C. Gwinner, E. Koroknay, L. Fu, P. Patoka, W. Kandulski, M. Giersig and H. Giessen, Small, 2009, 5, 400–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nemiroski, M. Gonidec, J. M. Fox, P. Jean-Remy, E. Turnage and G. M. Whitesides, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11061–11070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Garcia-Vidal, L. Martin-Moreno, T. W. Ebbesen and L. Kuipers, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 729–787 CrossRef .
Y. L. Zhang, Q. D. Chen, H. Xia and H. B. Sun, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 435–448 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, B. J. Huang, R. Chen, Y. Yang, J. F. Wu, R. Ji, X. D. Chen and M. H. Hong, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 20096–20103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Dispersions and applications of SPPs. (a) Dispersion of SPPs on semi-infinite silver and silver films with different thicknesses.30 (b) Dependence of the effective refractive index of SPPs on the silver slit width at a wavelength of 650 nm.39 (c) Theoretical modeling of the plasmon coupling, propagation and enhancement in a fabricated tapered groove.42 (d) A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a typical V-groove cross-section.42 (e) A tapered section of a gold film on a sapphire substrate.43 (f) Simulation of the near field distribution on a metal film with periodic perforations.44 (g) Schematic diagram of the plasmonic cavity lens.48 (h) SEM image of the resist pattern with a half pitch of 22 nm.48 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2004 Optical Society of America,30 (b) Copyright 2005 Optical Society of America,39 (c and d) Copyright 2009 Optical Society of America,42 (e) Copyright 2008 Optical Society of America,43 (f) Copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics,44 (g and h) Copyright 2015 American Institute of Physics.48	 

 	Fig. 2  Interactions of light and SPPs in complex nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 3  Plasmonic color filters. (a) Transmission spectrum of hole arrays. The triangular hole array was milled in a 225 nm-thick Au film on a glass substrate with an index matching liquid on the air side.73 (b) Holes in a dimple array generating the letters ‘hv’ in transmission.73 (c) Sketch of the spatial filtering process for the incoming white light through three overlapping bull's eye structures.74 (d) Schematic diagram of the plasmonic nano-resonators based on the MIM configuration.75 (e) Plasmon dispersions in the MIM stack array. Red, green and blue dots correspond to the case of filtering primary RGB colors.75 (f) Schematic of the color filter based on metallic grating on a glass substrate.76 (g and h) Color display based on space-variant absorption.77 (i) Sketch of the selective absorber using an ultra-thin lossy layer on a reflecting substrate.38 (j) Interference colors generated by Si films of thickness from 0 to 30 nm (I–IX) on top of an opaque Au film, deposited on a smooth, polished wafer.38 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group,73 (c) Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group,74 (d and e) Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited,75 (g and h) Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited,77 and (i and j) Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag.38	 

 	Fig. 4  Wavefront engineering based on plasmonic surface structures. (a) SEM image of a single hole surrounded by periodic corrugations prepared by focused ion beam (FIB).73 (b) Schematic illustration of redirecting beam by a single-slit aperture surrounded by grooves of different periodicities on the input (P1) and output (P2) surfaces.73 (c) Configuration to enhance and control the fluorescence emission of molecules diffusing in the central aperture.90 (d) Beam focusing structure using a nano-slit array with different widths.64 (e) Experimental demonstration of a planar lens based on nanoscale slit arrays in a metallic film.88 (f) Pseudocolor intensity map of the planar lens based on hole arrays.89 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group,73 (c) Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society,90 (e) Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society,88 (f) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.89	 

 	Fig. 5  Plasmonic metasurfaces for wavefront engineering. (a and b) SEM images of the V-shaped and elliptic antenna arrays.91,93 (c) The intensity of the electric fields in the yz plane when a circularly polarized point source is placed at the focus of the metasurface shown in (b).93 (d) SEM image of a single catenary aperture perforated in a 120 nm-thick gold film.97 (e) Simulation of the cross-polarized electric intensity for the catenary in the xz plane.97 (f) The amplitude of the farfield angular spectrum in the k-space.97 (g) Sketch of the measurement setup for the ultra-realistic color holography.100 (h and i) Holographic images for the China map and the Sun Phoenix pattern.100 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2011 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.91	 
y = Λ/πln(|sec(πx/Λ)|),	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Plasmonic metasurfaces for OAM generation and detection. (a and b) SEM images for the OAM generators based on V-shaped nanoantenna arrays and catenary nanoapertures.91,92 (c and d) Intensity and interference pattern for the OAM beam.91 (e) Schematic of the multi-channel vortex beam generation using a metasurface.105 (f) SEM image of the chip-scale OAM multiplexer based on double concentric and spatially-shifted nano-ring slits.103 (g and h) The simulated and measured total intensity distributions of the OAM beams in the transverse planes.103 Adapted with permission. (a–d) Copyright 2011 the American Association for the Advancement of Science,91 (e) Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag,105 (f–h) Copyright 2016 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.103	 

 	Fig. 7  Plasmonic metamirrors based on the resonant phase delay and geometric phase. (a) Schematic of the designed sample with a unit cell (inset) consisting of a Au nanorod and a continuous Au film separated by the MgF2 spacer.116 (b) Schematic of the three dimensional model for virtual shaping. The incident wave is scattered in the desired directions.112 (c) Calculated RCS of a sample with dimensions of 8 μm × 8 μm.112 (d) Illustration of the reflective nanorod-based CGH under a circularly polarized incident beam.120 (e) SEM image of the fabricated nanorod array.120 (f) Experimentally obtained optical efficiency for both the image and the zeroth-order beam.120 (g–i) SEM image, targeted object and reconstructed holographic image of an infrared metamirror made of gold. The pixel, period and thickness of the gold grating are 30 μm, 4 μm and 2.65 μm, respectively.87 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society,116 (d–f) Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.120	 

 	Fig. 8  Plasmonic blackbody absorbers based on free-bound wave exchange and critical coupling. (a) Schematic of a simplified blackbody, where a small hole is perforated on one side of the cavity. (b) Schematic (left) and SEM image of plasmonic blackbody absorber composed of void cavities in metal films.15 (c) Variation of the plasmonic cavity absorber and the typical electric field distribution in the dielectric layer.11 (d) Effective medium model for the wide-angle perfect absorber. Since the effective refractive index is rather large, light wave propagates approximately along the normal axis of the material surface. (e) The dual-band wide-angle absorbance as a function of the incidence angle and frequency.11 Adapted with permission. (b) Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group,15 (c and e) Copyright 2011 Optical Society of America.11	 

 	Fig. 9  Plasmonic enhancement of solar absorption. (a and b) Exchanging ohmic loss with useful loss in semiconductors by gradual incorporation of the complex permittivity of the semiconductor spacer with (a) Im(ε) = 0.1, (b) Im(ε) = 1.23.24 (c) Schematic of the fabricated organic solar cell. The SEM image shows the cross-sectional view of the fabricated device.145 (d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) enhancement of the nanowire device with reference to the ITO device.145 Adapted with permission. (c and d) Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag.145	 

 	Fig. 10  Broadband meta-devices based on dispersion engineering. (a) Schematic of the broadband absorber based on metasurface dispersion engineering.141 (b) Absorption at normal incidence as a function of frequency. The Salisbury absorption curve is shown as a reference.141 (c) Perspective view of the polarizing metamirror based on split ring resonators.150 (d) Simulated polarization conversion ratio (PCR) from LCP to LCP (blue line) and measured polarization conversion ratio from x- to y-polarization (red asterisk).150 (e) Schematic of the metamaterial linear polarization converter in transmission mode.152 (f) PCR obtained through experimental measurements and numerical simulations.152 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2012 Optical Society of America,141 (e and f) Copyright 2013 the American Association for the Advancement of Science.152	 

 	Fig. 11  Dispersion engineering for narrowband devices. (a) A schematic image of a 2D periodical nanohole array absorber.138 (b) Calculated absorption spectra as a function of in-plane wave vector kx (normalized to π/a) and photon energy (in eV) for TM polarization of the nanohole absorber.138 (c) Schematic of the wire pairs with perturbed periodicity. The grey, orange, and red colors depict different widths.157 (d) Measured amplitude transmission spectra for symmetric and asymmetric split ring arrays. The inset shows the E and H field orientations.156 (e) Scattering parameters of dielectric cylinder arrays for TE polarization.158 (f) Side view of the electric field distributions.158 Adapted with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag,138 (c) Copyright 2013 Optical Society of America,157 (d) Copyright 2011 Optical Society of America,156 and (e and f) Copyright 2014 the Japan Society of Applied Physics.158	 

 	Fig. 12  Graphene-based plasmonic devices. (a) Schematic of the graphene absorber. The inset depicts the optical transitions between hole and electron bands in monolayer graphene.171 (b) Reflectivity spectrum from the device at different bias voltages. The thickness of the spacer is 20 μm.172 (c) The measured (symbols) and calculated (line) coherent absorption of the graphene monolayer with R = 310 Ω. The inset shows the photo of the experimental setup.175 (d) The calculated coherent absorption of the graphene monolayer with different sheet resistance values.175 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2013 Optical Society of America,171 (b) Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society,172 (c and d) Copyright 2015 AIP Publishing LLC.175	 

 	Fig. 13  Refractory-material-based absorbers. (a) The measured absorption of the TiN absorber after annealing at 800 °C for 8 h, as well as the reference measured absorption of TiN before annealing.176 (b and c) The SEM image of the TiN and Au absorbers after annealing.176 (d) Photography and SEM image of the NiCr absorber.19 (e) SEM image of the NiCr surface before and after heating.19 (f) Measured absorbance of the NiCr absorber at various temperatures.19 Adapted with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag,176 (d–f) Copyright 2015 Science China Press and Springer-Verlag.19	 

 	Fig. 14  Flat optical devices based on phase-change materials. (a) Artistic impression of reconfigurable photonic devices in a phase-change film.179 (b) SEM image of the plasmonic slit lens filled by GST.180 (c) Light intensity patterns measured in the xz-plane by confocal scanning optical microscopy when GST is crystallized in selected slits to construct various phase fronts. From left to right: directive propagation, focus and deflection.180 The insets show the corresponding simulation results. (d) Schematic illustration of the electrically induced color changes in phase-change-based electronic displays.181 (e) Electrically constructed image on a continuous ITO/GST/ITO/Pt stack with a 50 nm-thick ITO spacer.181 (f) Representative reflectance spectra of the dynamic absorber with the GST-326 layer in the amorphous (solid line) and crystalline (dashed line) phases. The peak detection temperature is calculated from the resonance wavelength using Planck's law.14 Adapted with permission. (a) Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited,179 (d and e) Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.181 (f) Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag.14	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
