The future of solution processing toward organic semiconductor devices: a substrate and integration perspective  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02316D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02316D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 12468-12486The future of solution processing toward organic semiconductor devices: a substrate and integration perspective

        
          
            Shihao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Peng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huibin 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
          
        
      abc
aChina Key Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE) & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Jiangsu National Synergistic Innovation Center for Advanced Materials (SICAM), Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), 30 South Puzhu Road, Nanjing 211816, P. R. China. E-mail: iamhbsun@njtech.edu.cn
bJiangsu Key Laboratory for Biosensors, Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China
cShaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics (SIFE), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU), 127 West Youyi Road, Xi’an 710072, China
Received 
      3rd June 2022
    , Accepted 21st August 2022First published on 22nd August 2022Abstractπ-Conjugated organic semiconductors (OSCs) are the basic scaffold of organic semiconductor devices. Solution processing is an effective way to promote the industrialization of OSCs. The cost-effective and room-temperature compatibility advantages of the solution process are the basis for high-throughput printed electronic devices. Because OSCs usually exist in devices in the form of thin films, researchers have developed a large number of thin film preparation techniques based on solution processing. The past two decades have seen great progress in the improvement of conventional solution processing techniques and the development of new solution processing methods. However, there are still no mature and systematic industrial processing techniques just like that in the silicon-based semiconductor industry, which is why most of the current research work on organic semiconductors still remains in the laboratory stage. Given the many developed solution processing methods, which one is the most promising to promote organic semiconductor materials from laboratory research to industrial applications? Trying to answer this question, this review summarizes various film preparation methods and their advantages and disadvantages from a new perspective of the physical state of the film-forming substrates and integration methods. By analyzing the process characteristics and summarizing the corresponding assembly strategies, we want to present to the reader the evolution of solution processing methods for organic electronic devices. Finally, insights and opportunities were put forward to promote further research in this field.
Shihao Wang
Shihao Wang is currently a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University. He received his bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from Hefei Normal University in 2019. His work focuses on preparation and integration of large-area free-standing organic optoelectronic thin films.
Ling Peng
Ling Peng is currently a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University. She received her bachelor's degree in Electrical & Information Engineering from Tianjin Ren'ai College in 2019. Her research project involves industrial simulation of flexible electronic devices.
Huibin Sun
Huibin Sun received his BE degree in polymer materials science and engineering from Anhui University of Science and Technology in 2008 and his PhD degree in information materials from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2013. He then conducted his postdoc research at University of California, Los Angeles during 2016-2018. He is an Associate Professor at Nanjing Tech University. His research interest is focused on organic semiconductor thin film preparation and device integration.
Wei Huang
Wei Huang received his BSc, MSc, and PhD degrees in Chemistry from Peking University in 1983, 1988, and 1992, respectively. He was appointed as the Deputy President of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2006, the President of Nanjing Tech University in 2012, and the Provost of Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017. He is a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Foreign Academician and Honorary Doctor of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interests include organic optoelectronics, nanomaterials, polymer chemistry, plastic electronics, and bioelectronics.
1. Introduction
In the late 1970s, Alan J. Heeger, Alan G. MacDiarmid, and Hideki Shirakawa cooperated to invent conductive polymers, which opened up the emerging field of organic electronics, and they then won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2000.1 In the following decades, a large number of OSC molecules were designed and synthesized and the electrical performance in terms of mobility was enhanced by approximately 5 orders of magnitude.2,3 Although it is still quite challenging for organic semiconductors to outperform traditional semiconductors based on silicon and gallium arsenide in terms of electrical performance, they have advantages such as lower cost of manufacturing, low-temperature processing, flexibility, and disposability.4 With the continuous expansion and improvement of the functions of OSCs, scientists have examined various small organic molecules and polymers to expand their applications in electronic devices, including organic field-effect transistors (OFETs),5–7 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),8–14 organic solar cells,15–19 organic memories,20–25 organic sensors,26–29 and organic lasers.30–33
In organic semiconductor devices, organic thin films are usually adopted rather than single crystals.34 Therefore, in addition to the development of new materials, one of the main hotspots in organic electronics is the development of solution processing technology for the preparation of large-area uniform thin films. The traditional thin film preparation methods represented by spin coating, blade coating and inject printing are characterized by being carried out on the surface of a solid substrate.35–38 This is due to the fact that the surface of the solid substrates usually has strong wettability and affinity towards organic solvents, such as silicon, glass and metal, which facilitates the formation of uniform thin films. However, one consequence of this is that it is difficult to prepare multilayer organic films due to the erosion of the front film caused by the subsequent film processing. At the same time, due to the strong affinity of the substrates, the integration of multilayer films through transfer technology is also no longer feasible. To address these problems, scientists have developed the orthogonal solvent method and crosslinking post-treatment of films to avoid solvent erosion.39–45 However, these methods have limitations and are only applicable to specific material systems.
Different from the traditional solution processing methods characterized by thin film processing on solid substrates, the preparation of organic thin film on liquid substrates represented by water has gradually become a research hotspot in the field of solution processing. The most prominent advantage of liquid substrates is that the formed film can be easily patterned and integrated into multilayers via transfer printing. Whereas the difficulty is how to prepare a continuous homogeneous film on the free surface of a liquid substrate due to the weak wettability of liquids towards organic solvents and complex thermodynamic and hydrodynamic processes during the solvent volatilization. To address this issue, researchers have devoted a lot of effort to regulating the surface properties of aqueous liquids.46–48
Hence, the main purpose of this review is to compare different solution processing techniques from the perspective of the physical state of the film-forming substrates (Fig. 1). In the following, we first summarize the conventional solid substrate film-forming processes and integration methods including the processing characteristic and the latest research progress. Then we will focus on the review of the liquid substrate film-forming process and the latest research progress. By analyzing their respective advantages and disadvantages and summarizing the latest research progress, we hope to present the readers with the technical characteristics of the promising solution processing techniques that can promote organic semiconductor materials from laboratory research to industrial applications in the future. Finally, in the conclusion, we will highlight the limitations and obstacles of the existing strategies, as well as their future development.
 Fig. 1  Overview of thin film fabrication and integration technologies from the perspective of the physical state of the film-forming substrates. 
2. Solution processing on solid substrates
2.1 Film-forming technology

2.1.1 Spin-coating. 
Spin-coating is one of the most efficient and popular technologies for obtaining thin films, with a wide range of applications in the laboratory and production.49–63 From the name, spin-coating refers to the solvent containing the target substance that drops in and forms a uniform film under the centrifugal action of high rotation speed. This process consists of the following steps: (i) dropping; (ii) rotation; (iii) evaporation. As Fig. 2 shows, the film manufacturing process is realized by adjusting the rotating speed of the turntable and the concentration of the solution. It should be emphasized that the spin-coating technique is suitable for a wide range of small molecules and conjugated polymers on both hydrophobic and hydrophilic substrates. This technique is used to prepare ultrathin films from several layers down to monolayer, including NDI3HUDTYM2, NDI(2OD)(4tBuPh)-DTYM2, poly-[2,5-bis(3-alkylthiophen-2-yl)thieno(3,2-b)thiophene] (PBTTT-C12), and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) etc. For various OSCs with low defect density, this easy spin-coating method provides accurate thickness control. The tangential force shattered the static wetting equilibrium on the hydrophobic substrate at high speed, allowing an ultrathin film to be successfully deposited.35
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the spin-coating ultrathin film fabrication processes, and thickness based film as a function of rotation rate and concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Spin-coating technology plays a significant role in the preparation of various layers of thin films in devices, whether it is a hole transport layer, an active layer, or an electron transport layer. Although spin-coating is one of the commonest methods, it cannot be used to manufacture large-area OSC thin films. About approximately 90% of the solution is discarded, which will accumulate at the edge away from the rotating shaft, resulting in the coffee-ring effect (CRE) and uneven thickness when a thin film is formed by evaporation. And in the spin-coating process, OSC crystallization is characterized by a lack of control over the crystal nucleation and growth process, so it may be challenging to manage the morphology of the film. More and more evidence in the literature has proved the important influence of deposition methods on film morphology, which has aroused people's attention toward fine-tuning the process parameters.64–66


2.1.2 Meniscus-guided deposition technology. 
Meniscus-guided coating (MGC) refers to a kind of solution processing method characterized by translating a solution meniscus across a moving solid substrate with a coating head during the film deposition process. Due to its low-cost, high-throughput and large-area process characteristics, MGC methods have been widely used in the laboratory and industrial production of organic optoelectronic devices, especially in the field of OFETs and organic solar cells. Unlike spin-coating, in large-scale applications of the R2R process, the material utilization rate of MGC can reach more than 99%. According to the different formation mechanism of the meniscus, MGC techniques can be divided into three main categories, including knife coating, slot-die coating and dip coating and the corresponding technical variants (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic of typical MGC methods. 
Knife coating, also known as doctor blading or blade coating, is a common way of fabricating thin-films,67–72 which is characterized by running a blade over the substrate or moving a substrate underneath the blade. A hydrophobically modified silicon wafer or flexible stainless-steel sheet is usually adopted as the blade. The hydrophobic surface can effectively avoid the adhesion of the solution on the blade. There is a small gap between the blade and substrate, which determines the amount of solution passed through. The final thickness of the film will be influenced by the hydrodynamic properties of the solution and the speed of the blade. The general fabrication process of OSC by knife coating is that the solution containing the OSC is injected between the knife and the substrate, the knife or the substrate is stably controlled to move in one direction through an electric displacement platform, and then the OSC is precipitated near the three-phase contact line, and finally, a thin film is formed (Fig. 4a).37 Sometimes, in order to improve the film morphology and promote the film-forming process, the substrate will be equipped with a heating function unit. One major advantage of knife coating is the fast and simple process, which can create films quickly and efficiently. Knife coating can produce uniform thin films over large surface areas with low setup costs and high throughput. But the control accuracy of the film thickness of knife coating is much lower than that of spin coating, so it is only suitable for the fabrication of micron thickness films.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) knife coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Solution shearing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Bar coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Slot die coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Zone casting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In the knife coating process, if the knife is tilted at a certain angle along the moving direction, a new coating technique named shear coating is formed (Fig. 4b). The outstanding feature of shear coating is to build a solution shearing area between the blade slope and the substrate. Compared with the conventional knife coating in which the blade is perpendicular to the substrate, the shearing area can bring two advantages. On the one hand, by reducing the gas–liquid interface in front of the knife, the solvent volatilization speed can be effectively reduced to ensure the uniformity of solution concentration in the low-speed coating process. On the other hand, the existence of solution shearing force is conducive to obtaining organic semiconductor films with high crystallinity, which is particularly obvious for polymer semiconductor materials.73–79 The shear rate across various printing conditions can also be further increased by constructing micro-nano structures on the blade.80 Replacing the knife by a bar, the blade coating becomes bar coating, also known as Meyer bar coating. Just like in blade coating, an excess of solution is placed on the substrate and spread across by the bar with wire spiralling around it.81 The distance between the bar and substrate can be adjusted by changing the diameter of the wire, which determines how much solution is allowed through and subsequently determines the film thickness (Fig. 4c).
Slot-die coating is part of a family of MGCs where the solution is directly coated onto the substrate through a coating head (Fig. 3). One of the main advantages of slot-die coating over conventional coating methods such as spin coating is that it can easily be integrated into R2R coating and sheet-to-sheet deposition systems. Because of the excellent processing window over other R2R compatible techniques, slot-die coating has been widely adopted by researchers for the fabrication of organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells, polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs), and OFETs.82–90 Compared with knife coating, slot-die coating has a more sophisticated liquid supply system (Fig. 4d), which offers high levels of coating uniformity and can fabricate thin-films with thicknesses ranging from a few nanometers to many microns. And it has better compatibility and can be applied to a wide range of solution types and viscosities at speeds ranging from a few cm s−1 to several m s−1. A solution processing like slot-die coating is zone casting in which the solution is continuously supplied to the evaporation zone by a flat nozzle (Fig. 4e). The key technologies for obtaining good film quality of zone casting are to select the proper solution supply rate, substrate velocity, initial solute concentration, solvent evaporation rate, and crystallization rate. Zone casting is generally used for the preparation of small molecule semiconductor crystal films, so a lower flat nozzle moving speed is needed to match the crystallization speed of molecular materials. One of the main problems arising from this is that the nozzle is easily clogged resulting in the failure of the experiment.91
Another common MGC technique is dip coating, which is commonly used in manufacturing across a wide range of different industries. Within research and development, it has also become an effective strategy for preparing OSC thin films commonly used in laboratories.92–95 The general process for dip coating is immersing a substrate in a precursor solution containing OSCs and then lifting it vertically from the solution with a slow velocity. During this process, a wet film with a certain thickness is dragged to form the liquid upward along with the moving substrate. Although this seems very simple, to obtain a uniform organic semiconductor film, it needs to consider a complex interplay among many counteracting factors, such as the upward viscous drag on the liquid caused by the moving substrate, the gravity force on the wet film, the surface tension gradient in the solid–liquid–air contact zone.
In general, MGC is a kind of efficient organic semiconductor film preparation technology. Its main technical characteristics can be summarized as that the organic semiconductor solution is uniformly coated on a solid substrate by meniscus-guided coating, and then a continuous organic semiconductor film is obtained after solvent volatilization. Considering the complexity of the film-forming process and the coffee-ring effect, these techniques are mostly used for the fabrication of thick films with a single-layer. MGC is mainly used to prepare uniform and continuous thin films, and it can also be used to prepare patterned organic semiconductor films by area-selective wettability modification of the substrate surface.

2.2 Film patterning and integration
The preparation of OSC thin films on solid substrates is the first step, while the patterning and integration of the organic thin film for the final devices are the second and a difficult step. Fabricating multi-layer organic devices is full of challenges, mainly due to inter-layer mixing and solvent erosion of the solution processed organic film during the continuous deposition process. To address this issue, the following methods are derived. Generally speaking, the bottom-up film patterning integration method is mainly inkjet printing,38,96,97 while there are three top-down film patterning integration methods: (i) transfer printing;98–105 (ii) orthogonal solvent;40,41,106–110 (iii) cross-linker post-treating.44,45,111,112 Each of the above methods has advantages and disadvantages, which will be explained in detail below.

2.2.1 Inkjet printing. 
Inkjet printing is a non-contact, material-saving method for large-area production of patterned OSC thin film functional layers. The inkjet printer structure is divided into three parts: motion platform, vision system, and control system.38 As shown in Fig. 5a, the nozzle head is directly attached to the ink container or ink cartridge, and the pressure control system pushes the ink to the nozzle head using air pressure forming an ink meniscus at the nozzle hole. In order to produce stable droplets at the nozzle, the nature of the precursor ink is critical. For example, to eliminate fluid/air resistance, the lowest velocity associated with the conflict between fluid inertia and surface tension is required to trigger droplet ejection at the nozzle.113 Furthermore, throughout the drying process, the quality of the film created on the substrate is largely determined by the drop spreading, coalescence, solidification, and uniformity of the film. These are determined by the interaction between the ink drop and the substrate, such as the contact angle, surface roughness, and temperature of the ink drop on the substrate.114
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the inkjet printing technology. (b) Optical images of the cartridge-type nozzles having a diameter of 20 μm (left) and 10 μm (right). (The ejected droplets having a volume of ≈10 pL (left) and ≈1 pL (right) in flight are also included.) The highest voltage of the input pulse train determines droplet size and velocity from a 20 μm diameter nozzle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of organic RGB microlaser pixel arrays by ultrasonic vibration-assisted inkjet printing. The procedure begins with capillary action filling a hollow glass needle with the organic ink solution. Following that, the solution is ejected from the glass needle with the help of ultrasonic vibration and dropped onto a hydrophobic substrate. Following the printing of the red-emissive material, the green- and blue-emissive materials were printed in the same manner with exact alignment. (d) Image of large-area optical structures. The scale bar is 5 mm. (e and f) OM images of the printed RGB pixel array showing similar size and a well-defined pattern. The scale bars are 50 and 20 μm, respectively. (g) Fluorescence microscopy image of the printed RGB pixel under UV light radiation. The scale bar is 20 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Droplet ejecting methods are classified into two categories: thermal nozzles and piezoelectric nozzles. The thermal nozzle adopts a heater in the form of a resistor, which generates bubbles through volume expansion and then forms a single ink drop in the nozzle. After the ink drop is ejected from the nozzle, the negative pressure formed inside the ink reservoir sucks new ink inside the ink reservoir. As a result, the ink used in this process must be thermally compatible and sensitive to temperature functions of volume shrinkage/expansion. The piezoelectric nozzle has a piezoelectric film that runs the length of the reservoir's wall. Applying a voltage pulse to the film, it causes mechanical volume expansion and ejects ink in response to the pressure generated by the piezoelectric element, resulting in a lower temperature and more precise functioning. Compared with thermal nozzles, piezoelectric nozzles will not be troubled by the thermal decomposition of ink and the selection of temperature-sensitive solvents. The nozzle diameter and the maximum voltage of the input pulse sequence are the primary determinants of droplet size and speed (Fig. 5b). Therefore, piezoelectric nozzle technology is mostly used in current scientific experiments, because it is better than thermal nozzles in all aspects.
In the inkjet printing process, it is also important that the stable droplets ejected from the nozzles form a high-resolution pattern on the substrate. The ink in the nozzle is in equilibrium in the initial state. When a voltage pulse signal is applied to the piezoelectric element, the volume of the ink inside the nozzle expands and ejects. An in-flight ink drop is formed once the kinetic energy above the threshold is transferred to the ejected ink, which subsequently drops toward the target substrate. The ink in the nozzle is refilled and the procedure is repeated when the reverse voltage is provided successively. Because nozzle clogging is a fatal flaw of inkjet printing, a small voltage pulse is given to the nozzles during the non-ejection condition to prevent ink drying and nozzle clogging.
In addition, some new printing technologies have also been developed. In 2019, Zhao et al. reported full-color laser displays based on organic printed microlaser arrays.115 As shown in Fig. 5c, the manufacturing process began with a glass needle absorbing the ink solution by capillary action, and then ultrasonic vibration was used to spray a drop of ink onto a hydrophobic substrate. The droplets of ink dispersed on a hydrophobic substrate formed spherical caps and became solid as the water evaporates. On a range of hydrophobic substrates, this technique can be used in most organic ink solutions, and the coverage of laser wavelengths can be adjusted by adding a variety of luminescent dyes to the ink. A pixelated RGB ball cap array can be obtained by printing red-, green- and blue-emissive inks in sequence and aligning them accurately. RGB spherical caps that have been prefabricated can be patterned in a very broad region (Fig. 5d) and form a uniform geometry when positioned precisely (Fig. 5e), which was crucial for practical displays. Each of the three adjacent ball caps acted like a single pixel (Fig. 5f). Under UV light, the pixels fluoresced brightly in red, green, and blue (Fig. 5g).


2.2.2 Transfer printing. 
The most used transfer medium in the process of transfer printing is a flat polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp. Meanwhile, the appropriate sacrificial layer and substances that can significantly change the adhesion between layers and can greatly improve the success rate of the transfer process were selected. In 2008, Kim and co-workers reported a thin-film transfer-printing technique by a water-soluble sacrificial layer and PDMS.99 This technique enables the preparation of bilayer structures of poly(9,9-di-n-octylfluorene-alt-(1,4-phenylene-((4-sec-butylphenyl)imino)-1,4-phenylene))/poly(9,9-di-n-octylfluorene-alt-benzothiadiazole) (TFB/F8BT) and P3HT/methanofullerene([6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester) (P3HT/PCBM). The schematic diagram in Fig. 6 depicts a typical transfer printing process. A thin polymer film was spin-coated on the deposited sacrificial layer poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSSNa). The PDMS was then imprinted on the upper surface for contact and placed in a water bath to remove the sacrificial layer. The surface of the PDMS containing the target thin film is completely attached to the surface of the target substrate. The solid-state transfer process mainly depends on the difference between the adhesion strengths of the two contact surfaces (PDMS organic and organic substrate interface). Once wetting is formed due to conformal contact, the films on the PDMS stamp with low surface tension are easily transferred to various flat substrates with higher surface energy.
 Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the thin-film transfer-printing process to form a bilayer conjugated-polymer structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2019, Jin and co-workers reported a highly efficient nanotransfer printing technique that can produce large area multilayer 3D nanostructures.101Fig. 7 depicts two processes in the nanotransfer printing procedure for assembling 3D nanostructures. Step 1 was to spin coating water-soluble poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) film, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) film, and photoresist films on the quartz glass from the bottom to top. Then, using two-beam interference lithography, a grating structure was created, followed by the evaporation of 70 nm gold on the grating structure. The upper gold grating was peeled off by blue tape (Fig. 7c). The flat PDMS stamp functionalized with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl-1-trichlorosilane (TFOCS) (Fig. 7d) was placed on the nanostructure, then immersing it in deionized water, the layer of PAA film will dissolve, and the upper nanostructure will be transferred to the PDMS stamp. A layer of (3-mercaptopropyl)trimethoxysilane SAM was placed under the PMMA layer to improve the adhesion between PMMA and the target substrate, making it easier to transfer the pattern from the PDMS stamp to the target substrate (Fig. 7e). In step 2, the bottom grating (procedures in Fig. 7f–g) was made in the same way as the top grating (procedures in Fig. 7a–c), but without the PAA film. The photoresist grating was removed by a developer. Then, they fabricated 3D multilayer nanostructures by placing the pattern created in step 1 on the bottom layer of the grating by rotating the θ angle (Fig. 7j).
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the procedure for PAA-assisted nanotransfer printing to assemble 3D nanostructures layer-by-layer. Step 1 (a–e) transferring the nanostructures to a flexible substrate. Step 2 (f–j) fabrication of the bottom grating structures and the assembly of the 3D nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
In 2019, Campos and co-workers reported a nanotransfer technique that does not rely on adhesive layers or external stimuli.104Fig. 8 shows the schematic diagram of the transfer process. A thin film was prepared on a silicon and silicon dioxide (Si/SiO2) substrate. At the same time, they cleaned the glass slide in oxygen plasma for two minutes to increase the adhesion with the PDMS stamp to avoid separation. The PDMS stamp was in direct contact with the film without any bubbles, and then the whole stamp was immersed in 1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH) to etch the SiO2 as the sacrificial layer until it was completely separated from the substrate. Then, the newly peeled film on PDMS was directly contacted with the target substrate and heated at 70 degrees Celsius for ten seconds to ensure a successful transfer.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration for pattern-transfer printing. (a) A PDMS stamp connected to a glass slide comes into direct contact with the thin film of interest, which was generated on a SiO2/Si substrate, and (b) soaked in 1 M KOH until the SiO2 dissolves. (c) The thin film is transferred to the PDMS after the Si detaches during SiO2 etching. (d) Direct contact of the film with the final substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.3 Orthogonal solvent. 
Orthogonal solvent means that solvents dissolve a functional polymer but do not dissolve an underlaid semiconducting polymer; thus, it enables the sequential deposition of several polymer films through solution processing without damage to the underlaid film. Generally speaking, most organic semiconductor materials are soluble in common organic solvents such as benzene solvents. Therefore, the key of the orthogonal solvent method is to develop water/alcohol–soluble organic semiconductor materials.
In 2010, Mullen et al. reported the fabrication of multilayer device structures from orthogonal solvents.39 They fully tuned the solubility of polyfluorenes in organic solvents of different polarities by replacing the alkyl side chains with ethylene glycol side chains of appropriate length. The redissolution and mixing problem can be successfully suppressed during subsequent spin-coating for device fabrication. As shown in Fig. 9, they synthesized poly[9,9-bis(methoxytetra(ethylene glycolyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-(9,9-bis(methoxypoly(ethylene glycolyl)-2,7-fluorene)] (further called PFpolar), which showed higher solubility in methanol and ethanol, and poly(tetraarylindenofluorene) (PIF) was selected as the active material for the first layer. To determine the possible film thickness reduction due to the dissolution of the PIF layer by the PFpolar/ethanol solution during spin coating, the PIF films were treated with pure ethanol. The stability of PIF to ethanol was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), and it was found that the actual layer thickness did not change before and after treatment, and the rms roughness did not increase significantly.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of the multilayer device structure and the chemical structure of the utilized polymers. The magnified region shows the asymmetric shift of the HOMOs as obtained from quantum-chemical calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2014, Cao et al. reported a significant improvement in the efficiency of perovskite solar cells by introducing a new amino-functionalized polymer PN4N into the device structure as a new cathode intermediate layer (Fig. 10a).40 Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) can be used to dissolve PN4N, which is an excellent orthogonal solvent for the perovskite layer. Therefore, it can be deposited directly from the solution without corroding the perovskite layer. This straightforward method for modifying the interface reduced contact resistance, inhibited bimolecular recombination, and improved electron transport in the device, resulting in a power conversion efficiency rise from 12.4% to 15.0%. Simultaneously, a solar cell based on a typical PFN intermediate layer was created, but the performance was degraded due to the solvent's erosion of the perovskite layer, decreasing the perovskite's performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) The hybrid planar heterojunction solar cell's device structure, as well as the chemical structures of PN4N and PFN. (b) SEM image of the perovskite film on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate and (c) SEM image of the planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Solvent erosion on the quantum dot layer prohibits devices from obtaining excellent performance in all-solution processed inverted QLEDs. In 2018, the polar solvent 1,4-dioxane was used as an orthogonal solvent in HTL poly(9-vinlycarbazole) (PVK) to reduce solvent erosion by the Cao group.41 At the same time, the use of a PVK/TFB double-layer HTL permitted progressive energy level hole injection, which improved the device's efficiency and reduced efficiency attenuation. As shown in Fig. 11a and b, the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum and the cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) images confirmed that there was no solvent erosion and mixing between the QD layer and the HTL. Fig. 11c and d are the schematic diagram of the all-solution processed inverted QLEDs device and the EDS mapping image, which confirmed the clear boundaries between each layer and good film thickness and uniformity.
 Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra of films. Film 1: ITO/ZnO/QDs. Film 2: ITO/ZnO/QDs/1,4-dioxane rising. Film 3: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (7 nm). Film 4: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (7 nm)/p-Xy rinsing. Film 5: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (15 nm). Film 6: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (15 nm)/p-Xy rinsing. (b) Cross-sectional STEM image of a red QLED. (c) Schematic diagram of the QLED device structure. (d) EDS mapping image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.4 Cross-linker post-treating. 
The main challenge for the solution processing technique to prepare multilayer devices is the erosion of the previously deposited layer by the solvent used for the next deposited layer and interfacial mixing, which severely degrades the performance of the device. The most emerging use of OSCs with cross-linkable parts is a particularly promising method because the thin film formed by it has no solvent limitation on the subsequently deposited layers. As a result, developing OLED materials that can be photo-, thermally-, or chemically-polymerized is necessary.116,117 However, these methods have some disadvantages, such as photo-crosslinking requires a long exposure time,118–121 and thermal cross-linking requires high temperature.122–126 Therefore, we still lack an “additive” crosslinking agent that can be used for crosslinking organic molecules regardless of the function, especially no matter what proportion of crosslinking agent is added, it will not cause harmful changes to raw materials.
In 2009, Peter K H Ho reported a simple and versatile photocrosslinking methodology based on sterically hindered bis(fluorophenyl azide)s.42 Their main work was the insertion reaction of the alkyl side chain, which acted as cross-linking of the light-emitting layer without reducing the semiconductor performance. In 2018, the Bao group used a similar method to fabricate stretchable transistor arrays.43 To achieve general applicability to stretchable dielectric layers, they utilized azide crosslinking chemistry, which can be initiated by UV light and based on the reaction between azide groups and CH groups commonly found in elastomers (Fig. 12). The optimized patterning protocol was applied to both polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-polystyrene (SEBS) and polyurethane, with solvent resistance achieved afterwards.
 Fig. 12  (a) An azide-crosslinking reaction, which is initiated by ultraviolet light and is based on the reaction between azide groups and CH groups. (b) How the polymer-chain network in an elastomer (blue, with rectangular planes representing rigid segments and tortuous lines representing soft segments) becomes crosslinked by azides (red) into a three-dimensional network. (c) Chemical structure of an azide crosslinker. Azide crosslinking is a generally applicable strategy for photo-patterning intrinsically stretchable dielectrics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
In 2020, Pavel Anzenbacher Jr and co-workers reported new cross-linkers based on 3-trifluoromethyl-3-aryldiazirine moieties.44 This crosslinking agent can crosslink small molecules and polymers and release just molecular nitrogen as a byproduct. When diazirine was photolyzed, a carbene was formed, which was inserted into nearby C–H bonds, resulting in highly cross-linked and insoluble compounds.127 They have synthesized two compounds 1 and 2 (Fig. 13a). Fig. 13b is a brief schematic diagram of the experiment. This approach can crosslink polymers like dioctyl polyfluorene (PFO) or regioregular P3HT as well as small molecules of 4,4′-bis[N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenylamino]biphenyl (NPB).
 Fig. 13  (a) Structure diagram of the bis-diazirine cross-linkers. (b) Fabrication of insoluble polymer films using the cross-linkers 1 or 2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2020, Bao et al. reported robust materials and processes that afford a fully stretchable skin-like display.45 Previously they reported SEBS43,128 as a dielectric layer in stretchable carbon nanotubes or organic thin film transistors (OTFTs). On the other hand, most elastomers have low corrosion resistance and are quickly etched during further processing due to solvent swelling. To solve the above problems, they used perfluorinated elastomers to fabricate stretchable OTFTs.129,130 The perfluorinated elastomer is not only stretchable but also has corrosion resistance to organic solvents. In addition, to solve the problem of low adhesion between the perfluorinated elastomer and the OSC to avoid delamination during the stretching process, they introduced a crosslinking agent containing flexible polydimethylsiloxane, which can not only enhance the stretchability of the semiconducting polymer but also crosslink the semiconducting and gate dielectric layers to provide improved interfacial bonding (Fig. 14a).131 The monomers of their perfluorinated elastomer were made by combining two methacrylate (DMA) groups with the hydroxyl groups of perfluoropolyether (PFPE) diols (Fig. 14b).129 They compared the treatment of thin films of the same thickness with solvents (e.g. chloroform, 1,1,2-trichloroethane, and tetralin) commonly used to dissolve polymer semiconductors. PDMS and SEBS films show different thicknesses and inhomogeneities after solvent treatment, and even partial dissolution (Fig. 14c and d). PFPE-DMA film maintains uniform thickness after solvent treatment. This is a crucial step in the subsequent device's preparation.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram showing the material design for patterning of stretchable transistors on elastomeric dielectrics by inkjet printing. (b) Schematic illustration of molecular structure synthesis and photo-crosslinking of PFPE-DMA elastomer. (c) Representative 2D profilometer scanning images showing the roughness of PFPE-DMA and conventional stretchable dielectric thin films (5 μm thick) prior to and post the 1 min treatment of organic solvents, which are used for the solution-processed fabrication of stretchable OTFTs. TCE: 1,1,2-trichloroethane. (d) Statistical analysis of surface roughness changes of stretchable dielectric thin films after the solvent treatment (n = 5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. 

3. Solution processing on liquid substrates
In the past few decades, liquids such as water, as molecularly flat and defect-free substrates have also been used for two-dimensional (2D) organic small molecule semiconductor growth and conjugated polymer polymerization through solution processes. In comparison to solid substrates, the size of crystals on liquid substrates is unrestricted, and the solution process assembly method permits large-scale manufacture of semiconductor crystals without vacuum, which is an essential technique to lower industrial costs and advance crystal engineering.132 Here, we will summarize the recent development of surface self-assembly and confined-assembly of small organic molecules and the interfacial polymerization of conjugated polymers on the liquid surface and analyze the differences and influencing factors of the various methods.
The integration of OSC films on liquid substrates is relatively simple, and the transfer printing method is generally adopted for both small molecule and polymer films. As shown in Fig. 15a, the target substrate was immersed in the liquid substrate and placed under the film, and then extracted upward, the film can be effectively moved from the surface of the water to the target substrate, and the next step is to dry and anneal.133 There is also a similar transfer method shown in Fig. 15b. After the film is formed, the target substrate is placed on the top and moved down until it comes into contact with the film. The film will be successfully transferred to the target substrate and can be used for the subsequent device fabrication.134
 Fig. 15  (a) Up-transfer film method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2019 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (b) Down-transfer film method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 Copyright 2021 WILEY-VCH GmbH. 
3.1 Surface self-assembly and confined-assembly of organic small molecules
Self-assembly is a process of spontaneous assembly under intermolecular interaction force. Now with development, it has become one of the most effective methods for preparing OSC thin films.135 It is now generally accepted that self-assembly is used to prepare high-quality OSC thin films because self-assembly does not interfere with external forces.
The drop-casting method is widely used in the self-assembly process. Organic molecules are kept together by weak non-covalent interactions in crystals, which means that the molecular structure directly controls the morphology and size of the crystals (Fig. 16a).136,137 In 2011, the Hu group constructed the first millimeter-sized monolayer 2D crystals of OSCs using a solution self-assembly approach, and their mobility has already surpassed 1 cm2 V−1 s−1.138 The 1,4-bis((5′-hexyl-2,2′-bithiophen-5-yl)ethynyl)benzene (HTEB) molecule structure is the key to the success because π–π and C–H⋯π interactions ensure strong directional interactions leading to 2D self-assembled growth. In subsequent reports, many organic molecules were used to prepare large-area ultrathin 2D OSCs, including 2,6-bis(4-hexylphenyl)anthracene (C6-DPA), dioctyl-substituted dibenzo[d,d′]thieno[3,2-b;4,5-b′]dithiophenes (C8-DBTDT) and 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene (C8-BTBT).139–142 In 2019, the Hu group reported a “phase separation” molecular design strategy towards large-area 2D molecular (2DMC) crystals.143 The 2DMC was imaged by a polarized optical microscope (POM), as shown in Fig. 16b, the color varied uniformly when the samples were rotated showing that the crystal had no grain boundaries with single crystal nature. Fig. 16c shows AFM images of the monolayer and bilayer 2D crystals of organic semiconductors.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of drop-casting for generating 2DOSC with the “phase separation” molecule structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) POM of the 3Se-2N 2DOSC on the SiO2/Si substrate. (c) AFM images of a monolayer and a bilayer 2DOSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2018, the Hu group focused on confined-assembly at the water/air interface to prepare a 2DOSC film and proved that the phase transfer surfactants (tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB)) can control the solvent spreading area and the interfacial tension between water/solution, resulting in the 2D confined space required for 2DOSC film growth (Fig. 17).46 As Fig. 17 shows, when the organic solvent was dropped on the water surface, the wetting area was determined by the spreading coefficient S = γ1 − γ2 − γ12, where γ1, γ2, and γ12 are the surface tension of water, the solution, and the water/solution interface. If S is negative, wetting is partial. If S is positive, it means that the solvent is completely wetted and dispersed. For most common organic solvents that are water-immiscible, the phenomenon observed on the water surface is the former. When partial wetting occurs, a floating lens is formed, which will cause disordered crystals. TBAB is soluble both in organic solvents and water. When TBAB is used, enhanced spreading was observed, which means that it is more concentrated in the water/solution interface and significantly reduces γ12. Using this method, many 2D small molecule crystal (Perylene, C8-BTBT, and C6-DPA) films have been fabricated. The 2DOSCs' single-crystalline nature was confirmed by the same set of diffraction spots in selected-area electron diffraction data. The excellent mobility suggested that as-prepared 2DOSC could be used in high-performance optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 17  Illustrating the space-confined process for the growth and transfer of 2DOSC. (a) A floating lens was generated when a droplet of solution was placed on the surface of water. (b) Increased spreading with surfactant in the water. (c) The growth of 2DOSC. (d) Transfer of the 2DOSC to the target substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The dynamic motion caused by the low viscosity of water poses a challenge for the growth of large 2DOSC thin films on the water surface. To get through this serious obstacle, a method of replacing water with high-viscosity glycerin was proposed by the same group in 2019.47 There were three advantages by using high-viscosity glycerin as a viscous liquid substrate. (i) The glycerol substrate liquid nature eliminated the harmful coffee ring effect. (ii) The high surface tension promoted the organic solution to spread, which was beneficial to the formation of ultrathin crystals. (iii) Because of the high viscosity, the organic solution stayed in a fixed position, allowing for layer-number control. What's more, the crystal formation from bulk size to a single layer may be accurately regulated by altering the proportion of glycerin in the liquid matrix (Fig. 18a–l). At the same time, adding a surfactant inside, as shown in Fig. 18m, reduces γ2 and γ12, which was essential for the preparation of 2DOSC thin films. Using this technique, many 2D small molecule crystal (C8-BTBT, C6-DPA, Perylene, and 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene) films have been fabricated and used to make organic phototransistors and OFETs.144
 Fig. 18  (a–e) Images demonstrating the enhanced spreading area of a toluene solution with surfactant over a water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate as the glycerol volume fraction was changed from 10% to 100%. (f–j) Corresponding OM pictures of 2DOSC formed on a water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate. (k) The spreading area of the solution and (l) the average layer number of the 2DOSC as a function of the volume fraction of glycerol in the water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate. (m) Schematic diagrams showing the mechanism of the enhanced spreading of toluene solution on the glycerol surface with the addition of a surfactant in the solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
One of the most effective approaches for generating high-quality crystals in OSCs is epitaxial technology.145 Recently, this approach has evolved into the preparation of ultrathin OSC films.146 A basic premise of epitaxy is precise lattice matching with the substrate. However, it is difficult to find a crystal substrate that matches the organic crystal lattice, which limits the possibility of manufacturing 2DOSC thin films. Because of this, Xu et al. developed a method of assembling 2DOSC thin films on the surface of water/air, named “solution epitaxy” (Fig. 19).147 There were two key elements to this approach. (i) The coffee ring effect was successfully inhibited at the water surface due to the absence of the pinned three-phase contact line, and the water surface worked as a perfect growth substrate, resulting in uniform 2DOSC thin films.148 (ii) Re-growth of small molecules as seed crystals after nucleation was a key step. Small-sized 2DOSCs were obtained by drop-casting on a liquid substrate, and then it was as a seed crystal for epitaxy growth. Inspired by this method, through solution epitaxy, many OSCs were assembled into large-area high-quality 2DOSC thin films.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of growing 2DOSC by “solution epitaxy”. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The Jie group developed a graphene quantum dot (GQD)-induced self-assembly method for centimeter-sized monolayer organic crystals (C10-BTBT) in 2020, as shown in Fig. 20a. This method has the following advantages: (i) the spreading area of the solvent could be reasonably regulated by changing the pH value of the GQD solution, which was conducive to the formation of single-layer organic crystals (Fig. 20b–e). (ii) The π–π stacking interaction between QDs and organic molecules can greatly decrease the nucleation energy of organic molecules while also providing sufficient cohesion to bind the precipitated crystals together, allowing single-layer organic crystals to develop across a broad area. (iii) OFETs based on the single-layer organic crystal C10-BTBT showed high mobility as high as 2.6 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was one of the highest mobilities of self-assembled single-layer organic crystals in the solution process method.48
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of GQD-induced self-assembly of monolayer organic crystals. (b–e) Images of the spreading of organic solvent on the GQD solution surface at various pH values. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH GmbH. 
The electronic properties of OSC films depend largely on their morphology and crystallinity. Due to the complexity of fluid dynamics in the solution coating process, conjugated small molecule OSC films treated with solution often show abundant grain boundary orientation. So the Jie group reported a water surface drag coating method to prepare high-quality OSC thin films and greatly improved the charge transfer characteristics.149 This technique employed a novel drag coating process to induce the unidirectional growth of organic crystals. As shown in Fig. 21a, the polymer polystyrene (PS) and a mixed solution containing Dif-TES-ADT/toluene were slowly dropped into the water surface along the Teflon wall. The solution rapidly diffused to the water surface, generating a dispersed polymer film as the toluene evaporates. The solution was stored in the Teflon edge, and then a glass rod was used to drag the sacrificial membrane to induce the solution to spread again. With the spreading of the storage solution, the film gradually grew along with the drag direction. The generated film has a surface area of up to 63 cm2 with pure crystal orientation, which significantly increased the carrier mobility by 4.7 times. Most importantly, the resultant film can be transferred directly to any solid substrate (SiO2/Si substrate) or flexible substrate (paper, polyethylene terephthalate (PET)). As shown in Fig. 21d and e, the flexible transistor based on Dif-TES-ADT thin film showed the mobility of up to 16.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was the highest mobility value of flexible transistors based on Dif-TES-ADT published thus far.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of preparing organic semiconductor thin films using the drag coating method. (b) A photograph of 9 cm × 7 cm Dif-TES-ADT thin film on water surface. (c) Flexible OFETs based on a Dif-TES-ADT thin film prepared by the drag coating method. (d) The mobility of the Dif-TES-ADT material in this experiment was compared with that of other methods. (e) Mobility distribution of 81 flexible OFETs devices on the same substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH GmbH. 
3.2 Air–water interface polymerization
Rayleigh achieved the synthesis of organic molecule monolayers on the air/water interface in 1890. This notion, introduced by Langmuir, is the foundation of our present knowledge of the behavior of insoluble monolayer molecules.150 As shown in Fig. 22, we can use the Langmuir–Blodgett trough to limit water-insoluble monomers at the air/water interface, which can easily spin and move around in lateral directions unless they are densely packed to form a monolayer.151 This technical process is named Langmuir and Blodgett. To make organic films with a single molecular thickness, the LB technique can manage the bulk density of monomers by altering the surface pressure of water.152–154 Through non-covalent and covalent bonds, this approach allows the user to change the composition and structure of 2D materials at the molecular level. Laminated 2D materials can be prepared when the transfer process is repeated.
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method of chemical processing at the air–water interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The Talham group reported a crystal monolayer with square pattern structures synthesized by metal coordination at the air/water interface in 2002.155 The iron-nickel cyanide-bridged network in the 2D plane was formed in the LB trough after spreading the amphiphilic pentacyanoferrate(III) complex solution on the surface of the Ni2+ ion aqueous solution (Fig. 23). They utilized synchrotron grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) to validate the generation of a face-centered square grid structure and discovered a 36 nm2 average crystalline domain size. Under comparable conditions, solution synthesis cannot produce this 2D structure. The restricted spreading confined the reactants within the 2D interface, which was beneficial to induce anisotropic growth.
 Fig. 23  Assembly of a coordination monolayer based on 4-didodecylamino)pyridine/iron(III) complexes at the air–water Interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155 Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
In 2015, the Feng group used the LB technique to demonstrate the synthesis of a large area of monolayer conjugated 2D metal–organic framework (MOF) composed of nickel bis(dithiolene) complexes at the air/water interface.156Fig. 24a illustrates that they used a π-conjugated monomer named 1,2,5,6,9,10-hexathioltriphenylene (HTTP) to fabricate large-area Ni3(HTTP)2 sheets by the LB technique at the air/water interface. In an LB trough, a submonolayer of HTTP monomers was dispersed over the water surface. A solution of nickel salts was introduced into the aqueous phase after the monomers were packed tightly into a dense film and compressed to 10 mN m−1. The coordination of nickel ions and dithiolene units initiated polymerization as nickel ions diffused from the bulk phase to the interface, resulting in a target 2D supramolecular polymer (2DSP) with a large area and a sheet thickness of 0.7 nm.
 Fig. 24  (a) The Langmuir–Blodgett method was utilized to fabricate a 2DSP single-layer sheet formed of triphenylene-fused nickel bis(dithiolene) complexes at an air/water interface. (b) OM image indicating large-area single-layer sheets. (c) AFM images and the corresponding analysis demonstrate a single-layer sheet thickness measuring about 0.7 nm. (d) OM image of bilayer sheets. (e) TEM image of a monolayer on copper meshes. Inset: SAED pattern of the monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition to Langmuir–Blodgett, there are many methods that rely on specific reactions to achieve interfacial polymerization. At present, these strategies are specially used for the synthesis of organic 2D conjugated polymers. In 2019, the Hu group reported a Schiff base polycondensation reaction at the air–water interface to synthesize a wafer-scale ultrathin 2D polymer (2DP) film with controlled thickness from simple benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde (BTA) and p-phenylenediamine (PDA) building blocks (Fig. 25a).157 The generated 2DPBTA+PDA film can be easily transferred to any substrate since it is grown on the water surface. Fig. 25b and c are morphology characterizations through OM and AFM. In addition, the 2DPBTA+PDA has a remarkable freestanding ability, as demonstrated by SEM on a bare copper net (Fig. 25d). To further explore the internal structure of the 2DPBTA+PDA film, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were used for shooting analysis. The corresponding strong electron diffraction (ED) ring in the HRTEM image and SAED image confirmed the 2DPBTA+PDA film's amorphous nature (Fig. 25e). Apart from good freestanding ability, the 2DPBTA+PDA film also has excellent solvent resistance due to the structural effect of covalent bonding. The morphology stayed intact after 5 minutes of soaking in several organic solvents.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of 2DPBTA+PDA films via the Schiff-base reaction of the monomers. (b) OM, (c) AFM image of about 1.8 nm thick 2DPBTA+PDA film on a silicon wafer, and (d) SEM image of about 1.8 nm thick 2DPBTA+PDA film on a bare copper grid. (e) HRTEM image demonstrating the amorphous nature of the 2DPBTA+PDA film. Inset: SAED pattern of the 2DPBTA+PDA film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2019, the Park group reported a wafer-scale interfacial synthesis of 2D porphyrin polymer films at a pentane/water interface and developed laminar assembly polymerization (LAP), in which the film has wafer-scale uniformity within the limit of monolayer thickness for fabrication of hybrid superlattices.158 The manufacturing process of 2DP monolayers was based on porphyrin components (Fig. 26a). These molecules have two variable positions–the center of porphyrin ring M (M = 2H, Fe(III), or Pt(II)) and the phenyl groups R (R = –COOH or –NH2). The monomer was cross-linked by the coordination bond of the copper paddle wheel structure in the presence of Cu2+ ions (left, Fig. 26a; R = –COOH), or through the Schiff base reaction in the presence of terephthalaldehyde (TPA) (right, Fig. 26a; R = –NH2). There were three steps in the LAP process: injection, self-assembly, and polymerization (Fig. 26c and d). First, the monomer was introduced from the edge of a micro-injector and passed through the pentane layer to the pentane/water interface. The monomer was transported to the interface, where the porphyrin-based monomer self-assembled due to its amphiphilic nature, then diffused while being restricted by the longer sidewalls, resulting in continuous monolayer assembly, and finally the polymerization of assembled monomers occurred gradually through the reaction with reagents present in water (Cu2+ ions for MOF-based 2DP I-III; TPA for COF-based 2DP IV). By gradually draining the bottom solution, the film was transferred to the substrate beneath it.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of monolayer 2DP and corresponding chemical structures of the molecular precursors. (b) False color images of monolayer 2DP covering 2 inch silica wafers. (c) Schematic of a LAP reactor and in situ optical characterization apparatus. MSP stands for micro-syringe pump. (d) Schematic of the LAP synthesis that involves three phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In 2020, the Hu group reported the preparation of 2D crystalline conjugated polymer films by synergetic polymerization and self-assembly at the air/water interface.159 They used 1,4-diethynyl-2,5-bis(hexyloxy)benzene (DEBHB) monomers by optimizing the interfacial Glaser-type reaction conditions to prepare large-area 2D crystalline poly(2,5-dihexyloxy-1,4-phenylenebutadiynylene) (poly-DHO-PBD) films. The method can also be extended to the synthesis of other poly(butadienyl) derivatives. Fig. 27a and b shows the DEBHB monomer's synergetic polymerization self-assembly process and chemical reaction mechanism. Various analytical methods were used to characterize the efficient interfacial polymerization for the transformation from DEBHB monomers to poly-DHO-PBD films at the air–water interface. A representative OM and AFM of the poly-DHO-PBD film transferred to a Si/SiO2 substrate are shown in Fig. 27c and d. The microscope displayed hundreds of micrometers in width and thickness down to tens of nanometers of the film. The same year, the Hu group reported a simple method by using catalytic homocoupling of hexaethynylbenzene (HEB) at ambient temperature to generate a large-area uniform graphdiyne (GDY) layer at the air/water interface, as illustrated in Fig. 28a–c.160 The uniformity and continuity of the GDY films are displayed in Fig. 28d and f, respectively. The average thickness was around 7 nm, and the roughness was about 0.6 nm according to AFM analyses (Fig. 28e). The HRTEM image and SAED pattern of the film on copper grids show that GDY films were amorphous (Fig. 28g).
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy for crystalline conjugated polymer films via synergetic polymerization and self-assembly at the air/water interface. (b) Chemical structures of an exemplified DEBHB monomer studied in this research and its corresponding synthesized polymer poly-DHO-PBD. (c) OM image of the representative poly-DHO-PBD films transferred onto the Si/SiO2 substrate. Scale bar: 20 μm. (d) AFM image of a poly-DHO-PBD film, showing the smooth surface and layer-by-layer growth model. Scale bar: 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic process of GDY thin films at the air/water interface. (b) Image of GDY thin films floating on the top of an aqueous solution. (c) The monomer structure and GDY probable structure. (d) OM image of GDY thin film transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (e) AFM image of GDY film and thickness about 7 nm. (f) SEM image of GDY film on a holey carbon matrix. (g) HRTEM image of GDY film. Inset: Corresponding SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3 Interfacial-assembling of conjugated polymers
In addition to using monomers to prepare polymer films through specific polymerization reactions, existing polymer materials can also be used to directly prepare films by dissolving in common organic solvents and spreading on water surfaces. In 2018, the Li group published a paper describing a facile interfacial-assembly approach for generating P3HT:PC61BM films.161 As shown in Fig. 29a, P3HT and PC61BM chlorobenzene solutions rapidly diffused to the water surface within a few seconds under the guidance of the ultrafast precursor membrane at the water/air interface (Fig. 29b and c). The solvent evaporated to form a uniform film, and the material utilization rate was 100%. Because these two compounds have weak polar groups, they may have low surface activity. Consequently, they tend to diffuse and assemble at the chlorobenzene–water contact. As a result, the whole surface of the water was covered with chlorobenzene solution. After all the chlorobenzene has evaporated, an evenly floating P3HT:PC61BM film can be formed (Fig. 29d and e). The resulting film, which floated on water, was easily transferred to a variety of water-insoluble substrates. It can be seen from the AFM image that the film has a smooth surface with low roughness (Fig. 29f and g).
 Fig. 29  (a and b) Schematic diagram of dropping, spreading of the precursor solution and the P3HT:PC61BM film on the water surface. (c–e) Images of solution spreading at different times (dish diameter is 10 cm). (f and g) AFM image of P3HT:PC61BM film with height data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
In 2020, the air/water interfacial assembly of freestanding nanofilms was reported by the Yu group.162 Based on this assembly method, a pristine P3HT film was prepared. Due to the immiscibility of toluene and water, when the polymer solution dropped onto the water surface, it would quickly spread to the whole water surface, which is called the Marangoni effect.163,164 Therefore, when the solvent evaporated, a film was formed on the water surface (Fig. 30a). Fig. 30b depicts a sequence image of the original P3HT film assembly process, which takes around 2 minutes. During the evaporation of toluene, P3HT molecules at the air/water interface can efficiently self-assemble towards ordered structures through intermolecular interactions165 such as π–π stacking and hydrophobic interaction.166–168Fig. 30c shows the OM image of a film on a Si substrate. The nanofilm has a thickness of 60 nm (Fig. 30g) and was continuous and smooth across the whole substrate. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy was used to gain insight into the molecular packing within the film. The pristine P3HT film (redline) has three different multiorders, whereas the spin-coated film (blackline) has only one broad and weak diffraction peak, as illustrated in Fig. 30d. The results demonstrated that the pristine P3HT film has a highly organized packing structure. At the same time, it was found that the carrier mobility of P3HT thin films prepared by spin-coating is 1.14 cm2 V−1 s−1, while that of the original P3HT films was 16.7 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 30e and f).
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymer film generation process on the liquid surface and P3HT chemical structure. (b) Images of the pristine P3HT film generated on the liquid surface. (c) OM image of the pristine P3HT film formed on a Si substrate. (d) XRD pattern of the assembled pristine P3HT film and spin-coated film. (e) The assembled freestanding pristine P3HT film-based transistor's transfer curve. (f) Mobility of the assembled pristine P3HT film and spin-coated film. (g) AFM measured thickness of the pristine P3HT film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 Copyright 2020 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
4. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, the advancements in organic electronics, especially the electrical performance of organic semiconductors, have made impressive progress in the research scenarios in the laboratory. However, as a promising technology for the next generation of soft electronics, there are still numerous challenges before practical applications, especially in the development of mature processing techniques for commercial applications just like that in the silicon semiconductor industry. Through a detailed summary of the commonly used solution processing techniques with respect to the physical state of film-forming substrates and the corresponding integration methods, we anticipate that this review could help readers develop general and systematic printing and integration methods applicable to most developed organic semiconductor material systems. Large-area free-standing film-forming on liquid substrates is the most effective pathway to construct complex multi-layer devices via simple transfer technology. Although there are still many challenges in the preparation of large-area ultra-thin homogeneous films on liquid substrates, it is believed that in the future, through a series of optimization improvements, by controlling the spreading of organic solvent on the liquid substrates, ensuring the continuity of the precursor organic liquid film, and accurately controlling the evaporation rate of the organic solvent, a large area of controllable thickness OSC film can be obtained, which is sure to further promote the commercial application of organic semiconductors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the Natural Science Foundation of China (61935017, 6213000348) for financial support of this work.
References
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. Macdiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 16, 578–580 RSC .
Y. Yao, H. Dong, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701251 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chu, J. Fan, S. Yang, D. Liu, C. F. Ng, H. Dong, A. Ren and Q. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803467 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Sun, C. Wang, F. Yang, X. Ren, X. Zhang, H. Dong and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1492–1530 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Wang, J. Chen, J. Huang, Y. Jiang, J. Zhang, L. Shi, Y. Sun, Z. Wei, G. Yu, Y. Guo, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606162 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Dong, L. Jiang and W. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 422–500 RSC .
H. Li, W. Shi, J. Song, H. Jang, J. Dailey, J. Yu and H. E. Katz, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cui, A. J. Gillett, S. Zhang, H. Ye, Y. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Lin, E. W. Evans, W. K. Myers, T. K. Ronson, H. Nakanotani, S. Reineke, J. Bredas, C. Adachi and R. H. Friend, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wada, H. Nakagawa, S. Matsumoto, Y. Wakisaka and H. Kaji, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 643–649 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Wong and E. Zysman-Colman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605444 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ban, Y. Zou, J. P. H. Rivett, Y. Yang, T. H. Thomas, Y. Tan, T. Song, X. Gao, D. Credgington, F. Deschler, H. Sirringhaus and B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3839 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao, Z. Yuan, T. Borzda, A. J. Barker, E. Tyukalova, Z. Hu, M. Kawecki, H. Wang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, X. Shi, K. Uvdal, M. Fahlman, W. Zhang, M. Duchamp, J. Liu, A. Petrozza, J. Wang, L. Liu, W. Huang and F. Gao, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Xu, S. Bai, Y. Jin, J. Wang, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, W. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Xiao, Y. Liu, J. Chen, J. Huang and Z. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, P. C. Y. Chow, Z. Wang, G. Zhang, W. Ma and H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6298–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, M. A. Uddin, P. Bi, B. Fan, Y. Cai, X. Hao, H. Y. Woo, W. Li, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803045 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, W. Liu, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, D. Qian, J. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Xu, C. Yang, F. Gao, H. Zhu, F. Liu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1906324 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Qi, K. Jiang, F. Lin, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, W. Gao, Y. Li, Z. Cai, H. Y. Woo, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 826 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Yan, S. Lee, Y. Yu, H. Tsai, W. Choi, K. Wang, Y. Luo, Y. Gu, X. Zheng, C. Wang, C. Wang, H. Hu, Y. Li, B. Qi, M. Lin, Z. Zhang, S. A. Dayeh, M. Pharr, D. P. Fenning, Y. Lo, J. Luo, K. Yang, J. Yoo, W. Nie and S. Xu, Nature, 2020, 583, 790–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, X. Kuang, J. Deng, Y. Wang, A. C. Wang, W. Ding, Y. Lai, J. Chen, P. Wang, Z. Lin, H. J. Qi, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705195 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, F. Guo, H. Ling, P. Zhang, M. Yi, L. Wang, D. Wu, L. Xie and W. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700007 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Jeong, D. Yun, S. H. Noh, C. E. Park and J. Jang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7701–7709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, A. Fischer, M. Sawatzki, D. H. Doan, M. Liero, A. Glitzky, S. Reineke and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907119 CrossRef .
S. Lan, J. Zhong, E. Li, Y. Yan, X. Wu, Q. Chen, W. Lin, H. Chen and T. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 31716–31724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kim, C. Lee, E. J. Shin, T. I. Lee, S. Kim, J. Jeong, J. Choi, W. S. Hwang, S. G. Im and B. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103291 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Picca, K. Manoli, E. Macchia, L. Sarcina, C. Di Franco, N. Cioffi, D. Blasi, R. österbacka, F. Torricelli, G. Scamarcio and L. Torsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904513 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Huang, X. Zhu, X. Zhou and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703192 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Kim, H. Koh, C. E. Ren, O. Kwon, K. Maleski, S. Cho, B. Anasori, C. Kim, Y. Choi, J. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H. Jung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, S. A. A. A. Aljneibi, J. Yuan, Y. Wang, H. Liu, J. Fang, C. Tang, X. Yan, H. Cai, Y. Gu, S. J. Pennycook, J. Tao and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807161 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Vasileva, Y. Li, I. Sychugov, M. Mensi, L. Berglund and S. Popov, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700057 CrossRef .
M. Karl, J. M. E. Glackin, M. Schubert, N. M. Kronenberg, G. A. Turnbull, I. D. W. Samuel and M. C. Gather, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1525 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Yan, Z. Gao, Y. Du, H. Dong, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 870 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Fan, L. Li, Y. Yang, A. Nuernisha, D. Xue, C. He, J. Qian, Q. Hu, H. Chen, J. Liu and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2509–2521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1408–1428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, C. Di, N. Berdunov, Y. Hu, Y. Hu, X. Gao, Q. Meng, H. Sirringhaus and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1401–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, G. Giri, A. L. Ayzner, A. P. Zoombelt, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Chen, D. Nordlund, M. F. Toney, J. Huang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Niazi, R. Li, E. Qiang Li, A. R. Kirmani, M. Abdelsamie, Q. Wang, W. Pan, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, D. Smilgies, S. T. Thoroddsen, E. P. Giannelis and A. Amassian, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chung, K. Cho and T. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801445 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sax, N. Rugen-Penkalla, A. Neuhold, S. Schuh, E. Zojer, E. J. W. List and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2087–2091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xue, Z. Hu, J. Liu, J. Lin, C. Sun, Z. Chen, C. Duan, J. Wang, C. Liao, W. M. Lau, F. Huang, H. Yip and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19598–19603 RSC .
Y. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Song, J. Wang, L. Mu, Z. He, Z. Zhong, Y. Cun, C. Mai, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1564–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Png, P. Chia, J. Tang, B. Liu, S. Sivaramakrishnan, M. Zhou, S. Khong, H. S. O. Chan, J. H. Burroughes, L. Chua, R. H. Friend and P. K. H. Ho, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 152–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Xu, W. Wang, G. N. Wang, R. Rastak, F. Molina-Lopez, J. W. Chung, S. Niu, V. R. Feig, J. Lopez, T. Lei, S. Kwon, Y. Kim, A. M. Foudeh, A. Ehrlich, A. Gasperini, Y. Yun, B. Murmann, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2018, 555, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dey, S. R. Chowdhury, E. Dykstra, A. Koronatov, H. P. Lu, R. Shinar, J. Shinar and P. Anzenbacher, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11988–11996 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, F. Molina-Lopez, G. N. Wang, B. C. Schroeder, X. Yan, Y. Zeng, O. Zhao, H. Tran, T. Lei, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, J. B. H. Tok, R. Dauskardt, J. W. Chung, Y. Yun and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, F. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Lei, R. Li and W. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5339–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, Y. Zhang, X. Tian, X. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Jie, X. Wang, R. Li and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16082–16086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Wu, J. Pan, T. Feng, D. Wu, X. Zhang, B. Yang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wei Chou, H. Ullah Khan, M. R. Niazi, B. Yan, R. Li, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, D. Smilgies and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5681–5689 RSC .
S. Wang, X. Zhao, Y. Tong, Q. Tang and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901950 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, S. Jiang, L. Qiu, L. K. Ono, T. Sasaki, X. Wang, Y. Shi, Y. Zheng, Y. Qi and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1318–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. Abdollahi Nejand, M. Jakoby, T. Abzieher, D. Hauschild, S. Moghadamzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Brenner, R. Schmager, A. A. Haghighirad, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803699 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Fan, A. B. Djurišić, F. Liu, H. W. Tam, A. Ng, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, D. Wang and Z. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703519 CrossRef .
X. Liu, X. Tan, Z. Liu, H. Ye, B. Sun, T. Shi, Z. Tang and G. Liao, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 184–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shkir, A. Khan, A. M. El-Toni, A. Aldalbahi, I. S. Yahia and S. Alfaify, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 130, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chiang, Z. Tseng and C. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 RSC .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Zang, C. Han, Z. Hu, X. Tang, J. Du, Y. Leng and K. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, Q. Han, Q. Ge, D. Xue, J. Ma, B. Zhao, Y. Chen, J. Liu, D. B. Mitzi and J. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 402–416 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ko, J. Lee and N. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8808–8815 RSC .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, W. Zhong, C. Qiu, B. Lyu, Z. Zhou, M. Zhang, J. Song, J. Xu, J. Wang, J. Ali, W. Feng, Z. Shi, X. Gu, L. Ying, Y. Zhang and F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Richter, D. M. Delongchamp and A. Amassian, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6332–6366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Diao, L. Shaw, Z. Bao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2145–2159 RSC .
C. Luo, A. K. K. Kyaw, L. A. Perez, S. Patel, M. Wang, B. Grimm, G. C. Bazan, E. J. Kramer and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2764–2771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Kim, H. Lee, B. Shin and S. Park, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7377–7385 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, J. Zhao, Y. Huang, W. Tang, S. Chen and X. Guo, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2017, 38, 338–340 CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Deng, B. Lu, X. Fang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 1096–1105 RSC .
S. Chu, W. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Xiao, Y. Liu, J. Chen, J. Huang and Z. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, J. Hu, C. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Zeng, X. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Mai and F. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55830–55837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, D. Liu, H. Zhao, B. Lin, X. Zhou, H. B. Naveed, C. Zhao, K. Zhou, Z. Tang, F. Chen and W. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100098 CrossRef CAS .
K. Haase, J. Zessin, K. Zoumboulis, M. Müller, M. Hambsch and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900067 CrossRef .
A. Tamayo, S. Riera Galindo, A. O. F. Jones, R. Resel and M. Mas Torrent, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Galindo, A. Tamayo, F. Leonardi and M. Mas-Torrent, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700526 CrossRef .
C. Teixeira Da Rocha, G. Qu, X. Yang, R. Shivhare, M. Hambsch, Y. Diao and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30079–30088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Molina Lopez, H. Yan, X. Gu, Y. Kim, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605503 CrossRef .
J. Kim, W. Koo, H. Kim, C. Park, T. Lee, C. A. Hutomo, S. Q. Choi, D. S. Kim, I. Kim and S. Park, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, B. Peng, S. Huang and P. K. L. Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, Y. Zhou, T. Kurosawa, L. Shaw, C. Wang, S. Park, Y. Guo, J. A. Reinspach, K. Gu, X. Gu, B. C. K. Tee, C. Pang, H. Yan, D. Zhao, M. F. Toney, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ge, Z. Liu, S. B. Lee, X. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Lu, K. Cho and L. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21510–21517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Park, O. E. Kwon, S. H. Yun, H. G. Jeon and Y. H. Huh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8614–8621 RSC .
B. Park, I. Bae, O. E. Kwon and H. G. Jeon, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 11613–11621 Search PubMed .
Y. Galagan, H. Fledderus, H. Gorter, H. H. T. Mannetje, S. Shanmugam, R. Mandamparambil, J. Bosman, J. J. M. Rubingh, J. Teunissen, A. Salem, I. G. de Vries, R. Andriessen and W. A. Groen, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 834–842 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Farahat, A. Laventure, M. A. Anderson, M. Mainville, F. Tintori, M. Leclerc, E. L. Ratcliff and G. C. Welch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 43684–43693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Subbiah, F. H. Isikgor, C. T. Howells, M. De Bastiani, J. Liu, E. Aydin, F. Furlan, T. G. Allen, F. Xu, S. Zhumagali, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent, I. Mcculloch and S. De Wolf, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3034–3040 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chaturvedi, N. Gasparini, D. Corzo, J. Bertrandie, N. Wehbe, J. Troughton and D. Baran, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009996 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Dayneko, M. Pahlevani and G. C. Welch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46017–46025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, H. B. Naveed, B. Lin, X. Zhou, J. Yuan, K. Zhou, H. Wu, R. Guo, M. A. Scheel, A. Chumakov, S. V. Roth, Z. Tang, P. Müller Buschbaum and W. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Na, Y. H. Seo, Y. C. Nah, S. S. Kim, H. Heo, J. E. Kim, N. Rolston, R. H. Dauskardt, M. Gao, Y. Lee and D. Vak, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805825 CrossRef .
R. Janneck, F. Vercesi, P. Heremans, J. Genoe and C. Rolin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8007–8013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Z. Wang, T. Marszalek, M. Borkowski, G. Fytas, P. W. M. Blom and W. Pisula, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1631–1640 RSC .
K. Zhang, T. Marszalek, P. Wucher, Z. Wang, L. Veith, H. Lu, H. J. Räder, P. M. Beaujuge, P. W. M. Blom and W. Pisula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805594 CrossRef .
A. Gans, E. Dressaire, B. Colnet, G. Saingier, M. Z. Bazant and A. Sauret, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 252–261 RSC .
S. Zhang, H. Liu, S. Yang, X. Shi, D. Zhang, C. Shan, L. Mi, C. Liu, C. Shen and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10922–10932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, W. Lai, Y. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Browne, E. Redondo and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2783–2810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. L. Gong and J. G. Gai, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500343 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yim, Z. Zheng, Z. Liang, R. H. Friend, W. T. S. Huck and J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1012–1019 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohapatra, N. Singh, A. Singh, C. Lee, Y. Lu, Y. Tao, C. Lee and C. W. Chu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1962–1971 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng, Y. Shen, M. Liu, W. Liu, S. Wu and C. Jin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5583–5590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Ling, Y. Chen, Q. Cui, J. Ni, X. Wang, M. C. Hartel, X. Meng, K. Lee, J. Lee, W. Sun, H. Lin, S. Emaminejad, S. Ahadian, N. Ashammakhi, M. R. Dokmeci and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1906016 CrossRef .
K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602736 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tran, H. M. Bergman, K. R. Parenti, A. M. van der Zande, C. R. Dean and L. M. Campos, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 3194–3200 RSC .
Y. Xie, H. Wang, D. Cheng, H. Ding, D. Kong, L. Li, L. Yin, G. Zhao, L. Liu, G. Zou, J. Wei, C. Li, C. Liu and X. Sheng, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 384004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, M. Ban, W. Cui, Q. Huang, C. Wu, J. Liu, H. Wu, T. Song and B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603325 CrossRef .
A. M. Gaikwad, Y. Khan, A. E. Ostfeld, S. Pandya, S. Abraham and A. C. Arias, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 18–29 CrossRef CAS .
F. Peng, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, R. He, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1367–1376 RSC .
P. Luo, K. An, L. Ying, G. Li, C. Zhu, B. Fan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5273–5279 RSC .
J. Xu, F. Peng, Z. Hu, L. Yu, F. Huang, W. Yang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8003–8010 RSC .
T. Yu, J. Xu, L. Liu, Z. Ren, W. Yang, S. Yan and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9509–9515 RSC .
D. Kim, Y. Fu, S. Kim, W. Lee, K. Lee, H. K. Chung, H. Lee, H. Yang and H. Chae, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1982–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mcmanus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S. Son, G. Iannaccone, K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori and C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 343–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, J. Yuan, S. Shen, M. Gao, A. S. R. Chesman, H. Yin, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang and D. Angmo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703704 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Yan, Z. Gao, Y. Du, H. Dong, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 870 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wantz, L. Derue, O. Dautel, A. Rivaton, P. Hudhomme and C. Dagron-Lartigau, Polym. Int., 2014, 63, 1346–1361 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Zuniga, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 658–681 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakayama and T. Matsuda, J. Polym. Sci., Polm. Chem., 1992, 30, 2451–2457 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rehab and N. Salahuddin, Polymer, 1999, 40, 2197–2207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Yong, J. Grüner, A. B. Holmes, S. C. Moratti, F. Cacialli and R. H. Friend, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 437–438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. D. Hreha, G. E. Jabbour, B. Kippelen, N. Peyghambarian and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1703–1708 RSC .
J. Ji, S. Narayan-Sarathy, R. H. Neilson, J. D. Oxley, D. A. Babb, N. G. Rondan and D. W. Smith, Organometallics, 1998, 17, 783–785 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Niu, M. S. Liu, J. Ka and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 93505 CrossRef .
B. Ma, F. Lauterwasser, L. Deng, C. S. Zonte, B. J. Kim, J. M. J. Fréchet, C. Borek and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4827–4832 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aizawa, Y. Pu, T. Chiba, S. Kawata, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7543–7546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, B. J. Kim, D. A. Poulsen, S. J. Pastine and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1024–1031 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Preston and A. J. Wilson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3289 RSC .
J. Y. Oh, S. Rondeau-Gagné, Y. Chiu, A. Chortos, F. Lissel, G. N. Wang, B. C. Schroeder, T. Kurosawa, J. Lopez, T. Katsumata, J. Xu, C. Zhu, X. Gu, W. Bae, Y. Kim, L. Jin, J. W. Chung, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2016, 539, 411–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, J. A. Finlay, L. Chen, D. E. Betts, M. A. Hillmyer, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow and J. M. Desimone, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6999–7007 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Williams, S. Retterer, R. Lopez, R. Ruiz, E. T. Samulski and J. M. Desimone, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1421–1428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Wang, L. Shaw, J. Xu, T. Kurosawa, B. C. Schroeder, J. Y. Oh, S. J. Benight and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7254–7262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, B. Fu, X. Zhang, R. Li, H. Dong and W. Hu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 636–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Deng, W. Wang, R. Jia, X. Xu, Y. Xiao, X. Zhang, J. Jie and X. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2796–2801 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, M. Yang, X. Dong, L. Hu, L. Hu, C. Xie, T. Liu, F. Qin, W. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. Wu, W. Cao, F. A. Larrain, C. Fuentes Hernandez, K. Meng, B. Kippelen, P. Müller Buschbaum and Y. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009660 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, S. Huang, Z. Zhou and P. K. L. Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700999 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, J. Gao, Y. Fu, H. Dong, H. Zhao, H. Li, Q. Tang, K. Chen and W. Hu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2652 RSC .
A. Kovács, A. Szabó and I. Hargittai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 887–894 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jiang, H. Dong, Q. Meng, H. Li, M. He, Z. Wei, Y. He and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2059–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fu, C. Wang, Y. Sun, J. Yao, Y. Wang, F. Ge, F. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Dang, X. Zhang, X. Shao, R. Li and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901437 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, S. Dong, M. Bai, N. Cheng, H. Wang, M. Li, H. Du, S. Hu, Y. Yang, T. Yang, F. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Meng, S. Hou and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2113–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mirza, J. Wang, D. Li, S. A. Arabi and C. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5679–5684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mitsui, T. Okamoto, M. Yamagishi, J. Tsurumi, K. Yoshimoto, K. Nakahara, J. Soeda, Y. Hirose, H. Sato, A. Yamano, T. Uemura and J. Takeya, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4546–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fu, C. Wang, Y. Sun, J. Yao, Y. Wang, F. Ge, F. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Dang, X. Zhang, X. Shao, R. Li and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901437 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Duan, X. Zhang, B. Geng, Y. Xiao, J. Jie, H. Dong, L. Li and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2104166 Search PubMed .
E. C. Nelson, N. L. Dias, K. P. Bassett, S. N. Dunham, V. Verma, M. Miyake, P. Wiltzius, J. A. Rogers, J. J. Coleman, X. Li and P. V. Braun, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, Y. Zhao, H. Nan, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, D. He, Z. Jiang, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Shi, Z. Ni, J. Wang, J. Xu and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3754–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. He, J. Liu, A. Cui, H. Dong, Y. Zhen, W. Chen and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9519–9523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Liu, J. Chen, Z. Cai, Z. Wang, W. Chen, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Chi and D. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801497 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, Y. Xiao, B. Lu, L. Zhang, Y. Xia, C. Zhu, X. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Zhang and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Talham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 5479–5502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, T. Zhang and X. Feng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6189–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Schwartz, J. Garnaes, R. Viswanathan and J. A. N. Zasadzinski, Science, 1992, 257, 508–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Takamoto, Science, 2001, 293, 1292–1295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Talham, T. Yamamoto and M. W. Meisel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 184006 CrossRef .
J. T. Culp, J. Park, D. Stratakis, M. W. Meisel and D. R. Talham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10083–10090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058–12063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, F. Yang, L. Cao, B. Li, K. Yuan, S. Lei and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902264 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhong, B. Cheng, C. Park, A. Ray, S. Brown, F. Mujid, J. Lee, H. Zhou, J. Suh, K. Lee, A. J. Mannix, K. Kang, S. J. Sibener, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Science, 2019, 366, 1379–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shu, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. Qin, D. Liu, X. Gao, B. Guan, H. Qi, M. Xiao, Z. Wei, H. Dong and W. Hu, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1572–1579 RSC .
W. Li, J. Liu, Y. Yu, G. Feng, Y. Song, Q. Liang, L. Liu, S. Lei and W. Hu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1268–1273 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Chen, T. Yan, M. Lyu, L. Han, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Guan, A. Thukral, S. Zhang, K. Sim, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Ershad, Z. Rao, F. Pan, P. Wang, J. Xiao and C. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb3656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sim, Z. Rao, H. Kim, A. Thukral, H. Shim and C. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, aav5749 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Song, B. Kang, H. H. Choi, D. H. Sin, H. Lee, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500250 CrossRef .
J. E. Sosa-Hernández, A. M. Villalba-Rodríguez, K. D. Romero-Castillo, M. A. Aguilar-Aguila-Isaías, I. E. García-Reyes, A. Hernández-Antonio, I. Ahmed, A. Sharma, R. Parra-Saldívar and H. M. N. Iqbal, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 536 CrossRef PubMed .
F. S. Stinner, Y. Lai, D. B. Straus, B. T. Diroll, D. K. Kim, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7155–7160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. M. Choi, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 201–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tadmor, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 332, 451–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Shihao Wang
	Shihao Wang is currently a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University. He received his bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from Hefei Normal University in 2019. His work focuses on preparation and integration of large-area free-standing organic optoelectronic thin films.

Ling Peng
	Ling Peng is currently a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University. She received her bachelor's degree in Electrical & Information Engineering from Tianjin Ren'ai College in 2019. Her research project involves industrial simulation of flexible electronic devices.

Huibin Sun
	Huibin Sun received his BE degree in polymer materials science and engineering from Anhui University of Science and Technology in 2008 and his PhD degree in information materials from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2013. He then conducted his postdoc research at University of California, Los Angeles during 2016-2018. He is an Associate Professor at Nanjing Tech University. His research interest is focused on organic semiconductor thin film preparation and device integration.

Wei Huang
	Wei Huang received his BSc, MSc, and PhD degrees in Chemistry from Peking University in 1983, 1988, and 1992, respectively. He was appointed as the Deputy President of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2006, the President of Nanjing Tech University in 2012, and the Provost of Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017. He is a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Foreign Academician and Honorary Doctor of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interests include organic optoelectronics, nanomaterials, polymer chemistry, plastic electronics, and bioelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of thin film fabrication and integration technologies from the perspective of the physical state of the film-forming substrates.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the spin-coating ultrathin film fabrication processes, and thickness based film as a function of rotation rate and concentration. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of typical MGC methods.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) knife coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Solution shearing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Bar coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Slot die coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Zone casting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the inkjet printing technology. (b) Optical images of the cartridge-type nozzles having a diameter of 20 μm (left) and 10 μm (right). (The ejected droplets having a volume of ≈10 pL (left) and ≈1 pL (right) in flight are also included.) The highest voltage of the input pulse train determines droplet size and velocity from a 20 μm diameter nozzle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of organic RGB microlaser pixel arrays by ultrasonic vibration-assisted inkjet printing. The procedure begins with capillary action filling a hollow glass needle with the organic ink solution. Following that, the solution is ejected from the glass needle with the help of ultrasonic vibration and dropped onto a hydrophobic substrate. Following the printing of the red-emissive material, the green- and blue-emissive materials were printed in the same manner with exact alignment. (d) Image of large-area optical structures. The scale bar is 5 mm. (e and f) OM images of the printed RGB pixel array showing similar size and a well-defined pattern. The scale bars are 50 and 20 μm, respectively. (g) Fluorescence microscopy image of the printed RGB pixel under UV light radiation. The scale bar is 20 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic depiction of the thin-film transfer-printing process to form a bilayer conjugated-polymer structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the procedure for PAA-assisted nanotransfer printing to assemble 3D nanostructures layer-by-layer. Step 1 (a–e) transferring the nanostructures to a flexible substrate. Step 2 (f–j) fabrication of the bottom grating structures and the assembly of the 3D nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration for pattern-transfer printing. (a) A PDMS stamp connected to a glass slide comes into direct contact with the thin film of interest, which was generated on a SiO2/Si substrate, and (b) soaked in 1 M KOH until the SiO2 dissolves. (c) The thin film is transferred to the PDMS after the Si detaches during SiO2 etching. (d) Direct contact of the film with the final substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the energy levels of the multilayer device structure and the chemical structure of the utilized polymers. The magnified region shows the asymmetric shift of the HOMOs as obtained from quantum-chemical calculations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The hybrid planar heterojunction solar cell's device structure, as well as the chemical structures of PN4N and PFN. (b) SEM image of the perovskite film on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate and (c) SEM image of the planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PL spectra of films. Film 1: ITO/ZnO/QDs. Film 2: ITO/ZnO/QDs/1,4-dioxane rising. Film 3: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (7 nm). Film 4: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (7 nm)/p-Xy rinsing. Film 5: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (15 nm). Film 6: ITO/ZnO/QDs/PVK (15 nm)/p-Xy rinsing. (b) Cross-sectional STEM image of a red QLED. (c) Schematic diagram of the QLED device structure. (d) EDS mapping image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) An azide-crosslinking reaction, which is initiated by ultraviolet light and is based on the reaction between azide groups and CH groups. (b) How the polymer-chain network in an elastomer (blue, with rectangular planes representing rigid segments and tortuous lines representing soft segments) becomes crosslinked by azides (red) into a three-dimensional network. (c) Chemical structure of an azide crosslinker. Azide crosslinking is a generally applicable strategy for photo-patterning intrinsically stretchable dielectrics. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Structure diagram of the bis-diazirine cross-linkers. (b) Fabrication of insoluble polymer films using the cross-linkers 1 or 2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram showing the material design for patterning of stretchable transistors on elastomeric dielectrics by inkjet printing. (b) Schematic illustration of molecular structure synthesis and photo-crosslinking of PFPE-DMA elastomer. (c) Representative 2D profilometer scanning images showing the roughness of PFPE-DMA and conventional stretchable dielectric thin films (5 μm thick) prior to and post the 1 min treatment of organic solvents, which are used for the solution-processed fabrication of stretchable OTFTs. TCE: 1,1,2-trichloroethane. (d) Statistical analysis of surface roughness changes of stretchable dielectric thin films after the solvent treatment (n = 5). Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2020 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Up-transfer film method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133 Copyright 2019 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. (b) Down-transfer film method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 Copyright 2021 WILEY-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of drop-casting for generating 2DOSC with the “phase separation” molecule structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) POM of the 3Se-2N 2DOSC on the SiO2/Si substrate. (c) AFM images of a monolayer and a bilayer 2DOSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustrating the space-confined process for the growth and transfer of 2DOSC. (a) A floating lens was generated when a droplet of solution was placed on the surface of water. (b) Increased spreading with surfactant in the water. (c) The growth of 2DOSC. (d) Transfer of the 2DOSC to the target substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a–e) Images demonstrating the enhanced spreading area of a toluene solution with surfactant over a water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate as the glycerol volume fraction was changed from 10% to 100%. (f–j) Corresponding OM pictures of 2DOSC formed on a water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate. (k) The spreading area of the solution and (l) the average layer number of the 2DOSC as a function of the volume fraction of glycerol in the water–glycerol mixed-liquid substrate. (m) Schematic diagrams showing the mechanism of the enhanced spreading of toluene solution on the glycerol surface with the addition of a surfactant in the solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of growing 2DOSC by “solution epitaxy”. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagram of the process of GQD-induced self-assembly of monolayer organic crystals. (b–e) Images of the spreading of organic solvent on the GQD solution surface at various pH values. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic diagram of preparing organic semiconductor thin films using the drag coating method. (b) A photograph of 9 cm × 7 cm Dif-TES-ADT thin film on water surface. (c) Flexible OFETs based on a Dif-TES-ADT thin film prepared by the drag coating method. (d) The mobility of the Dif-TES-ADT material in this experiment was compared with that of other methods. (e) Mobility distribution of 81 flexible OFETs devices on the same substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method of chemical processing at the air–water interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Assembly of a coordination monolayer based on 4-didodecylamino)pyridine/iron(III) complexes at the air–water Interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155 Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) The Langmuir–Blodgett method was utilized to fabricate a 2DSP single-layer sheet formed of triphenylene-fused nickel bis(dithiolene) complexes at an air/water interface. (b) OM image indicating large-area single-layer sheets. (c) AFM images and the corresponding analysis demonstrate a single-layer sheet thickness measuring about 0.7 nm. (d) OM image of bilayer sheets. (e) TEM image of a monolayer on copper meshes. Inset: SAED pattern of the monolayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of 2DPBTA+PDA films via the Schiff-base reaction of the monomers. (b) OM, (c) AFM image of about 1.8 nm thick 2DPBTA+PDA film on a silicon wafer, and (d) SEM image of about 1.8 nm thick 2DPBTA+PDA film on a bare copper grid. (e) HRTEM image demonstrating the amorphous nature of the 2DPBTA+PDA film. Inset: SAED pattern of the 2DPBTA+PDA film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157 Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of monolayer 2DP and corresponding chemical structures of the molecular precursors. (b) False color images of monolayer 2DP covering 2 inch silica wafers. (c) Schematic of a LAP reactor and in situ optical characterization apparatus. MSP stands for micro-syringe pump. (d) Schematic of the LAP synthesis that involves three phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158 Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of the synthesis strategy for crystalline conjugated polymer films via synergetic polymerization and self-assembly at the air/water interface. (b) Chemical structures of an exemplified DEBHB monomer studied in this research and its corresponding synthesized polymer poly-DHO-PBD. (c) OM image of the representative poly-DHO-PBD films transferred onto the Si/SiO2 substrate. Scale bar: 20 μm. (d) AFM image of a poly-DHO-PBD film, showing the smooth surface and layer-by-layer growth model. Scale bar: 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic process of GDY thin films at the air/water interface. (b) Image of GDY thin films floating on the top of an aqueous solution. (c) The monomer structure and GDY probable structure. (d) OM image of GDY thin film transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (e) AFM image of GDY film and thickness about 7 nm. (f) SEM image of GDY film on a holey carbon matrix. (g) HRTEM image of GDY film. Inset: Corresponding SAED pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160 Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a and b) Schematic diagram of dropping, spreading of the precursor solution and the P3HT:PC61BM film on the water surface. (c–e) Images of solution spreading at different times (dish diameter is 10 cm). (f and g) AFM image of P3HT:PC61BM film with height data. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymer film generation process on the liquid surface and P3HT chemical structure. (b) Images of the pristine P3HT film generated on the liquid surface. (c) OM image of the pristine P3HT film formed on a Si substrate. (d) XRD pattern of the assembled pristine P3HT film and spin-coated film. (e) The assembled freestanding pristine P3HT film-based transistor's transfer curve. (f) Mobility of the assembled pristine P3HT film and spin-coated film. (g) AFM measured thickness of the pristine P3HT film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162 Copyright 2020 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
