Organic dye-sensitized solar cells containing alkaline iodide-based gel polymer electrolytes: influence of cation size   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP07544H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP07544H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 1276-1285Organic dye-sensitized solar cells containing alkaline iodide-based gel polymer electrolytes: influence of cation size†

        
          
            Ottavia 
            Bettucci
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Valeria 
            Saavedra Becerril
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            T. M. W. J. 
            Bandara
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Maurizio 
            Furlani
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Maria 
            Abrahamsson
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Bengt-Erik 
            Mellander
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Lorenzo 
            Zani
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena, Via A. Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy
bInstitute of Chemistry of Organometallic Compounds (CNR-ICCOM), Via Madonna del Piano 10, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. E-mail: lorenzo.zani@iccom.cnr.it
cDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden
dDepartment of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden
eDepartment of Physical Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Mihintale, Sri Lanka
Received 
      8th November 2017
    , Accepted 8th December 2017First published on 11th December 2017AbstractThe electrolyte used in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) plays a key role in the process of current generation, and hence the analysis of charge-transfer mechanisms both in its bulk and at its interfaces with other materials is of fundamental importance. Because of solvent confinement, gel polymer electrolytes are more practical and convenient to use with respect to liquid electrolytes, but in-depth studies are still necessary to optimize their performances. In this work, gel polymer electrolytes of general formulation polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/ethylene carbonate (EC)/propylene carbonate (PC)/MI, where M+ is a cation in the alkaline series Li–Cs, were prepared and used in DSSCs. Their ionic conductivities were determined by impedance analysis, and their temperature dependence showed Arrhenius behavior within the experimental window. FT-IR studies of the electrolytes confirmed the prevalence of EC coordination around the cations. Photo-anodes were prepared by adsorbing organic sensitizer D35 on nanocrystalline TiO2 thin films, and employed to build DSSCs with the gel electrolytes. Nanosecond transient spectroscopy results indicated a slightly faster dye regeneration process in the presence of large cations (Cs+, Rb+). Moreover, a negative shift of TiO2 flat-band potential with the decreasing charge density of the cations (increasing size) was observed through Mott–Schottky analysis. In general, results indicate that cell efficiencies are mostly governed by photocurrent values, in turn depending on the conductivity increase with cation size. Accordingly, the best result was obtained with the Cs+-containing cell, although in this case a slight reduction of photovoltage compared to Rb+ was observed.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are considered a promising alternative to conventional silicon-based solar cells, and have attracted significant interest due to their low production cost and the facile cell fabrication methods.1–4 The main components of a DSSC are: a working electrode made of nanocrystalline TiO2 sensitized with a dye, a platinum counter electrode and an electrolyte containing a redox couple with an appropriate potential to regenerate the oxidized dye after the electron injection event.5 Electrolyte properties can therefore affect the energy conversion efficiency significantly. So far, the most commonly used electrolytes in DSSCs have been organic solutions of a redox couple, typically I−/I3−, since they were consistently reported to provide the highest power conversion efficiencies (although more recently Co2+/Co3+ and Cu+/Cu2+ couples attracted significant attention).5–7 Various iodide salts have been employed in DSSC electrolytes, and in particular lithium, sodium, potassium, tetraalkylammonium and imidazolium iodides have been investigated in detail.8,9 Anion transport is clearly very important for DSSC performances, but the cation also plays a fundamental role in electron transfer dynamics.10,11 Some previous studies have investigated the influence on cell performances of the cationic size of the salts present in the electrolytes. An example is the work of Shi et al., describing the variation of DSSC photovoltaic performances for cations with different charge densities, such as lithium (Li+), sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), and dimethylimidazolium (DMI+), in a liquid I−/I3− electrolyte-system used in combination with ruthenium dye complex C106.12 The authors observed an improvement in cell photo-voltage with decreasing charge density of the cations, and correlated such results with a negative shift of the TiO2 conduction band edge. Recently, Bandara et al.13 conducted a similar investigation on quasi-solid state electrolyte systems containing various alkaline cations, using Ru-based dye N71914 as the sensitizer, and found an analogous trend for open-circuit potentials, accompanied by an improvement of electrolyte conductivity when larger cations were used.
Liquid electrolytes usually provide good efficiencies but have also several disadvantages, such as risk of leakage, evaporation of solvents, instability and flammability at high temperatures, which can lead to performance losses and dye degradation.5 In order to overcome such drawbacks several strategies have been implemented, for example by replacing the liquid electrolyte with solid or quasi-solid membranes, also capable of maintaining a constant distance as well as a sustained anion transport between the electrodes even when used in combination with flexible substrates.15,16 One further approach has been to insert inorganic silica nanoparticles in low molecular weight polyethylene glycol dimethylether (PEGDME)-based electrolytes in a similar way to what is used in lithium batteries, in order to obtain a more mechanically stable solid–liquid electrolyte. From photocurrent measurements, the use of such nanoparticles also seems to improve the regeneration kinetics of the dye in the DSSC.17 Solid, quasi-solid state or gel electrolytes using a variety of matrices, host polymers, solvents and salts were also studied and some were successfully used in DSSCs, both for non-aqueous and aqueous systems,18–23 among which of particular interest are those employing hydrogels formed by cellulose derivatives as “green” jellifying agents.24 Gel–polymer electrolytes exhibit many advantages over their liquid counterparts, including non-flammability, negligible vapor pressure and simple cell construction, but power conversion efficiencies of DSSCs based on these electrolytes are usually lower due to charge transport limitations in the bulk of the electrolyte as well as at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. Considering the latter aspect, incomplete pore-filling of the mesoporous TiO2 films constituting the photoanode was identified as a major factor limiting the performance of both solid-state and quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells,25–27 since it increases the recombination rate between injected electrons and the oxidized dye. To solve this problem, one of the best alternatives is to employ thin semiconductor layers, which would result in both improved electron collection and dye regeneration. However, a thin TiO2 layer implies a low dye-loading per unit area of the photoelectrode and a reduced light-harvesting ability, especially with Ru-dyes. For this reason, the use of organic sensitizers, usually characterized by higher molar extinction coefficients (ε) than Ru-based dyes, in combination with quasi-solid-state electrolytes could represent a good compromise, since it would allow to use a thinner layer of nanocrystalline TiO2.
Based on the above considerations, in the present work we studied the behavior of DSSCs employing gel electrolytes in combination with D–π–A organic dye D35 (Fig. 1),28,29 in order to gain insight into the relevant charge-transfer processes and compare this class of sensitizers with Ru-based ones. Furthermore, we evaluated the effect of the alkaline cation radius, in the series Li–Cs, on the electrolyte properties and the cell parameters. It should be noted that we did not incorporate any cell performance enhancers, such as ionic liquids, 4-tert-butylpyridine and guanidinium thiocyanate, into the electrolyte.30,31 Therefore, cell efficiencies obtained in this study are not comparable with those of quasi-solid state DSSCs prepared with performance enhancers or mixed salt systems. However, it must be pointed out that the main intention of this work was not to obtain very efficient devices, but rather to investigate the cation size dependence of quasi-solid state solar cell performances using single salt-based polymer electrolytes in the presence of an organic dye.
 Fig. 1  Structure of organic D–π–A dye D35. 
Electrochemical measurements, besides providing the fundamental cell parameters (J/V characterization) were used to investigate the ionic conductivity of the electrolytes and the relative position of TiO2 conduction band (EIS and Mott–Schottky analysis). Structural information on ion coordination in the electrolytes was gathered from FT-IR measurements, and dye regeneration dynamics were investigated by means of transient absorption spectroscopy measurements.
Experimental details
Materials
Alkaline metal iodides MI (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs), polyacrylonitrile (PAN, Mw = 150000), iodine (I2), ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate (PC) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The purities of all the chemicals were higher than 98%. Prior to use, PAN was vacuum dried in an oven for 6 h at 50 °C and the metal salts for 6 h at 100 °C. The organic carbonates were used as received. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conducting glass with sheet resistance of 15 Ω cm−2, the sensitizing dye D35 ((E)-3-(5-(4-(bis(2′,4′-dibutoxy-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-yl)amino)phenyl)thiophen-2-yl)-2-cyanoacrylic acid) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) were purchased from Solaronix SA. TiO2 paste 18-NR-T was purchased from Dyesol.
Electrolyte preparation
Five different gel electrolytes were prepared with the stoichiometric ratio (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1, in which AN corresponds to the monomer of polyacrylonitrile. The ponderal composition of the electrolytes is given in Table 1. Initially, EC, PC and alkaline salts were mixed at room temperature in a closed glass bottle; when the salt was completely dissolved, PAN was added to the mixture, which was stirred 1 h at room temperature and at 100 °C for additional 10 min to obtain the consistency of a viscous gel. Finally, iodine was added to the mixture at 100 °C and the stirring was continued for a few more minutes until a homogeneous light-brown solution was obtained. After cooling to room temperature this procedure yielded a semi-transparent, light-brown, homogeneous gel-type polymer electrolyte.
Table 1 Composition of the electrolyte series containing different alkaline cations




Salt
Amount (mg)






LiI
25.2

To be combined with:
0.100 g of PAN
0.415 g of EC
0.385 g of PC
4.8 mg of I2



NaI
28.1


KI
31.1


RbI
39.8


CsI
48.7




Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out on gel electrolyte samples with a thickness of ∼1.8–2.7 mm and a diameter of ∼6 mm, sandwiched between two stainless steel (SS) electrodes, using a computer-controlled HP4274 impedance analyzer in the frequency range 10 Hz–0.1 MHz. Prior to measurements, the samples were heated to 60 °C and thereafter their temperature was decreased gradually from 60 to 10 °C, and experiments were performed at 10 °C intervals during the cooling runs. During impedance measurements the SS/electrolyte/SS cells were kept inside a Faraday cage and the temperature was controlled using a water bath connected to a Grant heating system (type KD, England) and a cooling system (Heterofridge, Denmark). A K-type thermocouple connected to a Hewlett Packard 3478A multimeter was used to measure the sample temperature.
FT-IR measurements
Attenuated total reflectance (ATR) as well as transmission infrared spectra were obtained at room temperature on a computer-interfaced Bruker Alpha FT-IR spectrophotometer equipped alternatively with a platinum-ATR with a Ge crystal or a transmission module (resolution: 2 cm−1, accuracy: 0.2 cm−1), a DTGS sensor and TlBr-TlI (KRs-5) windows. For less intense transitions, in the transmission mode rather thick samples were used to increase the intensity of the corresponding bands.
Solar cell preparation
To prepare the photoanode, two layers of nanocrystalline TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18-NR-T) were sequentially deposited by means of the doctor blading technique on the conducting glass substrate, previously treated with TiCl4 (0.04 M in H2O, 70 °C, 30 min). Before deposing the second layer, the first was dried at 100 °C for 30 min in an oven. The semiconductor films were then subjected to thermal treatment by sintering at 450 °C for 30 min. The sensitizing solution was prepared by dissolving organic dye D35 (concentration 0.3 mM) and the co-adsorbent CDCA (concentration 3.0 mM) in ethanol. Dye adsorption was carried out by soaking the TiO2-coated glass plates in the ethanolic solution of the dye and CDCA for 16 h at room temperature, followed by rinsing with ethanol. Finally, the sensitized TiO2 electrodes were rinsed with acetone to remove any unbound particle prior to assembling of the solar cells.
The previously prepared gel electrolyte was pressed between two glass sheets to obtain electrolyte films with about 0.2 mm thickness. The electrolyte films were casted onto the dye-sensitized TiO2 electrode and then a platinum (Pt)-coated conducting glass plate (counter electrode) was pressed on the top of the electrolyte layer to form a DSSC with the configuration glass/FTO/TiO2/dye/electrolyte/Pt/FTO/glass.
Solar cell characterization
Fabricated solar cells were illuminated using a LOT-Oriel, class AAB, 1.5 G solar simulator under a 1000 W m−2 (one sun) irradiation. The current density versus cell potential (J–V) characteristics were measured using a computer controlled eDAQ Potentiostat and e-Chem software. The area of the cell exposed to light was 11 mm2 (defined by a black shading mask) and the scan rate was 100 mV s−1. During the experiment the position of the circular mask was maintained constant in the beam in order to increase the reproducibility of the measurements.
Nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy
Samples for the nanosecond transient absorption studies were prepared by doctor-blading a commercial TiO2 nanoparticle paste (Dyesol 18NR-T) onto FTO-coated glass substrates. The thickness of the TiO2 films was between 5–6 μm. The substrates were sensitized by immersion in a solution of dye D35 (0.3 mM in ethanol) for 45 min each. Surface dye coverage was ∼6 × 10−8 mol cm−2, which was determined from optical absorption data of dye films according to a published procedure (see ESI† for details).32 After sensitization, the polymer electrolyte was added by melting a small amount of it on a microscope slide cover and then pressing it against the photoanodes.
Single wavelength transient spectroscopic measurements were performed using a Continuum Surelight II, Nd:YAG laser at 10 Hz repetition rate with a Continuum Surelight optical parameter oscillator (excitation wavelength: 550 nm). The power of the pulse (8 ns fwhm) was adjusted to ca. 4 mW cm−2. Probe light was generated with a Quartz Tungsten Halogen lamp (Ushio) powered by a radiometric power supply (Newport). The wavelength of the probe was selected by two Cornerstone 130 monochromators (Oriel Instruments) to be 750 nm, where the oxidized dye D35 has a strong positive absorption signal. Data were collected using a photodetector amplified by a Costronics Optical Transient Amplifier connected to a Tektronix TDS 2022 oscilloscope.
Flat-band potential measurements
Impedance measurements were performed by sandwiching the gel electrolyte film between the TiO2-coated electrode without the dye absorbed, and a platinum counter electrode (a conductive glass plate coated with Pt), using a potentiostat (Autolab model PGSTAT302N) at a frequency of 1500 Hz in order to obtain the capacitance of the semiconductor/electrolyte junction. Measurements were conducted by varying the applied bias potential from −1.5 to 0 V at 0.05 V intervals in order to estimate flat band potentials using the Mott–Schottky plot.
Results
Electrolyte characterization by means of electrochemical measurements
The ionic conductivities of the different electrolytes were calculated from the EIS spectra of the corresponding SS/electrolyte/SS cells based on the intercept with the real axis of the Nyquist plots. Only the linear parts and not the semicircular parts of the curves were visible within the measured frequency range (see Fig. S1, ESI†).33 The ionic conductivity plots for all the samples are shown in Fig. 2a. The conductivity in the electrolyte with the largest cation (Cs+) is the highest in the entire temperature interval (from 10 °C to 60 °C) and the values range is from 2.80 mS cm−1 (10 °C) to 8.85 mS cm−1 (60 °C). For medium-sized cations (Rb+, K+) the conductivity is somewhat lower and more or less equal for both species, while the lowest values were recorded for electrolytes containing Na+ and especially Li+, for which values between 1.62 mS cm−1 (10 °C) and 5.09 mS cm−1 (60 °C) were measured.
 Fig. 2  (a) Temperature-dependent ionic conductivity of the (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1 electrolyte samples, where MI represents the alkaline iodide salt. (b) Arrhenius plot showing the temperature dependence of the conductivity for the five different electrolyte compositions. LiI, red squares; NaI, blue circles; KI, magenta triangles; RbI, green rhombs; CsI, orange hexagons. 
Ionic conductivity is due to charge transport by both the cations and the iodide anions. Several factors can affect the conductivity, such as salt dissociation, polymer crosslinking, mobility of ions, ion coordination and shielding by polymer chains, and they are all strictly connected to the cation size and charge density.34,35 The trend of enhanced conductivity with the increasing cation size observed here is in general agreement with a previous study by Bandara et al., although in that work a slightly higher concentration of salts was used.13 In general, the lower amount of salt employed here resulted in an increase of the fraction of bound cations, but nevertheless the reduced number of charge carriers decreased the overall conductivity.
The higher conductivity of K+, Rb+ and Cs+-based electrolytes can be understood in terms of a lowering of gel viscosity. The increasing cation size enhances the spacing between polymer chains, increasing polymer flexibility and the size of voids present in the matrix (swelling effect). This in turn reduces the viscosity and helps to improve segmental motion and ionic transport.13 In addition to that, all alkaline cations are hard Lewis acids, whose strength increases with their charge density (and therefore decreases with their ionic radius, considering that they are all monovalent ions). Consequently, the interaction between the cations and the electronegative sites of the polymer becomes weaker when cation size increases. Li+, having the highest charge density, can strongly coordinate not only the alkyl carbonates but also the –CN groups of PAN, and thus effectively cross-link the polymer chains, stiffening them and restricting in this way their flexibility. In summary, an increase of cation size results in: (a) a decrease of electrolyte viscosity; (b) an increase of polymer flexibility; (c) an increase of the size of voids around the chains; (d) a decrease of binding energy of cations and anions, and all these factors ultimately contribute to increase the electrolyte conductivity.
In Fig. 2b the variation of ionic conductivity (σ) with temperature is shown, which appears to follow Arrhenius eqn (1) within the measured temperature window: (1)where Ea is the activation energy, B a pre-exponential factor, k the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute temperature. Plots of ln(σT) vs. 1/T were therefore fitted to the Arrhenius equation, rather than fitting to the VTF equation, in order to get the advantage of calculating the corresponding activation energies,36 and presented an almost linear behavior, possibly due to small variations of dielectric constant within the measurement window.37,38 Activation energies were found to be in the 0.20–0.21 eV range and therefore almost independent on the cation size. The cation-independent Ea values observed in this work can be understood by considering the previous studies conducted by Petrowsky and Frech37,38 on temperature-dependent ion transport in organic liquid electrolytes and amorphous polymer electrolytes, after compensating for the dielectric constant variation. According to the authors, ion transport in the studied electrolytes is governed by a single activation process depending on the solvent family, and in particular on the nature of the solvent functional groups. In the case of organic liquid electrolytes and amorphous polymer electrolytes, the immediate environment surrounding the mobile ionic species undergoes dipole rearrangement in response to the dynamic change in position of the mobile ion, and therefore activation energy (Ea) will depend on the energy required for the rearrangement of the local structure. We can use a similar model to explain the observed conductivity vs. temperature variation, since the electrolytes can be viewed as an ionic salt dissolved in the organic polar co-solvent EC/PC, “entrapped” in a PAN matrix where EC and PC are the responsible of the high dielectric constant of the electrolyte. The energy of activation, therefore, depends to a large extent on the nature of the co-solvent and is possibly unaffected by the nature of the cation size.
Electrolyte characterization by means of FT-IR measurements
To further investigate the nature of the interaction of the different cations with the gel polymer matrix, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) measurements were carried out. EC is the most polar of the two solvents used in this study (its dielectric constant being 93 vs. 66 for PC, at 50 °C) and also exhibits the most complex vibrational spectrum, likely due to its C2v symmetry and a possible ordered arrangement in the liquid phase. A complete and revised description and proposed assignment of its IR spectrum was given by Fortunato et al.,39 who summarized their results and the far-infrared and Raman data obtained by Durig and co-workers.40

Fig. 3 shows the ATR-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20, (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1, in the region between 1700 and 1900 cm−1, where the band corresponding to the stretching of the CO group of the organic carbonates can be observed. The latter is the most prominent feature of the spectrum of the samples, and is in general very sensitive to the interaction with other molecules.
 Fig. 3  ATR-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20, (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1, in the region of the CO stretching band. Bands are normalized to the maximum value. 
The EC carbonyl group stretching band, peaking at 1798 cm−1, is complicated by the presence of the Fermi resonance (FR) peak at 1776 cm−1. The interaction of EC with propylene carbonate, which has a characteristic peak at 1792 cm−1, modifies the pattern of the carbonyl peak of both carbonates, in agreement with the Raman study of Ostrovskii et al.,41 due to the high polarity of both solvents and to the morphological compatibility of their molecules.42 The Fermi resonance of EC at 1776 cm−1 is also slightly shifted by the presence of PC. The further addition of polyacrylonitrile and of the alkaline salts did not cause a significant change in this region, as can be seen by the fact that all other spectra are almost perfectly superimposable.
The transmission FT-IR spectra of EC, (EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 in the CN stretching region are reported in Fig. 4a. In the gel electrolyte, the characteristic PAN peak at 2243 cm−1 appears to be 6 cm−1 blue-shifted with respect to what was reported by Tadokoro and others for pure PAN.43 The influence of the solvent on the position of this band was discussed by Wu et al.,44 who attributed the shift to the interplay of the CN functional group with the most polar groups of the solvents. According to their study, the strong interaction of the CN group with EC results in a diminished polarity of the polymer functional group, hindering its involvement in further interactions with alkaline ions. The absorption band at 2320 cm−1 is attributed to the modified EC band structure arising from the interaction of EC and PC. Indeed, in Fig. 4a it can be seen that the pristine EC band is modified after the introduction of PC, but after PAN introduction no further modification takes place. Such a band was differently interpreted as an indication of the EC/PC carbonyl interaction with PAN CN by different authors,44,45 but according to our findings it should not be considered as proof of the CN group interaction with EC. The interaction of EC with PC is testified also by the blue shifts in the ring stretching modes originally found at 1063 and 1140–1145 cm−1, which are shifted at 1072 and 1161 cm−1, respectively (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  (a) Normalized transmission FT-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 in the 2200–2450 cm−1 region; (b) normalized ATR-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 in the 1000–1250 cm−1 region; (c) normalized transmission FT-IR spectra of EC ring breathing modes around 893 cm−1 for the pristine PAN/EC/PC gel electrolyte and those containing the different salts; (d) correlation between the cations charge density (x-axis) and the split band/pristine band integral ratio (left y-axis) or band separation (right y-axis) for EC ring breathing modes, highlighting the influence of the different cations. 
The cation influence, which was not easily detectable in the CO stretching region (Fig. 3), is expected to be seen in the EC ring breathing modes at 715 cm−1 and especially at 893 cm−1. In the transmission spectra, which allow a better observation of the low intensity peaks, we found a modification of the 893 cm−1 band with a distinct but not very intense shoulder (Fig. 4c). It should be noted that a 1 M LiPF6 solution in EC/PC was reported to show a band splitting of similar width as our Li-containing sample, but with a more intense split band, up to the same intensity of the pristine band.45 According to the authors of that study, the splitting is sensitive to the cation nature, and for mono- and bivalent metallic cations a positive correlation with the ionic potentials was observed. Additionally, the intensity of this feature seems sensitive to the abundance of the free cation, in turn dependent on the salt dissociation degree and its concentration. Considering that in the present study a relatively low concentration of alkaline salts was used (around 0.2 M), and that iodide dissociation is surely lower than that of salts of non-coordinating anions (such as PF6−), we did not expect to observe intense split bands, as confirmed by Fig. 4c, where only a shoulder is visible for the Li- and Na-containing samples. With the increasing size of the cation, the splitting is progressively reduced, especially for the three largest cations K+, Rb+ and Cs+. Deconvolution of the pristine and split bands allows to evaluate both their separation and the integral ratio between them, revealing a progressive increase in the relative intensity of the latter going from Li+ to Cs+ (see Fig. S2, ESI,† for details). As shown in Fig. 4d, plotting these values against the charge density of the different ions reveals a clear correlation, which is compatible with a model where the larger cations are less bound to the solvent and therefore more mobile.
Solar cell characterization
The photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSCs assembled using organic dye D35 in combination with the electrolytes containing the five different alkaline iodides are shown in Fig. 5. These curves were used to calculate average solar cell parameters Jsc, Voc, FF and power-conversion efficiency (η), which are reported in Table 2 (average of three independent experiments conducted under similar conditions). The best efficiency (1.86%) was recorded with the CsI-based electrolyte, mostly due to an improved photocurrent compared to all other metal salts. On the other hand, the parameters recorded in the case of the LiI-containing cell were somewhat lower than those obtained in all other cases.
 Fig. 5  Photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) characteristics of the five solar cells of configuration glass/FTO/TiO2/dye D35/gel-electrolyte/Pt/FTO/glass fabricated with the different gel electrolytes. 
Table 2 Average values of photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs and flat band potentials (EFB) of TiO2 films obtained using the five quasi-solid-state electrolytes




Salt

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF

η/%

E
FB

/V





a Values relative to Pt-counter electrode.





LiI
0.54
3.78
0.57
1.15
−0.58


NaI
0.57
4.61
0.61
1.57
−0.62


KI
0.60
4.77
0.62
1.71
−0.64


RbI
0.61
4.64
0.62
1.72
−0.64


CsI
0.59
5.36
0.61
1.86
−0.67




The efficiency (η) and the short circuit current density (Jsc) variation with the different cations are reported in Fig. 6a. The efficiency variation follows essentially the same trend of Jsc, which therefore dominates cell performances: accordingly, the smallest cation (Li+) provides the lowest Jsc value, while the highest photocurrent is given by Cs+. Most probably, the observed trend in this case is correlated to the higher ionic conductivity displayed by the Cs+ electrolyte (see above), which maximizes charge transfer between the two electrodes of the cell, thus improving Jsc. On the other hand, Voc increases (from 0.54 to 0.61 V) with the increasing size of the cation except for Cs+, for which a slight decrease to 0.59 V was observed (Fig. 6b). In order to understand the observed variations of solar cell parameters with the size of the cation in the electrolyte, regeneration dynamics and flat-band potentials of the electrodes in contact with the electrolytes were then investigated (see following sections). A possible rationale for the measured cell parameters is reported in the Discussion section (see below).
 Fig. 6  (a) Variation of the power conversion efficiency and the short-circuit photocurrent density as a function of the salt in the electrolyte; (b) variation of the short-circuit photocurrent density and the open-circuit photovoltage as a function of the salt in the electrolyte. 
Measurement of regeneration dynamics
The kinetics of charge-transfer events have a strong influence on the photovoltaic parameters of dye-sensitized solar cells.46 Therefore, nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy measurements were carried out to assess whether the cations have any significant effect on the dye regeneration process (regeneration of D35 to its ground state by the redox mediator). To this end, D35-sensitized TiO2 films in contact with the gel electrolytes were subjected to pulsed laser excitation (550 nm), and the intensity of the resulting transient absorption was probed at 750 nm, where oxidized D35 has a strong positive absorption signal. The corresponding kinetic traces are shown in Fig. 7a. It should be pointed out that data interpretation is complicated by the fact that variations in regeneration kinetics were not very large. Moreover, charge recombination from TiO2 CB to the oxidized dye was also likely to occur during the experiment, although, for a working DSSC, such process should be much slower than dye regeneration.2,46 The traces in Fig. 7a show all a similar qualitative behavior, displaying a short-lived component with large amplitude followed by a minor long-lived component, which did not decay to zero at t = 4 ms. Attempts to fit the data with either a bi-exponential model or a stretched exponential model were unsuccessful: however, data clearly show that most of the regeneration process is complete within less than 0.2 ms. In particular, if we consider the traces in the first 100 μs (inset in Fig. 7a), it can be seen that regeneration appears faster for the cations with lower charge density (Rb+, Cs+, green and orange traces) than for the other alkaline ions, which could help explaining the better cell characteristics recorded with the corresponding electrolytes (see Discussion below). For longer times, the influence of the above-mentioned recombination phenomena could become more significant, complicating data interpretation. Nevertheless, it can be noticed that the amplitude of the Cs+-containing sample shows a slightly faster decay compared to the Rb+-containing one in the 0.5–4 ms interval, suggesting that charge recombination could be slightly enhanced in the former case. To test this observation, we repeated the transient absorption spectroscopy experiment, extending the time range to 9 ms and removing I2 from the electrolyte composition to single out the electron-dye recombination process (Fig. 7b). Indeed, it can be seen that traces for Cs+-containing samples decay slightly faster towards the end of the experiment (6–9 ms interval), in agreement with our hypothesis.
 Fig. 7  (a) Regeneration dynamics for the different electrolytes used in this study. (b) Comparison between kinetic traces recorded with Rb+ and Cs+ for longer times (two samples each). Note that in this case a logarithmic scale was used on the y-axis. 
Flatband potential measurement
As mentioned above, the open circuit voltage (Voc) of DSSCs increased with the increasing cation size, except for the Cs+-containing electrolyte. In a recent work by Wang and Peter47 (in which liquid electrolytes containing Li+, Na+, Mg2+ and TBA+ were investigated), the direct correlation between Voc and cation size was explained by a positive shift of the conduction band edge (Ecb) of TiO2, which resulted from cation adsorption or intercalation on the semiconductor surface and was directly proportional to the cation charge density. To determine if such a cation-dependent shift of the TiO2 conduction band edge was present also in this case, we carried out flatband potential (EFB) measurements on dummy cells containing non-sensitized TiO2 photoanodes and all the different electrolytes, since these values can give a direct information on the position of the conduction band edge at the semiconductor surface.48 It should be noted that this was the first time that such a measurement was carried out on quasi-solid state electrolytes.
The EFB of semiconductor films can be related to the space-charge capacitance (C) and the applied potential difference (E) within the cell using the Mott–Schottky equation: (2)where A is the area of the semiconductor film, Nd is the charge carrier density, e is the elemental charge, ε0 and ε are the vacuum permittivity and the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, T is the temperature, and k is the Boltzmann constant. Thus, by plotting the reciprocal of C2vs. E (Mott–Schottky plot), the value of EFB can be estimated by the intercept on the x-axis of the linear part of the plot.48,49 The Mott–Schottky curves for the entire series of gel polymer electrolytes are shown in Fig. 8 and the corresponding flat band potentials are reported in Table 2. The potential values are given with respect to Pt-counter electrode in order to understand the band edge shift.
 Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plots for dummy cells built with the different electrolyte compositions studied in this work. LiI, red squares; NaI, blue circles; KI, magenta triangles; RbI, green rhombs; CsI, orange hexagons. Dashed lines represent linear fitting of the experimental data. 
In general, a negative shift of the TiO2 conduction band edge with the decreasing charge density of the cations (increasing size) was observed, although similar values were obtained for K+ and Rb+. Despite that, the increase of DSSC photo-voltage in the Li+–Rb+ sequence seems to correlate well with the negative shift of EFB caused by the adsorption of the cations on TiO2, considering that the Rb-containing cell had only a slightly higher Voc value compared to its K-containing analog. The result obtained with Cs+, on the other hand, seems to require a more elaborated explanation, since in that case the increase of Jsc is accompanied by a Voc drop. Obviously, there are many different phenomena that govern photovoltage and photocurrent values in DSSCs, and therefore cell behavior cannot be explained only using shift of flat band potentials. For example, variations of electrolyte conductivity, as well as different charge regeneration and recombination kinetics also determine cell performances.50 Results obtained with CsI-based cells were thus tentatively explained based on the combined conductivity, transient absorption spectroscopy and Mott–Schottky results (see Discussion below).
Discussion
As mentioned above, in this study the small photovoltage drop displayed by CsI-containing DSSCs was compensated by a larger photocurrent increase. Conversely, in the cited work of Bandara et al.13 using electrolytes with similar composition as in the present work, cells containing Cs+ gave the highest Voc value, but a Jsc value smaller than that given by Rb+-containing devices. We note that the trend observed here is not unprecedented, since it was reported by Tennakone et al. both for quasi-solid state DSSCs based on porous SnO2/ZnO composite and TiO2 films using a different electrolyte composition.51
Based on the cell composition and on the results of the experiments described above, the behavior of CsI-containing cells prepared in this work could be tentatively explained considering three main factors:
(1) The dye used in the previous work by Bandara et al.13 was a Ru-containing complex (N719) with a non-planar structure. Conversely, in the present work an organic D–π–A sensitizer (D35) was employed, which is planar and features alkoxy chains on the donor group (Fig. 1), able to interact with alkaline cations thanks to their Lewis-basic oxygen atoms. In a DSSC, the Voc value is determined not only by the Ecb position, but also by other parameters, such as the kinetics of charge transfer and charge transport processes, which in turn could be influenced by the nature of dye absorption on TiO2. Computational analysis has revealed that modification of the dye anchoring geometry can significantly influence cell performances, as the bonding type and the extent of electronic coupling between the dye excited state and the semiconductor empty states induce different electron injection and recombination dynamics.52 We can therefore suggest that replacement of the Ru-based dye with organic sensitizer D35 could alter the interfacial properties of the photoanode, thus leading to a different result compared to the cited work by Bandara and co-workers.13
(2) The larger photocurrent given by the CsI-containing sample compared to the other cells could be due either to the higher conductivity of the electrolyte or to more convenient charge-transfer processes at the semiconductor/dye/electrolyte interface (enhanced dye regeneration). Indeed, as shown above, the CsI-containing electrolyte was characterized by the highest conductivity among the tested compositions, improving the efficiency of charge transport between electrodes. Furthermore, nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy measurements indicate that the Cs+-based electrolyte yields the fastest dye-regeneration kinetics, together with the Rb+-containing one.
On the other hand, transient absorption spectroscopy data seem to suggest that a slightly faster charge recombination process could be active in the case of the Cs+-containing electrolyte. DSSC potential is given by the difference between the Fermi level of the semiconductor and the redox potential of the electrolyte under operating conditions.53 The Fermi level, in turn, is dependent on the density of conduction band electrons according to eqn (3), (3)where Ecb is the energy at the conduction band edge, kT is the thermal energy, nc is the density of conduction band electrons, and Nc is the effective density of conduction band states.2 The slightly faster recombination suggested for Cs+ could therefore cause a drop of the number of photo-generated electrons in the conduction band at the equilibrium, shifting the Fermi level to less negative potentials and thus causing the observed small decrease of Voc.
(3) As suggested by the FT-IR studies, the larger cation size increases the concentration of the “free” form and diminishes the force of interaction with the solvent, especially EC, reducing the solvation sphere and therefore the hindrance to penetrate smaller photoanode pores, enhancing the surface of contact with the electrolyte. Although this process could be potentially detrimental in terms of enhanced charge recombination, nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy data suggest that its main effect is to speed up dye regeneration, contributing to improve cell performances.
Conclusions
The PAN/EC/PC-based gel electrolyte system containing the alkaline series Li–Cs has been studied with electrochemical and spectroscopic methods to determine the influence of cation size on the mechanism of photoelectric generation of a dye-sensitized solar cell in combination with D–π–A organic dye D35.
The ionic conductivity of the quasi-solid-state electrolytes investigated in this study increased with decreasing charge density of the corresponding alkaline cations. Infrared spectroscopy results showed the prevalence of EC coordination around the alkaline cations. The most important photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs built with these electrolytes (Jsc, Voc and power conversion efficiency) generally followed the same trend of ionic conductivity. The only exception was a slightly lower Voc recorded for the CsI-containing electrolyte. Nanosecond transient spectroscopy results showed evidence of a faster dye-regeneration process in the presence of the two largest cations Rb+ and Cs+. Mott–Schottky results indicated that the flat-band potential of the semiconductor films was influenced by the particular cation present in the electrolyte, and a negative shift was consistently found going from Li+ to Cs+, although the difference between Rb+ and Cs+ was rather small. Therefore, the small Voc drop was tentatively explained considering on one hand the alteration of photoanode interfacial properties induced by the use of organic sensitizer D35 instead of typical Ru-based complexes, and on the other by the slightly faster electron recombination suggested by transient absorption spectroscopy experiments for the Cs+-containing electrolyte.
The use of larger alkaline cations is therefore preferable in order to obtain a higher ionic conductivity and this is shown to be a prevalent requirement in the studied system. These findings will help the future selection of iodide salts for quasi-solid state electrolytes for DSSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Daniele Franchi for his assistance in the preparation of samples for DSSC efficiency and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy measurements. M. A. as well as T. M. W. J. B., M. F. and B. E. M. are indebted to the Swedish Research Council for financial support.
References
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Freitag, Q. Daniel, M. Pazoki, K. Sveinbjörnsson, J. Zhang, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2634 CAS .
F. Bella, S. Galliano, C. Gerbaldi and G. Viscardi, Energies, 2016, 9, 384 CrossRef .
M. Wang, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9394 CAS .
T. M. W. J. Bandara, W. J. M. J. S. R. Jayasundara, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, M. Furlani, I. Albinsson and B.-E. Mellander, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 609 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Watson and G. J. Meyer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1391 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, C. A. Thotawatthage, G. K. R. Senadeera, T. M. W. J. Bandara, W. J. M. J. S. R. Jayasundara and B.-E. Mellander, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 246, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and X. Dong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14590 RSC .
T. M. W. J. Bandara, H. D. N. S. Fernando, M. Furlani, I. Albinsson, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, J. L. Ratnasekera and B.-E. Mellander, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10873 RSC .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, L. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Miller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shanti, F. Bella, Y. S. Salim, S. Y. Chee, S. Ramesh and K. Ramesh, Mater. Des., 2016, 108, 560 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mohanty and P. Bhargava, Ionics, 2016, 22, 1217 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bella, J. Popovic, A. Lamberti, E. Tresso, C. Gerbaldi and J. Maier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37797 CAS .
W.-J. Wu, W.-H. Zhan, J.-L. Hua and H. Tian, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2008, 34, 241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, M. Huang, J. Wu, Z. Lan and S. Hao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 110, 38 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, S. Kambe, S. Nakade, T. Kitamura, K. Hanabusa and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4374 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. W. J. Bandara, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake and B.-E. Mellander, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2014 CrossRef .
O. A. Ileperuma, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, S. Somasunderam and L. R. A. K. Bandara, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 117 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 686 CrossRef .
F. Bella, S. Galliano, M. Falco, G. Viscardi, C. Barolo, M. Grätzel and C. Gerbaldi, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1043 RSC .
C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, J. H. Kim, M.-S. Kang, M. J. Lee, J. Won, J. C. Lee and Y. S. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1753 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Kang, J. H. Kim, J. Won and Y. S. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5222 CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, X. Jiang, E. Gabrielsson, M. Linder, T. Marinado, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7232 RSC .
M. Freitag, J. Teuscher, Y. Saygili, X. Zhang, F. Giordano, P. Liska, J. Hua, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Lu, J. Yin, G. Lü, Y. Cui, S. Wang, S. Deng, D. Shan, H. Tao and Y. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 185, 69 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. W. J. Bandara, H. D. N. S. Fernando, M. Furlani, I. Albinsson, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake and B.-E. Mellander, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 103683 RSC .
M. Pazoki, P. W. Lohse, N. Taghavinia, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 15, 8503 RSC .
A. Islam, Z. Imran, T. Yasin, N. Gull, S. M. Khan, M. Shafiq, A. Sabir, M. A. Munawar, M. H. Raza and T. Jamil, Mater. Res., 2015, 18, 1256 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1167 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Su’ait, M. Y. A. Rahman and A. Ahmad, Sol. Energy, 2015, 115, 452 CrossRef .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Petrowsky and R. Frech, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5596 Search PubMed .
M. Petrowsky and R. Frech, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1285 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fortunato, P. Miron and G. Fini, Spectrochim. Acta, 1971, 27, 1917 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Durig, G. L. Coulter and D. W. Wertz, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1968, 27, 285 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ostrovskii, M. Edvardsson and P. Jacobsson, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 2003, 34, 40 CAS .
F. Kollipost, S. Hesse, J. J. Lee and M. A. Suhm, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14176 RSC .
H. Tadokoro, S. Murahashi, R. Yamadera and T.-I. Kamei, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1963, 1, 3029 CAS .
Q.-Y. Wu, X.-N. Chen, L.-S. Wan and Z.-K. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 8321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ostrovskii, A. Brodin, L. M. Torell, G. B. Appetecchi and B. Scrosati, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 7618 CrossRef CAS .
A. Listorti, B. O’Regan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10468 CAS .
R. Beranek, Adv. Phys. Chem., 2011, 786759 Search PubMed .
K. Gelderman, L. Lee and S. W. Donne, J. Chem. Ed., 2007, 84, 685 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koide, A. Islam, Y. Chiba and L. Han, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 182, 296 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tennakone, G. K. R. Senadeera, V. P. S. Perera, I. R. M. Kottegoda and L. A. A. De Silva, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2474 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore, S. Fantacci and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3685 CAS .
J. Van de Lagemaat, N.-G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2044 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07544hThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure of organic D–π–A dye D35.	 

LiI	25.2	
To be combined with:
0.100 g of PAN
0.415 g of EC
0.385 g of PC
4.8 mg of I2

NaI	28.1
KI	31.1
RbI	39.8
CsI	48.7

 	Fig. 2  (a) Temperature-dependent ionic conductivity of the (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1 electrolyte samples, where MI represents the alkaline iodide salt. (b) Arrhenius plot showing the temperature dependence of the conductivity for the five different electrolyte compositions. LiI, red squares; NaI, blue circles; KI, magenta triangles; RbI, green rhombs; CsI, orange hexagons.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  ATR-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20, (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20(MI)1(I2)0.1, in the region of the CO stretching band. Bands are normalized to the maximum value.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Normalized transmission FT-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 in the 2200–2450 cm−1 region; (b) normalized ATR-IR spectra of EC, PC, (EC)25(PC)20 and (AN)10(EC)25(PC)20 in the 1000–1250 cm−1 region; (c) normalized transmission FT-IR spectra of EC ring breathing modes around 893 cm−1 for the pristine PAN/EC/PC gel electrolyte and those containing the different salts; (d) correlation between the cations charge density (x-axis) and the split band/pristine band integral ratio (left y-axis) or band separation (right y-axis) for EC ring breathing modes, highlighting the influence of the different cations.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) characteristics of the five solar cells of configuration glass/FTO/TiO2/dye D35/gel-electrolyte/Pt/FTO/glass fabricated with the different gel electrolytes.	 


LiI	0.54	3.78	0.57	1.15	−0.58
NaI	0.57	4.61	0.61	1.57	−0.62
KI	0.60	4.77	0.62	1.71	−0.64
RbI	0.61	4.64	0.62	1.72	−0.64
CsI	0.59	5.36	0.61	1.86	−0.67

 	Fig. 6  (a) Variation of the power conversion efficiency and the short-circuit photocurrent density as a function of the salt in the electrolyte; (b) variation of the short-circuit photocurrent density and the open-circuit photovoltage as a function of the salt in the electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Regeneration dynamics for the different electrolytes used in this study. (b) Comparison between kinetic traces recorded with Rb+ and Cs+ for longer times (two samples each). Note that in this case a logarithmic scale was used on the y-axis.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Mott–Schottky plots for dummy cells built with the different electrolyte compositions studied in this work. LiI, red squares; NaI, blue circles; KI, magenta triangles; RbI, green rhombs; CsI, orange hexagons. Dashed lines represent linear fitting of the experimental data.	 
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp07544h

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
