Multifunctional hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures directly grown over FTO glass substrates: enhanced photovoltaic and selective sensing application ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA04187C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04187C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15868-15887Multifunctional hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures directly grown over FTO glass substrates: enhanced photovoltaic and selective sensing applications†

        
          
            Mohammad Shaad 
            Ansari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Avishek 
            Banik
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Anamika 
            Kalita
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Parameswar Krishnan 
            Iyer
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Mohammad 
            Qureshi
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute Technology, Guwahati – 781039, Assam, India. E-mail: mq@iitg.ac.in;  Fax: +91-361-2582349;   Tel: +91-361-2582320
bCentre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, 781039, India
cDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, 781039, India
Received 
      5th May 2018
    , Accepted 18th July 2018First published on 18th July 2018AbstractAmmonia has been extensively utilized in many applications such as agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, organic dyes, synthetic fibres, and it can diffuse into the atmosphere and cause severe effects on human health as well as the environment. Ammonium nitrate is usually found in many explosives and they release trace amounts of ammonia upon decomposition, the monitoring of which is very crucial in order to prevent lethal accidents. It is therefore necessary to develop a highly-sensitive room-temperature-efficient NH3 gas sensor. Sensing devices that rely on electron transport often suffer from the drawback of higher ohmic contact between the active materials and the collecting electrodes, which are transparent conducting oxides in most cases. Designing such systems is important, especially when the vapor pressure of the compounds yield very low concentrations of sensing elements. Herein, we report the in situ growth of hierarchical three-dimensional zinc oxide superstructures over a conductive glass substrate, i.e., fluorine-doped tin oxide, under a controlled hydrothermal route for low ohmic contact, allowing efficient charge injection. An anionic polysaccharide “k-carrageenan” was employed for assisting the heteroepitaxial aggregated growth of the 1-D nanocrystals. We have successfully demonstrated the applications of the as-characterized multifunctional 3-D ZnO hierarchical structures in photovoltaic and selective chemical vapor sensing. A significant enrichment (∼33%) in power conversion efficiency (η) for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-based photovoltaic device, as compared to the 1-D ZnO nanowires, was observed, mainly due to the larger surface to volume ratio for sensitizer loading, better light-scattering effect, better charge separation and collection. Two terminal sensor devices displayed high sensitivity and selectivity for NH3 vapors with the limit of detection value of ∼5 (±3%) parts per billion (ppb) for three dimensional ZnO hierarchical superstructures and ∼17 (±3%) ppb for 1-D ZnO NWs, which is very small as compared to the maximum permissible limit, i.e., 25 parts per million (ppm). Selectivity, recyclability, response/recovery time and sensitivity toward primary, secondary and tertiary amines have been studied to understand the probable mechanism for the high sensing ability of the hierarchical superstructures.
Introduction
Fabricating semiconductors having hierarchical morphologies based on one-dimensional (1-D) nanostructures is an efficient way to significantly improve charge transfer and surface area.1 The vital scientific and technological importance of hierarchical nanomaterials and the design of their synthetic strategies are still challenging and need more research efforts for the complete utilization of their potential for application.2 The usual method for generating semiconducting hierarchical architectures is the self-integration of 1-D and two-dimensional (2-D) nanoscale building blocks.3–6 Multifunctional three dimensional (3-D) hierarchical nanoarchitectures have the ability to vitalize the photoelectric conversion efficiency due to their favorable characteristics such as high sensitizer loading, strong light scattering effect and efficient electron transport through 1-D networks.7–9 To assemble the 1-D nanostructures into a regular ordered array, several growth patterns have been utilized based on their crystal growth behavior, similar to template derived homo- or hetero-epitaxial growth behavior.10 Predominantly, templating agents used for integrating the 1-D nanostructures have several limitations in their practical applicability such as their high-cost fabrication, tedious removal route and their harmfulness to the environment. In this work, naturally occurring biomass-derived templating agents have been utilized as the alternative to conventional templating agents, due to their being economical, easy to remove and environmentally benign under moderate conditions.11–17 The crystal growth mechanism is essential to comprehend the epitaxial attachment of 1-D nanocrystals to form the hierarchical structures via a non-classical growth mechanism.18–22
Due to its favorable anisotropic growth behavior, zinc oxide (ZnO) is a good candidate for consideration as an excellent semiconducting material for various applications involving various hierarchical structures.23–28 Recently, different dimensions of ZnO nanostructures along with 3-D hierarchical structures were synthesized29–37 and utilized in various applications.38–45 The growth patterns of different shapes are greatly affected by different reaction conditions and the internal structure of a given crystal. Templating agents with various functionalities are responsible for the modification of nanostructure morphologies by adsorbing at the surface of crystals and restricting the crystal growth in a specific crystal plane.46 Relaxation energies related to various crystal planes are crucial for determining the equilibrium morphology of a crystal.47,48 Hence, from the perspective of decreasing the total surface energy, a ZnO crystal will develop 3-D morphology with distinct crystallographic facets.
Chemical sensors play an important role in the detection and monitoring of various toxic and harmful gases49 that are generated due to rapid industrialization, combustion of fuels and the use of agro-chemicals. Chemo-resistor devices are being utilized for the detection of these gases based on the changes in their electrical properties due to the gas–solid interaction.50 Among the various volatile toxic gases, ammonia (NH3) detection has gained notable consideration due to its toxic and corrosive impact on the atmosphere and human health.51–53 The exposure limit of NH3 vapors is 25 parts per million (ppm) for 8 h at the working sites, while the short-term exposure limit is 35 ppm for 15 min, as set by the Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA).54 Moreover, NH3 is also released during the progressive decomposition of ammonium nitrate, which is found in many explosives and is very crucial for monitoring and preventing dangerous accidents. Therefore, there is a great necessity to design and fabricate a highly-sensitive NH3 gas sensor. Ammonia vapor sensors based on various conducting materials, potentiometric electrodes, infrared devices and metal oxides have been explored50,53–56 and among them, metal oxide-based NH3 sensors are commonly preferred due to their high sensitivity and low fabrication cost. Therefore, ZnO heterostructures are utilized for the fabrication of highly sensitive NH3 gas sensor devices. Several sensing experiments were performed to support these sensor devices as simple, consistent, economical and effective in executing NH3 detection under practical conditions.
Experimental section
Materials
All analytical reagents were used as received without any purification. Zinc acetate dihydrate, tert-butyl alcohol, hydrogen chloride, ammonium hydroxide, acetonitrile and iodine were purchased from Merck. Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 2-methoxyethanol, k-carrageenan, lithium iodide, chloroplatinic acid, 1-butyl 3-methyl imidazolium iodide, valeronitrile, guanidinium thiocyanate and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) conductive glass substrates, having sheet resistance of 10–14 Ω cm−1,2 were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The dye, di-tetrabutylammonium cis-bis-(isothiocyanato)bis (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) was procured from Dyesol, Australia. Terpineol, ethanolamine, ethocel, and 4-tert-butylpyridine were procured from Himedia, whereas ethanol used in this article was procured from TEDIA, USA. Milli-Q water (18.2 MΩ cm−2) was utilized for the synthesis of ZnO structures and for cleaning purposes.

In situ growth of ZnO heterostructures
Firstly, the ZnO seed layer solution was prepared by dissolving the zinc acetate (300 mM) and ethanolamine (300 mM) in 3 mL of 2-methoxyethanol with overnight stirring at room temperature, followed by filtration through a 0.2 μm PTFE syringe filter. Filtered seed solution was spin coated onto the ozonized FTO substrates and calcined at 200 °C for 15 min at room temperature. The same procedure was repeated for the complete coverage of the conductive substrate with a seed layer, which acted as the template for uniform epitaxial growth of ZnO heterostructures. In situ growth of ZnO heterostructures was carried out on the ZnO seed layer coated FTO substrates under controlled hydrothermal reaction. At first, the biopolymer, k-carrageenan (1 mg mL−1) was dissolved in Milli-Q water (25 mL) under continuous stirring, followed by the addition of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (1 mmol) to the reaction mixture. The viscosity of this solution was increased due to the interaction of the biomass-derived template and metal salt. Liquid ammonia, NH3·H2O (25%) was then added dropwise to the solution. Instantly, a white precipitate was observed in the solution and on the continual addition of NH3·H2O, the precipitate disappeared and the reaction solution became colorless. The clear solution was then transferred into a Teflon autoclave and ZnO seeded substrates were immersed (FTO side down) in this clear solution. The Teflon lined stainless steel autoclave was closed tightly and kept at 125 °C for 4 h for the growth of ZnO heterostructures. The autoclave was allowed to cool down at room temperature and the FTO substrates were taken out and rinsed thoroughly with Milli-Q water and ethanol. The substrates were then calcined at 200 °C for 15 min and the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures were obtained. In the absence of the templating agent (k-carrageenan), 1-D ZnO NWs were grown on the FTO glass under the same reaction conditions. These ZnO heterostructure-grown FTO substrates were further used for the fabrication of the photoanode via N719 dye-sensitization.
Photovoltaic device fabrication
Photoanodes based on both in situ-grown ZnO structures were fabricated by dipping the FTO substrates having both in situ structures into 0.3 mM dye (N719) solution [acetonitrile:tert-butanol (1:1)] for 3 h at ambient conditions. Sensitized photoanodes were taken out from the dye solution, washed with acetonitrile and dried in hot blowing air. A photovoltaic device was constructed by integrating the photoanode and counter electrode. The counter electrode was prepared by spin coating chloroplatinic acid (2 mg mL−1 in isopropanol) solution onto the conductive glass substrate and then annealing at 450 °C for 30 min. Redox electrolyte was injected between the sandwiched devices. The I−/I3− redox electrolyte solution was prepared by using a previously reported protocol.57 The device area was fixed at 0.16 cm2. A schematic representation of the hierarchical structure-based photovoltaic device with electronic interactions between the dye/redox electrolyte is shown in Fig. 1. In the DSSC, the redox electrolyte is mainly utilized to regenerate the oxidized sensitizer (N719 dye) molecules and maintain electron flow within the solar cell to complete the circuit.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the hierarchical ZnO superstructure-based photovoltaic device and electronic interactions of the dye/electrolyte through the electron transport mechanism (the schematic figure was drawn by a partial adaptation from Chemical Physics Letters, 2012, 550, 125–129, Copyright obtained from Elsevier).58 
Two-terminal sensor device fabrication
A schematic representation of the step by step fabrication of the sensor device is displayed in Fig. 2. In the first step, FTO substrates were patterned by using zinc dust and conc. HCl to make the active sensing area (channel) of about 0.10 cm2 [10 mm length (L) and 1 mm width (W)] for the in situ growth of ZnO heterostructures that would later act as the active materials for the gas sensing experiments. In the second step, a similar synthetic procedure (as discussed in the in situ growth of ZnO heterostructures) was used for the deposition of the ZnO seed layer as well as the growth of in situ ZnO structures. The FTO substrates were then calcined at 200 °C for 15 min, and in the third step, devices having both in situ ZnO structures were ready for electrical characterizations and vapor phase sensing experiments.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the step by step fabrication of two terminal chemo-resistor devices for vapor phase sensing. 
All gas sensing experiments were carried out at room temperature with a specific relative humidity level. A digital image of the whole gas sensing assembly is presented in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic drawing related to the experimental set-up for the NH3 gas sensing assembly. 
Vapor phase detection
For vapor phase detection, 7 mL of ammonia, common organic solvents (hexane, acetone, ethyl acetate, methanol, tetrahydrofuran, ethanol, isopropanol) and various amines (ethanolamine, methylamine, diethylamine, triethylamine, ethylene di-amine, diethyltriamine, nitrobenzene) were kept for 24 h in a 10 mL culture tube with proper sealing to ensure complete saturation over the headspace area. The vapor concentrations in the headspace area were estimated by using the following expression:59  
We then converted the taken analyte volume into concentration by using the following equation:C1V1 = C2V2where C1 is the saturated concentration of analyte and V1 is the volume of analyte taken while C2 is the calculated concentration of analyte and V2 is the volume of the culture tube.
Measurements and material characterization
The crystal phase purity of the as-grown ZnO structures was investigated by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analyses using a Rigaku RINT 2500 TTRAX-III, with Cu-Kα (λ = 1.54 Å) X-ray source. Morphological analyses of the in situ grown ZnO structures were conducted by field emission scanning electron microscopic (FESEM) analysis using a Zeiss (Gemini) instrument, recorded at the voltages of 3 kV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements were performed on a JEOL JEM 2100 microscope having an operating voltage of 200 kV. Optical properties of the bare and dye-sensitized photoanodes were characterized by a JASCO Model V-650 spectrophotometer having an integrating sphere (150 mm) and BaSO4 internal standard. Room temperature photoluminescence (PL) analyses were performed using a Horiba-Jobin Yvon Fluoromax 4 spectrophotometer. Time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements were carried out using a LifeSpec II Edinburgh instrument. The thickness of the as-grown samples was measured by a Veeco Dektak-150 surface profilometer. The phase composition of both structures was analyzed by micro-Raman spectroscopy, using a LabRam HR800, Jobin Yvon at an excitation of 514 nm. FT-IR analyses for sensing devices were carried out using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum Two spectrometer. Photovoltaic performances of all solar cells were demonstrated by using a Keithley 2400 source-meter in the dark and illumination with solar light of 100 mW cm−2 and AM 1.5 G. A Newport ORIEL IQE-200 instrument fitted with a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp was utilized to measure the incident photon to current conversion efficiency. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), Tafel and open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) measurements were carried out using A CH instruments model CHI680E, Inc., Austin, TX. All the sensing measurements were carried out by using a Keithley 4200-SCS under ambient conditions.
Results and discussions
Powder X-ray diffraction analysis
The crystal purity of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructures was confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analysis and related diffractograms are presented in Fig. 4. The PXRD pattern of hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures with (100), (0002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (200), (112), and (201) crystal planes is due to the formation of the wurtzite-type hexagonal crystal structure with space group symmetry P63mc according to the JCPDS card no. 36-1451. No impurity peak was identified in this diffractogram, which indicates that the in situ grown hierarchical superstructures are pure and have good crystallinity. In the absence of a bio-template, the preferential crystal growth pattern of ZnO was observed along the c-axis, having a strong diffraction peak for the (0002) crystal plane at 2θ of 35.35°, which suggests the epitaxial growth of 1-D ZnO NWs on the multinuclear ZnO seed layer. A very narrow half peak width with strong intensity for the dominant direction (0002) was observed, which indicates that the 1-D ZnO NWs are single crystalline in nature. These different crystal growth patterns validate the dissimilar morphological features and specific orientation of nano-crystals. Here, k-carrageenan is utilized as a templating agent that monitors the crystal growth behaviour by altering the relaxation energy of definite crystal planes via strong electrostatic interactions between the surface charges of the bio-template and the polar facets of ZnO. Moreover, the micro-structural features of the in situ grown heterostructures were analyzed by FESEM and TEM analysis.
 Fig. 4  Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of both the in situ grown structures of ZnO: (a) 3-D hierarchical ZnO superstructures (blue line) and (b) 1-D ZnO NWs (black line). 
Materials morphology
Morphological features of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructures were investigated by performing FESEM and TEM analysis. Microstructural features of different regions of in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO are displayed as FESEM images [Fig. 5(a–d)], at different magnifications. It can be seen that most of the hierarchical superstructures are vertically aligned with uniform distribution on the entire surface of the ZnO seeded FTO substrate. The size distribution of these in situ grown hierarchical superstructures was observed in the micron range. The magnified FESEM image [trace (d)] clearly indicates the hierarchical integration of 1-D nanocrystals to form 3-D ZnO superstructures.
 Fig. 5  Traces (a–d) represent the FESEM images of in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure of different regions at different magnifications. 
The biomass-derived templating agent, i.e., k-carrageenan, was utilized for controlling the growth pattern of these 1-D nanostructures, as described in the growth mechanism (Fig. S2†). The surface functionalities of this templating agent are responsible for the oriented assembly of building blocks through interactions with the polar surfaces of the ZnO crystal. It is obvious from FESEM analysis that these superstructures seem to be closely allied to each other, which supports better inter-particle connectivity, resulting in efficient charge transfer and collection by minimizing the trap sites for electron–hole recombination. Cross-sectional FESEM analysis of the as-grown hierarchical superstructures was also carried out to clearly understand the morphological features (Fig. S3†). In the absence of a bio-template, the surface morphologies of the in situ grown ZnO structures were also investigated, as represented in Fig. S4 and S5.† In Fig. S5,† the epitaxial growth of 1-D ZnO NWs over the ZnO seeded FTO substrate divulged the preferential crystal growth behaviour along the c-axis with the minimal surface energy. Moreover, TEM analysis was also performed to further confirm the surface morphology of the in situ grown ZnO structures.
TEM analysis was performed for further corroboration of the structural features of the in situ grown hierarchical superstructures at high magnification, as shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  TEM images (a & b) show the structural features of the in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure. The inset of image (b) shows the selected area electron diffraction pattern with distinct crystal planes. Image (c) displays the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy image of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure. The selected rectangle of (c) was employed to perform the inverse fast Fourier transform analysis. Image (d) represents the inverse fast Fourier transform of the selected portion from the image (c) with the corresponding fast Fourier transform image as in the inset of the same image. 
Trace 6 (a) elucidates the integration of 1-D nanocrystals in a homo- as well as a hetero-epitaxial manner to fabricate the hierarchical structure on the conductive glass substrate. The average size of the in situ grown hierarchical ZnO superstructures was in the sub-micron range, composed of 1-D NWs, having a length in the range of 0.4–1 μm while the diameters appeared in the range of 40–80 nm. Trace 6 (b) represents the higher magnification image of the circled area of trace (a), supporting the claim of self-assembly of 1-D nanocrystals into hierarchical superstructures. The inset of the same TEM image depicts the selective area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern for hierarchical 3-D structures, which depicts the diffraction ring pattern, revealing the polycrystalline nature of the hierarchical ZnO structure, which is consistent with PXRD analysis. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the hierarchical ZnO structure exhibits the well-defined lattice fringes as shown in trace 6 (c). Inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) analysis was performed for the selected portion of trace (c), represented in trace (d). Lattice fringes having an interplanar distance of about ∼0.27 nm can be ascribed to (100) crystal planes. The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern [inset of trace (d)] consists of very symmetrical dots, divulging the highly crystalline nature of the 1-D nanocrystals. Morphological analyses of the in situ ZnO structure obtained in the absence of the templating agent were conducted using FESEM, TEM, and HRTEM and are displayed in Fig. S4–S7.†
Normalized UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra
The optical behaviour of both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures was examined by recording the normalized UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra in the wavelength range of 300–800 nm, depicted in Fig. 7(A). The absorption edges of the in situ grown 1-D ZnO NWs and 3-D hierarchical ZnO superstructures were observed at ∼397 nm and ∼378 nm, related to the optical band gap of ∼3.12 eV and ∼3.28 eV, respectively. Hence, there is a hypsochromic shift in the absorption onset of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO structures with respect to 1-D ZnO NWs, which is mainly due to the integration of smaller sized 1-D building blocks to form hierarchical structures.
 Fig. 7  (A) Normalized UV-visible absorption spectra of in situ grown ZnO heterostructures, i.e., the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure (navy blue line), 1-D ZnO NWs (black line), N719 dye (red line), dye-sensitized hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure film (wine red line) and dye-sensitized 1-D ZnO NWs film (olive line), while the inset of this figure depicts the Tauc plot of both ZnO heterostructures. Trace (B) represents the diffuse reflectance spectra of in situ grown heterostructures (hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure and 1-D ZnO NWs), grown on the FTO coated glass substrate and the inset of this plot shows the digital photographs of both ZnO heterostructures. 
ZnO NWs obtained in the absence of a templating agent have a larger particle size to self-assemble with respect to 1-D nanocrystals. Moreover, this hypsochromic shift was further verified by estimating the energy band gap (Eg) of both heterostructures by using Tauc plots, as represented in the inset of Fig. 7A. For the Tauc plot, (αhν)2 was plotted against the photon energy (hν) and a line was extrapolated to the x-axis to calculate the optical energy band gap. As estimated, the optical band gap energies for the in situ grown 1-D ZnO NWs and 3-D hierarchical ZnO superstructures were observed to be ∼3.231 eV and ∼3.294 eV, respectively, which are in accordance with the values obtained from the absorption spectra. This clear shift in the band gap energy estimation further supports the hypsochromic shift in the absorption profile of hierarchical structures as compared to 1-D ZnO NWs. Regardless of being inadequate for visible light absorption, hierarchical superstructure-based photovoltaic devices are expected to show better photovoltaic performance, due to the large exposed surface area for better sensitizer loading with efficient charge transport properties.
The optical behaviour of the N719 dye-sensitized in situ grown ZnO heterostructures along with the bare dye was also studied, as depicted in Fig. 7(A). It is well established that the N719 dye showed a broad absorption profile in the visible region (400–650 nm) with absorption onset of about 700 nm. Dye-sensitized photoanodes showed the characteristic absorption profile for both constituents, i.e., the ZnO as well as N719 dye, indicative of the successful loading of the N719 dye onto the thin films. Moreover, a hyperchromic shift was observed in the absorption edge of the hierarchical structure-based photoanode, contrary to the ZnO NWs-based photoanode because of the effective anchoring of the sensitizer molecule, supporting that there is higher sensitizer loading with better surface aspect ratio. Therefore, the light-harnessing capability of a hierarchical superstructure-based photoanode was enriched with the greater loading of dye molecules and generated the large flux of photoexcited electrons that encouraged the upsurge in the population of charge injection and collection to enhance the photovoltaic performance of the device.
Diffuse reflectance measurements were performed to examine the light scattering effect in both types of in situ grown ZnO heterostructures having similar thicknesses, as depicted in Fig. 7(B). A large reflectance value was noticed for the hierarchical structure in contrast to 1-D ZnO NWs in the wavelength range of 420–800 nm, suggesting the greater consumption of incident light by means of an increased optical path length through multiple internal reflections, which is helpful in the repetitive excitation of sensitizer molecules. Therefore, the improved light harnessing capability of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO structure will play a crucial role in improving the photon conversion efficiency of hierarchical superstructure-based photovoltaic devices.
Steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence analyses
Room temperature steady-state and dynamic photo-luminescence (PL) analyses were carried out to investigate the surface defect states and excited state charge transfer processes of in situ grown ZnO heterostructures, measured at an excitation wavelength of 325 nm and represented in Fig. 8(A) and (B). A regular static quenching in the PL intensity was noticed in the steady-state PL spectra of hierarchical superstructures with respect to 1-D ZnO NWs, indicative of having lesser trap sites for electron–hole recombination.
 Fig. 8  (A) Normalized steady-state photoluminescence spectra of in situ grown ZnO structures, i.e., a hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure (navy blue line), 1-D ZnO NWs (black line) at the excitation wavelength of 325 nm (B) time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra for both in situ structures at an excitation wavelength of 375 nm. 
For both in situ structures, we observed a characteristic emission peak in the UV region along with a strong peak at around ∼467 nm and a weak intense peak at around ∼563 nm. The emission peak in the UV range is mainly associated with the radiative recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pair at the near band-edge of the ZnO crystal.60 Various emission peaks in the range of ∼410–490 nm along with a sharp peak at ∼467 nm are ascribed to the structural defects associated with the zinc vacancies of the ZnO structures. An emission peak at around ∼563 nm was also observed which is mainly related to the inherent defects of the crystal structure caused by oxygen vacancies.61 Moreover, the PL emission intensity due to oxygen defects was quenched in the case of hierarchical structures, as compared to ZnO NWs, indicating the occurrence of less oxygen defect sites in hierarchical structures, in contrast to ZnO NWs. This observation supports the better charge transport in 3-D ZnO hierarchical superstructures and also suggests the reduced population of trap sites due to the close proximity of integrated 1-D nanocrystals. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements were performed to further monitor the kinetics of the excited state charge transport for both the in situ grown heterostructures. Measurements were carried out using the as-fabricated in situ thin films and a 375 nm laser excitation source, as depicted in Fig. 8(B). Both the decay patterns were fitted with a tri-exponential function, using fast software provided by Edinburgh instruments to estimate the average exciton lifetime. Several processes are involved in the decay of emissive excitons in the multi-exponential decay patterns. Values of several fitting parameters such as (χ2) and exciton lifetimes (τ1, τ2, τ3), pre-exponential factors (α1, α2, α3), average exciton lifetimes (〈τ〉) etc. are briefed in Table 1. The average lifetime values were derived from eqn (1):62 (1)
Table 1 Estimated fitting parameters such as χ2, exciton lifetimes (τ1, τ2, τ3) (ns), pre-exponential factors (α1, α2, α3) and average exciton lifetimes (〈τ〉) (ns) for 1-D ZnO NWs and hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure are summarized in the following table




Samples

χ
2


τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

τ
3 (ns)

α
1 (%)

α
2 (%)

α
3 (%)
〈τ〉 (ns)




1-D ZnO NWs
1.005
0.021
0.754
6.879
73.85
7.86
18.27
6.526


Hierarchical 3-D ZnO structures
0.998
0.024
0.048
5.358
67.96
1.64
30.08

5.302





In Fig. 8(B), the decay pattern for hierarchical ZnO superstructures is faster with respect to 1-D ZnO NWs, revealing the better charge transfers due to the presence of fewer recombination sites in the hierarchical superstructures. From Table 1, the estimated average exciton lifetime values for ZnO NWs and hierarchical ZnO structures were found to be ∼6.526 ns and ∼5.302 ns, respectively. Moreover, a gradual decrement in the average exciton lifetime was observed in the case of hierarchical structures with respect to NWs, which implies the enhanced charge transfer in the photoanodic segment. The greater value of the exciton lifetime for ZnO NWs is mainly associated with the presence of a greater population of structural defects that act as trap sites for the recombination of photoexcited electron–hole pairs.
Excited state charge interactions and injection kinetics between N719 dye and in situ structures were monitored by recording the static PL spectra of the bare dye and dye-sensitized heterostructures at an excitation wavelength of 505 nm with respect to the dye, as shown in Fig. 9(A). From this plot, the N719 dye exhibited the emission peak at around 756 nm. The PL intensity of the dye was gradually quenched when it became anchored to the surface of in situ grown ZnO structures, validating the occurrence of excited-state electronic interactions between dye and ZnO. This observation supported the probability of photogenerated charge injection from the dye to the ZnO structures. Based on the energy band positions of the dye (CB edge ∼ −3.64 eV) and ZnO (CB edge ∼ −4.24 eV), a photocurrent was generated due to the feasible photogenerated electron injection from the lower unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the dye to the conduction band (CB) of ZnO. It is obvious from the spectrum that there is a gradual decrement in the PL intensity of the composite materials with respect to the pristine dye, suggesting the improved charge kinetics with lesser trap sites. Furthermore, the emission intensity of the 3-D ZnO hierarchical structure was more quenched with respect to ZnO NWs, indicative of effective charge separation and transport in the hierarchical structure-based photovoltaic device.
 Fig. 9  (A) Normalized steady-state photoluminescence spectra of N719 dye (red line), in situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-dye (olive line) and in situ 1-D ZnO NWs-dye (navy blue line) at an excitation wavelength of 505 nm (B) time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of the bare N719 dye and dye-sensitized ZnO structures at an excitation wavelength of 475 nm. 
TRPL analysis was carried out to gain insight about the kinetics of photoexcited electron injection with the corresponding decay patterns, measured by using a 475 nm laser excitation source, displayed in Fig. 9(B). The bi-exponential function was used for fitting the decay patterns, and the average exciton lifetime values were calculated using eqn (1) as mentioned in Table 2. From Fig. 9(B), we noticed that both decay patterns related to dye-sensitized ZnO structures were faster as compared to the pristine N719 dye, enlightening the photo-excited electron injection from the LUMO of the dye to the CB of ZnO.
Table 2 Calculated parameters such as the fitting parameter (χ2), exciton lifetimes (τ1, τ2) (ns), pre-exponential factors (α1, α2), average exciton lifetimes (〈τ〉) (ns) for N719 dye, 1-D ZnO NWs-dye as well as hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-dye and electron injection rate constants (keinj) (s−1) for the 1-D ZnO NWs-dye and hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-dye are mentioned in the following table




Samples

χ
2


τ
1 (ns)

τ
2 (ns)

α
1 (%)

α
2 (%)
〈τ〉 (ns)

k
einj (s−1)




N719 dye
1.018
1.728
24.447
3.143
96.857
24.395
—


1-D ZnO NWs-dye
1.048
2.082
24.055
5.270
94.730
23.949

0.76 × 106


Hierarchical 3-D ZnO-dye
1.060
2.633
23.486
2.783
97.217
23.410

1.72 × 106




From Table 2, the as-estimated average exciton lifetime values for the N719 dye, dye-1-D ZnO NWs and dye-3-D hierarchical ZnO were found to be ∼24.395 ns, ∼23.949 ns and ∼23.410 ns, respectively. Accordingly, 〈τ〉 of the hierarchical superstructure-based composite was considerably decreased as compared to the 1-D NWs-based composite and this observation reflects better charge transfer in the hierarchical structure-based photoanodic film. Charge injection from the dye to ZnO should be the only pathway for the deactivation of excited dye molecules, so the rate of electron injection (keinj) was calculated from eqn (2) and is listed in Table 2:62 (2)
From Table 2, the as-calculated keinj values for the 1-D ZnO NWs-dye and hierarchical 3-D ZnO-dye were found to be ∼0.76 × 106 s−1 and ∼1.72 × 106 s−1, respectively. The as-obtained higher value of keinj for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO-based composite encouraged the faster charge injection dynamics, indicative of lesser recombination processes and support to meet the better device efficiency.
Raman spectra
Raman spectroscopy is an essential technique used to explain the several characteristics of materials such as their crystallization, structural disorder and optical properties. Fig. 10 shows the typical room temperature Raman spectra of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructures [hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure (navy blue line) and 1-D ZnO NWs (black line)] on FTO substrates, carried out at an excitation of 514 nm. For both the structures, a sharp and dominant peak was observed at 438 cm−1, assigned to the E2 (high) mode of the wurtzite hexagonal ZnO lattice, which is mainly due to the vibration of oxygen sub-lattices in the non-polar modes.63 This mode is likely to be considered as a fingerprint for the crystallinity of wurtzite ZnO, which reflects the purity of the crystal structure of both in situ grown structures. Subsequently, it was noticed that there was no shift in the peak positions of the wurtzite hexagonal ZnO lattice, confirming the purity of the crystal phase of both structures.
 Fig. 10  Room temperature micro Raman spectra of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructure thin films [hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures (navy blue line) and 1-D ZnO NWs (black line)] fabricated on FTO coated glass substrates at an excitation of 514 nm. 
The E2 (high) peak of the hierarchical structure was found to be sharper and more intense as compared to 1-D NWs, associated with the higher oxygen content, which may lead to a reduction in the structural defects related to the oxygen vacancies. The suppressed peak at 571 cm−1 is associated with the A1 (LO) mode, which may appear due to the c-axis growth pattern of wurtzite ZnO. In Fig. 10, a broad Raman peak was noticed at 1106 cm−1, attributed to multi-phonon modes having combinations of single phonon modes, i.e., A1 + E2.64 This multi-phonon scattering modes of 1-D ZnO NWs exhibited a blue Raman shift with respect to 3-D hierarchical superstructures, due to the optical phonon confinement and the presence of more structural defects or impurities in the 1-D ZnO NWs.
Photovoltaic measurements
To validate the supremacy of the 3-D hierarchical superstructures over the 1-D NWs in terms of better light harvesting and charge transport ability, photovoltaic measurements were performed by fabricating the dye (N719) sensitized photovoltaic devices based on both the in situ grown structures, under solar light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 with AM 1.5G. Fig. 11(A) represents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for both the devices. The as calculated values for all performance parameters such as short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and the overall power conversion efficiency (PCE, η) are given in Table 3. Based on the calculated photovoltaic parameters, the PCE of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-based device was found to be higher, in contrast to the 1-D ZnO NWs based device, which supported the advancement of hierarchical superstructures over NWs. In the earlier observations, it was clear that the hierarchical superstructures have a large surface to volume ratio for higher loading of the light responsive material, resulting in the enhanced light harvesting capability of the solar device.
 Fig. 11  (A) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve for both in situ grown ZnO heterostructure-based devices. (B) Incident photon to current conversion efficiency plot for the respective devices. Inset of (B) shows the in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures, helpful for the effective light utilization by providing higher loading sites for sensitizer adsorption. 
Table 3 Photovoltaic performance parameters such as short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (η) along with dye adsorption (mol cm−2) for the as-fabricated photovoltaic devices based on both ZnO heterostructures are mentioned in the following table




Photovoltaic device (N719 dye)
Dye loading (mol cm−2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (mV)
FF (%)
PCE (η, %)
IPCEmax (%)





a PCE value for the best performing device out of 5 identical devices.
b Average PCE of 5 identical devices.
c Average error estimated for the average of 5 devices.






In situ 1-D ZnO NWs
∼0.47 × 10−8
∼8.18 (7.78 ± 0.4)
∼633 (615 ± 18)
∼49.78 (46.28 ± 3.5)

∼2.57

 (2.27b ± 0.30c)
∼50.61 (48.31 ± 2.3)



In situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO structure
∼1.18 × 10−8
∼10.89 (10.59 ± 0.3)
∼676 (664 ± 12)
∼52.12 (50.22 ± 1.9)

∼3.83

 (3.56b ± 0.27c)

∼58.02 (56.12 ± 1.9)




Moreover, the hierarchical superstructures also reveal the better separation and transportation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, accredited to fewer surface defects for recombination processes, which facilitate the improved interfacial charge transfer as confirmed by TRPL analysis. Therefore, the as-calculated values of all photovoltaic parameters, such as Jsc (mA cm−2), Voc (mV), FF(%) and PCE, η (%) for hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures based devices, were found to be higher with respect to the 1-D NWs based device, observed to be ≈10.89, ≈676, ≈52.12 and ≈3.83 while ≈8.18, ≈633, ≈49.78, ≈2.57 for the NWs based device. The higher Jsc value in the 3-D ZnO hierarchical superstructures based device is ascribed to the presence of a greater exposed surface area for sensitizer loading, resulting in improved light harvesting, which accounts for the increasing flux of photoinduced electron injection. Furthermore, based on the quantitative estimation of the chemisorbed dye molecules on the surface of the metal oxide heterostructures, it was found that the 3-D hierarchical structures based photoanode exhibited the higher loading of dye molecules, viz. ∼1.18 × 10−8 mol cm−2, and ∼0.470 × 10−7 mol cm−2 for the 1-D ZnO NWs based photoanode. This observation further confirmed the upsurge in the generation of photogenerated electrons and improved charge injection as well as collection, attributed to the enhanced current density of the solar device. Moreover, the in situ growth of hierarchical superstructures over the multinucleated ZnO seed layer offered better electrical connectivity between the ZnO structures and FTO substrate, which encouraged the collection of photoexcited electrons with minimum obstacles. The higher Voc (≈676 mV) and FF (≈52.12%) values for the 3-D ZnO hierarchical superstructure-based device likely reflect the efficient separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs, which encourages better interfacial charge transfers. This implies reduced recombinations at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Basically, 3-D ZnO structures were fabricated by the integration of 1-D NWs in a very close manner due to which the inter-particle electrical connectivity was improved, facilitating the transport of the photogenerated electrons by minimizing the recombination sites. Improvement of the fill factor value for the 3-D hierarchical ZnO based device is mainly associated with improved photogenerated electron transport in the device and the presence of fewer recombination sites, helping to attain the high PCE value of the device. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopic analysis was subsequently carried out to better understand the recombination processes, as discussed in a later section.
Incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) analysis was carried out for the enhanced interpretation of the photocurrent behavior of the as-fabricated solar devices, measured in the wavelength range of 360–750 nm as shown in Fig. 11(B). Basically, the IPCE of a solar device depends on (i) the light harvesting efficiency, (ii) the electron injection efficiency, and (iii) the injected electrons collection efficiency. From Fig. 11(B), both the IPCE plots follow a similar increasing trend as observed for Jsc in the current–voltage (J–V) curve of the solar devices. The higher Jsc value due to the higher loading of sensitizer molecules, inhibited back transfer of photoexcited electrons and facilitated charge collection is also explicit in the IPCE value of the hierarchical superstructure-based device, which is about 58.02%. The lower IPCE value (∼50.61%) for the 1-D NWs based device revealed less deposition of sensitizer molecules having lower surface areas, which impedes the light harvesting ability as well as the performance of the device. In the IPCE plot, a significant red shift was noticed at longer wavelength in the case of the hierarchical 3-D superstructure-based device (navy blue line), occurring due to the scattering of the incident light, which was utilized for the repetitive excitation of sensitizer molecules. The efficient light scattering ability of the hierarchical ZnO superstructure-based photoanode was probably due to the large size of the 3-D ZnO structures, as shown in the inset of Fig. 11(B). Moreover, the 3-D ZnO superstructures assembled with the 1-D ZnO nanocrystals encouraged a better transport pathway for the faster interfacial transfer of photogenerated electrons to enhance the photovoltaic performance. Hence, the better photovoltaic performance of the hierarchical superstructure-based solar device was confirmed by enhanced light harvesting and better charge transport properties.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopic (EIS) analysis
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is considered to be a crucial technique for explaining the kinetics of interfacial charge transfer along with the numerous recombination processes, arising from the electrochemical reactions occurring at various interfaces of the solar device. EIS analyses were conducted in dark conditions within the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz by employing a bias equivalent to open circuit voltage (Voc), depicted in Fig. 12(A) and (B). Usually, EIS of a dye-sensitized solar device exhibits three different electrochemical behaviours taking place at the various interfaces of the device such as at the counter electrode/electrolyte interface in the high-frequency region, at the ZnO/dye/electrolyte interface in the mid-frequency region (0.1 Hz to 1 kHz), and the diffusion of electrolyte in the low frequency region (0.1 Hz to 0.01 Hz).65,66
 Fig. 12  (A) Nyquist plots for the as-fabricated photovoltaic devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures. The inset of this plot depicts the equivalent circuit diagram with abbreviations Rs, sheet resistance; R1 & R2, charge-transfer resistance of the counter electrode and working electrode; CPE1 & CPE2, constant-phase element of the counter electrode and working electrode respectively (B) Bode phase plot for the respective photovoltaic devices. 

Fig. 12(A) characterizes the Nyquist plots for both solar devices, measured at bias equivalent to Voc under dark conditions in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 100 kHz. Both the Nyquist plots have two distinct semicircles: one in the medium frequency region (0.1 Hz to 1 kHz) and one in the higher frequency region (1–100 kHz). The observed smaller semicircle is ascribed to the charge transfers and recombination processes occurring at the platinum and redox electrolyte interface, while the larger semicircle is attributed to electrochemical processes taking place at the photoanode and redox electrolyte interface. The interpretation of the EIS measurements was carried out by fitting the impedance data to an equivalent electrical circuit that represents the different electrochemical processes occurring at several interfaces of the device. The inset of Fig. 12(A) displays the equivalent circuit model used to fit the Nyquist plot and the parameters obtained from the fitted Nyquist plots are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Fitted parameters such as series resistance (Rs), recombination resistance of the counter electrode and working electrode (R1 & R2), constant-phase element of the counter electrode and working electrode (CPE1 & CPE2), maximum peak frequency (fmax) and electron lifetime (τe) for both devices based on in situ grown ZnO heterostructures




Photovoltaic device (N719 dye)

R
s (Ω)

R
1 (Ω)

R
2 (Ω)
CPE1 (μF)
CPE2 (μF)

f
max (Hz)

τ
e (ms)





In situ 1-D ZnO NWs

∼11.91

∼39.23
∼179.70
∼593
∼271
∼8.57

∼18.58




In situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO structure

∼9.60

∼110.30
∼203
∼909
∼532
∼3.80

∼41.90





It is established that the series resistance (Rs) mainly accounts for the transport resistance, occurring at the interface of the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate and ZnO film. From Table 4, the lower Rs value (∼9.60 Ω) for the hierarchical superstructure-based photoanode was found, as compared to the 1-D NWs based photoanode (∼11.91 Ω), supporting the close packing of the 1-D nanocrystals in the hierarchical structures and encouraging the better collection of photogenerated electrons at the FTO substrate, which contributes to enhancing the current density of the solar device. The fitting of the first semicircle yielded R1 and CPE-1 (a component of a chemical capacitor), associated with the recombination resistance and capacitance offered at the surface of Pt and the electrolyte. Basically, the counter electrode (CE) of a DSSC is responsible for collecting the electrons from the external circuit and reducing the oxidized form of the iodide/triiodide redox couple. The charge transfer between the CE and the electrolyte emerged as a voltage loss at the CE, which contributed to substantiating the series resistance of the solar device. Therefore, a CE must possess high recombination resistance for better separation of electron–holes, suggesting better electrocatalytic activity and chemical stability. This observation was further supported by the as-obtained higher R1 value (∼110.30 Ω) in the case of the hierarchical superstructure-based device with respect to the 1-D NWs (∼39.23 Ω) based device. In the Nyquist plot, the shifting of the high-frequency peak for the hierarchical structure-based device was also observed, implying faster electron transfer at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface that leads to the reduction in the recombination processes and supports the improved fill factor in the same photovoltaic device.
The larger semicircle observed in the medium frequency region was also fitted in a similar way to the smaller circuit and generated the R2 and CPE-2, attributed to the recombination resistance and capacitance offered at the interface of the working electrode–electrolyte. From Table 4, it was found that the hierarchical superstructures based device showed a higher R2 value, viz. ∼203 Ω as compared to the 1-D NWs-based device having an R2 value of about ∼179.70 Ω. Moreover, the as-observed higher recombination resistance assisted faster and better charge transport in the case of hierarchical superstructures, reducing the recombination process at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces. The enhanced R2 value for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO based device supports the large Voc value obtained from J–V measurements. Hence, an enhanced Voc value can mainly be attributed to the better charge transport along the one-dimensional path (1-D ZnO NWs as the integrating building blocks) and better interfacial electron transfer. From Table 4, an almost two-fold increment in the capacitance value for the hierarchical structure device (∼532 μF) was observed, in contrast to that (∼271 μF) of the 1-D NWs based device, symptomatic of the higher population of photogenerated electrons in the conduction band. Therefore, the resistivity of the 3-D ZnO device was decreased, which may have accounted for the improvement in the photogenerated electron density in the metal oxide. This enhanced the collection efficiency of photo-excited electrons and contributed to enriching the efficiency of solar devices.

Fig. 12(B) represents the Bode phase plots for both devices. Two different peaks corresponding to the two diode interfaces of the device were observed. Photoinduced electron lifetimes (τe) can be estimated from the maximum peak frequency (fmax) in the mid-frequency region. The τe values for both devices were calculated by using eqn (3)67 and are listed in Table 4: (3)
The maximum peak frequencies for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures and 1-D ZnO NWs based devices were observed at ∼3.80 Hz and ∼8.57 Hz, respectively, and the corresponding τe values for both devices were estimated and found to be ∼41.90 ms and ∼18.58 ms, respectively. The enhanced ‘τe’ value for hierarchical structure-based device validates the minimized recombination processes that occurred due to the back transfer of photoinduced electrons to the electrolyte at the working electrode/electrolyte interfaces. Subsequently, a higher ‘τe’ value also indicated that the photoinjected electrons spent more time in the photoanodic film before collecting at the FTO substrate. Therefore, there is an enrichment of photoinduced electron density in the CB of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO, which enhanced the Jsc value and contributed to the higher efficiency of solar devices.
Open circuit voltage decay (OCVD) and TAFEL polarization curve
To further corroborate the observations from the EIS analysis, open circuit voltage measurements were carried out using a CHI680D electrochemical workstation. The charge transport and recombination kinetics processes of DSSC were demonstrated by monitoring the nature of Voc decay patterns as a function of time. OCVD measurements were performed by using the simulated solar light on the device to get steady-state voltage, after which the illumination was turned off and the Voc decay pattern recorded as a function of time, as depicted in Fig. 13(A). However, we observed the sharp Voc decay patterns for both the photovoltaic devices, which were mainly due to recombinations occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface. It is clear from the Voc decay patterns that the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-based photoanode had a slower decay as compared to the 1-D ZnO NWs-based photoanode, symptomatic of the slower recombination kinetics in the earlier device.
 Fig. 13  (A) Open-circuit voltage decay spectra of as-fabricated devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures. Both decay curves were recorded after switching off the illumination (B) Tafel polarization curves for both devices under dark conditions. 
As observed, the slower Voc decay in the hierarchical superstructure-based photoanode indicated better charge transport by effectively impeding the back transfer of photoexcited electrons to the electrolyte and this is well supported by the supremacy of the hierarchical structure, as claimed in the earlier discussion. In the case of the 1-D NWs-based device, a faster Voc decay pattern was noticed, which was attributed to the presence of more structural defects that were responsible for the recombination of photoexcited electrons, resulting in lower PCE value.
Tafel polarization measurements were performed to analyze the kinetics of the interfacial charge transfer reactions occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces of the dye-sensitized solar cell, recorded using a CHI680D electrochemical workstation under dark conditions. Both devices were swept with a bias potential range from −0.2 to +0.2 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1; corresponding plots are depicted in Fig. 13(B). The kinetics of the interfacial charge transfer reactions occurring at the electrolyte and ZnO photoanode interface can be represented using the Butler–Volmer eqn (4):68 (4)where jo is the exchange current density; αc and αa are the anodic and cathodic transfer coefficients; E is the applied voltage and Eeq is the equilibrium potential of the iodide/triiodide redox system. It is evident from this equation that j = jo as E = Eeq in the dark conditions. The intersection point of the Tafel curves gives ‘jo’, which is directly correlated to the recombination reactions happening in the photovoltaic device. From Fig. 13(B), the Tafel plots for both devices look very similar, signifying the smooth interfacial charge transfers at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The exchange current density values for both devices were estimated by fitting the Tafel curves, which were found to be ∼1.46 μA cm−2 for the hierarchical superstructure-based device and ∼0.85 μA cm−2 for the 1-D NWs-based device, respectively. As observed, the ‘jo’ values for both heterostructure-based solar devices support the trend of recombination resistance (R1 and R2), obtained in EIS analysis, and the larger ‘jo’ value of the hierarchical superstructure-based device verified the enhanced photovoltaic performance over the 1-D NWs-based device.
Photostability of solar devices
The operational photostability of solar devices is essential for actual practical application. Fig. 14 depicts the photostability test for the best performing photovoltaic device based on hierarchical 3-D superstructures. The variation in values of all photovoltaic parameters, such as short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and the power conversion efficiency (η) were recorded over a period of more than 100 h under the solar irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at ambient conditions without sealing. Initially, the photocurrent density of the device increased considerably up to the first few hours, due to the better penetration of the iodide/triiodide redox electrolyte through the photoanodic film, after which the photocurrent value decreased continually due to leakage and evaporation of the electrolyte, resulting in the reduced hole recovery rate of the electrolyte. Other parameters such as open circuit voltage, fill factor and power conversion efficiency slightly decreased in the beginning hours and then constantly decreased with prolonged irradiation. Thus, there was ∼32% reduction in the power conversion efficiency for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-based photovoltaic device after 120 h duration. Based on the observations, we concluded that the photovoltaic devices are quite stable initially, but show a gradual drop in performance with increased time.
 Fig. 14  Dependency of all photovoltaic parameters such as current density (mA cm−2), open circuit voltage (mV), fill factor (%) and efficiency value (%) with respect to time under solar irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at ambient conditions to evaluate the photo-stability of the best performing photovoltaic devices. 
Sensing studies
Two terminal chemoresistor devices based on both in situ grown ZnO structures were fabricated and employed for the sensitive and selective detection of ammonia (NH3) vapor by observing the changes in current intensity. All the measurements were performed using a Keithley 4200 SCS at room temperature under ambient conditions. To examine the conducting behaviour of both chemo-resistor devices, current–voltage (I–V) measurements were performed by sweeping the voltage from −10 V to +10 V at room temperature with relative humidity (RH) of 53%, as presented in Fig. S9.† The I–V curves of both sensing devices exhibited a good conducting nature through the establishment of ohmic contact between the in situ grown ZnO structures and FTO substrate. Before performing the sensing experiments, we calibrated both sensor devices under ambient conditions with RH 52%. For calibrating the sensor before measurement, it is essential to install the sensor in such a position where the calibration can be performed easily and it is also possible to observe how well the sensor can be adjusted in any type of environment. Gas sensing calibration measurements were performed by sequentially measuring the current response as a function of time under ambient conditions at a relative humidity of RH 52% without the presence of any analyte vapors, as shown in Fig. 15(a). For the blank, we passed the voltage into the device without any analyte, equivalent to 500 measurement cycles, and let the device current to be saturated so that the contribution of the factors surrounding it will be minimized in the calibration. As shown in the calibration curves, initially, we observed a decrement in the current response for both sensor devices with respect to time, but after some time there was no significant change in current values. Current values for both sensor devices are likely to be consistent with the values observed in the current–voltage sweeping curve in Fig. S9.† Moreover, we noticed a similar trend of current values with time after performing the number of scans (current vs. time) for a few days at regular intervals (Fig. S10†), confirming the efficiency of the sensor accuracy, which needs to be simple, repeatable, and economical. Therefore, from a realistic and practical point of view, calibration of the sensor was done by keeping the air around it. After calibrating the sensor device, we injected a calculated amount of various analyte vapors onto the sensing device to check the selectivity of the sensor devices. The selectivity of the metal oxide-based gas sensing device is considered to be one of the major challenges. To demonstrate the selectivity of sensor devices, sensing experiments were carried out at room temperature with a relative humidity of RH 49%, by exposing the vapor of definite concentration (960 ppb) of common volatile organic solvents such as hexane, ethyl acetate, acetone, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, tetrahydrofuran (THF) along with the much lower concentration (96 ppb) of NH3 vapors. Observations related to this experiment are displayed in Fig. 15(b). From the observed trend, it is evident that the sensing responses of both devices are negligible towards the vapors of common organic volatile solvents, but they exhibit a significant sensing response to the comparatively lower concentration of NH3 vapors. Interestingly, with such notable selectivity and sensitivity towards NH3 vapors, these sensor devices are considered to be rare examples with respect to the reported literature. After the selective sensing experiments, further sensing responses of both the chemoresistor devices were evaluated at room temperature with a relative humidity range of about RH 48% by varying the concentration of NH3 vapors from 24 ppb to 432 ppb based on the steady-state measurements. Steady state response measurement of both sensor devices for NH3 vapors sensing is essential for getting an idea about the saturation concentration of analyte vapors, and the corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 15(c). Based on the observations, there were not many changes in the current intensity response beyond the 336 ppb concentration of NH3 vapor, which may be due to the complete coverage of all binding sites available for solid–gas interaction in metal oxide films. As for the sensing response, both sensing devices showed good sensitivity at very low concentrations of NH3 vapor, which may be crucial for the detection of trace amounts of NH3 vapor during the explosive accidents. Changes in the current intensity on varying the concentration of NH3 vapor were observed for both the devices, as presented in Fig. 15(d). Once the ammonia vapor was exposed to the sensing device, the vapor was adsorbed on the surface of ZnO film and reacted with the polar sites of Zn2+ with the introduction of electrons, leading to an improvement in the conductivity of the film and resulting in an increase in the current intensity of the device. However, a continual increment in the current intensity was noticed for both the devices with an increase in the concentration of NH3 vapor from 24 ppb to 432 ppb. For the hierarchical superstructure-based sensing device, a sharp increment in the current intensity was noticed at a higher concentration of NH3 vapor, which is mainly due to the uniform distribution of vapor molecules on the large exposed surface areas of these nanostructured films.69 Accordingly, the as-observed high current intensity response for the hierarchical superstructure-based device is reflective of a large specific surface area and high electron mobility. The 1-D NWs-based sensing device showed fewer changes in the current intensity with increased concentration of NH3 vapor, due to less surface area for gas molecule adsorption. Additionally, multilayers of ammonia vapor may also be formed because of a small exposed surface area for the adsorption of high NH3 vapor molecules. A decrease in the active sites present in the 1-D NWs film restricted the further interaction of NH3 vapor with ZnO structure; hence, the current intensity response was not much changed at higher concentrations of NH3 vapor.
 Fig. 15  (a) Gas sensing calibration curves for both in situ-grown heterostructure-based sensor devices, measuring the current response as a function of time without injection of any analyte vapors under ambient conditions at a relative humidity of 52%. (b) The sensing response of the as-fabricated chemo-resistor devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures with vapors of various common organic solvents as well as NH3 at a relative humidity of 49%. (c) Steady-state current response for both vapor phase sensing devices based on ZnO structures grown in situ with the different concentrations of NH3 vapors, measured at room temperature with a relative humidity of 48%. (d) The sensing response for both devices towards various concentrations of NH3 vapors (RH 48%). (e) Calibration curve for calculating the limit of detection (LOD) of both chemoresistor devices as a function of NH3 concentration. (f) Recyclability testing of both chemoresistor devices with 48 ppb concentration of NH3 vapors (RH 48%). (g) Response and recovery time of the NH3 sensing based on both devices. (h) Sensing response of both the chemoresistor devices with vapors of different amines, nitrobenzene, as well as NH3 (RH 47%). All sensing measurements were carried out at room temperature. 
To determine the limit of detection (LOD), both sensing devices were exposed to different concentrations of NH3 vapors to get the different current response patterns according to the analyte concentrations. For the estimation of the LOD, a calibration curve was plotted as the maximum current intensity response as a function of different concentrations of NH3 vapor, as depicted in Fig. 15(e). Subsequently, this curve was fitted linearly and the slope (S) was calculated for each device with considerable correlation coefficient (R2) values. The LOD was calculated by using the mathematical expression LOD = 3σ/S, where ‘σ’ is the relative standard deviation of the current response of the sensor device in the absence of NH3 vapor, and ‘S’ is the slope of the calibration curve.59 The LOD of the hierarchical superstructure-based device was found to be ∼5 (±3%) ppb, while it was ∼17 (±3%) ppb for the 1-D NWs based sensor device. Based on these lower LOD values, both sensor devices were highly sensitive with respect to the minimum permissible limit for NH3 in the working environment, i.e. 25 ppm. The hierarchical 3-D superstructure-based sensor device had the lower LOD value, which is mainly associated with the large surface area for the better adsorption of gas molecules and efficient electron transport for an improved current response.
The responses (R) of both sensor devices were calculated at room temperature with relative humidity (RH) of 48%, by using the relation R = I/I0, where I is the current intensity change with NH3 vapor exposure, while I0 is the initial current intensity before the exposure of NH3 vapors. Subsequently, the sensitivity of both devices was plotted as a function of different concentrations of NH3 vapors, which exhibited a linear response with an increase in the concentrations, as shown in Fig. S12.†
To check the feasibility of these gas phase sensing devices for practical application, reusability or recyclability tests were carried out for both devices by exposing them to a specific concentration (48 ppb) of NH3 vapors after a definite interval of time with RH 48%, represented in Fig. 15(f). Consequently, it was found that both devices exhibited an approximately similar trend of change in current intensity. This observation supports the viability of these sensing devices for realistic applications. Response and recovery time are considered to be essential parameters for determining the efficient usability of a vapor phase sensor device. The response time of a sensing device is the time required to change 90% of the current response after exposing the analyte vapor to the device, while recovery time is the time elapsed in changing the 90% of the current response to reach the original position after the turning off the analyte vapor. The trends in response and recovery times for both sensing devices are shown in Fig. 15(g). However, the calculated response/recovery time for the hierarchical superstructure-based sensing device was found to be 3 s/13 s whereas for 1-D NWs based sensing device it was 4 s/9 s, revealing the high sensitivity of both devices to the NH3 vapors. Recovery time for the hierarchical structure-based device was greater as compared to the 1-D NWs based device due to the diffusion of NH3 vapors into the hierarchical superstructure, which requires more time for its complete removal. This is the first report on such highly sensitive/selective NH3 vapor sensing devices that also show remarkable response/recovery times for NH3 vapors detection. Based on these observations, both sensing devices are highly suitable for the rapid detection of NH3 vapor.
The selectivities of both devices were determined by exposing them to vapors of nitrogen-containing different organic solvents, such as nitrobenzene, ethanolamine and several amines like methylamine, diethylamine, triethylamine, ethylenediamine, diethyltriamine, along with NH3 vapor with a relative humidity of 47%. From Fig. 15(h), it can be seen that the sensitivities of both sensor devices were very low and insignificant toward different nitrogen-containing groups with respect to NH3 vapor, even at much higher concentrations.
In general, the sensing mechanism of metal oxide semiconductor-based chemoresistor devices comprises the binding of analytes on the surface of the sensing device through diffusion or dissociation and formation of a possible charge transfer complex, ultimately leading to improving the mobility of the charge carriers on the surface of the device, resulting in an increment in the current of the device.70 Moreover, less trapping sites in the crystal structure of ZnO also encourages efficient charge transport and this observation was more prominent in the hierarchical structure-based sensing device. Based on the chemical nature of the device film and analyte, the binding may be weak or strong and depends on chemical interactions such as covalent bonding, hydrogen bonding, dipole–dipole interactions, etc. On exposing the NH3 vapors to the surface of ZnO-based sensor devices, the current intensity response showed a significant change with a very low response time. This observation can be elucidated by the schematic of a probable sensing mechanism, as displayed in Fig. S13.† The change in the current intensity may be explained by the formation of a donor–acceptor complex between the NH3 (electron donor) and n-type metal oxide, i.e., ZnO (electron acceptor). The wurtzite crystal structure of ZnO consists of the alternate stacking of O2− and Zn2+ ions along the c-axis, reflecting the Zn-terminated (0001) and O-terminated (000) planes with higher surface energy. Therefore, ZnO has an affinity for binding with NH3via an acid–base interactions and generated Zn–NH3 complex ion pairs as NH3 vapor was bound to the surface of ZnO, due to which the ionic conductivity of the sensing device was substantially improved, which improved the current response of the device. Additionally, the sensing mechanism can also be explained on the basis of the chemical interaction between NH3 and oxygen species of ZnO, ascribed to the release of electrons at the surface of ZnO, which leads to the upsurge in the charge carrier population and electrical conductivity of ZnO.
To further confirm NH3 adsorption and diffusion on the ZnO based sensor device, Fourier Transform Infra-red (FTIR) analysis was performed before and after exposure to NH3 vapors; the corresponding IR spectrum is depicted in Fig. 16. In the absence of NH3 vapors (trace a), we observed a sharp IR peak at 551 cm−1, related to the –Zn–O stretching vibration mode, while the IR peak at 3426 cm−1 is assigned to the –O–H stretching vibration mode, which may be observed due to moisture. After exposure to the NH3 vapors on the sensing device trace (b), a broad IR peak in the range of 3200–3600 cm−1 was observed, which corresponds to the –N–H stretching vibration mode, supporting the adsorption/diffusion of NH3 vapors onto the device surface through electronic interactions (acid–base interaction) between NH3 and ZnO and consequently enhanced the electrical conductivity of the film. Additionally, after some time (30 s), we again recorded the IR spectra to demonstrate the recovery of the sensing device. From the IR spectrum (trace c), there was no peak related to the N–H stretching vibration mode, which reflects the complete evacuation of NH3 vapors from the surface of the device, confirming the low recovery time of the sensor device.
 Fig. 16  FT-IR spectra of the hierarchical structure-based sensing device before (trace a) and after exposure to NH3 vapors (trace b). Trace c represents the FT-IR spectrum recorded after 30 s of NH3 exposure. 
Additionally, the efficient adsorption of NH3 vapor on the exposed surfaces of the wurtzite ZnO structure is well explained in a schematic illustration Fig. 17, which shows the three-dimensional stacking model of wurtzite ZnO with Zn-terminated (0001) and O-terminated (000) polar planes. The exposed (0001) facets are polar surfaces and consist of a positive Zn-terminated Zn2+–ZnO surface or Zn2+ (0001) and a negative O-terminated O2−–ZnO surface or O2− (000).
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the interaction of NH3 vapors with chemisorbed oxygen species on the Zn2+ terminated sites of wurtzite ZnO structures. 
In the wurtzite crystal structure, each layer contains all positive Zn2+ ions or all negative O2− ions in the (0001) direction. Due to different atomic charges on Zn and O atoms, an internal electric field is generated between the Zn2+–ZnO (0001) and O2−–ZnO (000) planes. Under the internal electric field, ZnO heterostructures with exposed (0001) polar facets efficiently separate electrons to positive polar Zn2+–ZnO (0001) planes and holes to negative polar O2−–ZnO (000) planes. Efficient charge separation between exposed polar (0001) surfaces can effectively reduce the probability of recombination of electrons and holes, thereby improving the charge transport and leading to a better gas sensing response. Rapid charge separation occurs at the interface of the heterostructure and the body of the sensing material, where electrons can efficiently react with analyte vapour during the sensing process and get better sensitivity along with short response/recovery times.71 In general, the gas sensing mechanism for semiconducting metal oxides can be ascribed to the change in electrical conductivity resulting from the chemical interaction of gas molecules with the surface having the sensing material. The exposed surface of ZnO heterostructures adsorb oxygen molecules from the ambient gas components, which capture electrons from the conduction band of the metal oxide and generate ion-adsorbed oxygen species (O2−, O− and O2−) on the surface of the sensing layer, as depicted by eqn (5)–(8).72,73 O2 (g) → O2 (ads)(5) O2 (ads) + e− → O2− (ads)(6) O2− (ads) + e− → 2O− (ads)(7) 2O− (ads) + e− → O2− (ads)(8)
Reaction with the adsorbed oxygen ions can modify the intrinsic conductivity of a metal oxide by changing the carrier concentration. Hence, oxygen adsorption plays an important role in the electrical transport properties of ZnO. Moreover, chemisorbed oxygen species are likely to reduce the grain boundaries of ZnO thin film and trapped free electrons from the conduction band, encouraging the efficient charge transfer processes at the interface between the analyte vapor and sensing material. Consequently, due to high reactivity of these chemisorbed oxygen species, the sensing surface of the ZnO film becomes more sensitive to the interaction with the reducing analyte species, NH3 vapor in our case.74 Therefore, the NH3 sensing response in both the sensing devices can be explained based on the efficient adsorption of NH3 molecules at the surface of the sensing material. Furthermore, inducing a change in the oxygen content on the surface of ZnO, a surface reaction or adsorption of another species induces a broad, intense IR band with discrete weak bands superimposed on it.75 In our case, we observed a broad IR band in the range of 3200–3600 cm−1 after exposing the reducing species, i.e., NH3 vapor to the ZnO surface, as discussed earlier in the FT-IR analysis. This broadness of the IR spectrum is assigned to the electronic transition from a native donor level, the oxygen vacancy in the bulk of the domain, to the conduction band of the ZnO.
We have also checked the stability of the hierarchical superstructure-abased sensor devices to justify the claim of the practical usability of the sensor device. After storage of these devices for 2 weeks initially and then 8 weeks under ambient conditions, the sensitivities of the devices were tested by exposure to different concentrations of NH3 vapors at room temperature with a relative humidity of 48%. In Fig. 18, it can be observed that after analyte vapor exposure, the current intensity responses of the stored device exhibited no significant changes in current response, advocating the stability of this sensor device under prolonged storage at ambient conditions with no significant loss in sensitivity. Hence, the sensing device is considered to be stable and proficient for NH3 vapor detection under practical conditions. Based on several sensing experiments like selectivity, sensitivity, LOD, recyclability, response/recovery time and stability, both sensing devices are considered as cost-effective, stable and proficient for NH3 vapor detection under practical conditions.
 Fig. 18  Sensing response of the hierarchical structure-based sensing devices (fresh, 2 weeks and 8 weeks old devices, stored under ambient conditions) with different concentrations of NH3 vapor, obtained at room temperature with relative humidity of about 48%. 
Comparative study
We also carried out a comparative study of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructure-based sensor devices with respect to previously reported materials for NH3 vapor sensing. The limit of detection (LOD) values for both in situ ZnO structure-based sensor devices towards NH3 vapors were compared with recently reported literature, as presented in Table 5. Based on the LOD values, both sensing devices demonstrate the advantages of this sensing platform over most of the previously reported literature. It is evident that the sensing performances of both the in situ grown ZnO structure-based sensor devices are not only superior to other reported materials but also provide a simple and economical platform among various other sensors towards NH3 vapor.
Table 5 A comparative study of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructure-based NH3 sensing devices with different reported materials




Reported sensing material
Limit of detection (LOD in ppb)
Reference




SnO2 nanoparticle
50000

76



Fe3O4/MWCNT PhCOOH hybrid composite
250000

77



WO3–SnO2 nanostructures
520

78



Polymer PGMA-AN & PGMA-S
13900 & 16000

79



Reduced graphene oxide
1

80



ZnO nanostructures
25000

81



ZnO nanorods
20000

82



Ag/ZnO flower
10000

83



Naphthalene diimide derivative
10000

84



Perylene diimide derivative
5600

85



ZnO–CNT hybrid tetrapods
200

86



Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
3

87



WO3 nanoparticles
2.5

88



Ce-Doped ZnO
5000

89



ZnO–graphene oxide
4000

90



2-D graphene/nanographite (aerographite)
100000

91



Fluorinated graphene
100000

92



Carbon-nanotube–ZnO hybrid tetrapod
2500000

93



Graphene film decorated with Pd
58000

94



TiO2 thin film
500000

95



Carbon-nanotube–ZnO NW
4000

96



1-D ZnO nanowires
∼17
Present manuscript



Hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures


∼5


Present manuscript





Conclusions
In summary, we have reported the biomass assisted in situ growth of multifunctional hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures directly grown over FTO substrates, using a controlled hydrothermal synthetic route. The sulfate group containing an anionic polysaccharide, “k-carrageenan”, was employed for regulating the heteroepitaxial aggregated growth of 1-D nanocrystals. A non-classical growth mechanism accounted for the fabrication of hierarchical 3-D superstructures. These superstructures seemed to be formed by a very compact assembly of the 1-D structure, due to which the interparticle electrical connectivity was improved. Good contact with low ohmic resistance therefore plays a very crucial role in the transport and collection of photogenerated charge carriers. We utilized the multifunctional 3-D ZnO hierarchical superstructures in photovoltaic as well as selective chemical vapor sensing. A significant enrichment (∼33%) in the power conversion efficiency (η) was observed for the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-based photovoltaic device (η = ∼3.83%) as compared to the 1-D ZnO NWs (η = ∼2.57%), which is mainly attributed to the larger surface to volume ratio for sensitizer loading, better light-scattering effects, better charge separation and collection. Two terminal sensor devices displayed high sensitivity and selectivity for NH3 vapor with the LOD value of ∼5 (±3%) ppb for 3-D ZnO hierarchical superstructures, and ∼17 (±3%) ppb for 1-D ZnO NWs, which are very small as compared to the maximum permissible limit, i.e., 25 ppm. The high sensitivity of the hierarchical superstructure-based device for NH3 vapor sensing is reflective of creating a good ohmic contact in the 3-D hierarchical superstructure and FTO substrate with respect to 1-D structures. Additionally, the large surface area and high electron mobility of the 3-D structures also played a crucial role for the better sensing ability toward NH3 vapor. We also performed other experiments such as selectivity, sensitivity, recyclability, response/recovery time and sensitivity for various amines, and found that these sensor devices are simple, consistent, economical and effective in NH3 detection under practical conditions. Based on the observations, these superstructures are promising for various applications such as nano-photonics, energy conversion devices and sensing devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Department of Science and Technology, India through the project no. SERB/EMR/2016/005123. The Infrastructure and instrumentation help from IIT Guwahati and CIF, IIT Guwahati are hereby acknowledged. MSA acknowledge Randeep, Adil and Kamal for their help.
References
Q. Zhanga and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6769–6774 RSC .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie, M. J. McDermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Lao, I. G. Wen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1287–1291 CrossRef .
P. Jiang, J. J. Zhou, H. F. Fang, C. Y. Wang, Z. L. Wang and S. S. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1303–1310 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, H. Zhaolin, F. Yiqun, C. Su, D. Weiping and X. Nanping, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11722–11728 CrossRef .
L. Chow, O. Lupan, H. Heinrich and G. Chai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 163105 CrossRef .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Memarian, I. Concina, A. Braga, S. M. Rozati, A. Vomiero and G. Sberveglieri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12321–12325 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Ansari, R. Maragani, A. Banik, R. Misra and M. Qureshi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 262–275 CrossRef .
S. Xu, Y. Ding, Y. Wei, H. Fang, Y. Shen, A. K. Sood, D. L. Polla and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6670–6671 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, T. Fan and D. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1344–1387 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, T. Kunitake and A. Nakao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4401–4406 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Q. Lu, Z. Yu, J. Wang, H. Pang and F. Gao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 40–43 CrossRef .
R. N. McMillan, C. D. Paavola, J. Howard, S. L. Chan, N. J. Zaluzec and J. D. Trent, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 247–252 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Tseng, H. Y. Lin, M. H. Liu, Y. F. Chen and C. Y. Mou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18053–18061 CrossRef .
F. Waltz, G. Wismann, J. Lippke, A. M. Schneider, H.-C. Schwarz, A. Feldhoff, S. Eiden and P. Behrens, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3066–3075 CrossRef .
O. Lupan, L. Chow, G. Chai, A. Schulte, S. Park, O. Lopatiuk-Tirpak, L. Chernyak and H. Heinrich, Superlattices Microstruct., 2008, 43, 292–302 CrossRef .
S. Sotiropoulou, Y. Sierra-Sastre, S. S. Mark and C. A. Batt, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 821–834 CrossRef .
V. M. Guérin and T. Pauporté, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2971–2979 RSC .
J. Qiu, M. Guo and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2358–2367 CrossRef PubMed .
T. L. Sounart, J. Liu, J. A. Voigt, M. Huo, E. D. Spoerke and B. McKenzie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15786–15793 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, W. Dong, M. K. Brewer, S. Konar, R. N. Njabon and Z. R. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10960–10968 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. D. Sun, C. S. Liao and C. H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2002, 262–263 RSC .
J. R. Jenning and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16100–16104 CrossRef .
C. X. He, B. X. Lei, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su, Y. P. Fang and D. B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757–8761 CrossRef PubMed .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527–546 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
N. Linares, A. M. Silvestre-Albero, E. Serrano, J. Sil-vestre-Albero and J. García-Martínez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7681–7717 RSC .
V. Kumar, N. Singh, V. Kumar, L. P. Purohit, A. Kapoor, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa and H. C. Swart, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 134506 CrossRef .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183–2187 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, S. Kumar, S. Zou and L. L. Kerr, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 381–383 CrossRef .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Y. Chen and Y. T. Yin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8480–8488 RSC .
Y. Jin, J. Wang, B. Sun, J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1649–1653 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Cho, Y. H. Kang, J. Y. Jung, S. Y. Nam, J. Lim and S. C. Yoon, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3517–3524 CrossRef .
O. Lupan and T. Pauporté, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 2454–2458 CrossRef .
C. T. Wu, W. P. Liao and J. J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2871–2876 RSC .
M. Ahmad, S. Yingying, A. Nisar, H. Sun, W. Shen, M. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
Z. Jing and J. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4547–4551 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 2436–2440 CrossRef .
D. Gedamu, I. Paulowicz, S. Kaps, O. Lupan, S. Wille, G. Haidarschin, Y. K. Mishra and R. Adelung, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1541–1550 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Lupan, B. Viana, T. Pauporté, M. Dhaouadi, F. Pellé, L. Devys and T. Gacoin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26768–26775 CrossRef .
Y. K. Mishra, G. Modi, V. Cretu, V. Postica, O. Lupan, T. Reimer, I. Paulowicz, V. Hrkac, W. Benecke, L. Kienle and R. Adelung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14303–14316 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Reimer, I. Paulowicz, R. Röder, S. Kaps, O. Lupan, S. Chemnitz, W. Benecke, C. Ronning, R. Adelung and Y. K. Mishra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7806–7815 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wu, X. Chen, P. Zhang, Y. Han, X. Chen, Y. Yan and S. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3010–3018 CrossRef .
T. R. Chetia, M. S. Ansari and M. Qureshi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13266–13279 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33–71 CrossRef .
C. Tang, M. J. S. Spencer and A. S. Barnard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22139–22144 RSC .
R. Kumar, O. Al-Dossary, G. Kumar and A. Umar, Nano-Micro Lett., 2015, 7, 97–120 CrossRef .
Q. Meng, F. Zhang, Y. Zang, D. Huang, Y. Zou, J. Liu, G. Zhao, Z. Wang, D. Ji, C. Di, W. Hu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1264–1269 RSC .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef .

          M. Appl, Wiley-VCH, New York, USA,  1999.
C. Cannilla, G. Bonura, F. Frusteri, D. Spadaro, S. Trocinoc and G. Neri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5778–5786 RSC .
T. Grady, T. Butler, B. D. MacCraith, D. Diamond and M. A. McKervey, Analyst, 1997, 122, 803–806 RSC .
S. Pandey, G. K. Goswami and K. K. Nanda, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2082 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Huang and Y. K. Choi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 122, 659–671 CrossRef .
T. R. Chetia, M. S. Ansari and M. Qureshi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5344–5357 RSC .
O. Lupan, V. M. Guérin, L. Ghimpu, I. M. Tiginyanu and T. Pauporté, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 550, 125–129 CrossRef .
A. H. Malik, S. Hussain, A. Kalita and P. K. Iyer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26968–26976 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Li, S. Yang, X. Xu and W. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 561–572 CrossRef .
X. L. Wu, G. G. Siu, C. L. Fu and H. C. Ong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2285–2287 CrossRef .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Alim, V. A. Fonobarov, M. Shamsa and A. A. Balandin, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 124313 CrossRef .
P. Wang, G. Xu and P. Jin, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 113303 CrossRef .
S. Phadke, A. D. Pasquier and D. P. Birnie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18342–18347 CrossRef .
M. S. Ansari, A. Banik and M. Qureshi, Carbon, 2017, 121, 90–105 CrossRef .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef .
J. N. Soderberg, A. C. Co, A. H. C. Sirk and V. I. Birss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10401–10410 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hussain, T. Liu, M. S. Javed, N. Aslam and W. Zeng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 1243–1250 CrossRef .
M. Z. Dai, Y. L. Lin, H. C. Lin, H. W. Zan, K. T. Chang, H. F. Meng, J. W. Liao, M. J. Tsai and H. Cheng, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3110–3117 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Tian, J. Wang, L. Sun, K. Shi, W. Zhou and H. Fu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7369–7378 RSC .
T. J. Hsueh, C. L. Hsu, S. J. Chang and I. C. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 126, 473–477 CrossRef .
N. Yamazoe, J. Fuchigami, M. Kishikawa and T. eiyama, Surf. Sci., 1979, 86, 335–344 CrossRef .
I. Paulowicz, V. Postica, O. Lupan, N. Wolff, S. Shree, A. Cojocaru, M. Deng, Y. K. Mishra, I. Tiginyanu, L. Kienle and R. Adelung, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 425–435 CrossRef .
S. Lenaerts, J. Roggen and G. Maes, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1995, 51, 883–894 CrossRef .
X. Liu, N. Chen, B. Han, X. Xiao, G. Chen, I. Djerdjc and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14872–14880 RSC .
A. Pistone, A. Piperno, D. Iannazzo, N. Donato, M. Latino, D. Spadaro and G. Neri, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 186, 333–342 CrossRef .
A. K. Nayak, R. Ghosh, S. Santra, P. K. Guha and D. Pradhan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12460–12473 RSC .
P. Dutta, B. Kalita, B. Gogoi and N. S. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17260–17270 CrossRef .
N. Hu, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Huang, H. Wei, L. Wei and Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 025502 CrossRef PubMed .
G. K. Mani and J. B. B. Rayappan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 183, 459–466 CrossRef .
J. X. Wang, X. W. Sun, Y. Yang, H. Huang, Y. C. Lee, O. K. Tan and L. Vayssieres, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4995 CrossRef .
R. S. Ganesh, M. Navaneethan, V. L. Patil, S. Ponnusamy, C. Muthamizhchelvan, S. Kawasaki, P. S. Patil and Y. Hayakawa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 672–683 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, C. Di, N. Berdunov, Y. Hu, X. Gao, Q. Meng, H. Sirringhaus and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1401–1407 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kalita, S. Hussain, A. H. Malik, N. V. V. Subbarao and P. K. Iyer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10767–10774 RSC .
F. Schütt, V. Postica, R. Adelung and O. Lupan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23107–23118 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Rigoni, S. Tognolini, P. Borghetti, G. Drera, S. Pagliara, A. Goldoni and L. Sangaletti, Analyst, 2013, 138, 7392–7399 RSC .
D. V. Dao, K. Shibuya, T. T. Bui and S. Sugiyama, Procedia Eng., 2011, 25, 1149–1152 CrossRef .
M. R. Prasada, M. Harisa and M. Sridharan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 269, 435–443 CrossRef .
H. Fu, Y. Jiang, J. Ding, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhu and H. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 239–247 CrossRef .
O. Lupan, V. Postica, M. Mecklenburg, K. Schulte, Y. K. Mishra, B. Fiedlerc and R. Adelunga, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16723–16730 RSC .
H. Zhang, L. Fan, H. Dong, P. Zhang, K. Nie, J. Zhong, Y. Li, J. Guo and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8652–8661 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Postica, F. Schütt, R. Adelung and O. Lupan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700507 CrossRef .
M. Gautam and A. H. Jayatissa, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 094317 CrossRef .
B. Karunagaran, P. Uthirakumar, S. J. Chung, S. Velumani and E. K. Suh, Mater. Charact., 2007, 58, 680–684 CrossRef .
O. Lupan, F. Schütt, V. Postica, D. Smazna, Y. K. Mishra and R. Adelung, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14715 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Chemical structure of templating agent, probable growth mechanism for in situ grown hierarchical ZnO superstructures, cross sectional FESEM images of in situ grown hierarchical ZnO superstructures, morphological analysis of ZnO in absence of bio-template, current–voltage (I–V), digital images of gas sensing assembly, steady state and sensing response measurement based on both sensor devices, schematic of probable sensing mechanism, a tables related to comparative study of N719 dye sensitized photovoltaic devices are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04187cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the hierarchical ZnO superstructure-based photovoltaic device and electronic interactions of the dye/electrolyte through the electron transport mechanism (the schematic figure was drawn by a partial adaptation from Chemical Physics Letters, 2012, 550, 125–129, Copyright obtained from Elsevier).58	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the step by step fabrication of two terminal chemo-resistor devices for vapor phase sensing.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic drawing related to the experimental set-up for the NH3 gas sensing assembly.	 

 		 
C1V1 = C2V2

 	Fig. 4  Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of both the in situ grown structures of ZnO: (a) 3-D hierarchical ZnO superstructures (blue line) and (b) 1-D ZnO NWs (black line).	 

 	Fig. 5  Traces (a–d) represent the FESEM images of in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure of different regions at different magnifications.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images (a & b) show the structural features of the in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure. The inset of image (b) shows the selected area electron diffraction pattern with distinct crystal planes. Image (c) displays the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy image of the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure. The selected rectangle of (c) was employed to perform the inverse fast Fourier transform analysis. Image (d) represents the inverse fast Fourier transform of the selected portion from the image (c) with the corresponding fast Fourier transform image as in the inset of the same image.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Normalized UV-visible absorption spectra of in situ grown ZnO heterostructures, i.e., the hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure (navy blue line), 1-D ZnO NWs (black line), N719 dye (red line), dye-sensitized hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure film (wine red line) and dye-sensitized 1-D ZnO NWs film (olive line), while the inset of this figure depicts the Tauc plot of both ZnO heterostructures. Trace (B) represents the diffuse reflectance spectra of in situ grown heterostructures (hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure and 1-D ZnO NWs), grown on the FTO coated glass substrate and the inset of this plot shows the digital photographs of both ZnO heterostructures.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Normalized steady-state photoluminescence spectra of in situ grown ZnO structures, i.e., a hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure (navy blue line), 1-D ZnO NWs (black line) at the excitation wavelength of 325 nm (B) time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra for both in situ structures at an excitation wavelength of 375 nm.	 
	(1)

1-D ZnO NWs	1.005	0.021	0.754	6.879	73.85	7.86	18.27	6.526
Hierarchical 3-D ZnO structures	0.998	0.024	0.048	5.358	67.96	1.64	30.08	
5.302


 	Fig. 9  (A) Normalized steady-state photoluminescence spectra of N719 dye (red line), in situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructure-dye (olive line) and in situ 1-D ZnO NWs-dye (navy blue line) at an excitation wavelength of 505 nm (B) time-resolved photoluminescence spectra of the bare N719 dye and dye-sensitized ZnO structures at an excitation wavelength of 475 nm.	 

N719 dye	1.018	1.728	24.447	3.143	96.857	24.395	—
1-D ZnO NWs-dye	1.048	2.082	24.055	5.270	94.730	23.949	
0.76 × 106
Hierarchical 3-D ZnO-dye	1.060	2.633	23.486	2.783	97.217	23.410	
1.72 × 106
	(2)

 	Fig. 10  Room temperature micro Raman spectra of the in situ grown ZnO heterostructure thin films [hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures (navy blue line) and 1-D ZnO NWs (black line)] fabricated on FTO coated glass substrates at an excitation of 514 nm.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve for both in situ grown ZnO heterostructure-based devices. (B) Incident photon to current conversion efficiency plot for the respective devices. Inset of (B) shows the in situ grown hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures, helpful for the effective light utilization by providing higher loading sites for sensitizer adsorption.	 



In situ 1-D ZnO NWs	∼0.47 × 10−8	∼8.18 (7.78 ± 0.4)	∼633 (615 ± 18)	∼49.78 (46.28 ± 3.5)	
∼2.57

 (2.27b ± 0.30c)	∼50.61 (48.31 ± 2.3)

In situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO structure	∼1.18 × 10−8	∼10.89 (10.59 ± 0.3)	∼676 (664 ± 12)	∼52.12 (50.22 ± 1.9)	
∼3.83

 (3.56b ± 0.27c)	
∼58.02 (56.12 ± 1.9)

 	Fig. 12  (A) Nyquist plots for the as-fabricated photovoltaic devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures. The inset of this plot depicts the equivalent circuit diagram with abbreviations Rs, sheet resistance; R1 & R2, charge-transfer resistance of the counter electrode and working electrode; CPE1 & CPE2, constant-phase element of the counter electrode and working electrode respectively (B) Bode phase plot for the respective photovoltaic devices.	 


In situ 1-D ZnO NWs	
∼11.91
	∼39.23	∼179.70	∼593	∼271	∼8.57	
∼18.58


In situ hierarchical 3-D ZnO structure	
∼9.60
	∼110.30	∼203	∼909	∼532	∼3.80	
∼41.90

	(3)

 	Fig. 13  (A) Open-circuit voltage decay spectra of as-fabricated devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures. Both decay curves were recorded after switching off the illumination (B) Tafel polarization curves for both devices under dark conditions.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 14  Dependency of all photovoltaic parameters such as current density (mA cm−2), open circuit voltage (mV), fill factor (%) and efficiency value (%) with respect to time under solar irradiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at ambient conditions to evaluate the photo-stability of the best performing photovoltaic devices.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Gas sensing calibration curves for both in situ-grown heterostructure-based sensor devices, measuring the current response as a function of time without injection of any analyte vapors under ambient conditions at a relative humidity of 52%. (b) The sensing response of the as-fabricated chemo-resistor devices based on both in situ grown ZnO heterostructures with vapors of various common organic solvents as well as NH3 at a relative humidity of 49%. (c) Steady-state current response for both vapor phase sensing devices based on ZnO structures grown in situ with the different concentrations of NH3 vapors, measured at room temperature with a relative humidity of 48%. (d) The sensing response for both devices towards various concentrations of NH3 vapors (RH 48%). (e) Calibration curve for calculating the limit of detection (LOD) of both chemoresistor devices as a function of NH3 concentration. (f) Recyclability testing of both chemoresistor devices with 48 ppb concentration of NH3 vapors (RH 48%). (g) Response and recovery time of the NH3 sensing based on both devices. (h) Sensing response of both the chemoresistor devices with vapors of different amines, nitrobenzene, as well as NH3 (RH 47%). All sensing measurements were carried out at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 16  FT-IR spectra of the hierarchical structure-based sensing device before (trace a) and after exposure to NH3 vapors (trace b). Trace c represents the FT-IR spectrum recorded after 30 s of NH3 exposure.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the interaction of NH3 vapors with chemisorbed oxygen species on the Zn2+ terminated sites of wurtzite ZnO structures.	 
O2 (g) → O2 (ads)	(5)
O2 (ads) + e− → O2− (ads)	(6)
O2− (ads) + e− → 2O− (ads)	(7)
2O− (ads) + e− → O2− (ads)	(8)

 	Fig. 18  Sensing response of the hierarchical structure-based sensing devices (fresh, 2 weeks and 8 weeks old devices, stored under ambient conditions) with different concentrations of NH3 vapor, obtained at room temperature with relative humidity of about 48%.	 

SnO2 nanoparticle	50000	
76

Fe3O4/MWCNT PhCOOH hybrid composite	250000	
77

WO3–SnO2 nanostructures	520	
78

Polymer PGMA-AN & PGMA-S	13900 & 16000	
79

Reduced graphene oxide	1	
80

ZnO nanostructures	25000	
81

ZnO nanorods	20000	
82

Ag/ZnO flower	10000	
83

Naphthalene diimide derivative	10000	
84

Perylene diimide derivative	5600	
85

ZnO–CNT hybrid tetrapods	200	
86

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)	3	
87

WO3 nanoparticles	2.5	
88

Ce-Doped ZnO	5000	
89

ZnO–graphene oxide	4000	
90

2-D graphene/nanographite (aerographite)	100000	
91

Fluorinated graphene	100000	
92

Carbon-nanotube–ZnO hybrid tetrapod	2500000	
93

Graphene film decorated with Pd	58000	
94

TiO2 thin film	500000	
95

Carbon-nanotube–ZnO NW	4000	
96

1-D ZnO nanowires	∼17	Present manuscript

Hierarchical 3-D ZnO superstructures
	
∼5
	
Present manuscript

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Chemical structure of templating agent, probable growth mechanism for in situ grown hierarchical ZnO superstructures, cross sectional FESEM images of in situ grown hierarchical ZnO superstructures, morphological analysis of ZnO in absence of bio-template, current–voltage (I–V), digital images of gas sensing assembly, steady state and sensing response measurement based on both sensor devices, schematic of probable sensing mechanism, a tables related to comparative study of N719 dye sensitized photovoltaic devices are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta04187c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
