Hygroscopic photothermal beads from marine polysaccharides: demonstration of efficient atmospheric water production, indoor humidity control and photo ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA00594H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA00594H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8556-8567Hygroscopic photothermal beads from marine polysaccharides: demonstration of efficient atmospheric water production, indoor humidity control and photovoltaic panel cooling†

        
          
            Jintao 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Na 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuxue 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuanfei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liangmin 
            Yu
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Petri 
            Murto
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Xu
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China. E-mail: xuxiaofeng@ouc.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Marine Chemistry Theory and Technology, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
cOpen Studio for Marine Corrosion and Protection, Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China
dYusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK. E-mail: pm707@cam.ac.uk
Received 
      21st January 2022
    , Accepted 14th March 2022First published on 14th March 2022AbstractAtmospheric water is an abundant source of freshwater and it plays an important role in controlling the available water on land. Emerging atmospheric water generators (AWG) using desiccant materials enable active and efficient capture of atmospheric water even under low humidity conditions (i.e., relative humidity, RH below 40%). AWGs show strong potential for integrated technologies that benefit from solar-powered water desorption and reversible sorption–desorption cycles. Future development of solar-powered AWG systems is of particular interest for versatile energy-saving applications with minimized carbon footprints. Herein, a new sorbent-based AWG is developed via rational incorporation of marine polysaccharide, hygroscopic salt and photothermal polymer in a bead-like hollow structure, demonstrating reversible and durable water vapor harvesting. The desiccant beads attain high moisture sorption in a wide RH range of 35–90%, reaching maximum water uptake of 7.6 g g−1 under 90% RH and outperforming a majority of sorbent-based AWGs. The AWG-integrated system delivers 3.14 g g−1 of safe drinking water per night–day cycle, provides efficient humidity control in closed environments and boosts electricity production via photovoltaic cell cooling. This work provides a perspective on intelligent desiccant materials extracted from marine biomass and highlights their future opportunities in various energy-wise and sustainable applications.
1. Introduction
Water is the most abundant resource on Earth, yet we are facing a looming freshwater crisis. One-quarter of the human population lacks adequate access to one of the essential elements of life and human rights, that is, safe drinking water.1 The freshwater crisis is expected to worsen with harmful effects of overpopulation, poor management and climate change.2 It causes wide-reaching damage to public health, global trade and economic development. Chemical clarification, granular media filtration, activated carbon adsorption and disinfection are the dominant processes used to treat surface water (also named blue water) for municipal users. The need for additional water supplies is critical in many arid/semi-arid areas which cover ∼40% of Earth's terrestrial surface and lack perennial surface water sources. Saltwater from underground and oceans is generally turned into drinkable water based on three methods (evaporation, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis).3 The significant barriers and drawbacks of current desalination processes include high costs of investment and operation, large energy requirements and greenhouse gas emissions, disposal of concentrated waste streams and adverse effects of intakes and outfalls on ecosystems.4
The Earth's atmosphere is a vast and renewable water resource, where ∼98% of atmospheric water is in a gaseous state (vapor) and the rest is in a condensed state (clouds and fog). The atmosphere serves as a superhighway in the hydrologic cycle, moving freshwater around the globe and delivering a sustainable water supply. It is estimated to contain ∼12900 billion tons of fresh water and accounts for ∼0.001% of all water on Earth.5 Atmospheric water harvesting is another potential method for safe drinking water production and has started growing in popularity worldwide.6 Atmospheric water harvesting technologies have disclosed several unique advantages, including water diversification, independence of water supply, clean water production for off-grid, remote or isolated areas, and having one more way to address emergency and medical requirements. Like solar distillation, atmospheric water harvesting also allows sustainable operation taking the benefits of renewable solar energy and abundant waste heat.7–10 In general, there are two types of fog/dew harvesting methods: passive and active.11,12 Passive fog/dew condensers rely on accelerating water droplet formation and growth via several biomimicking techniques.13 However, one of the critical challenges for passive fog/dew collection is that its water production ability is significantly limited by specific weather conditions, locations and surface properties of materials.14,15 For example, fog should occur frequently and ensure relative humidity (RH) over ∼40%. High-elevation fogs with higher RH of ∼80% are preferred and fog collection should be accompanied by weak wind (∼3 m s−1).
Active atmospheric water harvesting has been regarded as a promising and alternative option for locally managed water sources in dry and inland areas facing water quality and quantity issues.16 The design of active atmospheric water generators (AWGs) can significantly reduce geographical and climatic effects (i.e., sky emissivity, humidity, wind speed and topographic location) and improve water production yields from relatively dry air and low temperature as compared to passive approaches.17–19 So far, commercially available AWGs are generally based on a refrigeration mode, operating on vapor-compression and refrigeration cycles requiring additional energy input. The use of abundant and sustainable solar energy enables us to reduce the demand for fossil fuels.20 Two emerging methods have been recently developed: one is using solar-powered (photovoltaics) sorption chillers for refrigeration-based AWGs. The other is based on a sorption-regeneration-condensation process via solar–thermal conversion.21–23 In the latter method, desiccant materials are used to extract moisture from the air during nighttime and desorb the water by using solar irradiation during daytime.16,24 In this perspective, solar-powered sorbent-based AWGs disclose a great potential for the realization of efficient operation, optimized energy consumption and wide adaptability for clean water production, passive cooling, energy conservation and sustainable agriculture applications.25–43 However, a few roadblocks still lie ahead in the design of next-generation desiccants for AWGs, which can be generalized as follows (i–iv): (i) conventional desiccants (i.e., hygroscopic salts, silica gel and zeolite) suffer from relatively low water adsorption, unavoidable salt creeping and high regeneration temperature (over 100 °C). (ii) Emerging desiccants based on metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs) contain toxic organic ligands and metals, and less attention has been paid to the assessment of their environmental impact. (iii) Incorporation of emerging desiccants within porous polymer platforms is of particular interest.44 However, the widely used polyacrylamide (PAM) and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) hydrogels are often deemed costly.45,46 Degradation and leaching of synthetic compounds also raise concerns on water contamination and environmental issues. So far, sodium alginate and cellulose are two biopolymers used as material platforms in hybrid desiccants.25,33,39,40,47 The development of intelligent hybrid systems using renewable materials is still beyond reach. (iv) Conventional desiccants are generally made into powder and solid beads. Structural modulations of surface areas and pore volumes to allow moisture passing through at high flux have been largely neglected.48,49 The controlled fabrication of hollow and core–shell structures remains elusive.
In this contribution, hygroscopic photothermal beads were fabricated through rational incorporation of marine polysaccharide (carrageenan), lithium chloride (LiCl) and polypyrrole (PPy) (Fig. 1). Carrageenan offered unique sulfated backbones, coil–helix transition and double–helix aggregation that could be controlled by temperature and Li+ ions, which differentiated carrageenan from other marine polysaccharides (i.e., alginate and chitosan). The extensive ionic bonding, electrostatic forces and hydrogen-bonding networks within the double–helix aggregation triggered a rapid gelation, which stabilized the polymer scaffold, hygroscopic salt and photothermal polymer in a hybrid hydrogel as a crude material. Its proper gel strength and processing method enabled controlled fabrication of hollow beads with porous shells. Reversible and durable water vapor sorption was demonstrated in a broad RH range of 35–90%. Maximum water uptake of 7.6 g g−1 was achieved under 90% RH, which is one of the best-performing sorbent-based AWGs reported so far. The systematic evaluation of the multi-functional AWGs for atmospheric water harvesting, solar-powered production of drinking water, control of humidity in closed spaces and passive cooling of PV panels for enhanced solar energy conversion disclosed a representative series of application scenarios. This work highlights the great potential of marine-biomass-derived polymers, high-performing sorbent-based AWGs and well-defined integrated systems for versatile energy-saving and sustainable applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of KPL-based AWGs and potential applications for atmospheric water harvesting, clean water production, humidity control and photovoltaic panel cooling developed in this study. 
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Fabrication and characterization of KPL-based AWGs
Carrageenan is a generic description of a group of linear sulfated polysaccharides that are extracted from certain species of red algae in the Florideophyceae class. It comprises alternating repeating units of 3,6-anhydrogalactose (3,6-AG) and galactose-4-sulfate, which are joined by α-1,3- and β-1,4-glycosidic linkages. There are three commercial types of carrageenan, namely kappa (κ-), iota (ι-) and lambda (λ-) carrageenan, which differ in the positions and number of sulfate groups and the content of 3,6-AG in the polymer chains.50 κ-Carrageenan (KC) contains one sulfate group per disaccharide repeating unit, which is the most used type of carrageenan in food and beverage industry due to its biocompatibility, high molecular weight (over 100 kDa) and efficient gelling ability. Neat KC is thermo-reversible and can be fully solubilized in warm water (∼70 °C), since the sulfate groups on KC create electrostatic repulsion between polymer chains. The negative charges on KC show high sensitivity to the presence of many alkali metal ions (i.e., Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, Cs+ and Ca2+), which form several electrostatic bridges between the cations, ester–sulfate groups and the 3,6-AG ring of another galactose unit (Fig. 2a and S1, ESI†). The cross-linking reaction and sol–gel transition of KC (also named coil–helix transition) can be triggered by incorporating a catalytic amount of selected cations into warm aqueous solutions of KC and subsequently cooling the solutions to ambient temperature. In this way, the disordered polymer chains (present as random coils in warm solutions) transfer to ordered conformations with double-helix structures followed by aggregation of neighboring helices, generating heterotypic junction zones among the polymer networks (helix–helix aggregation) (Fig. S2, ESI†). This disorder-to-order transition increases the gelling temperature and molecular weights. The polymer networks are stabilized by numerous hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions, leading to firm and rigid KC-based hydrogels. As a result, KC can be regarded as a smart biopolymer with unique temperature- and cation-responsive properties.51 We point out that the coil–helix transition controlled by temperature and cations is a unique characteristic of KC, which differentiates KC from other widely used polysaccharides (i.e., alginate, chitosan and cellulose).52–54
 Fig. 2  (a) A flow chart and gelation mechanism of KPL beads; (b–d) cross-sectional SEM images and (e) EDS mapping of KPL beads; (f) G′ and G′′ of different KC gels under frequency sweep and (g) XPS spectrum of KPL beads. 
Based on its unique gelation behavior, KC was employed as a main matrix to fabricate the hygroscopic photothermal beads in this study. Lithium chloride (LiCl) was introduced as the hygroscopic salt and crosslinker for KC. PPy served as the solar absorbing component. PPy was evenly distributed into a warm aqueous solution of KC (2 wt% at ∼75 °C). The warm KC/PPy solution was dropwise extruded into a cold aqueous solution of LiCl (20 M at ∼0 °C) via a peristaltic pump (at a constant speed of 1 mL min−1) (Fig. 2a). The polymer chains of KC were ordered through cooling and cross-linked via ionic bonding and electrostatic forces in the presence of Li+. The fast gelation created rigid and homogenous KC/PPy/LiCl (KPL) beads with a homogeneous size of ∼4 mm. Notably, Li+ is an essential reagent forming the ordered conformation of the KC gels and the amounts of Li+ also determined the shapes and firmness of the KC beads. In the absence of Li+, gelation of the same KC solution (2 wt%) only generated a soft and flexible gel due to the formation of double helices with restricted lengths (Fig. S3a, ESI†). On the other hand, the compression strength of KPL gels was significantly improved by increasing the concentration of Li+ in the solutions. This is because the linear helicoidal segments of KC can further bind together (helix–helix aggregation) and form more stable and strong gels (Fig. 2a and S3b, ESI†).
Interestingly, solid KPL beads turned into hollow shells after being dried in a vacuum oven (−0.1 MPa, 40 °C) for 12 h. We suggest that the proper gel strength in LiCl solution (20 M at ∼0 °C) and mild release of water molecules to the surfaces of the beads synergistically contributed to the formation of the hollow and porous structures. On the other hand, the weaker gelation caused by a smaller concentration of Li+ (10 M) led to an evident shrinkage of the hollow KPL beads after vacuum drying (Fig. S4, S5 and Table S1, ESI†). Another hygroscopic salt (calcium chloride, CaCl2) was also considered, yet only solid beads were obtained after vacuum drying. It has been evidenced that Ca2+ is more efficient gelling reagent than Li+.51 The same KC/PPy solution cross-linked by Ca2+ formed a rigid and brittle gel, showing a higher compression strength than the KPL gel (Fig. S3a and S6, ESI†). We inferred that the stronger gelation of KC via Ca2+ played a crucial role in the formation of the solid KC/PPy/CaCl2 (named KPC) beads. Furthermore, common dehydration in a warm oven (∼80 °C) led to significant structural deformation of the KPL beads (Fig. S7, ESI†). This is because the high temperature accelerated the release of water and caused the structural collapse of thermal-reversible KPL beads. These results highlight the importance of selected components (KC), proper gelation (the right Li+ concentration) and rational processing methods (vacuum drying) for the fabrication of hollow KPL beads.
Interior and surface morphologies of KPL beads were characterized via a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and pore size analysis. The cross-sectional views of SEM images depict the open-cell structures of the KPL beads. In such a hollow structure, the air pocket with an average diameter of ∼3 mm was sealed by a porous and thin shell of KPL (Fig. 2b). Numerous macropores were observed throughout the KPL shells (Fig. 2c and d). The macropores exhibited a pore-size distribution ranging from 0.1 to 2.4 μm with an average pore size of 1.3 μm, which was evaluated using Nano Measurer 1.2 software based on the SEM images (Fig. S8, ESI†). In addition, Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) analysis was employed to determine the pore area and specific pore volume based on the hysteresis of nitrogen adsorption–desorption, indicating numerous mesopores inside the KPL shells (Fig. S9a, ESI†). The porous shells of the KPL beads significantly increased the specific surface area (3.68 m2 g−1) as compared to the solid KPL counterpart (1.47 m2 g−1) (Fig. S9b, ESI†). The hierarchically porous structures of KPL beads should contribute to the water vapor sorption and release in night–day cycles, as characterized in the following sections. The elemental mapping at the microstructural level obtained from the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) shows that Li was evenly distributed throughout the shell of the KPL bead. It indicated the homogeneous distribution of electrostatic bridges as cross-linking points within the KC matrix (Fig. 2e).
Dynamic rheological testing was performed to study the deformation and flow behavior of four KC gels, including neat KC, KC/PPy/LiCl (10 M Li+ solution) (named KPL-10), KPL and KPC (Fig. 2f). For viscoelastic materials, storage modulus (G′) represents the stored deformation energy in an elastic behavior. Loss modulus (G′′) reflects the deformation energy lost through internal friction of structural components. All gels presented elastic-like behavior (G′ > G′′) in the frequency sweep from 0.1 to 100 rad s−1, indicating the formation of ordered and cross-linked polymer networks throughout the gels.54 Taking into account the two ions (Ca2+ and Li+) and different Li+ concentrations (10 and 20 M) in aqueous solutions, the trend of G′ (KPC > KPL > KPL-10 > KC) revealed a gradual decrease in the degree of cross-linking in these gels, which was in good agreement with the gelation mechanism and mechanical properties discussed above.
Chemical compositions of KPL beads were characterized via Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The peaks at 1230, 933 and 845 cm−1 corresponded to the ester–sulfate groups, 3,6-anhydro-D-galactose and D-galactose-4-sulfate, respectively (Fig. S10a, ESI†). The characteristic signals of N–H and CC groups on PPy were observed at 3420 and 1550 cm−1, which confirmed PPy was incorporated into the KPL beads.20 After gelation, the SO stretching band of sulfate groups shifted from 1243 to 1230 cm−1, indicating the ionic binding between sulfate groups and Li+ (Fig. S10b, ESI†). Moreover, strong C 1s (285.1 eV) and O 1s (532.1 eV) peaks were found in the XPS spectrum of KPL (Fig. 2g and S11, ESI†). The atomic ratio of O/C was close to 1.1, implying the abundance of polar groups in KPL. The Li 1s, S 2p and N 1s peaks were observed at 55.1, 165.0 and 399.0 eV, corresponding to the functional groups on LiCl, KC and PPy, respectively.
2.2 Water vapor sorption of KPL beads
Neat KC is a naturally hygroscopic biopolymer. The neat KC powder showed a moderate moisture sorption and gave a saturated water content of 0.68 g g−1 under 90% RH (Fig. S12a, ESI†). The polymer chains of KC contain numerous hydrophilic groups (i.e. ester–sulfate and hydroxyl groups), which can interact with water molecules via hydrogen bonds. In addition, several Li halides (i.e., LiCl and LiBr) are highly hygroscopic and can attract several times their own weights in water. The thermodynamic drive (exothermic) allows water molecules to bond with the small Li+ ions (size: 90 pm) and accumulate water molecules in the crystal lattices of Li halides (known as hydration). The hollow sphere and porous shells maximized the contact areas between the two hygroscopic materials (KC and Li+) and water molecules in the air. As a result, the synergistic effects of materials and structures endowed KPL beads with water vapor sorption capability (Fig. 3a). The indoor water vapor sorption was characterized in an artificial climate chamber, where temperature and humidity were the main control parameters. Under a low RH of 35% at 20 °C, the KPL beads reached a steady-state within 4 h. The saturated water content (1.8 g g−1) indicates their efficient water vapor sorption at low humid conditions (Fig. 3b). Notably, this value was higher than that of neat LiCl powder (1.6 g g−1) and neat KC powder (0.17 g g−1) measured as control groups (Fig. S12b and S13, ESI†). Unlike the porous surface on KPL beads, the neat salt powder generally formed an impermeable hydrated crust on its surface, precluding continuous moisture sorption. Solid KPL beads measured at the same condition delivered a lower saturated water content of 5.3 g g−1 compared to the hollow KPL beads, which also highlights the advantages of the hollow structures of KPL beads (Fig. S14, ESI†). For KPL beads, higher water vapor sorption was observed under higher RH, because more water molecules can be captured per unit time. Under a moderate RH of 60%, the KPL beads afforded a saturated water content of 3.3 g g−1 within 5 h. The maximum water vapor sorption was 7.6 g g−1, which was attained under a high RH of 90% after 24 h (ESI Video S1†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of water vapor sorption of KPL beads; (b) water vapor sorption of KPL beads at different RH; (c) water vapor sorption–release cycles of KPL beads; (d) summary of water uptake capacity of reported AWGs; (e) water vapor sorption of KPL and SPL beads under 90% RH (inset images show KPL beads before and after water vapor sorption); (f) MD simulation of water diffusion and (g) zoom-in images of water bonding in the KC matrix (black dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds); (h) summary of binding energy and number of hydrogen bonds with water molecules in KC and SA matrix at 10 ns. 
Raman spectroscopy indicated varied hydrogen bonding of water in KPL based hydrogels.54,55 The broad peak in 2800–3000 cm−1 corresponded to the stretching vibration of C–H bonds in KPL gels (Fig. S15a, ESI†). The broad peak in 3000–3700 cm−1 corresponded to the stretching vibration of the O–H bonds in water and KPL gels, which can be fitted by four peaks based on Gaussian function (Fig. S15b, ESI†). The peaks at 3270 and 3410 cm−1 correspond to the asymmetric and symmetric –OH stretch and tetrahedral structures of free water. The peaks at 3520 and 3630 cm−1 correspond to the –OH stretch of intermediate water that was partially involved in hydrogen bonding and exhibited non-tetrahedral structures. These results disclose that different water molecules (freezable and non-freezable) interacted with the KPL hydrogels via multiple hydrogen bonds. The material and morphological characterization reveal that the multilevel pores on the surfaces of KPL beads exposed sufficient active sites of inorganic and polymeric hygroscopic materials, quickly capturing water molecules from the air via hydrogen bonds. The polymer interconnections enabled diffusion of condensed water droplets from the outside in and reactivate water vapor bonding sites on the surfaces of KPL beads. As a result, the formation of a stable and porous scaffold based on hybrid hygroscopic materials synergistically contributed to the efficient moisture sorption of the KPL beads.
Alternating moisture sorption–desorption cycles were conducted to assess the durability of KPL beads. Water vapor sorption was performed under 90% RH and room temperature (∼20 °C). The subsequent water desorption was conducted in a warm oven (∼50 °C). No structural deformation (i.e., swelling and shrinkage) was observed during ten cycles, indicating the good structural stability of the KPL beads. No evident decay on water uptake after ten cycles confirmed the good performance stability of KPL beads (Fig. 3c). As depicted in SEM and EDS images, the KPL beads retained their initial microstructures and Li+ ions were still evenly distributed in the shells of the KPL beads after ten cycles (Fig. S16, ESI†). Notably, KPL beads attained one of the highest saturated water contents in a broad RH range of 30–90%. The corresponding moisture uptake surpasses a majority of sorption-based AWGs containing inorganic, organic and hybrid desiccants, as summarized in Fig. 3d and Table S2, ESI†.
In order to verify the essential structural function of KC in KPL beads, sodium alginate (SA) was used to replace KC and SA/PPy/LiCl (SPL) beads were fabricated via the same approach. Unlike KC solutions, the warm aqueous solutions of SA showed no sol–gel transition through a cooling process due to the lack of temperature-responsive coil–helix transition (Fig. S17 and S18, ESI†). In the presence of Li+, SA solutions presented slower gelation compared to KC solutions. The subsequent vacuum-drying process only formed solid and elliptical SPL beads, which deviated from the desired hollow and circular structure of KPL beads (Fig. S19, ESI†). The SPL beads gave a saturated water content of 5.2 g g−1 under 90% RH, which was lower than KPL beads (7.6 g g−1) under the same conditions (Fig. 3e). Irrespective of hygroscopic salts, neat SA also showed a lower saturated water content of 0.33 g g−1 than neat KC (0.68 g g−1) at 90% RH, which was partially due to the weaker stronger hydrophilicity of carboxylate groups in comparison with ester–sulfate groups (Fig. S12a, ESI†). The absence of hollow structures in SPL beads also significantly limited the contact areas between hygroscopic materials and water vapor.
Moreover, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was conducted to understand water sorption and diffusion in KC and SA matrixes by establishing a computing model.32 The MD simulation illustrates a whole process of rapid capturing, diffusion and bonding of water molecules in the polymer matrixes of KC and SA (Fig. 3f and S20, ESI†). T0 and T1 referred to 0 s and ten ns for water molecule diffusion, respectively. The homogeneous diffusion of water molecules from the surfaces into the interiors enabled the water bonding sites on the surfaces to remain reactivate for continuous moisture sorption. Fig. 3g depicts the transportation of a cluster of water molecules into the KC networks and were bonded with polymer chains via hydrogen bonds. The calculated binding energy and the number of hydrogen bonds between each polymer and water were summarized in Fig. 3h. The binding energy between KC and water (−548.9 kJ mol−1) was higher than the binding energy between SA and water (−495.5 kJ mol−1), indicating KC matrix generated stronger interactions with water molecules. In addition, KC featured more hydrogen bonds with water molecules than SA, suggesting higher water retention of the KC matrix. The theoretical simulation was in good agreement with the experimental measurements. The results elaborate the superior hygroscopicity of KC and highlight that KC is an essential structural element in KPL beads.
2.3 Atmospheric water harvesting and solar-powered clean water production
Commercially available AWGs are generally based on refrigeration technologies, which are limited by their high energy consumption (J/L) for cooling the air below the dew point. Most desert and arid areas generally show low RH (∼10%) and high ambient temperature (∼40 °C) in the daytime and moderate RH (∼40%) and low ambient temperature (∼10 °C) in the nighttime. As a result, drinking water production through the rational integration of sorbent-based AWGs and solar evaporation is starting to gain traction.46,56 In this study, KPL beads were used in AWGs to absorb moisture from the air during the nighttime and were subsequently heated to release clean water via a solar-thermal process (Fig. 4a). KPL showed a solid and steady absorptance (over 92%) in a broad wavelength range of 250–2500 nm, spanning over the entire solar spectrum (Fig. 4b). Solar evaporation of KPL beads was characterized using an artificial optical setup in our lab, following similar protocols to our previous reports.53,54,57 Water-saturated KPL beads (5.2 g) were overlaid on a Petri dish (diameter: 3.5 cm) and illuminated under one sun (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2, at ∼20 °C and ∼30% RH). The surface temperature of KPL beads showed a sharp increase to ∼42 °C in the first 25 min, followed by a mild increase and reached a maximum value of ∼61 °C after 6 h (Fig. 4c and S21, ESI†). The mass of KPL beads showed a gradual decrease over 6 h, yielding an average water desorption rate (0.94 kg m−2 h−1) and a solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of 62% based on a widely-accepted method of evaluating solar-powered interfacial evaporation (Fig. S22 and S23, ESI†).58–60 The results indicate efficient steam generation and continuous water release of KPL beads under mild heating by the sun, taking the advantage of the hollow structures, interconnected micro- and macropores and homogeneous distribution of PPy in the KPL beads.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of atmospheric water harvesting and solar-powered clean water production based on KPL beads; (b) absorptance spectrum of KPL beads; (c) mass and temperature changes of wet KPL beads over time under one sun (the inset shows a IR image of KPL beads); (d) atmospheric water harvesting at outdoor conditions; (e) and (f) solar-powered clean water production at outdoor conditions; (g) atmospheric water harvesting and clean water production in night–day cycles; (h) primary ions concentrations in condensed water after solar evaporation. 
Atmospheric water harvesting and solar-powered clear water production were also performed outdoors throughout nighttime/daytime cycles in late May, Qingdao, China. Atmospheric water harvesting was characterized using an inverted umbrella setup, which contained 5.5 g of pre-dried KPL beads and was placed on a tree branch overnight. Small changes in the ambient temperature and RH were observed from 18:00 to 06:00 the next day, exhibiting average values of ∼19 °C and ∼78%, respectively (Fig. 4d). KPL beads captured the atmospheric water and the condensed water exhibited a gradual weight gain over time. After 12 h, 21.6 g of water was gathered in the bottom of AWG. The high moisture uptake of ∼3.93 g g−1 highlighted the high-performing moisture sorption of KPL beads overnight.
After atmospheric water harvesting at night, the water-saturated KPL beads were moved into a solar-powered evaporation setup under real sky. A hemispherical condenser and a larger Petri dish were used to condense and gather water, respectively. The outdoor evaporation measurements were conducted throughout the daytime (09:00–17:00). Azimuth and elevation angles were used to pinpoint the position of the sun in the sky. The local solar elevation angle was 46° at 09:00, then rose to the maximum angle of 70° at 12:00, and fell to 21° at 17:00 (Fig. S24, ESI†). The time-dependent water collection was monitored together with the surface temperature of KPL beads (Tsample), ambient temperature (Tair), RH and solar intensity (Fig. 4e and f). On a sunny and breezy day, Tair and RH were in a range of 20–30 °C and 10–25%, respectively. The surface temperature of KPL beads showed a similar trend with the solar intensity. The maximum temperature of ∼52 °C was observed at noon (∼13:00) when the sun gave the highest intensity and elevation angle. A linear decline in the mass of KPL beads was recorded, indicating continuous steam generation (Fig. S25, ESI†). Drops of condensed steam appeared on the inner surface of the condenser and were gathered every hour. Impressively, the total output of clean water was calculated to be 3.14 g g−1 after 8 h, exhibiting an average water production rate of 0.39 g g−1 h−1. A life cycle testing was conducted to evaluate the performance stability of KPL beads in outdoor conditions. The water collected from moisture sorption and condensation showed negligible mass changes during the five day/night cycles (Fig. 4h). Inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) measurements showed that the purified water was not contaminated by Li+ (0.09 mg L−1) and the concentrations of primary elements (Na, Mg, K, and Ca) of the purified water were far below the drinking-water quality standards published by World Health Organization (WHO) (Fig. 4h). The results highlight the potential of using KPL beads for reliable water production, delivering high-quality potable water particularly for the remote areas with limited water supply infrastructures.
2.4 Air humidity regulation application
Humidity control of commercial and institutional buildings is a vital aspect yet a critical challenge to prevent health issues (i.e., skin irritation, sore throats and coughing), and bacteria and fungi growth. High energy requirements and complicated components (i.e., fan compressor, cooling coils and re-heater) make conventional methods expensive and environmentally unsustainable.61 The reversibility of the water uptake and release provides a potential avenue for using KPL beads to regulate indoor humidity due to their proper handling of the latent heat/cooling load as compared to conventional humidifiers (i.e., based on evaporation and steam) and dehumidifiers (i.e., based on air conditioning and refrigeration).62 As illustrated in Fig. 5a, 0.5 g of KPL beads were placed in a confined and transparent chamber (∼12 L). The changes in RH, the mass of KPL beads, temperature and light intensity were characterized over time. The indoor light level was fixed to a constant 125 lux (soft diffused light) during the dehumidification and humidification (Fig. 5b). For dehumidification, the dry KPL beads extracted the excess moisture and showed a gradual increase in weight when the chamber's initial RH was high (∼95%). RH presented a reverse trend with the mass change of KPL. It rapidly fell to comfortable RH levels of 40–50% within 1 h. A low and steady value of ∼22% was reached after 5 h. For humidification, the water-saturated KPL beads can release water vapor when the chamber's initial RH was low (∼23%). Moisture of the chamber gradually increased along with the reduced mass of KPL beads. RH rapidly reached 50% in 18 min and an enduring value of ∼69% was reached after 4 h. Notably, the AWG-based dehumidification and humidification caused minor variations (less than 5 °C) of the air temperature in the chamber, indicating the possibility to retain the indoor temperature in a comfortable range between 20 and 25 °C. As a result, moisture sorption and desorption of KPL beads offer an energy-efficient avenue for humidity control in closed environments.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of humidity control of closed environments based on KPL beads; (b) ambient temperature and illuminance characterization. Mass changes of KPL beads and RH changes of environment during (c) dehumidification and (d) humidification. 
2.5 Passive photovoltaic panel cooling
Solar energy is a clean, renewable and abundant source of energy for use in efforts to address the global energy crisis and climate changes. Our earth receives thousands of times more solar energy from the sun every day than all climate-damaging fossil fuels use combined. Solar photovoltaic (PV) is a sustainable and elegant technology that directly converts sun rays into electric power. PV cells currently produce over 600 GW of the world's power and have become a vital part of the global energy transformation. Solar PV is generally used at a utility scale with thousands of large panels in arrays when it comes to large-scale solar systems. Such solar farms (solar parks) are deployed on non-cultivated land and reservoirs.63 Commercial PV installations are generally based on crystalline silicon-based PV panels, which convert 10–20% of absorbed sunlight to electricity. On the other hand, the solar energy that is not converted generates waste heat, which increases the temperature of PV panels by up to 50 °C or more under real sky. The overheating lowers power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) and markedly shortens the life expectancy of silicon-based PV cells (half a percent of PCE decline for every one-degree Celsius of temperature rise). Conventional active cooling approaches (i.e., ventilation and coolants) generally require complicated engineering systems and are at odds with the maximum exposure to the sun. As a result, a new strategy of passive approaches is highly desired for cooling PV cells.64–66
Apart from clean water production and humidity control, KPL beads can also be used as passive coolants for PV cells. A layer of KPL beads (0.3 g) was pressed on the underside of a silicon-based PV cell (active area: 5 cm2) (Fig. 6a). The KPL beads strongly absorb water vapor at night when the air is cool and humidity is high. During the daytime, the KPL beads can pull waste heat from the PV panels and cause steam generation on their surface, simultaneously cooling the PV panels. The KPL beads can be re-generated under solar irradiation and used for the next night–day cycle (Fig. 6b). In order to assess the cooling effect of KPL beads, the photovoltaic performance of the silicon-based PV cells without and with KPL beads was measured under one sun. All current–voltage (J–V) curves of the PV cells were plotted in Fig. 6c and S26, ESI†. Photovoltaic parameters such as open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF), PCEs and maximum power output (Pmax) were calculated from J–V curves. A common feature is that PV cells without and with KPL beads afforded the same device parameters in the beginning (a Voc of 1.23 V, a Jsc of 15.0 mA cm−2 and a FF of 0.81, leading to a PCE of 14.9%), thereby verifying a reliable comparison of the two systems under the same conditions.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of PV panels cooling without and with sorption-based AWGs; (b) operating mechanism of PV panel cooling in a night–day cycle. (c) J–V curves of AWG-integrated PV panels (The inset shows a digital photograph of the device under illumination); (d) surface temperature changes of PV panels without and with AWGs over time. Changes of (e) Voc, (f) PCE and (g) Pmax of PV panels without and with AWGs over time and (h) capacitor charging via PV panels without and with AWGs (the inset shows the equivalent circuit). 
Under one sun (AM 1.5G, 1000 W m−2), the surface temperature of the neat PV cell without KPL beads increased over 50 °C within the first 10 min (Fig. 6d). It reached a steady temperature of 55 °C after 3 h of continuous illumination, which is considered significant overheating of PV cells. As the surface temperature raised, Voc of the PV cell showed a sharp drop from 1.23 to 1.15 V in the first 15 min, followed by a plateau region after 3 h, affording a lower Voc of 1.12 V (Fig. 6e). This is because an increase in temperature generally reduces the bandgaps of semiconductors (i.e., Si) and the bandgap is proportional to Voc of PV cells. The substantial decreases in Voc and FF (Fig. S27a, ESI†) and a slight increase in the current (Fig. S27b, ESI†) led to a significant reduction in PCE (from 14.9% to 12.8%) and Pmax (from 74.5 W to 63.8 W) after 3 h, as summarized in Fig. 6f and g.
The passive cooling effect generated by KPL beads significantly decreased the surface temperature of the PV cell by 5–10 °C over the continuous illumination, relieving the overheating impact as compared to the neat PV cell. The mass of KPL beads gradually decreased due to the water evaporation, indicating synergistic regeneration of the desiccants by using the waste heat (Fig. S28, ESI†). As a result, the PV cell integrated with KPL beads afforded a lower decay in most photovoltaic parameters (Voc, FF, PCE and Pmax). Its PCE (∼13.3%) and Pmax (66.9 W) consistently surpassed those of the neat PV cell under continuous illumination over 3 h. In addition, the average cooling power (P) generated by KPL beads can be expressed using eqn (1),65 (1)where ΔH is the evaporation enthalpy of water (2450 J g−1), Δm is the mass loss of KPL beads over time, t is testing time (3 h) and A is the area of the absorbent layer (5 cm2). P of the KPL beads was calculated to be 298 W m−2, surpassing the cooling power (40–120 W m−2) obtained from many radiative cooling systems.67 Furthermore, the actual output of the PV cells was evaluated using a capacitor (10 F), which formed an RC charging circuit and stored the free charges generated in the two PV cells under one sun (Fig. 6h). The capacitor can charge up to 1.1–1.2 V within 3 min. Notably, the KPL-integrated PV cell showed a ∼0.2 V higher voltage at the steady-state than the conventional PV cell, which was consistent with the supply voltages from the two PV cells. The results disclose that water-saturated KPL beads can free enough water to generate a cooling power of 298 W m−2, reduce the surface temperature of PV panels by 5–10 °C and boost the PV's efficiency by an average of 5% under one sun, highlighting the efficient self-cooling property of this AWG-integrated PV system.
3. Conclusions
In summary, a new sorbent-based AWG was developed via rational integration of marine biopolymer, hygroscopic salt and photothermal polymer in a bead-like hollow structure, which was demonstrated for high-performance, reversible and durable AWG operation. The selected structural components with well-defined morphologies delivered unique merits of our design, which are rationalized as follows (i–iv): (i) the fabrication of KPL beads took the benefits of unique temperature-responsive orientations (double–helix aggregation) of KC, Li+-assisted sol–gel transition and rational processing (extrusion, gelation and vacuum drying). All of the synergistic effects stabilized Li+ and PPy in the KC scaffold, enabling the controlled fabrication of hollow KPL beads with porous shells for use in AWGs. (ii) KPL beads achieved outstanding water vapor sorption in a wide RH range of 35–90%. Maximum water uptake of 7.6 g g−1 was achieved under 90% RH, outperforming a majority of sorbent-based AWGs containing inorganic, organic and hybrid desiccants. (iii) The atmospheric water gathered at night was purified through solar evaporation in the daytime, delivering 3.14 g g−1 of safe drinking water per night–day cycle, which is among the best-performing AWGs based on hygroscopic absorbents. (iv) Apart from drinking water production, energy-efficient humidity control in closed spaces and passive PV panel cooling for enhanced solar power conversion were demonstrated through the reliable moisture sorption–desorption cycles of KPL beads. This work provides insight into the facile fabrication of hybrid desiccants based on marine biomass-derived materials. It also highlights the great potential of new generations of AWGs for use in various energy-efficient, reliable and sustainable applications.
4. Experimental section
4.1 Material preparation

Hollow KPL beads. 
An aqueous KC solution (2 wt%) was prepared by continuous stirring at 75 °C for 10 min. Then a fixed PPy suspension (10 mg mL−1 in water) was added to the KC solution. After sonication for 15 min, a homogeneous mixture was obtained. The warm KC/PPy solution was dropwise extruded into a cold aqueous LiCl solution (20 M at ∼0 °C) via a peristaltic pump (at a constant speed of 1 mL min−1). Notably, the gelation process was fast and spherical beads were formed quickly. After soaking for 24 h, the as-prepared KPL beads were filtered and washed with anhydrous ethanol. The KPL beads were transferred into a vacuum oven (−0.1 MPa and 40 °C) for 12 h. Finally, hollow KPL beads were obtained after drying at 80 °C for 8 h.


Solid SPL beads. 
The procedure of preparing SPL beads was similar to that of KPL beads, except for an aqueous SA solution (2 wt%) was used as the starting material.

4.2 Moisture sorption and desorption

Indoor measurements. 
Water vapor sorption of all samples was evaluated in an artificial climate chamber (RGC-160D, Youke) at room temperature (∼20 °C) and controlled RH (35, 60, 90%). The weight of samples was recorded in real-time and water uptake can be obtained by the mass change over time. Solar evaporation experiments were conducted at ∼20 °C and 30% RH using a xenon lamp (CEL-S500, CEAULIGHT) with an AM 1.5G optical filter. The mass change of water was real-time recorded through an electronic balance (QUINTIX224-1CN, Sartorius; accuracy: 0.1 mg), and the corresponding temperature distribution of samples was monitored by an IR camera (223s-L19, Fotric Precision Instruments).


Outdoor measurements. 
KPL beads were placed into an inverted umbrella setup and on a tree branch overnight. The water-saturated KPL beads were moved into a solar-powered evaporation setup under a real sky, where a hemispherical condenser and a larger Petri dish were used to condense and gather water, respectively. Mass changes of KPL beads were recorded every hour, temperature and RH were monitored by an automatic temperature and humidity meter (Smart sensor AS817). The solar flux was calibrated using a thermopile connected to a power meter (CEL-NP2000, CEAULIGHT).

4.3 PV panel characterization

J–V curves of PV panels were recorded in backward scan direction using a Keithley 2602B source meter under a solar simulator (Oriel Sol3A, 69920, Newport) with simulated AM 1.5G illumination at 1000 W m−2.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support from the Taishan Scholar Program of Shandong Province, China (Grant no. tsqn201812026), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province, China (Grant no. ZR2019QB014 and ZR2020ZD33) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (Grant no. 201941011 and 202161055).
Notes and references
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Haddeland, J. Heinke, H. Biemans, S. Eisner, M. Flörke, N. Hanasaki, M. Konzmann, F. Ludwig, Y. Masaki, J. Schewe, T. Stacke, Z. D. Tessler, Y. Wada and D. Wisser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 3251–3256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Curto, V. Franzitta and A. Guercio, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 670 CrossRef CAS .
A. Subramani and J. G. Jacangelo, Water Res., 2015, 75, 164–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. H. Schneider, T. L. Root and M. D. Mastrandrea, Encyclopedia of Climate and Weather, Oxford University Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Tu, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1452–1475 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. Liang, S. Kang and H. Choi, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131601 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, X. Zhu, Z. Xu, R. A. Davis, G. Liu, H. Zhong, X. Lin, P. Dong, M. Ye and J. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 4680–4689 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, Z. Fang, X. Wan, X. Ma, S. Wang, S. Fan, M. Dong, Z. Ye and X. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, Y. Xu, C. Wang, C. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Di, L. Yu, L. Dong and Z. Gan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1885–1890 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Zhou, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Nano Today, 2021, 40, 101283 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tu and Y. Hwang, Energy, 2020, 201, 117630 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3863–3879 RSC .
R. V. Wahlgren, Water Res., 2001, 35, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
B. Khalil, J. Adamowski, A. Shabbir, C. Jang, M. Rojas, K. Reilly and B. Ozga-Zielinski, Sustain. Water Resour. Manag., 2016, 2, 71–86 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, H. Lu, F. Zhao and G. Yu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 671–684 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Joule, 2020, 4, 2532–2536 CrossRef .
M. J. Kalmutzki, C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704304 CrossRef .
H. Kim, S. R. Rao, E. A. Kapustin, L. Zhao, S. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1191 CrossRef .
Q. Ji, N. Li, S. Wang, S. Li, F. Li, L. Yu, P. Murto and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21197–21208 RSC .
H. Kim, S. Yang, R. Rao Sameer, S. Narayanan, A. Kapustin Eugene, H. Furukawa, S. Umans Ari, M. Yaghi Omar and N. Wang Evelyn, Science, 2017, 356, 430–434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. LaPotin, H. Kim, S. R. Rao and E. N. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1588–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ejeian and R. Z. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1678–1703 CrossRef .
N. Hanikel, X. Pei, S. Chheda, H. Lyu, W. Jeong, J. Sauer, L. Gagliardi and M. Yaghi Omar, Science, 2021, 374, 454–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsumoto, N. Sakikawa and T. Miyata, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2315 CrossRef .
D. K. Nandakumar, S. K. Ravi, Y. Zhang, N. Guo, C. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2179–2187 RSC .
F. Fathieh, J. Kalmutzki Markus, A. Kapustin Eugene, J. Waller Peter, J. Yang and M. Yaghi Omar, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat3198 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Hanikel, M. S. Prévot, F. Fathieh, E. A. Kapustin, H. Lyu, H. Wang, N. J. Diercks, T. G. Glover and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1699–1706 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Li, G. Liu, J. Li, X. Hu, N. Xu, W. Zhao, B. Zhu and J. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12054–12058 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. K. Ravi, D. K. Nandakumar, F. I. Alzakia, W. Lu, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902963 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ni, N. Qiu, P. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. Jian, Y. Liang, W. Xie, L. Yan and T. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19237–19246 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, P. Zhang, F. Zhao and G. Yu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1419–1422 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Qu, Z. G. Yu, Y. Zhang, T. J. Eey, Y.-W. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002936 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gong, H. Li, Q. Zhou, M. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Lv, R. Xiao and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104922 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Loo, L. Vásquez, U. C. Paul, L. Campagnolo, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10307–10316 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Nguyen, N. Hanikel, S. J. Lyle, C. Zhu, D. M. Proserpio and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2218–2221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Altunkaya, S. Aleid, C. Zhang, W. Wang and P. Wang, Mater.
Horiz., 2021, 8, 1518–1527 RSC .
J. Xu, T. Li, T. Yan, S. Wu, M. Wu, J. Chao, X. Huo, P. Wang and R. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5979–5994 RSC .
F. Deng, C. Wang, C. Xiang and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106642 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shan, Q. Pan, C. Xiang, P. Poredoš, Q. Ma, Z. Ye, G. Hou and R. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100664 CrossRef CAS .
A. LaPotin, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, A. Leroy, H. Kim, S. R. Rao and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 166–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, Y. Guo, W. Guan, H. Lu, W. Shi and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202200271 Search PubMed .
G. Yilmaz, F. L. Meng, W. Lu, J. Abed, C. K. N. Peh, M. Gao, E. H. Sargent and G. W. Ho, Sci. Adv., 2019, 6, eabc8605 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Alsaedi, M. Wu, L. Shi and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11367–11377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Dai and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806446 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, T. Sun, D. Wan, M. Dai, S. Ling, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, S. Xu, J. Yeo, H. Yu, S. Liu, Q. Wang, J. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Fan and W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105569 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Wu, S. Hong and P. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104255 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hua, J. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105977 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Z. Wei and C. Xue, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2021, 112, 348–361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu and L. Li, Food Hydrocolloids, 2016, 61, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, N. Li, C. Guo, J. He, S. Wang, L. Qiao, F. Li, L. Yu, M. Wang and X. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128051 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, L. Qiao, J. He, S. Wang, L. Yu, P. Murto, X. Li and X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008681 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, N. Li, S. Wang, L. Qiao, L. Yu, P. Murto and X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104464 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, O. Ilic, H. A. Atwater and J. R. Greer, Nat.
Commun., 2021, 12, 2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiao, N. Li, L. Luo, J. He, Y. Lin, J. Li, L. Yu, C. Guo, P. Murto and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9692–9705 RSC .
X. Li, G. Ni, T. Cooper, N. Xu, J. Li, L. Zhou, X. Hu, B. Zhu, P. Yao and J. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1798–1803 CrossRef .
M. Xiong, S. Dong, Y. Xu, C. Liu, Y. Di, F. Xing, S. Wu, J. Zhang, L. Yu, L. Dong and Z. Gan, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 2100430 CrossRef .
N. Li, L. Luo, C. Guo, J. He, S. Wang, L. Yu, M. Wang, P. Murto and X. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 134144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Wang, J. Yu and B. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, L. Hua, Y. Tu and R. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1427–1436 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, T. Jiang, C. Guo, L. Qiao, Q. Ji, L. Yin, L. Yu, P. Murto and X. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105111 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Nature, 2014, 515, 540–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Wu, S. Hong and P. Wang, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 636–643 CrossRef .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, C. Zhang, W. Zhou, D. Liu, S.-W. Kuo and T. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeyghami, D. Y. Goswami and E. Stefanakos, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 178, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00594hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of KPL-based AWGs and potential applications for atmospheric water harvesting, clean water production, humidity control and photovoltaic panel cooling developed in this study.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A flow chart and gelation mechanism of KPL beads; (b–d) cross-sectional SEM images and (e) EDS mapping of KPL beads; (f) G′ and G′′ of different KC gels under frequency sweep and (g) XPS spectrum of KPL beads.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of water vapor sorption of KPL beads; (b) water vapor sorption of KPL beads at different RH; (c) water vapor sorption–release cycles of KPL beads; (d) summary of water uptake capacity of reported AWGs; (e) water vapor sorption of KPL and SPL beads under 90% RH (inset images show KPL beads before and after water vapor sorption); (f) MD simulation of water diffusion and (g) zoom-in images of water bonding in the KC matrix (black dotted lines represent hydrogen bonds); (h) summary of binding energy and number of hydrogen bonds with water molecules in KC and SA matrix at 10 ns.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration and digital photographs of atmospheric water harvesting and solar-powered clean water production based on KPL beads; (b) absorptance spectrum of KPL beads; (c) mass and temperature changes of wet KPL beads over time under one sun (the inset shows a IR image of KPL beads); (d) atmospheric water harvesting at outdoor conditions; (e) and (f) solar-powered clean water production at outdoor conditions; (g) atmospheric water harvesting and clean water production in night–day cycles; (h) primary ions concentrations in condensed water after solar evaporation.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of humidity control of closed environments based on KPL beads; (b) ambient temperature and illuminance characterization. Mass changes of KPL beads and RH changes of environment during (c) dehumidification and (d) humidification.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of PV panels cooling without and with sorption-based AWGs; (b) operating mechanism of PV panel cooling in a night–day cycle. (c) J–V curves of AWG-integrated PV panels (The inset shows a digital photograph of the device under illumination); (d) surface temperature changes of PV panels without and with AWGs over time. Changes of (e) Voc, (f) PCE and (g) Pmax of PV panels without and with AWGs over time and (h) capacitor charging via PV panels without and with AWGs (the inset shows the equivalent circuit).	 
	(1)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d2ta00594h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
