Wire-supported CdSe nanowire array photoelectrochemical solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP00024E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP00024E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3583-3588Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsWire-supported CdSe nanowire array photoelectrochemical solar cells†

        
          
            Luhui 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Enzheng 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peixu 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Jia
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Ji
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinquan 
            Wei
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kunlin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dehai 
            Wu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: anyuan@pku.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory for Advanced Materials Processing Technology and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
Received 
      4th January 2012
    , Accepted 18th January 2012First published on 18th January 2012AbstractPrevious fiber-shaped solar cells are based on polymeric materials or dye-sensitized wide band-gap oxides. Here, we show that efficient fiber solar cells can be made from semiconducting nanostructures (e.g.CdSe) with smaller band-gap as the light absorption material. We directly grow a vertical array of CdSe nanowires uniformly around a core metal wire and make the device by covering the top of nanowires with a carbon nanotube (CNT) film as the porous transparent electrode. The CdSe–CNT fiber solar cells show power conversion efficiencies of 1–2% under AM 1.5 illumination after the nanowires are infiltrated with redox electrolyte. We do not use a secondary metal wire (e.g.Pt) as in conventional fiber-shaped devices, instead, the end part of the CNT film is condensed into a conductive yarn to serve as the secondary electrode. In addition, our CdSe nanowire-based photoelectrochemical fiber solar cells maintain good flexibility and stable performance upon rotation and bending to large angles.
1. Introduction
Fiber-shaped photovoltaics can potentially be light weight, flexible, and are basic units for making power-supply woven fabrics.1–9 Previously reported fiber solar cells (FSCs) are mainly based on organic materials or dye-sensitized TiO2 nanotubes, and the power conversion efficiencies remain lower than their planar counterparts. For example, organic FSCs built on stainless steel wires with active layers consisting of a mixture of poly(3-hexyl-2,5-thiophene) (P3HT) and [(6,6)-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester] (PC61BM) show cell efficiencies of about 3%.1 However, the fabrication process appears to be rather difficult, in which the carrier transport layers and conjugated polymers must be coated onto the primary electrode by repeated solution drawing and drying, compared to planar devices where thin films can be made by spin-coating with controlled thickness. Due to thinness of polymer layers, the device is also more sensitive to shorting between the electrodes. Dye-sensitized FSCs have also been made by etching the surface of a Ti wire into regular TiO2 nanotube arrays for dye adsorption and subsequent electrolyte infiltration.2,7,8 Although TiO2 nanotube arrays surrounding the core wire with tunable tube length can be reliably synthesized, most reported dye-sensitized FSCs show cell efficiencies (<3%) lower than their counterpart devices made on glass substrates (>6%).10–13 Splitting of TiO2 arrays during growth outwards from the Ti wire (leaving blank area not favorable for dye adsorption), electrolysis residue on top of the arrays preventing dye and electrolyte infiltration, and uneasy control of monolayer dye adsorption are possible underlying factors that limit the performance of dye-sensitized FSCs.

        CdSe
        nanostructures have appropriate band-gap (e.g. 1.74 eV) and are potential light harvesting materials in photovoltaics. There has been an extensive study in this area and various device structures have been reported, such as bulk heterojunctions made by blending CdSe nanorods with P3HT,14CdSe–CdTe nanoparticle heterojunction films,15CdSe nanoparticle-sensitized photoelectrochemical solar cells,16,17 and CdSe nanorod arrays infiltrated with conjugated polymers (e.g.P3HT) or liquid electrolytes.18–21 The CdSe nanoparticle size or nanorod length can be controlled to tune the optical response range, and the nanoparticle surface can be functionalized to facilitate electron injection at the interface.22 Solar cells incorporating CdSe nanostructures have shown significantly improved light absorption and charge transfer processes, with enhanced internal quantum efficiency and solar cell performance. In a few studies on CdSe nanorod/nanowire arrays, the arrays were synthesized in an alumina template or by electrodeposition and the structure has poor crystallinity, yielding modest cell efficiencies in the range of 0.28% to 3.6%.18–21 Although we have seen so many different types of solar cells involving CdSe nanostructures, applying CdSe on fiber substrates to construct FSCs has not been reported.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Synthesis of CdSe nanowire arrays and carbon nanotube (CNT) films

          CdSe
          nanowire arrays were synthesized by a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, which was carried out in a tube furnace housed with a 1 inch diameter quartz tube. About 10 milligrams source powder (CdSe, 10 μm, 99.99%, Aldrich) was placed in an alumina boat and then loaded into the center of the CVD furnace. Ti wire 1 to 3 centimetres in length (oxide layer removed, from Shanghai Gioray Metal Material CO., LTD) was used as the growth substrate, and pre-coated by 10 nm-thick Au film through plasma sputtering (Quorum K550X) at a current of 20 mA for 30 seconds. The Ti wire was placed in the downstream of the CdSe source, at a distance of about 15 cm, and suspended in the gas flow for growing CdSe nanowires all around the Ti wire. Before heating, the quartz tube was purged with Ar flow at a rate of 200 sccm for 10 minutes. After that, the furnace was heated to 780 °C for 30 minutes. During the growth process, H2/Ar gas (volume ratio of H2 is 15%) was flowed at a constant rate of 100 sccm through the quartz tube and bubbled out from a water container connected to the outlet of the furnace. The growth period is typically 10 to 30 minutes. After reaction, CdSe nanowire arrays with lengths of 10 to 40 μm were grown from the Ti wire surface.
CNT films were prepared using a floating catalyst CVD process in a quartz tube furnace. Liquid carbon source was slowly pumped into the inlet portion of the quartz tube through a capillary tube, and then vaporized at a temperature of 200 to 220 °C. The vapor was carried to the reaction zone by a gas mixture of Ar (2500 sccm) and H2 (600 sccm). Reaction zone temperature was set to 1160 °C. Films of carbon nanotubes were collected by nickel foils clinging to the inner wall of the quartz tube. Typically, as-grown spiderweb-like films consist of one to few-layer interconnected single-walled and a small percentage of double-walled CNTs in the form of small bundles. These films exhibit sheet resistances in the range of 100 to 400 Ω per square with an optical transmittance of 70% to 90% at a wavelength of 550 nm. The as-grown films were purified by immersing in peroxide (48 hours), HNO3 (48 hours) and rinsed by distilled water to remove amorphous carbon and catalyst residue.
2.2 Fabrication of Ti–CdSe–CNT–electrolyte photoelectrochemical solar cells
The fabrication process involved three main steps. A piece of purified CNT film was transferred onto the Ti wire and wrapped on the CdSe nanowire array uniformly along a certain length of the Ti wire. A droplet of ethanol was put onto the CNT film to let it condense to form good coverage and contact with CdSe nanowires. One end of the Ti wire was exposed as primary electrode by removing the as-grown CdSe nanowires on its surface. Electrical contact to the counter electrode (CNT film) was made in two different ways. In one configuration, the Ti–CdSe–CNT wire was fixed onto a glass slide, and the CNT film (overlapped portion on glass) was wired by a strip of Ag paste deposited in parallel to the Ti wire at a certain distance (1–2 mm) as the counter electrode. Alternatively, the CNT film at the end of Ti wire was condensed into a densified yarn, which was directly wired as the secondary electrode. Liquid electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, 2 M KOH and 2 M S dissolved in water was then infiltrated into the nanowire arrays by capillary action. In addition, Ti foils with CdSe nanowire arrays were covered by CNTs and infiltrated by electrolyte to make planar-structure devices with similar configuration to wire solar cells.
2.3 Structural characterization, electrical measurements and solar cells tests
The morphology and structure of CdSe nanowires and wire-shaped solar cells were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (F30). Thin Au film catalyst was coated onto Ti wire surface by plasma sputtering (QUORUM K550X). Solar cell tests were carried out by a solar simulator (Newport Thermo Oriel 91195A-1000) under AM 1.5G conditions at an illumination intensity of 70 mW cm−2, calibrated by a standard Si solar cell (91150 V). The CNT film was wired as the positive electrode and the Ti wire as the negative electrode. Solar cell measurements were done on the wires without (dry heterojunction) or with (photoelectrochemical) electrolyte infiltration. All electrical data were recorded by Keithley 2635A. For rotation and bending tests, the solar cell characteristics were recorded at each rotation angle (from 0° to 360°) and bending angle (from 0° to 90°, and then reversed). Incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was recorded on a Keithley 2400 source meter under irradiation of a 150 W tungsten lamp with a 1/4 m monochromator (Spectral Product DK240).
3. Results and discussion
Here, we report the use of CdSe nanowires as light absorption materials to make FSCs with good flexibility, stability, and power conversion efficiencies up to 2.26%. This cell efficiency is higher than that of planar solar cells based on CdSe nanorods,21 and also comparable to organic and dye-sensitized FSCs reported recently.1,2 The CdSe nanowires were directly grown on the surface of a Ti wire and formed a vertical array. A transparent, conductive CNT film was wrapped on the Ti wire as the secondary electrode. The high porosity of nanowire arrays and CNT films allows electrolyte infiltration to significantly enhance the charge separation and collection efficiency. Since our CdSe-based FSCs adopt the CNT film and its condensed yarn as the counter electrode, the device structure is also simplified without using a secondary metal wire electrode, while maintaining good flexibility and stability.
Our photoelectrochemical FSCs were fabricated by the following steps, including (1) growth of nanowires on a metal wire, (2) covering the nanowires with a CNT film, and (3) infiltration by liquid electrolyte for solar cell tests, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. In the first step, CdSe nanowires were directly grown on a Ti wire substrate (220 μm in diameter) roughly along the radial direction by CVD (see Experimental for details). Before CVD, the Ti wire was etched to remove surface oxide and sputtered by a thin film of Au (10 nm) acting as the catalyst to initiate nanowire growth. Au nanoparticles can be observed at the tip of as-grown nanowires (ESI†, Fig. S1). After growth, SEM characterization shows a three-dimensional random array of CdSe nanowires uniformly coated around the Ti wire (Fig. 1b). Many nanowires protrude upward, with diameters of about 100 nm and lengths of 15 to 25 μm (Fig. 1c). They have similar lengths along the circumference of the Ti wire, indicating that the growth is uniform due to suspending of the Ti wire during the CVD process. We have also studied these CdSe nanowires by using high-resolution TEM imaging and selected area electron diffraction, which reveal a single-crystalline structure with a lattice spacing of 0.702 nm, corresponding to the (0001) plane of hexagonal wurtzite structure (Fig. S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  Fabrication of Ti–CdSe–CNT–electrolyte photoelectrochemical fiber solar cells and structural characterization. (a) Illustration of main steps for preparing the solar cell, including growing CdSe nanowires on a Ti wire, wrapping a CNT film around the wire, and infiltrating liquid electrolyte into the nanowire array. (b) SEM image of the Ti wire after growing CdSe nanowires on its surface, showing uniform coverage. (c) Enlarged view of the wire edge showing vertical CdSe nanowires with diameters of about 100 nm and lengths of 15 to 25 μm. (d) SEM image of the Ti–CdSe wire partially wrapped by a CNT film. As the arrow indicates, the left part has no CNT film, and the right part has been coated by a thin, transparent CNT film. (e) Enlarged view of the wire surface showing interconnected CNT bundles in close contact to the underlying CdSe nanowires. The surface has a porous structure for subsequent electrolyte infiltration. 
In particular, we observe that the CVD process also produces a thin layer of polycrystalline CdSe film underneath the nanowire array, which acts as a transition layer to adhere the nanowires onto the Ti wire (Fig. S2, ESI†). This continuous film is important in maintaining good electrical contact between the CdSe nanowires and the primary Ti electrode, and therefore could improve the electron collection efficiency. It also blocks direct contact between the liquid electrolyte infiltrated into the nanowire array and the Ti wire, thus preventing possible device shorting between the primary and counter electrodes.
In the second step, a piece of CNT film was transferred to cover a certain length along the Ti–CdSe wire. We synthesized freestanding, robust CNT films consisting of mainly single-walled nanotube bundles by CVD, as reported previously.23 A droplet of volatile solvent (ethanol) was delivered to the CNT film; subsequent ethanol evaporation condensed the CNT film, resulting in tight wrapping around the core wire. One can distinguish the CNT-wrapped portion clearly in the SEM image, where the CNT film serves as a transparent electrode and also helps carrier (holes) transport along the wire length direction (Fig. 1d). Due to ethanol evaporation and CNT film condensation, the initially perpendicular CdSe nanowire arrays have collapsed into a two-dimensional network which is covered by the CNT bundles (Fig. 1e). This collapsing process makes the CNT film wrap well around the Ti wire, resulting in a freestanding core–shell structure.
Because both the CNT film and the CdSe nanowire array are highly porous, we can easily infiltrate polysulfide electrolyte into the pores as the redox mediator to make a photoelectrochemical solar cell (Fig. 1a). Electrons excited in CdSe nanowires during light absorption will be extracted by the core Ti wire, and holes are carried by the electrolyte to the CNT film through redox reactions (S2− to S22− ions). Although the nanowires have high aspect-ratios, the mesoporous structure allows charge separation and transport to occur anywhere among the array, enabled by the liquid electrolyte. On the other hand, the CNT film also can form heterojunctions with the CdSe nanowires by direct physical contact in the dry state.24 Therefore, we have actually prepared a hybrid solar cell here, although the photoelectrochemical cycle dominates the energy conversion process as discussed later.
We have measured the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of our Ti–CdSe–CNT FSCs under AM 1.5 illumination at an intensity of 70 mW cm−2 by placing the fiber on a black substrate to minimize the back scattering. Solar cells without electrolyte (dry heterojunction cells) or with electrolyte (photoelectrochemical cells) are tested respectively. Exposed portion of the Ti wire was connected as negative electrode and the CNT film was connected by Ag paste at one side as positive electrode. Under illumination, the fiber solar cell in the initial dry state shows an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.21 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.24 mA cm−2, and negligible power conversion efficiency (Fig. 2a). The J–V curve is a nearly straight line indicating poor solar cell behavior. Then, liquid electrolyte containing 2 M Na2S, KOH and S in water was added to the Ti–CdSe–CNT structure through capillary suction. The electrolyte infiltration significantly boosts the solar cell performance, resulting in a Voc of 0.48 V, a Jsc of 12.7 mA cm−2 and cell efficiency (η) of 1.42% (Fig. 2b). Although the dark curve shows evident diode behavior, the current leakage in the reverse direction is relatively high indicating low barrier shunting contacts between CNT and CdSe. A reference cell with Pt counter electrodes not in direct contact with the Ti–CdSe wire shows better diode property in the dark, but the fill factor remains low, indicating that the CNT–CdSe contact may not be the main reason for the poor fill factor (Fig. S3, ESI†). The active cell area, which is the product of the fiber diameter (236 μm) and the CNT film covered length (3.5 mm), is used for calculating the cell efficiency here. This efficiency is comparable to planar CdSe nanoparticle-based photoelectrochemical solar cells reported recently (2.6%),25 higher than that of CdSe nanorod array-based photoelectrochemical cells (0.52%),21 and also at the same level compared with organic and fiber-shaped TiO2-based dye-sensitized solar cells reported recently (2% to 3%).1,2 We can see significant improvement in cell efficiency after infiltration because liquid electrolyte can penetrate to the porous nanowire arrays and create CdSe–liquid interfaces for hole extraction from nanowires and transport to the CNT electrode. Without electrolyte, holes can only be extracted by the CNT film at the CdSe–CNT interface, and carriers are probably subject to severe loss during transport through the long CdSe nanowires. The above results also indicate that the redox reactions in the CdSe–electrolyte–CNT system (versus the CdSe–CNT heterojunction) play the dominating role in the solar cells. Despite that, we notice that the fill factor (FF) remains low (23.3%), indicating that there is considerable series and low shunt resistance existing in the cell. Our CNT films have resistance of 100 to 400 Ω per square, which generate a source of series resistance in the solar cell. Further reducing the film resistance should help improving the fill factor and cell efficiency. We fabricated a planar cell based on CdSe nanowires grown on a Ti foil substrate with the same cell configuration (electrolyte and CNT film electrode) and measured its IPCE (Fig. S4, ESI†). The results show a spectral response in the wavelength range of 500 to 710 nm, corresponding to the band-gap absorption by CdSe (1.74 eV).
 Fig. 2  Solar cell characterization. (a) J–V characteristic of a solar cell measured in the dry state before adding electrolyte. Inset shows the cell structure. (b) J–V curves of a photoelectrochemical cell after electrolyte infiltration measured in the dark and light conditions (AM 1.5, 70 mW cm−2). Inset shows the cell structure, in which a strip of Ag paste is put in parallel to the core wire to connect the CNT film as the counter electrode. 
Since the CNT film works as the transparent electrode and also can be densified into a conductive yarn, we have fabricated a freestanding wire-shaped solar cell with a CNT yarn tail at its one end (Fig. 3a and b). The advantage of making this configuration is that electrical contacts can be made only at the ends of the cell, with Ti wire at one end and the CNT tail at the other end, and thus twisting a secondary wire electrode in parallel to the core wire is no longer necessary. This makes it convenient for further integration of a large number of such solar cell wires into textile. SEM images show that the CNT tail is flexible and with good connection to the CNT film, which is then contacted as positive electrodes for testing (Fig. 3b and c). For this type of configuration, photo-generated holes have to pass through the CNT film to the fiber end to be collected, therefore the axial length (L) of the solar cell might become a major factor contributing to the internal resistance and causing carrier recombination. We fabricated cells with different active areas by covering CNT films on predefined portions along the Ti wire (axial lengths from 0.39 to 1.8 cm), and observed a decrease in current density with increasing cell length. For example, the 0.39 cm-long cell shows a Jsc of 8.18 mA cm−2, higher than that of the 1.8 cm-long cell (4.07 mA cm−2), indicating that the output current is not proportional to the cell length (Fig. 3d). However, these two cells show almost the same Voc (0.49 V), which seems to be independent of the cell length. Also, cm-long fiber cells could maintain an efficiency of >1% in the configuration containing the CNT tail (η = 1.47% for L = 0.39 cm, and η = 1.16% for L = 1.8 cm).
 Fig. 3  Freestanding solar cells with CNT yarns as end-contacts. (a) Photo of an as-fabricated 1.8 cm long Ti–CdSe–CNT solar cell with a densified CNT yarn at the right end. (b) SEM image of the right end of the wire showing the CNT yarn tail as the electrode. (c) Enlarged view of the wire end showing that the CNT yarn is formed from the CNT film by condensation. (d) J–V curves of solar cells using CNT yarn-electrodes with different CNT film-covered lengths (L) (0.39 cm and 1.8 cm, respectively), measured under AM 1.5, 70 mW cm−2. Inset shows the cell structure. 
The performance of our FSCs is stabilized by growing CdSe nanowires with controlled length (l). We studied several solar cells with different nanowire lengths from 15 to 40 μm, obtained by controlling the CVD time (Fig. 4a). The CdSe array with larger length also seems denser than the array with smaller length. J–V characteristics show similar performance of these cells, with Jsc values of 11.2 to 13.1 mA cm−2, Voc values of 0.5 to 0.55 V, and efficiencies in the range of 1.77–2.26% under the same illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 70 mW cm−2) (Fig. 4b). This is reasonable given that the majority of holes are transported through the electrolyte so that the length of CdSe nanowires is not the bottleneck for charge transport. The results indicate that our FSCs could maintain high stability within a certain range of nanowire length.
 Fig. 4  Stability and flexibility of the solar cells. (a) SEM images of the CdSe nanowire arrays with nanowire length (l) of 15 (left panel) and 40 μm (right panel), respectively, synthesized on Ti wires by controlling the CVD period. (b) J–V curves of solar cells with three different CdSe nanowire lengths (15, 20, 40 μm), respectively. (c) Solar cell efficiencies and current densities recorded at each rotation angle when the Ti wire was rotated constantly from 0° to 360°. (d) J–V curves of a solar cell in original straight form, bent to 45°, bent further to 90°, and reversed to straight shape, respectively. 
The CdSe nanowire array is also uniform along the circumference of the Ti wire. During the CVD process, the Ti wire was suspended in the reaction zone to ensure that CdSe nanowires grew simultaneously from all radial directions, resulting in full coverage on the Ti wire surface. The structural uniformity was also confirmed by measurements on the solar cell during rotation. The values of Jsc show a modest change from 6.87 to 9.74 mA cm−2, and the cell efficiencies in different rotation angles (from 0° to 360°) remain in the range of 1.35% to 1.98% (Fig. 4c). Fluctuations in Jsc and efficiency might be caused by the electrolyte flow when the Ti wire was rotated. The Ti–CdSe–CNT solar cell also shows good flexibility as the nanowires adhere well to the Ti substrate during bending. The cell efficiency remains almost unchanged (from 1.12% to 1.10%) when it is bent from original straight form to an angle of 45°, and drops slightly to 0.90% upon bending to 90° (Fig. 4d). However, when the wire is reversed to the straight form, the efficiency returns to 1.10%, indicating complete recovery. Because the core wire is tightly wrapped by the flexible CNT film, the FSC can be bent to large angles without losing electrical contact to the counter electrode.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we reported a new type of FSC by directly growing CdSe nanowire arrays on a Ti wire, with a CNT film and yarn as the counter electrode. Liquid electrolyte was infiltrated into CdSe nanowire arrays to improve the charge transport and collection processes. The FSCs show cell efficiencies of 1–2%, with stable performance during rotation or bending. It might be possible to fabricate solid state FSCs by infiltrating CdSe nanowires with materials such as conjugated polymers. Our results demonstrate that lower band-gap semiconducting nanostructures are promising candidates for making fiber-shaped solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under the grant number 51072005.
Notes and references
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Liu and M. Misra, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6383 RSC .
D. C. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Z. Chu, Z. B. Lv and X. Fan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Z. Wang, Y. W. Tang, J. L. Sun and D. C. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 113510 CrossRef .
S. Huang, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, X. Guo, M. Deng, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 375201 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, C. Y. Ji, Z. Q. Bian, R. H. Liu, X. Y. Xia, D. Q. Yun, L. H. Zhang, C. H. Huang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379 CAS .
B. X. Lei, J. Y. Liao, R. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15228 CAS .
C. C. Chen, H. W. Chung, C. H. Chen, H. P. Lu, C. M. Lan, S. F. Chen, L. Luo, C. S. Hung and E. W. G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19151 CAS .
L. L. Li, Y. J. Chen, H. P. Wu, N. S. Wang and E. W. G. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3420 CAS .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4079 CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1970 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schierhorn, S. W. Boettcher, J. H. Peet, E. Matioli, G. C. Bazan, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kwon, M. Shim, J. I. Lee, T. W. Lee, K. Cho and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12449 RSC .
Z. F. Feng, Q. B. Zhang, L. L. Lin, H. H. Quo, J. Z. Zhou and Z. H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2705 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schierhorn, S. W. Boettcher, S. Kraemer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3262 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fuke, L. B. Hoch, A. Y. Koposov, V. W. Manner, D. J. Werder, A. Fukui, N. Koide, H. Katayama and M. Sykora, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6377 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Jia, J. Q. Wei, K. L. Wang, Q. K. Shu, X. C. Gui, H. W. Zhu, A. Y. Cao and D. H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7236 RSC .
L. H. Zhang, Y. Jia, S. S. Wang, Z. Li, C. Y. Ji, J. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, D. H. Wu, E. Z. Shi, Y. Fang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3583 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Im, Y. H. Lee and S. Il Seok, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5665 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp00024eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication of Ti–CdSe–CNT–electrolyte photoelectrochemical fiber solar cells and structural characterization. (a) Illustration of main steps for preparing the solar cell, including growing CdSe nanowires on a Ti wire, wrapping a CNT film around the wire, and infiltrating liquid electrolyte into the nanowire array. (b) SEM image of the Ti wire after growing CdSe nanowires on its surface, showing uniform coverage. (c) Enlarged view of the wire edge showing vertical CdSe nanowires with diameters of about 100 nm and lengths of 15 to 25 μm. (d) SEM image of the Ti–CdSe wire partially wrapped by a CNT film. As the arrow indicates, the left part has no CNT film, and the right part has been coated by a thin, transparent CNT film. (e) Enlarged view of the wire surface showing interconnected CNT bundles in close contact to the underlying CdSe nanowires. The surface has a porous structure for subsequent electrolyte infiltration.	 

 	Fig. 2  Solar cell characterization. (a) J–V characteristic of a solar cell measured in the dry state before adding electrolyte. Inset shows the cell structure. (b) J–V curves of a photoelectrochemical cell after electrolyte infiltration measured in the dark and light conditions (AM 1.5, 70 mW cm−2). Inset shows the cell structure, in which a strip of Ag paste is put in parallel to the core wire to connect the CNT film as the counter electrode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Freestanding solar cells with CNT yarns as end-contacts. (a) Photo of an as-fabricated 1.8 cm long Ti–CdSe–CNT solar cell with a densified CNT yarn at the right end. (b) SEM image of the right end of the wire showing the CNT yarn tail as the electrode. (c) Enlarged view of the wire end showing that the CNT yarn is formed from the CNT film by condensation. (d) J–V curves of solar cells using CNT yarn-electrodes with different CNT film-covered lengths (L) (0.39 cm and 1.8 cm, respectively), measured under AM 1.5, 70 mW cm−2. Inset shows the cell structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Stability and flexibility of the solar cells. (a) SEM images of the CdSe nanowire arrays with nanowire length (l) of 15 (left panel) and 40 μm (right panel), respectively, synthesized on Ti wires by controlling the CVD period. (b) J–V curves of solar cells with three different CdSe nanowire lengths (15, 20, 40 μm), respectively. (c) Solar cell efficiencies and current densities recorded at each rotation angle when the Ti wire was rotated constantly from 0° to 360°. (d) J–V curves of a solar cell in original straight form, bent to 45°, bent further to 90°, and reversed to straight shape, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp00024e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
