Nanotechnology-enabled flexible and biocompatible energy harvesting  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00137F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00137F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1275-1285Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsNanotechnology-enabled flexible and biocompatible energy harvesting

        
          
            Yi 
            Qi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Michael C. 
            McAlpine
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. E-mail: mcm@princeton.edu
Received 
      2nd June 2010
    , Accepted 7th July 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      10th August 2010
    AbstractThe development of a method for efficiently harvesting energy from the human body could enable extraordinary advances in biomedical devices and portable electronics. Being electromechanically coupled, nanopiezoelectrics represent a promising new materials paradigm for scavenging otherwise wasted energy, with the ultimate goal of replacing or augmenting batteries. Of particular interest is developing biomechanical energy nanogenerators that are highly efficient, but with flexible form factors for wearable or implantable applications. This perspective presents an overview of the opportunities, progresses, and challenges in the rapidly accelerating field of nanopiezoelectrics. The combination of new nanomaterial properties, novel assembly strategies, and breakthrough device performance metrics suggests a rich platform for a host of exciting avenues in fundamental research and novel applications.Yi QiDr Yi Qi is a post-doctoral researcher at Princeton University. He received his BS degree in Materials Science and Business Management (double major) from Tsinghua University in 1999, MS in Materials Science from Tsinghua University in 2002, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering in 2008 from University of Maryland. He has conducted pioneering research in the fields of multiferroic materials, ‘artificial’ spin ice, in situ TEM techniques, and flexible piezoelectrics. Most notably, his flexible energy harvesting invention has been featured in Science Magazine, MIT Technology Review, and the New York Times. He is a member of Materials Research Society, American Physical Society, and Sigma Xi.Michael C. McAlpineProfessor McAlpine began his appointment as Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Princeton in 2008, and is an associated faculty member with the Princeton Department of Chemistry and the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM). He received a BS with honors in Chemistry from Brown University in 2000, an MA in Chemistry from Harvard University in 2002, and a PhD in Chemistry from Harvard University in 2006. His research has been published in peer-reviewed journals such as Nature, Nature Materials, Journal of the American Chemical Society, Nano Letters, and Proceedings of the IEEE, and featured in major media outlets including the New York Times. He has given talks at several universities and conferences, most notably an invitation to speak to the prestigious JASONs Defense Advisory Group. He has received a number of awards, most prominently an Air Force Young Investigator Award, an Intelligence Community Young Investigator Award, a DuPont Young Investigator Award, and an American Asthma Foundation Early Excellence Award.

Broader context
Piezoelectric materials are smart materials which can convert mechanical energy (such as from breathing, or walking) into more useful electrical energy. Yet, traditional piezoelectrics are hard, inflexible crystals which can also be toxic. A new suite of energy harvesting devices, including those developed by our group at Princeton, Wang's group at Georgia Tech, and others, are based on novel nanoscale piezoelectrics, allowing for efficient power generation without the limitations of traditional piezos. Specifically, the ability to assemble advanced nanomaterials onto FDA-approved implantable silicones or plastics has led to nanopiezoelectric devices that combine the key qualities of flexibility, energy efficiency, and biocompatibility in a single platform. Recent laboratory experiments involving tapping these chips with a finger or implanting them onto the bodies of rats have shown excellent promise for meaningful energy harvesting capabilities. The excellent performance of the piezo-ribbon nanoassemblies coupled with flexible, biocompatible plastics suggests these devices could eventually be incorporated into the soles of shoes to power portable electronics, or even placed on a heart patient's lungs to recharge a pacemaker battery via breathing.

1. Introduction
Efficient, highly portable, and continuous energy sources have attracted increased interest due to the proliferation of hand-held consumer electronics.1 While the computational capability of mobile technologies have increased many orders of magnitude over the past 20 years, the battery energy density has lagged significantly.2 Although advances in power management have extended the life of batteries, batteries add size and weight to portable devices, along with the inconvenience of requiring an available outlet for recharging. This is a matter of vital relevance where medical implants are concerned. Most modern medical implants (e.g. pacemakers, insulin delivery pumps, glucose sensors, and magnetic valves serving as urinary sphincters) regulate or replace bodily functions, and thus require batteries capable of reliably functioning for many years without failure.3 Dead implanted batteries typically require secondary surgeries for replacement, incurring significant inconvenience to patients in the forms of high costs, discomfort, and the risk of infection.
An alternative approach is to extract energy from the environment in which the device is housed, potentially offering a power source limited only by the lifetimes of the device or its wearer. Indeed, decreasing power requirements for biomedical and portable electronic devices opens the possibility of continuously harvesting local energy sources to prolong battery life or even eliminate batteries altogether.1 Sources of harvestable ambient energy can adopt many forms, including wind, flowing water, sunlight, electromagnetic radiation, radioactivity, waste heat, and mechanical vibrations. For example, radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) are electric power sources which rely on heat produced by radioactive decay to power pacemakers and space shuttles. Solar energy has been utilized in backpacks which charge devices while they are worn (Fig. 1a). However, solar cells depend entirely on the availability of sunlight, and thus are not applicable for devices which require power “in the dark”—particularly medical implants. Thermoelectric modules have been used in the Seiko Thermic wristwatch (Fig. 1b and c) to generate microwatts of power from heat generated by the small thermal gradient between the human body and ambient temperatures. Yet, thermoelectric generators require difficult-to-dispose-of radioactive heat sources to generate the large thermal gradients necessary for high efficiency performance—indeed, the efficiency is below 1 percent for a ΔT of 20 °C.1
 Fig. 1  Portable electric harvesters using sunlight or human heat. (a) Photograph of a portable solar charger backpack; courtesy: Sunvalleytek. (b) A Seiko Thermic wristwatch and (c) its conceptual design. The backlid (high-T end) receives heat from the wearer's arm while the clock case (low-T end) radiates heat. Reprinted with permission. Copyright Seiko Instruments, Inc. 
2. Energy harvesting from the human body
Biomechanical energy represents a feasible source of continuous power for wearable or implantable devices. The human body is a surprisingly rich source of energy—the average adult consumes approximately 2000 kcal per day, equivalent to 100 W. This power is expended during everyday activities, most significantly in fueling the motions of walking, arm swinging, finger motion, and breathing.4Fig. 2 shows the total available power associated with everyday activities for a 150 lb (68 kg) adult. Because most of this power is lost to wasted heat and vibrations, it may be possible to recover some percentage of this power for use in wearable electronics without significantly increasing the load to human body. For example, the heel strike from walking is a particularly rich source of energy with 67 W of power available from a brisk walker.4 Harvesting even 1–5% of that power would be sufficient to run many body-worn devices. Similarly, lung motion by breathing can generate up to 1 W of power.4 If this power were harvested into charging a pacemaker battery, it could increase the time required between battery replacement surgeries for patients.
 Fig. 2  Total available power for everyday bodily activities. After Starner4 reproduced with permission. Copyright 1996 International Business Machines Corporation. 
Researchers have investigated multiple routes toward harnessing biomechanical motion into electrical power. The first approach utilizes motor-based generators such as spring-loaded backpacks5 or knee-mounted gears (Fig. 3a).6 With optimized mechanical design and power management circuitry, these components can produce substantial electricity. However, these generators contain moving parts, which may limit their lifetime, and their implantation can interfere with the user's natural gait.
 Fig. 3  Biomechanical energy harvesting. (a) Mechanical motor-based energy harvester. Device diagram on the left shows an aluminium chassis (green) and generator (blue) mounted on a customized orthopedic knee brace (red); the chassis (right) contains a gear train that converts the low velocity and high torque at the knee into high velocity and low torque for the generator; reprinted with permission from AAAS.6 (b) Shoes integrated with PZT and PVDF for energy harvesting. The shoe scavenges energy both from the heel strike (by flattening a clamshell made of a PZT/spring-steel bimorph), and from the toe-off (by bending a PVDF stave). Reproduced with permission,1 Copyright 2005 IEEE CS and IEEE ComSoc. 
As such, an alternative route is scavenging bio-mechanical energy with piezoelectric materials.7 Piezoelectrics are a particularly interesting subset of smart materials which become electrically polarized when subject to a mechanical stress, and conversely experience a strain in response to an applied electric field, and in proportion to the strength of the field. Piezoelectrics thus contain no movable parts or complex assemblies, representing a compact alternative to biomechanical power generation. From naturally occurring quartz crystals, to flexible piezopolymers, to more exotic and efficient ceramics, the research on piezoelectrics has been extensive. These materials can also be fashioned at a variety of length scales, ranging from large-scale bulk materials that can be used to dampen structural vibrations,8 to film structures that can harvest ocean wave energy,9 to micro-scale cantilever actuators fabricated via MEMS processes.10–12 Given this extensive palette, it is not surprising that research has already been conducted on applications of piezoelectrics to biomechanical power generation. For example, piezoelectrics such as lead zirconate titanate (PZT) and the polymer polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) have been located inside the soles of shoes for energy harvesting (see Fig. 3b), yielding power outputs up to 10 mW from walking.1,13,14 PVDF has also been shown capable of generating 20 µW of power during respiration when implanted inside the rib cage in dogs.3
3. Piezoelectricity
Designing piezoelectric energy harvesters which efficiently convert body motion into power requires fundamental understandings of: (1) the mechanism of the piezoelectric effect, (2) the energy conversion efficiency, (3) the proper selection of suitable materials, (4) the assembly of these materials into a bio-interfaced component, (5) the smoothing of the power output via AC-to-DC conversion circuitry, and, possibly, (6) the coupling to power storage components with minimal transfer loss. Clearly, this diverse hierarchy from materials design to component integration will require multi-disciplinary efforts from across the engineering spectrum. These fundamentals, as well as MEMS techniques for fabricating vibration-based energy harvester systems, have been discussed extensively in many research and review papers.7,15,16 Here, we focus on those materials, fabrication strategies, and performance metrics that are most critical for biomechanical energy harvesting.
Piezoelectric materials generally fall into two classes: piezoelectric polymers and piezoelectric crystals. The most studied piezoelectric polymers are the PVDF family, first discovered in 1969.17 PVDF is a high-molecular weight polymer with repeat unit [CH2–CF2] (Fig. 4a). The piezoelectric property of PVDF arises from the strong molecular dipoles within the polymer chain, combined with short- or long-range ordering—the latter obtained by heating the polymer above the glass transition temperature, Tg, and then cooling under the presence of an applied electric field. PVDF films are inherently flexible and have been used in tactile sensors,18–21 and energy harvesters.9,22–24 Other pizeo-polymers exist, but are less efficient.25
 Fig. 4  Some common piezoelectric materials. (a) PVDF and its repeating units; (b) phase diagram for PZT, with relevant regions labeled; adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature,33 Copyright 2004. (c) Stress-induced phase transition in PZT. Blue atoms are Pb. Green atoms are O. Orange atoms are either Ti or Zr. Courtesy: Rappe. 
Another class of piezoelectric materials are the inorganic piezo-ceramics, commonly perovskite crystals. The most popular of these is lead zirconate titanate, Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3.26–30 Above the Curie temperature, Tc ≈ 300–400 °C, this ferroelectric oxide has a centrosymmetric body-centered cubic (BCC) structure (Fig. 4b). On cooling, PZT distorts into a rhombohedral or tetragonal symmetry (Fig. 4c). Displacements of the positively charged metal atoms relative to the negatively charged oxygens confer a large spontaneous polarization in the crystal at room temperature. Zr-heavy crystals (x > 0.5) favor rhombohedral symmetry, with a dipole moment along one of the 8 〈111〉 directions (the corners). Ti-heavy crystals (x < 0.5), on the other hand, favor the tetragonal symmetry; with a dipole oriented along one of the 6 principal Cartesian 〈100〉 “face” directions. 50/50 solid solutions (specifically, x = 0.52) of PbTiO3 (PTO) and PbZrO3 (PZO) lie near the morphotropic tetragonal–rhombohedral phase boundary (MPB, see Fig. 4b). At this boundary, the 6 possible domain states from the tetragonal phase and 8 possible domain states from the rhombohedral phase are equally favored energetically, allowing a maximum 14 possible domain states, resulting in an increased piezoelectric response and poling efficiency. Indeed, the piezoelectric constant in bulk poled PZT (d33, 200–300 pC N−1) is >4 times larger than PTO alone (50 pC N−1).31,32 External conditions control the state of this Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 system; for example, applying a uniaxial stress or an electric field to this material will cause it to switch phases.29,30
The most important parameter for characterizing the efficiency of piezoelectric materials is the piezoelectric charge constant, d. This value represents the polarization generated per unit of mechanical stress applied to a piezoelectric material, or, inversely, is the mechanical strain experienced by a piezoelectric material per unit of electric field applied. The following linear constitutive equations describe the mechanical and electrical conversion of piezoelectric materials: Si = sEijTj + dkiEk(1) Di = dijTj + εTikEk(2)where the subscripts i, j, and k represent the 3 spatial dimensions. S and T are strain and stress tensors, respectively, induced by the mechanical and electrical effects. D and E are the electric displacement and electric field vectors. sE is the elastic compliance matrix evaluated at a constant electric field; d is a tensor of piezoelectric strain coefficients; and εT is a tensor of permittivity values evaluated at a constant stress.34,35 The piezoelectric coupling is contained in the strain coefficients d; if d = 0, the material is not piezoelectric and there is no coupling between the electric and mechanical fields, while a larger value indicates stronger electromechanical coupling. Eqn (1) and (2) above can be simplified in piezoelectric materials operating such that one piezoelectric strain coefficient dominates and the other interactions can be neglected. For instance, for a piezoelectric material that operates in 33 mode (i.e. the polarization is in the same direction as the applied stress), the piezoelectric constant can be defined as D = d33 × T(3)
For piezoelectric elements working under static or low frequency conditions, such as walking or breathing (both <1 Hz), the elastic energy W stored in the material can be represented by its maximum stress or strain, (4)where Y is the Young's modulus of the material, and V the volume.
After the piezoelectric element is stressed, charge is generated at the surface perpendicular to the stress direction. The electrical energy stored can be obtained from (5)or (6)
From eqn (4)–(6), the electromechanical coupling factor (representing the efficiency of energy conversion) is thus defined as (7)
Bulk PZT has a piezoelectric coefficient of ∼250 pC N−1, compared with 2.5 for Quartz, 100 for BaTiO3 and −25 for PVDF. Properties for some piezoelectric materials are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Piezoelectric materials and their properties. After H. Kim et al.36 (Data for PZT fiber composite are after Swallow et al.,37 and Sodano et al.,38 and data for PZT–PVDF are after Venkatragavaraj et al.,39 but they depend strongly on the specific material and the PZT fiber volume fraction)




Material
Structure
Piezoelectric constant d33/pC N−1
Dielectric constant ε




PMN–PT
Single crystal
∼2000 to 3000
∼6000


PZT
Polycrystalline
∼250 to 700
∼1300 to 3900


PZT
Thin film
∼60 to 130
∼300 to 1300


BaTiO3
Thin film
191
1700


ZnO
Thin film
5.9
10.9


Quartz
Thin film
2.3 (d11)
4.5


PVDF
Polymer film
−33
13


PZT–fiber composite
Composite
∼180 to 460
∼495


PZT–PVDF
Composite
∼13 to 25






When one considers the process of piezoelectric materials selection, it is natural to assume that choosing the piezoelectric with the largest d33 will yield the most optimal results in terms of energy conversion efficiency. However, this selection must be balanced against other factors based on the application of interest—including biocompatibility, flexibility, form factor, cycling longevity, ease of manufacturing, and cost. For example, most human activities such as swinging arms, bending knees, or lung and cavity expansion during respiration are bending or stretching modes of operation. As such, for most wearable or implantable applications, a strain-driven operation mode is desired, so minimal additional effort is needed in the process. Therefore, flexible piezoelectric materials provide a natural choice for such environments. Flexibility also enables the possibility of natural integration with soft cloths or organ tissues, to comfortably accommodate various human body motions.
Polymer type piezoelectric materials are obviously naturally flexible. For example, PVDF can accommodate a maximal strain of 2% or higher. However, this advantage is offset by the relatively weak electromechanical coupling, with a piezoelectric coefficient of −25 pC N−1. On the other hand, most highly efficient piezoelectric inorganic ceramic materials are mechanically brittle. For example, PZT has a piezoelectric coefficient ∼10 times higher than PVDF, but it has an elastic modulus of 50–100 GPa,4 thus requiring large forces to compress the material. From eqn (4)–(6), the small integrated strain leads to a significantly lowered power density output. Finally, inspection of the equations shows that power output for all piezoelectrics also depends on the volume of the material and the magnitude of the applied stress—factors that need to be considered when designing flexible piezoelectric assemblies.
4. Flexible piezoelectric nanomaterials and nano-hybrids
Recently, increased efforts have been directed toward the ultimate goal of fabricating a flexible, wearable or implantable energy harvesting system with realistic power outputs, based on highly efficient piezoelectric nanoassemblies. These can be categorized accordingly:
• Piezoelectric fiber composites;
• Piezoelectric polymer based generators with enhanced piezoelectric coefficients;
• Nanowire generators based on integrated arrays of wires on a flexible platform;
• Piezoelectric ribbons printed from thin films onto flexible and stretchable substrates.
Piezoelectric fiber composites
Long, drawn microfibers represent an attractive approach to achieving flexibility from high efficiency piezoelectric composites. The maximum deflection, x, of a material is given by (8)where S is the maximum surface strain, L is the length and t is the thickness. Therefore, even with a maximum surface strain of only S = 5 × 10−4, PZT fibers that are long and thin can achieve a surprising degree of flexibility. PZT microfibers have been machined either from source wafers using a computer controlled dicing saw, from mixed oxide powders using extrusion/suspension spinning, or from wet chemicals via the sol–gel method.40 Fibers thus produced can have rectangular or circular cross-sections with diameters between 50 and 300 µm (Fig. 5a). Likewise, piezoelectric fiber composites (PFCs) consist of uniaxially aligned fibers surrounded by a polymer matrix (Fig. 5b), made by hot press or solvent cast methods. Mechanically, composites offer advantages over traditional piezoelectrics, most interestingly the ability to impose twisting deformations onto the structure. PFCs also have higher strengths due to the decrease in volume fraction. Finally, the flexibility of the polymer matrix allows the piezoelectric ceramic fibers to conform to curved surfaces, and provides a protective shell for the ceramic fibers, allowing them to better withstand impact and harsh environments relative to monolithic piezoelectric ceramic materials.
 Fig. 5  Flexible energy harvesters made of PZT microfiber composites. (a) Photograph of PZT fibers and (b) PZT fiber composite laminated between two plastic films (courtesy of Advanced Cerametrics, Inc). (c) Diagram of a PZT fiber composite laminate, consisting of active fiber, polymer matrix and interdigitated surface electrodes. (d) Interdigitated electrode schematic showing the electric field and poling lines. After Nelson et al.41 
PFCs with integrated interdigitated electrodes (IDEs, Fig. 5c) have been shown to have potential use in actuators and sensors, structural health monitoring systems and active/passive vibration damping systems.41 PFCs have also been studied for flexible power harvesting, in which the IDEs are first used to pole the fibers along the length direction, and then serve as electrodes to collect electrical current when the PFCs are bent or stretched.37,42 Composites with this geometry operate in d33 mode, which is approximately twice as efficient as the d31 operation typically used for bulk materials or films in flexing mode.15 Indeed, some experiments with PFCs suggest that they could yield higher conversion efficiencies than traditional bulk piezoelectric ceramic materials owing to the large length to cross-sectional area ratios, leading to larger acceptable strains and the ability to collect current from across the spans of multiple fiber bundles.43 It is also worth noting that the geometry of the IDEs, including the electrode separations and widths, could greatly impact actuator or energy harvesting efficiency, since the polarization of the fibers are affected by poling lines between IDEs (Fig. 5d).38,41,44 It is suggested that thinner fibers (sub-µm) allow for more complete poling by accommodating smaller electrode separations, thus allowing for higher poling fields and a concomitant reduction in ‘dead zones’.41
Advanced piezoelectric polymer-based generators
As discussed above, polymeric piezo-materials such as PVDF are naturally flexible, lightweight, and available in variety of thicknesses and form factors.17,45 PVDF is also biocompatible, rendering it a good candidate for wearable or implantable uses. For example, Kymissis et al. have integrated multilayer laminates of PVDF foils into shoes to harness energy from walking.13 Häsler et al. implanted PVDF films in a dog's rib cage to harness energy from respiration.3 However, PVDF exhibits relatively weak electromechanical coupling, with a piezoelectric coefficient of −25 pC N−1, significantly poorer than inorganic perovskite piezoelectrics. This limitation apparently stems from the alignment of the H–C–F dipoles, as untreated PVDF can contain α, β, and γ crystalline phases, and polymer crystals are usually small and randomly oriented so that little net polarization is generated over a macroscopic sample.46,47 The non-polar α phase (a random orientation of dipoles) forms most readily upon cooling from above Tg, so the material must be post-processed to obtain the piezoelectric β phase.
One way to treat PVDF and increase crystallization is to chemically tailor the polymer. For example, it was shown that the (VDF-TrFE)n copolymer can be crystallized directly into the ferroelectric phase, similar to the β phase of PVDF.48 Indeed, d33 for (VDF-TrFE)n can be as high as −38 pC N−1, versus −25 pC N−1 for pure PVDF. Another treatment involves a combination of stretching and poling to align dipoles and form the ordered β phase.23,45 One recent study utilizes a direct-write technique by means of near-field electrospinning (NFES) to produce PVDF nanofibers with in situ mechanical stretching and electrical poling (Fig. 6).49 The strong electric fields (greater than 107 V m−1) and stretching forces from the electrospinning process naturally align dipoles in the nanofiber such that the α phase is transformed into the polar β phase. As will be shown, individual fibers on a flexible substrate can then be tested and current/voltage signals measured upon stretching and releasing.
 Fig. 6  Nanogenerator using poled piezoelectric PVDF fibers. (a) Near-field electrospinning (NFES) combining direct-write, mechanical stretching, and in situ electrical poling to create and place piezoelectric nanogenerators onto a substrate. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a nanogenerator comprising a single PVDF nanofiber and two contact electrodes on a plastic substrate. Reprinted with permission,49 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Piezoelectric nanowire-based generators
Efforts have also been advanced in synthesizing inorganic nanowires for use in nanogenerators. Wang et al. have demonstrated that ZnO nanowires, which exhibit both semiconducting and piezoelectric properties, can generate current when bent by an AFM scanning tip.50 These wires thus represent promising building blocks for self-powered, small scale, integrated nanosystems. ZnO nanowires are relatively easy to synthesize (for example, by hydrothermal synthesis), and are biocompatible, allowing for use in biomedical applications with little concern for toxicity. Other types of nanowires or nanorods have also been investigated for electricity generation upon tension strain; examples include BaTiO3,51 GaN,52 and CdS53 nanowires.
Due to their large aspect ratios and single crystalline structure, individual nanowires can perform with bulk-scale energy coupling coefficients. Further, they can be integrated in creative ways on a variety of substrates, for example, by bridging trenches,51 or via lateral packaging on a flexible substrate.54 Integration of single ZnO nanowires onto plastic substrates has been shown capable of converting biomechanical energy to electrical power from the movement of a human finger and the body motion of a live hamster.55 However, due to the low total volume, a single nanowire is insufficient to power any meaningful device. For realistic applications, it is necessary to integrate large numbers of nanowire energy generators in parallel on a single flexible platform. Recently, ZnO nanowires were coated on microfibers for hybrid flexible energy scavenging.56 Here energy is generated when the nanowires rooted on entangling fibers are brushed against each other during vibration or movement, as shown in the left part of Fig. 7. An alternative strategy involves rationally growing nanowires over large areas on a single flexible platform. Multilevel nanowire arrays can thus be laterally co-integrated into a flexible nanogenerator (right portion of Fig. 7).57 Significantly, this approach has yielded generators which produce enough energy to support “self-powered” biological and optical nanosensors.
 Fig. 7  Nanowire-based integrated generators. Left portion: microfiber–ZnO nanowire hybrid nanogenerator. (a) SEM image of a looped fiber, and (b) enlarged section of the looped fiber, showing the distribution of the ZnO nanowires. (c) Schematic experimental set-up of the fiber-based nanogenerator. Energy was generated by relative movement between two entangling fibers. (d) Schematic illustration of the teeth-to-teeth contact between the two fibers covered by nanowires. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature,56 Copyright 2008. Right portion: laterally integrated nanogenerator using ZnO nanowires assembled on a flexible film. (e) Schematic for the rational growth of nanowire arrays orientationally aligned parallel to the substrate surface. (f) SEM image of a row of a laterally grown ZnO nanowire arrays. (g) Optical image of a laterally integrated nanogenerator. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials,57 Copyright 2010. 
Piezoelectric ribbons printed onto flexible substrates
Single crystal perovskites, such as PZT, are an exceptionally efficient class of piezoelectric energy conversion materials. Indeed, PZT piezoelectric cantilevers operated near resonance have demonstrated mechanical to electrical energy conversion efficiencies above 80%.58 Yet, as mentioned above, they are brittle ceramics with limited flexibility. Recently, our group at Princeton has shown that using a scalable transfer printing method, piezoelectric nanoribbons can be fabricated from high quality thin films grown on rigid single crystal wafers, and subsequently printed onto rubber sheets or plastic films for flexible energy harvesting (Fig. 8).59–62 The print transfer method involves relocating materials63 or fully fabricated devices64 from the host inorganic substrate to plastic using PDMS stamps or epoxy, and has been previously used for integrating many semiconductor structures (from nm to µm-scales) onto plastic.65–68 Due to the highly controllable nature of the print transfer technique, and the relatively benign chemicals and processes involved, the morphology and performance properties of the transferred materials are largely preserved.
 Fig. 8  Transfer printing of PZT nanoribbons onto flexible substrates. (a) Crystalline PZT ribbons are synthesized on an MgO host substrate, which is subsequently etched, and the ribbons are transfer printed onto flexible PDMS rubber. (b) Optical micrograph of PZT ribbons on MgO substrate before transfer, and PZT ribbons on PDMS after transfer printing. (c) Photograph of a piece of PDMS with PZT ribbons covering the top surface. Reproduced with permission,59 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Most critically, the transfer printing process overcomes the dichotomy associated with large-scale assembly of high performance inorganic materials on flexible substrates. Inherent to this dichotomy is the thermal incompatibility of flexible and stretchable plastics or rubbers with crystallization temperatures of high quality inorganics, as most plastics often melt or deform at temperatures of ca. 100–200 °C. However, the crystallization of inorganics such as piezoelectric ceramics generally requires much higher temperatures (>600 °C) for maximally efficient performance. Epitaxial growth of such crystals also depends on the use of crystalline host substrates.
High quality piezoelectric PZT nanoribbons were printed onto a variety of flexible and stretchable substrates by the following steps. Piezoelectric thin films are first grown using a standard RF-sputtering method using a Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 target with 20% PbO excess, onto a MgO (100) substrate pre-patterned with photoresist.69,70 To form PZT ribbons, the photoresist was lifted-off, leaving behind PZT ribbons, which were then post-annealed in air at 700 °C for 5–6 minutes to convert the PZT from the pyrochlore phase into a perovskite crystal structure. The high temperature and lattice match between MgO and PZT (lattice constants, a: PZT, 3.905 Å; MgO: 4.213 Å) are critical for forming a high quality perovskite crystal with morphotropic composition, as confirmed by XRD and EDS data.59 Next, MgO was undercut etched by phosphoric acid to free the PZT ribbons from their host. Finally, the freed PZT nanoribbons were transfer printed onto PDMS via conformal contact (Fig. 8a). By peeling away the PDMS, PZT ribbons were retrieved from the host substrate by non-covalent (van der Waals) forces, resulting in a flexible “piezo-rubber.”

Fig. 8b shows, via optical microscopy, 500 nm thick, 5 µm wide PZT ribbons (10 µm center-to-center spacing) patterned on the host MgO substrate before transfer printing, and the ribbons following transfer to PDMS. It was found that the PZT ribbons were comprehensively transferred to the PDMS and remained uniform and continuous. A photograph of the resulting “piezo-rubber” chip (Fig. 8c) confirms that the PZT ribbon array was cleanly and efficiently freed from the host wafer. In our experiment, over 95% of the ribbons were successfully transferred from MgO to PDMS over a 1 cm2 area.
Indeed, from the fabrication process, we conclude the following advantages of this transfer printing technique:
(a) Scalability—the transfer printing technique is inherently scalable, as it can be used to transfer materials patterned on the nano- to micro-scales, and print over areas from the micro- to macroscopic scales, in a completely parallel process. Indeed, the ultimate scale of the transfer printing process appears to be limited only by the size of the source wafer.
(b) Morphology retention—transfer printing can yield controllably ordered structures, because morphology is not disturbed by the transfer process. In our case, because a top-down approach is applied to pattern the PZT ribbons, a highly ordered structure can be realized on the final flexible substrate.
(c) Broad substrate applicability—the PZT ribbons can be printed onto silicones such as PDMS via van der Waals interactions, which bond the surface-dominated nanoribbons. Recently, we have shown that these ribbons can then be post-printed sequentially onto other substrates, including Kapton plastic films, with the help of an epoxy bond (see discussion below).
(d) Materials versatility—the transfer printing process begins with a system consisting of an active layer patterned on a passive carrier substrate, and requires only that a selective wet etchant is available to free the active ribbons from the host.
(e) High achievable performance—the print transfer process is relatively benign, and thus it conserves the performance metrics of the source materials. In particular, the combination of (d) and (e) suggests that if new thin film materials with higher piezoelectric properties are developed, this technique can immediately be adapted to pattern and transfer them onto flexible or stretchable substrates.
5. Nanodevice performance
We have discussed several strategies for generating novel flexible piezoelectric materials, based on recent advances in nanoscale materials generation and assembly. Yet, most critical for assessing the long-term viability of these materials is to study both their fundamental materials performance at the nanoscale, and to integrate these materials into flexible energy harvesting devices to ascertain quantifiable power outputs. In the former case, it is helpful to know whether inorganic nanowires and nanoribbons grown or printed on flexible plastic substrates can truly retain their performance. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy has become the accepted method for quantifying d33 where small displacements are involved.71,72 In PFM, an AC signal is first applied between a conducting atomic force microscope (AFM) tip and a bottom contact electrode. Next, the conducting tip is brought into contact with the surface. Finally, the electromechanical response of the surface is detected as optically mapped deflections of the tip. Thus, the tip simultaneously supplies current to the electrode and measures the inverse piezoelectric response.
To fully characterize the performance of our PZT ribbons, we conducted d33 measurements before and after transfer printing. The setup of the PFM measurement is illustrated in Fig. 9a. A doped diamond conducting tip (radius 50 nm, Veeco DDESP-10) was used in contact mode, and an intermediate force applied (2000 nN) to ensure that the tip deflection is electromechanical response dominated.71 An AC bias voltage of 40 kHz, chosen such that it was far away from the mechanical resonance frequency of the cantilever (320 kHz), was applied between the tip and the bottom electrode (Pt or conducting PDMS, as described below). The AC amplitude was ramped from 0 to 8 V while the tip was held at one position. Finally, the slope of the piezoresponse amplitude (=vertical deflection × sensitivity) vs. modulation voltage amplitude was determined as the effective piezoelectric coefficient, d33. For the PZT film with an 80 nm Pt bottom electrode on MgO, the piezoelectric response amplitude was found to increase from 0 to 400 pm over the applied voltage range (not shown), resulting in an effective piezoelectric coefficient of d33 = 57.0 pm V−1. The film was subsequently scanned with a 100 kV cm−1 bias voltage over a small area (100 nm2) for 60 min to pole the sample; d33 was found to increase to 113.7 pm V−1 after poling.
 Fig. 9  Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) to determine d33. (a) Schematic of the PFM setup. An AC voltage is applied between the tip and bottom electrode, generating an oscillating strain that can be measured by the deflection signal using a lock-in amplifier. (b) Deflection amplitude vs. modulating AC bias voltage amplitude for PZT ribbons printed on c-PDMS. Reprinted with permission,59 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) Piezoresponse from ZnO nanobelts and bulk ZnO for comparison; data were adapted from Zhao et al.72 
Most significantly, we performed deff measurements on PZT ribbons after transfer to PDMS. The PDMS was rendered conducting by adding 13 wt% fine carbon black (Vulcan XC72; Cabot, Billerica, MA) to the prepolymer before curing.73 The PFM conditions were altered such that the applied force was 500 nN, to avoid delaminating the ribbons from the PDMS surface. Fig. 9b shows the piezoelectric response vs. modulation voltage measured on PZT ribbons stamped onto this conducting PDMS (c-PDMS), which serves as bottom electrode. For the as-transferred sample, deff was found to be 27.1 pm V−1, while with poling was found to yield deff = 50.5 pm V−1. The combination of a large tip radius and small force for these experiments suggests operation mode in the weak-indentation regime, for which an estimated conversion factor deff = 0.5 d33 should be applied.71 This results in d33 values of 54.2 pm V−1 and 101.0 pm V−1 for PZT ribbons before and after poling, respectively. These values agree well with the thin film data, which is understandable considering the relatively benign processing conditions for fabricating and transferring PZT ribbons. In particular, the value of d33 = 101.0 pm V−1 for PZT ribbons on PDMS represents a 4-fold improvement over similar values72 for flexible PVDF polymers (d33,PVDF = −26 pm V−1),74 and for PZT–PVDF hybrid composites (d33 = 15–25 pm V−1).39 By comparison, Fig. 9c shows the piezoelectric constant measured from an individual (0001) surface dominated ZnO nanobelt, and a bulk (0001) ZnO reference sample.72 The effective piezoelectric coefficient d33 of ZnO nanobelt is found to be frequency dependent and varies from 14.3 pm V−1 to 26.7 pm V−1, larger than that of the bulk (0001) ZnO (9.93 pm V−1).
Yet, despite these higher d33 values, challenges remain in the integration of these nanomaterials into functional energy harvesters with truly meaningful power outputs. For example, Fig. 10 shows the output current and voltage from generators using PVDF fibers and laterally integrated ZnO nanowires. The PVDF fiber generator described above has a maximum output of 4 nA and 30 mV (0.12 nW maximal output power, characterized by ∫V × I) with an applied strain of 0.085% (Fig. 10a and b),49 while the laterally integrated ZnO nanowire generator shows an open-circuit voltage of 1.2 V with a short-circuit current output of 25 nA (30 nW power output) from a 1 cm2 area, when subject to a maximum strain of 0.19% (Fig. 10c and d).57
 Fig. 10  Current and voltage output from flexible generator devices. Open-circuited voltage (a) and short-circuit current (b) from a PVDF nanofiber generator. Reprinted with permission Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. Open-circuited voltage (c) and short-circuit current (d) from laterally integrated ZnO nanowires. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology,57 Copyright 2010. 
To demonstrate power harvesting using printed PZT piezoelectric ribbons, we performed a secondary transfer step to integrate the ribbons onto circuit-grade plastics with the aid of a thin epoxy layer. Specifically, a plastic sheet such as polyimide (PI, Kapton HN500 film, DuPont) was washed with acetone and isopropanol, rinsed with water and dried with nitrogen. Epoxy SU-8 (MicroChem) was spin coated on the PI surface. After pre-baking, PDMS ‘inked’ with PZT ribbons was pressed onto the surface and a gentle force was applied to remove any trapped air bubbles. After baking and UV exposure to cure the epoxy, the PDMS was peeled back, leaving PZT ribbons on the plastic. The transfer was enabled by the differential adhesive force between PZT ribbons and the soft epoxy layer compared with the weak van der Waals bonding of the PZT on PDMS. Lastly, we patterned interdigitated electrodes with 25 µm spacing perpendicular to the PZT ribbons, by uniformly depositing 10/250 nm thick Cr/Au, patterning resist, and wet etching of the Cr and Au. Fig. 11a shows a schematic illustration of the flexible generator device with PZT nanoribbons and IDE electrodes, while Fig. 11b and c show a photograph and optical microscopy, respectively, of the finished device.
 Fig. 11  Flexible nanogenerator from printed PZT ribbons. (a) Illustration of a flexible energy harvesting device, composed of a Kapton plastic substrate, PZT nanoribbons, and patterned interdigitated electrodes; (b) photograph of the energy harvesting device; (c) enlarged optical microscopy image of PZT ribbons (horizontal) and interdigitated electrodes; (d) measured open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current as a function of tapping frequencies. 
The device was poled via the IDEs at ∼100 kV cm−1 for 3 hours at an elevated temperature of 150 °C. This sets the ‘3’ direction to be parallel to the plane of the PZT film, thus rendering the PZT ribbons alternatively poled along the longitudinal direction between neighboring electrodes. After poling, the device was tapped with a finger to stress the PZT ribbons. Electrical signals from the IDEs were measured as shown in Fig. 11d and e, yielding a short-circuit current of ∼10 nA and a corresponding open-circuit voltage of 0.1 V, when subjected to an estimated 0.05% strain and a tapping frequency of 0.8 Hz. Interestingly, we found that the response depends significantly on the tapping frequency. For example, as the tapping frequency is increased to 3.2 Hz, the current and voltage increase to maximal values of ∼40 nA and 0.25 V, respectively, for an available total power output of 0.01 µW. The larger electrical signals at higher tapping frequencies can be explained by fundamental piezoelectric theory relating current to strain rate,49,75 i =  = d33Y × A × Ṡ(9)
Here, i is the current, q is the generated charge, d33 is the piezoelectric constant, Y the Young's modulus, A is the cross-sectional area, and Ṡ is the applied strain rate. Accordingly, the increased strain rate associated with tapping the device at higher frequencies results in larger current outputs. Operating at higher frequency may also lower the output impedance of the device, which leads to better impedance matching with the measurement system and thus higher electrical outputs.49
Although these results are promising in terms of the ability to fabricate novel nano-piezoelectric materials and integrate them into functional devices, significant improvements remain to achieve a realistic flexible generator capable of powering macroscopic devices. The key challenges in scaling up the power to meaningful levels can be categorized accordingly. First, and most critically, is obtaining a large total volume of the nanopiezoelectric elements, which collectively contribute to the power output. For example, a final examination of our first-generation prototypes shows that perhaps only 50% of the ribbons (which themselves occupy 50% of the usable area) truly bridge the electrodes. This is a fabrication engineering problem, and as we improve our transfer printing processes, the power output will increase accordingly. Second is the possibility of the formation of nano-cracks which originate from defects in the nanocrystalline materials; we are currently investigating failure mechanisms of nanoribbons on flexible substrates, as a function of various stretching/flexing conditions. Finally, the geometry of both the piezoelectric ribbons and the IDEs should be optimized for maximal power output. Piezoelectric elements between IDEs can be treated as tiny capacitors, analogous to those in fiber composites. The overall capacitance of such devices depends on the thickness and density of the PZT ribbons, as well as the width and separation of the IDEs. This capacitance in turn determines the internal impedance and thus may limit the usable power that can be collected. For maximal power output, the coupled electrical circuitry will need to be carefully designed to match the internal impedance.
In summary, the emerging field of nanopiezoelectrics has the potential to introduce novel opportunities in efficient, flexible, and biocompatible energy scavenging. The catalysts for these exciting advances have been: (1) the discovery and fabrication of novel nanopiezoelectric materials, (2) the development of hierarchical assembly strategies for integrating these materials onto flexible substrates, and (3) nanoscale characterization methods for measuring the fundamental piezoelectric performance of these devices, as well as measuring the power outputs of integrated nanopiezoelectric devices. Despite ongoing challenges, we anticipate significant advances enabled by the coupling of highly efficient piezoelectric nanomaterials with flexible and biocompatible platforms, particularly in the use of piezoelectric nanogenerators for continuously self-powered portable electronics and biomedical implants.
Acknowledgements
M.C.M. acknowledges support of this work by the Young Investigator Award from the Intelligence Community (No. 2008-1218103-000), the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (No. N66001-10-1-2012), the National Science Foundation (No. NSF CMMI-1036055), and the Princeton Center for Complex Materials (No. NSF DMR-0819860).
References
J. A. Paradiso and T. Starner, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2005, 4, 18–27 CrossRef .

          T. Starner and J. A. Paradiso, in Low-Power Electronics Design, ed. C. Piguet, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2004, pp. 1–35 Search PubMed .
E. Häsler, L. Stein and G. Harbauer, Ferroelectrics, 1984, 60, 277–282 .
T. Starner, IBM Syst. J., 1996, 35, 618–629 Search PubMed .
L. C. Rome, L. Flynn, E. M. Goldman and T. D. Yoo, Science, 2005, 309, 1725–1728 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Donelan, Q. Li, V. Naing, J. A. Hoffer, D. J. Weber and A. D. Kuo, Science, 2008, 319, 807–810 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anton and H. Sodano, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, R1–R21 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Hagood and A.v. Flotow, J. Sound Vib., 1991, 146, 243–268 CrossRef .
G. W. Taylor, J. R. Burns, S. M. Kammann, W. B. Powers and T. R. Welsh, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 2001, 26, 539–547 CrossRef .
J. Baborowski, J. Electroceram., 2004, 12, 33–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ramsay and W. W. Clark, Proc. SPIE, 2001, 4332, 429–438 .
Y. B. Jeon, R. Sood, J.h. Jeong and S. G. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 122, 16–22 CrossRef .
J. Kymissis, C. Kendall, J. Paradiso and N. Gershenfeld, Proc. 2nd IEEE Int. Symp. Wearable Computers, Pitsburgh, 1998, 132–139 Search PubMed .
N. S. Shenck and J. A. Paradiso, IEEE Micro, 2001, 21, 30–42 CrossRef .
H. Sodano, G. Park and D. Inman, The Shock and Vibration Digest, 2004, 36, 197–206 Search PubMed .

          T. Rödig, A. Schönecker, G. Gerlach, J. Am. Ceram. Soc.,  2010, 93, 901–912 Search PubMed.
H. Kawai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1969, 8, 975–976 CrossRef CAS .
C.-K. Lee and T. C. O'Sullivan, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1991, 90, 945–953 CrossRef .
A. Spineanu, P. Bénabès and R. Kielbasa, Sens. Actuators, A, 1997, 60, 127–133 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Shen, N. Xi and X. Tan, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, S262–S271 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Lee, S. J. Elliot and P. Gardonio, Smart Mater. Struct., 2003, 12, 541–548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Smolorz and W. Grill, Rev. Prog. Quant. Nondestr. Eval., 1996, 7, 195–201 Search PubMed .
C. S. Lee, J. Joo, S. Han and S. K. Koh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1841–1843 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Elvin, A. A. Elvin and M. Spector, Smart Mater. Struct., 2001, 10, 293 CrossRef .
E. Fukuda and I. Yasuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1964, 3, 117–121 CrossRef .
D. L. Polla and L. F. Francis, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 563–597 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ahn, K. M. Rabe and J.-M. Triscone, Science, 2004, 303, 488–491 CrossRef CAS .
P. Muralt, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2000, 47, 903–915 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Ramer and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2000, 61, 315–320 CrossRef CAS .
I. Grinberg, V. R. Cooper and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2002, 419, 909–911 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gururaja, D. Christopher, R. E. Newnham and W. A. Schulze, Ferroelectrics, 1983, 47, 193–200 CAS .
J. Mendiola, B. Jimenez, C. Alemany, L. Pardo and L. D. Olmo, Ferroelectrics, 1989, 94, 183–188 CAS .
E. Cross, Nature, 2004, 432, 24–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Cook-Chennault, N. Thambi, M. A. Bitetto and E. B. Hameyie, Bulletin of Science Technology & Society, 2008, 28, 496–509 Search PubMed .
S. R. Platt, S. Farritor and H. Haider, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., 2005, 10, 240–252 CrossRef .

          H. Kim, Y. Tadesse, S. Priya, in Energy Harvesting Technologies, ed. S. Priya and D. J. Inman, Springer, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
L. M. Swallow, J. K. Luo, E. Siores, I. Patel and D. Dodds, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 025017 CrossRef .
H. A. Sodano, J. M. Lloyd and D. J. Inman, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 1211–1216 CrossRef .
E. Venkatragavaraj, B. Satish, P. R. Vinod and M. S. Vijaya, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2001, 34, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dent, L. J. Nelson, C. R. Bowen, R. Stevens, M. Cain and M. Stewart, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2387–2391 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Nelson, C. R. Bowen, R. Stevens, M. Cain and M. Stewart, SPIE Conference Proceedings, 2003, 5053, 556–567 Search PubMed .
R. B. Williams, G. Park, D. J. Inman and W. K. Wilkie, Congrès IMAC-XX: Conf. on Structural Dynamics, 2002, 4753, 1618 Search PubMed .
F. Mohammadi, A. Khan and R. B. Cass, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2003, 736 Search PubMed  , D5.5.2.
H. A. Sodano, D. J. Inman and G. Park, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2005, 16, 799–807 CrossRef .
A. G. Holmes-Siedle, P. D. Wilson and A. P. Verrall, Mater. Des., 1984, 4, 910–918 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calvert, Nature, 1975, 256, 694 CrossRef .
G. T. Davis, Adv. Dent. Res., 1987, 1, 45–49 Search PubMed .
R. D. Simoes, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. A. D. Saja and C. J. L. Constantino, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2009, 49, 2150–2157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. Wang, Y.-K. Fuh and L. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Hu, A. P. Suryavanshi, K. Yum and M.-F. Yu, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2966–2969 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Su, Y. F. Chen, C. L. Hsiao and L. W. Tu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 063110 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S.-Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 022105–022103 CrossRef .
R. Yang, Y. Qin, L. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, Y. Qin, C. Li, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1201–1205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809–813 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Wei, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Flynn and S. R. Sanders, IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, 2002, 17, 8–14 Search PubMed .
Y. Qi, N. T. Jafferis, K. Lyons, C. M. Lee, H. Ahmad and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 524–528 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin and I. A. Aksay, J. Electroceram., 2004, 12, 53–68 CrossRef CAS .
I. Graz, M. Krause, S. Bauer-Gogonea, S. Bauer, S. P. Lacour, B. Ploss, M. Zirkl, B. Stadlober and S. Wagner, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 034503 CrossRef .
X. Chen, S. Xu, N. Yao and Y. Shi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Ahn, H.-S. Kim, K. J. Lee, S. Jeon, S. J. Kang, Y. Sun, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2006, 314, 1754–1757 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimoda, S. Inoue and S. Utsunomiya, Proc. SPIE, 2001, 4295, 52–59 CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Kim, I. Adesida and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 083501 CrossRef .
E. Menard, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093507 CrossRef .
K. J. Lee, J. Lee, H. Hwang, Z. J. Reitmeier, R. F. Davis, J. A. Rogers and R. G. Nuzzo, Small, 2005, 1, 1164–1168 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. McAlpine, H. Ahmad, D. Wang and J. R. Heath, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
R. Takayama and Y. Tomita, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 65, 1666–1670 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bi, Z. Zhang and P. Fan, J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 2006, 61, 120–124 .
S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 125408–125418 CrossRef .
M. H. Zhao, Z. L. Wang and S. X. Mao, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 587–590 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Unger, H. P. Chou, T. Thorsen, A. Scherer and S. R. Quake, Science, 2000, 288, 113–116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Furukawa and N. Seo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 29, 675–680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sirohi and I. Chopra, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2000, 11, 246–257 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Yi Qi	Dr Yi Qi is a post-doctoral researcher at Princeton University. He received his BS degree in Materials Science and Business Management (double major) from Tsinghua University in 1999, MS in Materials Science from Tsinghua University in 2002, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering in 2008 from University of Maryland. He has conducted pioneering research in the fields of multiferroic materials, ‘artificial’ spin ice, in situ TEM techniques, and flexible piezoelectrics. Most notably, his flexible energy harvesting invention has been featured in Science Magazine, MIT Technology Review, and the New York Times. He is a member of Materials Research Society, American Physical Society, and Sigma Xi.
Michael C. McAlpine	Professor McAlpine began his appointment as Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Princeton in 2008, and is an associated faculty member with the Princeton Department of Chemistry and the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM). He received a BS with honors in Chemistry from Brown University in 2000, an MA in Chemistry from Harvard University in 2002, and a PhD in Chemistry from Harvard University in 2006. His research has been published in peer-reviewed journals such as Nature, Nature Materials, Journal of the American Chemical Society, Nano Letters, and Proceedings of the IEEE, and featured in major media outlets including the New York Times. He has given talks at several universities and conferences, most notably an invitation to speak to the prestigious JASONs Defense Advisory Group. He has received a number of awards, most prominently an Air Force Young Investigator Award, an Intelligence Community Young Investigator Award, a DuPont Young Investigator Award, and an American Asthma Foundation Early Excellence Award.

Broader context
Piezoelectric materials are smart materials which can convert mechanical energy (such as from breathing, or walking) into more useful electrical energy. Yet, traditional piezoelectrics are hard, inflexible crystals which can also be toxic. A new suite of energy harvesting devices, including those developed by our group at Princeton, Wang's group at Georgia Tech, and others, are based on novel nanoscale piezoelectrics, allowing for efficient power generation without the limitations of traditional piezos. Specifically, the ability to assemble advanced nanomaterials onto FDA-approved implantable silicones or plastics has led to nanopiezoelectric devices that combine the key qualities of flexibility, energy efficiency, and biocompatibility in a single platform. Recent laboratory experiments involving tapping these chips with a finger or implanting them onto the bodies of rats have shown excellent promise for meaningful energy harvesting capabilities. The excellent performance of the piezo-ribbon nanoassemblies coupled with flexible, biocompatible plastics suggests these devices could eventually be incorporated into the soles of shoes to power portable electronics, or even placed on a heart patient's lungs to recharge a pacemaker battery via breathing.


 	Fig. 1  Portable electric harvesters using sunlight or human heat. (a) Photograph of a portable solar charger backpack; courtesy: Sunvalleytek. (b) A Seiko Thermic wristwatch and (c) its conceptual design. The backlid (high-T end) receives heat from the wearer's arm while the clock case (low-T end) radiates heat. Reprinted with permission. Copyright Seiko Instruments, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  Total available power for everyday bodily activities. After Starner4 reproduced with permission. Copyright 1996 International Business Machines Corporation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Biomechanical energy harvesting. (a) Mechanical motor-based energy harvester. Device diagram on the left shows an aluminium chassis (green) and generator (blue) mounted on a customized orthopedic knee brace (red); the chassis (right) contains a gear train that converts the low velocity and high torque at the knee into high velocity and low torque for the generator; reprinted with permission from AAAS.6 (b) Shoes integrated with PZT and PVDF for energy harvesting. The shoe scavenges energy both from the heel strike (by flattening a clamshell made of a PZT/spring-steel bimorph), and from the toe-off (by bending a PVDF stave). Reproduced with permission,1 Copyright 2005 IEEE CS and IEEE ComSoc.	 

 	Fig. 4  Some common piezoelectric materials. (a) PVDF and its repeating units; (b) phase diagram for PZT, with relevant regions labeled; adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature,33 Copyright 2004. (c) Stress-induced phase transition in PZT. Blue atoms are Pb. Green atoms are O. Orange atoms are either Ti or Zr. Courtesy: Rappe.	 
Si = sEijTj + dkiEk	(1)
Di = dijTj + εTikEk	(2)
D = d33 × T	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

PMN–PT	Single crystal	∼2000 to 3000	∼6000
PZT	Polycrystalline	∼250 to 700	∼1300 to 3900
PZT	Thin film	∼60 to 130	∼300 to 1300
BaTiO3	Thin film	191	1700
ZnO	Thin film	5.9	10.9
Quartz	Thin film	2.3 (d11)	4.5
PVDF	Polymer film	−33	13
PZT–fiber composite	Composite	∼180 to 460	∼495
PZT–PVDF	Composite	∼13 to 25	

	(8)

 	Fig. 5  Flexible energy harvesters made of PZT microfiber composites. (a) Photograph of PZT fibers and (b) PZT fiber composite laminated between two plastic films (courtesy of Advanced Cerametrics, Inc). (c) Diagram of a PZT fiber composite laminate, consisting of active fiber, polymer matrix and interdigitated surface electrodes. (d) Interdigitated electrode schematic showing the electric field and poling lines. After Nelson et al.41	 

 	Fig. 6  Nanogenerator using poled piezoelectric PVDF fibers. (a) Near-field electrospinning (NFES) combining direct-write, mechanical stretching, and in situ electrical poling to create and place piezoelectric nanogenerators onto a substrate. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a nanogenerator comprising a single PVDF nanofiber and two contact electrodes on a plastic substrate. Reprinted with permission,49 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Nanowire-based integrated generators. Left portion: microfiber–ZnO nanowire hybrid nanogenerator. (a) SEM image of a looped fiber, and (b) enlarged section of the looped fiber, showing the distribution of the ZnO nanowires. (c) Schematic experimental set-up of the fiber-based nanogenerator. Energy was generated by relative movement between two entangling fibers. (d) Schematic illustration of the teeth-to-teeth contact between the two fibers covered by nanowires. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature,56 Copyright 2008. Right portion: laterally integrated nanogenerator using ZnO nanowires assembled on a flexible film. (e) Schematic for the rational growth of nanowire arrays orientationally aligned parallel to the substrate surface. (f) SEM image of a row of a laterally grown ZnO nanowire arrays. (g) Optical image of a laterally integrated nanogenerator. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials,57 Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transfer printing of PZT nanoribbons onto flexible substrates. (a) Crystalline PZT ribbons are synthesized on an MgO host substrate, which is subsequently etched, and the ribbons are transfer printed onto flexible PDMS rubber. (b) Optical micrograph of PZT ribbons on MgO substrate before transfer, and PZT ribbons on PDMS after transfer printing. (c) Photograph of a piece of PDMS with PZT ribbons covering the top surface. Reproduced with permission,59 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) to determine d33. (a) Schematic of the PFM setup. An AC voltage is applied between the tip and bottom electrode, generating an oscillating strain that can be measured by the deflection signal using a lock-in amplifier. (b) Deflection amplitude vs. modulating AC bias voltage amplitude for PZT ribbons printed on c-PDMS. Reprinted with permission,59 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) Piezoresponse from ZnO nanobelts and bulk ZnO for comparison; data were adapted from Zhao et al.72	 

 	Fig. 10  Current and voltage output from flexible generator devices. Open-circuited voltage (a) and short-circuit current (b) from a PVDF nanofiber generator. Reprinted with permission Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. Open-circuited voltage (c) and short-circuit current (d) from laterally integrated ZnO nanowires. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology,57 Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 11  Flexible nanogenerator from printed PZT ribbons. (a) Illustration of a flexible energy harvesting device, composed of a Kapton plastic substrate, PZT nanoribbons, and patterned interdigitated electrodes; (b) photograph of the energy harvesting device; (c) enlarged optical microscopy image of PZT ribbons (horizontal) and interdigitated electrodes; (d) measured open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current as a function of tapping frequencies.	 
i =  = d33Y × A × Ṡ	(9)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
