Designs from single junctions, heterojunctions to multijunctions for high-performance perovskite solar cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00841B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00841B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13090-13128Designs from single junctions, heterojunctions to multijunctions for high-performance perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Xin 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zonglong 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Chu-Chen 
            Chueh
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Alex. K.-Y. 
            Jen
          
          
        
      *abce
aDepartment of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong. E-mail: zonglzhu@cityu.edu.hk; alexjen@cityu.edu.hk
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong
cHong Kong Institute for Clean Energy, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon 999077, Hong Kong
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Research Center for Green Materials Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: cchueh@ntu.edu.tw
eDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
Received 
      5th September 2021
    First published on 22nd October 2021AbstractHybrid metal-halide perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have drawn unprecedented attention during the last decade due to their superior photovoltaic performance, facile and low-cost fabrication, and potential for roll-to-roll mass production and application for portable devices. Through collective composition, interface, and process engineering, a comprehensive understanding of the structure–property relationship and carrier dynamics of perovskites has been established to help achieve a very high certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.5%. Apart from material properties, the modified heterojunction design and device configuration evolution also play crucial roles in enhancing the efficiency. The adoption and/or modification of heterojunction structures have been demonstrated to effectively suppress the carrier recombination and potential losses in PVSCs. Moreover, the employment of multijunction structures has been shown to reduce thermalization losses, achieving a high PCE of 29.52% in perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells. Therefore, understanding the evolution of the device configuration of PVSCs from single junction, heterojunction to multijunction designs is helpful for the researchers in this field to further boost the PCE beyond 30%. Herein, we summarize the evolution and progress of the single junction, heterojunction and multijunction designs for high-performance PVSCs. A comprehensive review of the fundamentals and working principles of these designs is presented. We first introduce the basic working principles of single junction PVSCs and the intrinsic properties (such as crystallinity and defects) in perovskite films. Afterwards, the progress of diverse heterojunction designs and perovskite-based multijunction solar cells is synopsized and reviewed. Meanwhile, the challenges and strategies to further enhance the performance are also summarized. At the end, the perspectives on the future development of perovskite-based solar cells are provided. We hope this review can provide the readers with a quick catchup on this emerging solution-processable photovoltaic technology, which is currently at the transition stage towards commercialization.
Xin Wu
Xin Wu obtained his BS degree and MS degree in 2016 and 2019 from the School of Chemistry, Beihang University. Currently, he is undertaking a PhD study in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the physical properties of perovskite materials, carbon-based perovskite solar cells, inverted perovskite solar cells, and perovskite-based tandem solar cells.
Bo Li
Dr Bo Li is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the structure design and photophysics of semiconductor materials, lead-free perovskite solar cells, and inorganic perovskite solar cells.
Zonglong Zhu
Dr Zonglong Zhu is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree (Chemistry) in 2010 from Nanjing University (China). In 2015, he earned his PhD degree in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST). Then he worked in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the University of Washington as a postdoctoral fellow. His research mainly focuses on the design of inorganic/organic materials, as well as the relationships between the materials synthesis, physical properties and device performance for optoelectronic application.
Chu-Chen Chueh
Dr Chu-Chen Chueh received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2010 and conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Washington from 2011 to 2016. He joined NTU as an Assistant Professor of the Department of Chemical Engineering in 2017. His research focus on the development of polymer semiconductors and organic/hybrid semiconductors and their applications in memory, light-emitting diodes, transistors, and solar cells.
Alex. K.-Y. Jen
Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen is currently serving as the Lee Shau Kee Chair Professor of the City University of Hong Kong. Before this, he served as the Provost for the City University and the Boeing-Johnson Chair Professor and Chair of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Washington. He also served as the Chief Scientist for the Clean Energy Institute endowed by the Washington State Governor. His research interest is focused on utilizing molecular, polymeric-, and bio-macromolecular self-assembly to create ordered arrangement of organic and inorganic functional materials for applications in photonics, optoelectronics, energy, nanomedicine and nanotechnology, and employing the “molecular engineering” approach to tailor the size, shape, sequence, and functionality of organic/hybrid functional materials and explore their applications.
1. Introduction
Photovoltaics (PV) has been one of the most important technologies for humans as PV systems not only serve as clean energy sources to address the needs of the rapidly developing world but also help ensure a sustainable environment compared to other traditional fossil fuels. To facilitate the large-scale deployment of solar cells requires that PV systems have continuously reduced levelized costs of electricity (LCOE).1,2 Reducing the cost of raw materials combined with enhancing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) and lifetime of PV modules plays a decisive role in lowering the non-module cost. In the past decade, perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) have drawn unprecedented attention due to their extraordinary optical and electronic properties, including ambipolar transport characteristics, high absorption coefficients, low exciton binding energies, high carrier mobilities, long carrier lifetimes, and high defect tolerance.3,4 The PCEs of PVSCs have soared from 3.8% to a certified value of 25.5% within a decade of development, which can rival the performance of their commercial inorganic-based counterparts.5,6 Apart from the promising performance, the facile, low-cost fabrication and diverse applications of PVSCs make them as perfect candidates for the next-generation PV technology.7–10 In spite of all these aforementioned merits, there is still a strong need to further improve the device performance and stability of PVSCs in order to meet the specifications set for commercialization.
Perovskites are typically processed through facile solution-based techniques, resulting in heterogeneity from short length scales (<100 nm) to ranges (>10 μm).11 Due to defects,12–14 such as vacancies, interstitials, and anti-site substitutions at grain boundaries, the grain-to-grain interfaces in the polycrystalline perovskite film dramatically influence the charge dynamics and recombination, ion migration, and infiltration of external species.15–18 Control of the crystallization and passivation of defects in single junction PVSCs is important. Meanwhile, the interfaces between perovskite and charge-transporting layers are also crucial for the performance because they influence the built-in electric field and the accumulation of charges and defects.19–21
As the defects in the bulk of perovskites and at the interfaces both cause non-radiative recombination and instability, modifying the heterointerfaces of PVSCs becomes more pivotal to enhancing device performance compared to other photovoltaic technologies. Myriads of strategies have been developed to alter the heterojunction designs of perovskites, including composition engineering to construct gradient perovskite (or perovskite/perovskite) heterojunctions, interfacial modifications, the development of new charge transporting materials (CTMs) to form perovskite/functional layer heterojunctions, and employment of organic bulk-heterojunctions as CTMs to reduce the optical losses, which can dramatically enhance the device performance by reducing the energy losses in PVSCs (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Device evolution of perovskite solar cells from single junction, heterojunction, to multijunction designs. 
Although the advanced heterojunction designs of perovskites have enabled reaching PCEs as high as 25.5% for PVSCs, exceeding 75% of their S–Q limits (Fig. 2), their theoretical maximum efficiency is still limited by the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit.22,23 To break the S–Q limit for achieving PCEs >30% requires the further exploration of strategies in multijunction design. In principle, a multijunction solar cell consists of both wide-bandgap and narrow-bandgap absorbers to provide the complementary coverage of absorption for the solar spectrum, which can not only effectively reduce the below Eg loss for the wide Eg absorber but also suppress the thermalization loss for the narrow Eg absorber, resulting in an increment of maximum efficiency.24,25 The tunable Eg of perovskite materials from 1.2 eV to 2.3 eV makes them ideal absorbers in multijunction solar cells.26 In the past five years, wide Eg perovskites have been combined with silicon, copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), narrow Eg perovskites and organic bulk-heterojunctions (BHJs) to realize high-performance multijunction solar cells (Fig. 1).27,28 Through sophisticated optimization of subcells and interlayers, an unprecedented PCE of 29.52% has been achieved recently in a two-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem solar cell,29 confirming that the simultaneous optimization of heterojunction and multijunction designs is promising for further improving solar cell performance.
 Fig. 2  S–Q limits with the record efficiencies of different PV technologies plotted as a function of bandgap.6 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the advanced heterojunction designs and their evolution to multijunction designs in PVSCs have efficiently reduced energy losses from different paths and successfully improved the PCEs close to 30%. A comprehensive review of such device evolution can provide researchers with better guidance for the further advancement of this field. Hence, we systematically introduce the fundamentals and experimental progress of heterojunction and multijunction designs in perovskite solar cells in this review. First, the working mechanism of single junction PVSCs and the key points to achieve high-quality perovskite materials are introduced, followed by reviewing heterojunction designs, including gradient perovskite (or perovskite/perovskite) heterojunction design to enhance charge carrier extraction and suppress non-radiative recombination, perovskite/functional layer heterojunction design for interfacial modifications, and perovskite/organic BHJ heterojunction design to realize panchromatic light-harvesting. Afterwards, the working principles and potential of perovskite-based multijunction solar cells are discussed, and their representative progress, including perovskite/silicon, perovskite/CIGS, perovskite/perovskite, and other tandem solar cells, are summarized. Finally, an outlook for PVSCs is provided to offer guidelines for the further development of this field.
2. Design, fabrication and application of single junction, heterojunction and multijunction high-performance PVSCs
2.1 Single junction PVSCs

2.1.1 Basic working principles. 
For single junction PVSCs, the free-carrier model is always used for understanding the fundamental properties of perovskites, and the charge transport and dissociation that happen at the heterointerfaces in the device.30 To better understand the working mechanism of PVSCs, a comprehensive understanding of the basics of heterojunctions is required. Fig. 3 shows three types of heterojunctions, in which E0 represents the vacuum level, EC and EV are the conduction band edge and valence band edge, respectively, EF refers to the Fermi level, Φ is the work function and is equal to E0 − EF, χ is the electron affinity which is equal to E0 − Ec, and Eg is the bandgap of semiconductors. When two semiconductors with different bandgaps are in contact, a heterojunction is formed, and band bending and a built-in electric field will occur. Depending on the difference between χ1 and χ2, there are three types of possible band lineups of semiconductor heterojunctions: (a) type I alignment (straddling configuration), (d) type II alignment (staggered configuration), and (g) type III alignment (misaligned, broken gap) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic band diagrams for three typical heterojunctions with their aligned vacuum level E0 (a: type I – straddling, d: type II – staggered, g: type III – broken gap), brought into thermodynamic equilibrium resulting in an aligned Fermi level (EF) (b, e and h), and brought into contact with compensating space-charge regions (c, f and i). 
When a p-doped semiconductor (semiconductor 1) comes into contact with an n-doped semiconductor (semiconductor 2), the EF is not uniform throughout the junction, carriers will then exchange between both sides to reach thermal equilibrium. Here, a type II heterojunction is taken as an example to explain the establishment of the equilibrium, for which it appears more frequently, and as it is the efficient structure encountered in PVSCs.31 In a type II heterojunction (Fig. 3d), there are more electrons in semiconductor 1 (n-side) than in semiconductor 2 (p-side), and the electrons will thus diffuse from the n-side to the p-side. As a result, a net positive charge density appears on the left side of the interface (x < 0). Holes on the p-side transport in a similar way and result in a negative charge density on the right side. An electric field is therefore created, which points from the n-side to p-side due to the charge densities on the left and right sides, causing the drift of the electron and hole currents in a direction opposite to the diffusive currents.
When more charged carriers diffuse, the electric field is gradually enhanced until the drift components are equal to the opposite diffusive components. Then, the junction is in equilibrium (Fig. 3e) and EF is flat and constant throughout the heterojunction. Notably, the electrostatic potentials are required to be added to the energies in the band structure because E0 is not equal in two materials. In the depletion regions, the occurrence of band bending affirms the existence of an electric field and electrostatic potential, as well as the vacuum level also bends in response to the electric field, as shown in Fig. 3f, where the built-in electric field qVbi equals the difference in the EF of the two semiconductors under thermal equilibrium condition.
For single junction PVSCs, there are two common device structures (Fig. 4a and b): conventional (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) structures and the basic working principle are illustrated in Fig. 4c. When light passes through the perovskite layer, excitons are generated and immediately dissociate into electrons and holes due to the low binding energy (∼0.03 eV).32–34 These free carriers travel through the perovskite film efficiently to charge-transporting layers (CTLs) due to the long carrier diffusion lengths.35,36 The favorable energy level alignment at the CTL/perovskite interface (heterointerface) enables the effective extraction of electrons and holes by the electron-transporting layer (ETL) and hole-transporting layer (HTL). In this process, the ETL also serves as a hole-blocking layer to prevent charge carriers from recombining by forming an energy barrier. Then, the carriers are collected by two electrodes and transport through the external electric circuit and load to produce electricity.
 Fig. 4  Device configurations of (a) p–i–n structured and (b) n–i–p structured PVSCs. (c) Charge carrier dynamics of a PVSC. 
Different from the thermal equilibrium mentioned in Fig. 3, when absorbing photons and generating carriers, the thermal equilibrium of heterojunctions is broken, which changes the populations of electrons in the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) respectively. Under this circumstance, the EF of the perovskite under thermal equilibrium is not applicable. As the relaxation time for electrons within each band is much lower than that across the band gap, the CB and VB finally reach an individual population which is internally in equilibrium. Therefore, the quasi Fermi level was defined to describe this quasi thermal equilibrium state, in which the quasi-Fermi level of electrons (EF,e) (holes (EF,h)) quantitatively indicates the density of free photogenerated electrons (holes) in the conduction (valence) band. The difference between EF,e and EF,h is defined as quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS).
In single junction PVSCs, it is not easy to measure the absolute positions of EF,e and EF,h, and the QFSL that can be calculated from photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) is thus used for characterizing the recombination losses. Theoretically, the QFSL represents the internal voltage (Vint) of the device and should equal the device's external open-circuit voltage (VOC). It can be calculated through eqn (1) according to the literature,37 where k represents Boltzmann's constant, nid is the ideality factor which describes the deviation from the ideal diode condition where only pure bimolecular recombination is considered, Jph is the photocurrent at VOC, and J0 is the total dark current. This equation indicates that both QFLS and VOC are mainly affected by the light intensity, which also influences Jph, carrier density, and radiative/non-radiative charge recombination. Given that radiation recombination is the same for a certain system due to the S–Q limit, suppressing the non-radiative recombination caused by defects in perovskites is of great importance to achieve high-performance PVSCs. (1)
However, Neher et al. found that the QFSL is not equal to VOC in real situations.38 As compared with QFLS (Fig. 5a and b), a lower VOC is always attained due to the energetic misalignment at the perovskite CTL/interface. This misalignment, instead of the defects in the perovskite film, induces a non-radiative recombination loss. Therefore, a perfectly aligned and fully blocking transport layer is essential for constructing an ideal perovskite/CTL heterojunction to lessen the QFLS–VOC mismatch and to enhance the VOC in real situations.
 Fig. 5  Simulation of the QFLS and VOC of pin-type devices using SCAPS from ref. 38. (a) The simulated quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) in junctions with aligned transport layers (PTAA/perovskite/C60) is equal to eVOC but not in the case of energetically misaligned transport layers (b) where the hole QFL bends at the interface to the hole transport layer which causes a QFLS–VOC mismatch. The dashed lines indicate the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels (EF,e and EF,h), the resulting QFLS in the absorber and VOC at the contacts. The HTL (red) and ETL (blue) are represented by their bandgaps in between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
In view of the aforementioned working mechanism, to reduce the energy loss and enhance the efficiency of single junction PVSCs, there are mainly two aspects to note. First, CTLs with high carrier mobility and aligned energy levels to perovskite materials should be used to ensure an adequate built-in electric field and efficient charge carrier extraction and transport. Second, the defect density of perovskite films should be low enough to reduce the recombination loss. To achieve this, both the perovskite film and CTLs should be defect-free.


2.1.2 Defects in perovskites. 
Understanding the defect nature of perovskites is an important issue in single-junction PVSCs. Due to their polycrystalline nature, the properties of defects in perovskite films are crucial for the carrier diffusion length and performance of devices. The commonly used perovskite for device fabrication has an ABX3 3D crystal structure with an A-site cation (CH3NH3+, CH–(NH2)2+, Cs+, or Rb+), a B-site metal cation (Pb2+ or Sn2+), and three halide anions X− (I−, Br−, or Cl−). For an ideal perovskite crystal, every ion is located at the equilibrium site. Nevertheless, in fact, it is inevitable to form a great number of structural defects induced by the solution process and post treatments. Defects can be simply classified into shallow-level defects and deep-level defects according to their formation energy. Meanwhile, defects in semiconductors are classified into point defects (vacancies, interstitials, and anti-site substitutions) and higher dimensional defects (dislocations, grain boundaries, and precipitates).13
The defects in perovskite films are mainly composed of point defects, two-dimensional defects (such as grain boundaries and surface defects), and three-dimensional defects (such as lead clusters).14 For example, in a MAPbI3 film, point defects are the dominating defects, including vacancies (VMA, VPb, VI), interstitials (MAi, Pbi, Ii), cation substitutions (MAPb, PbMA), and anti-site substitutions (MAI, PbI, IMA, IPb). Yin et al. calculated the formation energy of each kind of defect (Fig. 6a and b).12 Some defects occupy shallow levels and have low formation energies, such as VMA, VPb, VI, MAi, Ii, and MAPb. Other defects are deep-level defects that have high formation energies, including IMA, IPb, Pbi, and PbI.
 Fig. 6  Transition energy levels of (a) intrinsic acceptors and (b) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (c) Electron capture and (d) hole capture by a defect of energy trap between the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). (e) Electron emission and (f) hole emission. (g) Electron and hole capture by a recombination center in a trap-assisted recombination event. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
Generally, when carriers are trapped by shallow-level defects, they are more likely to be de-trapped back to the conduction (valence) band by phonon absorption due to their small activation energy (Fig. 6c–f). Therefore, shallow-level defects are not responsible for non-radiative recombination. In contrast, the carriers trapped by deep-level defects are more likely to recombine with an opposite carrier, causing non-radiative recombination (Fig. 6g). During the operation of a PVSC, the photo-generated carriers cause the splitting of the quasi-Ef of electrons and holes. The quasi-Ef splitting (QFLS) theoretically determines the obtained open-circuit voltage (VOC). When the charge generation rate equals the charge recombination rate, the QFLS is affected by the charge density.
The trap-assisted non-radiative recombination reduces charge density and causes reduction of QFLS. As a result, the VOC and PCE are reduced. Fortunately, only deep-level defects serve as non-radiative recombination centers in PVSCs and their density is low in the perovskite films; therefore, perovskites are considered as defect tolerant materials. Although shallow-level defects are not responsible for non-radiative recombination, they tend to ionize at room temperature and serve as dopants of perovskite semiconductors. Besides, the migration of shallow-level defects causes the hysteresis behaviours, phase segregation, and degradation of devices via ion migration. Therefore, proper defect passivation becomes essential for realizing high-performance and stable PVSCs.


2.1.3 Deposition techniques and crystallization modification of perovskite films. 
In single junction PVSCs, the preparation of high-quality perovskite films with controllable morphology and high coverage with minimum pinholes remains very challenging. Some key factors that affect the photovoltaic performance of PVSCs, such as charge dissociation efficiency, carrier transport and diffusion length, are related to the morphology and crystallinity of the films.39–41 Crystallization is a complex process involving crystal nucleation and growth, which is highly dependent on the solution supersaturation.42 In the perovskite precursor solution, the supersaturated state promotes nucleation and forms nucleus-clusters that are conducive to crystal growth.
Nucleation can occur homogeneously or heterogeneously from a continuous phase.42 Homogeneous nucleation determined by the total excess free energy is only an intrinsic material process. In contrast, heterogeneous nucleation that occurs on a foreign nucleus or surface is affected by the surface or interface contact energy due to wetting on the foreign surface.43 Therefore, the factors influencing surface properties, such as surface chemistry, material type, surface heat treatment, and surface morphology, are very relevant to addressing these nucleation issues. Crystal growth, followed by nucleus formation, occurs as the clusters diffuse to the surface of the existing nucleus and combine with the crystal lattice structures.44 The transport of clusters can be controlled by diffusion and convection, which are driven by the molecular thermal motion and energy gradient in the system.45 In general, fast nucleation can increase the coverage of perovskite thin films, and controlling crystal growth contributes to the formation of highly crystalline materials. In this section, the recent reports of modifying the perovskite film morphology and crystallization will be reviewed based on different film deposition techniques.
2.1.3.1 One-step solution deposition method. 
The morphology and crystallization kinetics of perovskite materials are highly dependent on the film deposition technique, solvent and additive. The perovskite precursor solutions can be deposited either simultaneously or sequentially, which leads to a series of perovskite thin-film deposition techniques. In the one-step method, a perovskite precursor solution composed of metal halides and organic halides in an appropriate solvent is directly deposited on the substrate. Generally, without any modification to the composition or modulation to the crystallization process, the one-step deposition method produces more uncontrollable crystal nucleation and growth, resulting in poor coverage and morphologies, and thus an inferior photovoltaic performance.
Incorporating molecular additives in perovskite films is one of the most common strategies to modulate the perovskite film morphology. The excellent coordination capability of lead cations and iodide anions with molecules (functional groups) makes this approach quite effective. Pb2+ is considered as a Lewis acid and coordinates with the N-donor, O-donor, or S-donor in polar solvents (such as DMSO, DMF, NMP) to form Lewis acid–base adducts, which significantly influence the crystallization of perovskites.
As the affinity of different Lewis bases with PbI2 differs from each other (donor capability with PbI2: S > O > N), simply changing the solvent or properly employing an intramolecular exchange process enables control over crystallization of perovskites.46,47 Various additives have been employed to alter the crystallization by tuning the precursor, forming an intermediate phase during the film formation, reacting with perovskite compositions, interacting with perovskites via chemical bonds, or tailoring the contact between perovskites and substrates.48,49
Tuning the colloid distribution in perovskite precursor solution is an effective strategy to control the crystallization process. The distribution of colloids in a precursor is crucial for the film quality due to their role as nucleation sites for perovskites, which is easily influenced by the aging time and heating of solution.50–52 Acids (such as HI, HBr, HCl, and NH3SO3) have been added into perovskite precursors to induce small colloids with uniform distribution, thereby slowing the crystallization process due to the reduced nucleation sites.52–55 Most additives are based on the coordination chemistry to modify the crystallinity of perovskites. It has also been reported that acid additives induce the hydrolysis of DMF and produce dimethylamine to assist the dissolution of colloids.52
Another strategy to modulate the perovskite morphology is via coordination effects. Organic molecular additives with functional groups composed of lone pair electrons can interact with Pb2+ to slow down the crystallization process, enhancing the crystallinity of the perovskite film. Various polar solvents have been used as additives to modify the crystallization process.56–59 Molecules with halogen, carbonyl group, sulfonate group, or nitrogen atoms are also widely used to slow down the crystallization of perovskites by forming Lewis acid–base adduct intermediate phases.60–65 Some small molecules containing donor groups were employed to modulate the crystallization process of perovskites and remain in the perovskite films after crystallization. For example, Zhou et al. employed 4-(1H-imidazol-3-ium-3-yl)butane-1-sulfonate (IMS) in a perovskite precursor to alter the crystal orientation of a MAPbI3 film. The oxygen atom of the sulfonate group within IMS could coordinate with Pb2+ ions and form a MAPbI3–IMS intermediate phase before annealing, which slowed down the crystallization process and enabled ordered grain growth.61
Although some additives are left behind in perovskite films after annealing to passivate the defects, most additives should be removed after the film formation via volatilization or solvent extraction to avoid doping effects, especially for insulating ones. Therefore, volatile additives are preferably employed in perovskite film formation. MAAc, Pb(SCN)2 and MACl have been reported as effective additives to induce large perovskite grains.57,66,67 The mechanism can be attributed to the formation of an intermediate phase and/or the decrease of perovskite formation energy, which enables reduced nucleation density and the growth of larger perovskite grains. It is worth noting that MACl has become an essential additive to fabricate ultra-high performance FAPbI3-based PVSCs, due to their effectiveness in altering the perovskite grain size.68 Meanwhile, Pb(SCN)2 has also been reported to interact with MAI to form MASCN, which is readily decomposed into volatile HSCN and MA gas, resulting in large perovskite grains.69,70
Some nonvolatile ionic liquids (ILs) were employed as additives to modify the morphology of perovskite films.71,72 Moore et al. incorporated methylammonium formate (MAFa) as solvent in perovskite films to control the crystallinity of the perovskite and produce high-quality perovskite films.73 Differently, Seo et al. employed a small amount of MAFa as an additive rather than as solvent in a perovskite precursor to modify the crystallization. The HCOO− in MAFa could coordinate with Pb2+ in the precursor at the early stage of crystal growth and could be replaced by I− ions during the annealing process, thus slowing down the crystallization process and resulting in enlarged grain sizes.63
In addition, polymers have also been employed as heterogeneous nuclei or templates to control crystal nucleation and growth to induce the formation of high-quality perovskite films. Han et al. introduced a long-chain polymeric Lewis base, poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC), to accomplish an inter-grain cross-linking of a perovskite (Fig. 7a).74 Due to the strong Lewis acid–base adduct induced by the interaction of carbonate groups with the perovskite and the enlarged grain size, the PCE increased from 17.88% to 20.06% with outstanding stability owing to the hydrophobic nature of PCC. Similarly, Zhao et al. introduced a polymerization-assisted grain growth (PAGG) strategy by incorporating small monomers, dimethyl itaconate (DI), in PbI2 solution in the sequential deposition of a perovskite (Fig. 7b). The monomers were polymerized during the thermal annealing of a PbI2 film, with the bulkier polymer located at grain boundaries. The strong interaction between PbI2 and the polymer causes a higher energy barrier to form perovskite crystals during the second step reaction, contributing to an improved morphology and enlarged grain size from 0.75 μm to 1.25 μm (Fig. 7c–e). A remarkable efficiency of 23% was achieved along with superior stability.75
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the perovskite crystallization induced by small molecular and macromolecular intermediate phases. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the polymerization-assisted grain growth (PAGG) strategy. Top-view SEM images of perovskite films without (c) and with (d) PAGG. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell with PAGG. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
2.1.3.2 Sequential solution deposition method. 
Sequential solution deposition provides superior control over the reaction of perovskite precursors and the crystallization of perovskite materials, which is conducive to the formation of high-quality perovskite thin films with high surface coverage. Metal halides with layered crystal structures provide a three-dimensional framework for the intercalation of organic or cesium cations. For the traditional sequential deposition method, metal halides are first deposited on a mesoporous scaffold; they, then, react with organic–ammonium halides to form perovskites within a few seconds by immersing the substrate in an organic–ammonium halide solution. However, in inverted perovskite devices with planar structures, due to the lack of mesoporous scaffolds, metal halides are prone to form dense films, resulting in an inadequate reaction between the perovskite precursors, and thus the residual metal halides in the final perovskite films. The residual metal halides in the inverted devices can reduce the light-trapping ability and increase charge carrier transport resistance. Therefore, compared to the one-step solution deposition method, the key of the sequential solution deposition method is to control the crystallization of metal halides and to achieve complete reaction between metal halides and organic–ammonium halides.
Solvent engineering by applying DMSO instead of the commonly used DMF to dissolve metal halides is demonstrated to be an effective approach to modulate the crystallization of metal halides. The coordination ratios between Pb and the solvents (DMF and DMSO) are 1:1 and 1:2, and the Pb–O bond lengths for DMF and DMSO are 2.431 Å and 2.386 Å, respectively, suggesting that DMSO has stronger coordination with PbI2 compared with that of DMF. The strong interaction between Pb2+ and DMSO can slow down the crystallization rate of PbI2, thus forming a uniform and amorphous PbI2 film.76
For achieving the complete reaction of perovskite precursors, the interdiffusion approach is applied to fabricate perovskite thin films in an inverted planar configuration. Basically, an organohalide is spin-coated on the top of a metal halide layer to form a stacked film. Driven by thermal annealing, metal halides and organic–ammonium halides are diffused together and reacted with each other to form perovskites. The complete conversion of the two precursor materials could be achieved by precisely controlling the film deposition thickness. Huang et al. developed the interdiffusion method to fabricate MAPbI3 thin films at the early stage of perovskite photovoltaics.77 Attributed to this method, the morphology of the MA-based perovskite films showed obvious improvement, and the FF of the perovskite devices increased significantly.
In addition to optimizing the deposition method, the construction of mesoporous metal halide films is also an effective way to promote the conversion of metal halides to perovskites. For depositing MAPbI3, the porous PbI2 scaffold provides voids that serve as channels for the effective penetration of MAI into PbI2. These voids can also provide space for crystal expansion to reduce the lattice strain during the perovskite growth. The porosity of the PbI2 film can be adjusted by controlling the solvent evaporation rate of the solvent to optimize the photovoltaic performance of the devices. Choy et al. developed a self-assembled porous PbI2 structure by incorporating a small amount of 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) additive into PbI2 precursor solutions, which significantly promoted the conversion of the perovskite without any PbI2 residue.78
2.1.3.3 Vacuum deposition method. 
Vacuum deposition is usually carried out in a vacuum chamber and perovskite precursors can be thermally-evaporated simultaneously or sequentially to deposit them on substrates. The perovskite precursors react initially during the deposition, and undergo thermal annealing to promote crystal growth. Regardless of the surface wettability of the substrate, the vacuum deposition technique ensures the preparation of a high-quality perovskite thin film. One of the main advantages of the vacuum deposition method is that the perovskite film thickness can be precisely modulated as required, which provides the feasibility to study the relationship between the film parameters and the device performances. For instance, Bolink et al. applied the vacuum deposition method to prepare both n–i–p and p–i–n architectures, allowing a direct comparison of these two designs.79 The average PCEs of the p–i–n and n–i–p structures are 15% and 18%, respectively, making the vacuum-deposited PVSCs closer to their solution-processed equivalents. Another advantage of the vacuum deposition method is that it is conductive to the fabrication of large area perovskite photovoltaic modules. Although the vacuum deposition method provides a simple and more reproducible way to fabricate compact and uniform perovskite films, more attention still needs to be paid to finding better solution processing methods, since they can offer diverse alternatives to prepare PVSCs via more cost-effective and high-throughput approaches.


2.1.4 Defect passivation of perovskite films. 
The non-radiative recombination in the bulk and on the surfaces of perovskite films has devastating effects on device performance and stability. In perovskites, nonradiative recombination mainly refers to Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) trap-assisted recombination as Auger recombination is not dominant and can be neglected.80–82 The SRH non-radiative recombination is induced by defects, and can be effectively suppressed by defect passivation. As introduced earlier, deep-level defects have high formation energies and serve as non-radiative recombination centers and shallow-level defects have low formation energies and are not considered as SRH recombination centers, but they can cause unintentional doping due to their charged nature. A large number of shallow-level defects will accelerate ion migration and cause instability. Therefore, it is equally important to passivate both shallow- and deep-level defects.13
Lewis acids and Lewis bases, as electron acceptors or donors, are often employed to passivate negatively and positively charged defects, respectively. Fullerenes and their derivatives are representative Lewis acids commonly used to passivate negative defects (such as under-coordinated halide ions and Pb–I antisites) due to their superior electron accepting ability.83–85 Xu et al. and Chiang et al. separately proved that the incorporation of PCBM at grain boundaries is beneficial for passivating defects; the trap density could be reduced and the carrier lifetime could be prolonged, resulting in enhanced carrier lifetimes (Fig. 8a).86,87 Another kind of Lewis acid passivator is fluoro-containing molecules, in which the strongly electronegative fluoro atoms induce a positive charge on the other side of the molecule, providing the molecule with an electron-accepting ability. For example, iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB) was employed by Abate et al. to passivate the under-coordinated halide ions by constructing strong halogen bonding. The supramolecular halogen bond complexation between the iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB) and perovskite enables reduced trap density and longer carrier diffusion lengths.88
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the passivation effects due to PCBM. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015. (b) Scheme of the crosslinking polymerization process of TA under thermal conditions and the device structure with Poly(TA). The photographs display TA dissolved in different solvents. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (c) Scheme of DPSI mediated perovskite growth and defect passivation. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Possible mechanism of cyclic reduction of Pb0 and I0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pairs. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (e) Scheme of the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions, and scheme of the potential position of NaF in the perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Lewis bases with N, O, S, and P atoms as electron donors (such as pyridine and thiophene) can be used to passivate positively charged defects such as under-coordinated Pb2+. For instance, thiophene and pyridine have been reported to sufficiently passivate perovskite films through their coordination with uncoordinated Pb2+. Jung et al. employed a Lewis base molecule, hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA) with three nitrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, as a donor, to efficiently coordinate with under-coordinated Pb2+, which could not only modify the crystallization process, but also passivate defects.58 DeQuilettes et al. reported the use of trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) to passivate the defects at the grain boundaries of perovskites; the reduced trap density contributes to prolonged carrier lifetimes and enhanced photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs).89 Recently, Chen et al. incorporated a monomer, thioctic acid (TA), at both the perovskite/TiO2 interface and in the bulk of a perovskite. TA is crosslinkable at low-temperature, resulting in crosslinked Poly(TA) both at the interface and at the grain boundaries, which can passivate the defects of TiO2 and the perovskite via the interaction between the –COOH and –C–S groups in Poly(TA) and under-coordinated lead in the perovskite as well as the Ti4+ in TiO2, leading to a champion PCE of 20.4% (Fig. 8b).90 Yang et al. designed a small molecule named D4TBP, which contains 4-tert-butylphenyl, amine, and carboxyl groups, to effectively passivate different kinds of defects in perovskites, leading to a high VOC of 1.23 V with a low potential loss of 0.34V.91 Yang et al. also employed octylammonium sulfate to treat the surface of CsFAMA perovskite.92 The in situ reaction between SO42− and Pb2+ led to the formation of water insoluble lead(II) oxysalts, which not only effectively passivated the defects in grain boundaries, but also endowed the perovskite with better resistance to water. Consequently, the efficiency of the device was improved from ∼18% to >21% with better stability. Apart from the use of single component Lewis acids or Lewis bases as passivators, their synergistic effects have also been investigated. Zhang et al. simultaneously employed bis-PCBM mixed isomers as the Lewis acid in the antisolvent and N-(4-bromophenyl)thiourea (BrPh-ThR) as the Lewis base in the perovskite precursor to passivate Pb2+ and PbX3 antisite defects, meanwhile, improving the perovskite film quality.93
Ionic bonds between perovskites and passivators can also be used for defect passivation. Alkylammonium halogen salts have become very popular passivators due to their effectiveness in enhancing device performance. Such materials can passivate both positively and negatively charged defects via hydrogen bonding and ionic bonds. Zhao et al. systematically investigated the passivation effect of different diammonium salts (NH3I(CH2)4NH3I (C4), NH3I(CH2)8NH3I (C8), and NH3I(CH2)2O(CH2)2NH3I (EDBE)) by a simple post-treatment process.94 They found that the anti-gauche isomerization in C8 necessitates an additional energy barrier for the phase transformation from a 3D perovskite to a 2D perovskite. This means that C8 would stay on the surface of the 3D perovskite to efficiently passivate defects on the surface and at the grain boundaries, while C4 and EDBE didn’t show the same effect. Jiang et al. adopted phenylethylamine (PEA) on FA/MA mixed-cation perovskite films to passivate surface defects, resulting in a PCE of 23.32%.95 They pointed out that PEA could passivate the iodide vacancies only when there was no annealing post treatment as annealing caused the formation of a 2D perovskite. Lately, Li et al. employed phenylethylamine chloride (PEACl) to passivate the surface defects of 1.75 eV wide-bandgap PVSCs. The reduced energy loss and suppressed phase segregation enable the devices to have a high VOC of 1.26 V with excellent stability.96 Jen et al. designed and applied a bifunctional molecule, piperazinium iodide (PI), which can simultaneously passivate positively and negatively charged defects via its electron-donating and electron-accepting groups, achieving a high PCE of 23.37% in a p–i–n inverted device.97
Zwitterions have also been used for bulk defect passivation, as they can simultaneously passivate both negatively charged defects and positively charged defects through the positively and negatively charged functional groups in the molecule.98 The Huang group introduced a sulfonic zwitterion, 3-(decyldimethylammonio)-propane-sulfonate inner salt (DPSI), as an additive to modify the perovskite crystallization and passivate defects (Fig. 8c). The positively charged quaternary ammonium group and negatively charged sulfonic group in DPSI can neutralize the charged defects at the surfaces and grain boundaries, resulting in an efficiency of 21.1%.99 Wang et al. mixed a zwitterionic molecule, bethanechol chloride (BTCC), with organic salts in IPA during the sequential deposition of PVSCs; the passivation effects exerted by BTCC enable an enhanced PCE of 20.45%.100 Zheng et al. reported quaternary ammonium halides, L-α-phosphatidylcholine, choline chloride, and choline iodide, as zwitterions to passivate the surface defects of perovskites. The positively charged quaternary ammonium group (–N(CH3)3+) and negatively charged anions (phosphate and halides) can simultaneously passivate the positively and negatively charged defects. A high PCE of 21.0% was achieved with a VOC,deficit of 0.39 V when using choline chloride as a passivator.101 Similarly, Wang et al. employed choline iodide to perform surface passivation on all-inorganic perovskite CsPbI3, and achieved a record PCE of 18.4% for all-inorganic PVSCs.102
Small amounts of inorganic salts can also be integrated into perovskite films to enhance the device performance and stability. Wang et al. reported that the europium ion pair, Eu3+–Eu2+, works as the “redox shuttle” to selectively oxidize lead defects and reduce iodide defects in the perovskite in a cyclic transition (Fig. 8d).103 Li et al. employed NaF as an additive to perform passivation by forming strong hydrogen bonds (N–H⋯F) with organic cations (MA/FA) and strong ionic bonds with lead in perovskite films, which simultaneously passivated both halide anion vacancies and organic cation vacancies according to the high electronegativity of fluoride (Fig. 8e).104
Functionalized ionic liquids (ILs) have also been employed to passivate the surface defects of perovskites. Huang et al. used methyltrioctylammonium trifluoromethanesulfonate (MATS) to passivate the surface defects of p–i–n structured PVSCs. The low vapor pressure and non-volatile nature allow the IL to remain on the surface of the perovskite after thermal annealing. The interaction between the CF3SO3− with MA+ and Pb64− enables effective passivation of defects.105 Zhang et al. employed 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium chloride ([BMMIm]Cl) IL to passivate the surface defects of CsPbBr3 perovskite in carbon-based hole transporting layer free PVSCs, enhancing the PCE from 6.15% to 9.92%.106 The employment of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIMBF4) IL to alter the surface by Wang et al. enabled the simultaneously enhanced efficiency and stability of all-inorganic PVSCs.107 Recently, Zhu et al. utilized 1,3-dimethyl-3-imidazolium hexafluorophosphate (DMIMPF6) IL to passivate the surface defects of perovskite films by forming electrostatic interaction between undercoordinated Pb2+ ions and DMIMPF6. Meanwhile, the IL can tune the interfacial electronic properties to form a favorable energy level alignment at the perovskite/HTL interface, leading to a high efficiency of 23.25%.108
In summary, the defects in perovskite polycrystal films can be passivated through coordinate bonding or ionic bonding, Lewis acids, Lewis bases and ammonium salts. The development of multifunctional molecules that can simultaneously passivate different types of defects in perovskites will play a big role in this research field.

2.2 Heterojunction designs for PVSCs
As mentioned in Section 2.1.1, the heterojunction in PVSCs is crucial for charge carrier separation and the suppression of non-radiative recombination, thus influencing the device performance. Although high-quality perovskite films can be obtained via the strategies in Sections 2.1.3 and 2.1.4, PVSCs cannot be realized without the construction of ideal heterojunctions. In this section, we will introduce heterojunctions constructed between pristine perovskites and charge transporting layers (CTLs) to provide a comprehensive understanding of heterojunction designs in PVSCs. Here, the heterojunction means the interface between two semiconductors with unequal bandgaps. Perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions, perovskite/functional layer heterojunctions and perovskite/organic BHJ heterojunctions will be reviewed.

2.2.1 Gradient perovskite heterojunctions (perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions). 
At the early stage, a single junction PVSC is merely composed of a layer of a 3D perovskite with single components as active materials. Although the crystallization and defect density can be well controlled through the aforementioned strategies, such modification has a negligible influence on the heterojunction properties. With the development of perovskite device configurations, gradient perovskite heterojunctions (or perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions) have been constructed to alter the charge carrier dynamics between the perovskite and charge transporting layers. Here, the perovskite/perovskite heterojunction refers to two or more kinds of perovskites with different compositions/dimensions, and functions as the photoactive layer in PVSCs. The employment of perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions can tune the energy level alignment and defect density at interfaces, thus affecting the device performance. In this section, we will review the recently reported perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions and briefly introduce the mechanisms behind them.
2.2.1.1. Multi-composition perovskite heterojunctions. 
The preparation of perovskite layers with multi-composition has been employed to construct perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions, which can form better-matched band structures in perovskites to facilitate charge extraction and reduce energy loss due to non-radiative recombination. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is considered as a suitable tool for constructing gradient perovskites as it can avoid damage to the underlayer perovskite during the deposition. Tong et al. developed a stack sequence physical–chemical vapor deposition (SS-PCVD) method to deposit perovskites with gradient compositions and bandgaps.109 They first prepared CsBr and PbBr2 films via physical vapor deposition, followed by depositing the perovskite via CVD in a FAI atmosphere (Fig. 9a). The as-prepared perovskite film consists of a wide Eg CsPb2Br5 perovskite at the interface of a TiO2/FA-based perovskite (Fig. 9b). CsPb2Br5 not only can suppress the non-radiative recombination, but can also form a favorable energy band alignment for charge extraction, resulting in enhanced device performance and stability.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the formation of a FA-based perovskite/CsPb2Br5 ultra-thin film heterojunction, the vapor doping process and the energy level alignment of the PVSCs via the SS-PCVD process. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2018. (c) Device configuration of composition gradient distributed PVSCs. (d) Time-resolved PL decays of the perovskite films with and without a surface passivator. (e) J–V curves of PVSCs with and without a surface passivator. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Cation exchange reaction is another method to form graded distributed heterojunctions. Wu et al. constructed a perovskite graded heterostructure (GHS) by using a sequential cation exchange reaction between FASnI3 perovskite and bulky 4-(trifluoromethyl)benzylammonium cations (TFBA+), in which the pre-deposited FASnI3 film was immersed into TFBAI/chloroform solution followed by annealing. The cation exchange between FA+ and TFBA+ enables the formation of a gradiently distributed wide-Eg Sn perovskite from the bulk to surface, which accelerated the carrier extraction at the perovskite/ETM interface, reduced the density of trap states, and acted as an energy barrier to prevent the oxidation of Sn2+, resulting in a remarkable efficiency of 11% for pure Sn-based PVSCs.110
Kim et al. deposited a perovskite with gradient Br concentration by treating MAPbI3 with vaporized hydrobromic acid. HBr can be oxidized by O2 to convert into Br2, which substitutes I− with Br−. The various diffusion rates into different thicknesses of perovskites resulted in a gradient distribution, causing a graded band structure and enhanced device performance.111 Cho et al. constructed a FAPbBr3−xIx layer on top of a pristine (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 film by simply spin-coating a FABr layer onto the pristine film with excess PbI2. The FABr reacted with PbI2 to form a graded distributed wide-Eg perovskite from the bulk to surface (Fig. 9c). The optimized band structure resulted in a prolonged carrier lifetime and a PCE of 21.3% (Fig. 9d and e).112
Ion diffusion can also result in a gradient distribution of perovskite compositions. The Liu group deposited a low-cost lanthanide halide, SmBr3, before the preparation of a perovskite film. SmBr3 can diffuse into the perovskite and dope it to form a gradient energy band structure, which facilitates effective charge extraction and suppresses non-radiative recombination, resulting in a high PCE of 10.88% for CsPbI2Br-based PVSCs.113 Different from the diffusion method, Qiao et al. directly added “intolerant” trivalent metal cations, Sb3+ and In3+, into a perovskite precursor. Dopants spontaneously separated and located at the perovskite/TiO2 and Ag/Spiro-OMeTAD interfaces, owing to the dissimilar cation sizes and charge states, resulting in graded energy band alignment between the perovskite and ETL and contributing to a PCE of over 21%.114
2.2.1.2. Multi-dimensional perovskite heterojunctions. 
Low-dimensional perovskites (2D, quasi-2D, 1D or 0D perovskites) have attracted the significant attention of researchers because of their excellent stability owing to their hydrophobicity and superior thermal stability.39 Nevertheless, their large bandgaps, anisotropic charge transport and large exciton binding energies result in lower PCEs, which strongly limit their potential as active materials for photovoltaic applications. Combining low-dimensional perovskites with 3D perovskites to form 3D perovskite/low-dimensional perovskite heterojunctions has been widely reported as an effective strategy to resolve the stability problems of PVSCs and enhance device performance due to improved charge transfer through the heterojunction. Such heterojunctions can either be formed through the direct use of 3D perovskite precursor solution to react with low-dimensional perovskite additives or be constructed by the post-treatment of perovskite films; the former results in bulk heterojunctions and the latter leads to planar heterojunctions. Usually, low dimensional perovskites not only can modulate the crystallization through their functional groups on large cations, but can also passivate defects at grain boundaries and facilitate the charge transfer through favorable energy level alignment. The planar heterojunction will dramatically reduce the surface defects of perovskites; however, the formation of low-dimensional layers is challenging since the 3D perovskites should be intact after the film preparation. In this section, we will introduce (i) bulk and (ii) planar 3D/low-dimensional perovskite heterojunctions and briefly review their merits and challenges.
(i) 3D/low dimensional perovskite bulk heterojunctions. 
Incorporating a small amount of low-dimensional perovskites along the grain boundaries in 3D perovskites can effectively passivate defects at the grain boundaries and potentially modulate the crystallization of 3D perovskites to enable enhanced device performance and stability. As low-dimensional perovskites have high exciton binding energy, the amount of loaded low-dimensional perovskites and their compositions are critical, and therefore they should be carefully considered. To simultaneously obtain high efficiency and stability, a delicate balance of the 2D and 3D perovskite compositions and their structural configurations is required so that the optimum contribution from each perovskite phase can be achieved.
Normally, a small amount of excess PbI2 can be used in the precursor to form an intrinsic heterointerface at perovskite films for fabricating high-performance PVSCs. Recently, Rothmann et al. employed atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopy to investigate the microstructure of perovskites.115 They observed a perfect crystallographic alignment between the PbI2 and FAPbI3 perovskite at the material heterointerface between excess PbI2 and the FAPbI3 grains with undetectable lattice misfit (Fig. 10a and b), without creating any detrimental effect on device performance.
 Fig. 10  Atomic-resolution STEM images of (a) the checkered intensity pattern formed upon electron beam exposure with ∼200 e Å−2 for FAPbI3 perovskite and (b) native intergrowth between PbI2 (shaded yellow) and FAPbI3 within the perovskite film. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020. (c) Scheme of a preferential orientation for the [h00] direction to align out-of-plane and no preferential orientation within the plane of a 2D/3D perovskite. (d) Time-resolved PL spectra for 3D perovskite films with and without a 2D perovskite. (e) J–V curves for PVSCs using large-bandgap FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (x = 0) and BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (x = 0.09) perovskites. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
The advantage of using mixed 3D/low-dimensional perovskite heterojunctions is that the device performance can be improved through enhanced crystallinity, passivated defects, and better energy level alignment. At the early stage, Snaith et al. found that the introduction of n-butylammonium (BA) cations into FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IyBr1−y)3 perovskite will form two-dimensional perovskites dispersed within the 3D perovskite film to attain enhanced performance.116 The 3D perovskite showed a preferential orientation for the [100] direction (Fig. 10c). With the plate-like 2D-phase perovskite standing up between the 3D perovskite grains, the crystallization was enhanced, and the grain boundaries were passivated, resulting in enhanced carrier lifetimes and device performance (Fig. 10d and e). Lee et al. added a small amount of PEA+ into a 3D perovskite precursor to afford a modified morphology and passivated grain boundaries, which result in enhanced device performance and stability. They found that the addition of PEAI led to the formation of a quasi-2D perovskite near the perovskite/TiO2 interface. This formation of a preferred orientation of quasi-2D perovskites might be due to the hydrogen bonding between the amino group in PEAI and TiO2, indicating that the interfacial materials can affect the formation of quasi-2D/3D perovskite heterojunctions. The quasi-2D perovskites not only promote the crystallization of the perovskite but also result in a more preferred orientation in the (110) plane. Meanwhile, the quasi-2D perovskites at grain boundaries effectively passivate defects, leading to much improved device performance.117 Grancini et al. incorporated 3 mol% of aminovaleric acid iodide (AVAI) in MAPbI3 perovskite by directly mixing (AVAI:PbI2) with MAPbI3 precursor to induce a 2D/3D structure. The 3D perovskite exhibited a preferred orientation along the 〈hk0〉 direction with 2D perovskite additives; meanwhile, an electron recombination barrier was formed due to the lower CBM of 2D perovskites. The fabricated carbon-based perovskite solar modules showed a high PCE of 11.2% with an excellent stability of over 10000 h under one sun illumination.118 Yao et al. incorporated β-guanidinopropionic acid (β-GUA) into a MA-free FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3 perovskite to induce a 2D/3D heterostructure. The quasi-2D perovskite showed a face-on orientation at the grain boundaries; the three amine groups on the same molecule enable the β-GUA based quasi-2D perovskite to be effective in passivating defects via the coordination of nitrogen atoms with under-coordinated lead, resulting in suppressed non-radiative recombination and reduced energy losses.119 Recently, Liu et al. developed a class of aromatic formamidiniums as organic spacers in 2D/3D perovskites, which facilitated better crystal growth and orientation, reduced defect density, and enhanced the carrier lifetimes, contributing to a champion PCE of 23.36%.120
1D perovskites, which are 1D quantum confined materials that show unique optical and electrical properties due to the intense quantum confinement, were also used to assemble heterojunctions with 3D perovskites. Liu et al. utilized 1D-Tpy2Pb3I6 and 2D-TpyPb3I6 (Tpy; terpyridine) perovskites to assemble 1D/2D/3D heterojunctions with 3D all-inorganic perovskites. The incorporation of low-dimensional perovskites is beneficial to release residual strain, and form effective charge transport channels, resulting in an enhanced PCE of 16.1%. Benefitting from the hydrophobicity of low-dimensional perovskites, the stability of CsPbI2Br-based PVSCs under humidity was greatly enhanced, with unencapsulated devices being stable in an ambient environment for over 1000 h.121
Another merit of 3D/low-dimensional perovskites is their greatly enhanced long-term stability, mainly due to the intrinsic hydrophobicity and thermal stability of low-dimensional perovskites, as well as their capability to block ion migration. Zhang et al. incorporated a small amount of bicationic 2D perovskite EDAPbI4 (EDA: ethylenediamine) into 3D CsPbI3 perovskite precursor. The two terminal NH3+ groups in the 2D perovskite can crosslink the 3D grains to stabilize the cubic phase CsPbI3. Excellent long-term stability could be achieved under humid and thermal conditions.122 Niu et al. also employed n-butylammonium (BA)-based 2D perovskites to form a 2D/3D (FAPbI3) heterostructure to enhance the device longevity. Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase perovskites were interspersed at 3D grain boundaries, resulting in a more stable black phase perovskite with higher hydrophobicity, leading to superior long-term stability with a T80 lifetime of over 2880 h for unencapsulated devices under ambient conditions (40% RH, 25 °C).123 Ruggeri et al. incorporated PEAI into Sn–Pb 3D perovskites with NH4SCN as an additive to alter the crystallization. The addition of NH4SCN slows down the nucleation and crystallization of the 3D perovskites and homogenizes the crystal structure as they can bind to the early colloids in the precursor. The as-prepared 2D perovskites mainly exist on the surfaces and at grain boundaries of the 3D perovskites, leading to the enhancement of the ambient stability of Sn–Pb PVSCs.124
3D/1D perovskites have also been reported to enhance device longevity. 3 mol% aliphatic fluorinated amphiphilic additive, 1,1,1-trifluoro-ethyl ammonium iodide (FEAI), has been incorporated into a 3D perovskite to form a 3D/1D heterostructure. The 1D perovskite was formed due to the larger size of the fluoro group in FEAI than hydrogen, increasing the tolerance factor to 1.09. The addition of FEAI resulted in more hydrophobic perovskite films and more stable PVSCs due to the hydrophobicity of the fluoroalkyl group.125 Fan et al. introduced 2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine (PZPY) into 3D perovskites to form thermodynamically self-healing 1D/3D hybrid PVSCs. The result obtained by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) confirmed the existence of heterostructures between 1D FAI–PbI2–PZPY and 3D Cs0.04MA0.16FA0.8PbI0.85Br0.15 perovskites. On the one hand, the 1D perovskites enhance the hydrophobicity of the film and function as barriers to suppress the moisture permeation. On the other hand, they can block the ion migration of A-site ions and passivate defects, enabling excellent performance and stability to be realized for the fabricated devices.126 Liu et al. developed a new type of 1D/3D perovskite by introducing 1D PbI2–bipyridine BPy into the 3D perovskite solution. The resulting 1D/3D perovskite showed superior long-term operational stability in a humid environment under an externally applied electric field.127
As reviewed above, use of 3D/low dimensional perovskite bulk heterojunctions is an effective way to improve the efficiency and stability of PVSCs. To construct state-of-the-art bulk heterojunctions, several issues should be considered. First, since low-dimensional perovskites usually have high exciton binding energy, the amounts of low-dimensional perovskites should be controlled carefully in order to achieve high charge transfer efficiency. The functionalization of organic cations in low-dimensional perovskites can potentially lower their binding energy. Second, the orientation and crystallization of low-dimensional perovskites should be altered to ensure efficient charge transfer towards electrodes. Third, the employment of suitable organic cations that can passivate defects of 3D perovskites is beneficial for suppressing non-radiative recombination, resulting in enhanced device performance. Fourth, it is important to explore suitable organic cations that possess supramolecular interactive forces, such as hydrogen bonding or metal–organic coordination, which can potentially enhance the stability of devices.
(ii) 3D/low dimensional perovskite planar heterojunctions. 
Use of 3D/low dimensional perovskite planar heterojunctions is also a facile and effective strategy for enhancing the performance and stability of PVSCs. Unlike bulk heterojunctions, most 3D/low dimensional perovskite planar heterojunctions are constructed based on using a low-dimensional perovskite layer on/under 3D perovskites. Different from bulk heterojunctions, such a layer has a negligible influence on the crystallization of 3D perovskites, but plays the role of passivating the surface defects and modifying the energy level alignment to enhance device performance. The superior stability of the low-dimensional capping layer can also serve as a protection layer to improve the stability. A summary of high-performance 3D/low-dimensional perovskite planar heterojunction based PVSCs reported is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of reported 3D/low-dimensional planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells




Perovskite
Device structure
PCE (%)
Ref.




MAPbI3/PEA2Pb2I4
FTO/NiOx/Perovskite/PCBM-PN4N/Ag
19.89

128



MAPbI3/PEA2Pb2I4
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
18.51

134



(AVA)2PbI4/MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/Perovskite/carbon
12.9

135



FASnI3/(PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag
6.98

136



MAPbI3/(AVA)2PbI4
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
18.0

137



PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1/MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
19.10

138



Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39/PEA2Pb2I4
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
20.10

139



PEA2FASn2I7/PEA2SnI4/FASnI3
ITO/NiOx/Perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
9.41

129



Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/BAy(CsxFA1−x)1−yPb2(Br0.4I0.6)7
ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
19.4

140



MAPbI3/(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1
FTO/TiO2/C60/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
16.50

141



MAPbI3-(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Au
16.13

142



(CsPbI3)x(FAPbI3)y(MAPbBr3)1−x−y/PEA2Pb2I4
ITO/PTAA/Perovskite/PCBM/ZnO/Ag
21.31

143



(CsPbI3)x(FAPbI3)y(MAPbBr3)1−x−y/(PNA)2FAn−1PbnI3n+1
ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
22.62

144





A 3D/2D perovskite planar heterojunction is the most reported dimensional planar heterojunction. Bai et al. applied 2D/3D PVSCs in an inverted PVSC architecture by dripping a solution of phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI) onto the surface of a 3D perovskite to realize a PCE of 19.89%.128 Mixed-cation devices with a PCE of 21.7% have also been realized when bulky iso-butylammonium iodide (iBAI) and FAI were used by Cho et al. to modify the surface of bulk (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15.118 Ning et al. realized an improved efficiency of 9.41% for Sn-based 2D/3D PVSCs by using a 2D–quasi-2D–3D hierarchical structure.129
Lately, Zhang et al. replaced the organic hole-transporting material (HTM) with p-type 2D perovskites to obtain a graded band structure (Fig. 11a and b).130 2D perovskites on the surface exhibit a larger bandgap and a higher valence band maximum (VBM) to form an energy panel for efficient hole extraction, resulting in a PCE of 16.13% for HTM-free PVSCs (Fig. 11c). Liu et al. adopted pentafluorophenylethylammonium (FEA) as a fluoroarene cation to organize a thin 2D perovskite layer on the surfaces of 3D perovskites via a simple immersion method.131 The perfluorinated benzene moiety endows the space layer with hydrophobic properties to prevent the perovskite from being damaged in an ambient environment. Both enhanced PCE (from 20.6% to 22.2%) and stability were obtained in unencapsulated devices, indicating the superior function of the 2D interfacial layer.131 Zhou et al. adopted 2-thiophenemethylammonium (ThMA) as the spacer cation for preparing bulk 2D/3D PVSCs (Fig. 11d and e).132 The VBM and CBM of the 2D/3D perovskites match well with the HTM and ETM,51 facilitating efficient charge transport. Furthermore, the incorporation of the 2D spacer cation optimizes the crystal growth and orientation, alleviates the undesirable ion motion, and facilitates better charge extraction and device stability. The champion 2D/3D PVSC showed a PCE of 21.49% with improved stability under continuous light soaking compared to the 3D PVSC (Fig. 11f). Recently, Jang et al. employed a solid-state in-plane growth (SIG) method to grow a stable and highly crystalline 2D perovskite film on 3D perovskites, in which a solid-state 2D perovskite film was first stacked on a 3D perovskite film, followed by applying heat and pressure to induce the formation of a new 2D film. The SIG strategy avoids the formation of an unintended perovskite phase and, meanwhile, can control the final thickness of 2D perovskites. The constructed 2D/3D heterojunction greatly enhanced the built-in electric field and enabled a certified PCE of 24.35% for PVSCs.133
 Fig. 11  2D/3D perovskites boost the performance and stability of PVSCs. (a and b) Schematic diagram and band diagram of the growth of a MAPbI3/(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D/3D heterostructure, and (c) J–V curves of 3D/2D heterojunction PVSCs. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2018. (d) Energy level diagram of optimized ThMA-based PVSCs with 2D/3D perovskites and 3D perovskites. (e) Scheme of the ThMA-based 2D/3D perovskite structure. (f) Stability of unencapsulated devices exposed to continuous one sun illumination in N2. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 
Recently, 2D perovskites have been deposited under 3D perovskites as interfacial layers. Wu et al. incorporated large alkylammonium interlayers between the perovskite and underlayer PTAA to simultaneously reduce the non-radiative recombination loss at the top and bottom interfaces of the 3D perovskites, achieving a high PCE of 22.31%.145 Li et al. constructed a 2D/3D bottom-up structure by spin-coating a 2D perovskite precursor on PEABr. An enhanced PCE of 19.46% was achieved owing to the reduced trap states.146
1D perovskites have also been employed as interfacial layers to enhance the performance and stability of PVSCs. Kanatzidis et al. prepared a wide bandgap 1D perovskite capping layer on 3D perovskites based on thiazole ammonium (TA). The as-prepared 1D capping layer not only promotes the charge carrier extraction at the interface, but also blocks the ion migration, which enhances device stability, realizing an efficiency of 18.97% with superior stability.147 Elsenety et al. constructed a (FA/MA/Cs)PbI3−xBrx/(CH3)3SPbI3 bilayer structure to effectively enhance long-term stability.148 Recently, the Chen group introduced a crosslinkable propargylammonium (PA+) onto a 3D perovskite film to form a 1D/3D perovskite heterostructure. The 1D perovskite was formed by reacting PAI with excess PbI2 on the surface of the 3D perovskite. Moreover, the treatment of PA+ released the residual strain of the 3D perovskite, improving the efficiency to 21.19% with superior stability.149
The stability and performance of PSCs can also be improved using 0D perovskite quantum dots (QDs) owing to their similar lattice constants to and compatible processing with 3D perovskite films. Cha et al. deposited a layer of MAPbBr3−xIx quantum dots on 3D MAPbI3 perovskite; the well-matched energy level alignment promoted charge carrier extraction at the perovskite/HTM interface and enhanced device performance.150 Que et al. introduced CsxFA1−xPbI3 QDs with high x values on the surface of a 3D FAPbI3 perovskite. QDs not only passivated the surface defects, but also induced a better-matched energy alignment to enhance performance. In addition, the superior stability of QDs prolonged the lifetime of the fabricated devices.151 Zheng et al. used oleic acid (OA) ligand-capped CsPbBrCl2QDs as an antisolvent suspension to deliver molecular surface modifiers. The –COOH group can bond to Pb2+ for passivating defects, and the hydrophobic chain left on the surface can inhibit moisture penetration, which results in a high efficiency of 21.5% with excellent stability.152 Zhang et al. employed amphiphilic star-like poly(acrylic acid)-block-polystyrene (PAA-b-PS) diblock copolymers as nanoreactors to template the nucleation and growth of stable and uniform CsPbBrxI3−x QDs. The PS-ligated CsPbBrxI3−x QDs were deposited between MAPbI3 perovskite and Spiro-OMeTAD, which dramatically enhanced device performance due to the passivation of the surface defects of 3D perovskites by the as-prepared QDs as well as their cascade energy band alignment with the perovskite and the HTL.153 Zhang et al. constructed a multigraded 3D–2D–0D (bulk–nanosheet–quantum dot) perovksite heterostructure in CsPbI2Br-based PVSCs. The graded energy alignment enhanced the electric field at the interface and facilitated carrier extraction, resulting in improved performance.154
Although 3D/low-dimensional perovskite planar heterojunctions have great potential to be used for achieving high-efficiency PVSCs and overcoming stability challenges, there are several aspects that need to be considered in order to realize superior performance and stability. First, the deposition of low-dimensional perovskites must be carefully performed without damaging the 3D perovskite layer. Second, the orientation and amounts of low-dimensional perovskites should be carefully controlled to avoid impeding the charge transfer. Third, the tremendous structural diversities of low-dimensional perovskites need to be comprehensively understood in order to further improve device performance and stability. Modifying organic cations in low-dimensional perovskites with passivating capability or dipoles may be beneficial for enhancing charge transfer and suppressing non-radiative recombination at the interface.


2.2.2 Perovskite/functional material heterojunctions. 
In PVSCs, charge carrier extraction, transport, and recombination mainly occur at the heterointerfaces. However, the trap density is concentrated on the surface as the charge transporting materials (CTMs) may also have defects, causing serious non-radiative recombination. Apart from the performance, the trap states at interfaces can also lead to poor stability and hysteresis due to ion migration.155,156 Therefore, to achieve high efficiency and stability, it is critical to modify the interface. In general, functional interlayers are inserted into perovskite/charge transporting layer (CTL) interfaces to passivate the defects, tune the band energy offsets, block the ion migration, or construct a barrier to protect the perovskite from the ambient environment. Interlayers under perovskites can also serve as templates to modulate the film quality of perovskites. It was reported that 0.2 eV is an appropriate energy offset to enable efficient charge carrier extraction at the CTL/perovskite interfaces,157 and the modification of the band level of CTLs is important for enhancing device performance.158 Interfacial materials consisting of CTL modifiers and low-dimensional materials will be reviewed in detail in this section.
2.2.2.1 Perovskite/charge-transporting material (CTM) heterojunctions. 
The energy-level alignment between perovskites and CTMs is crucial for device performance. On the one hand, the mismatched energy levels will cause inferior charge extraction efficiency, resulting in charge accumulation and recombination at interfaces. On the other hand, the intrinsic defects of CTMs will also serve as non-radiative recombination centers, leading to serious energy loss. Therefore, interfacial modification of CTMs to enable better energy-level alignment across associated interfaces and to reduce the defect density will contribute to the reduction of recombination loss. The energy levels of commonly used CTMs and perovskites are shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Energy level diagram of hybrid perovskites with different compositions and different HTMs and CTMs. 
(i) Perovskite/electron transporting material (ETM) heterojunctions. 
A defect-free ETM/perovskite interface with a favorable band alignment is crucial to realizing high-performance and stable PVSCs. In the normal configuration, TiO2 is the most used ETM due to its high electron mobility, well-matched energy level, and good contact with perovskites.159–161 Therefore, electrons can be efficiently extracted in devices with the ETM composed of a compact TiO2 layer as a blocking layer and mesoporous TiO2. However, the generation of defects upon exposure of TiO2 to UV light causes charge recombination losses.162 In the defective TiO2 crystals, the point defects caused by the absence of the O atom lead to defect levels below the conduction band, which serve as electron traps.163,164 A similar understanding of defects has also been developed for SnO2.165 Therefore, relevant interfacial engineering has been studied to address these issues. The reported PVSCs with modified inorganic ETMs are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Representatives of perovskite/functional ETMs through modification




ETM
Modification
Structure
PCE (%)
Ref.




TiO2
Biopolymer heparin sodium (HS) interfacial layer
n–i–p
20.1

179



K-TFSI treated TiO2
n–i–p
21.1

180



Chlorine-capped TiO2 colloidal nanocrystal film
n–i–p
20.1

181



Dopamine-capped TiO2 nanoparticles
n–i–p
21

182



Lanthanide doped TiO2
n–i–p
20.57

183



CsBr-modified mesoporous TiO2
n–i–p
21

184



C-TiO2/a-SnO2
n–i–p
21.4

185



SnO2
SnO2-in polymer (PEG) matrix
n–i–p
20.8

186



Triphenylphosphine oxide doped SnO2
n–i–p
20.69

187



Atomic layer deposition (ALD) of SnO2
n–i–p
20

188



C9 anchored SnO2
n–i–p
21.3

189



Ammonium chloride induced coagulated SnO2 colloids
n–i–p
21.38

190



SnO2/TiO2
n–i–p
21.65

191



ZnO
MgO and EA+ passivated ZnO
n–i–p
21.1

173



Sulfur passivation of solution-processed ZnO
n–i–p
19.65

192



Fullerene-anchored core–shell ZnO nanoparticles
p–i–n
21.1

193



ZnO–ZnS interface
n–i–p
20.7

194





Recently, You et al. introduced a biopolymer heparin sodium (HS) (Fig. 13a) interlayer onto the surface of TiO2 to anchor the perovskite and TiO2 in MAPbI3 solar cells.166 Interactions between the functional groups (–COO−, –SO3−, and Na+) in HS with Pb2+ and I− in MAPbI3 and Ti4+ in TiO2 resulted in the passivated perovskite and TiO2. The surface wettability of TiO2 was improved and thus beneficial to forming perovskite films with reduced pinholes and roughness. The PCE was enhanced from 17.2% to 20.1% with suppressed hysteresis (Fig. 13b). Liu et al. employed a multifunctional molecule, 5-amino-2,4,6-triiodoisophthalic acid (ATPA), to anchor onto TiO2, which can simultaneously react with dangling –OH on the TiO2 surfaces and passivate the defects of all-inorganic perovskites through its carboxylic acid and amine groups.167 Cui et al. synthesized a variety of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) with precisely controlled dimensions and structures and inserted them between two layers of the TiO2 ETM. They found that for the Au/SiO2 core shell NPs, when the thickness of the SiO2 shell was lower than the critical value, the hot electrons were easily transferred from the Au core to TiO2, resulting in an enhanced electron mobility and upshifted Fermi level of TiO2. As a consequence, devices with a sandwich-like TiO2/Au NP/TiO2 ETM exhibited both greatly enhanced JSC, VOC, and PCE.168 Wang et al. developed an acid-treatment method to create an amorphous TiO2 buffer layer on anatase TiO2. The as-prepared amorphous TiO2 layer showed increased electron density due to the presence of oxygen vacancies, resulting in enhanced charge transfer between the perovskite and TiO2. The TiO2 ETL with the amorphous buffer layer realized enhanced JSC and PCE.169 Wei et al. designed a SnO2-in-polymer matrix (water soluble polymer PEG) to improve the quality of SnO2 films and facilitate electron extraction (Fig. 13c).170 The PEG molecules function as ligands around SnO2 nanoparticles, and the hydrogen bonding between PEG and SnO2 nanoparticles was able to prevent the aggregation of SnO2 nanoparticles. The alleviated aggregation and enhanced wetting ability contributed to the formation of a compact and pinhole-free SnO2 layer. The average PCE was improved from 16.2% to 19.5% with enhanced reproducibility. Tu et al. reported the n-doping of SnO2 with the triphenylphosphine oxide (TPPO) molecule (Fig. 13d).171 The doping led to an enhanced conductivity and a decreased work function of SnO2. The energy barrier at the SnO2/perovskite interface was decreased from 0.55 to 0.39 eV (Fig. 13e), facilitating electron transfer at the interface and preventing charge accumulation. As a result, the efficiency was increased from 19.01% to 20.69% with an enhanced VOC from 1.079 V to 1.106 V.
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of heparin sodium salt (HS). (b) J–V curves of MAPbI3 devices without and with HS layers. Inset: IPCE spectra of corresponding devices. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic of the interaction between PEG and SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (d) The model of a TPPO molecule absorbed onto a SnO2 surface. (e) Energy level diagram of a SnO2/CsFAMA heterojunction before and after doping with TPPO. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f) Schematic of ZnO–MgO and ZnO–Mg–EA+. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
The performance of ZnO-based devices was limited by serious surface recombination, which mainly originates from the intrinsic defects, the surface states of ZnO and the defects formed during the deposition process. Yao et al. developed fullerene-anchored core–shell ZnO as an efficient and stable ETM, in which ZnO was anchored with fullerene nano-shells to suppress trap states and passivate hydroxyl groups on the ZnO surface. Devices realized a high efficiency of 21.1%.172 Cao et al. introduced a thin layer of MgO and protonated ethanolamine (EA) for passivating ZnO (Fig. 13f).173 The incorporation of MgO–EA+ resulted in a decreased work function of SnO2 for better energy alignment with perovskites, and the transmission was also enhanced to improve the light harvesting of perovskites. The fabricated devices with graphene encapsulation showed a champion PCE of 21.1% and excellent stability in air for more than 300 h.173
In comparison to the more widely used binary metal oxides, ternary metal oxides such as BaSnO3, Zn2SnO4 and SrTiO3 offer greater degrees of freedom by simply adjusting their chemical stoichiometry to obtain various properties.174–176 BaSnO3 is a transparent semiconductor oxide with a wide bandgap of 3.1 eV and high electron mobility. Shin et al. reported a compact La-doped BaSnO3 transport layer via a superoxide colloidal solution method in PVSCs.174 The La-doped BaSnO3 single crystal and epitaxial thin films exhibited ultrahigh electron mobilities of 320 and 70 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The fabricated PVSCs with BaSO3 showed a champion PCE of 21.2% and retained 93% of their initial performance after 1000 h illumination operation. In addition to improving carrier transport, the BaSnO3 ETM was demonstrated as an excellent substitute for TiO2 owing to its better moisture resistance and light stability.177 Zhang et al. prepared network-like, hierarchical, porous Zn2SnO4 nanospheres through a facile and robust polymer-templating method. When applied in PVSCs as an ETM, the Zn2SnO4 nanospheres can promote the growth of perovskite films, and enhance light absorption and charge extraction, leading to superior device performance in comparison with Zn2SnO4 without using the polymer-templating method.178
(ii) Perovskite/hole-transporting material (HTM) heterojunctions. 
Although the perovskite/HTM interface seems to be less problematic for charge separation, it is still important to perfect this interface to suppress recombination and improve stability. For p–i–n structured devices, NiOx, PTAA, and PEDOT:PSS are among the most commonly used HTMs (Table 3). A properly designed functional layer between the HTM and perovskite not only can suppress recombination but can also modulate the crystallization of perovskites.
Table 3 Representatives of high-performance PVSCs with different HTMs




Category
HTM
HOMO (eV)
Device structure
PCE (%)
Ref.




Small molecule
FDT
−5.16
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/FDT/Au
20.2

195



DM
−5.27
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/DM/Au
23.2

196



Z26
−5.16
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Z26/Au
20.1

197



X55
−5.23
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/X55/Au
20.8

198



OMe-TATPyr
−5.4
ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/OMe-TATPyr/Au
20.6

199



G2
−5.22
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/G2/Au
20.2

200



XPP
−5.15
ITO/SnO2/C60/Perovskite/XPP/Ag
19.5

201



MPA-BTTI
−5.24
ITO/MPA-BTTI/Perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag
21.17

202



Spiro-mF
−5.19
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-mF/Au
24.82

203



Polymer
P3HT
−5.2
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite(NBH&WBH)/P3HT/Au
22.7

204



PTAA
−5.2
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/PTAA/Au
22.1

205



PEDOT:PSS
−5.2
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/PCBM/Au
18.1

206



PCDTBT1
−5.38
ITO/TiO2/Perovskite/PCDTBT1/MoO3/Au
19.1

207



DTB
−4.96
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/DTB/Au
19.68

208



PTEG
−5.40
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/PTEG/Au
19.8

209



Inorganic HTM
CuSCN
−5.3
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuSCN/rGO/Au
20.4

210



CuGaO2
−5.29
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuGaO2/Au
18.51

211



CuCrO2
−5.4
ITO/CuCrO2/Perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag
19.0

212



Cu2O
−5.28
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Cu2O/Au
18.9

213



CuOx
−5.4
ITO/CuOx/MAPbI3/PC61BM/ZnO/Al
17.43

214



NiOx
−5.4
FTO/NiOx/FAPbI3/PCBM/TiOx/Ag
20.65

215



Complex
CuPc
−5.2
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuPc/Au
18.8

216



CuPc–OBu
−5.11
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuPc-OBu/Au
17.6

217



NiPc–(OBu)8
−5.06
FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/NiPc-(OBu)8/V2O5/Au
19.4

218





Yao et al. developed a bilayer structure combining p-type Cu:NiOx nanoparticle-based mesoporous and Cu-doped NiOx blocking layers to realize efficient hole extraction in inverted PVSCs.219 The p-doping of NiOx gave rise to the high hole conductivity and the meso-structure with a high intensity of pores was beneficial for the deposition of a high-quality perovskite. As a result, the series resistance of the devices was reduced and the FFs were improved to as high as 82%. Large-area devices (1.08 cm2) exhibited a high efficiency of 18.1%. He et al. designed a 2,2′-(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene)dimalononitrile (F6TCNNQ) molecularly doped NiOx HTM to reduce the energy level offset between the VBMs of the perovskite and NiOx from 0.18 to 0.04 eV.220 The F6TCNNQ molecule could be strongly absorbed by the NiOx ETM and electrons could transfer from the NiOx ETM to F6TCNNQ, realizing the p-type doping of NiOx. Consequently, the average PCE of mixed cation PVSCs was boosted by 7% and a champion PCE of 20.86% was achieved.
PTAA and PEDOT:PSS are common HTMs in p–i–n structured PVSCs due to their suitable HOMO levels and high hole mobility. Recently, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) have become substitutes for traditional HTMs in p–i–n PVSCs due to their unique and multifunctional chemical and physical interface properties. Magomedov et al. reported a phosphonic acid-functionalized carbazole derivative SAM to replace the commonly used polymer or inorganic HTM in p–i–n PVSCs.221 The SAM can function as an undoped hole selective contact, boosting their JSC by 0.3 mA cm−2 compared with that of PTAA based devices, and the average FF was close to 80%. Yalcin et al. successfully designed two SAM organic molecules, TPA and MC-43, as WF modifiers and efficient substitutes of PEDOT:PSS on ITO electrodes.222 The replacement ensured the uniform formation of a perovskite layer, reduced charge loss and improved contact selectivity, which resulted in a significant increase in PCE from 9.59% to 17.3%. Recently, Al-Ashouri et al. reported a self-assembled, methyl-substituted carbazole (Me-4PACz) monolayer as the hole-selective layer in PVSCs, which obtained 84% FF in single junction PVSCs and a tandem open-circuit voltage of 1.92 V.29 The Me-4PACz SAM provided fast carrier extraction and effective passivation at the hole selection interface, allowing lower transmission loss due to its ultra-thin thickness and more suitable energy level alignment.
In n–i–p structured devices, Spiro-OMeTAD is the most common HTM used for high-performance PVSCs. However, the low intrinsic mobility of Spiro-OMeTAD requires doping, which causes instability. The modification of perovskite/HTM heterojunction plays a critical role in realizing stable and efficient PVSCs. Abdi-Jalebi et al. adopted a thermally evaporated dopant-free tetracene at the interface between the perovskite and Spiro-OMeTAD to form graded HTMs, which offers a superior hole extraction capability with reduced interfacial defects. Devices exhibited an enhanced VOC of 1.18 V compared with those with neat Spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM (1.13V).223 Habisreutinger et al. adopted P3HT-wrapped single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as an interlayer between perovskites and undoped Spiro-OMeTAD. The reduced series resistance and enhanced hole mobility of undoped Spiro-OMeTAD led to a PCE of 18.8% without any dopants.224 They also substituted Spiro-OMeTAD with a P3HT/SWNT and PMMA bilayer to improve the thermal stability of the devices. PMMA functioned as an effective perovskite protective layer due to its hydrophobicity and thermal stability.225
2.2.2.2 Perovskite/2D interfacial material heterojunctions. 
As mentioned above, the energy level alignment and charge carrier mobility of interfacial materials are crucial properties that influence device performance. 2D materials, including graphene and its derivatives, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), black phosphorus (BP) and MXenes, have been increasingly developed to modify the CTMs or directly serve as CTMs due to their high conductivity, tunable energy levels, excellent chemical properties, defect-free nature and superior mechanical properties in recent years.226
(i) Graphene and its derivatives. 
Graphene and its derivatives are employed as interfacial materials in PVSCs due to their excellent electrical properties and optical properties in addition to mechanical toughness. They are ambipolar so they can efficiently transport both holes and electrons. Their energy levels and charge carrier mobility can be easily tuned. Besides, their high optical transparency over the wide spectral range can help avoid potential parasitic absorption in solar cells.
Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has been used in PVSCs. Jokar et al. thoroughly investigated the carrier dynamics using GO and rGO as HTMs in inverted PVSCs. They found that although GO could extract holes from the perovskite more efficiently, the holes were trapped on the localized oxygen atoms, causing severe non-radiative recombination. The reduction of GO reduced the charge extraction efficiency but suppressed the recombination at the interface. Controlling the degree of reduction to balance the charge extraction efficiency and recombination is crucial for the device performance.228 Yang et al. employed rGO to replace PEDOT:PSS as an HTM in inverted PVSCs as its high work function is beneficial for the enhancement of the built-in electric field at the perovskite/HTM interface.229
Decorated GO materials have been used as CTMs in PVSCs. Bhosale et al. successfully employed MoOx nanoparticles to functionalize GO, which not only downshifted the work functions of GO, but also suppressed the hole trapping in the GO film (Fig. 14a and b). As a result, the built-in electric field and charge transfer efficiency were simultaneously enhanced, leading to improved VOC, JSC and PCE.227 Du et al. reported (NiCo)1−yFeyOx decorated GO as an effective hole-transporting layer in carbon-based PVSCs. The charge localization on the GO surface was suppressed as partial electrons on the GO surface would spontaneously transfer to the inorganic nanoparticles due to the variation of electron confinement and the dipole formed from GO to (NiCo)1−yFeyOx.230
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the hole transport mechanism in (a) GO-AuNP and (b) GO-MoOx devices. Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. 
In addition to the employment of graphene and its derivatives as CTMs, these materials are also inserted into the perovskite/CTM interface to modify the heterojunction. For instance, the Han group constructed a Pb-rich perovskite/chlorinated graphene oxide (Cl-GO) heterostructure to enhance device performance and stability. The appropriate HOMO level of Cl-GO between the VBM of the perovskite and the HOMO of Spiro-OMeTAD provides an efficient charge extraction pathway for holes from the perovskite. The strong Pb–Cl and Pb–O bonds between the perovskite and Cl-GO resulted in the enhancement of device stability.231
(ii) Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). 
TMDs are a class of 2D materials with the formula MX2, where M represents transition metal such as Mo or W, and X is a chalcogen (e.g., S, Se, or Te). TMDs have tunable electronic and optical properties to show either semiconducting or metallic properties by altering the metal and chalcogen compounds or varying the number layer, and have drawn great attention in forming perovskite/TMD heterojunctions in PSVCs recently.
MoS2 has high carrier mobility and a suitable energy level as an effective interfacial material for perovskite/HTM interfaces. Tang et al. first reported the vdW epitaxial growth of MAPbI3 perovskite on a MoS2 flake/PTAA substrate, which results in highly oriented perovskite films with large grain sizes and low defect densities. The enhanced crystallinity of the perovskite results from the perfect match between the (008) plane of the perovskite and the (110) plane of MoS2 (Fig. 15a–c), which promoted the out-of-plane growth of perovskite films with preferential orientation along (110). The HOMO level of MoS2 lies between the VBM of the perovskite and the HOMO of PTAA, which facilitates hole extraction at the interface. The employment of MoS2 leads to an enhanced PCE from 18.12% to 20.55%.232 Agresti et al. employed a thermally-assisted spray coating method to insert chemically functionalized MoS2 at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface to fabricate high-performance perovskite solar modules (PVSMs). The functionalization of MoS2 by connecting the thiol group of 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) moieties to the MoS2 surface via S–S van der Waals physisorption effectively tuned the energy level to match well with those of the perovskite and HTM, enhancing the hole extraction efficiency and resulting in high efficiencies of the PVSMs of 13.4% and 15.3% for active areas of 108 cm2 and 82 cm2 respectively.234
 Fig. 15  (a) The side view of the atomic crystal heterojunction of MAPbI3 and MoS2. Atomic crystal structure of the (001) plane of MoS2 (b) and the (110) plane of the perovskite (c). Reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (d) The crystallization process of the perovskite on SnO2 and SnS2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 
SnS2, with a layered structure in which tin atoms are sandwiched between two layers of hexagonal sulfur atoms through van der Waals interaction, has been introduced as a CTM in PVSCs. Zhao et al. employed a Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) self-assembly stacking deposition strategy to form few-layer SnS2 with a flat surface. The dense and smooth SnS2 film promotes the heterogeneous nucleation of the upper layer of the perovskite film and enables uniform deposition of large grains (Fig. 15d). Meanwhile, the high transparency (∼90% over the visible light range), superior conductivity relative to SnO2, and suitable level of the conduction band minimum ensure efficient charge extraction and transport at the perovskite/SnS2 interface, contributing to a remarkable efficiency of over 20% for n–i–p PVSCs.233
TiS2 is another TMD employed to construct perovskite/2D material heterojunctions in PVSCs. Yin et al. reported a low-temperature solution-processed TiS2 as an ETM in conventional structure PVSCs and realized a decent efficiency of 17.37%.235 Later, Huang et al. incorporated TiS2 as an interlayer at the perovskite/SnO2 interface to passivate the surface defects of SnO2 and with better energy matching with the perovskite to realize an efficiency of 21.7%.236
WS2 was used as a p-type interfacial material in PVSCs due to its high carrier mobility and well-matched energy level with perovskites. Cao et al. and Liu et al. separately employed 2D WS2 flakes to alter the energy level diagram of the PTAA/perovskite interface, modify the crystallization of the perovskite and passivate defects of the perovskite. The defect-free WS2 surface served as a template for van der Waals epitaxial growth of perovskite films, contributing to the formation of highly oriented perovskite grains. The facilitated hole extraction at the interface and reduced defects density enables a remarkable PCE of 21.1%.237 Zhou et al. incorporated 2D WS2 nanoflakes into the ETM/CsPbBr3 interface to trigger the van der Waals epitaxy of CsPbBr3 perovskite, which dramatically reduced the interfacial tensile strain due to the interfacial lattice movement via the weak interaction between WS2 and the perovskite, resulting in an ultrahigh VOC of 1.70 V.238
(iii) Black phosphorus (BP). 
BP has great potential to be used as an interfacial material in PVSCs due to its adjustable bandgap from 0.33 eV (for bulk BP) to 2.0 eV (for single-layer phosphorene) and high carrier mobility (up to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1).239 Zhang et al. introduced 3- to 4-layer-thick BP at the ETM/perovskite interface and 1-layer-thick BP at the perovskite/HTM interface. The tunable bandgap of BP achieved through precise control of its thickness and ambipolar properties enables the simultaneously promoted carrier extraction at both interfaces, leading to an enhanced PCE of 19.83% from 16.95%.240
(iv) MXenes. 
MXenes are 2D inorganic compounds with a formula of Mn+1XnTx, in which M represents an early transition metal, X is nitrogen or carbon, and T stands for a functional group (e.g. O, F, OH, Cl). MXenes combine the metallic conductivity of transition metal carbides and the hydrophilic nature because of their hydroxyl or oxygen terminated surfaces, making them promising interfacial materials in PVSCs. Several groups have mixed MXenes with traditional ETMs to enhance their conductivity and enhance device performance.241,242 The Carlo group employed MXenes with different functional groups to simultaneously tune the work function of perovskites and CTMs, which resulted in more favorable energy level alignment and enhanced device performance.243–245


2.2.3 Perovskite/organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) heterojunctions. 
In the above sections, the modifications of device structures to reduce electrical losses were introduced. However, these structures are still limited by the thermodynamic principle. The Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit indicates that the maximum efficiency for a single-junction solar cell is 33.7%. To break the S–Q limit, multiple photo-responsive materials have to be stacked to reduce thermalization. One simple structure is to directly deposit one absorber on top of the other absorber to form a heterojunction. However, such a structure requires compatible deposition methods to avoid damage to the underlying absorber. Besides, the Eg of the two absorbers should be complementary to absorb different ranges of light. Recently, bulk heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) have been integrated with PVSCs to fabricate devices with such a stacking structure (Fig. 16a). In such a device, two photoactive layers (the perovskite as the bottom layer and the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic as the top layer) are directly fabricated by sequential solution deposition of the two light absorbing layers. Because the perovskite layer and the organic BHJ layer have complementary light absorption, this type of hybrid solar cell can not only reduce the spectral losses but also save the fabrication costs compared to typical tandem cells.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the device structure of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. Schematic of (b) charge transfer and (c) light absorption of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. (d) Carrier dynamics of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
In a perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cell, the narrow Eg BHJ absorber is deposited on top of the perovskite. The incident light first passes through the large Eg perovskite, where the high-energy photons are absorbed, followed by the low-energy photons absorbed by the narrow Eg BHJ film (Fig. 16b and c). The sufficient harnessing of photons reduces thermalization loss and transmission loss when compared to the single junction PVSC. The Yang group found that the VOC is determined by PVSCs but the JSC is determined by both absorbers, making such a structure possible to break the S–Q limit.247
The carrier dynamics of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells are shown in Fig. 16d.246 When light passes through the system, the perovskite and BHJ films generate excitons. For the perovskite film, photo-generated excitons can easily dissociate into electrons and holes due to the low binding energy. For the BHJ film, excitons dissociate at the donor–acceptor (D–A) interfaces. Then, the donor in the BHJ film serves as the HTM, whose HOMO level must be higher than the valence band of the perovskite. By the same token, the acceptor in the BHJ film acts as the ETM and its LUMO should match with the CBM of the perovskite. Meanwhile, the energy level of the donor and acceptor should match with each other to ensure efficient charge separation. Finally, carriers transport across the perovskite and BHJ film and be collected by the respective electrodes. As there are two types of perovskite structures, p–i–n and n–i–p, the BHJ can be employed separately in both structures.
To achieve high performance, several key points should be noted. First, the PVSC should have a high VOC as it determines the VOC of the whole device; therefore, strategies introduced in the previous sections are also applicable here. Second, the BHJ film should have a narrow Eg and high EQE in the NIR region because it directly affects the JSC of the device; therefore, it is critical to exploit high-performance narrow Eg organic solar cells (OSCs) in this hybrid structure. Third, the energy levels between the perovskite and BHJ film should be matched to ensure appropriate charge carrier dynamics. Finally, the BHJ film should have high charge carrier mobilities close to those of the perovskite. With the rapid development of narrow Eg acceptors, Y6 and its derivatives have achieved both NIR absorption and high EQE compared to previously reported systems (such as IEICO-4F, 6TIC-4F).248–250 The Jen group recently reported a non-fullerene acceptor, CH1007, with enhanced intermolecular π-core interaction and an absorption edge of 950 nm. The BHJ device based on CH1007 can reach a high efficiency of 17.2%.251 All these will facilitate the development of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. In the following part, we will systematically introduce the reports on perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells to provide some specific examples.
2.2.3.1 In n–i–p device structures. 
The early reports mainly employed fullerene acceptor-based BHJ films. In 2014, Yang et al. incorporated a PBDTT-SeDPP/PC71BM BHJ film onto PVSCs to replace the traditional HTM. The BHJ film not only transports charges but also functions as a light absorber to complement the absorption loss of PVSCs in the near-infrared (NIR) region. The absorption edge was extended to over 900 nm, resulting in an enhanced JSC from 19.3 mA cm−2 to 21.2 mA cm−2.252 In 2016, Sun et al. introduced an A–D–A small molecule and a PC70BM-based BHJ on the surface of the perovskite and successfully extended the photovoltaic response to 900 nm.253 The Jen group successfully fabricated a high-performance perovskite/(DPPZnP-TSEH-PCBM) based hybrid solar cell with a PCE of 19.2%, which is among the highest PCEs reported for perovskite/organic hybrid solar cells (Fig. 17a). The alkyl-sulfide thienyl electron-donating groups in DPPZnP-TSEH help tune the HOMO level to match with that of the perovskite; meanwhile, the S atoms on the molecule serve as Lewis base to passivate the perovskite. The strong molecular interaction results in a high mobility and FF of the devices. The EQE was extended to the NIR range, leading to enhanced current density.254
 Fig. 17  (a) EQE spectra of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells in comparison to PVSCs with Spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM; the inset exhibits the device structure and energy level diagram. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Willey-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level alignment and EQE spectra (c) of CsPbIBr2-based hybrid solar cells with different BHJ films. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
Recently, BHJ films have also been integrated with large Eg all-inorganic perovskites to enhance JSC. Guo et al. integrated a BHJ film, PBDTTT-E-T:IEICO, with CsPbI2Br to broaden the light absorption range. The photoresponse was extended to 900 nm, resulting in an enhanced JSC from 14.78 to 15.98 mA cm−2. The hydrophobic BHJ film also endows the device with better stability in air.255 Recently, Chen et al. combined different BHJ films with CsPbIBr2 to fabricate integrated devices. They found that the PTB7-Th:ATT BHJ has an energy barrier to suppress the electron transport from the BHJ to perovskite. In contrast, the PBDB-T:BT2b system showed well-matched energy level alignment (Fig. 17b). As a result, the EQE in the NIR region is much higher for CsPbIBr2/PBDB-T:BT2b than CsPbIBr2/PTB7-Th:ATT (Fig. 17c). Moreover, a recast method was developed to modify the morphology and the D/A distribution in a BHJ film to facilitate charge extraction. Consequently, an additional JSC of 2.32 mA cm−2 was achieved with a PCE of 11.08%.256
2.2.3.2 In p–i–n device structures. 
Ye et al. integrated MAPbI3−xClx-based PVSCs (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/PCBM) with PDPP3T and PCBM-based BHJs to achieve an EQE of up to 46% in the 800–1000 nm region, contributing to an additional JSC of ∼5 mA cm−2 for a pure PVSC.257 Zhang et al. integrated a 90–110 nm PDPP3T:PCBM BHJ film with MAPbI3 perovskite to extend the absorption to 950 nm. The favorable energy level alignment between the perovskite and BHJ enables efficient charge transport.258 Kim et al. blended a diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-based low Eg polymer (LBP) DT-PDPP2T-TT (TT) and PC71BM with a novel n-type polymer, N2200, to enhance electron transport, leading to well-distributed bicontinuous networks and high electron mobility. An enhanced JSC of 20.04 mA cm−2 was achieved due to the extended absorption.259 Chen et al. employed a ternary BHJ film (PCE13:BTCIC:PCBM) as an ETL in inverted-structured PVSCs. They found that the energy level-alignment is crucial for the FF and VOC. PCE 13 has a lower HOMO level than PCE 12, better facilitating the hole transport from the BHJ to perovskite (Fig. 18a and b). By modifying the morphology of the BHJ film, the device showed enhanced NIR photo-response and demonstrated a 40% EQE in the range between 800 nm and 950 nm, which accounts for ∼9% of the overall photocurrent.260
 Fig. 18  (a) Device configuration and energy-level alignment of inverted PVSCs with a BHJ as an ETM and the proposed mechanism of exciton formation and carrier dynamics. (b) EQE spectra of devices using different BHJ films. Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Recently, Zhao et al. found that the incorporation of a narrow Eg molecule (IEICO-4F) into a perovskite film can extend the photo-response to the NIR region. IEICO-4F is also a Lewis base which can passivate the defects at grain boundaries, resulting in a high PCE of 21.6%.261 Daboczi et al. found that the interfacial energetics play a key role in the performance of hybrid solar cells. When there was an energy barrier, the device showed reduced VOC and FF, even though the JSC was enhanced.262 Recently, Chen et al. reported a record JSC of 28.06 mA cm−2 by integrating a 1.60 eV perovskite with a ternary BHJ (S1:Y6:PCBM). However, the integrated device showed a low FF of 67.3% and a slightly reduced VOC of 1.09 V, which may be due to the not well-matched energy level. This work indicates the effectiveness of enhancing photo-response in the NIR region using a Y6-based BHJ, but the interfacial energetics should be carefully modified.263

2.3 Multijunction designs for PVSCs
The efficiency of current PV technologies is approaching the S–Q limit of single junction cells. Up to now, the efficiency of c-Si solar cells has been stagnant at ∼26% for quite a long time. Apart from the perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells introduced in Section 2.2.3, the performance limitation of a single-junction cell can also be alleviated by using devices with tandem structures, which combines two or more photovoltaic semiconductors with complementary absorption properties. Tandem solar cells can minimize the thermalization losses of high-energy photons by employing semiconductor layers with matched Eg, providing an up-and-coming approach to realize enhanced performance (Fig. 19a). In a tandem cell, the ‘top cell’ with a wide Eg semiconductor absorbs high-energy photons but allows the low-energy photons to transmit and be absorbed by the ‘bottom cell’ with a low Eg semiconductor. The top and bottom cells should be designed based on their spectral efficiency (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Tandem solar cells reduce the thermalization loss. (b) The complementary absorption of two subcells in a tandem cell. Device configurations of (c) two-terminal (2T) and (d) (e) four-terminal (4T) tandem solar cells. 
The monolithic two-terminal (2T) and mechanically stacked four-terminal (4T) configurations are the two main types of tandem cells (Fig. 19c–e). The 2T configuration contains the in situ fabrication of series-connected sub-cells with complementary bandgaps. The sub-cells are often bridged monolithically by an interconnecting layer; therefore, only one of the two external electrical contacts is required to be transparent to ensure the transmission of light into the absorber layer. In contrast, the two sub-cells of the 4-T tandem are deposited on the respective substrates, and physically connected to each other by four external contacts. Three of them should be semi-transparent to ensure the light passes through both sub-cells. As the parasitic absorption and reflection may occur at the interconnecting layer and interfaces, the more semi-transparent electrical contacts of the 4-T tandem are not ideal for practical efficiency. Although the 2-T tandem exhibits more potential for high-performance tandem cells, fabricating 2T cells is quite challenging, especially for solution-processed 2T tandem cells, in which the solvents employed for depositing the upper layer may erode the underlying cell.

Fig. 20a and b shows the maximum theoretical efficiency according to the Eg of the sub-cells for 2-T and 4-T tandems, respectively. The selection of sub-cells with appropriate bandgaps is vital for the performance of tandem cells. The maximum efficiency for a two-junction tandem device is 47% under one sun illumination when combining the Eg of 1.63 eV for the top cell and 0.96 eV for the bottom cell. Three junctions would result in 52% efficiency and infinite junctions would result in 86% efficiency. In a 2T structure, the series-connected design of the sub-cells enables high voltages as the voltages produced by each sub-cell are added. Meanwhile, the current through each sub-cell must be identical to meet the ‘current matching’ requirement. As the sub-cells harvest independent ranges of the solar spectrum, realizing photocurrent matching under the maximum power point (MPP) condition requires careful bandgap selection and interface engineering. In contrast, the current matching is not required for 4-T tandems, as the sub-cells are fabricated separately and then connected, which is the advantage of 4-T tandem cells.
 Fig. 20  The maximum theoretical efficiency of (a) 2T tandems and (b) 4-T tandems. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
Previously, tandem solar cells usually consist of III–V compound semiconductors, c-Si, CdTe, and CIGS. Recently, a PCE of 32.8% has been achieved for a multi-junction tandem combining a III–V compound and Si.264 Although the tunable Eg of III–V compound semiconductors makes them ideal candidates for high-performance tandem cells, the complex manufacturing processes hinder their development towards market.265–267 Solution-processed PVSCs with tunable Eg have recently attracted tremendous attention as promising candidates for fabricating tandem solar cells, due to their unique optoelectronic properties and simple-fabrication process from low-cost precursors. By composition engineering, the tunable Eg of the perovskite ranges from 1.17 eV to over 2.3 eV, and almost the full range of available Eg can reach >50% of its S–Q limit.26,27 Therefore, perovskite-based tandem cells have been seriously considered for the fabrication of high-performance devices in both hybrid configurations and all-perovskite structures.
In the 2-T tandem structure, in addition to the two sub-cells, the protective buffer layer and recombination layers are also crucial. Typically, a 5–30 nm transparent buffer layer (MoOx, NiOx, VOx) is deposited through a mild process to prevent the sputtering damage to the transparent conducting electrode to the underneath soft layers consisting of PVSCs. The recombination layer (such as PEDOT:PSS and SnO2) was deposited to allow current to pass across the two sub-cells by promoting the opposite carriers from the two sub-cells to recombine in a highly conductive layer. Therefore, the design of an appropriate 2T configuration is crucial for the device performance. The materials used for the recombination layer should have high optical transparency to avoid parasitic absorption and excellent conductivity to facilitate the hole–electron recombination, an appropriate deposition method that does not damage the underlying layers and the barrier effects to stop solvent penetration.268–273
At present, the mostly explored perovskite-based tandem solar cells employed large Eg perovskites (1.6 eV to 1.80 eV) as top absorbers and silicon, CIGS, narrow Eg perovskites or BHJs as bottom absorbers. In this hybrid structure, the incorporation of PVSCs not only contributes to an enhanced efficiency, but also reduces device fabrication costs, providing an effective strategy to prepare high-efficiency panels for Si-based and thin-film based solar cells. The efficiency evolution of different kinds of tandem solar cells is shown in Fig. 21. Perovskite–Si tandem solar cells have recently reached a PCE of ∼29.52% in a 2-T configuration.29 All-perovskite tandems also present great opportunities for high-performance panels with low cost, high throughput and the potential of flexible applications. The progress of perovskite-based tandem solar cells will be reviewed in the following section.
 Fig. 21  Efficiency evolution of perovskite-based tandem solar cells.274–298 

2.3.1 Perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells. 
As mentioned earlier, c-Si PV technology accounts for 90% of the PV market share and the certified efficiency has been over 25%, indicating that it has already approached its S–Q limit. To further increase the efficiency, perovskite/Si tandem cells can adopt wide Eg PVSCs as the top cells and Si solar cells as the bottom cells to break the S–Q limit. With only a few years, perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells have already shown a record PCE of 29.52%.29 To further enhance the efficiency, some challenges should be overcome, including optical losses, electrical losses, and processing damage.
One of the crucial aspects for fabricating high-performance perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells is to reduce optical losses. The optical losses of the perovskite/silicon solar cells mainly originate from several aspects. First, the absorption of the two subcells should be complementary; as the Eg of silicon is ∼1.1 eV, the perovskite subcell should have an Eg of ∼1.7 eV. Employing perovskites with other Eg will cause lower JSC and poor performance. For example, some early studies used 1.5–1.6 eV perovskites as top absorbers, limiting the JSC to only 15–16 mA cm−2 and PCEs of 20%–22%, which are even lower than those of single-junction PVSCs.299–302 The optimization of wide Eg PVSCs is one of the driving forces that have advanced perovskite/silicon tandem cells to the current status.
Second, the large number of interlayers in tandem solar cells causes optical interferences with great differences in refractive indices, resulting in unwanted reflection. Silicon has a refractive index of over 3.0, which is much higher than those of perovskites, air, and transparent conductive oxide (TCO), leading to serious reflection when light passes into silicon. To solve this problem, one strategy is to use double-sided textured silicon as the bottom cell, which has been widely used in single-junction silicon solar cells. The challenge of such a structure is to deposit conformal perovskites and CTMs on a textured substrate although it is calculated that nanotexture with a depth of ∼150 nm is enough to reduce reflection losses in the tandem structure. Ballif et al. developed sequential deposition methods to deposit conformal perovskite layers on textured silicon heterojunction (SHJ) bottom cells, in which top cells were fabricated on the double-side-textured SHJ bottom cell by thermal evaporation of an HTM and porous PbI2 (with CsBr) as a template, followed by spin-coating a solution of FAI and FABr to acquire a high-quality perovskite (Fig. 22a and b). The double side textured tandem showed a low current loss of 1.64 mA cm−2 due to reflection loss, which is much lower than that of the rear side alone textured device (3.14 mA cm−2) (Fig. 22c). The champion tandem device realized a PCE of 25.2% with an extremely high JSC of 19.5 mA cm−2.303 Chen et al. developed a nitrogen-assisted blading method to deposit a conformal HTM and a perovskite layer that fully covers textured silicon, achieving an efficiency of 26% with a JSC of 19.2 mA cm−2.305 Hou et al. combined a solution-processed 1.1 μm perovskite with fully textured silicon heterojunction bottom cells to realize a certified PCE of 25.7% with a JSC of 19.3 mA cm−2. The thick perovskite layer enables a full coverage of textured silicon, and passivators guarantee a high carrier diffusion length for the carrier transport in the thick film (Fig. 22d and e).304 Another strategy is to employ interconnecting layers with similar refractive indices to silicon or develop effective anti-reflection layers. Nanocrystalline silicon and nanocrystalline silicon oxide have both been reported as interconnecting layer materials to significantly mitigate reflection losses at perovskite/silicon interfaces.306,307 Additionally, textured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films have been reported as efficient antireflection layers that reduce reflection loss on the front side of a tandem cell.308,309
 Fig. 22  (a) Device configuration of double-side-textured perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite top cell deposited on the textured silicon bottom cell. (c) EQE of perovskite/silicon 2T tandem cells with double-side-textured or front-side-polished (FSP) bottom cells. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2018. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of a textured c-Si covered with a perovskite film. (e) EQE of the textured devices, 19.3 mA cm−2 for the top cell and 19.2 mA cm−2 for the bottom cell. Reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020. 
Third, interconnecting layers and CTLs unavoidably have their own absorption, leading to parasitic absorption and causing optical losses, which is extremely serious in 4T tandem solar cells as two transparent electrodes are incorporated in the devices. Therefore, choosing materials with low absorption as interlayers or simplifying the device structure can reduce the parasitic loss.302,310,311
To suppress electrical losses is another important aspect for fabricating perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells. To achieve high performance, the two subcells and recombination layers should be carefully designed to suppress electrical losses in the bulk and at the interfaces. The interconnecting layers should have low contact resistance but should not be too conductive to avoid shunt. Silicon solar cells should be efficient enough, in which heterojunction silicon solar cells have gradually replaced homojunction structures due to their superior performance, especially for their high performance.312 For wide-Eg PVSCs, the phase segregation induces rapid efficiency decays under illumination. Besides, their energy loss is serious compared with that of an ∼1.5 eV perovskite.
Recent reports have proved that both these drawbacks of wide Eg perovskites originate from high defect densities. Therefore, effective passivation of the perovskites is essential for enhancing the device performance and stability. Strategies such as composition engineering, surface passivation, and employing additives have been widely used to solve these problems.314–317 For example, Huang et al. employed MACl and MAH2PO2 as additives in a perovskite precursor to improve the film quality of large bandgap perovskites (Fig. 23a).313 MACl slowed the perovskite crystallization process and enabled the deposition of smooth perovskite films with larger grains and preferential orientation (Fig. 23b). MAH2PO2 decreased the expulsion rate of MACl from the film, and thus enhanced the effect of MACl on enlarging the grain sizes. The improved perovskite quality contributed to a high PCE of 25.4% for the perovskite/Si tandem with an improved VOC of 1.80 eV (Fig. 23c).313
 Fig. 23  (a) Device configuration of tandem solar cells with a MACl/MAH2PO2 modified perovskite; (b) top view SEM image of the MACl/MAH2PO2 modified perovskite film. (c) J–V curves under forward and reverse scans of the champion Cs0.15(FA0.83MA0.17)0.85Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3/Si tandem device. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2019. 
Recently, Xu et al. incorporated chlorine into wide Eg perovskites to enhance the performance and stability. They found that the employment of MAPbCl3 or PbCl2, instead of MACl, did not improve the grain size, and they tended to reside in the perovskite lattice after annealing. The incorporation of chlorine induced the enlargement of Eg, thus reducing the use of bromide to obtain large Eg. As a result, the carrier lifetime and phase stability of the as-prepared wide Eg PVSCs were dramatically enhanced, resulting in a high PCE of 27% for perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with an area of 1 cm2.318 Kim et al. employed anion engineered phenethylammonium-based 2D additives to passivate perovskites and realized a PCE of 26.7% for 2T-tandems.285
Moreover, it is important to overcome the processing challenges. In a tandem cell, the deposition of a top layer should not cause damage to the bottom layer. The silicon solar cell cannot bear temperatures >200 °C, so the interconnecting layer and perovskite should be deposited at low temperature. Different from single-junction PVSCs, the top transparent electrode in many tandem configurations, such as ITO, has to be deposited on top of the perovskite cell to ensure that low energy photons cross over the PVSC sub-cell. To prevent sputtering damage to the underlying PVSCs, several research groups have developed ‘sputter buffer’ protective layers, which are often deposited at low temperature with mild precursors. MoOx, NiOx and VOx are among the most used protective materials for this layer.


2.3.2 Perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells. 
The Eg of the CIGS absorber layer can be tuned between 1.05 and 1.65 eV by changing the ratio of In and Ga in the semiconductor.319,320 Currently, these materials are optimized for use in single junction devices with an Eg of 1.17 eV.321,322 The current record of the highest PCE for perovskite/CIGS tandem cells is 24.16%. The PVSCs and CIGS solar cells are both thin-film solar cells, which allows the fabrication of flexible devices with high power-to-weight ratios.323 In spite of these advantages, there are challenges remaining for the fabrication of high-performance perovskite/CIGS tandem cells.
There are several challenges to fabricate high-performance perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells.
(1) Processing challenges: As the device structure of CIGS solar cells is substrate/Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO, only p–i–n structured PVSCs are suitable for fabricating perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells. Besides, the CIGS can only withstand low temperatures, so the PVSCs and interlayers cannot be deposited with high temperatures. Moreover, the roughness of the CIGS surface is 50–200 nm depending on the fabrication process; therefore, the PVSCs should be thick enough to fully cover the CIGS.
To conformally deposit perovskite/CIGS tandems, Jang et al. deposited a layer of ZnO onto PCBM as a buffer layer to prevent damage to the underlayers when depositing AZO.326 Albrecht et al. deposited a thin layer of NiOx through atomic layer deposition on a CIGSe bottom cell so that it fully covered the cell to prevent the possible shunting owing to the rough CIGSe surface. This resulted in a high PCE of 21.6% for 2-T tandems (Fig. 24a).324 Yang et al. deposited a smooth ICL by chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) on ITO to reduce the surface roughness, which provided a smooth scaffold for fabricating PVSCs and a better ohmic contact for hole transport. The resulting tandem cells showed a high PCE of 22.43% (Fig. 24b).298
 Fig. 24  (a) Device configuration and cross-sectional SEM image of perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells with atomic layer deposited NiOx. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the deposition of ITO via sputtering and post-treatment by chemical mechanical polishing. Reproduced from ref. 298 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of the wide bandgap PVSC with SAM molecules attached to the ITO surface. (d) J–V curves of single-junction wide bandgap PVSCs with different SAMs and PTAA as HTMs under one sun illumination with the respective MPP tracks in the inset. (e) J–V curve of a monolithic CIGS/perovskite tandem solar cell with a MeO-2PACz2PACz SAM as an HTM. The inset shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the device. Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
(2) Optical management: similar to perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells, suppressing optical losses in perovskite/CIGS tandems is also crucial, although the reflection losses of perovskite/CIGS tandems are not as severe as those of perovskite/silicon tandems. However, the current matching for 2T tandems and reduction of parasitic absorption are still quite challenging for device performance. Meanwhile, the interlayers should have high transmittance to realize high JSC. Todorov et al. developed a reactor for precise control of the optical Eg of the perovskite layer via vapor-based halide exchange reactions at 100 °C, achieving an efficiency of 15.9%.327 Uhl et al. employed perovskites and CIGS with complementary Eg to achieve 2T tandems with a PCE of 18.5%.328 Catchpole et al. fabricated a semi-transparent PVSC with a champion PCE of 18.1% with a bandgap of 1.62 eV and then combined it with a 16.5% CIGS cell to form perovskite/CIGS tandem cells. The fabricated tandem devices exhibited a high PCE of 23.9%.329
(3) Suppressing electrical losses: as wide Eg perovskites are used in perovskite/CIGS tandems, the defects should be sufficiently passivated in PVSCs to reduce VOC,loss and alleviate phase segregation. In addition, a well-matched energy level alignment should be ensured throughout the whole device to promote the efficient working of the devices. Recently, Albrecht et al. replaced the traditionally used HTM, PTAA, with a self-assembled monolayer through a facile solution process, which demonstrated stronger hole-selectivity than PTAA (Fig. 24c and d). They realized an efficiency of over 21% for single-junction PVSCs and 23.26% for perovskite/CIGS 2T tandems (Fig. 24e).325 Recently, Kim et al. employed bimolecular additives (PEAI and Pb(SCN)2) to modify the crystallinity of wide-Eg perovskites, achieving a high PCE of 25.9% for 4T perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells.67


2.3.3 All-perovskite tandem solar cells. 
The bandgap tunability of perovskites along with their cost-effectiveness and facile production feasibility creates a great opportunity for the development and commercialization of perovskite/perovskite tandem cells.314 Rajagopal et al. showed that the striving for high performance optically stacked and electronically connected 2-terminal devices necessitates the development of two essential requirements that have not been adequately explored so far: (1) a high performance and stable narrow bandgap perovskite material; (2) an efficient charge recombination layer (CRL) with low optical and ohmic losses, utilizing a deposition process compatible with the underlying structure; and (3) a high-performance and phase stable large bandgap perovskite solar cell.330
Thus far, the composition engineering toward smaller Eg has been achieved by incorporating tin-based perovskites but facing significant challenges of dealing with their oxidative sensitivity and processability. It has been shown that the additives of Cs and FA ions tend to stabilize and enhance the lifetime of the tin-based PVSCs. Pb and Sn binary perovskites show an anomalously lower Eg than either of the pure phases and are more stable than pure tin-based perovskites. All these features are beneficial to the development of all-perovskite tandem cells, which is more cost effective and suitable for flexible application. As the achievable lowest Eg of the perovskite is about 1.25 eV, the bandgap of perovskites in top cells is required to be 1.75–1.80 eV, which indicates that the perovskites are more unstable than those used in perovskite/silicon and perovskite/CIGS tandems. Therefore, achieving stable 1.75–1.80 eV perovskites and reducing the energy loss are quite crucial.
Currently, the research is mainly focused on the optimization of the two sub-cells. Snaith et al. optimized the fabrication of small Eg PVSCs and employed a layer of SnO2 with sputtered ITO as the recombination layer to prevent the underlying sub-cell from being damaged. Combining this small Eg sub-cell with a large Eg sub-cell based on the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.5Br0.5)3 perovskite resulted in a 2-T tandem solar cell with a PCE of 17%.275 Jen et al. performed a dual optimization of the large Eg sub-cell and small Eg sub-cell to improve the performance of tandem solar cells to reach a high PCE of 18.5% and VOC of 1.98 V (∼80% of the theoretical limit (Fig. 25a and b)).330 Their work indicates that the optimization of sub-cells is crucial for the enhancement of tandem devices.
 Fig. 25  (a) Device configuration of perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cells with optimized subcells from the Jen group. (b) Fractional contribution of VOC and associated losses with respect to bandgap for different high-performance perovskite-based tandem solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 330 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (c) J–V curves of narrow bandgap PVSCs with and without GuaSCN as an additive. (d) J–V curves of the perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cells with the GuaSCN additive and the corresponding EQE spectra of the top and bottom sub-cells. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (e) Device configuration and (f) J–V curves of large-area all-perovskite tandem solar cells with formamidine sulfinic acid (FSA) additive. Reproduced from ref. 280 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020. 
Recently, Yan et al. incorporated chloride into a perovskite precursor to realize bulk-passivation and enhanced performance of PVSCs. They successfully fabricated a narrow Eg PVSC with a thick absorber layer (∼750 nm) and realized a PCE of 18.4%. By combining the prepared narrow Eg sub-cell with a large Eg (1.75 eV) sub-cell, the resulting 2-T tandem cell showed a high efficiency of ∼21%.331 Zhu et al. further employed guanidinium thiocyanate (GuaSCN) as an additive in a 1.25 eV bandgap perovskite to fabricate highly efficient small Eg PVSCs (Fig. 25c).278 The SCN− enabled the increase of grain sizes. The Gua+ led to the formation of 2D structures at grain boundaries, which is beneficial for the defect passivation at grain boundaries and the suppression of Sn vacancies. Such incorporation of GuaSCN reduced the defect density and prolonged the carrier lifetime to over 1 microsecond, resulting in a high PCE of 23.1% for 2-T tandem cells and 25% for 4-T tandem cells (Fig. 25d).278 Lin et al. employed Sn powder to suppress the oxidation of Sn2+, realizing a high PCE of 24.8% for 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells.332 Huang et al. employed a simplified ICL with unintentionally n-doped C60/SnO1.76. The SnO1.76 showed ambipolar carrier transport properties due to the presence of a large amount of Sn2+. Such an ICL demonstrated ohmic contact with both the top and bottom cells, realizing a high PCE of 24.4%.271 Xiao et al. used reductive surface-anchoring zwitterionic molecules to simultaneously passivate defects and suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ in the narrow Eg subcell, reaching a high PCE of 24.7% for 2T tandem solar cells with an active area of 1.05 cm2 (Fig. 25e and f).280


2.3.4 Other types of tandem solar cells. 
As mentioned in Section 2.2.3, BHJ organic solar cells have tunable Eg, and perovskites can also be incorporated into such cells to fabricate tandem solar cells. Moreover, organic solar cells are perfect candidates for fabricating flexible devices, which enable perovskite/organic tandem cells to find various potential applications. Besides, orthogonal solvents employed for organic solar cells and PVSCs facilitate the fabrication of tandem devices. There are several groups that have reported the fabrication of perovskite/organic tandem solar cells.333–339 In 2016, Liu et al. combined MAPbI3 perovskite with PBDTT-DPP:PC70BM to fabricate tandem solar cells and achieved an efficiency of 8.62%.334 The unmatched Eg limits the JSC. In 2018, Chen et al. employed an all-inorganic perovskite, CsPbBr3, to fabricate tandem solar cells with an organic photoactive layer. The excellent stability of CsPbBr3 perovskite makes it an UV-filter to protect the BHJ film from UV light. As a result, the tandem devices showed superior stability.335 Recently, Li et al. fabricated flexible perovskite/organic tandem solar cells with a PCE of 13.61% and applied them to water splitting electrocatalysis, achieving a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 11.21%.336 Xie et al. fabricated CsPbI2Br/PM6:Y6 based tandem solar cells with an efficiency of 18.38%.337 Aqoma et al. combined CsPbI2Br with the PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F BHJ to realize an efficiency of 18.04%.338 The highest efficiency of perovskite/organic tandem cells was obtained by Yang et al., as they employed all-thermally evaporated ICLs, FA0.8MA0.2Cs0.18Pb2.8Br1.2 perovskite and a Y6-based ternary BHJ to reach a high PCE of over 20%, proving the potential of fabricating high-performance tandem solar cells (Fig. 26a and b).339
 Fig. 26  (a) Device configuration of high-performance perovskite/organic tandem solar cells and simulated distributions of photon absorptions. (b) J–V curves of champion perovskite/organic tandem solar cells with forward and reverse scans. Reproduced from ref. 339 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2020. (c) Device configuration of triple-junction all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (d) J–V curves of single-junction subcells and tandem solar cells. (e) EQE spectra of triple junction tandem solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 340 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020. 
There are also reports on triple-junction perovskite-based tandem solar cells. Although three junction perovskite tandem solar cells showed higher theoretical efficiency, there are very limited reports due to the difficulty involved in fabrication. Werner et al. fabricated perovskite/perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells with a VOC of 2.69 V by tuning the perovskite composition and modifying the recombination layers.341 McMeekin et al. fabricated the first triple-junction all-perovskite tandem solar cells through an all-solution process, achieving a high VOC of 2.83 V and a PCE of 6.7%.342 Wang et al. combined 1.73 eV/1.57 eV/1.23 eV perovskites to achieve a 16.8% efficiency for triple junction all-perovskite tandem solar cells (Fig. 26c–e).340

3. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we have systematically reviewed the evolution of PVSCs from single junction, heterojunction to multijunction designs. The passivation of defects and optimization of crystallization in single junction solar cells contribute to improved device performance. The modified heterojunction designs through perovskite/perovskite heterojunctions, perovskite/functional layer heterojunctions and perovskite/organic BHJ heterojunctions enable achieving PCEs beyond 25%. The emergence of perovskite-based multijunction solar cells makes it possible to achieve efficiencies of >30% by reducing thermalization loss. However, there are still several issues listed below that need to be resolved before PVSCs can be considered for commercialization.
Performance
To achieve a deeper understanding of carrier dynamics and defect nature and how they influence the device performance is essential to continue enhancing the performance of PVSCs. To reduce the potential losses, further modifications of perovskite deposition, the development of appropriate materials for defect passivation, the exploration of optimal perovskite compositions, and the development of CTMs will alleviate non-radiative recombination and prolong the carrier lifetime in perovskites. To reduce optical losses, the parasitic absorption of CTMs at the front contact needs to be alleviated via more transparent materials. Light absorption enhancing materials (such as light conversion NPs, plasmonic NPs) can be incorporated into the perovskite films. The employment of textured perovskite films and the popularization of anti-reflection (AR) coating will also afford higher JSC.
More attention should be paid to PVSC-based multijunction solar cells, which have the promising potential to achieve PCEs >30%. The relationship between defects, energy loss, and photo-induced phase segregation in wide Eg perovskites requires a deeper understanding and novel solutions. Strategies should be employed to optimize and stabilize wide Eg perovskite top cells, including composition engineering, defect passivation, and interface modifications. ICL materials with high transparency, suitable energy levels, conductivity, moderate deposition methods that don’t damage the underlayer materials, and appropriate barriers to prevent solvent penetration should be developed. Optimizing methods to deposit thick and compact perovskite layers on rough surfaces is beneficial for fabricating perovskite/textured silicon and perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells. Exploring strategies to suppress the oxidation of Sn2+ and reduce the defect density in narrow Eg PVSCs is essential for improving the performance and stability of all-perovskite tandem solar cells. For perovskite/organic hybrid and tandem solar cells, the synthesis of narrow Eg acceptors with extended absorption and low energy loss is crucial for their development.
Stability
Long-term operational stability is crucial for PVSCs to get into market. IEC 61646 test certification was established by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to evaluate the long-term operational stability of PV modules, including a temperature cycling test (−40 to +85 °C for 200 cycles), a humidity freeze test (−40 to +85 °C and 85% RH for 10 cycles), and a damp heat test (+85 °C and 85% RH for 1000 h). The target for PVSCs is to meet these requirements. Generally, the instability of PVSCs mainly originates from the degradation of the perovskite and/or CTM under external stimuli, such as oxygen, moisture, heat, and light. A more comprehensive understanding of the device degradation mechanisms is crucial for solving the stability issues. Several aspects can be focused on to enhance the long-term operational stability. (1) Developing perovskite compositions with superior intrinsic stability is important. (2) Passivating various defects of perovskite films can efficiently enhance device stability because the charged defects are closely related to the ion migration. (3) Optimizing interfaces in PVSCs is extremely important because the instability comes from the defects caused by ion migration; therefore, the exploration of more stable CTMs to replace traditional TiO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD will help stabilize the whole device. (4) Minimizing the reactions between the perovskite component and metal electrodes to avoid the degradation of devices is crucial. Replacing metal electrode materials with robust materials, such as sputtered ITO, will benefit the long-term device stability. (5) Developing advanced encapsulation techniques will dramatically improve the device stability by preventing the penetration of oxygen and water. (6) For multijunction devices, apart from continuously enhancing their performance, more attention should be paid to investigating their long-term operational stability. A deeper understanding of the degradation mechanism is needed to provide better guidance for enhancing device stability.
Scale-up
Fabricating large-area devices is the essential step for PVSCs to be developed for commercialization. Developing suitable techniques for depositing large-area perovskites with uniform and compact morphologies in air is very critical because they are far different from those observed in lab devices. A comprehensive understanding of perovskite crystal growth and film formation will guide the scalable deposition of perovskites. Doctor blading, slot die coating, screen printing and vapor-assisted deposition methods are the commonly used technologies for high-performance PVSCs and PV modules. The detailed studies and optimizations of the techniques will promote the scale-up of PVSCs. In addition, developing appropriate strategies to realize scalable deposition of CTMs and electrodes is also crucial for the scale-up of PVSCs.
Toxicity
The toxicity issue is very critical for PVSCs to become environmentally-friendly PV technology. The potential leakage of lead into the environment due to the damage caused by the irresistible natural factors will result in carcinogenic and polluting risks. To solve the problems of toxicity, lead-free Sn-based PVSCs have been developed, but their champion PCEs are lower than 15%.343–345 Meanwhile, the poor stability due to the oxidation of Sn2+ strongly limits their application in the real world. Further enhancing the performance and stability of lead-free PVSCs is essential in order for them to be utilized. Another strategy is to employ a protecting layer (a lead absorbing material or an encapsulation coating) to prevent lead leakage. Although several reports have demonstrated the effectiveness of this strategy, it still calls for more research on designing and synthesizing new materials with superior lead-capture capability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the APRC Grants of the City University of Hong Kong (9380086, 9610421), Innovation and Technology Bureau supported programs (ITS/497/18FP, GHP/021/18SZ), the Office of Naval Research (N00014-17-1-2201), the National Science Foundation (DMR-1608279), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2019A1515010761), the Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macao Joint Laboratory of Optoelectronic and Magnetic Materials (No. 2019B121205002), the ECS grant (CityU 21301319) from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong, the Guangdong Major Project of Basic and Applied Basic Research (No. 2019B030302007), and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-18-1-0046). AJ acknowledges the support from the Lee Shau Kee Chair Professorship.
References
W. Shen, X. Chen, J. Qiu, J. A. Hayward, S. Sayeef, P. Osman, K. Meng and Z. Y. Dong, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 133, 110301 CrossRef .
L. A. Zafoschnig, S. Nold and J. C. Goldschmidt, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2020, 10, 1632–1641 Search PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Schünemann, S. Song and H. Tüysüz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7045–7077 RSC .
A. Rajagopal, K. Yao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800455 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. R. E. L. (NREL), Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
Z. Li, J. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Deng, F. Li, D. Liu, C. C. Lee, F. Lin, D. Lei, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105377 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lee, M.-c. Kim, Y. W. Choi, N. Ahn, J. Jang, J. Yoon, S. M. Kim, J.-G. Lee, D. Kang and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3182–3191 RSC .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, F. Li, M. Su, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, Z. Cai, X. Yang, X. Meng and P. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 979–987 RSC .
B. Shi, L. Duan, Y. Zhao, J. Luo and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Tennyson, T. A. Doherty and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Rev. Mater, 2019, 4, 573–587 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–13 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan and P. R. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, J. A. Christians, M. Yang, P. Schulz, S. U. Nanayakkara and C.-S. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1234–1242 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
Z. Chu, M. Yang, P. Schulz, D. Wu, X. Ma, E. Seifert, L. Sun, X. Li, K. Zhu and K. Lai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Cho and N. G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3687–3704 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803515 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. Fakharuddin, A. G. Coutsolelos, P. Falaras, P. Argitis, A. R. bin Mohd Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4496–4526 RSC .
N.-G. Park and H. Segawa, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2970–2977 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, T. P. Xiao and E. Yablonovitch, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1703–1711 CrossRef PubMed .
A. De Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839 CrossRef .
F. Meillaud, A. Shah, C. Droz, E. Vallat-Sauvain and C. Miazza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2952–2959 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2554–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828–838 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jošt, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904102 CrossRef .
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. M. Vilches, E. Kasparavicius and J. A. Smith, Science, 2020, 370, 1300–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. K. Wang, R. B. Wang, P. F. Shen, C. Li, Y. Q. Li, L. J. Liu, S. Duhm and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400528 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Hsiao, T. Wu, M. Li, Q. Liu, W. Qin and B. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15372–15385 RSC .
A. M. Askar and K. Shankar, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 5890–5901 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X.-H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady and T. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 490–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yao, T. Kirchartz, M. S. Vezie, M. A. Faist, W. Gong, Z. He, H. Wu, J. Troughton, T. Watson and D. Bryant, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 014020 CrossRef .
M. Stolterfoht, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, J. A. Márquez, J. Nordmann, S. Zhang, D. Rothhardt, U. Hörmann, Y. Amir and A. Redinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2778–2788 RSC .
Y. Chen, N. Li, L. Wang, L. Li, Z. Xu, H. Jiao, P. Liu, C. Zhu, H. Zai and M. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef .
G. Zheng, C. Zhu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, G. Tang, R. Li, Y. Chen, L. Li, J. Hu and J. Hong, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zeng, S. Chen, K. Forberich, C. J. Brabec, Y. Mai and F. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4666–4690 RSC .
S. Sánchez, L. Pfeifer, N. Vlachopoulos and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7108–7131 RSC .
S. Okita, E. Miyoshi, S. Sakane, T. Takaki, M. Ohno and Y. Shibuta, Acta Mater., 2018, 153, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Maggioni and M. Mazzotti, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 4698–4709 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O’Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. Ei-Sayed and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, M. Li, C. Fei, G. Cao and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24168–24177 RSC .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Dutta, N. K. Noel and C. B. Arnold, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5980–5986 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, M. Congiu, A. J. Ramadan, S. Fearn, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Joule, 2017, 1, 328–343 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, C. Mu, Q. Li, W. Li, D. Ma and D. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8309–8314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Sato, K. Shoyama and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5410–5416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, W. Sato, K. Shoyama, H. Halim, Y. Itabashi, R. Shang and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9598–9604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jo, K. S. Oh, M. Kim, K. H. Kim, H. Lee, C. W. Lee and D. S. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500768 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Su, M. Cai, Z. Zhou, T. Noda and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701073 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jung, W.-S. Chae, Y. C. Park, J. Kim and M.-J. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, P. Gao, E. Oveisi, Y. Lee, Q. Jeangros, G. Grancini, S. Paek, Y. Feng and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14380–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Wu, Q. Guo, Y. Yang, H. Luo, Q. Liu, X. Wang, X. He, M. Huang and Z. Lan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11764–11770 RSC .
W. Zhou, D. Li, Z. Xiao, Z. Wen, M. Zhang, W. Hu, X. Wu, M. Wang, W. H. Zhang and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901026 CrossRef .
X. Deng, Z. Cao, Y. Yuan, M. O. L. Chee, L. Xie, A. Wang, Y. Xiang, T. Li, P. Dong and L. Ding, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Seo, T. Matsui, J. Luo, J. P. Correa-Baena, F. Giordano, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, A. Ummadisingu, K. Domanski and M. Hadadian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600767 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. Cheng, D. Li, F. Lin, J. Mao, C. Liang, A. K. Y. Jen, M. Grätzel and W. C. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604695 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, B. Li, P. Siffalovic, L.-C. Chen, G. Cao and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15386–15394 RSC .
D. H. Kim, C. P. Muzzillo, J. Tong, A. F. Palmstrom, B. W. Larson, C. Choi, S. P. Harvey, S. Glynn, J. B. Whitaker and F. Zhang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1734–1745 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, J. Chen, R. J. Ellingson and X. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Wang, C. R. Grice, N. Shrestha, D. Zhao, W. Liao, L. Guan, R. A. Awni, W. Meng and A. J. Cimaroli, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1177–1182 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Wang, C. Li and T. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Fei, P. Gao, Y. Lee, F. F. Tirani, R. Scopelliti, Y. Feng, P. J. Dyson and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702157 CrossRef PubMed .
D. T. Moore, K. W. Tan, H. Sai, K. P. Barteau, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3197–3199 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Han, J.-W. Lee, C. Choi, S. Tan, C. Lee, Y. Zhao, Z. Dai, N. De Marco, S.-J. Lee and S.-H. Bae, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, P. Zhu, M. Wang, S. Huang, Z. Zhao, S. Tan, T. H. Han, J. W. Lee, T. Huang and R. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Mao, H. He, D. Zhang, H. L. Zhu, F. Xie, K. S. Wong, M. Grätzel and W. C. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501354 CrossRef .
C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, E. M. Hutter, M. Sessolo, K. Lederer, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456–3463 RSC .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, O. Inganäs, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400812 CrossRef .
G. J. A. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Ávila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472–3481 RSC .
J. Peng, Y. Wu, W. Ye, D. A. Jacobs, H. Shen, X. Fu, Y. Wan, N. Wu, C. Barugkin and H. T. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1792–1800 RSC .
Y. Fang, C. Bi, D. Wang and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 782–794 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, F. Lin, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, T. Zhao, P.-W. Liang, Z. Zhu, Y. Sun and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning and J. J. McDowell, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. DeQuilettes, S. Koch, S. Burke, R. K. Paranji, A. J. Shropshire, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, T. Liu, P. Zhou, S. Li, J. Ren, H. He, J. Wang, N. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781–5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, S. Chen, E. Mosconi, Y. Fang, X. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Yu, J. Zhao and Y. Gao, Science, 2019, 365, 473–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. Bi, N. Pellet, C. Xiao, Z. Li, J. J. Berry, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3480–3490 RSC .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Deng, F. Li, D. Liu, C. C. Lee, F. Lin, D. Lei and C.-C. Chueh, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105377 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, X. Deng, F. Qi, Z. Li, D. Liu, D. Shen, M. Qin, S. Wu, F. Lin, S.-H. Jang, J. Zhang, X. Lu, D. Lei, C.-S. Lee, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20134–20142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Q. Liang, M. Qin, D. Shen, H. Yin, Z. Ren, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, P. W. Fong and Z. Wu, Joule, 2020, 4, 2404–2425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Deng, B. Chen, H. Wei, X. Xiao, Y. Fang, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, Y. Liu and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803428 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, L. Huang, Q. Chen, L. Hu, F. Zeng, X. Zhou, L. Zhang, C. Liu, X. Wang and L. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6929–6932 RSC .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang and X. Gao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, H. Guo, K. Wang and X. Liu, Org. Electron., 2017, 41, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Liu, B. He, Z. Gong, J. Zhu, Y. Ding, H. Chen and Q. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4540–4548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, X. Deng, J. Wang, S. Wang, X. Niu, F. Hao and L. Ding, Nano Energy, 2020, 105631 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu, M. Du, J. Feng, H. Wang, Z. Xu, L. Wang, S. Zuo, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Priya, D. Yang and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 60, 4238–4244 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tong, H. Li, G. Li, T. Zhang, C. Li, L. Yu, J. Xu, Y. Jiang, Y. Shi and K. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, D. Cui, X. Liu, X. Meng, Y. Wang, T. Noda, H. Segawa, X. Yang, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000240 CrossRef CAS .
M.-c. Kim, B. J. Kim, D.-Y. Son, N.-G. Park, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5756–5763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 RSC .
W. S. Subhani, K. Wang, M. Du, X. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803785 CrossRef .
H. W. Qiao, S. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, T. Y. Wen, L. J. Tang, Q. Cheng, Y. Hou, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804217 CrossRef PubMed .
M. U. Rothmann, J. S. Kim, J. Borchert, K. B. Lohmann, C. M. O'Leary, A. A. Sheader, L. Clark, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston, P. D. Nellist and L. M. Herz, Science, 2020, 370, eabb5940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim and S. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yao, Q. Xue, Z. Li, K. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Li, S. Yang, C. J. Brabec, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, J. Guo, D. Lu, Z. Xu, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie, X. Wan, X. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7811–7820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, S. Yuan, Y. Xian, Y. Long, Q. Yao, N. U. Rahman, Y. Guo, M. Sun, Q. Xue and H. L. Yip, Small, 2021, 2100888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Niu, J. Lu, M.-C. Tang, D. Barrit, D.-M. Smilgies, Z. Yang, J. Li, Y. Fan, T. Luo and I. McCulloch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3358–3366 RSC .
E. Ruggeri, M. Anaya, K. Gałkowski, G. Delport, F. U. Kosasih, A. Abfalterer, S. Mackowski, C. Ducati and S. D. Stranks, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Oveisi, J. Luo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2910–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, Y. Ma, C. Zhang, C. Liu, W. Li, R. E. Schropp and Y. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703421 CrossRef .
P. Liu, Y. Xian, W. Yuan, Y. Long, K. Liu, N. U. Rahman, W. Li and J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Shang, H. Liu, J. Wei, W. Zhou, H. He, W. Liu and Z. Ning, Joule, 2018, 2, 2732–2743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. Long, M. Qin, X. Lu, S. Chen, F. Xie, L. Gong, J. Chen, M. Chu and Q. Miao, Joule, 2018, 2, 2706–2721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milić, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl and S. M. Zakeeruddin, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Lai, T. Liu, D. Lu, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901242 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-W. Jang, S. Lee, K. M. Yeom, K. Jeong, K. Choi, M. Choi and J. H. Noh, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xi, W. Gao, F. Yuan, T. Lei, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 713–721 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ye, A. Bruno, G. Han, T. M. Koh, J. Li, N. F. Jamaludin, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and W. L. Leong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801654 CrossRef .
M. H. Li, H. H. Yeh, Y. H. Chiang, U. S. Jeng, C. J. Su, H. W. Shiu, Y. J. Hsu, N. Kosugi, T. Ohigashi, Y. A. Chen, P. S. Shen, P. Chen and T. F. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801401 CrossRef PubMed .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo, J. Park, J. Jang, S. Paek, G. Garcia-Belmonte and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. Abdollahi Nejand, M. Jakoby, T. Abzieher, D. Hauschild, S. Moghadamzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Brenner, R. Schmager, A. A. Haghighirad, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803699 CrossRef .
D. Lin, T. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Long, F. Xie, J. Chen, B. Wu, T. Shi, K. Yan, W. Xie, P. Liu and J. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 619–625 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. Long, M. Qin, X. Lu, S. Chen, F. Xie, L. Gong, J. Chen, M. Chu, Q. Miao, Z. Chen, W. Xu, P. Liu, W. Xie and J.-B. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2706–2721 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Wu, L. Tao, G. M. Arumugam, C. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Zhu, Y. Yang, J. Lin and X. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002004 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, J. Liang, Z. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Z. Deng, H. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Chen and C.-C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25831–25841 RSC .
S. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Li, D. Liu, M. Qin, S. H. Cheung, X. Lu, D. Lei, S. K. So, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Joule, 2020, 4, 1248–1262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Wu, G. Yang, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Zheng and J. Yu, Sol. Energy, 2020, 205, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, I. Spanopoulos, W. Ke, S. Huang, I. Hadar, L. Chen, X. Li, G. Yang and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1763–1769 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Elsenety, M. Antoniadou, N. Balis, A. Kaltzoglou, L. Sygellou, A. Stergiou, N. Tagmatarchis and P. Falaras, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2465–2477 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, H. Zai, C. Wang, X. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ma, Z. Gao and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4344–4352 RSC .
M. Cha, P. Da, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Xiu, G. Zheng and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Que, Z. Dai, H. Yang, H. Zhu, Y. Zong, W. Que, N. P. Padture, Y. Zhou and O. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1970–1975 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen and C. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963–1976 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. J. Yoon, X. Cui, Y. Chang, M. Zhang, S. Liang, C.-H. Lu and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 26098–26108 RSC .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, X. Zheng, C. Wu, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4693–4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Minemoto and M. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 133, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 RSC .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Yang, F. Fu, Z. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2020, 370, eabb8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pathak, A. Abate, P. Ruckdeschel, B. Roose, K. C. Gödel, Y. Vaynzof, A. Santhala, S. I. Watanabe, D. J. Hollman and N. Noel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6046–6055 CrossRef CAS .
W. Göpel, J. Anderson, D. Frankel, M. Jaehnig, K. Phillips, J. Schäfer and G. Rocker, Surf. Sci., 1984, 139, 333–346 CrossRef .
S. Sidhik, J. Velusamy, E. De la Rosa, S. A. Pérez-García, G. Ramos-Ortiz and T. López-Luke, Carbon, 2019, 146, 388–398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ai, W. Liu, C. Shou, J. Yan, N. Li, Z. Yang, W. Song, B. Yan, J. Sheng and J. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2019, 194, 541–547 CrossRef CAS .
S. You, H. Wang, S. Bi, J. Zhou, L. Qin, X. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang and X. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706924 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wu, H. Liu, F. Li, X. Deng, F. Lin, X. Li, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000205 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, Y. Chen, M. Zhang, Y. W. Harn, J. Qi, L. Gao, Z. L. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Yang and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1743–1752 RSC .
B. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Cui, Z. Wang, M. Rager, Y. Yang, Z. Zou, Z. L. Wang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, F. Guo, X. Wang, K. Xu, M. Lei, Y. Liang, Y. Zhao and D. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805153 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tu, Y. Shao, W. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, Y. He, J. Li, F. Liu, Z. Zhang and Y. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805944 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yao, S. Leng, Z. Liu, L. Fei, Y. Chen, S. Li, N. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y.-X. Xu and L. Zhou, Joule, 2019, 3, 417–431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, B. Wu, R. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Hui, B. W. Mao and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705596 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, J. H. Suk, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, W. M. Seong and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. Mahmoudi, Y. Wang and Y. B. Hahn, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chung, S. S. Shin, G. Kim, N. J. Jeon, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Joule, 2019, 3, 1977–1985 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Cui, Y. Wang, B. Wang, M. Ye, W. Wang, C. Ma and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104620 CrossRef CAS .
S. You, H. Wang, S. Bi, J. Zhou, L. Qin, X. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Shi, H. Zhou and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706924 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Singh, S. Öz, A. Sasinska, R. Frohnhoven, S. Mathur and T. Miyasaka, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706287 CrossRef .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. G. De Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Liu, P. Li, Y. Duan, X. Hu, F. Li and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 733–740 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Liu, Y. Wu, W. Bi, X. Sun, X. Chen, W. Liu, L. Xu, H. Song and Q. Dai, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 849–862 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Seo, R. Uchida, H.-S. Kim, Y. Saygili, J. Luo, C. Moore, J. Kerrod, A. Wagstaff, M. Eklund, R. McIntyre, N. Pellet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705763 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800794 CrossRef .
J. Wei, F. Guo, X. Wang, K. Xu, M. Lei, Y. Liang, Y. Zhao and D. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805153 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tu, Y. Shao, W. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, Y. He, J. Li, F. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Lin, X. Lan, L. Xu, X. Shi, A. M. C. Ng, H. Li, L. W. Chung, A. B. Djurisic and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805944 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. Lee, G. Seo, S. Paek, K. T. Cho, A. J. Huckaba, M. Calizzi, D. W. Choi, J. S. Park, D. Lee, H. J. Lee, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800130 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Tu, Q. Meng and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3463–3471 RSC .
Z. Liu, K. Deng, J. Hu and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 11621–11628 Search PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, M. Saliba, P. Yadav, P. Holzhey, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802646 CrossRef .
R. Azmi, C. L. Lee, I. H. Jung and S. Y. Jang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702934 CrossRef .
K. Yao, S. Leng, Z. Liu, L. Fei, Y. Chen, S. Li, N. Zhou, J. Zhang, Y.-X. Xu, L. Zhou, H. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, Joule, 2019, 3, 417–431 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Duan, Y. Hui, T. T. Chuong, D. Ou, F. Han, F. Cheng, X. Huang, B. Wu and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 541–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi, K.-H. Dahmen, F. De Angelis, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, G. Pozzi, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15017 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, N. Pellet, J. Luo, C. Yi, X. Liu, H. Liu, S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Hua, P. Liu, L. Wang, C. Ruan, Y. Li, G. Boschloo, E. M. J. Johansson, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Sun, Chem, 2017, 2, 676–687 CAS .
Q. Q. Ge, J. Y. Shao, J. Ding, L. Y. Deng, W. K. Zhou, Y. X. Chen, J. Y. Ma, L. J. Wan, J. Yao, J. S. Hu and Y. W. Zhong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10959–10965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, B. Xu, C. Hong, X. Shi, H. Liu, X. Li, L. Xie and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800809 CrossRef .
B. Xu, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700683 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, W. Chen, L. Wang, B. Tu, T. Chen, B. Liu, K. Yang, C. W. Koh, X. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Chen, X. Feng, H. Y. Woo, A. B. Djurisic, Z. He and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902781 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi and J. Lee, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim and J. H. Noh, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 RSC .
F. Cai, J. Cai, L. Yang, W. Li, R. S. Gurney, H. Yi, A. Iraqi, D. Liu and T. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Li, C. Cheng, Y. Tian, A. K. Y. Jen and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804028 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-W. Kim, J. Lee, G. Kang, T. Kim and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701935 CrossRef .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604984 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, W. Chen, S. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702762 CrossRef .
C. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Chen, X. Zhao, S. Dai and B. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801169 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-K. Yu, W.-F. Fu, W.-Q. Liu, Z.-Q. Zhang, Y.-J. Liu, J.-L. Yan, T. Ye, W.-T. Yang, H.-Y. Li and H.-Z. Chen, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 13–18 CrossRef .
F. Xie, C.-C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942–1949 RSC .
Y. C. Kim, T. Y. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Im, S. Jang, T. J. Shin, H. W. Shin, S. Kim, E. Lee, S. Kim, J. H. Noh, S. I. Seok and J. Seo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2109–2116 RSC .
X. Jiang, D. Wang, Z. Yu, W. Ma, H.-B. Li, X. Yang, F. Liu, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803287 CrossRef .
M. Cheng, Y. Li, M. Safdari, C. Chen, P. Liu, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602556 CrossRef .
K. Yao, F. Li, Q. He, X. Wang, Y. Jiang, H. Huang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 155–162 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Tu, B. Yu, F. Liu, H. W. Tam, G. Wang and A. B. Djurišić, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800515 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Magomedov, A. Al-Ashouri, E. Kasparavičius, S. Strazdaite, G. Niaura, M. Jošt, T. Malinauskas, S. Albrecht and V. Getautis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801892 CrossRef .
E. Yalcin, M. Can, C. Rodriguez-Seco, E. Aktas, R. Pudi, W. Cambarau, S. Demic and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 230–237 RSC .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. I. Dar, S. P. Senanayak, A. Sadhanala, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. M. Richter, A. J. Pearson, H. Sirringhaus and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Iocozzia, M. Zhang, M. Ye, S. Yan, H. Jin, S. Wang, Z. Zou and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4854–4891 RSC .
S. S. Bhosale, E. Jokar, A. Fathi, C. M. Tsai, C. Y. Wang and E. W. G. Diau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803200 CrossRef .
E. Jokar, Z. Y. Huang, S. Narra, C. Y. Wang, V. Kattoor, C. C. Chung and E. W. G. Diau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701640 CrossRef .
Q.-D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Cheng, H.-W. Li, Z. Guan, B. Yu and S.-W. Tsang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9852–9858 RSC .
J. Du, J. Duan, X. Yang, Y. Duan, Q. Zhou and Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 10702–10707 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, T. Wu, J. Barbaud, W. Kong, D. Cui, H. Chen, X. Yang and L. Han, Science, 2019, 365, 687–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tang, P. You, Q. Tai, A. Yang, J. Cao, F. Zheng, Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, P. K. L. Chan and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807689 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Y. Chang, W. Huang, B. Zhu, Y. Shen, C. Shen, D. Wang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805168 CrossRef .
A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, A. L. Palma, B. Martín-García, L. Najafi, S. Bellani, I. Moreels, M. Prato, F. Bonaccorso and A. Di Carlo, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1862–1871 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yin, H. Zhao, J. Feng, J. Sun, J. Yan, Z. Liu, S. Lin and S. F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9132–9138 RSC .
P. Huang, Q. Chen, K. Zhang, L. Yuan, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6213–6219 RSC .
J. Cao, G. Tang, P. You, T. Wang, F. Zheng, J. Zhao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002358 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, J. Duan, X. Yang, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 22181–22185 CrossRef .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and L. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22539–22549 RSC .
M. Zhang, M. Ye, W. Wang, C. Ma, S. Wang, Q. Liu, T. Lian, J. Huang and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, P. Wang, C. Ma, F. Igbari, Y. Kang, K.-L. Wang, W. Song, C. Dong, Y. Li and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, X. Zhou, R. Xue, P. Xu, S. Wang, C. Xu, W. Zeng, Y. Xiong, H. Sang and D. Liang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–19 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Agresti, A. Pazniak, S. Pescetelli, A. Di Vito, D. Rossi, A. Pecchia, M. A. der Maur, A. Liedl, R. Larciprete and D. V. Kuznetsov, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Di Vito, A. Pecchia, M. Auf der Maur and A. Di Carlo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909028 CrossRef CAS .
D. Saranin, S. Pescetelli, A. Pazniak, D. Rossi, A. Liedl, A. Yakusheva, L. Luchnikov, D. Podgorny, P. Gostischev and S. Didenko, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105771 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1805843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, E. Yao, P. Sun, L. Meng, Y. Lin, J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng and P. A. Johnson, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qi, K. Jiang, F. Lin, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, W. Gao, Y. Li, Z. Cai, H. Y. Woo and Z. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 9–15 CrossRef .
X. Shi, X. Liao, K. Gao, L. Zuo, J. Chen, J. Zhao, F. Liu, Y. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802324 CrossRef .
F. Lin, K. Jiang, W. Kaminsky, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15246–15251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, W. Chang, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, E. Young, Y. Yang, J. You and G. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 662–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, C. Chen, K. Aitola, F. Zhang, Y. Hua, G. Boschloo, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8631–8639 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gao, Z. Zhu, B. Xu, S. B. Jo, Y. Kan, X. Peng and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703980 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Guo, Y. Bai, K. Lang, Z.-Z. Yu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, E. Zhou and Z. A. Tan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37991–37998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, D. Li, S. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Shen, G. Zeng, X. Zhu, E. Zhou, L. Jiang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000851 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, B. Fan, S. Zhang, S. Li, B. Yang, Y. Qin, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Sci. China: Mater., 2015, 58, 953–960 CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Yu, W. Qin, Z. Yang, D. Yang, Y. Xing, S. F. Liu and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 126–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, G. Kim, H. Back, J. Kong, I. W. Hwang, T. K. Kim, S. Kwon, J. H. Lee, J. Lee and K. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3159–3165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. I. Chen, S. Wu, Y. A. Lu, C. C. Lee, K. C. Ho, Z. Zhu, W. C. Chen and C. C. Chueh, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. Yao, T. Liu, J. C. Hamill Jr, G. O. Ngongang Ndjawa, G. Cheng, N. Yao, H. Meng and Y. L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Daboczi, J. Kim, J. Lee, H. Kang, I. Hamilton, C. T. Lin, S. D. Dimitrov, M. A. McLachlan, K. Lee, J. R. Durrant and J.-S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Sun, Q. Hu, A. B. Djurišić, T. P. Russell, X. Guo and Z. He, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2535–2536 CrossRef CAS .
S. Essig, C. Allebé, T. Remo, J. F. Geisz, M. A. Steiner, K. Horowitz, L. Barraud, J. S. Ward, M. Schnabel and A. Descoeudres, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
A. Benmir and M. Aida, Energy Procedia, 2013, 36, 618–627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, J. Yi, S. Yang, Z. Cao, X. Huang, Y. Li, H. Li and J. Zhong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 382, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mufti, T. Amrillah, A. Taufiq, M. Diantoro and H. Nur, Sol. Energy, 2020, 207, 1146–1157 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese and S. Nanayakkara, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Wang and W. C. Choy, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000093 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Jia, Z. Chen, T. Jiang, L. Bai, F. Tao, J. Chen, X. Chen, T. Liu, X. Xu, C. Yang, W. Shen, W. E. I. Sha, H. Zhu and Y. Yang, Joule, 2020, 4, 1594–1606 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Z. Yang, Z. Ni, Y. Shao, B. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Wei, J. Y. Zhengshan, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 657–665 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. S. Wang, H. L. Zhu, D. Zhang, J. Cheng, H. Lin, D. Ouyang and W. C. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801954 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chang, B.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Hsiao, M.-Z. Lin and H.-F. Meng, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 354–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5121–5125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot and R. May, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rajagopal, Z. Yang, S. B. Jo, I. L. Braly, P. W. Liang, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702140 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield and O. G. Reid, Science, 2019, 364, 475–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lin, K. Xiao, Z. Qin, Q. Han, C. Zhang, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, J. Xu, M. Xiao, A. Li, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 864–873 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, R. Lin, Q. Han, Y. Hou, Z. Qin, H. T. Nguyen, J. Wen, M. Wei, V. Yeddu, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, X. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Gao, C. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 870–880 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, C. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Yu, C. Chen, X. Zhao, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 305–306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 RSC .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, H. J. Jung, I. J. Park, B. W. Larson, S. P. Dunfield, C. Xiao, J. Kim, J. Tong, P. Boonmongkolras and S. G. Ji, Science, 2020, 368, 155–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. R. E. L. (NREL), Best Research-Cell Efficiencies Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
P. Loper, S. J. Moon, S. M. de Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J. H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
J. Werner, L. Barraud, A. Walter, M. Bräuninger, F. Sahli, D. Sacchetto, N. Tétreault, B. Paviet-Salomon, S.-J. Moon, C. Allebé, M. Despeisse, S. Nicolay, S. De Wolf, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jaysankar, M. Filipič, B. Zielinski, R. Schmager, W. Song, W. Qiu, U. W. Paetzold, T. Aernouts, M. Debucquoy, R. Gehlhaar and J. Poortmans, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1489–1498 RSC .
M. Jaysankar, B. A. L. Raul, J. Bastos, C. Burgess, C. Weijtens, M. Creatore, T. Aernouts, Y. Kuang, R. Gehlhaar, A. Hadipour and J. Poortmans, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 259–264 CrossRef .
T. Duong, H. Pham, T. C. Kho, P. Phang, K. C. Fong, D. Yan, Y. Yin, J. Peng, M. A. Mahmud, S. Gharibzadeh, B. A. Nejand, I. M. Hossain, M. R. Khan, N. Mozaffari, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Zheng, H. Mai, W. Liang, C. Samundsett, M. Stocks, K. McIntosh, G. G. Andersson, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, U. W. Paetzold, A. Ho-Ballie, Y. Liu, D. Macdonald, A. Blakers, J. Wong-Leung, T. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903553 CrossRef CAS .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, C. Sturdevant, L.-Y. Chang and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500799 CrossRef .
A. Al-Ashouri, A. Magomedov, M. Roß, M. Jošt, M. Talaikis, G. Chistiakova, T. Bertram, J. A. Márquez, E. Köhnen, E. Kasparavičius, S. Levcenco, L. Gil-Escrig, C. J. Hages, R. Schlatmann, B. Rech, T. Malinauskas, T. Unold, C. A. Kaufmann, L. Korte, G. Niaura, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3356–3369 RSC .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jager, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. P. Weiss, S. Pisoni, E. Avancini, C. Andres, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16190 CrossRef .
H. Shen, T. Duong, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber, X. Xiao, T. P. White and K. Catchpole, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394–406 RSC .
D. H. Kim, C. P. Muzzillo, J. Tong, A. F. Palmstrom, B. W. Larson, C. Choi, S. P. Harvey, S. Glynn, J. B. Whitaker, F. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Lu, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, L. M. Mansfield, Y. Huang, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1734–1745 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, Y.-T. Hsieh, L. Meng, J.-L. Wu, P. Sun, E.-P. Yao, S.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Bae, T. Kato and V. Bermudez, Science, 2018, 361, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. C. Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich and L. Korte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 RSC .
J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, H. Mehrvarz, F.-J. Ma, Y. Jiang, X. Deng, A. Soeriyadi, J. Kim, M. Zhang and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2432–2443 RSC .
J. Zheng, H. Mehrvarz, F.-J. Ma, C. F. J. Lau, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2299–2300 CrossRef CAS .
P. Löper, S.-J. Moon, S. M. De Nicolas, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, S. Nicolay, J. Bailat, J.-H. Yum, S. De Wolf and C. Ballif, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1619–1629 RSC .
F. Sahli, J. Werner, B. A. Kamino, M. Bräuninger, R. Monnard, B. Paviet-Salomon, L. Barraud, L. Ding, J. J. D. Leon and D. Sacchetto, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 820–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, C. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, H. Chen, B. Bahrami and A. H. Chowdhury, Science, 2020, 367, 1135–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, J. Y. Zhengshan, S. Manzoor, S. Wang, W. Weigand, Z. Yu, G. Yang, Z. Ni, X. Dai, Z. C. Holman and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 850–864 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sahli, B. A. Kamino, J. Werner, M. Bräuninger, B. Paviet-Salomon, L. Barraud, R. Monnard, J. P. Seif, A. Tomasi and Q. Jeangros, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701609 CrossRef .
L. Mazzarella, Y. H. Lin, S. Kirner, A. B. Morales-Vilches, L. Korte, S. Albrecht, E. Crossland, B. Stannowski, C. Case and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803241 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, H. Mehrvarz, C. Liao, J. Bing, X. Cui, Y. Li, V. R. Gonçales, C. F. J. Lau, D. S. Lee and Y. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2623–2631 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bush, S. Manzoor, K. Frohna, Z. J. Yu, J. A. Raiford, A. F. Palmstrom, H.-P. Wang, R. Prasanna, S. F. Bent and Z. C. Holman, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2173–2180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, S. T. Omelchenko, D. A. Jacobs, S. Yalamanchili, Y. Wan, D. Yan, P. Phang, Y. Wu, Y. Yin and C. Samundsett, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau9711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Bai, Z. Yu, T. Li, X. Zheng, Q. Dong, L. Shen, M. Boccard, A. Gruverman and Z. Holman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601128 CrossRef .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Z. Yu, K. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. Shi, D. Spronk, P. N. Rudd, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Joule, 2019, 3, 177–190 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte and B. Rech, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Duong, H. Pham, T. C. Kho, P. Phang, K. C. Fong, D. Yan, Y. Yin, J. Peng, M. A. Mahmud and S. Gharibzadeh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903553 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jaysankar, B. A. Raul, J. Bastos, C. Burgess, C. Weijtens, M. Creatore, T. Aernouts, Y. Kuang, R. Gehlhaar and A. Hadipour, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 259–264 CrossRef .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong and M. Stocks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, J. Y. Zhengshan, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey and E. J. Wolf, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dilena, Y. Xie, R. Brescia, M. Prato, L. Maserati, R. Krahne, A. Paolella, G. Bertoni, M. Povia and I. Moreels, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3180–3187 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. A. Wang, X. Zhang, N. Bao, B. Lin and A. Gupta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11072–11075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Kamada, T. Yagioka, S. Adachi, A. Handa, K. F. Tai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC),  2016, pp. 1287–1291 DOI:10.1109/PVSC.2016.7749822.
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pisoni, F. Fu, T. Feurer, M. Makha, B. Bissig, S. Nishiwaki, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13639–13647 RSC .
M. Jošt, T. Bertram, D. Koushik, J. A. Marquez, M. A. Verheijen, M. D. Heinemann, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Braunger and F. Lang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 583–590 CrossRef .
A. Al-Ashouri, A. Magomedov, M. Roß, M. Jošt, M. Talaikis, G. Chistiakova, T. Bertram, J. A. Márquez, E. Köhnen and E. Kasparavičius, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3356–3369 RSC .
Y. H. Jang, J. M. Lee, J. W. Seo, I. Kim and D.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19439–19446 RSC .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, Y. S. Lee, C. Sturdevant, L. Y. Chang and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500799 CrossRef .
A. R. Uhl, Z. Yang, A. K.-Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3214–3220 RSC .
H. Shen, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber and X. Xiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394–406 RSC .
A. Rajagopal, Z. Yang, S. B. Jo, I. L. Braly, P. W. Liang, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702140 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi and N. J. Podraza, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, K. Xiao, Z. Qin, Q. Han, C. Zhang, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, J. Xu and M. Xiao, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 864–873 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Qi, F. Lin, H. Fu, K. Jiang, S. Wu, L. Bi, D. Wang and F. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19778–19787 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Li and W. C. Choy, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3638–3646 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Xu, R. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Hou and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800855 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Wu, J. Zhang, K. C. Lee, H. Lei, F. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Zhu and A. K. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, R. Xia, Z. Chen, J. Tian, L. Yan, M. Ren, Z. Li, G. Zhang, Q. Xue and H.-L. Yip, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105238 CrossRef CAS .
H. Aqoma, I. F. Imran, F. T. A. Wibowo, N. V. Krishna, W. Lee, A. K. Sarker, D. Y. Ryu and S. Y. Jang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001188 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Jia, Z. Chen, T. Jiang, L. Bai, F. Tao, J. Chen, X. Chen, T. Liu and X. Xu, Joule, 2020, 4, 1594–1606 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, V. Zardetto, K. Datta, D. Zhang, M. M. Wienk and R. A. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. M. Werner, F. Sahli, F. Fu, J. J. Diaz Leon, A. Walter, B. A. Kamino, B. Niesen, S. Nicolay, Q. Jeangros and C. Ballif, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2052–2058 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, S. Mahesh, N. K. Noel, M. T. Klug, J. Lim, J. H. Warby, J. M. Ball, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Joule, 2019, 3, 387–401 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, H. Li, Q. Zhou, Q. Wei, M. Wei, L. Jiang, Z. Wang, Z. Peng, F. Wang and Z. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10970–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Di, B. Chang, R. Yin, L. Fu, Y. N. Zhang and L. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007447 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cui, X. Liu, T. Wu, X. Lin, X. Luo, Y. Wu, H. Segawa, X. Yang, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100931 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Xin Wu
	Xin Wu obtained his BS degree and MS degree in 2016 and 2019 from the School of Chemistry, Beihang University. Currently, he is undertaking a PhD study in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the physical properties of perovskite materials, carbon-based perovskite solar cells, inverted perovskite solar cells, and perovskite-based tandem solar cells.

Bo Li
	Dr Bo Li is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the structure design and photophysics of semiconductor materials, lead-free perovskite solar cells, and inorganic perovskite solar cells.

Zonglong Zhu
	Dr Zonglong Zhu is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong. He obtained his BS degree (Chemistry) in 2010 from Nanjing University (China). In 2015, he earned his PhD degree in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST). Then he worked in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the University of Washington as a postdoctoral fellow. His research mainly focuses on the design of inorganic/organic materials, as well as the relationships between the materials synthesis, physical properties and device performance for optoelectronic application.

Chu-Chen Chueh
	Dr Chu-Chen Chueh received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2010 and conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Washington from 2011 to 2016. He joined NTU as an Assistant Professor of the Department of Chemical Engineering in 2017. His research focus on the development of polymer semiconductors and organic/hybrid semiconductors and their applications in memory, light-emitting diodes, transistors, and solar cells.

Alex. K.-Y. Jen
	Prof. Alex K.-Y. Jen is currently serving as the Lee Shau Kee Chair Professor of the City University of Hong Kong. Before this, he served as the Provost for the City University and the Boeing-Johnson Chair Professor and Chair of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Washington. He also served as the Chief Scientist for the Clean Energy Institute endowed by the Washington State Governor. His research interest is focused on utilizing molecular, polymeric-, and bio-macromolecular self-assembly to create ordered arrangement of organic and inorganic functional materials for applications in photonics, optoelectronics, energy, nanomedicine and nanotechnology, and employing the “molecular engineering” approach to tailor the size, shape, sequence, and functionality of organic/hybrid functional materials and explore their applications.

 	Fig. 1  Device evolution of perovskite solar cells from single junction, heterojunction, to multijunction designs.	 

 	Fig. 2  S–Q limits with the record efficiencies of different PV technologies plotted as a function of bandgap.6	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic band diagrams for three typical heterojunctions with their aligned vacuum level E0 (a: type I – straddling, d: type II – staggered, g: type III – broken gap), brought into thermodynamic equilibrium resulting in an aligned Fermi level (EF) (b, e and h), and brought into contact with compensating space-charge regions (c, f and i).	 

 	Fig. 4  Device configurations of (a) p–i–n structured and (b) n–i–p structured PVSCs. (c) Charge carrier dynamics of a PVSC.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Simulation of the QFLS and VOC of pin-type devices using SCAPS from ref. 38. (a) The simulated quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS) in junctions with aligned transport layers (PTAA/perovskite/C60) is equal to eVOC but not in the case of energetically misaligned transport layers (b) where the hole QFL bends at the interface to the hole transport layer which causes a QFLS–VOC mismatch. The dashed lines indicate the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels (EF,e and EF,h), the resulting QFLS in the absorber and VOC at the contacts. The HTL (red) and ETL (blue) are represented by their bandgaps in between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transition energy levels of (a) intrinsic acceptors and (b) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2014. (c) Electron capture and (d) hole capture by a defect of energy trap between the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). (e) Electron emission and (f) hole emission. (g) Electron and hole capture by a recombination center in a trap-assisted recombination event. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the perovskite crystallization induced by small molecular and macromolecular intermediate phases. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the polymerization-assisted grain growth (PAGG) strategy. Top-view SEM images of perovskite films without (c) and with (d) PAGG. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell with PAGG. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the passivation effects due to PCBM. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015. (b) Scheme of the crosslinking polymerization process of TA under thermal conditions and the device structure with Poly(TA). The photographs display TA dissolved in different solvents. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (c) Scheme of DPSI mediated perovskite growth and defect passivation. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Possible mechanism of cyclic reduction of Pb0 and I0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ metal ion pairs. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (e) Scheme of the hydrogen bond between the halogen and MA/FA ions and strengthening the ionic bond between the halogen and metal ions, and scheme of the potential position of NaF in the perovskite films. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the formation of a FA-based perovskite/CsPb2Br5 ultra-thin film heterojunction, the vapor doping process and the energy level alignment of the PVSCs via the SS-PCVD process. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, copyright 2018. (c) Device configuration of composition gradient distributed PVSCs. (d) Time-resolved PL decays of the perovskite films with and without a surface passivator. (e) J–V curves of PVSCs with and without a surface passivator. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  Atomic-resolution STEM images of (a) the checkered intensity pattern formed upon electron beam exposure with ∼200 e Å−2 for FAPbI3 perovskite and (b) native intergrowth between PbI2 (shaded yellow) and FAPbI3 within the perovskite film. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020. (c) Scheme of a preferential orientation for the [h00] direction to align out-of-plane and no preferential orientation within the plane of a 2D/3D perovskite. (d) Time-resolved PL spectra for 3D perovskite films with and without a 2D perovskite. (e) J–V curves for PVSCs using large-bandgap FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (x = 0) and BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (x = 0.09) perovskites. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

MAPbI3/PEA2Pb2I4	FTO/NiOx/Perovskite/PCBM-PN4N/Ag	19.89	
128

MAPbI3/PEA2Pb2I4	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	18.51	
134

(AVA)2PbI4/MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/ZrO2/Perovskite/carbon	12.9	
135

FASnI3/(PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag	6.98	
136

MAPbI3/(AVA)2PbI4	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	18.0	
137

PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1/MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	19.10	
138

Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39/PEA2Pb2I4	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	20.10	
139

PEA2FASn2I7/PEA2SnI4/FASnI3	ITO/NiOx/Perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag	9.41	
129

Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/BAy(CsxFA1−x)1−yPb2(Br0.4I0.6)7	ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	19.4	
140

MAPbI3/(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1	FTO/TiO2/C60/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	16.50	
141

MAPbI3-(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Au	16.13	
142

(CsPbI3)x(FAPbI3)y(MAPbBr3)1−x−y/PEA2Pb2I4	ITO/PTAA/Perovskite/PCBM/ZnO/Ag	21.31	
143

(CsPbI3)x(FAPbI3)y(MAPbBr3)1−x−y/(PNA)2FAn−1PbnI3n+1	ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	22.62	
144


 	Fig. 11  2D/3D perovskites boost the performance and stability of PVSCs. (a and b) Schematic diagram and band diagram of the growth of a MAPbI3/(BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 2D/3D heterostructure, and (c) J–V curves of 3D/2D heterojunction PVSCs. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2018. (d) Energy level diagram of optimized ThMA-based PVSCs with 2D/3D perovskites and 3D perovskites. (e) Scheme of the ThMA-based 2D/3D perovskite structure. (f) Stability of unencapsulated devices exposed to continuous one sun illumination in N2. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  Energy level diagram of hybrid perovskites with different compositions and different HTMs and CTMs.	 

TiO2	Biopolymer heparin sodium (HS) interfacial layer	n–i–p	20.1	
179

K-TFSI treated TiO2	n–i–p	21.1	
180

Chlorine-capped TiO2 colloidal nanocrystal film	n–i–p	20.1	
181

Dopamine-capped TiO2 nanoparticles	n–i–p	21	
182

Lanthanide doped TiO2	n–i–p	20.57	
183

CsBr-modified mesoporous TiO2	n–i–p	21	
184

C-TiO2/a-SnO2	n–i–p	21.4	
185

SnO2	SnO2-in polymer (PEG) matrix	n–i–p	20.8	
186

Triphenylphosphine oxide doped SnO2	n–i–p	20.69	
187

Atomic layer deposition (ALD) of SnO2	n–i–p	20	
188

C9 anchored SnO2	n–i–p	21.3	
189

Ammonium chloride induced coagulated SnO2 colloids	n–i–p	21.38	
190

SnO2/TiO2	n–i–p	21.65	
191

ZnO	MgO and EA+ passivated ZnO	n–i–p	21.1	
173

Sulfur passivation of solution-processed ZnO	n–i–p	19.65	
192

Fullerene-anchored core–shell ZnO nanoparticles	p–i–n	21.1	
193

ZnO–ZnS interface	n–i–p	20.7	
194


 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of heparin sodium salt (HS). (b) J–V curves of MAPbI3 devices without and with HS layers. Inset: IPCE spectra of corresponding devices. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic of the interaction between PEG and SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (d) The model of a TPPO molecule absorbed onto a SnO2 surface. (e) Energy level diagram of a SnO2/CsFAMA heterojunction before and after doping with TPPO. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (f) Schematic of ZnO–MgO and ZnO–Mg–EA+. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

Small molecule	FDT	−5.16	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/FDT/Au	20.2	
195

DM	−5.27	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/DM/Au	23.2	
196

Z26	−5.16	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Z26/Au	20.1	
197

X55	−5.23	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/X55/Au	20.8	
198

OMe-TATPyr	−5.4	ITO/SnO2/Perovskite/OMe-TATPyr/Au	20.6	
199

G2	−5.22	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/G2/Au	20.2	
200

XPP	−5.15	ITO/SnO2/C60/Perovskite/XPP/Ag	19.5	
201

MPA-BTTI	−5.24	ITO/MPA-BTTI/Perovskite/C60/BCP/Ag	21.17	
202

Spiro-mF	−5.19	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Spiro-mF/Au	24.82	
203

Polymer	P3HT	−5.2	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite(NBH&WBH)/P3HT/Au	22.7	
204

PTAA	−5.2	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/PTAA/Au	22.1	
205

PEDOT:PSS	−5.2	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Perovskite/PCBM/Au	18.1	
206

PCDTBT1	−5.38	ITO/TiO2/Perovskite/PCDTBT1/MoO3/Au	19.1	
207

DTB	−4.96	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/DTB/Au	19.68	
208

PTEG	−5.40	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/PTEG/Au	19.8	
209

Inorganic HTM	CuSCN	−5.3	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuSCN/rGO/Au	20.4	
210

CuGaO2	−5.29	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuGaO2/Au	18.51	
211

CuCrO2	−5.4	ITO/CuCrO2/Perovskite/PCBM/BCP/Ag	19.0	
212

Cu2O	−5.28	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/Cu2O/Au	18.9	
213

CuOx	−5.4	ITO/CuOx/MAPbI3/PC61BM/ZnO/Al	17.43	
214

NiOx	−5.4	FTO/NiOx/FAPbI3/PCBM/TiOx/Ag	20.65	
215

Complex	CuPc	−5.2	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuPc/Au	18.8	
216

CuPc–OBu	−5.11	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/CuPc-OBu/Au	17.6	
217

NiPc–(OBu)8	−5.06	FTO/TiO2/Perovskite/NiPc-(OBu)8/V2O5/Au	19.4	
218


 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the hole transport mechanism in (a) GO-AuNP and (b) GO-MoOx devices. Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The side view of the atomic crystal heterojunction of MAPbI3 and MoS2. Atomic crystal structure of the (001) plane of MoS2 (b) and the (110) plane of the perovskite (c). Reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (d) The crystallization process of the perovskite on SnO2 and SnS2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the device structure of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. Schematic of (b) charge transfer and (c) light absorption of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. (d) Carrier dynamics of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) EQE spectra of perovskite/BHJ hybrid solar cells in comparison to PVSCs with Spiro-OMeTAD as an HTM; the inset exhibits the device structure and energy level diagram. Reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Willey-VCH, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level alignment and EQE spectra (c) of CsPbIBr2-based hybrid solar cells with different BHJ films. Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Device configuration and energy-level alignment of inverted PVSCs with a BHJ as an ETM and the proposed mechanism of exciton formation and carrier dynamics. (b) EQE spectra of devices using different BHJ films. Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Tandem solar cells reduce the thermalization loss. (b) The complementary absorption of two subcells in a tandem cell. Device configurations of (c) two-terminal (2T) and (d) (e) four-terminal (4T) tandem solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 20  The maximum theoretical efficiency of (a) 2T tandems and (b) 4-T tandems. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 21  Efficiency evolution of perovskite-based tandem solar cells.274–298	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Device configuration of double-side-textured perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite top cell deposited on the textured silicon bottom cell. (c) EQE of perovskite/silicon 2T tandem cells with double-side-textured or front-side-polished (FSP) bottom cells. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2018. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of a textured c-Si covered with a perovskite film. (e) EQE of the textured devices, 19.3 mA cm−2 for the top cell and 19.2 mA cm−2 for the bottom cell. Reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Device configuration of tandem solar cells with a MACl/MAH2PO2 modified perovskite; (b) top view SEM image of the MACl/MAH2PO2 modified perovskite film. (c) J–V curves under forward and reverse scans of the champion Cs0.15(FA0.83MA0.17)0.85Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3/Si tandem device. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Device configuration and cross-sectional SEM image of perovskite/CIGS tandem solar cells with atomic layer deposited NiOx. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the deposition of ITO via sputtering and post-treatment by chemical mechanical polishing. Reproduced from ref. 298 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of the wide bandgap PVSC with SAM molecules attached to the ITO surface. (d) J–V curves of single-junction wide bandgap PVSCs with different SAMs and PTAA as HTMs under one sun illumination with the respective MPP tracks in the inset. (e) J–V curve of a monolithic CIGS/perovskite tandem solar cell with a MeO-2PACz2PACz SAM as an HTM. The inset shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the device. Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Device configuration of perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cells with optimized subcells from the Jen group. (b) Fractional contribution of VOC and associated losses with respect to bandgap for different high-performance perovskite-based tandem solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 330 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (c) J–V curves of narrow bandgap PVSCs with and without GuaSCN as an additive. (d) J–V curves of the perovskite/perovskite tandem solar cells with the GuaSCN additive and the corresponding EQE spectra of the top and bottom sub-cells. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019. (e) Device configuration and (f) J–V curves of large-area all-perovskite tandem solar cells with formamidine sulfinic acid (FSA) additive. Reproduced from ref. 280 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Device configuration of high-performance perovskite/organic tandem solar cells and simulated distributions of photon absorptions. (b) J–V curves of champion perovskite/organic tandem solar cells with forward and reverse scans. Reproduced from ref. 339 with permission from Elsevier Inc., copyright 2020. (c) Device configuration of triple-junction all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (d) J–V curves of single-junction subcells and tandem solar cells. (e) EQE spectra of triple junction tandem solar cells. Reproduced from ref. 340 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
