Recent advances in the photothermal applications of two-dimensional nanomaterials: photothermal therapy and beyond   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA04134G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04134G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17569-17591Recent advances in the photothermal applications of two-dimensional nanomaterials: photothermal therapy and beyond†

        
          
            Hui 
            Ma
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Mianqi 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *ac
aTechnical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. E-mail: xuemq@mail.ipc.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
cBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      17th May 2021
    , Accepted 23rd July 2021First published on 23rd July 2021AbstractPhotothermal conversion, as a rapid and effective form of energy conversion, has become increasingly attractive in recent years. Among various photothermal agents, two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials tend to become mainstream due to their higher photothermal conversion efficiency empowered by excellent in-plane electron mobility. And their good biocompatibility enables their prosperous applications in photothermal therapy and usually with satisfactory therapeutic effects. In addition, along with the development of more 2D nanomaterials, their photothermal conversions derive many more applications in cutting-edge fields. In this review, we briefly discuss the photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials including photothermal therapy, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuation, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, wearable heaters and wound healing, which can provide valuable information and insights for future research on photothermal conversion and 2D nanomaterials.Hui MaHui Ma received her BS degree (2019) in Physical Chemistry from Shandong University. She is now a PhD student under the supervision of Prof Mianqi Xue at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. Her research focuses on the synthesis and application of two-dimensional nanomaterials.Mianqi XueMianqi Xue received his PhD degree in 2012 from the Renmin University of China. He then joined as a professor in the School of Advanced Materials, Peking University. During 2014–2018, he worked at the Institute of Physics, CAS. He is currently a professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of conducting polymers and organic superconductors.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials are a class of new nanomaterials with a freestanding sheet-like structure and high ratio of lateral size to thickness.1–3 The discovery of graphene and its promising applications in various fields have prompted researchers to explore new functional 2D nanomaterials,4,5 such as transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides (MXenes),6,7 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),8–10 transition metal oxides (TMOs),11,12 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),13–15 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),16–18 and black phosphorus (BP),19,20 palladium (Pd)21,22 and boron nitride (BN) nanosheets.23,24 These materials have been studied and explored for cutting-edge fields including biomedicine, catalysis and energy, which drive the rapid development of bioscience, materials science and energy chemistry.25–35
Recently, 2D nanomaterials have been considered as promising photothermal agents (PTAs) due to their ultrathin structure, high photothermal conversion efficiency, and unique optoelectronic properties.36–38 2D nanomaterials exhibit plasmonic effects upon near-infrared (NIR) light irradiation, which favours the conversion of light energy into thermal energy.39,40 The heat produced by photothermal conversion can kill cancer cells and promote the occurrence of chemical reactions and accelerate the reaction rate.41,42 In addition, some 2D nanomaterials can efficiently absorb sunlight and convert it into heat energy, which increases the utilization of solar energy and further alleviates the threat of energy crisis from excessive use of traditional fossil fuels.43–46 The photothermal conversion of 2D nanomaterials is becoming increasingly significant with plenty of elegant studies reported and encourages a variety of applications such as photothermal therapy (PTT), water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuators, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable heaters, bacterial inhibition and wound healing.47–60 Therefore, a systematic review on the comprehensive photothermal applications of various 2D nanomaterials is still essential to provide overall understanding for the readers on 2D PTAs in various fields.
Here, the applications of 2D nanomaterials based on photothermal properties in PTT and beyond are systematically summarized. The structure and properties of 2D nanomaterials are first introduced. Furthermore, we briefly summarize the latest progress of photothermal applications in PTT, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuators, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable heaters, bacterial inhibition and wound healing of different classes of 2D nanomaterials, mainly including graphene, MXenes, TMDs, and BP and Pd nanosheets (Scheme 1). Finally, the current challenges and future prospects of developing 2D nanomaterials as PTAs are discussed.
 Scheme 1  A scheme to illustrate the photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials, including graphene, MXenes, TMDs, BP and Pd nanosheets and other types of 2D nanosheets, for PTT, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, light-driven actuators, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, wearable heaters and bacterial inhibition. 
2. Structures and properties of 2D nanomaterials
2D nanomaterials are unique owing to the thickness size effect with only a few atomic layers. Graphene is an archetypal 2D nanomaterial and its each atom is bonded to each other via a covalent sp2 bond in a flat and regular hexagonal pattern (Fig. 1a).61,62 Other 2D nanomaterials (such as silicene, germanene and BN (Fig. 1b)) have similar structures.4,63 Aside from 2D nanomaterials with monoatomic thickness, some materials are composed of stable single crystal units like 2D MXenes, LDHs, TMDs and TMOs. In MXenes, M atoms are distributed in a close-packed mode and X atoms are located in the octahedral interstitial positions (M stands for a transition metal and X is carbon and/or nitrogen). The overall crystal mode of MXenes is hexagonal close-packed.64,65 LDHs can be expressed as [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2](An−)x/n·mH2O, where M2+, M3+ and An− represent divalent and trivalent metal cations and an exchangeable interlayer anion, respectively. Metal cations are arranged in edge-sharing MO6 octahedral host layers and An− is filled in the gap of hydrated interlayers (Fig. 1c).66,67 2D TMDs exhibit a typical layered structure in which a transition metal layer with a hexagonal structure is sandwiched between two chalcogen layers.68 Different from TMDs, the crystal structures of 2D TMOs are different from one another depending on their individual components. For example, MoO3 possesses a layered structure (Fig. 1d), while TiO2 has an octahedral conformation.69,70
 Fig. 1  Crystal structure diagrams of (a) graphene, (b) BN, (c) LDHs and (d) MoO3. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The ultrathin structure of 2D nanomaterials endows them with properties including a high specific surface area and excellent photothermal effect.71 2D nanomaterials are the thinnest materials known, which means that they also have the highest specific surface area among all known materials. This characteristic allows these materials to show a rapid response to external stimuli, such as light or pH.72 In particular, 2D PTAs possess an excellent photothermal effect compared with other materials. The photothermal effect is a direct energy conversion process in which light energy captured by a material is converted into thermal energy. Under light irradiation, PTAs absorb photons and generate light excitation, where the mobile charge carriers are induced by a light-induced electric field. The energy obtained by these carriers is subsequently transformed into heat.73,74 Compared to 0D, 1D and bulk materials, 2D nanomaterials in photothermal applications have the following advantages: (i) thanks to the ultrathin thickness of 2D nanomaterials, large-area photothermal devices can be prepared with only a small amount of 2D PTAs, thus greatly reducing the cost of materials. (ii) The large surface area of 2D nanosheets allows a rapid response to light. (iii) 2D PTAs possess adjustable bandgaps by changing the number of layers, allowing them to have wide absorption in the solar spectrum. (iv) Due to excellent in-plane electron mobility, 2D PTAs have high photothermal conversion efficiency to translate light into thermal energy.75
3. Photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials
The past few years have witnessed the rapid development of 2D nanomaterials as PTAs for biomedicine, energy storage, marine chemistry, catalysis, electrochemistry, photoelectricity and intelligent sensing. In this section, we summarize the recent advances in the photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials in PTT, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuation, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable heaters, bacterial inhibition and wound healing.
3.1 Photothermal therapy
PTT is a recently developed effective therapeutic strategy that uses heat produced by optical materials to selectively kill tumor cells upon NIR irradiation.76,77 Due to its minimally invasive, rapid, and easy combination with other therapies, PTT stands out among many cancer therapies. The PTT based on the photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials, effectively inducing local high temperature at tumor sites to ablate tumor cells without damaging normal cells, has drawn considerable attention.78–80 Previous studies have demonstrated that various 2D nanomaterials of graphene, MXenes, TMDs, BP, Pd and MOFs can perform PTT on cancer cells both in vivo and in vitro. In addition, PTT combined with photodynamic therapy (PDT), chemotherapy, immunotherapy, radiation therapy (RT), gene therapy (GT), sonodynamic therapy and image-guided (like magnetic resonance (MR), photoacoustic (PA) and computed tomography (CT)) therapy has achieved better therapeutic effects in the experimental stage.

3.1.1 Graphene for photothermal therapy. 
Graphene-based materials, such as graphene, graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and GO-nanocomposites, are ideal PTAs for cancer PTT owing to their excellent NIR absorbance.81–85 Graphene is the first 2D nanomaterial used for PTT.86 Thereafter, many graphene-based nanocomposites have been used as PTAs for PTT such as doxorubicin (DOX)-loaded bovine serum albumin (BSA)-functionalized rGO,87 β-cyclodextrin-grafted GO,88 folic acid-polyethylene glycol (PEG)-rGO,89 polyethylenimine (PEI)-PEG-rGO,90 GO-adipicdihydrazide-hyaluronic acid (HA)-methotrexate (MTX),91 rGO-MS-polydopamine (PDA),92 indocyanine green-PDA-rGO93 and GO-fullerene C60 nanocomposites.94 In addition, graphene-based photothermal synergistic therapy can effectively enhance therapeutic efficacy by integrating the advantages of various therapies.95 Shao et al. fabricated a HA and DOX modified PDA functionalized rGO (pRGO-MS(DOX)-HA) nanocomposite by layer-by-layer assembly for synergistic chemo-PTT (Fig. 2a).96 After injecting with pRGO@MS(DOX)-HA, the tumor growth of mice was obviously suppressed with NIR laser irradiation after several days (Fig. 2b). Such an excellent antitumor effect could be attributed to the improved synergistic effect of PTT and chemotherapy by promoting photothermal temperature as well as inducing drug release from pRGO@MS(DOX)-HA. Chen's group constructed MnOx/TiO2-rGO-polyvinylpyrrolidone (MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP) nanocomposites for synergistic sonodynamic therapy and PTT (Fig. 2c).97 Under 808 nm NIR irradiation (2.0 W cm−2), the tumor temperature injection of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites increased to 60 °C which was high enough to kill tumor cells for 10 min, while the tumor temperature in the control group without the nanocomposites only raised by ∼3 °C (Fig. 2d). Fig. 2e shows the relative viabilities of 4T1 cells in different experimental groups. The group of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP combined with ultrasound (US)/laser co-irradiation displayed the highest killing effect of 4T1 cells compared with other groups, indicating the high therapeutic effect of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP for synergistic sonocatalytic therapy and PTT.
 Fig. 2  The graphene-based composites for PTT. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of pRGO@MS(DOX)-HA nanocomposites and their application in chemo-PTT synergistic therapy. (b) Tumor growth curves of mice after various treatments. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of preparing MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites and their application in PTT combined with sonodynamic therapy. (d) IR thermal images of 4T1 tumor bearing nude mice with (top) or without (bottom) the injection of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites under 808 nm NIR irradiation with a power density of 2.0 W cm−2. (e) Relative viabilities of 4T1 cells in different experimental groups. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 MXenes for photothermal therapy. 
MXenes have attractive hydrophilicity due to fluorine, oxygen, or hydroxyl functional groups on the surfaces. Combining their strong NIR absorbance with high biocompatibility in vivo, MXenes such as Ti3C2,98–105 Ti2C,106 NbC2,107,108 and Ta4C3109–111 have been used as PTAs for PTT and imaging-guided cancer therapy. Shi's group first reported that Ti3C2 MXene shows a unique functionality for photothermal ablation of tumors.100 Soybean phospholipid (SP)-modified Ti3C2 nanosheets reached and accumulated at tumor tissues via intravenous injection. Under NIR light irradiation, tumors were eliminated by the photothermal effect of Ti3C2 nanosheets (Fig. 3a). Lin et al. explored a 2D Nb2C MXene for the photothermal tumor eradication of 4T1-tumor-bearing mice in 750–1000 nm and 1000–1350 nm.107 Although 2D MXenes have made great progress in PTT, the elimination of tumor cells is a complex process and typically requires the predetermination of the tumor location and size, which can be achieved by integrating diagnostic-imaging capability with therapeutic performance. In recent years, MXene-based nanocomposites were developed for multimodal-imaging-guided cancer therapy to obtain satisfactory therapeutic outcomes. Zong et al. employed GdW10-functionalized Ti3C2 (GdW10@Ti3C2) nanosheets for MR and/or CT imaging guided-PTT.102 These GdW10@Ti3C2 composite nanosheets had high in vitro and in vivo biocompatibility, excellent photothermal ablation performance and enhanced-MR and CT signal properties. Wu's group constructed Ta4C3 MXene-based composite (MnOx/Ta4C3-SP) nanosheets for MR, CT and PA imaging guided photothermal tumor ablation.109 After NIR irradiation at a power density of 2 W cm−2 for 10 min, the tumor temperature of the MnOx/Ta4C3-SP injected mice increased to ∼55 °C (Fig. 3b), which was high enough for tumor ablation. Tumors in the MnOx/Ta4C3-SP treated mice were nearly completely eradicated under 808 nm laser irradiation, whereas the other three groups showed no significant inhibition effect on the tumor growth (Fig. 3c). All MnOx/Ta4C3-SP treated mice survived after 60 days without tumor reoccurrence (Fig. 3d).
 Fig. 3  MXenes for PTT and imaging-guided cancer therapy. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti3C2 nanosheets and their application in PTT. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) IR thermal images of 4T1 tumor bearing nude mice with or without the intravenous injection of MnOx/Ta4C3-SP nanosheets under 808 nm laser irradiation at different time intervals. (c) Time-dependent tumor-growth curves of four groups after different treatments. (e) Survival rates of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice within the feeding duration after various treatments. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 Transition metal dichalcogenides for photothermal therapy. 
2D TMD nanomaterials have excellent absorption in the NIR range and strong X-ray attenuation ability, which make them promising nanoplatforms for biomedical applications. Some TMD materials like MoS2,112–127 WS2,128–133 TiS2,134–136 ReS2,137 TaS2,138 VS2,139 SnS2,140 Bi2S3,141 MoSe2142–144 and Bi2Se3145–149 have been successfully demonstrated for PTT by integrating with other therapeutic and imaging functions. Yin et al. utilized MoS2-chitosan (CS)-DOX as a therapeutic agent for PTT and chemotherapy via NIR-mediated hyperthermia and heat-induced local drug release (Fig. 4a).112 This synergistic therapy achieved effective treatment of in vivo pancreatic cancer under NIR irradiation compared with single therapy. Liu's group constructed TiS2-PEG nanosheets as a PA contrast agent and PTA for PA imaging guided PTT (Fig. 4b).134 After the injection of TiS2-PEG, strong PA signals appeared and dispersed in the whole tumor and then guided the in vivo PTT. The PA imaging guided PTT was completely realized to eradicate tumors in animal tumor model experiments. In addition, the group also designed WS2-PEG nanosheets for in vivo dual-modal CT/PA imaging guided PTT.128 He et al. designed and synthesized red blood cell (RBC)-MoSe2 for PTT-triggered immunotherapy (Fig. 4c).143 The as-fabricated RBC-MoSe2 nanosheets displayed prominent PTT and immunotherapy synergistic therapeutic effects. Bai et al. developed a nanoplatform based on BSA-coated Bi2Te3 nanosheets conjugated with methylene blue (MB) (BSA-Bi2Te3/MB) for bimodal PTT/PDT combination therapy (Fig. 4d).47 The BSA-Bi2Te3/MB composites not only showed a photothermal ablation effect but also generated 1O2 to kill tumor cells. Tumors in mice with BSA-Bi2Te3/MB injection were thoroughly eradicated under NIR irradiation without recurrence within 15 days, which displayed a prominent therapeutic effect via photothermal and photodynamic synergistic therapy. Zhang et al. constructed a WS2@PEI-siRNA nanocomplex for dual-mode PA/CT imaging guided gene-photothermal synergistic therapy (Fig. 4e).130 The nanocomplex exhibited CT/PA imaging enhancement and excellent GT/PTT synergistic therapeutic effects, facilitating the accurate location and complete realization of the elimination of tumor.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of TMD-based composites and their application in multimodal-imaging-navigated combined therapy. (a) MoS2-CS-DOX composites. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) TiS2-PEG nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) RBC-MoSe2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d) BSA-Bi2Te3/MB composites. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) WS2@PEI-siRNA composites. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.4 Black phosphorus nanosheets for photothermal therapy. 
As a novel member of 2D nanomaterials, BP possesses biodegradation, high surface reactivity, good NIR photothermal and singlet oxygen generation properties,150–157 which allow for highly effective and precise tumor treatments via combining PTT with immunotherapy,158,159 GT,160 PDT,161–166 and chemotherapy.167–172 Wang et al. fabricated a BP-PEI-siRNA complex for PTT and GT.160 The as-prepared complex displayed improved cellular uptake capability and gene transfection efficiency, resulting in obvious downregulation of surviving expression (Fig. 5a). Combined with the photothermal properties of BP, the BP-PEI-siRNA complex delivery system showed excellent therapy efficiency for tumors. Noticeably, the BP nanosheets gradually degrade into biocompatible phosphate ions, which can avoid long-term toxicity in vivo. Yang et al. utilized BP@PEG/chlorin e6 (Ce6) nanosheets for photothermal and photodynamic synergistic cancer treatment.162 Under 660 nm NIR illumination of 0.65 W cm−2 for 10 min, the temperature of the BP@PEG/Ce6 nanosheets went up 12.6 °C (Fig. 5b), presenting the best photothermal conversion in the four groups. The tumor volumes of mice injected with BP@PEG/Ce6 nanosheets showed a slight increase (Fig. 5c), which displayed an excellent tumor ablation effect under 660 nm NIR illumination. In addition, the BP@MTX-HA platform designed and constructed by Zhang et al. achieved excellent chemo-photothermal synergistic treatment for tumors (Fig. 5d).167
 Fig. 5  BP nanosheets for photothermal combined therapy. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the BP-PEI-siRNA complex and its application in synergistic PTT and GT of cancer cells. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Time-dependent temperature variation (b) and tumor-growth (c) curves of different treatments. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of constructing the BP@MTX-HA platform and its application in chemo-photothermal synergistic treatment. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 


3.1.5 Palladium nanosheets for photothermal therapy. 
Pd nanosheets have been regarded as a new kind of promising PTA with different sizes due to strong absorption in the NIR region and high photothermal conversion efficiency.173 Pd nanosheet-based nanocomposites such as Pd@Au nanoplates and Pd@reduced glutathione with excellent NIR absorption have achieved the photothermal treatment of tumors.174–176 Anticancer drugs could also be loaded onto these 2D Pd nanomaterials, thereby significantly improving the therapeutic efficacy of cancer.177–179 Jiang et al. encapsulated the common anticancer drug DOX into a Pd nanosheet-based hydrogel for combined chemo-PTT.177 Under NIR laser irradiation, the light energy absorption of Pd nanosheets and conversion into heat energy for PTT and the DOX release were accelerated by producing local hyperthermia to promote chemotherapy (Fig. 6a). In vivo experiments showed that chemo-photothermal combination therapy efficiently eradicated the tumors and restrained their transfer. A conventional drug release platform normally releases one drug and then another instead of simultaneous drug release. Hence, developing novel dual-drug delivery to achieve synchronous drug release is a great challenge, which is expected to achieve a better therapeutic effect by further combining with other treatments. Zhang et al. designed unidentified flying object (UFO)-like cyclodextrin–Pd nanosheet/zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 Janus nanoparticles (CD-PdNS/ZIF-8 JNPs) to load hydrophobic 10-hydroxycamptothecin (HCPT) and DOX anticancer drugs independently for synergistic dual-drug chemotherapy and PTT (Fig. 6b).179 The in vitro and in vivo results demonstrated that the dual-drug loaded JNPs achieve the simultaneous release of the two drugs and better cancer treatment by synergy with PTT.
 Fig. 6  Pd nanosheets for PTT combined with chemotherapy. Schematic illustration of DOX@Pd Gel (a) and UFO-like CD-PdNS/ZIF-8 JNPs (b) for synergistic chemo-PTT. Reproduced with permission.177,179 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.6 Other 2D nanomaterials for photothermal therapy. 
In addition to the nanomaterials mentioned above, a number of other 2D nanomaterials have been explored for PTT, such as TMOs,180–184 MOF,185–188 LDH,189–192 single element (Ti, Ge, Sn, Si),193–200 polymers,201–203 carbon nitride,204,205 SnS,206,207 CoS,208 bismuth tungstate,209 copper/carbon quantum,210 Bi-anchored manganese boride,211 FePSe3,212 Fe3S4,213 BiOCl,214 graphdiyne,215 ternary chalcogenide (Ta2NiS5-P) based nanosheets216 and so on. Li et al. prepared melanin decorated MoOx nanosheets with a high photothermal conversion for efficiency synergistic PTT and chemotherapy (Fig. 7a).183 The synergistic PTT-chemotherapy exhibited a complete suppression of tumor growth in a murine xenograft breast cancer model. Zhang's group constructed a Ti nanosheet-based theranostic nanoplatform for CT and PT imaging-guided PTT (Fig. 7b).194 Due to their excellent X-ray response properties and strong NIR light absorbance, the as-prepared Ti nanosheets possessed enhanced dual-modal contrast PA and CT imaging ability and high photothermal performance, which contributed to achieve multimodal imaging-guided cancer theranostics and therapy. Notably, the Ti nanosheets also gradually degraded at room temperature (77% degradation over 30 days in water), which can avoid long-term damage to the human body system and further enhance their safety and clinical potential. Peng et al. designed a Gd3+-doped monolayered-double-hydroxide (MLDH) nanosheet-based platform for near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF)/MR imaging and synergistic PTT/PDT/chemotherapy (Fig. 7c).190In vivo dual-mode NIRF/MR imaging noninvasively visualized the distribution profiles of tumor cells, which is beneficial to accurate diagnosis and effective therapy. In addition, a complete ablation of HepG2 tumor in mice indicated the excellent treatment effect of chemo, photothermal and photodynamic trimode combination therapy.
 Fig. 7  Other 2D nanomaterials for PTT. Schematic illustration of a MoOx-based nanoplatform for synergistic chemo-photothermal therapy (a), a Ti nanosheet-based theranostic nanoplatform for dual-modal CT/PA imaging-guided PTT (b), a MLDH-based drug delivery system for NIRF/MR imaging and chemo, photothermal and photodynamic trimode combination therapy (c) and a PPy-based PTA for PTT in NIR II (d). Reproduced with permission.183,190,194,203 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
To date, most 2D PTAs mainly absorb NIR light in the first NIR window (NIR I, wavelengths from 650 to 950 nm). The NIR light in the second NIR window (NIR II) with wavelengths ranging from 1000 to 1350 nm could offer more effective tissue penetration by decreasing photon scattering, providing a broader prospect in the practical application of PTT. Wang et al. realized efficient photothermal therapeutics in the NIR II window via novel 2D PPy nanosheets (Fig. 7d).203 Due to the formation of a bipolaron band, the ultrathin PPy nanosheets had a strong absorbance in the NIR II window, which leads to higher photothermal conversion efficiency and high-performance PTT.
In a short summary, various 2D nanomaterials such as graphene, MXenes, TMDs, BP, Pd and so on have achieved good therapeutic effects by PTT combined with PDT, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, RT, GT, sonodynamic therapy and image-guided therapy. Although great progress has been made in therapeutic outcomes, the safety of PTAs needs deep research in practical applications. In addition, current photothermal research mainly focuses on the NIR-I window. PTT in the NIR-II window needs accelerated development to achieve better clinical applications.

3.2 Water evaporation
Water shortage and energy crisis are serious global issues in the 21st century. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to this field in order to deliver better solutions. Efficient solar steam generation triggered by photothermal materials has emerged as a green and sustainable strategy.217–225 Water evaporation gains broad practical application in seawater desalination, wastewater purification, and electricity generation, which hold great potential in solving the longstanding global challenges in water and energy.

3.2.1 Seawater desalination. 
Seawater desalination is a cost-effective approach to produce fresh water by removing mineral components from saline water.226–229 In this process, the heat source for evaporation is usually provided with photothermal materials by converting solar energy. The photothermal conversion properties of graphene,230–236 MXenes,237–242 TMDs243–246 and polymers247–250 have been widely applied to produce fresh water via seawater desalination. A wood-GO bilayered structure was prepared by depositing GO on the surface of wood for highly efficient solar steam generation and desalination (Fig. 8a).48 Under solar illumination of 12 kW m−2, the surface temperature of the wood-GO composite rapidly raised from 25 to around 67 °C, while the temperature of pristine wood only increased from 27 to 54 °C (Fig. 8b). Meanwhile, the cumulative weight loss of saline water increased linearly with the irradiation time (Fig. 8c). The evaporation efficiency of the wood-GO composite was calculated to be 82.8% at a power density of 12 kW m−2, which is higher than that of pristine wood (59.5%). These outstanding properties are due to the broad optical absorption and high photothermal conversion of GO. Although graphene has good photothermal properties, hydrophobic graphene hardly contacts with water and hydrophilic graphene suffers from swelling and dissolution in aqueous solution, which would greatly limit steam generation. Therefore, more PTAs need to be developed to achieve efficient solar evaporation. Hu's group designed a three-dimensional dimpled 2H-MoS2 membrane (2H-DMM) and achieved highly efficient water desalination.246 The water temperatures with 2H-DMM increased by 9.1 ± 0.7 °C within 60 min of solar illumination at one sun (Fig. 8d). In real seawater samples, 2H-DMM showed steady water evaporation with the average rates at 1.51 LMH bar−1 after 12 h operation under one sun irradiation (Fig. 8e). In addition, 2H-DMM also exhibited superior performance for salt rejection (>99.5%). The concentrations of Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+ and K+ were below 1 mg L−1 in evaporated water (Fig. 8f), which are far below the salinity of World Health Organization standard for fresh water.
 Fig. 8  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in seawater desalination. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the wood-GO composite and setup for seawater desalination. (b and c) The surface temperatures (b) and cumulative mass changes (c) of the wood-GO and wood and saline water under solar illumination of 12 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) The temperature evolution during water evaporation in the floating dimpled MoS2 membrane. (e and f) The evaporation rate (e) and the concentration of four primary ions (f) for an actual seawater sample taken from Bohai Sea, Tianjin, China. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Although solar energy triggered seawater desalination has effectively achieved seawater desalination on sunny days with strong sunlight exposure, the production of fresh water is greatly limited when sunlight is inadequate under dusky light or dark conditions. Therefore, it is significant to design continuous all-weather steam generators to meet the escalating freshwater demand. Zhao et al. combined the photothermal and electrothermal conversion of crosslinked MXene aerogels (CMAs) to construct an all-weather steam generator for continuous seawater desalination.240 In detail, the steam generation system mainly consists of MXene aerogels and solar cell-battery components. Under strong sunlight, the CMAs generated steam by converting sunlight into heat and solar cells synchronously converted sunlight into electricity to store in the battery. Under rainy, foggy, cloudy or dark environments, the electricity stored in the battery was converted into heat for electrothermal steam generation when photothermal steam generation was greatly limited. In virtue of the alternating photothermal and electrothermal processes, the steam generation system can continuously generate steam at any time of the day and have a high evaporation rate of 29.4 kg m−2 for most of the day. The continuous steam generation devices possess great application potential in seawater desalination by overcoming complex practical environments.


3.2.2 Wastewater purification. 
Another important application of water evaporation is the purification of domestic and industrial sewage. Clean water is obtained by the elimination of dye molecules,251–258 sterilization,259,260 regulation of pH,256,257,261,262 and removal of heavy metal ions.255,258,260,261 Zhao et al. fabricated a Janus membrane by combining two-side copper/copper oxide (Cu@CuO) foam with a g-C3N4/GO aerogel film as a solar thermal converter for producing clean water (Fig. 9a).260 Due to the high optical absorption and unique thermal properties, the as-prepared Janus membrane displayed a faster heating rate and higher photothermal temperature compared with single-layer membranes under solar light irradiation. After evaporation assisted with the Janus membrane, 99% dyes such as rhodamine B, MB, and methyl orange were removed from stained water (Fig. 9b). The Janus membrane also had a high sterilization ability for contaminated water under solar irradiation. Bacteria were almost removed in both steaming water and stock E. coli-containing water in the presence of the Janus membrane after solar irradiation (Fig. 9c). Additionally, the Janus membrane was also effective in killing viruses and parasites under solar irradiation, exhibiting a strong sewage treatment capacity. Apart from organic molecules and pathogen content, the pH value and heavy metal ion content are also important indicators in wastewater treatment. Qu's group used a GO membrane to generate clean water from concentrated acid/alkali solutions and common wastewater.261 After solar thermal purification, all generated water from concentrated acid/alkali solutions was neutral (Fig. 9d and e). The GO membrane also had high removal efficiency of metal ions, where 99.5% of heavy metal ions such as Cr3+, Pb2+, Zn2+, Ni2+ and Cu2+ in common wastewater were eliminated after solar evaporation (Fig. 9f).
 Fig. 9  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in wastewater purification. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the Janus membrane and its application in sewage purification. (b) Concentration changes of dyes before and after solar thermal purification with the Janus membrane. (c) The E. coli counts in different water samples under 1 sun solar irradiation. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (d–f) The concentration of H+ (d), OH− (e) and heavy metal ions (f) before (original) and after water purification. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Electricity generation. 
In most previous studies of solar steam generation, steam is usually condensed to form clean water with heat energy lost to the environment (Fig. 10a).263 Zhou's group proposed the concept of production of both clean water and electricity during solar steam generation, which is expected to be an attractive avenue to realize more effective thermal management by decreasing heat losses.264 In general, the integration of evaporation system with energy generators is used to obtain electricity from water evaporation.257,265–270 Zhang et al. designed a solar evaporation device based on a Ti3C2 MXene sponge nanoplated with a SnO2 thin-film (SnO2-SPM) for simultaneously generating freshwater and electricity.241 Under solar irradiation, high temperature steam was produced by heat from the photothermal conversion of the SnO2-SPM absorber and then was condensed into clean water at the outlet of the chamber. Meanwhile, a temperature difference was generated between the chamber and the external environment, which could induce a voltage difference at both ends of the two different types of semiconductors according to the Seebeck effect. As a result, the device achieved the simultaneous generation of water and electricity under sunlight irradiation (inset in Fig. 10b). Importantly, the whole device could steadily output an open-circuit voltage of 3.6 V under 25-sun irradiation for 100 h without any decline (Fig. 10b). Jiang et al. reported broadband semiconductor foam based Ni3S2 nanosheet arrays for electricity generation during producing freshwater by integrating with a thermoelectric module.257 Apart from generating steam under solar irradiation, there was a temperature difference between the hot side and cold side of the thermoelectric module. Driven by the temperature difference, the thermoelectric module could convert harvested photothermal energy into electricity to achieve waste heat recovery (Fig. 10c). The open-circuit voltages of this solar steaming system increased with the rise of illumination intensity and almost kept stable in three on–off cycles (Fig. 10d), indicating the production of stable solar-driven electrical energy. Up to now, 2D nanomaterial based-PTAs combined with a triboelectric, thermo-electrochemical or salinity power device have been designed for simultaneously generating freshwater and power under free solar illumination. In this way, the energy conversion efficiency of the overall system can be enhanced.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the evaporation–condensation step of steam to form water with heat lost to the surrounding environment. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. The photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials for electricity generation. (b) Voltage changes for 100 h under 25-sun irradiation (inset: schematic diagram of the designed device for simultaneous clean water and electricity generation). Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of simultaneous production of steam and electricity. (d) Open-circuit voltage change with light on–off cycle responses. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
2D PTAs have strong absorption in the broadband solar spectrum, which makes them widely used in seawater desalination, wastewater purification and electricity generation. Although the water evaporation rate has yielded satisfactory results under simulated sunlight, it currently needs to be further improved under the natural sunlight. Furthermore, the utilization rate of heat energy in solar evaporation device also needs to promote.

3.3 Other applications
The photothermal conversion properties of 2D nanomaterials are not only used for PTT and water evaporation. The energy produced by photothermal conversion is also applied to thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuation, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable devices, bacterial inhibition, wound healing and so on.

3.3.1 Thermochemical reactions. 
Heat is the core basis of all biological/physical phenomena and chemical reactions.271,272 Most physiological activities, physical phenomena and chemical reactions are accompanied by the change of heat, and in turn, heat would directly or indirectly affect these processes. Photothermal conversion brings about heat production and temperature increase, which usually promotes the occurrence of chemical reactions and accelerates the reaction rate. Chai et al. for the first time reported an ultrahigh photothermal temperature of 310 °C for rGO/PPy nanosheets under 808 nm NIR irradiation.49 The good processability of the rGO/PPy ink makes it easy to coat, paint and write on any substrates to obtain relatively high photothermal temperature. The heat generated from photothermal conversion was further utilized for various contact thermochemical reactions including burning, thermal decomposition reactions, cross-linking reactions, and alloying reactions (Fig. 11a), offering a new direction for photothermal conversion beyond PTT and water evaporation.
 Fig. 11  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in a thermochemical reaction and electrostatic lithography. (a) Schematic illustration of the process for chemical reactions with heat induced by the photothermal conversion. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) IR thermal images of Ti3C2Tx@PEI films on a PDMS substrate. (c) Kelvin probe force microscopy image of the PMMA nanofilm after selective charge release with heat from the photothermal conversion of Ti3C2Tx@PEI nanosheets. (d and e) Optical images of the electrostatic printing pattern (d) and Cu deposition (e) on PMMA. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 Electrostatic lithography. 
Electrostatic lithography is a technology that patterns electrostatic charges on the device surface.273 The obtained electrostatic charge pattern has great significance in guiding the self-assembly of nanoparticles, inducing in situ electrochemical reactions and storing information.274 Ambient electrostatic lithography can be easily achieved on electrets via a thermally stimulated discharging process. Heating the electrets quickly and cost-effectively is a key issue for developing feasible electrostatic lithography. At this point, 2D PTAs can be used as a suitable heat source under light irradiation if two conditions are satisfied: (i) the photothermal conversion temperature needs to be above 100 °C to eliminate the effect of self-discharge at room temperature; (ii) 2D PTAs need to have good processability to design different shapes and structures. Based on the above considerations, Ti3C2Tx@PEI nanosheets with a good photothermal effect and processability were selected as PTAs and a temperature of 300 °C was obtained under 808 nm NIR irradiation with 1.7 W cm−2 power density. In this work, we developed novel light-induced electrostatic lithography by combining the in situ photothermal conversion of Ti3C2Tx@PEI nanosheets and selective thermally stimulated discharging.275 This new technology makes the large-scale application of electrostatic charge mapping possible in xerography by breaking through the space limitations of traditional heat sources. The surface temperature of the Ti3C2Tx@PEI film increased from 88 to 340 °C on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) under 808 nm NIR irradiation with a rise of power density from 0.3 to 1.7 W cm−2 (Fig. 11b). The high photothermal temperature under NIR light was used for light-induced electrostatic lithography on electrets. Specially, the irradiated Ti3C2Tx@PEI patterns used as heat sources were brought into contact with previously charged poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and quickly removed. A surface potential difference was formed between the areas touched and untouched irradiated Ti3C2Tx@PEI pattern in the Kelvin probe force microscopy image (Fig. 11c), which shows that charges on PMMA are selectively released by heat from Ti3C2Tx@PEI nanosheets. The obtained electrostatic charge patterns were further applied in electrostatic printing and in situ electrochemical reactions. After the charge-patterning process, dry powders of carbon toner were blown onto the PMMA to generate the patterns (Fig. 11d). Cu deposition topographical patterns were also obtained by the reduction of Cu2+ to Cu on the charged area (Fig. 11e).


3.3.3 Catalysis. 
Photocatalysts possess high efficiency in the reduction of COx to hydrocarbons and degrading pollutants. The photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials is demonstrated to play an important role in the enhanced photocatalytic performance, such as LDH nanosheets,276–278 graphene,279–282 CuOx/ZnO/Al2O3,283 molybdenum oxide,284 Pd/Ag,285 PdFe,286 Ni3S2,287 Nb2C,288 and C3N4 (ref. 289 and 290) nanosheets. Zhang's group fabricated different CoFe-x catalysts by hydrogen reduction of CoFeAl LDH nanosheets at different temperatures for CO2 hydrogenation (Fig. 12a).277 Alumina-supported CoFe alloy catalysts prepared at precursor reduction temperatures above 600 °C showed high CO2 conversion and remarkable hydrogenation performance under an efficient photothermal effect. In addition, the group also achieved an unprecedented selectivity for light olefins via a CO hydrogenation reaction using a Co-x photothermal catalyst under UV-vis irradiation.278 Wang et al. fabricated a graphene-based MnO2 (MnO2-G) nanohybrid for the catalytic oxidation of gaseous formaldehyde (HCHO).281 When the MnO2-G hybrid was exposed to light, the removal efficiency of HCHO greatly enhanced (Fig. 12b) compared with that of solo MnO2 or graphene and 270 ppm of CO2 was produced after 40 min (Fig. 12c). The increased transformation efficiency of HCHO into CO2 originated from the synergistic photothermal effect of MnO2 and graphene. Under solar light irradiation, the heat produced from graphene rapidly transferred to MnO2 nanosheets, further leading to the temperature increase of MnO2. In addition, the hybridization of MnO2 and graphene increased the chargeability of Mn atoms (Fig. 12d). The improved thermal and electron transfer facilitated the enhanced catalytic activity of the MnO2-G nanohybrid.
 Fig. 12  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in photocatalysis. (a) Illustration of a series of CoFe-based catalysts formed by the hydrogen reduction of a CoFeAl-LDH nanosheet precursor at 300–700 °C. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b and c) Concentration changes of HCHO (b) and ΔCO2 (c) with different reaction times. (d) Mechanism of enhanced HCHO catalytic oxidation activity over the MnO2-G nanohybrid under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
In addition to photocatalysis, the photothermal effect can also promote electrocatalytic water splitting.291–293 Gu et al. developed a photothermal-effect-driven strategy to enhance the electrocatalytic performance of Ni/rGO nanosheets.291 The electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction activities of Ni/rGO nanosheets were improved with the help of the photothermal effect of composites. In summary, the photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials can improve the performance of both photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, which has a broad application prospect in the field of catalysis.


3.3.4 Light-driven actuators. 
A light-driven actuator as a typical energy conversion device can convert light energy into mechanical energy, leading to shape-deformations and motions. Photothermal materials are promising for the design of wireless and remote controlled light-driven actuators. At present, photothermal-actuation based on graphene,52,294,295 or MXenes296–298 has been developed and can realize complex programmable motions. Wang et al. used PDA reduced graphene oxide (PDG) as a photothermal material for constructing light-driven robots.52 By combining with kirigami technique, the light-driven robots achieved the structural transformation from 2D precursors (including saddles, nested cage, closed-loop S-shape and star-shape dome) to complex photothermal actuated 3D architectures (Fig. 13a). Cao et al. prepared a coating with multi-layered/delaminated Ti3C2Tx and PDMS (PDMS@m/d-F) to realize controllable light-driven motion based its excellent superhydrophobicity and high photothermal-conversion performance.296 By adjusting the structure and irradiation positions, the coated filter paper achieved linear, clockwise (Fig. 13b), and anticlockwise rotation motions (Fig. 13c). In addition, Cai et al. designed a bilayer-structured actuator with Ti3C2Tx MXene-cellulose composites/polycarbonate membrane (MXCC/PC). Under NIR light irradiation, the bilayer actuator completed a series of sophisticated configurations including a double folding U-shape, trefoil arch-shape, self-folding box and self-blooming flower.297
 Fig. 13  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in light-driven motions. (a) Programmable 3D architectures for light-driven robots. Scale bars, 1 cm. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. Representative photothermal-driven motions for the filter paper coated with PDMS@m/d-F. Clockwise (b) and anticlockwise (c) rotational motion. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.5 Sensing. 
Some 2D nanomaterials with unique optical and electronic properties are also ideal sensing materials. In conventional nanomaterial-based sensing systems, optical and electrical signals are usually output but their thermal signal seems to be ignored. Qin et al. found that the thermal-sensing properties of materials can promote the sensing performance of the whole device.299 The photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials can also be applied to the sensing field. Immunochromatographic sensors,300 thermal sensors301,302 and optical sensors303 have been designed based on the photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials. Li et al. firstly designed a quantitative photothermal-sensing immunochromatographic sensor (PT-ICS) with Au nanoparticle-enhanced 2D BP and enrofloxacin (ENR) antibody (BP-Au-Ab) as a photothermal-sensing antibody probe.300Fig. 14a shows the preparation process of the BP-Au-Ab photothermal-sensing antibody probe with good photothermal conversion properties and chemical instability. This PT-ICS was used to detect ENR under an 808 nm laser (Fig. 14b). The photothermal sensing probe can be competitively captured by ENR target and antigen in the sensing system. This process was exothermic and the thermal energy decreased with the increase of the ENR in the sample. An infrared thermal camera was applied to record the change of the thermal energy. After analyzing the temperature changes in T-lines, the concentration of the ENR residues in animal-derived foods was obtained. Under optimal conditions, the PT-ICS displayed a detection limit of 0.023 μg L−1 and a relatively wide detection range from 0.03 to 10 μg L−1. Cheng et al. fabricated a Ti3C2Tx/ionic liquid ink with a high photothermal conversion efficiency as a thermal sensitive ink for flexible thermal sensors.302 The thermal sensors based Ti3C2Tx/ionic liquid thermal sensitive agents had good sensitivity to the change of temperature, a wide detection range from 20 to 250 °C and excellent stability. In addition to immunochromatographic and thermal sensors, Zuo et al. developed a photothermal optical sensor by integrating Ti3C2Tx MXene films into a Mach–Zehnder interferometer.303 Due to the spectral dependence and efficient photothermal conversion of Ti3C2Tx MXene films, the optical sensor could respond to multiple wavelengths from visible to short wavelength infrared and showed a high control efficiency (0.19 π mW−1 mm−1 under a 980 nm laser) and a fast response time of 23.4 μs.
 Fig. 14  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for sensing and photothermal electrodes. (a) Preparation process of the BP-Au-Ab photothermal-sensing probe. (b) Structure and test procedures of a photothermal-sensing immunochromatographic sensor. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. The photothermal application of 2D MoS2 for photothermal electrodes. (c) Schematic illustration of a photo-thermoelectric nanogenerator based on a MoS2/PU photothermal film. (d) Currents of the photo-thermoelectric nanogenerator under IR laser illumination with different power densities. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 


3.3.6 Photothermal electrodes. 
With the rapid increasing energy demand, developing clean and renewable energy technologies is becoming increasingly important and urgent. In this regard, using photothermal conversion to produce electricity could provide an effective path.304 Based on the photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials, MoS2 and Ti3C2 MXene-based photothermal electrodes have been developed for converting light energy into electricity without a spatial temperature gradient in the environment.54,305 He et al. designed a flexible photothermal electrode for harvesting NIR by integrating a MoS2/polyurethane (PU) photothermal film with a thermoelectric layer.54 Under NIR illumination, the photothermal layer absorbed IR light and induced a rise in the temperature of its own, resulting in a temperature difference generated between the two electrodes. Therefore, a potential difference was established between them based on the Seebeck effect, which further drove the charge carrier flow through an external circuit and produced an output current (Fig. 14c). The electrical output of the photo-thermoelectric nanogenerator can be controlled by adjusting the illuminating laser power and time. A larger current could be generated when a higher laser power was introduced. With the extension of the irradiation time, the current rose rapidly and reached saturation values (Fig. 14d). These results suggested a strong relationship between the laser power and photothermal conversion of MoS2/PU films. In addition, Wang et al. prepared a photothermal bioelectrode by coating Ti3C2Tx MXene to harvest microbial energy at low ambient temperatures.305 The Ti3C2Tx MXene sunlight absorber could increase the local temperature of the bioelectrode from 20 to 30 °C under simulated sunlight illumination. As a result, microbial energy harvesting was enabled and efficient current was further produced from the bioelectrochemical systems at a low temperature without bulk water heating.


3.3.7 Energy storage. 
Solar energy, one of the important renewable energy sources, is an ideal substitute for fossil fuels. Among the many solar energy capturing technologies, storing solar energy by phase change materials has attracted significant attention due to their easy operation as well as high conversion rate.306,307 As potential thermal storage materials, phase change materials can store and release a considerable amount of thermal energy during the phase change process within a very small temperature range. In particular, integrating photothermal materials and phase change materials has realized high-efficiency solar energy storage.308,309 Fan et al. combined Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with a PEG phase change material for efficient solar energy conversion and storage (Fig. 15a).55 Compared with PEG, PEG (80%)/Ti3C2Tx showed a broader and stronger absorbance in the UV-vis-NIR range (Fig. 15b). Consequently, it had the highest photothermal conversion temperature among all samples (Fig. 15c). Under sunlight irradiation, the PEG/Ti3C2Tx phase change material absorbed solar energy and converted it into thermal energy stored in the composites by the melting of PEG. When the light disappeared, the composites quickly cooled and released thermal energy. In this way solar energy can be efficiently stored and quickly released when needed. Additionally, bacterial cellulose/PEG/Ti3C2Tx,307 PEG-PU/Ti3C2Tx@PDA308 and PEG/Ti3C2Tx (ref. 309) phase change materials also achieved efficient solar energy conversion and storage. Nevertheless, the low thermal conductivity of phase change materials often limits heat transfer in the bulk phase and results in heat accumulation at the surface of materials. To solve this problem, Chang et al. designed a rapid roll-to-roll solar-thermal energy harvesting rGO-based composite inspired by the dynamic thermoregulation behavior of butterfly wings (Fig. 15d).310 Compared with static charging of bulk phase change materials, the roll-to-roll process could realize faster solar-thermal energy harvesting and more uniform temperature distribution by shortening the heat transfer distance.
 Fig. 15  The photothermal effect driven solar energy conversion and storage. (a) Schematic diagram for the mechanism of light-to-heat conversion and storage of PEG/Ti3C2Tx composites. (b and c) Absorbance spectra (b) and temperature evolution curves (c) of PEG and PEG composites. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a rGO-based composite for rapid roll-to-roll solar-thermal energy harvesting. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to MXene and graphene materials, BP nanosheets can also be used in solar energy storage.311,312 By integrating with BP nanosheets, the flame retardancy of phase change materials was effectively enhanced due to BP nanosheets producing a protective carbonaceous layer during combustion. Huang et al. constructed a solar energy storage system by combining PMMA-modified BP nanosheets (mBPs) and phase-changing microcapsules.311 The mBPs and eicosane (phase change materials) were encapsulated with PMMA to form microcapsules. Under solar irradiation, the thermal energy converted by mBPs was immediately transmitted to eicosane. When heat was accumulated at a certain level, eicosane underwent a phase transformation to store thermal energy. This work makes it possible for phase change materials without photothermal conversion properties used in solar energy storage by integrating with PTAs.


3.3.8 Smart hydrogels. 
Smart hydrogels can respond to external stimuli such as temperature, light and pH, which is broadly applied in drug delivery, tissue engineering, microdevices and so on. Photothermal materials like MoSe2,313 Ti3C2Tx MXenes,314 graphene315 and MoS256,316 have been incorporated into hydrogels to fabricate temperature-sensitive hydrogels. Lei et al. designed a dual photo- and thermo-responsive hydrogel by encapsulating hydrophilic PVP-coated MoSe2 nanosheets in the poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) network (Fig. 16a).313 The prepared dual-responsive hydrogel was then used as a novel intelligent remote control device and a PTA for drug encapsulation and release. In addition, Ti2C3Tx nanosheets were also incorporated into the PNIPAM network to expand the performance of pure PNIPAM. The as-obtained smart composite hydrogel achieved remote light-control of the microfluidic pipeline.314 Xu et al. prepared light-triggered self-healing hydrogel based gelatin, PEG and MoS2 nanosheets (GPM hydrogel).56 Thanks to the excellent photothermal conversion properties of MoS2 nanosheets, the GPM hydrogel with only 0.04 wt%-MoS2 nanosheets fast self-repaired under NIR irradiation in 90 s. Further study suggests that the self-healing efficiency is positively correlated with the content of MoS2 nanosheets. Self-healing induced by photothermal conversion can avoid the adverse effect on the undamaged region of the device causing by direct thermal initiation, which possesses significant potential in the in situ repairing of electronic devices.
 Fig. 16  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for smart hydrogel and wearable devices. (a) Schematic illustration of preparing a PVP-MoSe2 nanosheets/PNIPAM hydrogel. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the photothermal effects of an AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating under light irradiation. (c) Optical image of the AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating pasted on the hand. (d and e) IR thermal images of the hand with the pasted coating before (d) and after solar irradiating for 60 s (e). Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


3.3.9 Wearable heaters. 
Wearable heaters, newly emerging personal portable devices, are mainly applied to warmth maintaining and thermal therapy.317–319 Nowadays, MXene nanomaterials are photothermal fillers for wearable heaters due to their excellent photothermal conversion properties, high thermal conductivity and eminent fire resistance.320–323 Fan et al. constructed wearable composite coatings by using an AgNP@MXene hybrid as a photothermal filler.320 The photothermal effect of MXene nanosheets, the plasmonic effect of the AgNPs and the synergistic effect of the two materials make the coatings exhibit rapid and substantial temperature increase (Fig. 16b). The AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating could easily attach on the skin as a heating device (Fig. 16c). Upon exposure to sunlight for about 60 s, the temperature of the composite coating increased from 18.3 to 24.3 °C (Fig. 16d and e), which showed that the composite coating had good potential as a wearable heater for transforming sunlight into heat in practical applications. Furthermore, a dual-driven (solar and electric) wearable MXene based composite has been designed to realize more effective thermal management. In addition to the basic warmth maintenance, more intelligent and versatile wearable heaters have been developed by integrating electromagnetic interference shielding, thermal detecting and human health monitoring in recent years. Liu et al. constructed multifunctional wearable heater based MXene-decorated poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) textiles.323 The MXene/PET compound textiles not only maintained innate flexibility, comfort, and air-permeable performance, but also displayed a wide adjustable temperature range (40–174 °C), safe operating voltage (1.0–3.5 V), high electromagnetic interference shielding efficiency (42.1 dB in the X-band) and superb bacterial inhibition. The multifunctional MXene/PET-textile wearable heaters are highly desired to apply in human health management and protection.


3.3.10 Bacterial inhibition. 
Bacterial infection, as one of the greatest public health concerns, seriously threatens human health.324 The use of antibiotics as a traditional method of antimicrobial therapy has aroused widespread concern about drug resistance. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria like resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin resistant Enterococci (VRE) are usually tough or even impossible to eliminate with existing antibiotics.325,326 Therefore, it is urgently needed to develop new potential antibacterial materials and find advanced antibacterial strategies. In recent years, photothermal antibacterial therapy has attracted significant attention, which eliminates bacteria through a local photothermal effect without affecting normal tissue and avoiding drug-resistance caused by antibiotics. Various photothermal antibacterial agents based on GO,327–329 BP,330–333 MoS2,325 Ti3C2,326 and Nb2C (ref. 334) nanosheets have been designed and synthesized with relatively high antibacterial activity, excellent stability and limited cytotoxicity. Wu et al. developed a rapid and broad-spectrum photothermal antibacterial method with the photothermal effect of Ti3C2 MXene.326 Under 808 nm NIR irradiation, Ti3C2 MXene exhibited an effective antibacterial activity toward 15 bacterial species including methicillin-resistant MRSA and VRE. Ouyang et al. constructed a synergistic antibacterial platform based on Ag@BP nanohybrids for inhibiting MRSA growth (Fig. 17a).332 The bacterial growth was completely inhibited after treatment with Ag@BP nanohybrids under NIR light irradiation (Fig. 17b), suggesting their high antibacterial efficacy. The agar plate assay was employed to further detect the synergistic antibacterial activity of Ag@BP nanohybrids (Fig. 17c and d). There is no bacterial colony observed after the treatment with Ag@BP nanohybrids under NIR light irradiation, while other groups still had amounts of bacteria surviving. In addition, GO@iron oxide@CS,327 amino-functionalized GO,58 HA@dopamine@rGO329 and BP@poly(4-pyridonemethylstyrene)330 photothermal antibacterial agents have been prepared and showed effective antibacterial performance under light irradiation.
 Fig. 17  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for bacterial inhibition and wound healing. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of the Ag@BP nanohybrid and its application for the inhibition of bacteria. (b) The growth curves of MRSA bacteria after treatment with (1) a blank control, (2) NIR, (3) BP, (4) Ag@BP, (5) BP + NIR and (6) Ag@BP + NIR. (c and d) Quantitative analysis (c) and corresponding optical images (d) of MRSA bacterial colonies on agar plates after different treatments. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Optical images of E. coli infected skin wounds after different treatments. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.3.11 Wound healing. 
The wound healing process is a complicated process including renewing damaged tissues as well as recovering the structure and function. Avoiding wound infections and promoting wound healing are major challenges in wound care management.335 The warming of the wound, as an effective way, is beneficial for accelerating the local metabolism of the wound and improving wound healing by increasing the blood flow and oxygen tension, stimulating fibroblast proliferation and reducing inflammation.336 Photothermal conversion has been employed to heat the wound, which provides convenience and non-contact heating with high temporal and spatial accuracy. The photothermal effects of rGO,336 BP,337,338 MoS2 (ref. 339) and Nb2C (ref. 334) nanosheets under light irradiation effectively prevent bacterial infections and accelerate wound healing, indicating huge clinical potential for wound repair management. Huang et al. demonstrated that BP-based wound dressings could effectively promote wound healing via NIR light irradiation.337 The as-prepared BP@silk fibroin (SF) dressings accelerated wound healing and skin regeneration under NIR light irradiation. After being treated with BP@SF and NIR irradiation for 5 days, the wound tissues of mice were completely healed and regenerated with no erythema and edema compared with other groups (Fig. 17e). In addition, a rGO-based photothermal hydrogel film could adhere to the wound to promote wound healing and tissue regeneration by warming up the wound with its photothermal effects under solar light irradiation.336
With the rapid development of 2D PTAs, their photothermal conversions are applied in cutting-edge fields such as thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuation, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable devices, bacterial inhibition, wound healing and so on. Different from PTT and water evaporation, the research of 2D PTAs for these applications remains in the preliminary stage, and more systematic work needs to be further performed.
The photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials and their composites are summarized in Table S1,† in which the photothermal application, materials, light source and temperature are included.

4. Conclusions and prospects
2D nanomaterials have become mainstream PTAs in recent years thanks to their excellent photothermal conversion properties, ultrathin structure and high specific surface area. In this review, we summarize the progress in photothermal applications with a systematic review, including PTT, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, electrostatic lithography, catalysis, light-driven actuators, sensing, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, smart hydrogels, wearable heaters, bacterial inhibition and wound healing. In spite of these achievements, there are still several challenges needed to be overcome as well as many opportunities for researchers and engineers to explore. Here we would like to present several insights and perspectives into this developing research field:
4.1 Developing low-cost large-scale preparation methods of high-stability 2D PTAs
Although 2D nanomaterials have driven rapid development in PTT, energy storage, catalysis and sensing, the complex synthesis process, high production cost and low yield greatly limit their practical large-scale application. Strategies for the mass production of 2D nanomaterials are becoming increasingly important and urgent. Electrochemical exfoliation, pulsed-laser deposition and intermediate-assisted grinding exfoliation could achieve the mass production of 2D materials.340–342 In addition, the stability is also a key factor considered in the practical application of 2D PTAs. Taking 2D MXenes for example, they tend to be rapidly oxidized and degrade in air and/or water. For this class of materials, polymer coating could improve their stability to a certain extent.
4.2 Exploiting more PTAs with excellent photothermal properties in the NIR II window
Current photothermal research mainly pays attention to the NIR-I window, while the NIR-II window has been investigated less. Working in the NIR-II window is more favourable to practical PTT and other biological applications because of a larger penetration depth and higher maximum permissible exposure to a laser.343 The main reason for the slow progress of photothermal research in the NIR-II window is the lack of PTAs of small sizes exhibiting strong absorption and high photothermal conversion efficiency in the NIR-II window. Therefore, the development of more materials with excellent photothermal properties in the NIR-II window could enrich the research on the photothermal conversion in the entire NIR region.
4.3 Improving the utilization of heat energy in practical applications
Although the photothermal conversion efficiency of PTAs has obtained satisfactory results, the utilization of heat energy from photothermal conversion is relatively low due to a large heat loss to the surrounding environment. Currently, PTAs coupled with energy storage modules have provided a path to achieve more effective thermal management. Learning from the above strategy, a multi-module integration design concept could be used to reduce heat diffusion and improve heat utilization in the future.
4.4 Enriching the research on higher photothermal temperature
At present, photothermal applications are mainly concentrated in water-rich systems such as in vivo environments and seawater, where photothermal temperature produced is generally lower than 100 °C due to the low boiling point of water. Higher photothermal temperature needs to be further researched to meet the requirements in high-temperature scenarios such as inducing and catalyzing specific reactions. By breaking through the boiling point of water, higher photothermal temperature could be obtained in other media.
4.5 In-depth study of safety issues in practical applications
The safety of PTAs needs to be considered in practical applications especially in the biomedical field such as PTT, bacterial inhibition, wound healing and so on. Although some PTAs have showed no cytotoxicity in vitro, the results of in vivo tests may not be consistent with those of in vitro tests due to the complex biological environment. It is indispensable to take their long-term biosafety into account in vitro when materials are introduced into the body. The research on the long-term effects of PTAs on human health and the mechanisms of toxicity is still inadequate. Additionally, the biodistribution, excretion, and toxicity of nanomaterials after the completion of their functions in the body should also be considered. Therefore, the long-term effects of PTAs in vivo need further research such as toxicity, biodistribution, excretion, degradation and so on.
4.6 Expanding to more photothermal applications
Photothermal conversion usually involves light absorption, electric field generation, heat production and temperature rising. Therefore, photothermal applications can be extended to other systems correlated with light, electric field, heat or temperature beyond the above-listed. In addition, multidisciplinary integration tends to become significant to satisfy the increasing requirements of multifunctional devices. Hence, photothermal conversion can be used to combine with electrochemical, catalytic, electromagnetic, and sensing performance to achieve multifunctional all-in-one devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875266, 21622407) and the Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS201909).
References
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 9451–9469 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kong, Q. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Peng and Q. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2127–2157 RSC .
L. Cheng, X. Wang, F. Gong, T. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902333 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, X. Ma, Y. Chai, H. Ma, F. Tang, K. Hua, R. Chen, Z. Jin, X. Wang, J. Ji, X. Yang, R. Li, H. Lian and M. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 5425–5434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chai, X. Ma, X. Zang, X. Wang, N. Zhu, Z. Xie, J. Ji, X. Zhang and M. Xue, Carbon, 2020, 157, 140–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gong, L. Yan, R. Zhou, J. Xie, W. Wu and Z. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1873–1895 RSC .
G. H. Jeong, S. P. Sasikala, T. Yun, G. Y. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, M. Xue, J. Li, X. Ma, L. Chen, X. Zhang, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14718–14722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, X. Wang, H. Liu, X. Ma, W. Wang, J. Ji, J. Chen, R. Li and M. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9347–9354 CrossRef CAS .
V. Yadav, S. Roy, P. Singh, Z. Khan and A. Jaiswal, Small, 2019, 15, 1803706 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Guan, Y. Weng, M. Li, R. Liang, C. Sun, X. Qu and S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10367–10374 RSC .
M. Zhao, Q. Zhao, B. Li, H. Xue, H. Pang and C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15206–15225 RSC .
T. Hu, J. He, S. Zhang, X. Mei, W. Zhang, R. Liang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5760–5763 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Wei, M. Liu, Y. Bai, X. Wang, S. Shang, J. Chen and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2887–2891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Peng, Z. Huang, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6267–6295 RSC .
Q. W. Chen, X. H. Liu, J. X. Fan, S. Y. Peng, J. W. Wang, X. N. Wang, C. Zhang, C. J. Liu and X. Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909806 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qu, T. Xia, W. Zhou, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Shi, X. F. Yu and G. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2288–2346 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, D. Wang, T. Fan, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Tao, L. Liu, S. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4747–4755 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shi, J. Wei, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 579–588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Du, D. Wang, S. Yin, W. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Kraft, G. Chen and R. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604328 CrossRef .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .
N. Panwar, A. M. Soehartono, K. K. Chan, S. Zeng, G. Xu, J. Qu, P. Coquet, K. T. Yong and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9559–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mohammadpour and A. K. Majidzadeh, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 1852–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ares, J. J. Palacios, G. Abellan, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703771 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Q. Huang, H. Huang, L. Mao, M. Liu, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3574–3592 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Xue, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Liu and W. Rao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 409, 128160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, H. Zhang and M. Xue, Chin. J. Chem., 2021, 79, 388–405 Search PubMed .
X. Zang, X. Wang, J. Xia, Y. Chai, X. Ma, R. Li, J. Ji, H. Xu and M. Xue, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800531 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, X. Li, C. Pi, H. Song, B. Gao, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, FlatChem, 2020, 19, 100149 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, Y. Jiang, X. Wang, X. Wang, J. Ji and M. Xue, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1195–1201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhu, X. Cai, L. Qu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Trends Biotechnol., 2018, 36, 1145–1156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, Z. Gu and Y. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 800–816 RSC .
Y. Chen, L. Wang and J. Shi, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 292–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Pan and H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5890–5900 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and L. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15685–15708 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Wu, B. Sun, S. Liu and H. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603446 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xu, Z. Li, L. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000712 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS .
V.-D. Dao, N. H. Vu and S. Yun, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
G. Liu, J. Shen, Q. Liu, G. Liu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and W. Jin, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 548, 548–558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, X. Jia, Y. Ruan, C. Wang and X. Jiang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10180–10188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chai, H. Ma, X. Ma, X. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Wang, Q. Jiang, X. Wang, J. Ji and M. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10891–10897 RSC .
H. Peng, L. Zhang, M. Li, M. Liu, C. Wang, D. Wang and S. Fu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125410 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, R. Shi, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Wei, X. D. Wen, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800527 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Q. Wang, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, T. Ding, T. Li, S. Achavananthadith, S. Ahmet, J. S. Ho and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
M. He, Y. J. Lin, C. M. Chiu, W. Yang, B. Zhang, D. Yun, Y. Xie and Z. H. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, L. Liu, X. Jin, W. Wang, S. Zhang and B. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14319–14327 RSC .
W. Xu, W. Wang, S. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Yuwen, W. J. Yang and L. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 586, 601–612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, T. H. Chang, Z. Li, H. Yang, F. Fu, T. Li, J. S. Ho and P. Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901687 CrossRef .
L. Mei, C. Lin, F. Cao, D. Yang, X. Jia, S. Hu, X. Miao and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, D. Wang, G. Wang, F. Zhang and L. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 508, 214–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, J. Lao, B. Wang, X. Li, G. Li, J. Gao, Y. Wan, X. Sun, R. Guo and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20162–20167 RSC .
D. Chimene, D. L. Alge and A. K. Gaharwar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7261–7284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J. O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Velusamy, J. K. El-Demellawi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Giugni, S. Lopatin, M. N. Hedhili, A. E. Mansour, E. D. Fabrizio, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807658 CrossRef .
V. Rives and M. A. Angeles Ulibarri, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1999, 181, 61–120 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Z. Liu, L. Li, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3809–3813 RSC .
N. Choudhary, M. A. Islam, J. H. Kim, T. J. Ko, A. Schropp, L. Hurtado, D. Weitzman, L. Zhai and Y. Jung, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 16–40 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 23 CrossRef .
M. P. Browne, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 41–58 RSC .
Y. Han, Y. Ge, Y. Chao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 57–72 CrossRef .
Z. Gu, S. Zhu, L. Yan, F. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800662 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–38 CrossRef .
G. Liu, J. Xu and K. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 269–284 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, J. Ouyang, N. Y. Kim, J. Shi and X. Ji, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2417–2433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, J. H. Dou, S. Liu, X. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Pei and Z. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7919–7926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Y. Kim, S. Blake, D. De, J. Ouyang, J. Shi and N. Kong, Front. Pharmacol., 2019, 10, 1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou and S. Yang, Biomaterials, 2015, 42, 66–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, T. Liu, Z. Su, L. Shang and G. Wei, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 74–89 RSC .
Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. An, W. Choi, Y. Duo, Y. Ge, B. Zhang, G. Nie, N. Xie, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8065–8087 RSC .
P. T. Yin, S. Shah, M. Chhowalla and K. B. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2483–2531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, Y. L. Su, S. H. Hu and S. Y. Chen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 190–204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Leng, J. Huang, M. Shu and D. V. Papavassiliou, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Biomedical Engineering, 2020, 36, 3275 Search PubMed .
N. Losada-Garcia, I. Rodriguez-Oliva, M. Simovic, D. I. Bezbradica and J. M. Palomo, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 4362–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tong, X. Zhang, J. Fan, B. Li, B. Liu, M. Daniyal and W. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 935–946 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3318–3323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Cheon, J. H. Bae and B. G. Chung, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 2731–2736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Q. Yu, Y. M. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12200–12203 RSC .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
M. Yan, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Liu, H. Sun, C. Wang, D. Kong and G. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1876–1885 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Pan, Y. Chen, Z. Fan, H. Tian, S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Shang, B. Jiang, F. Wang, F. Luo and Z. Hou, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2019, 16, 1982–1998 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, H. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Liu and Y. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 96, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, J. Zhang, G. Gao, Z. Sheng, H. Cui and L. Cai, Theranostics, 2016, 6, 1043–1052 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L. Hong, H. Li and C. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 477–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, G. R. Williams, L. Fu, J. Wu, H. Wang, R. Liang, X. Weng and M. Wei, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000272 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shao, R. Zhang, J. Lu, C. Zhao, X. Deng and Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1226–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, R. Wu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9467–9480 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, H. Lin, G. Xu, Z. Liu, R. Wu and Y. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8637–8652 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 384–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, X. Liang, Q. Liu, M. Qu, Q. Zou, J. Li, H. Tan, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27631–27643 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zong, H. Wu, H. Lin and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4149–4168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, J. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701394 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tang, Z. Dong, R. Zhang, X. Yi, K. Yang, M. Jin, C. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 284–294 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Han, W. Yang, X. Gan, Y. Yang, K. Xie, L. Xie and Y. Deng, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 116, 111212 CrossRef CAS .
A. Szuplewska, D. Kulpinska, A. Dybko, A. M. Jastrzebska, T. Wojciechowski, A. Rozmyslowska, M. Chudy, I. Grabowska-Jadach, W. Ziemkowska, Z. Brzozka and A. Olszyna, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 98, 874–886 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16235–16247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, H. Ran, P. Li and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4491–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai, Y. Chen, X. Jing, L. Xiang, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Han and R. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12696–12712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703284 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Lin, M. Zhao, C. Dai, S. Zhang, W. Peng and Y. Chen, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 1648–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, L. Yan, J. Yu, G. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, J. Li and Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6922–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Shi, L. Feng, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, S. Shi, C. Liang, S. Shen, L. Cheng, C. Wang, X. Song, S. Goel, T. Barnhart, W. Cai and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 950–960 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Chen, X. Cai, H. Yao, W. Gao, Y. Zheng, X. An, J. Shi and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2775–2782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, K. Li, Y. Chen, H. Chen, M. Ma, J. Feng, Q. Zhao and J. Shi, Biomaterials, 2015, 39, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, W. Yin, X. Zheng, G. Tian, X. Zhang, T. Bao, X. Dong, Z. Wang, Z. Gu, X. Ma and Y. Zhao, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 931–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Kim and W. J. Kim, Small, 2016, 12, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Peng, D. W. Zheng, S. B. Wang, S. X. Cheng and X. Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13965–13975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhang, A. Li, W. Tian, Z. Li, C. Wei, Y. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Liu and J. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11346–11356 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Xiu, Y. Sun, D. Zhu, Q. Zhang, L. Yuwen, L. Weng, Z. Teng and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15835–15845 RSC .
Q. Han, X. Wang, X. Jia, S. Cai, W. Liang, Y. Qin, R. Yang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5927–5934 RSC .
X. Zhu, X. Ji, N. Kong, Y. Chen, M. Mahmoudi, X. Xu, L. Ding, W. Tao, T. Cai, Y. Li, T. Gan, A. Barrett, Z. Bharwani, H. Chen and O. C. Farokhzad, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2922–2938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, L. Tan, X. Ren, Q. Wu, H. Shao, J. Ren, Y. Zhao and X. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13989–13992 RSC .
B. Geng, H. Qin, F. Zheng, W. Shen, P. Li, K. Wu, X. Wang, X. Li, D. Pan and L. Shen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7209–7220 RSC .
R. Jin, J. Yang, P. Ding, C. Li, B. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. D. Zhao, Y. Cao and B. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 205102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, M. Chen, L. Dong, L. Cai, M. Zhao, Q. Wang and J. Li, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 194, 111162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, J. Liu, X. Gu, H. Gong, X. Shi, T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Wang, G. Liu, H. Xing, W. Bu, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1886–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, A. Zhao, K. Dong, W. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3216–3227 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Yong, L. Song, X. Dong, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao and Z. Hu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2776–2787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Zhao, H. Yang, C. Wu, F. Hu, H. Chang, G. Li, D. Ma, D. Zou and M. Huang, Acta Biomater., 2017, 58, 442–454 CrossRef .
N. Kong, L. Ding, X. Zeng, J. Wang, W. Li, S. Shi, S. T. Gan, X. Zhu, W. Tao and X. Ji, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 2331–2346 CAS .
M. Xie, M. Yang, X. Sun, N. Yang, T. Deng, Y. Li and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 2331–2342 RSC .
X. Qian, S. Shen, T. Liu, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6380–6387 RSC .
S. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Yang, D. Gao, C. Zeng and M. He, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 211 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Fu, Z. Li, J. Ye, Z. Li, F. Fu, S. L. Lin, C. A. Chang, H. Yang and J. Song, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 4997–5010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, Y. Chao, Z. Dong, G. Wang, X. Yi, G. Song, K. Yang, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700250 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, X. Ji, J. Liu, W. W. L. Tong, D. Askhatova and J. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703261 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Q. Xu, T. Ge, X. Zheng, L. Zhang and P. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3322–3328 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, M. Tang, H. Jiang, M. Li, S. Jiang, L. Sun and J. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125814 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Chen, B. Yu, Y. Shen and H. Cong, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 3870–3876 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mao, T. Bao, J. Yu, L. Zheng, J. Qin, W. Yin and M. Cao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2667–2682 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, T. Nie, X. Xia, T. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Wang and T. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901240 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, F. Zhang, Q. Wang, W. Guo, K. Wang, H. Lin and F. Qu, Biomaterials, 2019, 217, 119282 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, S. Shen, S. Shi, Y. Yi, X. Wang, G. Song, K. Yang, G. Liu, T. E. Barnhart, W. Cai and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2185–2197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Xu, X. Jiang, W. Zhang, Y. Peng, R. Zou, X. Huang, Q. Liu, Z. Qin and J. Hu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1934–1947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, Z. Li, Z. Sun, J. Shao, X. F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Wang, Q. Xiao, H. Wang, Q. Q. Wang, H. Zhang and P. K. Chu, Small, 2016, 12, 4136–4145 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Shao, Q. Luo, X. F. Yu, H. Xie, H. Fu, S. Tang, H. Wang, G. Han and P. K. Chu, Biomaterials, 2017, 133, 37–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Che, Z. Guo, M. Wu, W. Li, W. Xu and L. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4863–4870 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, D. Yang, P. Yang, J. Xu, F. He, S. Gai, C. Li, Y. Dai, G. Yang and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4724–4734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, H. Xie, H. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, Q. Xiao, X. F. Yu, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12967 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Ouyang, X. Yi, Y. Xu, C. Niu, W. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Sheng, L. Deng, Y. N. Liu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703458 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Tong, Z. Li, N. Yang, H. Fu, L. Wu, H. Cui, W. Zhou, J. Wang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7131–7139 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, G. Jing, X. Liang, M. Qiu, Z. Li, R. Cao, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8096–8101 RSC .
J. Shao, C. Ruan, H. Xie, Z. Li, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700848 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Yin, Y. Chen, S. Pan, H. Yao, Y. Gao and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705611 CrossRef .
W. Liu, A. Dong, B. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003033 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ou, J. H. Byeon, R. K. Thapa, S. K. Ku, C. S. Yong and J. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10061–10074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Jian, W. Wu and R. Lv, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 4940–4948 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, X. Xu, C. Xing, M. Wang, S. M. Bai, C. H. Lu and H. H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3142–3145 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Ouyang, H. Liu, M. Chen, K. Zeng, J. Sheng, Z. Liu, Y. Han, L. Wang, J. Li, L. Deng, Y. N. Liu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603864 CrossRef .
X. Yang, D. Wang, Y. Shi, J. Zou, Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, J. Shao, X. Xie and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12431–12440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Du, T. Liu, B. J. Cordova Wong, W. Wang, H. Ju and J. Lei, Biomaterials, 2019, 192, 179–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Wang, J. Zhu, L. Xue, C. Ou, W. Wang, M. Lu, X. Song and X. Dong, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3779–3785 RSC .
L. Hai, A. Zhang, X. Wu, H. Cheng, D. He, T. Wang, X. He and K. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 3, 563–575 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Zhang, F. Wu, T. Zheng, B. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. Shen, N. Zhou and Y. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123525 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, F. Peng, L. Qin, D. Yang, R. Li, S. Jiang, H. He and P. Zhang, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 180, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, M. Luo, G. Liu, X. Wang, W. Tao, Y. Lin, X. Ji, L. Nie and L. Mei, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800510 CrossRef .
B. Geng, W. Shen, P. Li, F. Fang, H. Qin, X. K. Li, D. Pan and L. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44949–44960 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, H.-I. Tsai, X. Zeng, J. Qi, M. Luo, X. Wang, L. Mei and W. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121917 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, M. Qian, H. Jiang, Y. Zhou, Y. Du, Y. Yang, T. Huo, R. Huang and Y. Wang, Biomaterials, 2020, 236, 119770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, F. Zhao, L. Shan, R. Li, S. Jiang and P. Zhang, Colloids Surf., B, 2021, 198, 111467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shi, Y. Huang, X. Chen, J. Weng and N. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14369–14375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Tang, Z. Guo, X. Wang, S. Mo, X. Huang, G. Liu and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Small, 2014, 10, 3139–3144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, X. Chen, J. Wei, Y. Huang, J. Weng and N. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5706–5713 RSC .
Y. W. Jiang, G. Gao, P. Hu, J. B. Liu, Y. Guo, X. Zhang, X. W. Yu, F. G. Wu and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 210–219 RSC .
X. Chen, X. Zhu, T. Xu, M. Xu, Y. Wen, Y. Liu, J. Liu and X. Qin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 112–122 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Li, X. Chen, T. Wang, L. Li, Z. Su and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803815 CrossRef .
L. Jin, J. Liu, Y. Tang, L. Cao, T. Zhang, Q. Yuan, Y. Wang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41648–41658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Zhang, H. Lin, M. Zhao, H. Yao, L. Zhang, W. Peng and Y. Chen, Biomaterials, 2018, 155, 54–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Cui, S. Yan, X. Jing, D. Wang and L. Meng, Mater. Today Commun., 2018, 16, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wu, G. R. Williams, S. Niu, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Fu, D. Li and L.-M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 4356–4366 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Guan, Y. Weng, S. M. Xu, H. Lu, X. Meng and S. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6267–6275 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Dang, J. Chang and C. Wu, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4086–4096 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lan, K. Ni and W. Lin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 379, 65–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pandey, N. Dhas, P. Deshmukh, C. Caro, P. Patil, M. Luisa García-Martín, B. Padya, A. Nikam, T. Mehta and S. Mutalik, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 409, 213212 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, C. Fang, X. Ma, X. Li, Y. J. Zeng and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20321–20330 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, K. L. Zhang, S. Chen, S. H. Li, L. L. Wang, L. P. Wang, R. Liu, J. Gao and H. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3629–3633 RSC .
L. Peng, X. Mei, J. He, J. Xu, W. Zhang, R. Liang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707389 CrossRef .
Y. Ruan, X. Jia, C. Wang, W. Zhen and X. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11729–11732 RSC .
X. Mei, J. Ma, X. Bai, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Liang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5630–5639 RSC .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song, Q. Xiong, S. Shi, Z. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, L. Mei and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xie, S. Chen, Y. Duo, Y. Zhu, T. Fan, Q. Zou, M. Qu, Z. Lin, J. Zhao, Y. Li, L. Liu, S. Bao, H. Chen, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22129–22140 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, C. Liu, X. Ji, J. Joseph, Z. Tang, J. Ouyang, Y. Xiao, N. Kong, N. Joshi, O. C. Farokhzad, W. Tao and T. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7155–7164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, H. Guo, R. Zhang, F. Wang, Z. Liu, M. Ge, L. Yu, H. Lin and Y. Chen, Biomaterials, 2020, 256, 120206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, X. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Su and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 4609–4619 RSC .
C. Feng, J. Ouyang, Z. Tang, N. Kong, Y. Liu, L. Fu, X. Ji, T. Xie, O. C. Farokhzad and W. Tao, Matter, 2020, 3, 127–144 CrossRef .
R. Hu, Z. Chen, C. Dai, X. Guo, W. Feng, Z. Liu, H. Lin, Y. Chen and R. Wu, Biomaterials, 2021, 269, 120455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fu, G. R. Williams, S. Niu, J. Wu, F. Gao, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Li and L. M. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 14739–14750 RSC .
J. Bai, X. D. Jia, Z. F. Ma, X. E. Jiang and X. P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5260–5267 RSC .
F. Pierini, P. Nakielski, O. Urbanek, S. Pawlowska, M. Lanzi, L. De Sio and T. A. Kowalewski, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 4147–4167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Sheng, Y. Wang and H. Xu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2217–2225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Ong'achwa Machuki, W. Pan, W. Cai, Z. Xi, F. Shen, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, F. Gao and M. Guan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4045–4060 CrossRef CAS .
H. Taheri, M. A. Unal, M. Sevim, C. Gurcan, O. Ekim, A. Ceylan, Z. Syrgiannis, K. C. Christoforidis, S. Bosi, O. Ozgenc, M. J. Gomez, M. Turktas Erken, C. Soydal, Z. Eroglu, C. V. Bitirim, U. Cagin, F. Ari, A. Ozen, O. Kucuk, L. G. Delogu, M. Prato, O. Metin and A. Yilmazer, Small, 2020, 16, 1904619 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ren, B. Li, Z. Peng, G. He, W. Zhang, G. Guan, X. Huang, Z. Xiao, L. Liao, Y. Pan, X. Yang, R. Zou and J. Hu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 4464–4467 RSC .
Z. Xie, D. Wang, T. Fan, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Tao, L. Liu, S. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4747–4755 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Li, L. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Hu, Z. Miao, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2436–2449 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, D. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, G. Yang, P. Yang and J. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 1147–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Bao, X. W. Hua, Y. H. Li, H. R. Jia and F. G. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1544–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, D. Chen, P. Zhao, Y. Wen, M. Fan, G. Zhou, Y. Wang and Q. He, Theranostics, 2020, 10, 1861–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, X. Wu, Z. Li, L. Jiang, W. S. Lo, G. Chen, Y. Gu and W. T. Wong, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003041 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guan, X. Wang, B. Li, W. Zhang, Z. Cui, X. Lu, R. Zou and J. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17902–17911 RSC .
S. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Luo, Z. Zhou, J. Xie, Y. Li, S. Cong, M. Zhou, Y. Xu and G. Ran, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 185–194 RSC .
J. Jin, M. Guo, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Li, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Z. Lai, Y. Fang, X. Zhen, C. Tan, X. Qi, D. Ding, P. Chen, H. Zhang and K. Pu, Small, 2017, 13, 1604139 CrossRef .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
J. Yao and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3869–3876 RSC .
B. Shao, X. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Liu, G. Owensa and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24703–24709 RSC .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 507–518 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, X. Peng, J. Xue, Y. Wei, Y. Suna and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11013–11024 RSC .
Z. Li, C. Wang, J. Su, S. Ling, W. Wang and M. An, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800206 CrossRef .
Y. Pang, J. Zhang, R. Ma, Z. Qu, E. Lee and T. Luo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 437–456 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Y. Duo, Z. Lin, T. Fan, C. Xing, L. Yu, R. Wang, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, A. Cao, Y. Du, Q. Yuan and C.-H. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1165–1171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, Z. Zheng and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2876–2886 RSC .
J. Xu, F. Xu, M. Qian, Z. Li, P. Sun, Z. Hong and F. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef .
K. Kim, S. Yu, C. An, S. W. Kim and J. H. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15602–15608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, C. Jia, E. M. Hitz, B. Yang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Han, Y. Xu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Qi, D. Liu and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21771–21779 RSC .
B. Hou, Z. Shi, D. Kong, Z. Chen, K. Yang, X. Ming and X. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 15, 100371 CrossRef .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
J. Fei, S. W. Koh, W. Tu, J. Ge, H. Rezaeyan, S. Hou, H. Duan, Y. C. Lam and H. Li, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, L. M. Peng, C. Y. Tang, J. H. Pu, X. J. Zha, K. Ke, R. Y. Bao, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 855–865 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Z. Fu, H. Yu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8065–8074 RSC .
B. Zhang, Q. Gu, C. Wang, Q. Gao, J. Guo, P. W. Wong, C. T. Liu and A. K. An, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 3762–3770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, G. Wang, X. Ming, T. Mei, J. Wang, J. Li, J. Qian and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24583–24589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, Z. Li, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Q. Guo, F. Jia, Y. Li and S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32673–32680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Mu, Q. Zhou and X. Hu, Water Res., 2020, 170, 115367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Yuan and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, D. Jiang, B. Huo, M. Ding, C. Huang, D. Jia, H. Li, C. Y. Liu and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 841–849 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, K. Yang, Y. S. Kim, J. C. Won, P. Kang, Y. H. Kim and B. G. Kim, Carbon, 2020, 164, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11665–11673 RSC .
J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Shi and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10789–10797 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. J. Zha, J. H. Pu, L. Bai, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10446–10455 RSC .
Z. C. Xiong, Y. J. Zhu, D. D. Qin and R. L. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32556–32565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, G. Yang, Z. Qiao, H. Bao, S. Zhang, X. Li and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35193–35200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, L. Ai, M. Chen and J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 10833–10841 CAS .
R. Xu, N. Wei, Z. Li, X. Song, Q. Li, K. Sun, E. Yang, L. Gong, Y. Sui, J. Tian, X. Wang, M. Zhao and H. Cui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 125–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ming, A. Guo, Q. Zhang, Z. Guo, F. Yu, B. Hou, Y. Wang, K. P. Homewood and X. Wang, Carbon, 2020, 167, 285–295 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, C. Du, Y. Jia, J. Yuan, G. Song, X. Zhou, S. Sun, C. Zhou, L. Zhao and S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124131 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, C. Yang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15303–15309 RSC .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 429–446 CrossRef .
X. Q. Wang, C. F. Tan, K. H. Chan, K. Xu, M. Hong, S. W. Kim and G. W. Ho, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10568–10574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, T. Ding, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900250 CrossRef .
G. Liu, T. Chen, J. Xu, G. Li and K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 513–531 RSC .
J. Lao, S. Wu, J. Gao, A. Dong, G. Li and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104481 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao, Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Wu, F. Xu, R. Wang and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25314–25323 RSC .
Y. Zhao and R. V. Davalos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 143702 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, L. Duan, M. Xue, W. Ni and T. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6699–6703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, D. Zhao, M. Xue, H. Wang and T. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5537–5540 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, H. Cheng, X. Ma, S. Wang, Z. Zhou, Y. Chai, R. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Wang, R. Li, N. Ma and M. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19022–19027 RSC .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Meng, T. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601657 CrossRef .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704663 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. Chen, X. Xiong, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1972–2010 RSC .
L. Song, T. Zhao, D. Yang, X. Wang, X. Hao, Y. Liu, S. Zhang and Z. Z. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 393, 122332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gan, X. Wu, M. Meng, X. Zhu, L. Yang and P. K. Chu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9304–9310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Zhang and P. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pei, J. Zhang, H. Tong, M. Ding, F. Shi, R. Wang, Y. Huo and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119575 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shi, D. Yuan, L. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Lu, L. Gao, X. San, S. Wang and G. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19467–19472 RSC .
Q. Yin, L. Tan, Q. Lang, X. Ke, L. Bai, K. Guo, R. Qiao and S. Bai, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 671–680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Li, C. Xu, P. Wang, M. Wang and Y. Jin, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 13173–13181 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Sui, N. Sui, L. Wang, M. Liu and W. W. Yu, Plasmonics, 2021, 16, 777–786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Jiang and M. Huang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002550 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Li, Z. Li, K. Feng, M. Cai, D. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Chu, C. Zhang, J. Shen, Z. Huang, Y. Xiao, G. A. Ozin, X. Zhang and L. He, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5696–5705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, K. Wang, T. Guo, J. Li, X. Wu and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119232 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Zhao, X. Duan, H. Zhang, S. Yang, P. Zhang, S. P. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Sun and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 283, 119660 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gu, C. Zhang, Y. Guo, J. Gao, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3710–3714 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hao, R. Wu, H. Yang and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12440–12445 RSC .
X. Luo, R. Li, K. P. Homewood, X. Chen and Y. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 505, 144099 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Jian, C. Wang, X. Liang, J. Niu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903048 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Hong, W. Sun, X. Liu and Z. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15633–15639 RSC .
W. T. Cao, W. Feng, Y. Y. Jiang, C. Ma, Z. F. Zhou, M. G. Ma, Y. Chen and F. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1057–1065 RSC .
G. Cai, J.-H. Ciou, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang and P. S. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, L. Yang, Q. Yan, Q. Ji, L. Chang, C. Zhang, J. Yan, R. Wang, L. Zhang, G. Wu, J. Sun, B. Zi, W. Chen and Y. Wu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5294–5306 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, W. C. Chan, D. R. Boulware, T. Akkin, E. K. Butler and J. C. Bischof, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4358–4361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Wen, W. Sheng, J. Wang, S. Wang and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 133, 223–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, B. Xu, X. Lu, L. Wang, Y. Li, N. Ma, H. Wei, X. Zhang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6763–6770 RSC .
H. Cheng, Q. Liu, S. Han, S. Zhang, X. Ouyang, X. Wang, Z. Duan, H. Wei, X. Zhang, N. Ma and M. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37637–37646 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zuo, Y. Gao, S. Qin, Z. Wang, D. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Yu, M. Shao and X. Zhang, Nanophotonics, 2019, 9, 123–131 Search PubMed .
E. Kim, T. Park, J. Na, B. Kim, Y. Kim and H. Shin, SPIE Newsroom, 2016 DOI:10.1117/2.1201604.006377 .
Y. Wang, L. Zhou, X. Luo, Y. Zhang, J. Sun, X. A. Ning and Y. Yuan, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 4071–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Tong, Q. Ye, H. Hu, X. Nie, C. Yan, W. Shang, C. Song, J. Wu, J. Wang, H. Bao, P. Tao and T. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1478 CrossRef .
L. Tang, X. Zhao, C. Feng, L. Bai, J. Yang, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110174 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, J. Qiu, S. Deng, Z. Du, X. Cheng and H. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5799–5806 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, J. Xie, Y. He, X. Lu, W. Li, J. Fang, S. Yan, L. Zhang, X. Sheng and Y. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, X. Nie, X. Li, P. Tao, B. Fu, Z. Wang, J. Xu, Q. Ye, J. Zhang, C. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20970–20978 RSC .
H. Huang, T. Shi, R. He, J. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, J. Qiu, S. Deng, Z. Du, X. Cheng and H. Wang, Renewable Energy, 2021, 164, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, W. Zhu, S. Xu, J. Ding, J. Wan and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20900–20908 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, D. Xu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15387–15392 RSC .
Y. Jiang, Y. Yang, X. Zheng, Y. Yi, X. Chen, Y. Li, D. Sun and L. Zhang, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 18 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yang, X. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Qiu, L. Yuwen and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 2266–2274 RSC .
Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Wang, H. Zhai, T. Wang, Q. Jin and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32925–32933 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, Y. Zhao and S. Song, Appl. Clay Sci., 2021, 200, 105886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Chen, J. Yu and L.-Q. Tao, Mater. Lett., 2021, 284, 128869 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, J. Liang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8124–8134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, J. Ma, W. Zhang, Z. Pan, Z. Ma, S. Kang and Q. Fan, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 6580–6588 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. An, E. J. Gwak, K. Kim, Y. C. Kim, J. Jang, J. Y. Kim and J. U. Park, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 471–478 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Jin, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cao and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12526–12537 RSC .
Z. Hao, X. Lin, J. Li, Y. Yin, X. Gao, S. Wang and Y. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 173, 112789 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cai, L. Wang, H. Hu, W. Bing, L. Tian and J. Zhao, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 085102 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, H. Zheng, W. Wang, Q. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Guo, B. Pu, X. Shi, J. Li, X. Chen and W. Hong, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 64, 748–758 CrossRef .
X. Jia, I. Ahmad, R. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2459–2467 RSC .
P. Kumar, P. Huo, R. Zhang and B. Liu, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, X. Zhao, T. Hu, B. Chen, Z. Yin, P. X. Ma and B. Guo, Small, 2019, 15, 1900046 CrossRef .
L. Tan, J. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, K. W. K. Yeung, H. Pan, Y. Zheng, X. Wang and S. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703197 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Yu, C. Yan, Y. Liu, S. Hong, H. Tao, A. W. Robertson, Z. Wang and A. A. H. Padua, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12543–12553 RSC .
J. Ouyang, R. Y. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Xu, K. Zeng, L. Deng, L. Shen and Y. N. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6302–6310 RSC .
A. Naskar and K. S. Kim, Microb. Pathog., 2019, 137, 103800 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Y. Luo, H. Lin, M. Ge, J. Shi and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1086–1099 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, S. Zhu, Z. Li, X. Yuan, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, P. K. Chu and S. Wu, Acta Biomater., 2018, 77, 352–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, H. Du, Z. Xie, M. Li, J. Zhu, J. Xu, L. Zhang, J. Tao and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3644–3651 RSC .
X. W. Huang, J. J. Wei, M. Y. Zhang, X. L. Zhang, X. F. Yin, C. H. Lu, J. B. Song, S. M. Bai and H. H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35495–35502 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, N. Abbasi, Y. Xiao and Z. Xie, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2001538 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Carrow, K. A. Singh, M. K. Jaiswal, A. Ramirez, G. Lokhande, A. T. Yeh, T. R. Sarkar, I. Singh and A. K. Gaharwar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 13329–13338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Hou, G. Zou, W. Shi, H. Shuai, J. Li and X. Ji, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16–33 RSC .
J. D. Yao, Z. Q. Zheng and G. W. Yang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 106, 100573 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Tan, Y. Pan, X. Cai, X. Zou, H. M. Cheng and B. Liu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 324–332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, J. H. Dou, N. J. Zhao, S. Zhang, Y. Q. Zheng, J. P. Zhang, J. Y. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 718–725 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04134gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Hui Ma	Hui Ma received her BS degree (2019) in Physical Chemistry from Shandong University. She is now a PhD student under the supervision of Prof Mianqi Xue at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. Her research focuses on the synthesis and application of two-dimensional nanomaterials.
Mianqi Xue	Mianqi Xue received his PhD degree in 2012 from the Renmin University of China. He then joined as a professor in the School of Advanced Materials, Peking University. During 2014–2018, he worked at the Institute of Physics, CAS. He is currently a professor at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of conducting polymers and organic superconductors.

 	Scheme 1  A scheme to illustrate the photothermal applications of 2D nanomaterials, including graphene, MXenes, TMDs, BP and Pd nanosheets and other types of 2D nanosheets, for PTT, water evaporation, thermochemical reactions, light-driven actuators, photothermal electrodes, energy storage, wearable heaters and bacterial inhibition.	 

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structure diagrams of (a) graphene, (b) BN, (c) LDHs and (d) MoO3. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The graphene-based composites for PTT. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of pRGO@MS(DOX)-HA nanocomposites and their application in chemo-PTT synergistic therapy. (b) Tumor growth curves of mice after various treatments. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of preparing MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites and their application in PTT combined with sonodynamic therapy. (d) IR thermal images of 4T1 tumor bearing nude mice with (top) or without (bottom) the injection of MnOx/TiO2-GR-PVP nanocomposites under 808 nm NIR irradiation with a power density of 2.0 W cm−2. (e) Relative viabilities of 4T1 cells in different experimental groups. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  MXenes for PTT and imaging-guided cancer therapy. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ti3C2 nanosheets and their application in PTT. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) IR thermal images of 4T1 tumor bearing nude mice with or without the intravenous injection of MnOx/Ta4C3-SP nanosheets under 808 nm laser irradiation at different time intervals. (c) Time-dependent tumor-growth curves of four groups after different treatments. (e) Survival rates of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice within the feeding duration after various treatments. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of TMD-based composites and their application in multimodal-imaging-navigated combined therapy. (a) MoS2-CS-DOX composites. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) TiS2-PEG nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) RBC-MoSe2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d) BSA-Bi2Te3/MB composites. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (e) WS2@PEI-siRNA composites. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  BP nanosheets for photothermal combined therapy. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the BP-PEI-siRNA complex and its application in synergistic PTT and GT of cancer cells. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Time-dependent temperature variation (b) and tumor-growth (c) curves of different treatments. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of constructing the BP@MTX-HA platform and its application in chemo-photothermal synergistic treatment. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Pd nanosheets for PTT combined with chemotherapy. Schematic illustration of DOX@Pd Gel (a) and UFO-like CD-PdNS/ZIF-8 JNPs (b) for synergistic chemo-PTT. Reproduced with permission.177,179 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Other 2D nanomaterials for PTT. Schematic illustration of a MoOx-based nanoplatform for synergistic chemo-photothermal therapy (a), a Ti nanosheet-based theranostic nanoplatform for dual-modal CT/PA imaging-guided PTT (b), a MLDH-based drug delivery system for NIRF/MR imaging and chemo, photothermal and photodynamic trimode combination therapy (c) and a PPy-based PTA for PTT in NIR II (d). Reproduced with permission.183,190,194,203 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in seawater desalination. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the wood-GO composite and setup for seawater desalination. (b and c) The surface temperatures (b) and cumulative mass changes (c) of the wood-GO and wood and saline water under solar illumination of 12 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) The temperature evolution during water evaporation in the floating dimpled MoS2 membrane. (e and f) The evaporation rate (e) and the concentration of four primary ions (f) for an actual seawater sample taken from Bohai Sea, Tianjin, China. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in wastewater purification. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the Janus membrane and its application in sewage purification. (b) Concentration changes of dyes before and after solar thermal purification with the Janus membrane. (c) The E. coli counts in different water samples under 1 sun solar irradiation. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (d–f) The concentration of H+ (d), OH− (e) and heavy metal ions (f) before (original) and after water purification. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the evaporation–condensation step of steam to form water with heat lost to the surrounding environment. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. The photothermal effect of 2D nanomaterials for electricity generation. (b) Voltage changes for 100 h under 25-sun irradiation (inset: schematic diagram of the designed device for simultaneous clean water and electricity generation). Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of simultaneous production of steam and electricity. (d) Open-circuit voltage change with light on–off cycle responses. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in a thermochemical reaction and electrostatic lithography. (a) Schematic illustration of the process for chemical reactions with heat induced by the photothermal conversion. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) IR thermal images of Ti3C2Tx@PEI films on a PDMS substrate. (c) Kelvin probe force microscopy image of the PMMA nanofilm after selective charge release with heat from the photothermal conversion of Ti3C2Tx@PEI nanosheets. (d and e) Optical images of the electrostatic printing pattern (d) and Cu deposition (e) on PMMA. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in photocatalysis. (a) Illustration of a series of CoFe-based catalysts formed by the hydrogen reduction of a CoFeAl-LDH nanosheet precursor at 300–700 °C. Reproduced with permission.277 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (b and c) Concentration changes of HCHO (b) and ΔCO2 (c) with different reaction times. (d) Mechanism of enhanced HCHO catalytic oxidation activity over the MnO2-G nanohybrid under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials in light-driven motions. (a) Programmable 3D architectures for light-driven robots. Scale bars, 1 cm. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. Representative photothermal-driven motions for the filter paper coated with PDMS@m/d-F. Clockwise (b) and anticlockwise (c) rotational motion. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for sensing and photothermal electrodes. (a) Preparation process of the BP-Au-Ab photothermal-sensing probe. (b) Structure and test procedures of a photothermal-sensing immunochromatographic sensor. Reproduced with permission.300 Copyright 2019 Elsevier. The photothermal application of 2D MoS2 for photothermal electrodes. (c) Schematic illustration of a photo-thermoelectric nanogenerator based on a MoS2/PU photothermal film. (d) Currents of the photo-thermoelectric nanogenerator under IR laser illumination with different power densities. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  The photothermal effect driven solar energy conversion and storage. (a) Schematic diagram for the mechanism of light-to-heat conversion and storage of PEG/Ti3C2Tx composites. (b and c) Absorbance spectra (b) and temperature evolution curves (c) of PEG and PEG composites. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a rGO-based composite for rapid roll-to-roll solar-thermal energy harvesting. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for smart hydrogel and wearable devices. (a) Schematic illustration of preparing a PVP-MoSe2 nanosheets/PNIPAM hydrogel. Reproduced with permission.313 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the photothermal effects of an AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating under light irradiation. (c) Optical image of the AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating pasted on the hand. (d and e) IR thermal images of the hand with the pasted coating before (d) and after solar irradiating for 60 s (e). Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  The photothermal application of 2D nanomaterials for bacterial inhibition and wound healing. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of the Ag@BP nanohybrid and its application for the inhibition of bacteria. (b) The growth curves of MRSA bacteria after treatment with (1) a blank control, (2) NIR, (3) BP, (4) Ag@BP, (5) BP + NIR and (6) Ag@BP + NIR. (c and d) Quantitative analysis (c) and corresponding optical images (d) of MRSA bacterial colonies on agar plates after different treatments. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Optical images of E. coli infected skin wounds after different treatments. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04134g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
