Graphene–organic hybrid electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00664K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00664K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4598-4613Graphene–organic hybrid electronics

        
          
            Chang-Hyun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Ioannis 
            Kymissis
          
          
        
      c
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea. E-mail: chang-hyun.kim@outlook.com
bResearch Institute for Solar and Sustainable Energies, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 61005, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
Received 
      13th February 2017
    , Accepted 27th April 2017First published on 28th April 2017AbstractBoth organic semiconductors and graphene now represent an established field of research with great technological potential. Recently, impressive progress has been made in our understanding of how to synergistically exploit their basic properties as unique functions in practical applications. It is therefore time to regard hybrid electronics from organic semiconductors and graphene as a distinct subject of research that may open up many new possibilities. This article reviews fundamental aspects and recent advances in emerging devices, and projects our perspectives on their future.
Chang-Hyun Kim
Chang-Hyun Kim is a Research Fellow with the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. His work focuses on the development of novel electronic devices based on organic semiconductors and hybrid nanoarchitectures. He received his PhD in physics from the Ecole Polytechnique, France, and conducted postdoctoral research at Columbia University, USA, and with the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). Dr Kim was a recipient of the Alliance Doctoral Mobility Award and Prix de thèse (PhD thesis award) of the Ecole Polytechnique.
Ioannis Kymissis
Ioannis Kymissis received the SB, MEng (joint with IBM Research), and PhD degrees from MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Following a postdoc at MIT's Laboratory for Organic Optics and Electronics and QDVision, he joined Columbia University's Department of Electrical Engineering as an Assistant Professor in 2006 working on the development and applications of thin film electronics. He has won a number of awards for his work including the IEEE EDS Paul Rappaport Award, the MIT/DOE Clean Energy Prize, the IEEE ComSoc award for Outstanding Paper on New Communications Topics, and the NSF CAREER award.
1 Introduction
Materials science has significantly contributed to the development of the current electronic era, in which the basic properties of newly synthesized materials drive the functionality of devices that hold the promise to improve our daily lives.1–5 Among the promising directions of research for next-generation systems are material hybridization and multi-scale integration, both of which offer strategy for unravelling the full potential of known materials, rather than simply searching for new ones.6–16 Another important reason for this trend is that any single material or physical dimension cannot easily satisfy the requirements for ever-advancing target applications that call for high performance, multi-functionality, energy efficiency, and environmental compatibility to address emerging technological challenges.17–21
In this context, simultaneous use of graphene and organic semiconductors in optoelectronic architectures provides versatility in designing particularly promising mixed-dimensional hybrid device building blocks. Graphene is known for its ultimate physical thinness, exceptional mechanical strength, very high charge-carrier mobility, and excellent optical transparency.22,23 However, its limited prossability, relatively low structural tunability, and absence of bandgap are considered to be some of the current technological bottlenecks.24 Interestingly, organic semiconductors are materials that inherently feature largely complementary traits to graphene; these π-conjugated molecules or polymers can be synthesized with tailored properties at the molecular level and are low-temperature solution-processable over a large area. These materials, however, offer only moderate carrier mobility and are susceptible to degradation and operational stresses, preventing application in certain fields.25–30 Therefore, combining these two material platforms in a single device structure is believed to offer a high probability for generating synergies from the existing strengths of each component. Furthermore, the chemical similarity of organic semiconductor and graphene (carbon sp2 networks) together with the dimensional complementarity are factors that may offer unique interface phenomena and associated device functionalities.
This article reviews the rising field of graphene–organic hybrid electronics (GOHE). The need to define GOHE as a new subject field arises from the fact that the major interest has clearly moved from simply using graphene as a transparent and flexible electrode in traditional organic devices to creating novel systems where both elements undertake active functions and their interface becomes a key component. Therefore, we attempt to put forward a balanced overview of possible architectures including both classical approaches and recently developed strategies. Our review differentiates itself from other recent reports discussing both organic semiconductors and graphene in that our focus is on the device-level, macroscopic manifestation of the physicochemical properties of the graphene/organic interfaces for building upon established understanding at the material level, and that our scope extends to several newly proposed systems that have not been previously reviewed. In this regard, readers may refer to related reviews on topics such as graphene electrodes in organic devices,31,32 interface between graphene and organic molecules,33 and chemical properties of graphene–organic composite materials.34
2 Graphene/organic interface
Understanding fundamental phenomena occurring at nanoscopic graphene/organic contacts is a prerequisite to the analysis and design of GOHE devices, as their particularities are practically manifested in larger-scale measurables (e.g. device currents, optical absorption or emission). For this reason, we start by giving an overview of basic concepts on the interfaces.
2.1 Structural aspects
The molecular nature and mechanical softness of organic solids underlines that the nanostructure and crystallinity in an organic film is significantly affected by the sequence of depositions in a multi-layer unit,39 and by the surface chemistry of the underlying substrate.40–42 In 2009, Wang and Hersam reported one of the earliest experimental investigations on the structural property of molecular semiconductors deposited on the surface of graphene.35 In this study, an archetypal semiconducting molecule perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) was vacuum-evaporated on graphene epitaxially grown on SiC(0001). By using molecular-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), they observed nearly defect-free growth of a large PTCDA monolayer of which the crystal structure well matches the lattice of the underlying graphene (Fig. 1a). This result was an indication that there is strong structural coupling between the two matters, and while initially put into the context of organic functionalization of graphene, it equally implied that graphene might be utilized to modulate the growth kinetics of functional organic films.
 Fig. 1  Structural understanding of graphene/organic semiconductor interfaces. (a) Molecular-resolution STM image of the PTCDA monolayer self-assembled on the epitaxial graphene substrate, overlaid with the herringbone unit cell structure. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited.35 (b) Illustration of the orientation of CuPc molecules vacuum-evaporated on bare glass (left) and graphene-modified glass (right) with the characteristic π–π stacking direction. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.36 (c) GIXD pattern for a CuPc film on graphene. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.37 (d) Epitaxial growth motif of pentacene molecules on graphene (φ is the intersecting angle). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.38 
Later, the ‘templating property’ of graphene started to receive growing attention. In 2012, Singha Roy et al. developed a study which systematically compared the films of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc), another widely used semiconductor, deposited on bare glass/Cu substrates and on graphene-modified counterparts.36 The insertion of a graphene sheet between the substrate and the organic layer dramatically changed the orientation of molecules; those deposited on glass were mainly standing up (so-called ‘edge-on’ motif), while evaporation on graphene resulted in lying-down molecules (‘face-on’ motif) (Fig. 1b). They drew this conclusion from the Bragg peaks in their X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. In addition, they showed the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of enlarged CuPc grains on graphene and the optical spectrum with stronger visible-range absorption. These data collectively addressed the strong potential of graphene as a highly conductive, ultra-transparent, and structurally active electrode that is capable of producing multiple benefits in organic electronics.
An accompanying advantage of using graphene as a bottom electrode is that the direction of efficient charge transport (π–π stacking direction43) can be made nearly normal to the substrate (Fig. 1b). It may in turn translate into an optimal scenario for diode-type devices (e.g. solar cells) where current flows in the ‘out-of-plane’ direction. This expectation was experimentally confirmed in a study by Mativetsky et al.37 and a study from our group44 in 2014. Both studies employed two-dimensional (2-D) grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) as a tool to visualize nanoscale crystal orientation. CuPc molecules deposited on graphene revealed high-qz features that stem from the small interlayer distance in crystallites that are face-on to the graphene (Fig. 1c). In contrast, films on glass or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxylthiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) were mostly composed of edge-on molecules. Direct electrical measurements were performed locally (by using conductive atomic force microscopy (AFM))37 or macroscopically (by fabricating full diode devices),44 similarly showing an enhanced out-of-plane hole conductivity in graphene-templated CuPc.
As the structure-inducing role of graphene discovers interesting properties, papers are being published dealing with materials, processes, and characterizations that may help us to explore related phenomena in more depth and breadth. Recently, pentacene (a classical high-mobility hole transporter) on graphene was thoroughly investigated by Nguyen et al.38 This group proposed a transfer technique to produce residue-free clean graphene surface on arbitrary substrates. The final structure of a film was dictated by the self-assembly of first-arriving molecules that formed a unit cell for further growth (Fig. 1d). In addition, graphene was demonstrated to be a ‘wettability-transparent’ template. The surface energy of SiO2 was modified by self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) or UV/ozone treatment before transferring graphene on it. Surprisingly, the hydrophobicity of SiO2 was not fully screened by graphene, and it effectively affected the wetting of pentacene in SiO2/graphene/pentacene structure. While the top surface of graphene still seems to play a dominant role in templating, this result highlighted the chemical tuning of the graphene's substrate as a possible new engineering approach.
2.2 Energetic aspects
The electronic structure of a given material refers to the energetic distribution of its electronic states that charge carriers can occupy.39 The relative position of these states (or levels) dictates the direction and degree of charge transfer at a junction between two materials, and therefore, it affects such physical processes as charge injection and depletion, doping, trapping, exciton dynamics, and associated chemical reactions that are central to the device operation.
We produced as Fig. 2 a graphical summary of the energy levels of technologically relevant organic semiconductors. This diagram includes some of the traditional, widely studied materials that constitute an important model system (e.g. pentacene, CuPc, C60) and other more recently proposed ones that show excellent performance in applications like solar cells and field-effect transistors (FETs).55,60–65 The highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of an organic semiconductor are equivalent to the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band of an inorganic semiconductor, and these are transport levels for holes and electrons, respectively. It is worth mentioning that reported positions of HOMO and LUMO of the same material seem to differ substantially in the literature, because the values may depend on the phase and structure of the sample, the type of experiment, the measurement environments, and even on how we define the energy bands or band edges.66–69 The data in Fig. 2 are representative for the selected systems and they are mostly from the direct measurement in a solid state, thus are relevant to the context of device application.
 Fig. 2  Energetic representation of organic semiconductors. Red and blue bars indicate the HOMO and LUMO levels, respectively, and the values written along show their energetic position with respect to the vacuum level. The chemical structure of a semiconductor is alternately placed above or below its name. CuPc: copper phthalocyanine, DNTT: dinaphtho[2,3-b:2′,3′-f]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene, TIPS-Pn: 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene, diF-TESADT: difluorinated 5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene, C8-BTBT: 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene, P3HT: poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl), PCDTBT: poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)], DPP2T-TT: poly(2,5-bis(alkyl)-1,4-dioxopyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-3,6-diyl-thiophene-2,5-diylthieno[2,3-b]thiophene-2,5-diyl-thiophene-2,5-diyl), F16-CuPc: copper hexadecafluorophthalocyanine, PTCDA: perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride, PCBM: [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PTCDI-C8: N,N′-dioctyl-perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide, P(NDI2OD-T2): poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene). Values taken from ref. 45–59. 
The classical notion of n-type or p-type for an inorganic semiconductor such as Si signifies the ‘material property’, and simply means whether the host material is doped with electron-donating or electron-accepting impurities. However, the same notion is used quite differently for organic semiconductors.70 Regardless of doping, we generally describe an organic semiconductor as n-(p-) type when it is known to transport electrons(holes) more effectively than holes(electrons). In other words, the type is a descriptor for the ‘transport property’ rather than an indication of doping level. We may expect to switch between n- and p-type by contacting the semiconductor with an electrode whose Fermi level is close to the LUMO or HOMO level of that material.71 In reality, most organics have only one of their frontier orbitals sufficiently approachable by the Fermi level of a metal, and even in the case of balanced injection, the material may intrinsically favor the transport of one carrier type over another (offering imbalanced mobilities). In addition, other extrinsic factors, such as charge traps at the interface with another medium, may prevent the observation of a specific type of transport.72
The first ten materials in Fig. 2 are broadly regarded as p-type, and the rest are known n-type semiconductors (some of the low-gap materials are inherently favorable to ambipolar conduction55). Graphene can visibly inject both electrons and holes into many organic semiconductors; its moderate work function (ca. 4.6 eV) is intermediate between that of a good hole injector (e.g. Au, Ag) and that of a good electron injector (e.g. Al, Ca), and its Fermi level well matches the HOMO of p-type semiconductors and the LUMO of n-type semiconductors. Therefore, graphene can be a reasonable alternative to conventional metal electrodes in organic electronics. Nonetheless, simplistic prediction of a charge-injection barrier from the energy levels of isolated materials may not fully reflect real situations where surface dipoles, Fermi-level pinning, or other interface phenomena may play a role.39,73 Consequently, such deviations are to be analyzed more directly at a junction with the targeted semiconductor to fully ascertain the feasibility of graphene contact.
Furthermore, energetic consideration leads us to assess the usefulness of graphene for purposes other than a charge-injection electrode. A small energy mismatch with respect to the transport orbitals of an organic semiconductor can be exploited to make graphene an electron donor or acceptor that facilitates the dissociation of excitons in optical devices,74 or controllable charge-trapping centers that enable the realization of electrical memories.75 Even when the graphene's Fermi level is located considerably far from the organic's transport levels, the formation of a blocking contact can become an essential ingredient for devices relying on a built-in potential and resulting current rectification.76
We additionally note that, as carbon-based conductors, organic metals such as tetrathiafulvalene-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TTF-TCNQ) or carbon nanotubes (CNTs) may provide a comparable work function and partly share the merits of graphene as a charge injection contact in organic devices.77,78 While these non 2-D materials are likely to offer greater tunability and processability, graphene seems to have advantages in terms of charge-transport properties and optical transparency.79–81
3 Device structures
As GOHE is receiving growing attention, we can now find in the literature a great variety of device architectures. Therefore, it is meaningful to classify them systematically. First of all, we can divide reported GOHE devices into two categories; (i) those where graphene serves as (an) electrode(s), and (ii) those that include an active layer made of a graphene–organic composite (or mixture) (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Device structures for GOHE. The first three structures from the left are organic semiconductor devices with graphene as an electrode. Graphene is used to replace a conventional metal or oxide-based conductor in these systems. The last structure represents composite devices where graphene and organic semiconductor co-exist within a channel, usually as a solid-state bulk mixture. 
The devices using graphene electrodes rely on the charge-injection or blocking properties of a generally macroscopic graphene sheet, when it is in contact with a semiconducting channel. This channel can consist of a single-component organic film, a multi-component film, or a stack of multiple organic layers. We mentioned here conventional organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) with graphene source/drain electrodes as lateral transistors to differentiate them from vertical FETs.82 Diodes are broadly identified as vertical two-terminal devices. Simple rectifying diodes, organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) all belong to this group. Vertical transistors can be regarded as a graphene bottom-contacted organic diode that is controlled by a distant gate electrode.
Composite devices can have vastly different structures depending on the type and number of organic materials put into the blend, chemical states of graphene, and their distribution and function in an organic matrix. For this type of devices, graphene is generally introduced as an ensemble of nanoscale flakes (or nanoribbons) rather than a film. Although Fig. 3 only illustrates a transistor structure for simplicity, we will describe both transistor and diode type devices using a composite-based active layer.
4 Recent progress
The early observation of electrical conductivity in bulk molecular crystals is considered as the advent of the concept of organic semiconductors, and this generally dates back to the 1960s.83 However, it was only in the mid to late 1980s that dramatic improvement was achieved in the performance of practical, thin-film based, application-oriented devices (OFETs,84 OPVs,85 and OLEDs86), and this gave birth to the vibrant field of organic electronics. Graphene was first isolated in 2004 through mechanical exfoliation,87 and its exceptional promise as an electronic material has ignited tremendous research efforts on the properties, processes, and applications of this atomically thin material. Large-scale synthesis of high-quality graphene and its controlled transfer was reported in the late 2000s,88 and it is among major milestones that substantially increased the viability of graphene technology. First GOHE devices were also reported in this period, and therefore the field has experienced an impressively rapid development over less than a decade.
In this section, we overview the progress of GOHE. The historical development of representative devices will be summarized in reference to selected key papers, and their design principles and distinguishable features will be succinctly explained. In addition, we will showcase several recent studies reflecting up-to-date scientific and technological advances, and discuss their impacts.
4.1 Lateral transistors
OFETs are basic building blocks in organic electronics that can act as, for instance, a switching device, a signal amplifier, a sensor, and they can construct diverse conventional transistor circuits such as a display pixel driver or digital logic gates.92 As an unintentionally doped organic channel is generally depleted, the current flow in an OFET is strongly dependent on the efficiency of external carrier injection, which is the characteristic that makes many devices contact-dominated.93
Some early devices included graphene as an interlayer between metallic source/drain electrodes and an organic channel, as a way of engineering charge-injection characteristics. The underlying metal electrodes were required to enable area-selective formation of graphene (thus, securing a lateral gap necessary to open a channel), or to guarantee an advantage over pristine metal electrodes. In 2008, Di et al. showed that pre-patterned Ag or Cu bottom-contact electrodes can serve as a catalytic substrate onto which graphene grows selectively.94 The graphene coating was carried out by vapor deposition, and with ethanol as a carbon source, a Si/SiO2 substrate with Ag or Cu source/drain electrodes was heated at temperatures up to 700–800 °C. OFETs were completed by pentacene deposition, and they observed an improvement by a factor of 11 or 9 in field-effect mobility by capping Ag or Cu contacts with graphene. Lee et al., in a study published in 2009, employed a solution-based approach to chemical assembly of reduced graphene oxides (GO) on Au electrodes.95 The graphene-coated Au contacts performed better than regular Au contacts for pentacene transistors, evidenced by a mobility improvement by a factor of 3.
The combination of new growth, patterning, and transfer processes enabled the fabrication of high-performance graphene-contact OFETs without metallic support in their final structure. Large-area synthesis of graphene by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and its direct patterning by photolithography was a major step toward scalable, industry-compatible technology, and in 2010, Liu et al. used these techniques to create novel OFET devices.96 Highly uniform, low-defect, few-layer graphene was synthesized on a Ni-coated two-inch Si wafer by CVD. Graphene was attached to a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp and transferred to a glass/indium tin oxide (ITO)/Al2O3 substrate, and then lithographically patterned to become stand-alone source/drain contacts. CuPc nanoribbons were deposited as the final step, and the fabricated OFET devices showed promising p-type performance. The majority of component materials were optically transparent, suggesting the possibility of integrating their devices into transparent electronic circuitries.
Along with their successful demonstration of mechanically flexible OFETs on plastic,97 Lee et al. reported in 2011 an intriguing study that couples structural and energetic aspects of graphene/organic interfaces.98 These authors synthesized monolayer graphene on Cu foil by CVD, which was then covered by a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) film to be transferred to a Si/SiO2 substrate. It was found that, even after patterning and lift-off, a non-negligible amount of PMMA were left, and a thermal annealing at 500 °C was required to remove these polymer residues and to get a clean top surface of graphene. Somewhat counterintuitively, pentacene transistors with untreated (residue-adsorbed) graphene source/drain showed better performance than those with clean graphene. As we reviewed in Section 2, evaporated small molecules tend to quasi-epitaxially grow on graphene, which is beneficial for vertical currents (relevant to diodes). The polymer residues restricted graphene–pentacene interaction, making standing-up molecules to form the major fraction of the channel, which is known to facilitate lateral transport (relevant to OFETs). Despite the insulating nature of PMMA and the slight work-function decrease, the hole injection into pentacene was not seriously hampered, presumably due to the fact that carrier injection from the side edge is the main contribution in coplanar OFETs,99 and enhanced mobility can, to a great extent, compensate the carrier depletion at large-barrier contacts.100
From this period, a growing number of publications dealt with advanced patterning,101 surface modification,102 and chemical synthesis103 of graphene for its tailored use in OFET applications. However, still p-type FETs were predominantly fabricated, and comparable n-type devices necessary for complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuits were lacking. In 2014, Jeong et al. suggested a meaningful solution to this problem (Fig. 4a–c).89 As shown in Fig. 4a, selected region on SiO2 was passivated by SAMs of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APS) before putting graphene source/drain above. The electron-withdrawing character of exposed NH2 groups rendered the opposite side of graphene geometrically n-doped, decreasing its work function to 3.87 eV that favors electron injection (Fig. 4b). Furthermore, they built p- and n-type transistors on one substrate by etching APS locally to prepare selective hole or electron contacts in desired areas. This technique led them to realize transistors with balanced performances (Fig. 4c). A hole mobility of 0.44 cm2 V−1 s−1 in pentacene and an electron mobility of 0.40 cm2 V−1 s−1 in PTCDI-C13 were measured, and a CMOS inverter was demonstrated by connecting these OFETs.
 Fig. 4  State-of-the-art GOHE: lateral transistors. (a) OFET comprising chemically modified graphene source/drain electrodes and an n-type organic channel. (b) Energy diagram showing efficient electron injection into the semiconductor via APS doping. (c) Electrical performance evidencing balanced p- and n-type behaviors. (a–c) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.89 (d) Structure of the OFET with all-graphene electrodes and an hBN dielectric layer. (e) AFM image of the stacked layers. (d and e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.90 (f) Optical microscope image of screen-printed graphene gate(G)/source(S)/drain(D) electrodes on glassine paper. (g) Photograph of a printed organic transistor array. (f and g) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.91 
Depositing and patterning other layers on a soft organic film can easily damage it, and this might be a major reason that most reports chose the bottom-gate bottom-contact structure where the channel is formed lastly.93 Also in 2014, Kang et al. developed an interesting method to safely process multiple 2-D materials on an organic crystal (Fig. 4d and e).90 CVD-grown single-layer graphene (CVD-SLG) was softly deposited on a bulk rubrene crystal using dry PDMS transfer. Then, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) dielectric and few-layer graphene (FLG) gate were carefully placed above to cover the channel by micromanipulation of PDMS stamping (Fig. 4e). Because of very large capacitive coupling through ultra-thin hBN, low-voltage top-gate operation of OFET was successfully demonstrated, and this study highlighted a new paradigm of hybridization with other layered nanomaterials.
In 2015, Hyun et al. developed fully printed graphene-contact transistors on paper (Fig. 4f and g).91 The in-plane gating structure was constructed by screen-printing a graphene ink on an untreated glassine paper through a stencil mask (Fig. 4f). These electrodes were photonically sintered by a high-intensity pulsed xenon lamp to minimize substrate damage. Aerosol jet printing of P3HT channel and inkjet printing of ion-gel dielectric completed low-voltage electrolyte-gated p-type OFETs (Fig. 4g). The devices were exceptionally resistant to mechanical deformation, largely maintaining their initial performance even after 100 cycles of folding. This demonstration was a compelling evidence that GOHE devices can be a promising candidate for unconventional, human- and eco-friendly electronics.104
4.2 Diodes
The simplest version of an organic diode is created by sandwiching a single organic semiconductor layer between two electrodes (anode and cathode). When using dissimilar contact materials, energetic asymmetry is introduced, and the current flow in one direction becomes stronger than that in the opposite direction. Although some early demonstrations showed great potential,107 organic rectifying diodes (ORDs) have not been a mainstream topic, and there are very few reports on ORDs with a graphene contact. In 2012, Berke et al. studied current transport across the pentacene/graphene interface for diode applications.108 They compared pentacene diodes with Au top contact and three different bottom contacts; CVD-grown graphene, highly-ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), and Cu. By physical analysis, dominant transport mechanisms were identified for each device and voltage regime. Rectification in the Au/pentacene/graphene device was moderate, because both contacts are good hole injector and their built-in potential is small. As briefly mentioned above (see Section 2.1), our group established structure-performance relation of CuPc in diode architecture. In this study published in 2014, we fabricated CuPc diodes on graphene or ITO/PEDOT:PSS anode with Al top cathode.44 The templated growth and vertical π–π interaction gave rise to decrease in reverse current and increase in forward current in the graphene/CuPc/Al device, achieving a rectification ratio of the order of 100. ORDs provide a model system that forms the basis of OLEDs or OPVs. With minimum complexity in the active layer, both interface injection and bulk transport physics can be accessed at reduced carrier concentration.73 We have witnessed renewed interests in theory and application of ORDs,109–111 which may stimulate their further exploration in the context of GOHE.
OLEDs represent an example of successful commercialization of organic semiconductors, and they are found in today's smart-phone or TV screens. Sheet-type solid-state lighting device that replaces other bulky indoor lamps is another target of OLED technology.112 OPVs position themselves as an attractive energy source with large-area, flexible form factors, making them ideally suited for environment- or infrastructure-embedded photon harvester and wearable wireless electric supply.74,113 Both are actively-researched, practical diode-based devices, and integrating graphene into them is expected to eventually decline our reliance on standard ITO electrode.81
One early demonstration in OPVs was published by Wu et al. in 2008.114 They deposited a graphene anode by reducing functionalized graphene spin-coated on quartz substrates. The surface of thin graphene films (<10 nm) was optically transparent and morphologically smooth, promising for an OPV contact. Operating OPV devices were constructed with the structure of graphene/CuPc/C60/bathocuproine(BCP)/Ag. The power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of the graphene-anode cell was 0.4%, lower than that of the ITO reference device (PCE of 0.84%). Later, growing interests were captured in the design of OPVs or OLEDs using solution-processed or CVD-grown graphene and with different stack and interface architectures.115–117 They showed still moderate performance, but the implication of these early studies was significant when considering the potential impact of ITO replacement in terms of sustainability and cost.
In our work reported in 2011, the behavior of graphene top cathode in an OPV was examined.118 As we mentioned in Section 4.1, on-organic deposition of graphene can be challenging and reliable transfer technique is required. Furthermore, graphene's work function is substantially higher than that of conventional cathode metals, questioning its suitability as an electron-collecting electrode. We completed the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuPc/C60/1,3,5-tri(phenyl-2-benzimidazole)-benzene(TPBi)/graphene, by laminating monolayer CVD graphene from a PDMS stamp. While fill factor and PCE was lower than that of the Al-cathode control sample, the surprise was that nearly identical open-circuit voltage (Voc) was measured despite expected degradation in built-in potential. The contact doping at the TPBi/graphene interface was suggested as a possible origin of stable Voc, and we additionally demonstrated that cathode-side illumination produces much larger PCE, emphasizing the ability to accept photons from both electrodes as a key feature of our device.
Limited performance of graphene-contact OLEDs or OPVs reported until this time was mainly due to the series resistance problem, which is in turn attributed to the moderate in-plane conductivity or large charge injection barrier. A promising approach to solve this issue was proposed by Han et al. in 2012.119 By utilizing multilayer graphene as a bottom anode of OLEDs, they achieved very high luminous efficiencies (37.2 lm W−1 in fluorescent devices, 102.7 lm W−1 in phosphorescent devices) that largely outperform ITO-based ones. These authors employed two methods; p-doping of graphene and insertion of a novel hole-injection layer (HIL). Graphene was first doped with HNO3 or AuCl3 lowering its sheet resistance down to 30 Ω sq−1. A conducting-polymer based self-organized gradient HIL (GraHIL) was deposited on graphene, resulting in vertically changing work function with an exceptionally high value of 5.95 eV at the top surface of GraHIL. Note that this can eliminate a hole-injection barrier into most hole-transporting organic semiconductors (see Section 2.2). The benefits from these techniques enabled balanced charge injection and bright electroluminescence, and various structures including an efficient flexible white OLED for lighting application were successfully demonstrated.
Enhancing luminous efficiency or PCE still constitutes the major research direction, and the key strategy has been advanced interface engineering.120,121 Other recent trends seen in the literature concern special applications and smart manufacturing. In 2015, Liu et al. reported semitransparent neutral-color OPVs with both electrodes made of graphene (Fig. 5a and b).105 Although visual impression of a solar cell may not be an important factor in general deployment, these authors envisioned power-generating windows or building-integrated PVs as target applications where colorless appearance and visual imperceptibility of devices might be appreciated. To ensure maximum transparency, they restricted the number of graphene layers to two for each electrode, and buffer materials were introduced to compensate conductivity and improve charge selectivity. As shown in Fig. 5a, modifying the graphene cathode with both PEDOT:PSS and ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) gave the best result. The optimized inverted cell included a solution-processed polymer:fullerene bulk heterojunction active layer, and no serious distortion was noticed when an object was seen through the whole PV stacks (Fig. 5b). Furthermore, OPVs performed well under illumination from either side, showing balanced PCE up to 3.4% (Fig. 5a). Jia et al. proposed in 2016 a relatively simple approach to optimize the characteristics of graphene for its use as an OLED anode (Fig. 5c–e).106 They addressed the problem of long-term stability in other known chemical doping, and suggested graphene oxide/graphene (GO/G) vertical heterostructure as an alternative. Multi-color, flexible OLEDs were fabricated on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) using GO/G (Fig. 5c). Three layers of CVD graphene were independently transferred and stacked on a substrate, and their controlled exposure to ozone selectively oxidized the topmost layer (Fig. 5d). Quite impressively, this surface oxidation did not degrade conductivity of pristine three-layer graphene, while simultaneous improving optical transmittance, surface work function, and wetting of MoO3 HIL (Fig. 5e). The superior performance of GO/G-based OLEDs as compared to pristine graphene or ITO based ones highlighted that this method is a promising technique to prepare highly stable and efficient hole-injecting or collecting contacts. As a related phenomenon, first-principle studies by Tang et al. showed that surface properties of GO can be further manipulated by adsorbing materials such as NH3 or Ag NPs, giving implications for fabricating OLEDs with functionalized GO/G contact.122,123
 Fig. 5  State-of-the-art GOHE: diodes. (a) Performance of all-graphene electrode OPVs under AM 1.5 illumination. Different cathode buffer structures are shown by line colors. Solid and dashed lines indicate illumination from the anode and the cathode, respectively. (b) Photograph of a semitransparent OPV that shows a neutral color. (a and b) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.105 (c) Light emission from a flexible OLED with graphene oxide/graphene heterostructure anode. (d) Illustration of the heterostructure electrode. (e) Structure of the OLED. (c–e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.106 
4.3 Vertical transistors
Vertical graphene-organic field-effect transistor (VGOFET) is a new member of GOHE, and its general structure is given in Fig. 3. Graphene's unique band structure as a zero-gap semiconductor dictates substantial electric-field tuning of its work function, a phenomenon that is associated with the reduced density of states near the Dirac point.126 As an equally important characteristic, organic semiconductors' very low thermal carrier density makes the current flow in a device highly injection-limited.93 When considering these fundamental traits, VGOFETs, which rely on the remote tuning of charge-injection from graphene to semiconductor, can be a particularly interesting platform.
The concept of barristor (from barrier-variable transistor) was suggested by Yang et al. in 2012.127 They demonstrated extremely large modulation of the electrical current in a graphene/Si Schottky diode by vertically applying an external gate voltage (VG). The current on/off ratio of 105 was achieved, highlighting the new device as a promising alternative to pristine graphene-channel (lateral) FETs whose switching performance is low. Soon after, similar structures with an organic channel started to receive considerable attention. Such devices might be regarded as an organic version of barristors. Nonetheless, it is meaningful to discuss them in the broader context of organic vertical transistors, which represent an emerging topic.128 Therefore, we will use the name VGOFETs to identify these devices.
Also in 2012, the first VGOFET was published by Lemaitre et al.129 They made p-type transistors as a stack of Si/SiO2/benzocyclobutene(BCB)/graphene/DNTT/Au. An improved transfer technique that inserts a Au protection layer between PMMA and graphene was employed, and this enabled fabrication of residue- and wrinkle-free graphene with systematically introduced micropores. Note that porously patterned electrodes have proved beneficial in previous metal-contact based vertical transistors.130 The best performance was recorded at an elevated pore density (20% of the graphene area), and the optimized VGOFET reached an on/off ratio over 106 and an on-state drain current density (JD) of ∼1200 mA cm−2. This pioneering piece of work underlined great potential of this new generation of organic devices. Primary challenges remained on the reduction of operating voltages that were up to −10 V for drain voltage (VD) and −40 V for VG. Pentacene p-type VGOFETs were reported shortly after (in 2013) by Ojeda-Aristizabal et al., and these devices had similar geometrical dimensions and voltage ranges.131
The graphene/organic/metal sub-structure in a VGOFET is basically equivalent to an ORD. This implies that forming a ‘blocking’ contact at the graphene/organic junction is desirable to minimize the saturation (or leakage) current of the diode and to maximize the room for the current modulation by VG.73 In 2014, our group published the first n-type VGOFETs (Fig. 6a and b).12 Within the graphene/C60/Al diode (Fig. 6a), graphene becomes a stronger electron-blocking (depleting) contact to the channel than Al, generating a sufficient equilibrium built-in potential to make the VG effect pronounced. Combining a narrow channel (140 nm thick C60) and a large capacitance (20 nm thick Al2O3), our VGOFETs exhibited drain current (ID) switching ratio exceeding 104 within an extremely low VG and VD range (Fig. 6b). In addition, we proposed detailed physical analysis of temperature-dependent ID that extracted barrier modulation as high as 300 meV, and presented the first CMOS VGOFET inverter integrating pentacene and C60 devices.
 Fig. 6  State-of-the-art GOHE: vertical transistors. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a VGOFET based on graphene/C60 heterostructure. (b) Transfer characteristics of this device at room temperature. (a and b) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.12 (c) Impedance spectra measured between source and drain of a C60 VGOFET at different VG. (d) Photograph of a flexible VGOFET on a polyimide film. (c and d) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.124 (e) Concept of underside doping for VGOFETs. (f) Performance of a complementary inverter that comprises PTCDI-C8 and pentacene devices with optimized graphene contact. (e and f) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.125 
From this time, we have seen rapidly growing interests in VGOFETs, and many well-performing p- and n-type transistors with various materials and structures have been developed.132–135 As a very recent discovery, scientific and technological capacity of VGOFETs has yet to be fully explored, and researches on diverse new characteristics are under way. In 2015, Shih et al. reported an article that shows particularly meaningful theoretical and technological advancement of VGOFETs (Fig. 6c and d).124 By using gated impedance spectroscopy, they measured frequency response of the source-to-drain diode in a C60 VGOFET at varying VG (Fig. 6c). The organic channel underwent abrupt conductivity enhancement around the charge-neutrality point (VCNP) of graphene, and partially screened field effect and selective charge injection was proposed as the origin of such dramatic insulator–conductor transition. These authors also fabricated highly flexible VGOFETs on a thin (∼10 μm) polyimide substrate (Fig. 6d) and simulated area-optimized driving of an OLED pixel, which is an important practical application of VGOFETs. In 2016, Kim et al. focused on advanced chemical tuning of graphene for optimum VGOFET performance (Fig. 6e and f).125 CVD graphene attached to a PMMA layer was floated on the surface of an aqueous solution that contained dopant molecules, and this process caused ‘underside’ doping of graphene that is then transferred onto the SiO2 substrate of an VGOFET (Fig. 6e). Bis-(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)amine (TFSA) and poly(ethylene imine) (PEI) were used as p- and n-type dopants, respectively. By systematically inducing tailored interface energetics through doping, the authors achieved enhanced tunability of the transistor performance. Interestingly, the underside doping also substantially affected the growth of molecular semiconductor crystals on graphene. They finally demonstrated a complementary inverter by connecting a pentacene p-type device with PEI-doped graphene and a PTCDI-C8 n-type device with pristine graphene, the choice that assured optimized voltage transfer curves (Fig. 6f).
4.4 Composite devices
The majority of composite-channel devices have been constructed from solution-phase deposition. A blend solution containing dispersion of both graphene and organic semiconductor can be processed in one deposition step, or sequential deposition of two individual materials was also shown to form a tightly mixed phase through nanoscale self-assembly. From a material point of view, organic semiconductors can be used as an additive in a graphitic solution to enable liquid-phase exfoliation and dispersion, thus increasing processability of graphene.138 In an electronic device, an active layer made of graphene–organic semiconductor mixture has shown a variety of interesting properties that complement any functional weakness of one material or deliver unique characteristics arising from direct interaction between the two components.
An early report by Liu et al. published in 2008 showed the promise of solution-processable graphene–organic composite materials with tunable optoelectronic characteristics.139 This group observed that the energetics between poly(3-octylthiophene) (P3OT) and graphene may facilitate exciton dissociation and charge transfer, and utilized graphene as an electron acceptor alternative to widely used fullerene derivatives. Solution-processable functionalized graphene (SPFGraphene) was synthesized by reaction from GO and phenyl isocyanate. This process rendered the material soluble in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB) to prepare a mixed solution of P3OT and SPFGraphene. The composite solution was spin coated on a substrate and thermally annealed at different time and temperature conditions. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra from a composite film was significantly weaker than that from a pristine P3OT film, evidencing exciton quenching promoted by graphene. The OPV structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3OT:graphene/LiF/Al was fabricated, and the best film showed a PCE of 1.4%. Such performance was much higher than that of the P3OT-only diode, and the solar cell performance was largely dependent on the annealing conditions, meaning that optimized activation and solidification of the material is crucial. They also reported OPVs based on the co-deposited P3HT:graphene photoactive layer in 2009.140 Similar conclusions were drawn from a series of experiments, and the maximum PCE of 1.1% was obtained. These studies indicated that the concept of bulk heterojunction, originally developed for a blend of two organic semiconductors,74 can be extended to organic–graphene hybrid. More importantly, these devices provided general inspiration for the design of advanced composite devices with tailored structure and functionalities.
In 2010, Wang et al. elucidated interesting structural interplay between graphene and PTCDI-C8 (named PDI in this paper), and investigated its use in OPV applications.141 The authors found that graphene can serve the dual role of atomic template and structural scaffold for the fabrication of hybrid PDI-G wires. They synthesized the composite through hydrothermal treatment of GO and PDI in solution. The choice of a structural template (graphene, single-walled CNT, or fullerene) greatly affected PDI growth factors, showing that the role of host (template) and guest (adsorbate) can interchange to determine the final geometric form. In an OPV having the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PDI-G/LiF/Al, the PDI-G wires performed better than pure PDI or PDI-G mixture, giving a PCE of 1.04%. We infer that highly inter-penetrating network between P3HT and PDI created by graphene-mediated self-assembly drove the performance enhancement, while graphene might have also energetically facilitated interfacial exciton dissociation to some degree. In this regard, this study demonstrated that merged structural and electrical function of graphene can realize versatile synergies in hybrid platforms.
The charge transport mechanism of a graphene–P3HT film prepared by sequential deposition was characterized in OFET architecture, as reported by Liscio et al. in 2011.142 These authors systematically controlled the coverage of spin-coated reduced GO on a Si/SiO2 substrate by changing its concentration in an aqueous dispersion. A solution of P3HT was then spin coated on top of the partially connected graphene islands to fill the empty spaces and to make a transistor channel between Ni source and drain electrodes physically continuous. Note that although graphene mostly exists at the bottom of the P3HT layer in this case, it can significantly affect the charge transport behavior because the conducting channel forms as an ultra-thin (a few-monolayer thick) charge sheet accumulated at the semiconductor/insulator interface in the on-state of an OFET.143 The incorporation of P3HT brought overall improvement in the apparent field-effect mobility, which should be mainly attributed to the efficient gap-filling by P3HT. More importantly, a percolation threshold of charge transport was found at the graphene coverage of ∼40%. Near this blending ratio, the good on/off ratio of P3HT was maintained, while significant enhancement in effective mobility was implemented because of the intrinsically higher carrier mobility of graphene that also provided energetically preferential transport pathways.
More recently, various studies proposed novel synthetic routes, characterization methods, and theoretical approaches to optimize properties of hybrid materials and to achieve their advanced performance in device applications.144–147 In 2015, Bonaccorso et al. reported on air-processed ternary blend OPVs with functionalized graphene as an electron-cascade acceptor (Fig. 7a–c).136 They synthesized solution-processable graphene nanoflakes (GNF) (Fig. 7a) and introduced various chemical modification. Calculations from density functional theory (DFT) dictated bandgap opening and tunable energy levels in functionalized GNFs. The attachment of ethylenedinitrobenzoyl (EDNB) was carried out (Fig. 7b), and the obtained Graphene–EDNB possessed the transport levels that are intermediate between those of PCDTBT (donor) and PC71BM (acceptor). In other words, this particular GNF was designed to serve as an energetic bridge between the two organic semiconductors, thus promoting the exciton dissociation and electron transfer from PCDTBT to PC71BM (creating the ‘cascade’ of charge motion). The ternary OPV fabricated as shown in Fig. 7c fully benefited from this cascade concept and high mobility of GNF and featured the best PCE of 6.59%, which was substantially higher than that of the binary PCDTBT:PC71BM reference cell.
 Fig. 7  State-of-the-art GOHE: composite devices. (a) Bright-field TEM image of graphene flakes. Inset: Electron diffraction pattern collected on an area of 2 μm in diameter. (b) Illustration of the graphene functionalization process. (c) Device structure of the ternary blend OPV. (a–c) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.136 (d) Structure of an OFET with the channel made of LPE-G/polymer hybrid. (e) Transfer characteristics of an IIDDT-C3 polymer device showing programmable memory behavior. (d and e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.137 
Also in 2015, Mosciatti et al. presented polymer-graphene hybrid FETs with tunable transport regimes (Fig. 7d and e).137 They fabricated bottom-gate top-contact transistors on Si/SiO2 substrates and used Au as source/drain electrodes. The active layer consisted of sequentially deposited liquid-phase exfoliated graphene (LPE-G) and a semiconducting polymer (Fig. 7d). It was observed that, by adjusting the thermal annealing duration in ambient air, the ionization energy (IE) of LPE-G can be broadly changed from 4.8 to 5.7 eV. This implied that the transport level of graphene can be systematically tuned, and it was possible to place it either within or outside the HOMO–LUMO gap of the polymer. This discovery led them to realize multifunctional devices based on the composite channel. Electrical memory devices addressable by the gate electrode were fabricated using both n- and p-type polymers. The controllable trapping and detrapping of charges allowed the transistors to retain its electrical state for a certain period of time, and the charge confinement effect was shown to be reversible and reproducible (Fig. 7e).
5 Challenges and opportunities
The overview given in Section 4 was an ample indication that GOHE has grown to be a prominent player in modern electronics over a relatively short period of time. In our estimation, such rapid progress has been largely driven by accumulated knowledges of the parent fields, and the dramatic pace has inevitably left many questions unanswered. This section discusses several important challenges of GOHE. We believe that these challenges will equally mean opportunities for future scientific and technological breakthroughs.
5.1 Material
The intriguing structural and energetic interactions at the molecular scale have undoubtedly been a key contributor that gave birth to many of the devices we reviewed in this article. However, it is noted that fundamental mechanisms behind the unique hybrid structures are far from being fully understood, and the lack of rational design principles may underline limited success in synthetic approaches.
For instance, the templating property of graphene and face-on stacking of organic molecules has been observed in only a small number of material systems, and their generalization toward other semiconductors is a subject that requires further investigation. Vacuum-evaporated planar small molecules seem to be most strongly affected by attractive force of graphene (to become lying-down), but there seem to be unobvious exceptions, either because of the particularity of the molecules or the deposition conditions.124 On the other hand, solution-cast molecules are likely to undergo much more complex processes from deposition to crystallization, and it is reasonable to infer that graphene–molecule interaction has to compete with additional kinetics such as solvent drying and molecular heat reflux in determining the final solid-state microstructure. It was shown that the self-organization property of spin-cast TES-ADT is quite different from that of evaporated molecules (e.g. pentacene, CuPc), and the edge-on motif was predominant in this case regardless of the existence of polymer residues on graphene.148
The nature of charge transfer, chemical doping, and van der Waals interaction in graphene and related carbon nanomaterials has recently gained improved understanding both theoretically and experimentally.149–151 As an example, recent theoretical works have highlighted the fine-tuning of physical properties of novel hybrid nanomaterials, e.g. bilayer graphene/GO or zigzag graphene nanoribbons/fluorographene–graphane nanoribbons, upon combining geometric and chemical factors governing the weak and structurally non-destructive interaction.152,153 Further progress in this direction will allow us to sufficiently explain the general relationship between material structure and interface phenomena, to be able to prepare optimized hybrid nanoarchitectures in a more predictive and reproducible manner.
5.2 Process
The CVD of graphene on metal substrates still seems to offer the best structural integrity and physical properties. When using this process, a transfer step is generally required, and various methods for moving pre-synthesized graphene onto a device substrate have been proposed to date.154 As we discussed in Section 4.1, the widely used adhesive (e.g. PMMA) transfer technique may induce geometrical defects or leave residues on the surface of graphene, and this should be minimized or avoided for controllable fabrication of GOHE devices. Although such impurities may contribute positively to certain device types (e.g. OFETs) in a purely performance-metric point of view, it seems to be difficult to systematically distinguish the secondary effects from intended characteristics based on unperturbed interfaces. Also, the presence of residues will make doping or other surface functionalization of graphene less efficient. Also, the already proposed high-temperature treatment will not be compatible with plastic substrates desirable for flexible applications. Therefore, development of clean transfer or low-temperature post-deposition purification methods is an important topic.
All-solution-processable GOHE devices might be also a particularly meaningful target of the field. The solution deposition of organic semiconductors is relatively well-established, and roll-to-roll fabrication of large-area device arrays via industrial printing methods (e.g. inkjet, screen, or gravure printing) is a low-cost route that takes full advantage of the chemistry of organic materials.155 Printing of graphene and related 2-D materials is under steady progress,156 and the maturity of this technology will bring solution-processed GOHE closer to the level acceptable for commercialization. The remaining challenges in this direction include target-optimized formulation of graphene inks, chemically orthogonal processes for sequential multi-step printing, and low-temperature post-deposition sintering methods to make the properties of solution-processed, chemically modified graphene comparable to those of pristine material. The composite devices are naturally well suited for solution-phase deposition, and therefore advanced processing for tailored chemical and electrical properties of hybrid thin films will be an important subject of future research endeavors.
5.3 Device
The widely varying device structures reported in the literature was a convincing evidence that graphene–organic hybrids are capable of producing versatile platforms useful in many practical applications. However, in most instances, graphene is still taken as a replacement for another class of materials, and it seems highly desirable that we focus future research efforts on the search for novel applications that are more based on the unique and complementary traits of both of the materials. Material tuning via molecular engineering or surface functionalization will be the two essential steps for designing new applications with on-demand characteristics, and given the range available for charge-transport and energetic parameters of the components, many architectures in optical, electrical, and magnetic branches can be foreseen. Also, the materials' compatibility with physiological environments, large interface areas, and excellent electrochemical transduction are solid grounds for realizing advanced bio-chemical sensing devices.20,157
Physical and computational modeling plays a pivotal role in electronics research.93 Therefore, new models dedicated to state-of-the-art GOHE devices are of great importance. For instance, we have recently developed the first macroscopic model for VGOFETs.158 The model allowed us to pinpoint the different transport regimes in measured switching curves, and the predictive simulations drew reasonable estimation of performance limits in this particularly promising new device platform. As this example showed, an analytical or numerical model serves as a tool for in-depth analysis of experimental observation, and as a guideline for purposeful device optimization. A major challenge is that the physics of graphene and organic semiconductors differ substantially from that of well-established inorganic crystalline semiconductors, and existing standard models fail to fully describe operation of the devices based on these new materials.159 More investigation of basic material properties and improved understanding of their multi-scale manifestation will be the key ingredients for the creation of widely applicable models, which will serve the field by setting a reliable new standard for performance analysis and circuit-level simulation.
6 Conclusion
GOHE represents a smart approach to leverage science and technology infrastructure of the existing domains in creating improved or unprecedented features at the forefront of materials research. The rise of this new field was recognizable in recent reports of highly creative and well-performing architectures, and now we expect that its development will be even faster in the future, and will be strongly supported by very intense research activities of the graphene and organic electronics communities. More importantly, there are strong evidences that GOHE is forming a distinct subject area that provides unique concepts in device engineering. This article summarized basic material properties, interface effects, structural variants of devices, and representative demonstrations that witness how the field has evolved until recently. Despite the dramatic improvement, our understanding of complex interplay between the materials still seems to be incomplete, and more studies are envisioned to advance the conceptualization of multi-scale phenomena and the realization of a newer generation of devices that are difficult to obtain through any other material candidates. We believe that this article will serve as a practical background that helps steer such explorations, and it is our estimation that GOHE will have a totally new shape in the coming years with much more exciting opportunities ahead.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2015R1D1A4A01018560).
References
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486 CrossRef .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha and R. Martins, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. H. L. Koppens, V. Palermo, N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini, M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhänen, A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo, A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider, F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, Z. Sun, C. Galiotis, A. N. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi, D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini, A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn, J. M. Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant, L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller, E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen, S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Löfwander and J. Kinaret, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598 RSC .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, L. J. Rozanski, C. A. Mills, M. J. Beliatis, N. A. Nismy and S. R. P. Silva, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8411 RSC .
M. Wright and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Antognazza, D. Ghezzi, D. Musitelli, M. Garbugli and G. Lanzani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 243501 CrossRef .
P.-C. Chen, G. Shen, Y. Shi, H. Chen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, L. Baeten, H.-G. Boyen, D. Spoltore, J. D'Haen, L. Grieten, P. Wagner, M. K. Van Bael and J. V. Manca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16695 CAS .
M. Melucci, M. Durso, M. Zambianchi, E. Treossi, Z.-Y. Xia, I. Manet, G. Giambastiani, L. Ortolani, V. Morandi, F. De Angelis and V. Palermo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18237 RSC .
H. Hlaing, C.-H. Kim, F. Carta, C.-Y. Nam, R. A. Barton, N. Petrone, J. Hone and I. Kymissis, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. de Pauli, U. Zschieschang, I. D. Barcelos, H. Klauk and A. Malachias, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500402 CrossRef .
K. Banger, C. Warwick, J. Lang, K. Broch, J. E. Halpert, J. Socratous, A. Brown, T. Leedham and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6337 RSC .
C.-H. Kim, G. Bhak, J. Lee, S. Sung, S. Park, S. R. Paik and M.-H. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11898 CAS .
C.-H. Kim, S. Sung and M.-H. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ellmer, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 809 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Anthony, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Higgins, J. Hodgkiss, N. Plank, L. Torsi, P. Cowper, G. Malliaras, Y. Braeken, N. Laurand, I. Samuel, A. Pomorska, F. Wudl, B. Xu, U. Lemmer, D. Perepichka, A. Mount, L. Dennany, D. Bradley and K. Melzer, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 174, 413 RSC .
O. Moldovan, B. Iñiguez, M. Jamal Deen and L. F. Marsal, IET Circ. Devices Syst., 2015, 9, 446 CrossRef .
J. Berry, T. Buonassisi, D. A. Egger, G. Hodes, L. Kronik, Y.-L. Loo, I. Lubomirsky, S. R. Marder, Y. Mastai, J. S. Miller, D. B. Mitzi, Y. Paz, A. M. Rappe, I. Riess, B. Rybtchinski, O. Stafsudd, V. Stevanovic, M. F. Toney, D. Zitoun, A. Kahn, D. Ginley and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, P. Soukiassian and J. Boeckl, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berggren, D. Nilsson and N. D. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ward, Z. A. Lamport and O. D. Jurchescu, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3859 CrossRef CAS .
N. Grossiord, J. M. Kroon, R. Andriessen and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 432 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jo, M. Choe, S. Lee, W. Park, Y. H. Kahng and T. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 112001 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hong, Q.-H. Wu, J. Ren, C. Wang, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schlierf, P. Samorì and V. Palermo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3129 RSC .
Q. H. Wang and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singha Roy, D. J. Bindl and M. S. Arnold, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Mativetsky, H. Wang, S. S. Lee, L. Whittaker-Brooks and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5319 RSC .
N. N. Nguyen, S. B. Jo, S. K. Lee, D. H. Sin, B. Kang, H. H. Kim, H. Lee and K. Cho, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kahn, N. Koch and W. Gao, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2003, 41, 2529 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ruiz, D. Choudhary, B. Nickel, T. Toccoli, K.-C. Chang, A. C. Mayer, P. Clancy, J. M. Blakely, R. L. Headrick, S. Iannotta and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4497 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Virkar, S. Mannsfeld, Z. Bao and N. Stingelin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kim, H. Hlaing, J.-A. Hong, J.-H. Kim, Y. Park, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, Y. Bonnassieux, G. Horowitz and I. Kymissis, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400384 CrossRef .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. L. Tang and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kim, H. Hlaing, S. Yang, Y. Bonnassieux, G. Horowitz and I. Kymissis, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1724 CrossRef CAS .
N. Koch, A. Kahn, J. Ghijsen, J.-J. Pireaux, J. Schwartz, R. L. Johnson and A. Elschner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 70 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding and Y. Gao, Proc. SPIE, 2010, 7778, 77780J CrossRef .
J. Hwang, A. Wan and A. Kahn, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 1 CrossRef .
H. Yagi, T. Miyazaki, Y. Tokumoto, Y. Aoki, M. Zenki, T. Zaima, S. Okita, T. Yamamoto, E. Miyazaki, K. Takimiya and S. Hino, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 563, 55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shinamura, I. Osaka, E. Miyazaki and K. Takimiya, Heterocycles, 2011, 83, 1187 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Griffith, J. E. Anthony, A. G. Jones, Y. Shu and D. L. Lichtenberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Smith, R. Hamilton, Y. Qi, A. Kahn, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lyu, D. Niu, H. Xie, Y. Zhao, N. Cao, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, P. Liu and Y. Gao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1669 RSC .
Z.-L. Guan, J. B. Kim, H. Wang, C. Jaye, D. A. Fischer, Y.-L. Loo and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1779 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ratcliff, J. Meyer, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Armstrong, D. Olson and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 744 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Tang, M. C. Y. Ang, K.-K. Choo, V. Keerthi, J.-K. Tan, M. N. Syafiqah, T. Kugler, J. H. Burroughes, R.-Q. Png, L.-L. Chua and P. K. H. Ho, Nature, 2016, 539, 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, J. G. Jeong, H.-J. Kim, S.-H. Park, M.-H. Cho, S. W. Cho, Y. Yi, M. Y. Heo and H. Sohn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013302 CrossRef .
Y. Hirose, A. Kahn, V. Aristov, P. Soukiassian, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 13748 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hiroshiba, R. Hayakawa, T. Chikyow, Y. Yamashita, H. Yoshikawa, K. Kobayashi, K. Morimoto, K. Matsuishi and Y. Wakayama, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6280 RSC .
Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, H. Yan and A. Facchetti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Zschieschang, F. Ante, D. Kälblein, T. Yamamoto, K. Takimiya, H. Kuwabara, M. Ikeda, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. Klauk, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1370 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, B. C.-K. Tee, G. Giri, J. Xu, D. H. Kim, H. A. Becerril, R. M. Stoltenberg, T. H. Lee, G. Xue, S. C. B. Mannsfeld and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Diemer, C. R. Lyle, Y. Mei, C. Sutton, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Brédas and O. D. Jurchescu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, G. Giri, A. L. Ayzner, A. P. Zoombelt, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, J. Chen, D. Nordlund, M. F. Toney, J. Huang and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3005 Search PubMed .
S. Beaupré and M. Leclerc, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11097 Search PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dötz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Bredas, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 17 RSC .
S. Jung, C.-H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 395103 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 115502 CrossRef .
A. Kahn, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 7 RSC .
G. Horowitz, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1946 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Newman, C. D. Frisbie, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Brédas, P. C. Ewbank and K. R. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4436 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Chua, J. Zaumseil, J.-F. Chang, E. C.-W. Ou, P. K.-H. Ho, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2005, 434, 194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Kim, O. Yaghmazadeh, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 093722 CrossRef .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251 CAS .
P. Heremans, G. H. Gelinck, R. Müller, K.-J. Baeg, D.-Y. Kim and Y.-Y. Noh, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 341 CrossRef .
C. H. Kim, O. Yaghmazadeh, D. Tondelier, Y. B. Jeong, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 083710 CrossRef .
B. Mukherjee and M. Mukherjee, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, Z.-T. Zhu, M. G. Lemaitre, M.-G. Xia, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 113511 CrossRef .
K. P. Goetz, D. Vermeulen, M. E. Payne, C. Kloc, L. E. McNeil and O. D. Jurchescu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3065 RSC .
R. Pfattner, C. Rovira and M. Mas-Torrent, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26545 RSC .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Ben-Sasson, M. Greenman, Y. Roichman and N. Tessler, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kallmann and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1960, 32, 300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsumura, H. Koezuka and T. Ando, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 1210 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jeong, J. Jang, S. Nam, K. Kim, L. H. Kim, S. Park, T. K. An and C. E. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6816 CAS .
S. J. Kang, G.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Yu, Y. Zhao, B. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, P. Kim and C. Nuckolls, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5157 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, G. A. Rojas, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Kymissis, Organic Field Effect Transistors: Theory, Fabrication and Characterization, Springer, New York, NY,  2009 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2014, 61, 278 CrossRef CAS .
C.-a. Di, D. Wei, G. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Guo and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3289 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Lee, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and A. Dodabalapur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 023304 CrossRef .
W. Liu, B. L. Jackson, J. Zhu, C.-Q. Miao, C.-H. Chung, Y.-J. Park, K. Sun, J. Woo and Y.-H. Xie, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, J. Park, S. H. Sim, S. B. Jo, K. S. Kim, B. H. Hong and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, J. Park, S. H. Sim, S. Lim, K. S. Kim, B. H. Hong and K. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Street and A. Salleo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 2887 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2013, 60, 280 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Wöbkenberg, G. Eda, D.-S. Leem, J. C. de Mello, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Chhowalla and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1558 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kang, S. Lim, W. H. Lee, S. B. Jo and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, R. Li, S. R. Puniredd, Y. Hernandez, F. Hinkel, S. Wang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Irimia-Vladu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 588 RSC .
Z. Liu, P. You, S. Liu and F. Yan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jia, H. D. Sun, J. H. Du, Z. K. Zhang, D. D. Zhang, L. P. Ma, J. S. Chen, D. G. Ma, H. M. Cheng and W. C. Ren, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10714 RSC .
S. Steudel, K. Myny, V. Arkhipov, C. Deibel, S. De Vusser, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Berke, S. Tongay, M. A. McCarthy, A. G. Rinzler, B. R. Appleton and A. F. Hebard, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 255802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Altazin, R. Clerc, R. Gwoziecki, J.-M. Verilhac, D. Boudinet, G. Pananakakis, G. Ghibaudo, I. Chartier and R. Coppard, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 064509 CrossRef .
J. Lee, S. R. A. Raza, P. J. Jeon, J. S. Kim and S. Im, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e278 CrossRef CAS .
C.-m. Kang, J. Wade, S. Yun, J. Lim, H. Cho, J. Roh, H. Lee, S. Nam, D. D. C. Bradley, J.-S. Kim and C. Lee, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500282 CrossRef .
B. W. D'Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1585 CrossRef .
N. Espinosa, M. Hösel, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 855 CAS .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, J. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cox, A. Gorodetsky, B. Kim, K. S. Kim, Z. Jia, P. Kim, C. Nuckolls and I. Kymissis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 123303 CrossRef .
T.-H. Han, Y. Lee, M.-R. Choi, S.-H. Woo, S.-H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, S. Chang, M. Smith, S. Gradeak and J. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1581 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kuruvila, P. R. Kidambi, J. Kling, J. B. Wagner, J. Robertson, S. Hofmann and J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6940 RSC .
S. Tang and Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8778 CAS .
S. Tang, W. Wu and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7797 RSC .
C.-J. Shih, R. Pfattner, Y.-C. Chiu, N. Liu, T. Lei, D. Kong, Y. Kim, H.-H. Chou, W.-G. Bae and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, B. J. Kim, Y. J. Choi, M. H. Lee, M. S. Kang and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Yu, Y. Zhao, S. Ryu, L. E. Brus, K. S. Kim and P. Kim, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. Heo, S. Park, H. J. Song, D. H. Seo, K.-E. Byun, P. Kim, I. Yoo, H.-J. Chung and K. Kim, Science, 2012, 336, 1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lüssem, A. Günther, A. Fischer, D. Kasemann and K. Leo, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 443003 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Lemaitre, E. P. Donoghue, M. A. McCarthy, B. Liu, S. Tongay, B. Gila, P. Kumar, R. K. Singh, B. R. Appleton and A. G. Rinzler, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Ben-Sasson and N. Tessler, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 044501 CrossRef .
C. Ojeda-Aristizabal, W. Bao and M. S. Fuhrer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 035435 CrossRef .
S. Parui, L. Pietrobon, D. Ciudad, S. Vélez, X. Sun, F. Casanova, P. Stoliar and L. E. Hueso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2972 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, T. H. Lee, E. J. G. Santos, P. S. Jo, A. Salleo, Y. Nishi and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Oh, J.-S. Kim, J. H. Jeon, E. Won, J. W. Son, D. H. Lee, C. K. Kim, J. Jang, T. Lee and B. H. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Zhou, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, N. Balis, M. M. Stylianakis, M. Savarese, C. Adamo, M. Gemmi, V. Pellegrini, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3870 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mosciatti, S. Haar, F. Liscio, A. Ciesielski, E. Orgiu and P. Samorì, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Iguchi, C. Higashi, Y. Funasaki, K. Fujita, A. Mori, A. Nakasuga and T. Maruyama, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 39937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Yang, N. Zhang, G. Pan, S. Yin, Y. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. M. Goh, K. K. Manga, Q. Bao, P. Yang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Liscio, G. P. Veronese, E. Treossi, F. Suriano, F. Rossella, V. Bellani, R. Rizzoli, P. Samorì and V. Palermo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2924 RSC .
C. H. Kim, Y. Bonnassieux and G. Horowitz, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 1302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Osella, A. Narita, M. G. Schwab, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng, K. Müllen and D. Beljonne, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. El Gemayel, A. Narita, L. F. Dössel, R. S. Sundaram, A. Kiersnowski, W. Pisula, M. R. Hansen, A. C. Ferrari, E. Orgiu, X. Feng, K. Müllen and P. Samorì, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6301 RSC .
S. R. Pathipati, E. Pavlica, A. Schlierf, M. El Gemayel, P. Samorì, V. Palermo and G. Bratina, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24819 CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Eigler, Y. Ishii, Y. Hu, C. Papp, O. Lytken, H.-P. Steinrück and M. Halik, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8595 RSC .
J. Jang, J. Park, S. Nam, J. E. Anthony, Y. Kim, K. S. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. H. Hong and C. E. Park, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11094 RSC .
A. J. Samuels and J. D. Carey, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Gobre and A. Tkatchenko, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2341 Search PubMed .
H.-Z. Tsai, A. A. Omrani, S. Coh, H. Oh, S. Wickenburg, Y.-W. Son, D. Wong, A. Riss, H. S. Jung, G. D. Nguyen, G. F. Rodgers, A. S. Aikawa, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zettl, S. G. Louie, J. Lu, M. L. Cohen and M. F. Crommie, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang and X. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23214 RSC .
S. Tang, W. Wu, X. Xie, X. Li and J. Gu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9862 RSC .
J. Kang, D. Shin, S. Bae and B. H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5527 RSC .
B. Kang, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2302 CAS .
J. Li, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 3427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Z. Bao and G. Malliaras, Nature, 2016, 540, 379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kim, H. Hlaing and I. Kymissis, Org. Electron., 2016, 36, 45 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Bittle, J. I. Basham, T. N. Jackson, O. D. Jurchescu and D. J. Gunlach, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Chang-Hyun Kim
	Chang-Hyun Kim is a Research Fellow with the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. His work focuses on the development of novel electronic devices based on organic semiconductors and hybrid nanoarchitectures. He received his PhD in physics from the Ecole Polytechnique, France, and conducted postdoctoral research at Columbia University, USA, and with the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). Dr Kim was a recipient of the Alliance Doctoral Mobility Award and Prix de thèse (PhD thesis award) of the Ecole Polytechnique.

Ioannis Kymissis
	Ioannis Kymissis received the SB, MEng (joint with IBM Research), and PhD degrees from MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Following a postdoc at MIT's Laboratory for Organic Optics and Electronics and QDVision, he joined Columbia University's Department of Electrical Engineering as an Assistant Professor in 2006 working on the development and applications of thin film electronics. He has won a number of awards for his work including the IEEE EDS Paul Rappaport Award, the MIT/DOE Clean Energy Prize, the IEEE ComSoc award for Outstanding Paper on New Communications Topics, and the NSF CAREER award.

 	Fig. 1  Structural understanding of graphene/organic semiconductor interfaces. (a) Molecular-resolution STM image of the PTCDA monolayer self-assembled on the epitaxial graphene substrate, overlaid with the herringbone unit cell structure. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited.35 (b) Illustration of the orientation of CuPc molecules vacuum-evaporated on bare glass (left) and graphene-modified glass (right) with the characteristic π–π stacking direction. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.36 (c) GIXD pattern for a CuPc film on graphene. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.37 (d) Epitaxial growth motif of pentacene molecules on graphene (φ is the intersecting angle). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.38	 

 	Fig. 2  Energetic representation of organic semiconductors. Red and blue bars indicate the HOMO and LUMO levels, respectively, and the values written along show their energetic position with respect to the vacuum level. The chemical structure of a semiconductor is alternately placed above or below its name. CuPc: copper phthalocyanine, DNTT: dinaphtho[2,3-b:2′,3′-f]thieno[3,2-b]thiophene, TIPS-Pn: 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene, diF-TESADT: difluorinated 5,11-bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene, C8-BTBT: 2,7-dioctyl[1]benzothieno[3,2-b][1]benzothiophene, P3HT: poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl), PCDTBT: poly[N-9′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)], DPP2T-TT: poly(2,5-bis(alkyl)-1,4-dioxopyrrolo[3,4-c]pyrrole-3,6-diyl-thiophene-2,5-diylthieno[2,3-b]thiophene-2,5-diyl-thiophene-2,5-diyl), F16-CuPc: copper hexadecafluorophthalocyanine, PTCDA: perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride, PCBM: [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PTCDI-C8: N,N′-dioctyl-perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide, P(NDI2OD-T2): poly[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene). Values taken from ref. 45–59.	 

 	Fig. 3  Device structures for GOHE. The first three structures from the left are organic semiconductor devices with graphene as an electrode. Graphene is used to replace a conventional metal or oxide-based conductor in these systems. The last structure represents composite devices where graphene and organic semiconductor co-exist within a channel, usually as a solid-state bulk mixture.	 

 	Fig. 4  State-of-the-art GOHE: lateral transistors. (a) OFET comprising chemically modified graphene source/drain electrodes and an n-type organic channel. (b) Energy diagram showing efficient electron injection into the semiconductor via APS doping. (c) Electrical performance evidencing balanced p- and n-type behaviors. (a–c) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.89 (d) Structure of the OFET with all-graphene electrodes and an hBN dielectric layer. (e) AFM image of the stacked layers. (d and e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.90 (f) Optical microscope image of screen-printed graphene gate(G)/source(S)/drain(D) electrodes on glassine paper. (g) Photograph of a printed organic transistor array. (f and g) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.91	 

 	Fig. 5  State-of-the-art GOHE: diodes. (a) Performance of all-graphene electrode OPVs under AM 1.5 illumination. Different cathode buffer structures are shown by line colors. Solid and dashed lines indicate illumination from the anode and the cathode, respectively. (b) Photograph of a semitransparent OPV that shows a neutral color. (a and b) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.105 (c) Light emission from a flexible OLED with graphene oxide/graphene heterostructure anode. (d) Illustration of the heterostructure electrode. (e) Structure of the OLED. (c–e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.106	 

 	Fig. 6  State-of-the-art GOHE: vertical transistors. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a VGOFET based on graphene/C60 heterostructure. (b) Transfer characteristics of this device at room temperature. (a and b) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.12 (c) Impedance spectra measured between source and drain of a C60 VGOFET at different VG. (d) Photograph of a flexible VGOFET on a polyimide film. (c and d) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.124 (e) Concept of underside doping for VGOFETs. (f) Performance of a complementary inverter that comprises PTCDI-C8 and pentacene devices with optimized graphene contact. (e and f) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.125	 

 	Fig. 7  State-of-the-art GOHE: composite devices. (a) Bright-field TEM image of graphene flakes. Inset: Electron diffraction pattern collected on an area of 2 μm in diameter. (b) Illustration of the graphene functionalization process. (c) Device structure of the ternary blend OPV. (a–c) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.136 (d) Structure of an OFET with the channel made of LPE-G/polymer hybrid. (e) Transfer characteristics of an IIDDT-C3 polymer device showing programmable memory behavior. (d and e) Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.137	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
