Solution phase synthesis of carbon quantum dots as sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO 2 solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM14112K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM14112K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1265-1269Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSolution phase synthesis of carbon quantum dots as sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells†

        
          
            Peter 
            Mirtchev
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eric J. 
            Henderson
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Navid 
            Soheilnia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher M. 
            Yip
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Geoffrey A. 
            Ozin
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3H6
bOpalux Inc., Lash Miller Chemical Laboratories, Suite 308, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3H6
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 200 College Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E5
Received 
      22nd August 2011
    , Accepted 7th November 2011First published on 18th November 2011Abstract
        Carbon
        quantum dots (CQDs) have recently emerged as viable alternatives to traditional semiconductor quantum dots because of their facile and low cost synthesis, long term colloidal stability, and low environmental and biological toxicity. The compatible surface chemistry, good solubility in polar solvents and extensive optical absorption throughout the visible and near-infrared wavelength regions render CQDs as potentially useful sensitizers for photovoltaic applications. Presented herein is a new strategy for the solution phase synthesis of water-soluble, colloidally stable CQDs and a preliminary exploration of their utilization as sensitizers in nanocrystalline TiO2 based solar cells. Under AM 1.5 illumination, the Voc and FF values reach 380 mV and 64% respectively, achieving a power conversion efficiency of 0.13%.

        Carbon
        quantum dots are intriguing recently discovered members of the carbon nanomaterials family alongside carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and graphene.1,2 The general description of CQDs is that of nanometer size particles consisting of an sp2 hybridized graphitic core functionalized with polar carboxyl or hydroxyl groups on the surface. Initial CQD synthesis efforts focused on top-down methods such as laser ablation or electrochemical oxidation.3,4 Less expensive and more scalable solution phase methods involving thermal decomposition of carbon precursors and microwave assisted pyrolysis of carbohydrates have since been reported.5,6 Much of the current research attention on CQDs is driven by their ability to display many of the favorable properties of traditional semiconductor quantum dots such as size dependent absorption and photoluminescence spectra, and resistance to photobleaching. Furthermore, CQDs possess the inherent advantages of elemental abundance and low toxicity, the latter of which has been exploited in the use of CQDs as fluorescent tags for bioimaging applications.7,8
These properties, in combination with their broad absorption spectra, large absorption coefficients,9 and good solubility in polar solvents make the carbon dots very attractive as alternatives to scarce and expensive heavy metals commonly used for photovoltaic10 and photocatalytic applications.11–14
Herein we present a facile, solution phase synthesis of water soluble CQDs via the dehydration of γ-butyrolactone with concentrated sulphuric acid and a preliminary examination of their use as sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells. The strategy to CQDs described involves dehydration of the molecular precursor γ-butyrolactone using concentrated sulphuric acid resulting in a carbonaceous material dispersed in residual acidic butyrolactone. This mixture is subsequently neutralized with aqueous Na2CO3 solution and dialyzed against deionized water to remove residual salt byproducts giving colloidally stable aqueous dispersions of purified CQDs, (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Preparation of carbon quantum dotsvia the dehydration of single molecule precursor γ-butyrolactone. 
Inspired by the synthesis of metal and semiconductor nanocrystals by arrested nucleation and growth, we speculate that nucleation of CQDs involves a carbonaceous agglomeration formed by dehydration of the γ-butyrolactone precursor. The reaction stoichiometry suggests that initial aggregation of the seeds is prevented by H-capping. The seeds then grow in size by accretion of carbonaceous species and become terminated with charged surface groups including sulfonate, carboxylate and hydroxyl, thereby providing colloidal stability to the resulting CQDs in polar solvents. Our synthesis is distinct from that reported by Peng and Travas-Sejdic who used a macromolecular carbohydrate as the carbon source followed by refluxing in nitric acid to obtain CQDs.15 In our synthesis, characteristic blue-green photoluminescence is observed prior to and following neutralization, in contrast to many synthetic procedures which typically require passivation of the CQD surface with an aminated polyethyleneglycol derivative.16,17Fig. 1 shows the PL spectra of aqueous CQDs showing the excitation dependent nature of the photoluminescence. A large red-shift in the PL maximum from approximately 470 to 580 nm was observed upon increase of the excitation wavelength from 350 to 500 nm, most likely attributed to optical selection of differently sized CQDs in the colloidal dispersion. A full width at half maximum of approximately 100 nm is observed, indicating a broad size distribution, consistent with other reports of CQD PL.7 A slight redshift of ∼10nm in the PL maximum is observed following dialysis indicating size selection of larger particles, see Figures S1–S3. The absolute PL quantum yield (AQY) of our CQD dispersions was determined to be 0.5%. This value is likely related to efficient non-radiative competing pathways involving vibrational relaxation enabled by high frequency core and surface modes.18 Relative quantum yields of CQDs as high as 20% have been reported, but to the best of our knowledge, this is the first measurement of an AQY for CQDs.19
 Fig. 1  
PL spectra of purified CQDs at different excitation wavelengths from 350 nm to 500 nm increasing at 25nm intervals. (Inset) Normalized PL spectra at the corresponding excitation wavelengths. 
Due to the low electron contrast between CQDs and carbon coated TEM grids, acquiring high quality TEM images was a challenge, and therefore AFM imaging was performed to obtain a more reliable nanoparticle size distribution, see Fig. 2. Due to the AFM tip convolution effect, which can contribute to significant overestimation of lateral dimensions, the size of the CQDs was estimated from their height. The average height of CQD nanoparticles was found to be 9 ± 6 nm by AFM with significant numbers of larger particles in the range of 20–30 nm, some of which were also visible by TEM.
 Fig. 2  a) TEM image of CQDs drop cast on a carbon-coated TEM grid (b) AFM image and particle height distribution of a CQD thin film spin-coated onto a Si wafer. 
As mentioned earlier, CQDs are typically surface-functionalized with oxygen containing functional groups (COOH, COOR, OH, etc) rendering them highly soluble and colloidally stable in aqueous or polar organic solvents. This presents a distinct advantage over similar graphene quantum dots which suffer from low solubility in most common solvents.20 Typically these functionalities are introduced by refluxing bare CQDs in nitric acid, leading to partial oxidation of the surface.21 In our method, the CQDs are oxidized by sulphuric acid in situ eliminating the need for the post-synthetic nitric acid treatment.
The IR spectrum of the purified CQDs dissolved in EtOH is shown in Fig. 3a. The broad O–H stretching vibration is clearly seen at 3400 cm−1, along with several peaks in the carbonyl region around 1700 cm−1 indicating the presence of carboxylic acid groups as expected. A weak C–H stretch at 2950 cm−1 indicates possible alkyl capping and the presence of sulfonic groups is shown by the strong -SO3 stretch at 1100 cm−1. Powder X-ray diffraction of the as-synthesized CQDs did not yield a good match to literature spectra of various types of elemental carbon (see Figure S6†) but the Raman spectrum (Fig. 3c) clearly shows the D (1361 cm−1) and G (1594 cm−1) bands characteristic of graphitic carbon materials. Fig. 3b shows the 13C NMR spectra of the as-sensitized CQDs in residual γ-butyrolactone overlapped with pure γ-butyrolactone for clarity. The observed peaks confirm the functional groups identified through IR spectroscopy; the two resonances at 168 and 175 ppm correspond to carbonyl functionalities, and the two peaks at 125 and 135 ppm are likely sp2 CC bonds. A peak at 50 ppm is attributed to O–C carbons, and there are several weaker resonances in the aliphatic region below 30 ppm.
 Fig. 3  (a) Infrared spectrum of a MeOH CQD solution, neat on NaCl disks (b) 13C NMR spectra of CQDs (top) and γ-butyrolactone (bottom) in D2O (c) Raman spectrum of CQDs showing the D and G bands characteristic of graphitic carbon (d) Deconvoluted X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the C1s region and assignment of the corresponding carbon functionalities. 
The carboxylic and sulfonic functional groups render the CQDs colloidally stable by electrostatic repulsion as they are deprotonated at neutral pH, with a measured zeta potential of −16.7 mV at pH 7 (see Figure S4†). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed to confirm the surface composition of the CQDs. As expected, the presence of S-containing sulfonate groups was observed (see Figure S5†), as was a small amount of Na from the neutralizing Na2CO3 solution, presumably acting as charge balancing counter-ion. The deconvoluted C1s region in Fig. 3d shows four different carbon functionalities with the non-oxygenated graphitic ring C–C bond forming the main feature at 284.8 eV. Smaller features attributed to O–C, CO, and RCO2 are found at 286.2, 287.8, and 288.8 eV respectively, in good agreement with values reported for graphene oxide, which exhibits similar carbon functionalities.22,23 In summary, the CQDs appear to consist of a mixture of sp2 CC groups likely confined to the core of the particles and a variety of polar groups including hydroxyl, alkyl, carboxyl and sulfonate located mainly on the surface.
The broad absorption spectra, ease of synthesis from a single molecule precursor and solution processable nature of CQDs makes them potentially valuable as sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO2 based solar cell applications.24 DSSC's have the capacity to be a useful solution to the impending energy challenge facing our planet due to their low cost, environmental friendliness, and nearly angle-independent performance under diffuse light. The current state of the art Ru-complex sensitizers offer good performance but rely on expensive, scarce ruthenium, and are often time-consuming to synthesize. To explore whether these issues can be surmounted our CQDs can function as sensitizers we have fabricated the first example of a CQD-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cell. It is well known that the most effective Ru-based sensitizers contain a number of carboxylate ligands to enable coordination of the dye to the TiO2 surface as shown in Fig. 4a, and it is noteworthy that this anchoring scheme of sensitizer to TiO2 can clearly be mimicked by our surface functionalized CQDs.25 The absorption spectrum of a thin film of CQDs is shown in Fig. 4b, displaying the broad absorption throughout the visible region. An electronic bandgap of approximately 1.1 eV for an indirect transition and 3.1 eV for a direct transition was calculated using Tauc relations (Figure S7†)26 with the experimental absorption onset at approximately 800 nm, see Fig. 4b.
 Fig. 4  (a) CQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle and the proposed CQD-TiO2 bonds (b) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of CQD thin film on quartz substrate (c) Current–voltage characteristics of CQD-sensitized solar cells prepared from a MeOH CQD solution and from an aqueous solution of CQDs refluxed in nitric acid to ensure complete surface oxidation (d) Current–voltage characteristics of aqueous CQD-sensitized solar cell. 
The current–voltage characteristics of a CQD sensitized solar cell prepared from an aqueous CQD solution under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation are shown in Fig. 4d. A short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.53 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.38 V were produced with a fill factor (FF) of 0.64, for a power conversion efficiency of 0.13%. Cells fabricated from MeOH CQD solutions and aqueous CQDs refluxed in HNO3 to ensure complete surface oxidation showed similar performance, whereas a non-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 gave an efficiency of 0.03% (data not shown). Similar to an excellent recent report of graphene dot sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells, the Jsc seems to be the factor limiting the efficiency of these cells, with both the Voc and FF exhibiting values comparable to Ru-complex sensitized cells.9 Here, we have been able to achieve an improvement in the short circuit current density in comparison to that work, nevertheless the Jsc value is much lower than values routinely obtained with Ru sensitizers.
A possible explanation for this might be that the I3−/I− electrolyte has been reported as being corrosive to a number of QD sensitizers, thus decreasing the photocurrent.27 This explanation seems unlikely in this case since the CQDs are already heavily oxidized by sulfuric acid during their synthesis. Polysulfide based electrolytes have been demonstrated as effective alternatives to iodide/triiodide, leading to improved QD stability and record efficiencies, and work is underway to evaluate the performance of our cells with these electrolytes.28 Surface recombination of photoinduced charges is also a likely contributor to the low current density. Regardless of synthesis method, CQDs contain a distribution of different emissive trap sites, which are likely responsible for the observed CQD PL.29 These sites are likely acting as recombination centers for the photogenerated excitons, and contributing to the low current density. The charge injection properties of the CQDs are also likely to be inferior to Ru dyes, as the ultrafast injection is based on a metal to ligand charge transfer of an electron from the metal to the π* orbital of the bypyridyl ligand from where it is transferred to the TiO2 CB.30 Maximizing the TiO2 surface coverage could also potentially be improved by size-selection of smaller CQD's or functionalization of TiO2 with bifunctional linker molecules.31
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have demonstrated the facile, solution phase synthesis of water soluble, colloidally stable carbon quantum dotsvia the dehydration of a single molecule precursor γ-butyrolactone with concentrated sulphuric acid. Notably, the CQDs do not require surface passivation or treatment with HNO3 to exhibit the characteristic visible photoluminescence and surface functionality of other carbon nanodots. Thorough characterization of core and surface properties indicates that the CQDs likely consist of a sp2 hybridized core capped with hydroxyl, carboxyl, and sulfonate groups. A preliminary examination of these CQDs anchored to nanocrystalline TiO2 shows that they can function as a sensitizer for TiO2 based solar cells, achieving a power conversion efficiency of 0.13% in a proof-of-concept device. It is hoped that refinements in the surface chemistry, corrosion stability, charge transport and charge injection properties of CQDs will lead to improved performance.
Notes and references
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Zhou and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater, 2010, 22, 1963 CAS .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, D. Ghosh, W. Chen, S. Pradhan, X. Chang and S. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2803 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wang, F. Yang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118 RSC .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858 RSC .
L. Cao, X. Wang, M. J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, Y. Lin, B. A. Harruff, L. M. Veca, D. Murray, S. Xie and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11318 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. Shiral Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754 CrossRef CAS .
R. Leary and A. Westwood, Carbon, 2011, 49, 741 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonieti and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3317 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zabek and H. Kisch, J. Coord. Chem., 2010, 63, 2715 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng and J. Travas-Sejdic, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5563 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Cao, S. Yang, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y.-P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. Shiral Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. C. Johnson, J. M. Luther, A. G. Midgett, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2445 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Yang, X. Wang, H. Wang, F. Lu, P. G. Luo, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, J. Liu, Y. Liu, M. Chen, Y. Huang and Y.-P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18110 CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Mullen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, C. Chen, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Chen, N. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155 RSC .
B. O'Regan and M. Graetzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tauc, R. Grigorovici and A. Vancu, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1966, 15, 627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shalom, S. Dor, S. Ruhle, L. Grinis and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3895 CAS .
L. Li, X. Yang, J. Gao, H. Tian, J. Zhao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Li, X. Zhou, T. Sham, X. Sun and Z. Ding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Graetzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145 CrossRef .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental procedures, additional PL spectra, PXRD, XPS, and zeta potential measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14112kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Preparation of carbon quantum dotsvia the dehydration of single molecule precursor γ-butyrolactone.	 

 	Fig. 1  
PL spectra of purified CQDs at different excitation wavelengths from 350 nm to 500 nm increasing at 25nm intervals. (Inset) Normalized PL spectra at the corresponding excitation wavelengths.	 

 	Fig. 2  a) TEM image of CQDs drop cast on a carbon-coated TEM grid (b) AFM image and particle height distribution of a CQD thin film spin-coated onto a Si wafer.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Infrared spectrum of a MeOH CQD solution, neat on NaCl disks (b) 13C NMR spectra of CQDs (top) and γ-butyrolactone (bottom) in D2O (c) Raman spectrum of CQDs showing the D and G bands characteristic of graphitic carbon (d) Deconvoluted X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the C1s region and assignment of the corresponding carbon functionalities.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) CQD-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticle and the proposed CQD-TiO2 bonds (b) UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of CQD thin film on quartz substrate (c) Current–voltage characteristics of CQD-sensitized solar cells prepared from a MeOH CQD solution and from an aqueous solution of CQDs refluxed in nitric acid to ensure complete surface oxidation (d) Current–voltage characteristics of aqueous CQD-sensitized solar cell.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed experimental procedures, additional PL spectra, PXRD, XPS, and zeta potential measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c1jm14112k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
