Impact of charge transport layers on the photochemical stability of MAPbI 3 in thin films and perovskite solar cells   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00493A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00493A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2705-2716Impact of charge transport layers on the photochemical stability of MAPbI3 in thin films and perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            A. G. 
            Boldyreva
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            A. F. 
            Akbulatov
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Elnaggar
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            S. Yu 
            Luchkin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. V. 
            Danilov
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            I. S. 
            Zhidkov
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            O. R. 
            Yamilova
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu S. 
            Fedotov
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            S. I. 
            Bredikhin
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            E. Z. 
            Kurmaev
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            K. J. 
            Stevenson
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            P. A. 
            Troshin
          
        
      ab
aSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Nobel street 3, Moscow, 143026, Russia. E-mail: aleksandra.boldyreva@skolkovotech.ru
bInstitute for Problems of Chemical Physics of the Russian Academy of Sciences (ICP RAS), Semenov prospect 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, 142432, Russia
cMoscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, 141700, Russia
dInstitute of Solid State Physics of Russian Academy of Science (ISSP RAS), Chernogolovka, 142432 Moscow Region, Russia
eInstitute of Physics and Technology, Ural Federal University, Mira 9 str., 620002 Yekaterinburg, Russia
fM.N. Mikheev Institute of Metal Physics of Ural Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, S. Kovalevskoi 18 str., 620108 Yekaterinburg, Russia
Received 
      11th July 2019
    , Accepted 26th July 2019First published on 29th July 2019AbstractIn this work, we systematically explored the photochemical stability of MAPbI3 interfaces with five different charge transport layers (CTLs): substituted naphthalene (NDI) and perylene (PDI) diimides, fullerene derivatives PC61BM and PC71BM, and widely used hole transport material spiro-OMeTAD. While studying these model systems, we revealed several important interfacial degradation pathways. First, we demonstrated that diimides (both NDI and PDI) strongly accelerate the photodegradation of MAPbI3 since they specifically interact with PbI2 formed as one of the perovskite degradation products. Fullerene derivatives, in turn, absorb another decomposition product, methylammonium iodide (MAI), which also results in accelerated ageing of the perovskite films deposited atop fullerene-based CTLs. However, both fullerene derivatives and spiro-OMeTAD have excellent encapsulation properties and strongly suppress photodecomposition of MAPbI3, when the perovskite films are placed underneath. Unfortunately, the observed impressive perovskite bulk phase stabilization using PC61BM, PC71BM and spiro-OMeTAD coatings does not improve the operation lifetime of photovoltaic cells due to interfacial degradation processes. TOF-SIMS analysis has revealed accumulation of the perovskite decomposition products (presumably CH3I) in the spiro-OMeTAD layer as well as a noticeable degradation at the interface with the electron transport tin dioxide layer. The obtained results emphasize the major challenge in the development of perovskite solar cells with long operation lifetime related to poor stability of the functional perovskite/CTL interfaces.
Introduction
Solar cells based on complex lead halides with a perovskite structure have attracted particular attention of materials scientists and engineers all over the world. Rapid improvement in power conversion efficiencies, which reached >24%,1 in combination with the potentially low fabrication costs of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) might accomplish a revolution on the PV market. However, the main obstacle on the way to successful perovskite solar cell commercialization is the poor stability of complex lead halides. The most common methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) absorber used in PSCs undergoes rapid decomposition under severe environmental conditions. The impact of oxygen and moisture on the stability of perovskite films has been explored in detail previously.2–8 In contrast, the degradation effects caused by sunlight are less studied and usually remain underestimated.9–12 We believe that the action of oxygen and moisture can be significantly suppressed by a proper solar cell encapsulation, while a direct contact of PV panels with sunlight is unavoidable and thus, remains the most critical.
There is growing evidence that MAPbI3 thin films have poor intrinsic stability.11–15 In particular, it was revealed that MAPbI3 starts to decompose in the dark under high vacuum and an elevated temperature of 60 °C.11 The illumination of MAPbI3 in a vacuum leads to release of iodine vapor.11 A similar process in photovoltaic cells is followed by I2 migration towards the top electrode, e.g. silver, and the formation of a blocking metal iodide interlayer.16,17
To prevent this kind of degradation one needs to encapsulate perovskite absorber films between the adjacent charge transport layers (CTLs). Therefore, these layers have to be uniform, compact and non-permeable for the volatile perovskite degradation products to achieve the desired isolation characteristics.12,18 Fullerene derivatives, which are commonly used as electron transport layers (ETLs) in PSCs, form non-compact films supporting the iodine migration towards the metal electrode. Moreover, fullerene derivatives (e.g. PCBM) actually facilitate decomposition of MAPbI3 by absorbing the methylammonium iodide (MAI) in the cavities between the fullerene spheres.19 Introducing additional ZnO nanoparticles as a hole-blocking layer (HBL) placed atop the PCBM films helps to mitigate the problem of the metal electrode corrosion, but can hardly prevent the perovskite decomposition.20
Spiro-OMeTAD commonly used as a hole transport layer (HTL) in PSCs with the n–i–p architecture was shown to be the main cause of the device degradation by many researchers.21–23 It is claimed that dopants, e.g. 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), introduced in the HTL to enhance the hole mobility, are actually responsible for the reduced operation stability of PSCs assembled with spiro-OMeTAD.21 The cation-radical of spiro-OMeTAD might oxidise I− with the formation of I2, which represents an important degradation pathway at the perovskite/doped HTL interface.22 At the same time, spiro-OMeTAD molecules tend to crystallize at elevated temperatures, which is another device failure mechanism.21
Some degradation processes can also occur at the bottom CTL/perovskite interface. Depending on the type of CTL material, different mechanisms were reported.10,24–28 PEDOT:PSS commonly used as the HTL was shown to be highly reactive both with ITO and perovskite due to its acidic characteristics. Another study showed the appearance of S− ions at the PCBM/Ag interface as revealed by ToF-SIMS analysis, which led to the conclusion of the chemical instability of PEDOT:PSS.16 TiO2 being one of the most popular ETLs for n–i–p PSCs was also found to be reactive with the perovskite layer. An applied bias induces a reversible oxygen migration from the TiO2 to the MAPbI3 layer even in the absence of other stress factors. Oxygen migration affected the perovskite phase crystallinity and facilitated the formation of PbI2.24 The degradation at the perovskite/ETL interface was suppressed by insertion of a diffusion barrier interlayer of Sb2S3 between the TiO2 and MAPbI3 layers.25 The operation stability of PSCs utilizing a mesoporous oxide scaffold was enhanced by replacing TiO2 with Al2O3.10
The aforementioned examples illustrate clearly the crucial role of CTLs in achieving long-term stability of perovskite solar cells. Surprisingly, systematic and comparative studies of multiple CTLs under identical conditions are essentially missing in the field. Here we explored the impact of conventional CTLs such as fullerene derivatives or spiro-OMeTAD and emerging imide-type materials (NDI and PDI, Fig. 1) on the stability of MAPbI3 films in different bilayer stacks (CTL/MAPbI3vs. MAPbI3/CTL) and completed PSCs.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the investigated CTLs (a) and schematic representation of the experimental methodology (b). 
Results and discussion
Among hundreds of hole transport materials reported for PSCs, spiro-OMeTAD is the most frequently used one since it delivers high efficiencies in devices.29,30 Common ETL materials for p–i–n PSCs are based on C60 and C70 fullerene derivatives such as phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)31,32 and phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM).16,33 They have relatively good charge carrier mobilities, optimally aligned frontier energy levels with respect to the perovskite absorber and excellent film formation properties. At the same time, a great success was achieved in organic photovoltaics by using rylene diimides, such as perylene diimide (PDI)34,35 and naphthalene diimide (NDI)36,37 derivatives as non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). It is reasonable to assume that many of the NFAs working well in organic solar cells can also be successfully utilized as ETLs in perovskite solar cells. Recent examples of using ITIC derivatives in PSCs support this conclusion.38 The aforementioned arguments justify the choice of 5 different CTL materials involved in this study: PC61BM, PC71BM, NDI, PDI and spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. 1a).
In the first stage, we investigated the behavior of glass/CTL/MAPbI3 stacks under exposure to white light illumination in an inert atmosphere to reveal the impact of CTL underlayers on the perovskite stability. In the next stage of the experiment, the same CTLs were applied atop the perovskite films (glass/MAPbI3/CTL stacks) to evaluate their encapsulation characteristics with respect to the perovskite photodegradation products. Finally, the CTLs revealing the most promising behaviour in bilayer samples were further investigated in PSCs without the top metal electrode in order to eliminate its contribution to the overall degradation of the system. The proposed experimental design is aimed at the direct comparison of the aging behavior induced by CTL films deposited under and above the perovskite absorber layer as shown in Fig. 1b. Considering the structure of the experiment, we intentionally did not explore those common CTLs (e.g. metal oxides or PEDOT:PSS), which cannot be processed efficiently atop the perovskite. Methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) was used as a benchmark absorber material, which allows for a relatively fast assessment of the degradation effects occurring in the system, particularly at the perovskite/CTL interfaces.
Photochemical stability of the reference glass/MAPbI3 samples
Before studying the perovskite/CTL interfaces, we explored the photochemical stability of the reference bare glass/MAPbI3 samples. We assumed that the glass substrate is mostly chemically inert with respect to the perovskite films and does not affect their stability under light exposure. The performed experiments allowed us to evaluate the MAPbI3 degradation rate in the absence of any adjacent charge-transport layer. Both UV-vis and XRD data revealed that MAPbI3 film undergoes a rapid decomposition under light soaking conditions. Fig. 2a shows strong photobleaching of the perovskite film: the optical density rapidly decreases, while the characteristic perovskite band at 750 nm disappears. XRD data (Fig. 2b) evidenced that light induces the decomposition of MAPbI3 into PbI2 with further decay to metallic Pb. Fig. 2c shows a diagram that visualizes the evolution of the phase composition of the films in the course of ageing. The percentage of each phase was estimated by considering a relative contribution of the analyzed component to the total integral peak intensity in the XRD pattern. This method might not be fully precise with respect to the real quantitative composition of the samples since it does not account for the presence of amorphous components. However, it provides very valuable qualitative information on the ageing behaviour of perovskite films. Fig. 2c shows that the amount of MAPbI3 gradually decays, while the formation of PbI2 and metallic Pb is observed after 200 h and 500 h of light soaking, respectively. Notably, 70% of the crystalline material is represented by the perovskite decomposition products after 1000 h, which illustrates the poor photochemical stability of MAPbI3. The obtained results are fully consistent with our previous publication reporting low intrinsic thermal and photochemical stability of MAPbI3.12
 Fig. 2  Evolution of the UV-vis spectra (a), XRD patterns (b) and phase composition (c) of the glass/MAPbI3 samples under continuous light soaking. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (+), MAPbI3 (*) and Pb0 (θ) phases. 
Impact of CTL underlayers on the photochemical stability of MAPbI3
The organic CTL material deposited between the perovskite film and glass substrate affects significantly the degradation rate of MAPbI3 under light soaking. Fig. 3 gives an overview of the evolution of the absorption spectra, XRD patterns and phase compositions of all studied CTL/perovskite systems. Interestingly, some charge transport layers accelerate perovskite degradation, while others slow down the photodecomposition of MAPI3.
 Fig. 3  Absorption spectra (left), XRD patterns (middle) and phase composition diagrams (right) for glass/NDI/MAPbI3 (a), glass/PDI/MAPbI3 (b), glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 (c), glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 (d) and glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 (e) stacks. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (), MAPbI3 (), Pb0 () and NDI () phases. 
There are some reports suggesting that the stability of perovskite films depends on the grain size, i.e. the larger the grains, the more stable is the film of the material.39 Such a trend is fully justified with respect to the ambient stability since a decrease in the size of the grains increases significantly the material's surface area, where perovskite is in contact with aggressive species such as oxygen and moisture. In contrast, we found no significant impact of the grain size on the kinetics of the intrinsic light-induced perovskite decomposition. AFM and SEM analysis showed that pristine MAPbI3 films grown on different substrates have a uniform structure with an average grain size of 0.1–0.15 μm and an RMS roughness of ∼10 nm (Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). Therefore, some specific interfacial interactions between the perovskite and CTLs provide the strongest contribution to the films' degradation kinetics rather than the perovskite film morphology itself.
Among all studied CTLs, PDI and NDI were the strongest promoters of the perovskite degradation. Glass/NDI/perovskite stacks show no perovskite phase already after 20 h of light soaking according to the UV-vis data (Fig. 3a). XRD analysis of this system provided very interesting results. The NDI phase (peak at 8.5°) becomes dominating when increasing the exposure time, which might be suggesting either crystallization of this material or, most probably, amorphization of the perovskite film. Surprisingly, NDI strongly suppressed the formation of crystalline phases of PbI2 or metallic Pb so typical of MAPbI3 photodecomposition. Such unusual behavior indicates the presence of some specific interactions between NDI and the perovskite degradation products. Most likely, a portion of NDI reacts with PbI2 forming some mostly amorphous adduct (Fig. 4a), which is not detectable by XRD. In order to verify this hypothesis, we dissolved NDI and PbI2 (1:3 ratio) in dimethylformamide (DMF) and then evaporated the solvent. XRD analysis of the dried powder (Fig. 4b) showed the presence of both NDI and PbI2 phases along with a number of other peaks, which can be tentatively assigned to the PbI2–NDI adduct. Co-existence of the adduct with the pure components (PbI2 and NDI) did not allow us to obtain single crystals of the adduct and identify its structure by X-ray diffraction analysis. However, with respect to understanding the perovskite ageing behaviour, identifying an exact structure of this adduct is much less important than the fact of its formation. It is known that MAPbI3 has low formation energy and, therefore, can easily dissociate to MAI and PbI2 under elevated temperatures or light soaking. Binding of PbI2 to NDI with the adduct formation shifts the thermodynamic equilibrium in the system and accelerates the decomposition of the perovskite films. Considering the fact that PDI has the same functional groups as NDI, it is reasonable to assume that it can also form some adducts with PbI2. Indeed, a glass/PDI/MAPbI3 system (Fig. 3b) shows essentially the same degradation behaviour as glass/NDI/MAPbI3 stacks (Fig. 3a). These two examples reveal the importance of specific interactions between the CTL molecules and perovskite or its decomposition products. In this particular case, these interactions strongly promote the light-induced breakdown of MAPbI3. However, we believe that careful (supra)molecular engineering might help to develop CTLs that stabilize the perovskite phase via some specific interactions.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of some chemical interactions between NDI and PbI2 leading to adduct formation (a). XRD pattern for the powder of an NDI–PbI2 blend (b), and XPS Pb 4f7/2 bands for NDI/MAPbI3 samples (c). A comparison of the XPS Pb 4f7/2 band FWHM (d) and binding energy (e) evolution under aging for the different systems. 
The CTLs based on the fullerene derivatives did not affect the stability of MAPbI3 as dramatically as was observed in the case of using NDI and PDI. Glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 and glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 stacks showed relatively slow degradation kinetics under continuous light soaking. For instance, ca. 60% of the perovskite phase survived in glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 samples after 500 h of light exposure. However, complete decomposition of MAPbI3 to PbI2 and Pb(0) was observed after 1000 h (Fig. 3c). The glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 system showed better stability demonstrating the presence of ∼15% of crystalline MAPbI3 after 1000 h under the same ageing conditions (Fig. 3d).
It should be emphasized that glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 stacks represent the only system that showed better stability than the reference samples based on perovskite films deposited directly on bare glass (Fig. 3e). Over 40% of the crystalline MAPbI3 phase survived after 1000 h of light soaking, while the reference samples showed only 30% of this phase remaining. This observation suggests that spiro-OMeTAD films provide an even more inert substrate interface for the perovskite films than bare glass. A comparison of all five glass/CTL/MAPbI3 systems based on the photobleaching kinetics of their films is presented in Fig. S3 (ESI†). These results also support the conclusion that the spiro-OMeTAD underlayer slows down the perovskite degradation as compared to the reference films, while all other CTLs promote MAPbI3 decomposition.
Additional insight into the degradation behaviour of all glass/CTL/perovskite stacks was gained with the use of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The XPS survey spectra of glass/NDI/MAPbI3 and glass/PDI/MAPbI3 samples before and after light soaking are presented in Fig. S4,† while data on the chemical composition of the film surface are given in Table S1 (ESI†).
The obtained results suggest that MAPbI3 rapidly loses organic cations under light exposure. Thus, in the case of glass/NDI/MAPbI3 stacks, the nitrogen content on the film surface gradually decreases from 6.1% to 0.9% (note that NDI also has nitrogen) with the ageing time going up to 1000 h. At the same time, the I:Pb atomic ratio for this system also decreases from ∼2.45 for fresh films down to 1.29 for the samples after 1000 h of light soaking. XPS data suggest that glass/PDI/MAPbI3 undergoes even faster degradation upon light exposure. The nitrogen content decreases to zero already after 200 h of light soaking, while the I:Pb ratio falls from 2.52 to 1.45.
It should be noticed that the XPS Pb 4f7/2 spectra of the glass/NDI/MAPbI3 (Fig. 4c) and glass/PDI/MAPbI3 (Fig. S5, ESI†) samples show strong band broadening in two directions: towards high energies to match the PbI2 band and towards low energies thus featuring the formation of metallic lead. Thus, the obtained XPS data confirm that MAPbI3 films deposited atop NDI or PDI underlayers undergo facile light-induced degradation while losing organic cations and forming PbI2 and metallic Pb. XPS data for the glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 and glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 stacks are presented in Fig. S6 and Table S2 (ESI†). These samples were clearly more stable but still showed the same degradation trends as can be concluded considering the complete absence of nitrogen and ∼3-fold reduction in the I:Pb ratio after 1000 h of light soaking. An interesting comparison can also be drawn from the full width of the Pb 4f7/2 band measured at half of the intensity maximum (FWHM) and the energy position of this band (Fig. 4d and e). Importantly, there was no change in the FWHM for glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 samples up to 200 h of light exposure while after 1000 h of light soaking it increased only by ∼10% (Fig. 4d). However, there is a high-energy shift of the Pb 4f7/2 band by ∼0.19–0.20 eV after 200 h and by ∼0.34–0.40 eV after 1000 h of ageing, which clearly indicates the formation of the PbI2 phase.
A similar trend was observed for glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 stacks. These results suggest that fullerene derivatives somehow suppress the formation of metallic lead (at least on the film surface) from MAPbI3 under light soaking conditions, while PbI2 becomes a predominant decomposition product. This finding correlates with our previous report evidencing PC61BM-assisted light-induced splitting of MAPbI3 to MAI and PbI2.19
XPS data also confirmed a reduced decomposition rate of glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 stacks as compared to the reference glass/MAPbI3 samples. First, N:Pb and I:Pb ratios show a slower decrease for the perovskite films deposited on spiro-OMeTAD than on bare glass (Fig. S7 and Table S3, ESI†). Second, the glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 system demonstrates the smallest high-energy shift of the Pb 4f7/2 band in the course of light-induced ageing within up to 1000 h, which indicates suppressed formation of the PbI2 phase (Fig. 4d and e). The revealed behaviour of spiro-OMeTAD makes it the most preferable CTL if placed under the perovskite layer.
To summarize this part, we want to emphasize that the nature of the CTL underlayer significantly affects the photostability of the perovskite films. Some materials such as rylene diimides severely accelerate MAPbI3 decomposition due to their specific interactions with the PbI2 formed as a perovskite ageing product. Fullerene derivatives PC61BM and PC71BM also promote decomposition of MAPbI3 since they form adducts with MAI, which is another perovskite decomposition product. This behaviour can be understood considering the fact that bonding of MAI with PbI2 within the perovskite lattice is rather weak and MAPbI3 can reversibly dissociate to MAI and PbI2. If one of the decomposition products is absorbed by the CTL or forms some adducts, the equilibrium shifts to the right and perovskite undergoes massive decomposition (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Impact of specific interactions between PbI2 or MAI and the CTL material on the decomposition of MAPbI3. 
In contrast, other materials such as spiro-OMeTAD do not react with either MAI or PbI2 and, therefore, provide the most stable interface with what is deposited above the perovskite layer while slowing down its decomposition. Thus, a careful design of the CTL/perovskite interfaces is a crucial point to deliver the desired operation lifetimes required for the practical implementation of perovskite photovoltaics.
The performance of CTLs as top encapsulation coatings for MAPbI3 thin films
The charge transport materials discussed in the previous section were also explored as encapsulation coatings atop the perovskite films in the glass/MAPbI3/CTL configuration. The obtained results are summarized in Fig. 5. It was not surprising that NDI and PDI coatings accelerated the perovskite decomposition. These highly crystalline materials did not provide uniform coatings above the perovskite layer (Fig. S6 ESI†), which suggests that they can hardly block the evaporation of the volatile components from the MAPbI3 films in the course of their light-induced ageing. At the same time, both NDI and PDI tend to form some adducts with PbI2, which facilitates the decomposition of the perovskite under light soaking.
 Fig. 5  Absorption spectra (left), XRD patterns (middle) and phase composition diagrams (right) for glass/MAPbI3/NDI (a), glass/MAPbI3/PDI (b), glass/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD (c), glass/MAPbI3/PC71BM (d) and glass/MAPbI3/PC61BM (e) stacks. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (), MAPbI3 (), Pb0 () and NDI () phases. 
All other investigated CTLs formed uniform coatings above the perovskite films and increased substantially the lifetime of the MAPbI3 absorber under continuous light soaking conditions (Fig. S8 and S9, ESI†). Rather interesting results were obtained for the glass/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD system (Fig. 5c). According to the XRD data, the amount of MAPbI3 phase after 1000 h of light soaking was nearly the same as in the case of glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 samples with a CTL underlayer. Importantly, the degradation pathway has changed in favour of the formation of metallic lead rather than PbI2 observed in the case of the glass/CTL/MAPbI3 systems discussed above. The formation of metallic lead might be a consequence of the direct contact of the MAPbI3 degradation products, e.g. PbI2, with spiro-OMeTAD. It is known that PbI2 can undergo photochemical decomposition to I2 and Pb(0),40 while electron-rich aromatic amines such as spiro-OMeTAD can absorb I2 and undergo doping. The I2 absorption by spiro-OMeTAD proposed here might be a driving force accelerating the decomposition of MAPbI3 to metallic lead.
Interestingly, spiro-OMeTAD acts as a good encapsulation layer stabilizing the perovskite films for at least 500 h, while longer exposure to light leads to fast ageing with the formation of Pb(0). It is known that spiro-OMeTAD tends to crystallize under light soaking,22 which might lead to the formation of grains and voids at the grain boundaries. These voids might provide some routes for evaporation of volatile components from the perovskite layer, thus ruining the encapsulation properties of the spiro-OMeTAD upper coating.
Among all the CTL layers explored as top coatings above MAPbI3 films, the fullerene derivatives showed the best encapsulation characteristics. Indeed, PC61BM and PC71BM films deposited above MAPbI3 completely prevented its decomposition under light soaking conditions (Fig. 5d and e). Both UV-vis and XRD data for these systems showed no signs of PbI2 or Pb(0) formation. The revealed remarkable stabilization properties of the fullerene derivatives suggest that they form compact and uniform coatings above the perovskite grains, thus preventing loss of volatile species produced in the course of MAPbI3 photochemical ageing. Isolation of all degradation products inside the perovskite layer shifts the thermodynamic equilibrium in the desired direction and slows down the decomposition reactions, as we discussed previously.19 This mechanism relying on the thermodynamic reversibility of the lead halide decomposition processes apparently explains the self-healing of the perovskite solar cells in the dark after they were degrading under light soaking conditions.41,42
To summarize this section, we conclude that for the investigated series of glass/MAPbI3/CTL systems, spiro-OMeTAD and especially PC61BM and PC71BM showed the strongest stabilization effects on MAPbI3 films due to their excellent encapsulation properties.
Effect of CTLs on device stability
In the previous section, we featured PC61BM and PC71BM as the most promising CTLs enhancing remarkably the photostability of MAPbI3 films. However, these results might contradict the conclusions of our previous publication, where we showed that PC61BM and PC71BM absorb MAI in the cavities between the fullerene spheres, which leads to a rapid failure of the photovoltaic cells.19
Here we revised the stability of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/ETL p–i–n device architectures (ETL: PC61BM or PC71BM) under continuous light soaking conditions. Considering the fact that the top electrode might also be responsible for a number of ageing pathways, we exposed the electrode-free ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/ETL stacks to illumination and evaporated the Mg/Ag electrodes just before the measurements (see details in the Experimental section). Fig. 6 shows that the devices comprising PC61BM or PC71BM as ETLs strongly degraded within less than 20 h of light exposure, and after 40 h the efficiency drops to almost zero. Current–voltage characteristics of the degraded solar cells can be found in Fig. S11 and S12, ESI.† Particularly fast degradation was observed for the solar cells with the PC61BM layer. Short circuit current density (Jsc) dropped from ∼15 to ∼4 mA cm−2 within the initial 15 h of light soaking. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements confirmed severe current losses (Fig. S13, ESI†). Such behaviour is fully consistent with our previous observations19 and does not indicate excellent stability of the perovskite films encapsulated with either PC61BM or PC71BM. One might suspect that it is another interface, namely PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3, which is responsible for the observed device degradation. However, replacing PEDOT:PSS with PTAA, which is one of the most chemically inert and robust HTL materials, does not really influence the degradation trend (Fig. S15, ESI†). Note also that the efficiency of devices with PTAA used as the HTL comes close to 16%, which is a decent value for p–i–n perovskite solar cells that were not optimized for achieving the ultimate performance. This also suggests that MAPbI3 films have acceptable quality and bulk defects in the perovskite films should not dramatically affect their degradation behaviour. Therefore, the obtained results lead to the conclusion that the fullerene-based electron transport layer is mainly responsible for the degradation at least within the presented timescale.
 Fig. 6  Structure of 3 types of studied solar cells (a) and evolution of their PCE, Jsc and FF under light soaking conditions (b). 
Thus, even though PC61BM and PC71BM can encapsulate and stabilize the MAPbI3 films, interfacial degradation ruins their performance in devices. It should also be noted that the adsorption of MAI in the PC61BM layer at the perovskite/ETL interface can hardly be detected by UV-vis or XRD measurements due to the limited sensitivity of these techniques. Considering the impressive perovskite film stabilization effects demonstrated here for PC61BM and PC71BM, future efforts should be focused on preventing the MAI adsorption in the fullerene-based ETLs while maintaining their charge transport characteristics.
Notably, the n–i–p solar cells with an ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au configuration also showed low operation stability even though gold electrodes were deposited just before measurements as described above for p–i–n cells. The light power conversion efficiency (PCE) decreased rapidly approaching ∼2% after 100 h of light soaking (Fig. S16, ESI†). It is known that the SnO2 layer might contribute to device degradation. However, solar cells fabricated with a TiOx bottom ETL and spiro-OMeTAD top HTL demonstrated a similar degradation behaviour. Therefore, we assume that the spiro-OMeTAD layer is mainly responsible for the observed device ageing, while the impact of the oxide ETLs should also not be neglected.
We have applied time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) in order to gain a deeper insight into the degradation mechanism of perovskite solar cells with the spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer. Fresh and degraded ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au devices were profiled with O2+ ion beams (for both detection modes) to reveal possible light-induced changes inside the functional layers and at the interfaces. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of the most important markers, which can be used to identify the corresponding layers. For instance, Pb+ and I2− ions show a homogeneous distribution and outline the borders of the perovskite film.
 Fig. 7  TOF-SIMS profiles showing the distribution of the marker in fresh and aged ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au/Ag solar cells. 
Organic CH3NH3+ cations probed by both CH3+ and CH5N+ ions show a somewhat inhomogeneous distribution. Since the perovskite films were grown using a two-step approach by applying organic iodide on top of PbI2 films, some enrichment of the upper layers with respect to MAI as compared to the bottom layers is not surprising. Therefore, both CH3+ and CH5N+ ions should be considered primarily as markers of non-bound excessive MAI. The I2+ ion, most probably, is the marker of a degradation product formed via oxidation of iodide anions I− to molecular iodine (I2+) and its trapping in the form of polyiodide (e.g. I3−).43 Interestingly, for fresh samples it appears only at the interface between SnO2 and MAPbI3 since Sn(IV) oxidizes I−, probably under the harsh conditions induced by the ion beam. However, the aged sample shows the I2+ signal uniformly distributed in the perovskite layer, which suggests that the SnO2/MAPbI3 interface becomes passivated (e.g. via reduction of Sn(IV) to Sn(II)) and polyiodide species accumulate everywhere in the bulk of the perovskite phase suggesting its photochemical degradation with the release of iodine. This degradation pathway was identified previously.12
The most striking is the behaviour of CH3+ and CH5N+ markers. Both of them virtually disappear in the perovskite layer after ageing, suggesting the absence of any non-bound “excessive” MAI. This result is expectable since long exposure of the samples to light soaking and elevated temperature (∼45 °C) facilitated interdiffusion of MAI and PbI2, thus producing MAPbI3 with uniform composition. However, we can clearly observe the appearance of CH3+ inside the spiro-OMeTAD HTL layer after 100 h of light exposure. One might assume that spiro-OMeTAD behaves in the same way as fullerene derivatives PC61BM and PC71BM by adsorbing and accumulating MAI. However, the fact that CH5N+ marker ions are not visible in the HTL suggests a different nature of the absorbed species. It was reported previously that thermal and photochemical degradation of MAPbI3 produces PbI2 first, while the organic part decomposes to CH3NH2, HI, NH3 and CH3I. The latter two components might dominate under certain conditions.11,44,45 It is known that CH3I is a strong alkylating reagent and can easily convert aromatic amines Ar3N to the corresponding quaternized species [Ar3NCH3]+I−. Alternatively, it can react with the doping reagent LiTFSI, forming LiI and CH3N(SO2CF3)2 species (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Proposed degradation pathways explaining the modification of the HTL leading to the appearance of CH3+ marker ions. 
Regardless of which pathway is realized, it is clear that spiro-OMeTAD is not chemically inert with respect to the MAPbI3 photodegradation products and, therefore, can hardly provide long-term device stability.
Conclusions
In this work, we performed a comparative analysis of five different organic charge transport layers in two different sample geometries: glass/CTL/MAPbI3 and glass/MAPbI3/CTL, which provided complementary information on the interfacial chemistry and encapsulation properties of the corresponding CTLs. Using rylene diimides NDI and PDI as a model system, we have shown that any specific interactions of the perovskite degradation products (PbI2 in this case) with the CTL strongly accelerate MAPbI3 photodecomposition. Fullerene derivatives PC61BM and PC71BM showed remarkable encapsulation properties and completely prevented MAPbI3 decomposition under light soaking conditions.
However, interfacial chemistry related to MAI diffusion to the fullerene-based CTL ruins the performance of both PC61BM and PC71BM in perovskite solar cells exposed to continuous illumination. Well-known organic hole-transport material spiro-OMeTAD stabilized MAPbI3 in both sample geometries while being used as an underlayer or upper encapsulation coating for the perovskite films. However, spiro-OMeTAD adsorbed some of the perovskite degradation products as revealed by ToF-SIMS analysis, which has a strong adverse effect on the operation lifetime of the devices using this CTL.
Thus, the presented set of results emphasizes the crucial importance of interfacial degradation effects limiting severely the lifetime of present-generation perovskite solar cells. Achieving long-term operation stability in perovskite photovoltaics requires both a deeper understanding of the chemistry occurring at the functional interfaces and designing new advanced CTLs that are chemically robust with respect to the perovskite absorber while suppressing the main pathways of its photodegradation.
Among the studied panel of the charge transport materials, the fullerene derivatives delivered the most impressive results as top encapsulation coatings improving the stability of the perovskite films. However, MAI diffusion and accumulation in the fullerene-based ETLs has a strong adverse effect on their electrical characteristics and ruins the perovskite solar cell performance.16 This challenge can be addressed by filling the space between the fullerene spheres with some inert material, e.g. poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as was shown recently for PCBM/PMAA passivation coatings. Alternatively, an additional diffusion barrier (e.g. 1 nm thick Al2O3)46 might be introduced at the perovskite/PCBM interface to block the migration of MAI. We strongly believe that using these or other approaches for careful engineering of the CTL structure and properties, the perovskite community will succeed in substantially increasing the solar cell operation lifetime, setting commercially interesting benchmarks.
Experimental
Preparation of thin films and photovoltaic cells
Glass substrates were cleaned by sonication in deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 10 min each, dried in air and subjected to a plasma cleaning for 300 s. While preparing glass/CTL/MAPbI3 stacks, a CTL film was first deposited on glass. NDI and PDI powders were dissolved in chloroform (10 mg mL−1) and spin coated at 1000 rpm. PC61BM and PC71BM were dissolved in chlorobenzene (20 mg mL−1) and spin coated at 2000 rpm. The spiro-OMeTAD solution in chlorobenzene (40 mg mL−1) was deposited at 3000 rpm. Next, PbI2 films (100 nm) were evaporated atop glass/CTL samples in a high vacuum (5 × 10−6 mbar) chamber installed inside a nitrogen glovebox. The solution of MAI in isopropanol (25 mg mL−1) was spin coated at 3000 rpm dynamically in air. All substrates were annealed for 3 hours at 85 °C inside the nitrogen glovebox until the formation of the perovskite phase was virtually complete and absorption spectra of the films were saturated (i.e. stopped changing).
While preparing glass/MAPbI3/CTL samples, the MAPbI3 layer was grown first on glass substrates and then CTL films were deposited following the same procedures as described above.
Ageing experiments
All prepared samples were placed in a specially designed ageing chamber integrated into an MBraun glovebox. White light with 50 mW cm−2 intensity was provided by metal-halide lamps, which usually provide a decent match with the solar AM1.5G spectrum. The sample temperature during the experiments was 45 ± 3 °C. More details can be found in our previous publication.12
Device fabrication
The n–i–p ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD and p–i–n ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/ETL (ETL: PC61BM or PC71BM) samples were prepared following standard procedures.19,47 The SnO2 nanoparticle ink was purchased from Alfa Aesar, while spiro-OMeTAD was doped with LiTFSI and tBuPy as reported previously.23 The aforementioned multilayered stacks without top electrodes were exposed to light soaking under the same conditions as specified above. After completion of the ageing period, the samples were processed to complete solar cell architectures by depositing Mg/Ag (20/80 nm) electrodes for p–i–n structures and Au/Ag (20/80 nm) electrodes for n–i–p structures. Electrodes were evaporated in high vacuum (5 × 10−6 mbar) through a shadow mask defining the active area of each device as ∼0.16 cm2. Characterization of the solar cells by current–voltage and EQE measurements was performed as reported previously.19
Film characterization
X-ray diffraction patterns were collected using a Bruker D8 instrument with a Cu Kα source. Thin film measurements were carried out in a fixed illumination mode with no sample stage rotation in the range of 5–60 2θ degrees. The powder of the NDI–PbI2 blend was analyzed with the rotation of the sample stage with a frequency of 30 rpm. A Cypher ES microscope (Asylum Research, CA) was used to measure the topography of the samples in a tapping mode in a dry inert Ar atmosphere in an MBraun glovebox with O2 and H2O concentrations < 0.1 ppm. UV-vis spectra were measured in an inert atmosphere using an AvaSpec-2048-2UV-VIS fibre spectrometer integrated with an MBraun glovebox. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were carried out using a PHI XPS 5000 Versaprobe spectrometer (ULVAC Physical Electronics, USA) with a spherical quartz monochromator and an energy analyzer working in the range of binding energy (BE) from 0 to 1500 eV. The energy resolution ΔE was ≤0.5 eV.
Conflicts of interest
No conflicts of interest are reported here.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project No. 19-73-30020). The XPS measurements were supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (project no. 3.7270.2017/8.9) and Theme ‘Electron’, no. AAAA-A18-118020190098-5.
References
NREL efficiency chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
Z. Wang, Z. Shi, T. Li, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 56, 1190–1212 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Song, A. Abate, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, A. B. Phillips, U. Steiner, M. Graetzel and M. J. Heben, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600846 CrossRef .
Y. Han, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 2, 1955–1963 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. Alexander, M. Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-fisher, L. Etgar, E. A. Katz and G. Ram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 6, 326–330 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, M. Maeda and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9604–9612 RSC .
A. F. Akbulatov, S. Y. Luchkin, L. A. Frolova, N. N. Dremova, I. S. Zhidkov, K. L. Gerasimov, D. V. Anokhin, E. Z. Kurmaev, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1211–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Seo and N. Park, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2528–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen and N. Gauquelin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
B. Brunetti, C. Cavallo, A. Ciccioli, G. Gigli and A. Latini, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 46867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee and C. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1702197 Search PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Dong, N. Li and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1602922 CrossRef .
E. M. Sanehira, B. J. Tremolet De Villers, P. Schulz, M. O. Reese, S. Ferrere, K. Zhu, L. Y. Lin, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Akbulatov, L. A. Frolova, M. P. Griffin, I. R. Gearba, A. Dolocan, D. A. Vanden Bout, S. Tsarev, E. A. Katz, A. F. Shestakov, K. J. Stevenson and P. A. Troshin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700476 CrossRef .
B. Rivkin, P. Fassl, Q. Sun, A. Taylor, Z. Chen, B. Rivkin, P. Fassl, Q. Sun, A. Taylor and Z. Chen, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10042–10047 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Malinauskas, D. Tomkute-Luksiene, R. Sens, M. Daskeviciene, R. Send, H. Wonneberger and V. Jankauskas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11107–11116 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
A. K. Jena and Y. Numata, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2219 RSC .
H. J. Jung, D. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 30, 1802769 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, C. Sun, H. Li, H. Shi, X. Shai, Q. Sun, J. Han, Y. Shen, H. L. Yip, F. Huang and M. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4587–4594 RSC .
J. Xie, V. Arivazhagan, K. Xiao, K. Yan, Z. Yang, Y. Qiang, P. Hang, G. Li, C. Cui, X. Yu and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5566 RSC .
J. Xie, X. Yu, J. Huang, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, M. Lei, L. Xu, Z. Tang, C. Cui, P. Wang and D. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700018 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liang, C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402321 CrossRef .
S. Park and D. H. Wang, Macromol. Res., 2018, 26, 1598–5032 Search PubMed .
S. Li, W. Liu, C. Z. Li, F. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. Shi, H. Chen and T. P. Russell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10659–10665 RSC .
Y. J. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Lin, Y. Liu, K. Jiang, C. Mu, T. Ma, J. Y. L. Lai and H. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 520–525 RSC .
K. Rundel, S. Maniam, K. Deshmukh, E. Gann and C. R. Mcneill, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12266–12277 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Lee, H. W. Wang, A. Santala, F. Liu, Y. Diao, A. L. Briseno and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 2–9 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, Z. Jin, J. Lei, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, F. Gao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9514–9522 RSC .
C. Chiang and C. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2666–2672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. I. Gurina and V. D. Evtushenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 1986, 21, 718–719 CrossRef .
D. R. Ceratti, Y. Rakita, L. Cremonesi, R. Tenne, V. Kalchenko, M. Elbaum, D. Oron, M. A. C. Potenza, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706273 CrossRef PubMed .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz and I. Visoly-fisher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 550–558 RSC .
L. A. Frolova, N. P. Piven, D. K. Susarova, A. V. Akkuratov, S. D. Babenko and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2242–2244 RSC .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, Z. Hawash, S. R. Raga, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3406–3410 RSC .
A. Latini, G. Gigli and A. Ciccioli, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1351–1357 RSC .
D. Koushik, W. J. H. Verhees, Y. Kuang, S. Veenstra, D. Zhang, M. A. Verheijen, M. Creatore and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 91–100 RSC .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, H. Tan, R. Fu, Q. Li, F. Lin, D. Yu, G. Walters, E. H. Sargent and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14517–14523 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00493aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of the investigated CTLs (a) and schematic representation of the experimental methodology (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  Evolution of the UV-vis spectra (a), XRD patterns (b) and phase composition (c) of the glass/MAPbI3 samples under continuous light soaking. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (+), MAPbI3 (*) and Pb0 (θ) phases.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorption spectra (left), XRD patterns (middle) and phase composition diagrams (right) for glass/NDI/MAPbI3 (a), glass/PDI/MAPbI3 (b), glass/PC61BM/MAPbI3 (c), glass/PC71BM/MAPbI3 (d) and glass/spiro-OMeTAD/MAPbI3 (e) stacks. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (), MAPbI3 (), Pb0 () and NDI () phases.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of some chemical interactions between NDI and PbI2 leading to adduct formation (a). XRD pattern for the powder of an NDI–PbI2 blend (b), and XPS Pb 4f7/2 bands for NDI/MAPbI3 samples (c). A comparison of the XPS Pb 4f7/2 band FWHM (d) and binding energy (e) evolution under aging for the different systems.	 

 	Scheme 1  Impact of specific interactions between PbI2 or MAI and the CTL material on the decomposition of MAPbI3.	 

 	Fig. 5  Absorption spectra (left), XRD patterns (middle) and phase composition diagrams (right) for glass/MAPbI3/NDI (a), glass/MAPbI3/PDI (b), glass/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD (c), glass/MAPbI3/PC71BM (d) and glass/MAPbI3/PC61BM (e) stacks. Symbols denote the peaks of PbI2 (), MAPbI3 (), Pb0 () and NDI () phases.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of 3 types of studied solar cells (a) and evolution of their PCE, Jsc and FF under light soaking conditions (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  TOF-SIMS profiles showing the distribution of the marker in fresh and aged ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au/Ag solar cells.	 

 	Scheme 2  Proposed degradation pathways explaining the modification of the HTL leading to the appearance of CH3+ marker ions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00493a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
