Towards understanding the nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system: well matched charge selectivity and ionic composition   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01088C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01088C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2259-2266Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsTowards understanding the nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system: well matched charge selectivity and ionic composition†

        
          
            Liuxuan 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Guo
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Xia
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shutao 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yugang 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Jiang
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Daoben 
            Zhu
          
        
      b
aState Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, and Center for Applied Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, P. R. China.  Fax: (+86) 010-62751875;   Tel: (+86) 010-62755406E-mail: ygwang@pku.edu.cn
bBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), and Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China.  Fax: (+86) 010-82627566;   Tel: (+86) 010-82621396E-mail: wguo@iccas.ac.cn
cSchool of Chemistry and Environment, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, 100191, P. R. China
Received 
      24th January 2011
    , Accepted 16th March 2011First published on 9th May 2011AbstractThe widespread use of tiny electrical devices, from microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) to portable personal electronics, provides a new challenge in the miniaturization and integration of power supply systems. Towards this goal, we have recently demonstrated a bio-inspired nanofluidic energy harvesting system that converts salinity gradient energy from the ambient environment into sustainable electricity with single ion-selective nanopores (Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20, 1339). The nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system (NREDS) significantly improves the performance of conventional membrane-based reverse electrodialysis systems due to a higher ionic flux and a lower fluidic resistance. However, the fundamental working mechanism of the NREDS has been largely unexplored in the literature. In this work we have systematically investigated the performance of the NREDS in relation to the electrolyte type and the charge selectivity of the nanofluidic channel using both experimental and theoretical approaches. Experimental results show that the short-circuit current, the open-circuit voltage, and the resulting electric power of the NREDS are very sensitive to the ionic composition of the electrolyte solution. Through an in-depth theoretical analysis, two dominant factors that govern the charge separation and ion selectivity of the nanochannels were identified. The results prove that, with well-matched electrolyte types and nanopore charge selectivity, the harvested electric power and energy conversion efficiency can be improved by nearly two orders of magnitude.

Broader context
Salinity gradient power, a type of Gibbs free energy, is in principle clean, sustainable, and ubiquitous in our living environment. The gross power potential of this renewable energy source is about 2.6 TW, which is equivalent to approximately 20% of the present world energy consumption. Reverse electrodialysis (RED), a promising but still challenging method to recover clean energy by mixing fresh and salt water with ion-exchange membranes, was proposed more than half a century ago. This membrane-based technology has encountered some critical problems which impede its large scale utilization, such as high membrane cost, low power density and short life due to bio-fouling. A recent advance in this field, namely the nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system (NREDS), focuses on the use of nanoscale and bio-inspired architectures to address these challenges. Herein, the fundamental working mechanism of the NREDS in relation to the electrolyte type and the charge selectivity of the nanofluidic channel have been systematically investigated using both experimental and theoretical approaches. These features guarantee a substantially higher energy conversion performance and offer great possibilities for miniaturization of the power supply component of small electrical devices, ranging from the microelectromechanical systems to portable personal electronics.

Introduction
Harvesting clean energy directly from the ambient environment is an economically and environmentally feasible way of powering very small electrical devices, such as microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), biomedical implant micro-devices and even portable personal electronics, without the limitations of cumbersome batteries or external power supplies.1,2 In addition to the intensively studied solar,3,4 thermal,5,6 and biomechanical energy sources,7,8 renewable energy resources that arise in fluidic systems,9,10 such as water flow (mechanical energy)11,12 and salt content (chemical energy),13,14 are also ubiquitous in our environment. One notable source is salinity gradient power, a type of Gibbs free energy which is in principle clean and sustainable, and does not discharge any thermal pollutants or CO2.15,16 A conventional method used to retrieve salinity gradient energy by mixing brine and fresh water through permselective membranes, namely reverse electrodialysis, was proposed by Pattle more than half a century ago.9 However, the power density obtained was only 0.005 mW cm−2. In 1976, Weinstein and Leitz designed an improved reverse electrodialysis cell13 composed of an array of alternating anion and cation exchange membranes, but the electric power generated was also very limited (0.017 mW cm−2), such that the energy price at that time was unaffordable. Recently, Metz et al. achieved a power density of 0.093 mW cm−2 with 50 pairs of ion exchange membranes.17 Although the achievements in the study of membrane reverse electrodialysis systems are encouraging, the performance needs to be further improved for use in practical applications.18 In addition, this membrane-based technology still encounters some challenges, such as high membrane cost and short membrane life due to bio-fouling.19
Combining inspiration from living systems with advanced nanofabrication techniques, the concept of reverse electrodialysis has gained renewed attention.20–23 It is known that, in a biological system, the transmembrane protein pores conduct ions or molecules in a highly efficient way by either passive diffusion or active transportation.24 Compared to the more-elaborate active transport mechanism that involves versatile biological motors and transporters, passive diffusion along the chemical concentration gradient is a primordial cellular transport mode that delivers vital materials to desired reaction sites in a timely and energetically favorable fashion.25 In the recent years solid-state nanofluidic channels or nanopores have been proposed as functional mimics of these protein pores,26–31 in which mass transportation is governed by steric interactions, electrostatic interactions, van der Waals interactions, and hydrogen-binding networks between the fluid and the channel wall.32
In order to induce the passive diffusion mechanism in synthetic nanofluidic channels, intensive efforts have been made in both fundamental research and engineering fields, including nanofluidic analytics,33 diode-based nanofluidic devices,34–37 nanoscale fluid pumping,38 biomimetic nanochannels,39,40 surface patterning,41 energy conversion,42,43 and seawater desalination.44,45 Inspired by the electrogenic cell of the electric eel, we recently demonstrated a proof-of-concept nanofluidic energy-harvesting system that converts salinity gradient energy into sustainable electricity with single ion selective track-etched nanopores.46 We achieved a maximum 26 pW power output with a single-pore device. By exploiting parallelization with a pore density of 108–1010 cm−2, the estimated power density approaches 3–260 mW cm−2, which is 2–4 orders of magnitude higher than that using ion-exchange membranes. Kim and Duan et al. have further proved that a nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system (NREDS) can be made using silica nanochannels fabricated by a standard semiconductor manufacturing processes.47 Due to the relatively low surface charge density of silica materials, the highest power density they obtained was only 0.77 mW cm−2, but this is still one order of magnitude higher than that using ion-exchange membrane. From these results, we can conclude that utilizing solid-state nanofluidic channels or nanopores can significantly improve the performance of the reverse electrodialysis system due to a higher ionic flux and lower fluidic resistance. Moreover, with the track-etched nanoporous membrane, the cost of the energy harvesting system can be substantially reduced, which makes this technology more practical.
So far, the fundamental working mechanism of the newly proposed NREDS has been largely unexplored. One important issue is that, besides the common use of potassium chloride in the laboratory, when inorganic salts are used as an electrolyte the performance of energy harvesting devices has hardly been taken into account in the literature. This seriously impedes their potential applications in harvesting electricity from brine water in the sea or from bodily fluids in a physiological environment. In the present work, we take a deeper look into the NREDS from both an experimental and a theoretical perspective. Experimentally, we compare the performance of both the cation- and anion-selective nanopores in three representative monovalent inorganic electrolytes: potassium chloride (KCl), sodium chloride (NaCl) and lithium chloride (LiCl). The results show that both the short-circuit current (Isc), the open-circuit voltage (Uoc) and the resulting power are very sensitive to ionic composition. With cation-selective nanopores, the maximum difference in power generation among the three kinds of monovalent salt can be up to around 270% with a 1000-fold concentration gradient. This difference can be magnified to about 340% with anion-selective nanopores and a 100-fold concentration gradient. Through further theoretical analysis, we found that the power generation using ion-selective nanochannels is not only an electrostatic process associated with the nanopore size, surface charge density and ionic strength,48 but also an electrokinetic process in which the inherent difference in ion mobility between cations and anions plays a key role in device performance. For the salts whose cations diffuse faster than anions, the cation-selective nanochannels exhibit distinctly better performance in energy production. In contrast, for those salts which have higher anion diffusion rates, the anion-selective nanochannels have better performance. Therefore, for a certain type of charge-selective nanopore, not all types of 1:1 inorganic salts are suitable as the electrolyte for salinity gradient energy conversion. In addition, the surface charge properties are a vital factor in obtaining high power generation and good energy conversion efficiency. Well matched electrolyte types and nanopore charge selectivity is crucial for the salinity gradient energy conversion using synthetic nanofluidic devices.
Experimental
Nanopore fabrication and characterization

          Polyimide films (Kapton 50HN, DuPont) of 12 μm thickness were irradiated with single swift heavy ions (Pb) with energy 11.4 MeV per nucleon at the UNILAC linear accelerator (GSI, Darmstadt, Germany). Therefore, on each irradiated polymer membrane, only one latent ion track was contained. The fabrication of cone-shaped nanopores was accomplished by electrical-field-assistant asymmetric etching of the polymer membranes, as reported previously.49 In brief, the single-ion irradiated polyimide films were chemically etched with sodium hypochlorite (NaClO, ∼9% chloride content) at 50 °C from one side, while a protecting solution of potassium iodide (KI, 1 M) was placed on the other side of the polymer film.50 During the chemical etching, an electric field of +1 V was applied across the membrane by a pair of platinum electrodes to monitor the ionic current through the nascent nanopore with a Keithley 6487 picoammeter/voltage source (Keithley Instruments, Cleveland, OH). The etching process was terminated when the recorded transmembrane current approach a value of ∼0.4–2 nA.51 Once the pore opens, the protecting solution can neutralize the etchant in order to prevent the smaller end of the conical nanopore from being etched further. The polymer films were firstly immersed in 1 M KI solution for ten minutes, followed by thoroughly washing with pure water three times on each side. The typical diameter of the large opening (the base side) of the conical nanopore was about 1.2–1.5 μm, which could be precisely measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The diameter of the small opening (the tip side) was about 10–40 nm estimated with a commonly used conductance measurement in 1 M KCl solution.
Chemical modification

N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, 98%, Aldrich), pentafluorophenol (PFP, >99%, Aladdin Reagent (China)), and ethylenediamine (EDA, Beijing Xingjin Chemical Reagent (China)) were used for chemical modification. Chemical etching of the polymeric materials resulted in the formation of carboxyl groups (–COOH) on the surface of the nanopore wall. These carboxyl groups could be converted into amino (–NH2) terminated groups through a two-step chemical reaction (Scheme 1):52,53 firstly, the carboxyl groups were activated into pentafluorophenyl estersviaPFP and EDC coupling chemistry. The track-etched polymer films were immersed in an ethanol solution containing 100 mM EDC and 200 mM PFP for 60 min at room temperature. Secondly, the covalent coupling of ethylenediamine was realized by immersing the sample films into a reaction vessel containing 100 mM EDA overnight. After that, the chemically modified membranes were washed carefully, first with ethanol and then with pure water.
 Scheme 1  The chemical modification strategy for converting the carboxyl groups (–COOH) into amino (–NH2) terminated groups. 
Transmembrane current recordings
The nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis device was composed of a two-chamber conductivity cell with a single-pore polyimide membrane mounted in-between, as demonstrated in our previous work.46 For the cation-selective nanopores, a fixed concentration of 1 mM was applied at the tip side of the conical nanopore. Electrolyte solutions with different ionic strength (1 mM to 1000 mM) were sequentially applied at the base side, forming the concentration gradient. The pH of the electrolyte used was about 5.6–6.0. For the anion-selective nanopores, the chemical gradient was formed by placing a 10 mM salt solution on the tip side and 10 to 1000 mM on the base side. The pH of the testing solution was about 3.4, at which the amino (–NH2) terminated groups could be positively charged. Current recordings were carried out with a Keithley 6487 picoammeter/voltage source through Ag/AgCl electrodes. The electrode potential differences in different electrolyte solutions and with different ionic strengths were calibrated with a saturated calomel reference electrode (see ESI†, Fig. S1 and S2).
Results and discussion
In charged nanofluidic channels, counter-ions (with the opposite polarity of the surface charge) are preferentially transported over co-ions (with the same polarity as the surface charge), which is known as ion-selectivity.28 Pristine track-etched nanopores have carboxyl groups (–COOH) on their pore wall. In neutral or basic solutions, deprotonation of the carboxyl groups yields negatively charged carboxylate groups (–COO−). Through a two-step chemical modification, the carboxyl groups can be converted into amino (–NH2) terminated groups (Scheme 1), which are positively charged in acidic solutions. In this way, both cation- and anion-selective nanopores can be obtained. The charge-selectivity of the cone-shaped nanopore can be identified by monitoring the current–voltage (I–V) response in, for example, 1 mM KCl solution. As shown in Fig. 1a, the I–V curve of the cation-selective nanopores indicates a preferential ion transport direction from the tip to the base side.29 In contrast, the preferential ion transport direction for the anion-selective nanopores is the opposite, as shown in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 1  Power generation from the cation-selective single-nanopore fluidic system (negatively charged). (a) Current–voltage response (in 1 mM KCl) of the negatively charged single conical nanopore indicates a preferential ion transport direction from the tip to the base side. The short-circuit current (b), the open-circuit voltage (c) and the resulting electrical power (d) were measured as a function of the logarithm of the KCl (square), NaCl (circle) and LiCl (triangle) concentration gradient. The effective diameter of the nanopore tip side was about 40 nm. The pH of the testing solution was about 5.6–6.0. 
 Fig. 2  Power generation from the anion-selective single-nanopore fluidic system (positively charged). (a) Current–voltage response (in 1 mM KCl) of the positively charged single conical nanopore indicates a preferential ion transport direction from the base to the tip side. The short-circuit current (b), the open-circuit voltage (c) and the resulting electrical power (d) were measured as a function of the logarithm of the KCl (square), NaCl (circle) and LiCl (triangle) concentration gradient. After the two-step chemical modification, the effective tip diameter of the nanopore was assumed to be unchanged. This assumption can be justified by comparing the I–V curves before (Fig. 1a) and after (Fig. 2a) the chemical modification. The pH of the testing solution was around 3.4. 
We have experimentally investigated the power generation performance of both cation- and anion-selective nanopores in three kinds of monovalent inorganic electrolyte: KCl, NaCl and LiCl. The zero-volt current (I0) and the reversal potential (Vrev) are considered as the short-circuit current (Isc) and the open-circuit voltage (Uoc) of the NREDS.54,55 For the three kinds of inorganic salt, the Isc, Uoc, and the resulting power, calculated as I0Vrev/4, are very sensitive to the ionic composition of the electrolyte solution (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). With the cation-selective nanopores (negatively charged), the highest power generation is ∼45 pW with a 1000-fold concentration gradient in KCl solution (Fig. 1d), followed by the NaCl solution (∼29 pW), and then the LiCl solution (∼17 pW). The maximum difference in power generation between KCl and LiCl can be up to 270%.
With the anion-selective nanopores (postively charged), the highest power generation is obtained in the LiCl solution (∼22 pW, Fig. 2d), followed by the NaCl solution (∼14 pW) and then the KCl solution (∼6 pW). The difference between LiCl and KCl reaches 340% under a 100-fold concentration gradient. Since the three kinds of inorganic salt share the same anion, the chloride ions, the difference in the transmembrane diffusion current and the resulting electrical power may stem from the different cation mobility, which is scaled by their diffusion coefficients (D+), as listed in Table 1. In cation-selective nanopores, the power harvested increases with the cation mobility. In contrast, surprisingly, in anion-selective nanopores, the sequence is the opposite. Therefore, an intuitive description is that the electrolyte type and the nanopore charge selectivity may have some mutual coordination to impact the power generation capability. We will justify this hypothesis with theoretical analysis in the following paragraphs.
Table 1 The diffusion coefficient of cation (D+) and anion (D−) in different electrolytes and the maximum electrical power obtained in single cation-selective nanopores (Pm(CSN)) and in single anion-selective nanopores (Pm(ASN)). Since we cannot measure stable ionic current in KF solution with Ag/AgCl electrodes, the data are not shown here




 
 

D
+ (10−5 cm2s−1)

D
− (10−5 cm2s−1)
Ratio (D+/D−)

P
m (CSN) (pW)

P
m (ASN) (pW)




Salt 1

                  KCl
                
1.957
2.032
0.96
45
6


Salt 2

                  NaCl
                
1.334
2.032
0.65
29
14


Salt 3

                  LiCl
                
1.029
2.032
0.50
17
22


Salt 4

                  KF
                
1.957
1.475
1.33
–
–




An in-depth understanding of the energy conversion mechanism can be obtained based on a thermodynamic analysis. It is known that the chemical concentration gradient is a type of Gibbs free energy available for work.56 We consider an ion diffusion process from a high-concentrated solution (H) to the low-concentrated solution (L). The two bulk reservoirs are interconnected with a single nanochannel with certain surface charge properties. In an infinitesimal time unit (dt), the Gibbs free energy loss (dG) due to solution mixing can be described as: (1)where aH/L is the chemical activity of the ion species on the H or L side, and I± is the ion flux contributed by either cations (+) or anions (−). During the diffusion process, owing to the asymmetric diffusion between cations and anions, part of the Gibbs free energy could be converted into electric work (dW) in the form of a net diffusion current, which is the core idea of the NREDS: (2)
Then the energy conversion efficiency (η) can be derived as: (3)
The physical meaning of this formula is very clear: the total ion diffusion through the nanochannel in an infinitesimal time unit (dt) can be scaled as the sum of the absolute value of the diffusion current contributed by both cations and anions (|I+| + |I−|), but only the net diffusion current (|I+| − |I−|) generated from the asymmetric ion diffusion across the nanochannel can be harvested as electric work.
With existing experimental methods, the ionic current contributed by cations and anions cannot be measured separately. Thus, we calculate them with a continuous model based on the Poisson and Nernst–Planck (PNP) equations: (4) (5)where Φ, ci, ji, Di, and zi are the local electrical potential, the local ion concentration, the local ionic flux, the diffusion coefficient and the valence of ionic species i. T, e, ε, and kB have their usual meaning. The finite element method was employed to solve the coupled partial differential eqn (4) and (5) with appropriate boundary conditions (see the ESI†). Detailed discussion of the arithmetic optimization, and the validity and the reliability of the calculation method can be found in previous publications by us and other authors.57–59 We have demonstrated that power generation from the nanofluidic system is independent of the channel profile.46 Therefore, for simplicity and to reduce the computational scale, the model nanochannel is cylindrical in shape and 500 nm in length (see ESI†, Fig. S3). Its radius is 20 nm, similar to the nanopore tip size in our experiments. The length and radius of the electrolyte reservoirs are both 500 nm. The surface charge density (σ) ranges from 0 to 100 mC m−2. The polarity of the surface charge is set to be either negative to simulate cation-selective nanopores, or positive to simulate anion-selective nanopores.
As listed in Table 1, four representative kinds of inorganic electrolyte with simple monovalent ions were investigated, including potassium chloride (KCl), sodium chloride (NaCl), lithium chloride (LiCl), and potassium fluoride (KF). For KCl, the mobility for K+ and Cl− are very close in bulk solution (D+ ≈ D−). For NaCl and LiCl, the anions diffuse faster than the cations (D+ < D−). In contrast, in KF solution, the cations diffuse faster than the anions (D+ > D−). Since no chloride ions are contained in the KF solution, it is very difficult to obtain stable ionic current signals experimentally with the same Ag/AgCl electrodes as those used in measuring ionic current in chloride salt solutions. Therefore, only theoretical results in KF electrolyte are provided in this paper. The concentration gradient applied on the model nanopore is 1000-fold, by applying a 1 mM concentration on one side of the model nanochannel, and 1000 mM on the other side. The total diffusion current for both cations and anions is calculated by integrating the ionic flux density in the cross section of the model nanopore.
We first calculate the radial ion distribution from the channel axis (r = 0) to the channel wall (r = 20 nm). From an electrostatic viewpoint, the radial ion distributions are identical for all the four kinds of monovalent electrolyte in either cation- (Fig. 3a) or anion-selective nanopores (Fig. 3d). We have proved that the net diffusion current in KCl (D+ ≈ D−) electrolyte only stems from the charge separation within the electrical double layer (EDL),46 in which the ion transport behavior is governed by the surface charge properties.60 In the non-EDL region, monovalent salts, such as KCl, do not generate a net diffusion current due to an equal cation/anion distribution and the symmetrical ion mobility. However, for the salts with asymmetric cation/anion mobility (Fig. 3b and 3e), the net diffusion current is generated both in and out of the EDL, such as NaCl, LiCl (D+ < D−) and KF (D+ > D−).
 Fig. 3  Generation of the net diffusion current from asymmetric ion migration across the cation- (a–c) or anion-selective nanochannels (d–f). The radial ion distributions are identical for the four representative types of monovalent inorganic salt in either cation- (a) or anion-selective nanochannels (c). However, the resulting local net current density (j) is not the same (b, e). Due to the asymmetric diffusion rates between cations and anions, the net diffusion current generates in and out of the EDL at the channel wall (a, b, d, and e in gray). (c, f) The total diffusion current (I0) was calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). Four types of salt were studied, including KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle). The radius of the model nanopore was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. (a, b) The surface-charge density was −60 mC m−2. (d, e) The surface-charge density was 60 mC m−2. 
From these results, two mechanisms that generate a net diffusion current in a nanochannel can be identified: firstly, by the charge separation within the electrical double layer at the channel wall, namely, the charge-selectivity, and secondly by the inherent asymmetric ion diffusion among cations and anions. The two mechanisms can reciprocally compete or collaborate with each other to control the generation of total net diffusion current, as shown in Fig. 3c and 3f. The charge-selective nanochannels enhance the generation of net diffusion current, only if the inherent ion mobility of counter-ions is higher or approximately equal to that of the co-ions. Otherwise, the charge-selectivity would reduce the magnitude of the net diffusion current.
The two mechanisms can also control the ion selectivity of the nanochannel (Fig. 4), which is quantitatively measured by the cation transference number (t+ = |I+|/(|I+| + |I−|)).56 In the presence of remarkably asymmetric ion diffusion, the ion selectivity of a nanochannel cannot be solely determined by the surface charge properties. The ionic composition in the electrolyte is also important. If the counter-ions diffuse faster than the co-ions, the presence of surface charge enhances the total ion selectivity of the nanochannel. On the contrary, if the co-ions diffuse faster, the increment in surface charge density compensates for the divergence in the cation current (I+) and the anion current (I−), resulting in very limited ion selectivity.
 Fig. 4  Ion-selectivity of the nanochannel scaled by the cation transference number (t+) was calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). (a) The case for the cation-selective nanochannel. (b) The case for the anion-selective nanochannel. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. Four types of 1:1 simple salt, including KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle), were investigated. 
As summarized in Scheme 2, the competition and collaboration between electrolyte type and nanopore charge selectivity can be further employed to optimize the charge separation and the energy conversion processes. In the low surface charge region (|σ| < 0.005 C m−2, in Fig. 5 and 6), the nanochannels harvest the highest power and with the highest energy conversion efficiency in the LiCl electrolyte (D+ < D−). This is because, in this region, the inherent ion selectivity due to asymmetric ion diffusion is responsible for the generation of the net diffusion current (Scheme 2d–2f). With the increase in surface charge density, the highest power production and conversion efficiency are obtained by using KF (D+ > D−) in cation-selective nanochannels (Fig. 5 and Scheme 2c) and by LiCl (D+ < D−) in anion-selective nanochannels (Fig. 6 and Scheme 2h), where the surface charge properties further facilitate the transportation of counter-ions. On the other hand, the surface charge properties can also undermine the power generation capability in some cases, where the co-ion mobility is higher than that of the counter-ions, such as NaCl and LiCl in cation-selective nanochannels (Fig. 5 and Scheme 2b) and KF in anion-selective nanochannels (Fig. 6 and Scheme 2i). Therefore, for a certain type of charge-selective nanochannel, not all types of 1:1 inorganic salt are suitable for use as the electrolyte for salinity gradient energy conversion. KCl, the most commonly studied electrolyte, is not the best choice for energy conversion with either cation- or anion-selective nanochannels. With a well-matched electrolyte type and the nanopore charge selectivity, the power generation and the energy conversion efficiency of the NREDS can be improved by nearly two orders of magnitude.
 Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of the competition and collaboration between electrolyte type and nanopore charge selectivity. The ionic flux profile (|j+|, red and |j−|, black) depicts the degree of charge separation in a nanofluidic channel. 
 Fig. 5  Power generation from the single cation-selective (negatively charged) nanochannel. Both the generated electrical power (a, dW/dt) and the energy conversion efficiency (b) defined by eqn (2) and (3) were calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). The radius of the model nanochannel was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. The symbols in each panel stand for KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle). 
 Fig. 6  Power generation from the single anion-selective (positively charged) nanochannel. The generated electrical power (a, dW/dt) and the energy conversion efficiency (b) were calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). The radius of the model nanochannel was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. The symbols shown here stand for KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle). 
It should be emphasized that the surface charge properties are very necessary to obtain high performance. From the results shown in Fig. 5 and 6, we discover that high power generation and energy conversion efficiency are always found in high surface charge density regions. This feature becomes particularly significant if the dimension of the nanochannel is further decreased, in which the electrical double layer overlaps within the channel.
For a given type of monovalent electrolyte, it is difficult to judge experimentally which type of charge-selective nanopores can give better performance. That is because one cannot fabricate two nanopores with identical geometry and opposite surface-charge properties (the same in density, but opposite in polarity), which would critically impact power generation from the nanopore fluidic system. The efficiency of the surface chemical reaction that converts carboxyl groups (−COOH) into amino (−NH2) terminated groups (see Scheme 1) cannot reach 100%, thus the surface charge density for anion-selective nanopores is always lower than that in cation-selective nanopores (see ESI†, Fig. S4 and S5). Nevertheless, we can still do some analysis, for a given electrolyte, of the power generation difference between the two types of charge-selective nanopore by comparing the theoretical results. As plotted in Fig. 7, with the same amplitude of surface charge density (|σ| = 0.1 C m−2), the electric power generation in cation- (red column) or anion-selective (blue column) nanochannels is nearly identical when using KCl electrolyte (D+ ≈ D−). However, the difference in power generation between the two kinds of nanochannels becomes evident when the cations and anions in the electrolyte solution have asymmetric mobility. In the case of NaCl and LiCl electrolyte (D+ < D−), power generation in anion-selective nanochannels is over one order higher than that in cation-selective nanochannels. Moreover, this trend can be the opposite when using the KF (D+ > D−) electrolyte. Cation-selective nanochannels exhibit better performance in energy production. These results can also be understood based on the above discussion of the interplay between charge-selectivity and ionic composition (see also Scheme 2).
 Fig. 7  Power generation from the single cation- (red) or anion-selective (blue) nanochannels using KCl, NaCl, LiCl, and KF electrolytes. The generated electrical powers (dW/dt) are nearly identical between the two types of nanochannels when using the KCl electrolyte (D+ ≈ D−). However, the power generation in anion-selective nanochannels can be approximately double that in cation-selective nanochannels when using NaCl and LiCl (D+ < D−). This trend is opposite when using the KF electrolyte (D+ > D−). The radius of the model nanochannel is 20 nm, |σ| = 0.1 C m−2, and the concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. 
Conclusions and outlook
We have systematically investigated the performance of a nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system in three representative types of inorganic monovalent electrolyte. Experimentally, we find that both the short-circuit current, the open-circuit voltage and the resulting electrical power are very sensitive to the ionic composition of the electrolyte solution. In cation-selective nanopores, with the same type of anion, the harvested power increases with the cation mobility. Surprisingly, in anion-selective nanopores, this trend can be the opposite. Deep insights into the energy conversion mechanism were obtained with a thermodynamic analysis and numerical calculation on a model nanochannel. Two leading factors, the inherent asymmetric ion mobility and the charge properties at the channel wall, that govern the charge separation process, and therefore contribute to the performance of the NREDS, are identified. Results show that well-matched electrolyte types and nanopore charge selectivity can enhance the output power and energy conversion efficiency by nearly two orders of magnitude.
The concentration gradient driven nanofluidic energy conversion system does not rely on any mechanical moving parts, such as turbines or motors, and uses simple inorganic electrolyte as fuel, which is innocuous to life processes. With appropriate miniaturization and encapsulation, the integrated chip devices can even directly extract salinity gradient energy from a physiological environment. Therefore, this technology may have a bright future for the power supply component of some implantable biomedical devices that harvest electricity in vivo.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to give warm thanks to the Materials Research Group of GSI (Darmstadt, Germany) for providing the single-ion irradiated samples. This work is financially supported by the National Research Fund for Fundamental Key Projects (2011CB935700, 2010CB832904, 2010CB934700, 2009CB930404, and 2007CB936403) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (90923004, 20920102036, 20974113, and 20601005). The Chinese Academy of Sciences is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
Z. L. Wang, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 82–87 CrossRef .
J. Baxter, Z. Bian, G. Chen, D. Danielson, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. G. Fedorov, T. S. Fisher, C. W. Jones, E. Maginn, U. Kortshagen, A. Manthiram, A. Nozik, D. R. Rolison, T. Sands, L. Shi, D. Sholl and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 559–588 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Tian, X. L. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. F. Yu, G. H. Yu, J. L. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–890 CrossRef CAS .
A. Majumdar, Science, 2004, 303, 777–778 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Minnich, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 466–479 RSC .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. Wei, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi and M. C. McAlpine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1275–1285 RSC .
R. E. Pattle, Nature, 1954, 174, 660–660 CrossRef CAS .
S. Loeb and R. S. Norman, Science, 1975, 189, 654–655 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. J. van der Heyden, D. J. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2232–2237 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. J. van der Heyden, D. J. Bonthuis, D. Stein, C. Meyer and C. Dekker, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Weinstein and F. B. Leitz, Science, 1976, 191, 557–559 CrossRef CAS .
D. Brogioli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 058501 CrossRef .
S. Pacala and R. Socolow, Science, 2004, 305, 968–972 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Marinas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Veerman, M. Saakes, S. J. Metz and G. J. Harmsen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 327, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Post, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5785–5790 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Post, J. Veerman, H. V. M. Hamelers, G. J. W. Euverink, S. J. Metz, K. Nymeijer and C. J. N. Buisman, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 288, 218–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. T. Eijkel and A. van den Berg, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2005, 1, 249–267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pennathur, J. C. T. Eijkel and A. van den Berg, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 1234–1237 RSC .
D. A. LaVan and J. N. Cha, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 5251–5255 CrossRef .
F. Xia and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2842–2858 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Hille, Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, Sinauer Associates Inc.,  2001 Search PubMed .
S. Soh, M. Byrska, K. Kandere-Grzybowska and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4170–4198 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Harrell, P. Kohli, Z. Siwy and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15646–15647 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, W. Guo, Y. D. Mao, X. Hou, J. M. Xue, H. W. Xia, L. Wang, Y. L. Song, H. Ji, O. Y. Qi, Y. G. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8345–8350 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vlassiouk, S. Smirnov and Z. Siwy, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1978–1985 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2070–2071 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, H. W. Xia, L. X. Cao, F. Xia, S. T. Wang, G. Z. Zhang, Y. L. Song, Y. G. Wang, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3561–3567 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan and A. Majumdar, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 848–852 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sparreboom, A. van den Berg and J. C. T. Eijkel, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 713–720 CrossRef CAS .
A. Piruska, M. Gong, J. V. Sweedler and P. W. Bohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1060–1072 RSC .
L.-J. Cheng and L. J. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 923–938 RSC .
I. Vlassiouk and Z. S. Siwy, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Guo, Y. B. Xie, X. W. Wang, J. M. Xue and Y. G. Wang, Radiat. Meas., 2009, 44, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yan, W. Liang, R. Fan and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3820–3825 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Qian, B. Das and X. B. Luo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 315, 721–730 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, H. Xia, F. Xia, X. Hou, L. Cao, L. Wang, J. Xue, G. Zhang, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 859–864 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2788–2793 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karnik, K. Castelino, C. H. Duan and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1735–1740 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Holden, D. Needham and H. Bayley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8650–8655 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, F. J. Sigworth and D. A. LaVan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
B. Corry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 751–759 RSC .
S. J. Kim, S. H. Ko, K. H. Kang and J. Han, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, L. Cao, J. Xia, F.-Q. Nie, W. Ma, J. Xue, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1339–1344 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kim, C. H. Duan, Y. F. Chen and A. Majumdar, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Daiguji, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 901–911 RSC .
P. Y. Apel, Y. E. Korchev, Z. Siwy, R. Spohr and M. Yoshida, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2001, 184, 337–346 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Siwy, D. Dobrev, R. Neumann, C. Trautmann and K. Voss, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2003, 76, 781–785 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, J. M. Xue, W. M. Zhang, X. Q. Zou and Y. G. Wang, Radiat. Meas., 2008, 43, S623–S626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, V. Bayer, B. Schiedt, R. Neumann and W. Ensinger, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 485711 CrossRef .
M. Ali, S. Mafe, P. Ramirez, R. Neumann and W. Ensinger, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11993–11997 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Siwy, I. D. Kosinska, A. Fulinski and C. R. Martin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 048102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cervera, A. Alcaraz, B. Schiedt, R. Neumann and P. Ramirez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12265–12273 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods Fundamental and Applications, New York: John Wiley,  2001 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Guo, H. Ji, J. Xue and Q. Ouyang, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 75, 051201 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Xue, L. Wang, W. Guo, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Ji and Q. Ouyang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 7077–7084 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cervera, B. Schiedt, R. Neumann, S. Mafe and P. Ramirez, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 104706 CrossRef .
D. Stein, M. Kruithof and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 035901 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: details of the experimental methods and numerical simulations. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01088cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Salinity gradient power, a type of Gibbs free energy, is in principle clean, sustainable, and ubiquitous in our living environment. The gross power potential of this renewable energy source is about 2.6 TW, which is equivalent to approximately 20% of the present world energy consumption. Reverse electrodialysis (RED), a promising but still challenging method to recover clean energy by mixing fresh and salt water with ion-exchange membranes, was proposed more than half a century ago. This membrane-based technology has encountered some critical problems which impede its large scale utilization, such as high membrane cost, low power density and short life due to bio-fouling. A recent advance in this field, namely the nanofluidic reverse electrodialysis system (NREDS), focuses on the use of nanoscale and bio-inspired architectures to address these challenges. Herein, the fundamental working mechanism of the NREDS in relation to the electrolyte type and the charge selectivity of the nanofluidic channel have been systematically investigated using both experimental and theoretical approaches. These features guarantee a substantially higher energy conversion performance and offer great possibilities for miniaturization of the power supply component of small electrical devices, ranging from the microelectromechanical systems to portable personal electronics.


 	Scheme 1  The chemical modification strategy for converting the carboxyl groups (–COOH) into amino (–NH2) terminated groups.	 

 	Fig. 1  Power generation from the cation-selective single-nanopore fluidic system (negatively charged). (a) Current–voltage response (in 1 mM KCl) of the negatively charged single conical nanopore indicates a preferential ion transport direction from the tip to the base side. The short-circuit current (b), the open-circuit voltage (c) and the resulting electrical power (d) were measured as a function of the logarithm of the KCl (square), NaCl (circle) and LiCl (triangle) concentration gradient. The effective diameter of the nanopore tip side was about 40 nm. The pH of the testing solution was about 5.6–6.0.	 

 	Fig. 2  Power generation from the anion-selective single-nanopore fluidic system (positively charged). (a) Current–voltage response (in 1 mM KCl) of the positively charged single conical nanopore indicates a preferential ion transport direction from the base to the tip side. The short-circuit current (b), the open-circuit voltage (c) and the resulting electrical power (d) were measured as a function of the logarithm of the KCl (square), NaCl (circle) and LiCl (triangle) concentration gradient. After the two-step chemical modification, the effective tip diameter of the nanopore was assumed to be unchanged. This assumption can be justified by comparing the I–V curves before (Fig. 1a) and after (Fig. 2a) the chemical modification. The pH of the testing solution was around 3.4.	 

Salt 1	
                  KCl
                	1.957	2.032	0.96	45	6
Salt 2	
                  NaCl
                	1.334	2.032	0.65	29	14
Salt 3	
                  LiCl
                	1.029	2.032	0.50	17	22
Salt 4	
                  KF
                	1.957	1.475	1.33	–	–
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Generation of the net diffusion current from asymmetric ion migration across the cation- (a–c) or anion-selective nanochannels (d–f). The radial ion distributions are identical for the four representative types of monovalent inorganic salt in either cation- (a) or anion-selective nanochannels (c). However, the resulting local net current density (j) is not the same (b, e). Due to the asymmetric diffusion rates between cations and anions, the net diffusion current generates in and out of the EDL at the channel wall (a, b, d, and e in gray). (c, f) The total diffusion current (I0) was calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). Four types of salt were studied, including KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle). The radius of the model nanopore was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. (a, b) The surface-charge density was −60 mC m−2. (d, e) The surface-charge density was 60 mC m−2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ion-selectivity of the nanochannel scaled by the cation transference number (t+) was calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). (a) The case for the cation-selective nanochannel. (b) The case for the anion-selective nanochannel. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. Four types of 1:1 simple salt, including KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle), were investigated.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of the competition and collaboration between electrolyte type and nanopore charge selectivity. The ionic flux profile (|j+|, red and |j−|, black) depicts the degree of charge separation in a nanofluidic channel.	 

 	Fig. 5  Power generation from the single cation-selective (negatively charged) nanochannel. Both the generated electrical power (a, dW/dt) and the energy conversion efficiency (b) defined by eqn (2) and (3) were calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). The radius of the model nanochannel was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. The symbols in each panel stand for KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle).	 

 	Fig. 6  Power generation from the single anion-selective (positively charged) nanochannel. The generated electrical power (a, dW/dt) and the energy conversion efficiency (b) were calculated as a function of the surface charge density (σ). The radius of the model nanochannel was 20 nm. The concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM. The symbols shown here stand for KCl (square), NaCl (circle), LiCl (up triangle), and KF (down triangle).	 

 	Fig. 7  Power generation from the single cation- (red) or anion-selective (blue) nanochannels using KCl, NaCl, LiCl, and KF electrolytes. The generated electrical powers (dW/dt) are nearly identical between the two types of nanochannels when using the KCl electrolyte (D+ ≈ D−). However, the power generation in anion-selective nanochannels can be approximately double that in cation-selective nanochannels when using NaCl and LiCl (D+ < D−). This trend is opposite when using the KF electrolyte (D+ > D−). The radius of the model nanochannel is 20 nm, |σ| = 0.1 C m−2, and the concentration gradient was 1000 mM/1 mM.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: details of the experimental methods and numerical simulations. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01088c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
