Amphiphile nanoarchitectonics: from basic physical chemistry to advanced applications  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP50620G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP50620G
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10580-10611Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAmphiphile nanoarchitectonics: from basic physical chemistry to advanced applications

        
          
            Muruganathan 
            Ramanathan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lok Kumar 
            Shrestha
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Taizo 
            Mori
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Qingmin 
            Ji
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jonathan P. 
            Hill
          
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Katsuhiko 
            Ariga
          
          
        
      *bc
aCenter for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA. E-mail: nmr@ornl.gov; rm.muruganathan@gmail.com;  Fax: +1-865-574-1753;   Tel: +1-865-574-4626
bWorld Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: SHRESTHA.Lokkumar@nims.go.jp; ARIGA.Katsuhiko@nims.go.jp;  Fax: +81-29-860-4832;   Tel: +81-29-860-4597
cJapan Science and Technology Agency (JST), CREST, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
Received 
      11th February 2013
    First published on 5th April 2013AbstractAmphiphiles, either synthetic or natural, are structurally simple molecules with the unprecedented capacity to self-assemble into complex, hierarchical geometries in nanospace. Effective self-assembly processes of amphiphiles are often used to mimic biological systems, such as assembly of lipids and proteins, which has paved a way for bottom-up nanotechnology with bio-like advanced functions. Recent developments in nanostructure formation combine simple processes of assembly with the more advanced concept of nanoarchitectonics. In this perspective, we summarize research on self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules such as lipids, surfactants or block copolymers that are a focus of interest for many colloid, polymer, and materials scientists and which have become increasingly important in emerging nanotechnology and practical applications, latter of which are often accomplished by amphiphile-like polymers. Because the fundamental science of amphiphiles was initially developed for their solution assembly then transferred to assemblies on surfaces as a development of nanotechnological techniques, this perspective attempts to mirror this development by introducing solution systems and progressing to interfacial systems, which are roughly categorized as (i) basic properties of amphiphiles, (ii) self-assembly of amphiphiles in bulk phases, (iii) assembly on static surfaces, (iv) assembly at dynamic interfaces, and (v) advanced topics from simulation to application. This progression also represents the evolution of amphiphile science and technology from simple assemblies to advanced assemblies to nanoarchitectonics.
Muruganathan Ramanathan
Muruganathan “Nathan” Ramanathan is a materials scientist at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA. He received his PhD degree at the Max-Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany in physical chemistry and materials science. Prior to his current position, he was a postdoctoral fellow at Florida State University and Argonne National Laboratory, USA.
Lok Kumar Shrestha
Lok Kumar Shrestha received his PhD degree from Yokohama National University, Japan in 2008. He is currently a MANA scientist at World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA) at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).
Taizo Mori
Taizo Mori received his PhD from the Department of Polymer Chemistry at Kyoto University in 2009. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).
Qingmin Ji
Qingmin Ji earned her PhD (2005) in chemistry from the University of Tsukuba. She started working as a post-doctoral fellow in National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) from 2006 and became a MANA scientist at World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA).
Jonathan P. Hill
Jonathan P. Hill received his PhD degree from Brunel University, UK in 1995. He is currently a sub-group leader of the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science. His current research interests include synthesis and properties of tetrapyrroles and their supramolecular manifolds as well as unusual methods for preparing organic nanomaterials.
Katsuhiko Ariga
Katsuhiko Ariga received his PhD degree from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He is currently the Director of the Supermolecules Group and the Principal Investigator of World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).
1. Introduction
Various functional structures have been created based on so-called nanotechnology.1,2 Most examples rely on sophisticated fabrication using top-down approaches for preparation of nano-systems from macroscopic objects.3–5 Undoubtedly, top-down nanotechnology has an apparent fundamental limitation involving the minimum possible structural dimensions imposed by lithographic techniques. In an alternative approach, bottom-up spontaneous self-assembly and/or self-organization has recently attracted considerable attention.6–11 Excellent examples of self-assembly processes can be found in biological systems where highly evolved assemblies of various component molecules achieve high functions based on integrated actions. Therefore, materials research based on self-assembly often employs biological molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids, saccharides, and lipids.12–18 Of these, lipids have the simplest structures and have been widely investigated but their properties (especially their self-assembly properties) can also be extended to analogous molecules known as amphiphiles. It might be said that the study of the self-assembly of amphiphiles is a forerunner to the development of bottom-up nanotechnology involving advanced functions analogous to biochemical systems.
The study of the self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules such as lipids, surfactants or block copolymers has been a center of interest for colloid, polymer, and materials scientists for several years and continues to attract attention due to its fundamental importance for day-to-day applications in diverse fields including pharmaceutical, food and cosmetic formulations, catalysis and controlled synthesis of nanostructured materials.19–22 The word amphiphile was introduced by Hartley in 193623 being derived from the Greek amphi meaning ‘both’, and phile, meaning ‘like’ (as in prefer) so that the term ‘amphiphile’ denotes a type of molecule consisting of two or more different moieties that interact differently with, for instance, a particular solvent based on its polarity.
Sustained interest in amphiphilic systems is due to their wide range of real life applications. For instance, oil recovery, surfactant enhanced carbon regeneration for waste water treatment, herbicide dispersions, de-inking of paper and plastic film, filtration of ultrafine particles, stabilization of particulate suspensions, and as cleaning detergents, etc. In addition to these known industrial applications, there are also numerous exploratory usages of amphiphiles in modern high technology industries. From a fundamental viewpoint, this field remains an important source of inspiration for researchers from many different scientific disciplines.
In this review a fundamental description of amphiphile assembly is presented and is followed by an application-oriented description of advanced amphiphile assembly structures. Because surfactants play important roles in amphiphile science and technology, those on surfactants would be mainly described. However, amphiphilic molecules with non-rational-surfactants are involved. Since amphiphile sciences were initially developed as a result of their solution assembly properties and were then transferred to assemblies on surfaces as a development of nanotechnological techniques, this perspective similarly initially addresses solution systems leading to interfacial systems. Recent developments in nanostructure formation combine simple assembly processes with the more advanced concept of nanoarchitectonics.24–32 Similarly, amphiphile assemblies have been developed from more traditional assembly structures, such as micelles, to well designed nanoarchitectures. The organization of this perspective also attempts to represent the evolution of amphiphile assemblies into nanoarchitectonics.
2. Basic properties of amphiphiles
Prior to an advanced description of amphiphile assembly, we will briefly introduce basic properties of amphiphiles. In terms of solvophilicity/solvophobicity, an amphiphilic molecule contains both hydrophilic (water-loving) and hydrophobic (water-hating) moieties. The hydrophobic portion is usually insoluble in water but is soluble in organic solvents or oils so that it is often referred to as being lipophilic. It is often a hydrocarbon or a fluorocarbon chain such as an n-alkyl or a perfluoroalkyl group. In general, the hydrophilic moiety is referred to as the ‘headgroup’ and the hydrophobic moiety is known as the ‘tail’. The term amphiphile and surfactant are very often used interchangeably. However, in this paper, we will use preferentially amphiphile because this term covers a wider range of molecules and materials.
2.1. Types of amphiphile

2.1.1. Conventional amphiphiles. 
Amphiphiles play a variety of roles in personal care and household detergency including cleansing, foam formation, conditioning, viscosity control which is combined with safety and mildness in use. The presence of water-soluble groups such as sulphate or ammonium confers on them solubility in polar solvents (see Fig. 1). These polar groups may be charged (ionic) or neutral (non-ionic) and ionic amphiphiles can be further classified into anionic (negatively charged), cationic (positively charged) or zwitterionic (amphiphiles with both positive and negative charges). Although amphiphiles usually consist of one hydrophilic polar head group, recently dimeric amphiphiles containing two hydrophobic tails and two polar head groups linked together with a short spacer have drawn considerable interest from industrial and academic researchers. This relatively new type of amphiphile known as Gemini amphiphiles offers several interesting physicochemical properties, such as propensity for lowering surface tension and very low critical micelle concentrations.
 Fig. 1  Typical examples of conventional amphiphiles. 


2.1.2. Advanced amphiphiles. 
Amphiphilicity was formerly based upon a portion of a molecule's structure being soluble in water. However, this definition cannot now be considered general since amphiphilicity can be extended to various media including organic solvents.33,34 That is, even some compounds bearing both fluorocarbon and hydrocarbon chains can form bilayer-like assemblies in an appropriate hydrocarbon solvent. The fluorocarbon group has a low affinity for the hydrocarbon solvent and so is solvophobic while, in contrast, hydrocarbon regions are solvophilic. These two terms, solvophilic and solvophobic, are often used instead of hydrophilic and hydrophobic when non-aqueous solvents are used as surrounding media. If there is an appropriate structural balance between the solvophilic and solvophobic parts then assembly structures similar to those involving hydrophobic–hydrophilic amphiphiles can be formed.
Another extension of amphiphilicity obviates the necessity of intrinsically amphiphilic molecules in the formation of amphiphile assemblies. Requirements of amphiphilicity can be satisfied by different types of molecules in admixture (e.g. one solvophilic and one solvophobic) that can form amphiphilic units through some specific supramolecular interactions. For example, when a cyanuric acid derivative containing a hydrophilic region is mixed with a melamine derivative containing hydrophobic tails assemblies similar to lipid bilayers are formed through complementary hydrogen bonding.35,36
Amphiphilic assemblies are not limited to purely organic structures. Sophisticated amphiphile design allows us to prepare organic–inorganic hybrid assemblies. For example, amphiphiles with alkoxysilane heads have been used to form hybrid assemblies.37–42 At the surface of these assemblies, cross-linked silanol groups form an inorganic silica-like structure. This structure is called a cerasome because it has both a ceramic-like surface and a liposome-like cell structure. The cerasome is mechanically stable and can be further assembled into a multi-cellular form without causing the vesicular structure to collapse. Inorganic materials such as nanoparticles and nanocrystals can also be used for amphiphilic assemblies and are described in a later section of this paper.

2.2. Surface activity
Surfactants are major members of amphiphile families. A key characteristic of surfactants is their ability to lower the surface tension at an air–water interface. The word surfactant originates from its use to describe surface-active agents which can adsorb at surfaces or interfaces and markedly alter the surface or interfacial free energy. The term ‘interface’ indicates a boundary between any two immiscible phases while the term ‘surface’ denotes an interface where one phase is usually a gas or air. Amphiphilic molecules tend to adsorb at an air–water interface and consequently reduce the surface tension of water.43 Therefore, amphiphiles are an important class of materials with unique structural features that confer great utility in industrial and biological applications.
Amphiphiles are usually characterized by their tendency to adsorb at surfaces or interfaces; the better the amphiphile, the stronger is the adsorption capacity. When amphiphilic molecules are added to water their hydrophobic groups distort the water structure thus decreasing the entropy of the system with the result that some of the molecules are expelled from the bulk of the solvent being then adsorbed at the interface (i.e. an air–water interface). In that case, hydrophilic headgroups remain in solution while the hydrophobic tail avoids direct contact with water. This is because the adsorbed molecules at the interface have to be arranged with hydrophilic portions in contact with the water phase and hydrophobic portions oriented to the air phase. This orientation at the interface is an important factor in determining the change in properties of the interface induced by the presence of the amphiphile. The properties of an interface having adsorbed molecules may vary greatly depending on the orientation of these molecules.
3. Self-assembly of amphiphiles in bulk phases
Assembly behaviours in bulk solution phases have been intensively investigated including well known assemblies such as micelles, liposomes, and vesicles.44–51 Although developments in nanoscale observations such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) provide many opportunities for detailed investigation of amphiphile assemblies on surfaces, amphiphile assemblies in bulk solution have maintained their crucial importance in science and technology. These assemblies have great possibilities for practical usage in various applications. In this section, examples of amphiphile assemblies are introduced.
3.1. Micelles and critical micelle concentration (CMC)
The amphiphilic nature of some molecules leads to their self-aggregation into a variety of structures in aqueous and nonaqueous solvent systems. Micelles are important structures formed by the association of all types of amphiphiles in solution. Micelles consist of inner hydrophobic cores shielded from water by a surrounding corona formed by the hydrophilic headgroups of the amphiphile. Micelle formation is a spontaneous self-assembly process above a certain concentration of amphiphile called the critical micelle concentration (CMC) (Fig. 2A).52–62 Several physicochemical properties change abruptly at CMC as shown in Fig. 2B. Assemblies of amphiphiles can have various morphologies including spheroid, ellipsoidal prolate, short-to-long rods, flexible rods or wormlike micelles, disk-like structure, or branched chain forms, resulting in various phases such as cubic, hexagonal, lamellar, and cage (Fig. 3). This depends on the packing of amphiphilic molecules within the aggregate structure. This will be discussed later.
 Fig. 2  Changes in physical properties at critical micelle concentration (CMC): (A) surface tension; (B) various other parameters. 
 Fig. 3  A few examples of surfactant self-assembled structures of amphiphilic molecules in the bulk phase. 
The thermodynamic properties of amphiphiles in solution are influenced by the strong tendency of hydrophobic tails to avoid direct contact with water, which is often termed as the hydrophobic effect and leads to the association of amphiphilic molecules into micelles.63,64 Micellization (the micelle formation process) is also expected as the result of an entropy effect.65,66 The enthalpic contribution results partly from the energetically favorable optimization of interactions between the hydrophobic tails of amphiphiles whereas the entropic contribution arises from the local structure of water due to hydrogen bonding. Segregated amphiphilic hydrocarbon chains interrupt hydrogen bonding between water molecules causing locally a more ordered structure, which is entropically unfavorable. Micelles are formed to avoid disruption of the water structure. These aggregated structures are entropically more favorable than the segregated amphiphilic molecules. Micellization can also be considered as an alternative mechanism to adsorption at the interfaces for removing hydrophobic groups from direct contact with water, thereby reducing the free energy of the system. Micelles are thermodynamically stable species that are in equilibrium with the free ‘monomers’ (unassociated amphiphilic molecules). It should be noted that the amphiphilic molecules behave very differently when present as free monomers in solution than in micelles. It is only the free monomers that contribute to reductions in surface and interfacial tensions and variations in dynamic properties, such as wetting and foaming. The micelles serve as reservoirs for amphiphilic monomers.
3.2. Solubilization in micelles
Micelles are important in a number of industrial and biological processes due to their potential ability to solubilize organic molecules. Compounds such as oils, drugs or dye molecules or flavor compounds that are practically insoluble in water can be solubilized in the hydrophobic (oily) core of the micelles.67–71 This is very useful in pharmaceutical formulations where water-insoluble drug compounds need to be delivered, and similarly in the incorporation of fragrance and coloring agents into cosmetic products. Micelles are also important in detergency. Dirt or oily stains can be removed by applying a micellar solution to affected areas. Solubilization capacity of the micellar solution is generally expressed as the ratio of the concentration of the solubilized molecules to the concentration of amphiphile in micellar solution. This ratio is usually not very large although it can be varied depending on the system components. Further addition of oils above the solubilization limit may result in turbid solutions, which on stirring yield an emulsion. Addition of co-amphiphile (e.g. a medium chain length alcohol) to such an emulsion often results in transparent or translucent systems referred to as microemulsions. Microemulsions are macroscopically homogeneous mixtures of oils, water and an amphiphile, which on the microscopic level consist of individual domains of oil and water separated by a monolayer of amphiphile.72–75 They are thermodynamically stable.
At higher amphiphile concentrations above CMC, amphiphilic molecules self-assemble into lyotropic liquid crystalline phases.76–84 Lyotropic liquid crystals lack full three-dimensional translational order of molecules of their crystal lattices. Typical lyotropic liquid crystalline phases are bilayer structures of amphiphiles separated by solvent often called lamellar phases, a two dimensional structure formed by the hexagonal packing of rodlike micelles known as a hexagonal phase and a three dimensional structure formed by the packing of spherical micelles known as a cubic phase. The geometry of the self-assembled structures can be determined by the packing of amphiphilic molecules and also in terms of interfacial curvature.
3.3. Interfacial curvature, critical packing, and geometry of aggregates
Self-assembly behaviour of amphiphiles at higher concentrations above CMC can be described using appropriate models.85 The first is based on the curvature of an amphiphilic film at an interface while the second model is based on the molecular architecture of the amphiphilic molecule itself (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Molecular structure of amphiphilic molecules, preferred aggregate structures, and the related aggregate curvature. 
The first model involving the interfacial curvature of a continuous amphiphilic film is based on calculations of the different geometries of surfaces. A surface can be described by two main types of curvatures: mean and Gaussian. The principle curvatures, c1 and c2, define both the mean (H = (c1 + c2)/2) and the Gaussian (K = c1c2) curvatures. The hydrophilic headgroup on the side of the water interface and the hydrophobic tail on the other side of the interface determine an optimal curvature also known as a spontaneous curvature, which in turn determines the geometry of the aggregates. Aggregates enclosing polar head groups and water (reverse micelles) are regarded to have negative curvatures; on the other hand, aggregates with interiors filled with lipophilic chains (normal micelles) have positive curvatures.
The second model, i.e. critical packing parameter (cpp) is based on the packing of amphiphilic molecules. The effective area of the hydrophilic headgroup of surfactants, a, with respect to the length of the hydrophobic tail, lc, for a given molecular volume, v, controls the interfacial curvature. The effective area of an amphiphile's headgroup or an effective molecular cross-sectional area is due to the balance between the hydrophobic effects for assembly of the amphiphile tails (which causes the organization of amphiphilic molecules and, hence, reduces a) and the tendency of hydrophilic headgroups to maximize their contact with water (and increases a). The balance between these two opposing forces leads to an optimal area per amphiphilic headgroup, as, for which the interaction energy is minimum.
In order to determine the micellar shape a dimensionless parameter, cpp, is introduced, which is defined as v/aslc, where v and lc are the volume and extended length of the hydrophobic alkyl chain and as is the area occupied by an amphiphilic molecule at the micelle–water interface. As mentioned earlier, as is determined by the cross-sectional area of the amphiphilic headgroup and the various interactions during micelle formation. On the other hand, the extended length of the alkyl chains for a saturated hydrocarbon with n carbon atoms, lmax, and volume v can be estimated by Tanford's equation. lc ≤ lmax ≈ 0.154 + 0.1265n nm(1) v ≈ (27.4 + 26.9n) × 10−3 nm3(2)
The extended length lc is approximately 80% of the lmax value. After the cpp of an amphiphilic molecule has been estimated from its molecular dimensions, a rough idea of the shape of the aggregates can be given.
3.4. Normal micelles in the aqueous system
We know that the intrinsic geometry of an individual amphiphilic molecule has a strong influence on the morphology of its micelles and that the shape of the micelles can be determined by the cpp. The cpp values for spherical, cylindrical, and lamellar particles are ∼1/3, 1/3 < cpp < 1/2, and 1/2 < cpp < 1, respectively. Previous investigations have revealed formation of spherical micelles just above the CMC. However, this spheroid geometry of micelles can be modulated into other geometries such as prolate, rods or disks or ordered liquid crystalline phases by variation of control parameters such as concentration, temperature, salinity, and pH.
Here we discuss the general effect of volume fraction of amphiphile on the micellar structure. As mentioned earlier, micelles are formed at CMC due to the hydrophobic interaction, and the shape of the micellar aggregates varies depending on the value of cpp. Upon further increases in amphiphile concentration above CMC repulsive intermicellar forces emerge and operate normal to the interface. Repulsive intermicellar interactions such as electrostatic repulsion induce micelle ordering at a certain amphiphile volume fraction and with symmetry that depends on the micellar shape. For instance, spherical micelles close pack into a cubic array forming the discontinuous cubic phase. Similarly, rodlike and lamellar micelles pack into hexagonal and lamellar phases respectively. By this simple approach, for an amphiphile forming spherical micelles (cpp < 1/3) the phase sequence, from spherical micelles to the cubic phase to the hexagonal phase to the lamellar phase, can be expected depending on the amphiphile concentration. If the amphiphile forms elongated micelles (1/3 < cpp < 1/2) then the phase follows a sequence of elongated micelles to the hexagonal phase to the lamellar phase.
As mentioned previously, intermicellar interactions operate normal to the micelle–water interface so that any decrease in the intermicellar distance with rising amphiphile concentration increases the free energy of the system. Another possible route for the system to compensate this excess free energy caused by an increase in amphiphile concentration is through microstructure transformation, i.e. a transition from spherical-to-cylindrical micelles or from cylinder-to-planar micelles.
3.5. Reverse micelles in the nonaqueous system
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in studying the self-assembly behaviour of amphiphiles in nonpolar solvents with a small amount of water because of the wide range of potential applications.86,87 Generally, lipophilic amphiphiles form reverse micelles in nonpolar solvents. Reverse micelles have structures in contrast to those of conventional micelles in water. Reverse micelles consist of a polar headgroup oriented toward each other at the interior of a micelle with the hydrophobic groups oriented towards the exterior hydrophobic environment of a nonpolar solvent.88–92 That is, reverse micelles have a watery core with nonpolar lipophilic chains of the amphiphile as a shell. Likewise in a normal micelle system, reverse micelles can have various shapes and sizes depending on both the amphiphile and solvent.
It should be noted that the solution behaviour of amphiphilic molecules in nonaqueous mixtures differs markedly from that in aqueous systems. It is well known that when amphiphile concentration increases physical, colligative, and spectral properties of the aqueous system undergo an abrupt change over a narrow region of concentration (at CMC). However, the physical properties of amphiphile solutions in nonaqueous media change gradually with amphiphile concentration, i.e. there is not any sharp transition in the solution properties with increases in amphiphile concentration.93 This is why the existence of CMC in nonaqueous systems has been questioned. However, previous experiments have shown evidence of the formation of aggregate structures (reverse micelles) in nonaqueous systems even at low amphiphile concentrations.
In contrast to aqueous systems, the structure of solvent remains largely unaffected by the addition of amphiphiles to nonaqueous media. The hydrophobic tail of a single dispersed amphiphile interacts only with the solvent, whereas if incorporated into an aggregate (reverse micelle) it interacts with both the solvent and neighboring hydrophobic groups within the same aggregate. However, the dispersion forces between organic molecules depend only on the intermolecular distance so that dispersion interactions of a hydrocarbon tail in an aggregate and those of a hydrocarbon tail in a single dispersed amphiphile are practically the same. Headgroups of ionic amphiphiles remain largely in an un-dissociated state in nonaqueous organic solvents and behave essentially as dipoles, and the headgroups of nonionic amphiphiles also possess a permanent dipole moment. When the amphiphiles are singly dispersed, the headgroup interacts with solvent through dispersion forces, dipole induced-dipole interactions, and, in aromatic solvents, through charge-transfer interactions. These interactions are also negligible.
The polar headgroups of amphiphiles within the aggregates interact via dipole–dipole, dipole-induced dipole, dispersion, and closed shell repulsion interactions of which the dipole–dipole interaction is the most important. In systems where intermolecular hydrogen bonds or metal coordination bonds exist between amphiphilic headgroups, these bonds make significant contributions to reverse micelle formation in addition to those due to the interactions between the polar headgroups.94 Furthermore, the transfer of free energy of hydrophilic headgroups from a hydrophilic environment to an oily hydrophobic environment may provide insight into the mechanism of reverse micellar formation.
Concentration dependence of aggregation number, Nagg, gives an idea of the micellization process and also of the distribution of micellar size in nonaqueous media. The Nagg of several ionic amphiphiles is negatively affected by the concentration of the amphiphiles. For instance, nonaqueous solutions of barium or calcium dinonylnaphthalene sulfonates, sodium 1,2,-bis(2-ethylhexyloxycarbonyl)ethane sulphonate or aerosol OT (sodium 1,2-bis(2-ethylhexyloxycarbonyl)-l-ethanesulfonate, AOT) are characterized by a constancy of amphiphilic monomers over a wide range of concentration and by a narrow distribution of the micellar size.95–97 However, the aggregation number of nonionic amphiphiles in nonaqueous systems increases either linearly or according to the Langmuir adsorption isotherms with the amphiphile concentration.
The nature of the solvent is one of the factors affecting the micellar size in nonaqueous systems.98,99 The solvent dependence of Nagg has been studied for a variety of anionic and cationic amphiphiles in nonaqueous systems. However, the solvent dependency of Nagg of the nonionic amphiphiles is limited because of their poor solubility in these media. The study of temperature dependence of CMC or the aggregation number in nonaqueous systems is very important from a thermodynamic point of view. With the few data available on such studies of nonionic amphiphiles, it has been shown that the aggregation number decreases with increasing temperature although this is not consistent with some dependency on the solvents present. For example, the aggregation number of sorbitan monolaurate micelles increases with increasing temperature in benzene.100
Compared to normal micelles in aqueous systems, the structure (shape, size and internal cross-sectional structure) control of reverse micelles in nonaqueous systems is not a simple matter because of their inverted structures and lesser freedom in variation of the control parameters. However, recent developments in the free structure control of reverse micelles have shown that micellar growth can be achieved by replacing water with other molecules such as formamide, glycerol or urea, and also upon addition of amphiphilic salts.101–106 The ionic amphiphile AOT and lecithin phospholipid are the most common amphiphiles used for the study of reverse micelles. These amphiphiles form reverse micelles or water in oil (W/O) microemulsions in amphiphile–oil–water ternary mixtures.107–116 The structure of such micelles has been found to depend on the extent of water solubilization in the micellar core. Recent studies of nonionic amphiphilic reverse micelles have shown that glycerol- or sugar-based nonionic amphiphiles potentially form reverse micelles in a variety of organic solvents in the absence of water.117–123
Formation of uncharged reverse wormlike micelles has recently been realized in sucrose-based nonionic amphiphile–oil systems in the absence of water under ambient conditions. This route involves the addition of sucrose dioleate (SDO) to semi-dilute solutions of sucrose trioleate (STO) in hexadecane. It should be noted that it had only been possible to form reverse wormlike micelles using ionic amphiphiles (AOT or phospholipid lecithin) where water and/or salts are essential to induce micellar growth. However, it has been shown that a less lipophilic nonionic amphiphile SDO promotes one-dimensional growth of STO reverse micelles and leads to the formation of transient networks of viscoelastic reverse wormlike micelles. The zero-shear viscosity increases by ∼4 orders of magnitude and the mixing fraction of SDO to STO determines the growth. In amphiphile self-assembly, the co-presence of polar and nonpolar solvent and ‘strong’ amphiphile bearing charge are common. Thus, the unusual case of the SDO–STO system could be interesting from the viewpoint of practical applications since the presence of both charge and water can be avoided.
3.6. Vesicles in aqueous systems: normal vesicles
Vesicles are closed shells of amphiphile or lipid bilayers which form in a solvent and have typical sizes of 10–100 nm124 but can also reach dimensions in the range of several hundreds of nanometers to several micrometers. They are hollow aggregates with a shell composed of single or multiple amphiphile or lipid bilayers. Vesicles formed in aqueous systems are called normal vesicles in which membranes are separated by a water phase with the hydrophilic part of the amphiphile oriented to the exterior of the membrane as shown in Fig. 5. A vesicle formed from a single bilayer structure is called a unilamellar vesicle (Fig. 5A), whereas those formed from multiple bilayers are known as multilayer vesicles (Fig. 5B). Normal unilayer or unilamellar vesicles have a classical structure where a normal bilayer, composed of two monolayers with their hydrophobic parts facing each other, forms a closed shell in aqueous solvent. Vesicles formed by lipids are known as liposomes. Vesicles or liposomes are important model systems for biological membranes and for fluid surfaces. They have drawn considerable attention in various fields including drug delivery, pharmaceutical formulations, cosmetics, and also in materials architectonics.125–131 Vesicle formation and fusion are anticipated to be important in many physiological processes such as cell division and fusion. In drug delivery or cosmetic applications, vesicles act as delivery agents for encapsulated materials. For targeted drug delivery applications, vesicles are formulated from amphiphilic or phospholipid molecules in the presence of the drug molecules to be encapsulated then the vesicle solutions are injected into the bloodstream where vesicles can carry the drug protecting it from unwanted release. Since vesicles can potentially bind to cell membranes, they are effective in delivering the drug directly to cells.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of normal (unilamellar (A) and multilamellar (B)) and reverse (multilamellar) vesicles (C). 
Cholesterol is an important constituent of liposomes as it plays a crucial role in stabilizing the bilayer structure of liposomes. Cholesterol orients itself within the space adjacent to phospholipids due to its relatively small size. However, it should be noted that cholesterol cannot itself initiate the formation of a bilayer structure. Cholesterol also prevents tilting and distortion of the membrane structure at temperatures exceeding the phase-transition temperatures. Depending on the hydrophilic headgroup of the amphiphile, liposomes may be charged or neutral (uncharged). For charged liposomes, stability is largely determined by the magnitude and the range of electrostatic interactions. For zwitterionic phospholipids with a zero net charge, liposomes repel each other and consequently possess colloidal stability. Similar to phospholipids, nonionic amphiphiles may also self-assemble into a closed bilayer structure. This generally requires external energy in the form of physical agitation or heat. Some nonionic amphiphiles (glycerol-based) may spontaneously form vesicles in water.
Vesicles are usually thermodynamically nonequilibrium systems which can however be kinetically stable over quite long periods of time. There are several methods for preparation of vesicles which influence the shape, size, polydispersity and type of vesicle obtained. The classical phospholipid vesicles are normally prepared by sonication of a lamellar phase dispersion in the two-phase region composed of the lamellar phase in equilibrium with an excess aqueous phase. Lamellae are broken by ultrasonication and can then reassemble as vesicles. This leads to smaller vesicles with a wide size distribution since the mechanical action of sonication is inhomogeneous. The resulting vesicles are considered to be only metastable. Over time they relax back to a stable two-phase equilibrium. Occasionally, multilayer vesicles form spontaneously upon dissolution and gentle agitation of phospholipids in water. Dissolution of a lamellar phase formed at higher concentrations into excess water also produces vesicles. Another method involves the dispersion of amphiphiles in an organic solvent followed by injection into an excess of water. Giant unilamellar vesicles are formed by this method as the organic solvent evaporates. Multilamellar vesicles with a narrow size distribution can be prepared by applying a steady shear to the lamellar phase. In this case, the mechanical deformation is more uniform in comparison to sonication. The average size of vesicles can be controlled by varying the applied shear.
In the past, spontaneous vesicle formation has been formulated in certain mixtures of short- and long-chain, double-tailed lecithins,132 in solutions of double-tailed amphiphiles with hydroxides and other more exotic counterions,133,134 and also in some mixtures of single-tailed amphiphiles135 as an improvement over conventional vesicles formed by sonication. However, up until the 1980's the relatively restricted chemical or physical properties of the vesicles and systematic methods of vesicle preparations were not widely exploited. Kaler et al. then proposed a general method for preparing spontaneous, equilibrium vesicles of controlled size, surface charge, or permeability from commercial amphiphiles.136 Vesicles formed immediately upon combining aqueous mixtures of two commercially available, single-tailed amphiphiles with oppositely charged headgroups. They proposed that this method is a remarkably simple way of tailoring vesicle properties and allows gentle and efficient encapsulation to take place without mechanical or chemical perturbations from the final vesicle composition or structure. It should be noted that the curvature of the mixed amphiphile bilayers (which controls size and shape), the vesicle wall thickness (which controls permeability), and the sign and magnitude of the surface charge (which control vesicle interactions and stability against aggregation) can be determined by the relative amounts and the chain length of the individual amphiphiles used. The vesicles prepared from aqueous mixtures of cetyl trimethylammonium tosylate (CTAT) and sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) range from about 30 to 80 nm in radius. And again the size depends on the amphiphile ratio and total concentration. Vesicles prepared from these systems are stable for at least 1 year.
3.7. Vesicles in nonaqueous systems: reverse vesicles
Vesicles formed in nonaqueous media are known as reverse vesicles and contain membranes separated by the oily phase with the hydrophobic part of the amphiphile oriented to the outside of the membrane as shown in Fig. 5C. Reverse vesicles consist of bimolecular layers of amphiphiles whose hydrophilic part is located in the interior of the concentric bilayers and are dispersed in nonaqueous media. Unlike vesicles observed in aqueous systems, reverse vesicles in nonaqueous media are relatively uncommon although they may find many applications such as for the encapsulation and controlled delivery of hydrophilic solutes or in tailored synthesis of nanostructured materials. Kunieda et al. for the first time demonstrated the formation of reverse vesicles using the nonionic amphiphilic tetraethylene glycol dodecyl ether.137 This amphiphile dissolved in dodecane formed isotropic solutions without any liquid crystalline structure in the amphiphile–oil binary mixture. However, upon addition of a small amount of water, the isotropic solution divided into a lamellar liquid crystalline phase, which was in equilibrium in the excess oil phase. The reverse vesicles formed by hand shaking of this two-phase system containing a lamellar liquid crystal and an excess oil phase have wider size distributions with diameters in the range from 10–20 μm and, like normal vesicles, coalesce and revert to a lamellar phase after standing. In the study of phase equilibria in the water–tetraethylene glycol dodecyl ether–dodecane system, Kunieda et al. found that lamellar liquid crystal swelling of a large amount of oil coexists with an excess oil phase in the oil-rich region in which reverse vesicles form.138 The inside and the outside of the reverse vesicles are oil. The shapes of the reverse vesicles are dependent on the oil content in lamellar liquid crystals. They also found stable reverse vesicles (with stability greater than 6 months) in a water–sucrose monoalkanoate–hexanol–decane system although the size distribution was very large in the range of 100 nm to 5 μm.139 They found that the interlayer spacing of bilayers increased upon addition of hexanol and thus hexanol is regarded as being effective in making the bilayers flexible and in dispersing the liquid crystal as reverse vesicles.
The Kunieda group also demonstrated for the first time reverse vesicles containing ionic amphiphiles and concluded that a combination of less hydrophilic oil-soluble ionic amphiphile and hydrophilic amphiphile is important for the formulation of reverse vesicles.140 Moreover, addition of a small amount of water is also crucial to adjust the interactions of the hydrophilic part of reverse vesicles. In the presence of a small amount of water, a lamellar liquid crystal containing a large amount of oil is formed in the AOT and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) system. When the liquid crystal is dispersed in oil, reverse vesicles are formed.
Several other groups later also formulated reverse vesicles based on sucrose esters,141 amino acid derivatives,142 and metalloamphiphiles.143 However, questions continue to arise regarding the stability, robustness, and ease of formulation of reverse vesicles and the general guidelines for the structure control of such aggregates are unclear. Recently, Tung et al. reported a new route for the formation of stable unilamellar reverse vesicles in the nonpolar organic solvents, cyclohexane and n-hexane.144 Their method offers a general framework for tuning reverse aggregate geometry from reverse spherical-to-cylindrical micelles and eventually to reverse vesicles using an appropriate combination of long- and short-chain phospholipids. The long-chain lipid is L-α-phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), a natural double-tailed lipid with an average tail length of 17 carbons and an unsaturation in one of the tails. The short-chain lipid is 1,2-dibutyroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (C4-lecithin) with two four-carbon saturated tails. Their method involves mixing of short- and long-chain lipids (lecithins) in the presence of a trace amount of sodium chloride. They successfully controlled the size of reverse vesicle by tuning the ratio of short- to long-chain lecithin. Increasing this ratio favored a spontaneous transition from reverse micelles to reverse vesicles. Average vesicle size can be tuned from 60 to 300 nm depending on the sample composition. They suggested that electrostatic interactions may be important in reverse vesicle formation and stabilization. Sodium chloride is proposed to act as a glue in binding the lipid headgroups together and in stabilizing the vesicles in solution.
4. Assembly on static surfaces
Along with developments in surface analytical techniques as seen in molecular level observation using STM and AFM, amphiphile assemblies at surfaces have attracted much attention. Amphiphile assemblies at surfaces have great potential to connect molecular phenomena with artificial devices such as electrodes, sensors and transistors. Various techniques including self-assembled monolayer (SAM) methods,145,146 Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) techniques,147–156 and layer-by-layer (LbL) assemblies157–161 have been developed providing well organized and designed thin films at interfaces. Although we give brief descriptions of LB films here, SAM and LbL techniques are not well described. This section is dedicated to exploratory research on assembly of amphiphiles on static surfaces and their applicability as structure directing agents. Anisotropic shaped nanoparticles are also ideal building blocks for engineering and tailoring nanoscale structures for specific technological applications. In this section, the role of amphiphilic assemblies in the controlled growth (synthesis) of inorganic nanomaterials is discussed in detail.
4.1. Role of amphiphile assemblies in understanding intermolecular forces
The early developments in amphiphilic assembly were centered around understanding of static surface forces. Molecular or atomic level short-range forces were first introduced by Langmuir in well-ordered molecular layers of amphiphiles. Developments in quantum mechanics and electromagnetics are key to the formulation of theories describing the nature of dispersion forces such as London, Keesom, Debye and related long-range surface forces. In combining short and long range forces DLVO (Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek) theory was developed by a team of Russian and Dutch scientists.162,163 Experimental developments for probing various components of these intermolecular forces commenced soon after the introduction of the surface force apparatus, which is still used today. Current developments in this field are primarily exploratory and benefit from the sophistication of modern instruments.
The adsorption of amphiphiles from solutions onto solid surfaces has been investigated because of the numerous practical applications where solid–liquid contact occurs. Both hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces carrying charges have been examined. It has been postulated that adsorbed amphiphiles will self-assemble at the solid–liquid interface in a manner analogous to bulk-phase micellization. The competition between the interaction of the amphiphile-surface and the solvent-surface determines the formation of surface aggregates. The most important result is that the process of surface aggregation takes place at critical aggregate concentrations (CAC) much lower than the bulk phase CMC. This indicates that the aggregates are truly self-assembled on the surface and that they are not micelles formed in the bulk and subsequently adsorbed on the surface.
It has been postulated that a continuous monolayer of amphiphile forms on hydrophobic surfaces whereas a continuous bilayer forms on hydrophilic surfaces. However, both anionic (SDS) and cationic (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB) amphiphiles are known to form hemicylindrical aggregates on hydrophobic graphite surfaces where the amphiphile tails are oriented such that only the tails are in contact with the surface. These hemicylindrical aggregates are transformed into lamellar assemblies by adding a co-amphiphile (dodecanol) to the system.
According to Brinck, Jönsson and Tiberg, the adsorption of non-ionic amphiphiles from their micelle solution to a solid surface occurs in a two-step process where the first step is diffusion from the bulk solution to a subsurface, and the second step is transportation from the subsurface to the surface with concomitant adsorption.164 They assumed a finite stagnant layer outside the surface due to the convection caused by stirring during measurements (a stirred cuvette geometry). The adsorption was observed to be diffusion controlled, and the concentration immediately outside the surface was determined by a local equilibrium in the sub-layer region as is schematically summarized in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of amphiphile equilibrium with layered regions. 
Very recently, Bain and coworkers have used total internal reflection Raman spectroscopy to look at both the equilibrium and kinetic aspects of adsorption of a cationic amphiphile.165,166 According to them the well-defined wall-jet geometry is sufficient to model the mass transport of amphiphile using known hydrodynamics for the adsorption process. The cuvette and wall-jet geometries differ in the dimension of the stagnant layer. However, the need for further exploratory research to understand the fundamentals of amphiphile adsorption on solid substrates is imperative.
As a parallel development to the physiochemical studies on amphiphile assemblies, structure evolution and force measurements, synthetic chemists have explored the realm of new amphiphiles with various molecular architectures.167 Adsorption kinetics and microstructures of various gemini (dimeric), zwitterionic amphiphiles have been studied in detail.168 While considerable attention has been paid to hydrocarbon chain amphiphiles there are only a limited number of reports regarding the adsorption kinetics and microstructures of fluorocarbon tailed amphiphiles or fluoroamphiphiles. In fact, fluoroamphiphiles have been used to advantage in a range of applications owing to their superior hydrophobicity, lipophobicity, thermal stability and bioinertness.169 Strong intermolecular interactions between fluorocarbon tails are the origin of these unique characteristics in comparison to their hydrocarbon counterparts.
Fundamental studies of direct adsorption of fluoroamphiphiles on solid surfaces are rare170 in spite of their favorable spreading and wetting characteristics, including low surface tension, high fluidity, high density and low solubility in aqueous media. However, fluoroamphiphile coated surfaces are being widely used in biomedical and analytical applications. For instance, in bioseparation processes, fluoroamphiphiles are used as an additive in buffer solutions for (free-flow) capillary electrophoretic separation of proteins, peptides, and enzymes.171,172 Highly hydrophobic fluroamphiphile coated surfaces are used for immobilization of biomolecules, heterogeneous diagnostic assays and in biosensors.173
The adsorbed layer structure of partially fluorinated cationic amphiphiles and their mixtures on mica were determined using AFM imaging. It was found that the fluoroamphiphile self-assembled as cylindrical micelles and shape transitions in the adsorbed layer were correlated with surface and bulk compositions.174,175 Solvophobic interaction forces are largely studied in fluorocarbon amphiphilic surfaces but their adsorbed layer structures are not well understood. Classeon and coworkers have used the nanointerferometric surface force apparatus also known as MASIF (Measurements and Analysis of Surface Interactions and Forces) to study the adsorption behaviour and interaction forces of fluoroamphiphiles adsorbed on solid surfaces.176,177 Their experimental results indicate that cationic fluoroamphiphiles self-assemble on a variety of solid surfaces such as silica, glass, and mica in the form of bilayer structures. This adsorption process is influenced by the interaction forces between the adsorbed layers that largely depend on the amphiphile concentration. At low fluoroamphiphile concentration the molecules adsorb both on glass and mica surfaces due to favorable electrostatic interactions. At higher amphiphile concentrations hydrophobic interactions continue to drive the adsorption process. Fig. 7 illustrates the structure of two amphiphile assemblies on the approaching surfaces at various concentrations.
 Fig. 7  Illustration of the structure of amphiphile assemblies on approaching surfaces at various concentrations. 
4.2. Amphiphilic monolayers on crystalline surfaces for controlled nanoscale synthesis and assemblies
Metal and semiconductor nanoparticles and nanocrystals that exhibit novel and/or enhanced characteristics contingent on their size and shape are of prime interest in the modern era of nanotechnology. The current and potential applications of nanoparticles are growing covering an extremely broad range of markets and industries including catalysis, plasmonics, sensing, spectroscopy, biomedicine, renewable energy, cancer treatment, environmental protection, pharmaceuticals, personal care, surface coatings, textiles, food, plastics, electronics, storage devices, building materials, automotives, agricultural, etc.178 In these applications, control of nanoparticle shape and size is critical for obtaining required functionality and selectivity. Therefore, the ability to fabricate and control the structure of nanoparticles allows scientists and engineers to influence the resulting properties and, ultimately, design materials to give the desired properties. Both top-down and bottom-up processes are used to obtain metal nanoparticles. In the case of bottom-up processes, amphiphilic assemblies play a critical role in developing nanoparticles with tunable sizes and different shapes. A synthetic method now popularly known as colloidal chemistry has been widely used for nanoparticle fabrication.179–181 In this method, surface passivation and self-assembly of amphiphile-coated nanoparticles are harmoniously coupled.182
In the process of solution-phase synthesis of metallic, semiconducting, magnetic, and multicomponent nanoparticles the crystalline core is surrounded by a layer of amphiphilic molecules. These amphiphilic molecules are often referred to as stabilizing agents, capping agents or ligands. Typically, colloidal nanomaterials are synthesized by reacting appropriate molecular precursors, that is, inorganic salts or organometallic compounds. Nucleation and growth of nanocrystals occurs in the solution phase in the presence of organic amphiphilic molecules which dynamically bind to the nanoparticle/nanocrystal surfaces immediately after their nucleation and prevent them from fast growth and coagulation.183–185 In this process amphiphiles play an important role in tuning the kinetics of nucleation and growth for achieving the required shape and size of nanoparticles. Amphiphiles such as long-chain carboxylic and phosphonic acids (e.g., oleic acid and n octadecylphosphonic acid), alkanethiols (e.g., dodecanethiol), alkyl phosphines, alkylphosphine oxides (classical examples are trioctylphosphine, TOP, and trioctylphosphine oxide, TOPO), and alkylamines such as hexadecylamine are commonly used in the colloidal synthesis of nanoparticles and nanocrystals.186–188 Another significant advantage of having an organic amphiphilic monolayer as a stabilizing/capping agent is to provide solubility of inorganic nanoparticles in a particular solvent, which is very important for further processing of nanoparticles and nanocrystals. Various types of amphiphiles are commonly used as surface ligands with their molecular structure, interparticle spacing and their function on nanoparticle and nanocrystal growth.
Rodlike micelles, microemulsions, reverse micelles and amphiphile assemblies in solutions have been used as a soft template to direct the growth of anisotropic nanomaterials.189–192 For instance, Murphy and Jana have demonstrated that the shape of the seed-mediated growth of Au and Ag can be precisely controlled by a rodlike micellar template made of CTAB amphiphile assemblies.193,194 In this case moderately strong binding of CTAB amphiphiles to the growing crystal phase of Au or Ag helps anisotropic growth of nanorods. Fig. 8 illustrates an example of the role of amphiphile assemblies in determining the shape of the nanoparticles and nanocrystals. The aspect ratios of the resulting nanorods and nanowires are controlled by the shape and size of the micellar templates and by the relative concentration of precursors, salts, and amphiphiles. Besides CTAB, micelles derived from SDS or AOT amphiphiles along with other co-amphiphiles are often used as soft templates. Here, we aim to demonstrate how these amphiphile assemblies direct the growth of solid surfaces.
 Fig. 8  An example of the contribution of amphiphile assemblies to formation of the anisotropic shapes of the nanoparticles and nanocrystals. 
In addition to size and shape, precursors and amphiphiles can control the crystalline phase of the nanoparticle. Different ligand coverage on different nanocrystal facets can lead to anisotropic interactions between nanocrystals by changing their effective shape. For instance, Choi et al. have shown that PbS nanocrystals pack into superlattices of different symmetry, depending on their degree of aging in solution, due to selective detachment of oleic acid (OA) ligands from the 100 facets of the rock salt (RS) core.195,196 Bealing et al. have shown that the change in surface energies with ligand coverage of these two surfaces is predicted to give rise to equilibrium nanocrystal shapes ranging from octahedra to cuboctahedra to cubes, in accordance with experimentally observed shapes of Pb-salt nanocrystals capped with OA− as shown in Fig. 9.197
 Fig. 9  Effect of ligand coverage on equilibrium nanocrystal shapes ranging from octahedra to cuboctahedra to cubes. 
Mann and coworkers have demonstrated that the interfacial activity of reverse micelles and microemulsions can be exploited to couple nanoparticle synthesis and self-assembly over a range of length scales.198,199 It can lead to materials with complex organization arising from the interdigitation of amphiphilic molecules attached to specific nanoparticle crystal faces. According to their model of adsorption, interdigitation and aggregation, it should be possible to produce 1D nanowires and higher order colloidal architectures using amphiphiles with headgroups complementary to the crystal surface of the nanoparticles. In a different report, Filankembo and Pileni have demonstrated that the shape of the nanoparticles can be controlled without affecting the macroscopic structure of the amphiphile templates by simply adding the Hofmeister series of salt ions.200

4.2.1. Controlled assembly of metal nanoparticle–amphiphile hybrids. 
So far we have reviewed some of the novel application and exploratory research in the field of amphiphilic assembly directed growth of inorganic nanomaterials. Once grown, further scientific and technological advances in the application of nanorods in functional devices depend on the ability to organize them in complex one- or multi-dimensional functional architectures. Also, to enhance their electronic and optical properties, the anisotropic nanorods need to be organized in a controllable and predictable fashion. In order to achieve the self-assembly of nanorod arrays surface chemistry of the nanorods is often modified. For instance, end-to-end or side-to-side nanorod assemblies can be obtained using chemical or physical binding of ligands that stabilize nanoparticles. Here the shape tunability is limited to the ligand–ligand interactions. Thus, to obtain varying self-assembly structures of nanorods, their surface chemistry has to be changed by replacing or modifying ligands. Nie et al. have introduced a new “block copolymer” paradigm for the self-assembly of nanorods. In this approach, they have organized metal nanorods in structures with varying geometries using a striking analogy between amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers and the hydrophilic nanorods tethered to hydrophobic polymer chains at both ends. Here the self-assembled structure is directed by the thermodynamics and kinetics of the system. The tunability and reversibility of the assembly were achieved solely by changing the solvent quality for the constituent blocks. Using this amphiphilic materials assisted assembly process, they have demonstrated a range of structures including rings, linear and bundled chains and nanospheres with 2D walls as shown in Fig. 10.201
 Fig. 10  Structures including rings, linear and bundled chains and nanospheres coated with amphiphiles and block copolymers. 


4.2.2. Advantages, limitations, challenges and opportunities. 
Of the advantages of amphiphile directed colloidal synthesis, we would like to emphasize the excellent control over size and shape of prepared nanostructures and their applicability to a broad range of materials (metals, semiconductors, quantum dots etc.). Moreover, the use of relatively simple experimental equipment and chemicals allows one to obtain high quality materials and tailor their properties at surprisingly low cost. Using this process significant success has been achieved in synthesis of nanocrystals and nanoparticles of different technology inspired semiconductors including II–VI (CdSe, CdTe, CdS), III–V (InP, InAs) and IV–VI (PbS, PbSe, PbTe) semiconductors. State-of-the-art exploratory research in this field includes synthesis of more complex and sophisticated structures where size, shape, and connectivity can be independently tailored in multicomponent systems. Development of core–shell structures, dumbbell morphologies with high level of monodispersity with the size range of sub-20 nm are all ongoing research endeavors. In spite of rapid progress having been made in the last few decades the empirical synthetic procedures are still naïve in terms of our fundamental understanding. For instance, amphiphiles (soft templates) are dynamic in solution and the stability of the amphiphile assemblies during crystal growth remains uncertain.202 Charged amphiphiles such as SDS or CTAB might form complexes with metal salt precursors ultimately affecting the reduction kinetics but which is not clearly understood.203 A commonly accepted but not proven mechanism is that the functionality of amphiphile is similar to growth-directing adsorbates on metal surfaces than a physical template for metal reduction. For technological applications, particularly in semiconductor technology, pure, all-inorganic and highly crystalline materials are preferred. Therefore, structure directing agents (hydrocarbon amphiphiles) should be removed to facilitate charge transport in arrays of metallic nanocrystals. Advantages of using amphiphiles over SAMs (thiols, silanes, amines etc.) as structure-directing agents are their moderate affinity to the growing crystal planes which can be removed relatively easily compared to hydrocarbons with anchoring end groups. Several excellent papers promote the detailed understanding of organic amphiphiles (ligands) in colloidal synthesis of nanoparticles and nanocrystals and their subsequent removal and exchange for smaller molecules.204–207

4.3. Assembly and application of superamphiphiles on static surfaces
Block copolymers exhibit a wide range of phase-separated morphologies in bulk, on surfaces and at interfaces. Diblock copolymers consisting of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic blocks are naturally amphiphilic and they are often referred to as “superamphiphiles”. The self-assembly of these large molecular weight amphiphiles depends strongly on the structure of the macromolecule and its microphase separation. Polymeric micelles were first proposed as drug carriers by Bader et al. in 1984.208 From the viewpoint of a fundamental understanding of amphiphilicbehaviour, amphiphilic block copolymers possess several special characteristics that derive from their polymeric nature. In contrast to low molecular weight amphiphiles, fragments of block copolymers are large enough so that many aspects of the interactions with solvents or among chains can be understood in universal terms that transcend the specific chemical natures of the species involved. Some of the unique features of superamphiphiles over small amphiphiles are entropic elasticity of random coils, nonideal free energy of mixing, excluded volume, the possibility of systematically varying the molecular weight of homologous series of a block copolymer and the possibility of forming greater size interfacial structures/zones.209
Amphiphilic polymers can be synthesized by introducing hydrophilic groups such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, amine, glycol, and hydrophilic polymers such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), poly(vinyl alcohol), polyacrylamide, polyacrylic acids, hydroxy ethyl methacrylate, poly vinyl pyridine, and poly vinyl pyrrolidone into a hydrophobic moiety. Because of their ability to form micelles, amphiphilic block copolymers are strong candidates for potential applications as emulsifiers, dispersants, foamers, thickeners, rinse aids, and compatibilizers and are also widely being used in cosmetic, detergent and food industries.
In solution these amphiphilic block copolymers usually have a core–shell structure with the hydrophobic block forming the core and the hydrophilic block or blocks forming the shell. Recent pharmaceutical research on polymeric micelles has been mainly in copolymers having an A–B diblock structure with A, the hydrophilic corona and B, the hydrophobic polymers (core), respectively. Here we focus on their assembly and application on solid surfaces. Recent interests in developing amphiphilic polymer coated surfaces are twofold: (a) to improve the biocompatibility of polymeric materials by changing the interfacial properties of the material for obtaining non-thrombogenic surfaces and (b) to develop antifouling surface coatings.

4.3.1. Superamphiphiles as biomaterials and artificial bio-implants. 
As described above, polymers behave as amphiphile especially when they have hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties. Not limited to typical amphiphilic polymers, many synthetic polymers show amphiphile-like properties and functions because different moieties within a single polymer have different affinities to surrounding media. These polymers are well used in many functions such as biological applications. For example, synthetic polymers are widely used in fabrication of artificial bio-implants either to repair or replace organs that range from cardiac stents to dental, vascular, spine, artificial skin and orthopaedic implants. Introduction of these foreign synthetic materials into living tissue leads to some unwanted reactions (commonly known as side effects) such as, adsorption of different proteins and adhesion of cells.210 Above all, when a polymer surface is implanted in the blood stream, e.g. a heart stent, adsorption of blood proteins will occur that will ultimately lead to blood clotting (thrombosis).211 The properties of the interface between the polymer and the biological environment are key for controlling/eliminating the fatal blood clotting. Therefore, it is of great importance for biomaterial scientists to improve the biocompatibility of polymeric materials while maintaining requisite mechanical strength, flexibility and chemical resistance of the polymer.
Polymeric surfaces with low interfacial energies to water or blood are ideal for developing non-thrombogenic surfaces. Hydrophilic homopolymers such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) coated substrates show reduced protein adsorption and cell adhesion.212 In contrast to the PEO coated hydrophilic surfaces, developing a hydrophilic surface by coating small amphiphilic molecules does not exhibit any reduction in protein or cell adsorption. Therefore, it has been suggested that the excluded volume effects and rapid conformational changes of the water-soluble PEO chains at the surface with its high degree of hydration give rise to a low interfacial energy, which effectively reduces the hydrophobic interactions responsible for the protein adsorption.213 However, surface adsorbed PEO homopolymers suffer from poor stability on surfaces that they are adsorbed. Several techniques have been employed to improve the stability of PEO on surfaces. One approach is to covalently link PEO on surfaces (PEO brushes), which however, limits the choice of surface that can be covalently bound with the modified PEO.214 An alternative route to produce PEO surfaces with greater stability, and still use the adsorption technique, is adsorption of amphiphilic polymers containing PEO as the hydrophilic component.215 The amphiphilic polymers may be block or graft copolymers and, in either case, the hydrophobic segments of the copolymers will adsorb strongly at the substrate surface leaving the hydrophilic flexible PEO segments extending outwards from the surface.
Freij-Larsson et al. have investigated the adsorption behaviour of a number of PEO containing amphiphilic copolymers on hydrophobized silica model surfaces.216 Subsequently, they have studied the adsorption of serum proteins such as albumin and fibrinogen using ellipsometry. The morphology and composition of the modified surfaces were studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and AFM, and contact angle measurements were performed to determine their wettability characteristics. A combination of hydrophobic interactions with the substrate and a low solubility of the hydrophobic segments of the polymers in the aqueous solution drives the amphiphilic polymers to adsorb on the hydrophobized silica surface. The adsorbed amphiphilic polymers are suggested to be present at the hydrophobic surface as molecularly dispersed molecules and as micellar aggregates of different sizes, according to AFM. Although the amphiphilic polymers may not completely cover the substrate surface, highly hydrated PEO segments extend into the solution and sterically prevent the adsorption of serum proteins from closely approaching the hydrophobic surface.
The effect on the cell response of the presence and density of bioactive ligands on biomaterial surfaces is under frequent investigation. Biomaterials for guided tissue regeneration and tissue engineering are required to have well-defined surfaces that would provide for controlled cell–biomaterial interactions.217 Numerous strategies have been developed and are under further investigation for coupling of bioactive compounds to polymers for drug delivery and tissue engineering.218 Among the biodegradable polymers in the tissue-engineering field, aliphatic polyesters, such as polylactide (PLA), polyglycolide (PGA), polycaprolactone (PCL), and their copolymers are the most often studied.219 These polymers are easy to process, biodegradable, nontoxic and serve as 3D scaffolds. The disadvantage of these polymers is that they are hydrophobic in nature and thus easily fouled by proteins as discussed earlier. For the past few decades, the materials science community has fine tuned the properties of antifouling surface coatings that are resistant to nonspecific protein adsorption. In this regard, amphiphilic polymers that contain PEG, phosphazene or zwitterionic small amphiphiles have been explored in detail.220 In polyesters, due to their low content of suitable reactive groups, physical immobilization of hydrophilic components, such as PEO, is needed to carry functional groups to bind bioactive components to the chain end group. Třesohlavá et al. have developed a model system using PLA surfaces modified with mixtures of copolymers composed of a neutral PLA-b-PEO and its analogue with biotin at the end of PEO block where the biotin serves as a surrogate of a bioactive peptide group.221


4.3.2. Applications in anti-biofouling and biomedical imaging. 
Preventing biofouling in a marine environment is critical but challenging due to the amphiphilic nature of several marine species.222 Thus, designing a single coating that is capable of resisting bioadhesion remains an explorative research area that also includes synthesis and assembly of amphiphilic materials. Towards this end, a number of research groups have demonstrated the usefulness of ethylene glycols (hydrophilic) and fluoropolymers (hydrophobic). Coatings containing these two materials have been shown to be effective in minimizing adhesion of a variety of marine organisms. While early strategies have relied primarily on tuning the coating's chemical composition, recent developments in the field have revealed that combating adsorption of biomass onto man-made surfaces requires not only control over the coating's surface chemistry but also tailoring of its topography, charge, mobility of the surface groups, and mechanical properties. Genzer and coworkers have explored the possibility of using amphiphilic copolymers comprising ethylene glycol and fluorinated groups by chemically ‘fluorinating’ poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) brushes anchored to flat solid surfaces. Post-polymerization reaction at the hydroxyl termini of HEMA's pendant groups was performed using three classes of fluorinating agents, including organosilanes, acyl chlorides, and trifluoroacetic anhydride (TFAA). The ability to controllably distribute the fluorinated groups inside the polymer brushes to obtain tailor made hydrophobic surfaces with tunable wetting/bioadhesion characteristics was demonstrated. Systematic testing and performance evaluation against a variety of biological moieties and marine species are still needed in order to fully understand the role of amphiphilic groups along the copolymer in governing bioadhesion.
Inorganic nanoparticles are attractive as biomedical imaging probes. For computed tomography (CT) scanning, those inorganic nanoparticles are coated with biocompatible polymers such as PEG. These polymer coated nanoparticles surpass the limitations of conventional iodine-based contrast agents for CT scanning that includes short imaging time and the risk of renal toxicity. Another advantage of polymer coated nanoparticles as contrast-enhancing agents is their ability to be used in multiple modalities. Kim et al. have developed a hybrid nanoparticle, composed of iron oxide and gold nanoparticles, as a potential dual contrast agent for CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).223 They coated these nanoparticles with amphiphilic poly(DMA-r-mPEGMA-r-MA) [DMA, N,N-dimethylacrylamide; MA, methyl acrylate] to impart water-dispersity and anti biofouling properties. This amphiphilic polymer enables coating on a variety of hydrophobically modified nanomaterials making the surfaces hydrophilic and resistant to nonspecific adsorption of biological species. This biomaterial, poly(DMA-r-mPEGMA-r-MA), contains a hydrophilic PEG moiety, enabling the particles to disperse in water (thus showing antibiofouling properties), and a long hydrophobic alkyl chain, enabling the polymer to coat oleylamine-stabilized hybrid nanoparticles via hydrophobic and van der Waals interactions. As shown in Fig. 11, the amphiphilic polymer coated hybrid nanoparticles show one or more iron oxide nanoparticles that are fused to Au nanoparticles in a bent or pyramidal shape without aggregation. Intravenous injection of the hybrid nanoparticles into hepatoma-bearing mice results in high contrast between the hepatoma and normal hepatic parenchyma in both CT and MRI. These results suggest that the amphiphilic polymer coated Au-Fe3O4 hybrid nanoparticles may be useful as CT/MRI dual contrast agents for in vivo hepatoma imaging.
 Fig. 11  An example of hybrid nanoparticles (Au and Fe3O4) coated with amphiphilic polymers and amphiphilic molecules. 

4.4. Polyelectrolyte–amphiphile complexes
The concept of self-assembly has been successfully used to construct periodic nanostructures from ordered arrays of organic molecules. Highly ordered nanostructures are to be utilized in such a way that new materials will have, at least in theory, useful physical properties for everyday applications. Polyelectrolyte complexes are being explored as a material for constructing ordered organic molecule-periodic nanostructures with a periodicity of 5 nm. A polyelectrolyte complex contains a polyelectrolyte and an ionic amphiphile of opposite charge and the formation of polyelectrolyte–amphiphile complexes is modular. Permutation and combination of amphiphiles and polyelectrolytes is possible as either the polyelectrolyte or the amphiphiles used in the building blocks can be of either a natural or a synthetic origin. Polyethyleneimine, polyamino acids and DNA are examples of polyelectrolytes, while typical representatives of useful amphiphiles are carboxylic acids and lipids. Interdisciplinary efforts involving physical chemistry, synthetic expertise, and colloidal science are in place to design and investigate polylectrolyte–amphiphile complexes.
Polymer complexes formed by polyelectrolytes and fluorinated amphiphilic (PEFA) materials are the fluoro-containing analogues of the non-fluorinated solid polyelectrolyte–amphiphile complexes.224 The various properties of PEFAs and non-fluorinated polyelectrolyte–amphiphile complexes are comparable to those of the classical polymers, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and polyethylene. A common property of PEFA and polyelectrolyte–surfactant complexes (PE–surfs) is a pronounced tendency to form well-ordered liquid crystal-like structures with a high mechanical and thermal stability. The main difference is in their wetting behaviour: PEFA forms on highly oleophobic surfaces, while PE–surfs form on oleophilic surfaces.
A cooperative ‘zipper’ mechanism between a polyelectrolyte chain and oppositely charged fluorinated amphiphilic molecules is postulated for the formation of the PEFA complex. An idealized lamellar mesomorphous complex structure with a repeat unit length of d consisting of fluoroalkyl-containing sheets with a thickness of d1 (dark shaded) and ionic sheets containing polyelectrolytes with a thickness of d2 are formed. This multi-lamellar structure is typical of many fluorinated PEFA materials. The molecular arrangement at the interface complex to air is dominated by the enrichment of CF3-groups. The amphiphiles are strongly linked to the polyelectrolyte chains, which lie about 1 nm beyond the CF3-layer.
The systematic preparation of low energy surfaces formed by the self-assembly of PEFA is potentially of high technological importance as easy-to-clean surface coatings. These coatings are easy to prepare and are being used as thin protective coatings for walls that are frequently graffitized. Polyelectrolyte complexes are also currently being used in the textile industries as anti-soiling coatings and in sports equipment as colloidal substitutions.
4.5. Amphiphilic assemblies for/in mesoporous materials
The role of amphiphile self-assembly in developing a wide range of high quality mesoporous materials is imperative. In particular, syntheses of mesoporous materials using amphiphile assemblies are now conducted by a large body of researchers. These materials are defined as porous materials with pore diameters in the range of 2–50 nm according to IUPAC classification. The archetypal mesoporous silica materials can be prepared by silica formation about template micelle assemblies followed by removal of the template by appropriate methods such as calcination.225,226 Replica synthesis using mesoporous silica results in extension of this family of materials to other mesoporous structures such as mesoporous carbon227–231 and carbon nanocages.232–235 Hierarchic assembly of mesoporous materials has been accomplished through LbL assembly of mesoporous materials.236–240 These advanced structures all essentially originate from amphiphile assembly. Detailed descriptions of typical mesoporous materials have been given in other reviews241–244 while examples of amphiphile assemblies are shown below.
Porous inorganic oxide membranes composed of alumina or titania that are prepared by an anodization process generally possess packed arrays of columnar pores ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometres in diameter depending on the anodizing conditions.245 The channel direction of the columnar pore is perpendicular to the membrane surface. The orientation of these nanochannels can be controlled to obtain a required orientation by introducing precursor materials that contain a mixture of an amphiphile (CTAB) and a silica source tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). The precursor is introduced into the alumina pores and the silica–amphiphile nanocomposite assembles at the pore walls to form the amphiphile-templated nanochannels. Using this simple procedure, a novel method for obtaining the desired mesoporous materials for separation of molecules was demonstrated. Additionally, this methodology could also be used to fabricate arrays of chips by patterning of the silica–amphiphile nanocomposite in the alumina membrane leading to special sensor array systems based on mesoporous materials. This strategy can also be extended to other porous systems that contain columnar pores, for example, polycarbonate and porous silicon membranes. In the coming years, this methodology will have a significant influence on the separation and catalysis industries and on microchip technologies.
Fluorocarbons and hydrocarbons are thermodynamically immiscible. Phase separation of F- and H-chain amphiphiles was first examined by Kunitake and others in micellar systems, bilayer membranes, and in liposomes.246–248 Mixed monolayers of F- and H-chain amphiphiles phase separate into patch domains on planar surfaces. Interestingly, on curved surfaces, such as on nanoparticles, this patchy phase evolves into an equilibrium-striped phase as demonstrated by Sing et al. The Flory–Huggins interaction parameter determines the miscibility of two amphiphiles and their morphology and kinetics of pattern formations.249
Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy has been used for the study of mixed monolayers composed of hydrocarbon and fluorocarbon amphiphilic thiolates decorated with terminal PEG chains. Apart from ESR, several other indirect methods such as NMR, SERS and fluorescence tagging have been used to understand the organization of mixed amphiphiles on solid surfaces, particularly on nanoparticles.250–253 However, these indirect methods suffer from the lack of a general view of the monolayer organization. For direct visualization of monolayer assemblies, techniques such as STM, AFM or XRD are currently applied.254,255 Nonetheless, there exist a number of experimental challenges for direct visualization including the size of the amphiphile which is limited to 14–16 carbon atoms, rigidity of the ligands, size of the nanoparticles, and so on. Recently, Posocco et al. have presented a combined experimental/simulation approach to the characterization of Au nanoparticles decorated with immiscible amphiphiles of a hybrid nature, i.e., F- and H-based thiolates bearing a PEG chain as an end group.256 According to this study, the phase segregation between H-chains and F-chains and the different length of the hydrophilic chains determine a peculiar folding of the PEG moieties responsible for the increased affinity of an organic compound for the fluorinated region, which increases as the size of the fluorinated domains decreases independently of the shape of the domains. In other words, the spontaneous organization of the F-/H-chains in the inner part of the monolayer is transferred to the outer surface of the nanoparticle. By tuning the hydrocarbon and fluorocarbon chain ratio in a mixed monolayer system one can effectively guide the amphiphilic assemblies in 3-D space.
5. Assembly at dynamic interfaces
Amphiphilic molecules naturally adsorb at air/water or liquid/liquid interfaces to form a monolayer. At the air/water interface, depending on the solubility characteristics of the monolayer they are categorized either as Gibbs monolayers (a soluble monolayer, made from relatively small hydrocarbon-tailed amphiphiles) or Langmuir monolayers (an insoluble monolayer, usually made from long-tailed hydrocarbon or double-tailed lipids). Amphiphilic assemblies at liquid/liquid interfaces thermodynamically favour the formation of isotropic dispersions of two immiscible liquids knows as emulsions. There are an extensive number of studies dedicated to monolayer assemblies at the air/water interface, micelle formation, emulsification, micellar structures, foamability, foam stability, vesicles etc. Also numerous review articles, books and book chapters dealing with different aspects of amphiphilic assemblies at dynamic interfaces have been published in the past few decades. Here, we focus on some of the state-of-the-art developments in amphiphile assemblies at dynamic interfaces with specific examples of explorative research that are promising to replace or improve some of the existing industrial materials for novel technological applications in the near future.
First, we will consider the self-assembly of short-tailed, micelle-forming amphiphiles at the air/water interface. An intensive study of self-assembly of short-tailed Gibbs monolayer forming amphiphiles has been stimulated by their wide range of important applications as components in the cosmetics, detergents, and food industries. Apart from these well established industrial applications there are several ongoing research activities exploring new uses. Thus, development of nanomembranes exploits the self-assembly nature of organic amphiphiles. In addition, we focus on current, technologically relevant developments in Langmuir monolayer studies. Finally, we conclude this section with a brief overview of the current trends in unconventional amphiphiles and their assemblies at dynamic interfaces and on static surfaces.
5.1. Amphiphilic assemblies for novel nanomembranes
Nanomembranes are well suited for incorporation into other materials and offer unique opportunities for utilizing their size-dependent properties in commercially viable products. The field of synthesis and fabrication of nanomembranes is expected to burgeon to encompass a diverse range of technologically important materials. Here we review some novel and cost-effective ways of developing nanomembranes exploiting the self-assembly nature of organic amphiphiles.

5.1.1. Amphiphilic bilayers as nanomembranes. 
Ramanathan et al. have developed ultrathin, dense, and cost-effective gas–vapor separation membranes from freestanding foam films.257 Foam films (also known as soap films) are made up of two identical amphiphilic monolayers adsorbed at the gas/liquid interfaces which are separated by a thin aqueous core. The interactions between the two amphiphilic surfaces of the foam film can be precisely controlled and the thickness of the central aqueous core determines the membrane thickness. When the aqueous core thickness is low, the amphiphilic monolayers are adsorbed onto each other and steric forces stabilize the membrane. Fundamental studies on these membranes started in early 1980s258–263 with subsequent gas permeability characteristics of the membranes being studied in detail to probe the interactions within the film.264–267 The influence of the charge of the headgroup of the amphiphilic molecule, (i.e. negative charge for SDS, positive charge for alkyltrimethylammonium halides, and no charge for nonionic polyoxyethylene and sugar-based amphiphiles) on the film permeability has been well investigated.268–271 Effects of concentration of amphiphiles, ionic strength, temperature, applied pressure, and curvatures of the film are some of the other rigorously studied parameters.272–274
Müller and Krustev have convincingly demonstrated that the permeability of a freestanding foam film can be used as a sensitive tool to evaluate minute changes that occur within the film architecture including variation in amphiphile packing density as a function of distance between two adsorbed monolayers.275 Recently it was shown that these liquid nanomembranes can be used as gas separation membranes. CH3- and CF3-tailed amphiphiles with head groups of various polarities (positive, negative and neutral) have been used to demonstrate the usability of these easily formed nanomembranes for industrial applications. Permeation of gases such as oxygen, nitrogen, argon, and atmospheric air has been assessed. The results indicate that these films can be used for size exclusion separation applications. We believe that these amphiphile-based nanomembranes will soon revolutionize the related industrial processes either replacing or being integrating into existing polymer-based membranes.276,277


5.1.2. Amphiphile assembly guided single crystalline nanomembranes. 
An approach to free-standing nanomembrane fabrication was introduced by Wang et al.278 They developed a low cost process involving amphiphile assemblies to produce large area nanomembranes at the air/water interface. In contrast to the above examples where amphiphile assemblies of bilayer structures are used directly as nanomembranes, Wang et al. used the Gibbs monolayers as a template for directing the growth of single-crystalline nanomembranes. As shown in Fig. 12, an excess of soluble amphiphile, SDS in water, forms a tightly packed Gibbs monolayer at the air/water interface. By increasing the pH, dodecylsufate ions are formed. Zinc nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) are added into this solution, since they both are precursors of zinc oxide nanostructures in aqueous solutions. In this case, the presence of dodecylsufate (DS) ions enables the mineralization of zinc ions into zinc hydroxyl sulphate hydrate. At elevated temperature, crystallization of zinc hydroxy dodecylsulfate occurs both beneath the DS ion monolayer and in the bulk solution where DS micelles are present. The micelles have no apparent significant influence on the diffusion-controlled growth of the nanomembrane at the water surface. Dodecylsulfate ions remain in the crystal in a tail-to-tail configuration with surface heads bonding with zinc ions as shown in Fig. 13. This creates a layered structure with alternating zinc hydroxide layers and double hydrophobic dodecylsufate layers. These nanomembranes were then transferred onto a silicon substrate. These single crystalline nanomembranes exhibit good flexibility and integrity while covering and remaining intact over the entire substrate surface. To demonstrate its application in flexible electronics, a flexible thin film transistor was made from this nanomembrane and was reported to possess good n-type transport properties. We believe that amphiphilic assembly provides a low-cost and large-scale synthesis and fabrication route for development of nanomembranes and flexible devices from various functional materials that is not feasible by conventional membrane manufacturing processes.279
 Fig. 12  Formation of zinc oxide nanostructures with Gibbs monolayers of SDS as a template. 
 Fig. 13  Growth of nanomembranes at the water surface (A) and in solution (B). 


5.1.3. Bio and organic nanomembranes. 
Biological nanomebranes are conventionally prepared using naturally occurring lipids. There is increasing demand for development of these membranes using synthetic analogues of lipids.280 Assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers can be used to develop biomimetic nanomembranes as has been demonstrated previously.281–283 The advantages of these biomimetic membranes are that their properties can be easily fine tuned by simple variation of polymer molecular weight, composition, and structure. Moreover, they have certain advantages over natural lipid membranes, for instance, the lateral diffusivity, membrane thickness, elasticity and permittivity may be controlled over a broader range that can be achieved with lipid systems.
Gluing of an LB bilayer, as introduced by Regen and coworkers, has opened up new possibilities for the development of high quality and robust organic nanomembranes for gas separation (Fig. 14).284 In the gluing process, two LB monolayers are ionically cross-linked. In order to demonstrate this concept, a calix[6]arene derivative was used as the bilayer-forming, water soluble, charged, amphiphile and poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) as the glue.285–287 These glued bilayers are ultrathin with thicknesses of around 6 nm, although they are easy to prepare and process. They can be used as organic nanomembranes for gas separation applications since they exhibit remarkable permeation selectivity involving He, N2 and CO2. The results indicate that (i) the main pathway for permeation of the small He molecule is through the central pore of the calix[6]arenes, (ii) the main pathway for permeation of the larger CO2 and N2 molecules is through void spaces around the perimeter of the calix[6]arenes (due to dynamic gaps and/or physical defects), (iii) the combined cross-sectional area of the central pores of the calix[6]arenes is large relative to the dynamic gaps and/or physical defects around their perimeter, and (iv) ionic cross-linking of the amphiphile assembly reduces the number of dynamic gaps and physical defects that are present.288 The gluing not only improves the quality and stability of the LB films but also their permselectivity characteristics for nanomembrane-based applications.289 The role of porous and nonporous amphiphiles and the effect of counterions on gluing and gas separation have been explored.290 Further research is needed to improve the membrane characteristics for molecular sieving applications.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the concept of material separation through a glued LB bilayer. 

5.2. Amphiphilic-assembly-assisted hybrid materials and microfluidic mixing
Langmuir monolayers formed at the air/water interface by insoluble amphiphiles and biomolecules remain an exciting area of interest for modern science and technology. Research on Langmuir monolayers and LB films is actively pursued by materials scientists, nanotechnologists, physicists, chemists, biologists and biomedical scientists and engineers because of their potential application in hi-tech industries, such as energy, electronics, fluidics and sensors.291,292
Langmuir monolayers with controlled shapes, sizes, and pattern alignments can be used for surface patterning and the system is considered to be dynamically self-assembled until transferred onto a solid support.293,294 Dynamic and nonlinear characteristics have not been well addressed although an exceptional study by Ramanathan and Fischer shows that there exist several unexplored realms of fundamental science, which could potentially lead to contemporary applications of these systems.295 For example, in lab-on-a-chip applications, it is important to efficiently mix all the reactants of liquid phase chemical species. At large scales, turbulent mixing can be utilized but in miniaturized devices such as in lab-on-a-chip or in micro/nanofluidic devices it is extremely difficult to achieve turbulent mixing using existing processes or techniques due to the ultrasmall quantities of the reactants.296 Reynolds number is another important characteristic of the efficient mixing on microfluidic lab-on-a-chip devices outside the turbulent regime.
Ramanathan and Fischer have proposed a solution for this problem by locally heating a quasi 2D Langmuir monolayer at the air/water interface (Fig. 15).297 Local heating using an IR laser serves as a quasi-two-dimensional pump leading to two-dimensional flow. Thermal and surface tension gradients open a cavitation gas bubble in the liquid expanded phase of the Langmuir monolayer.298 This cavitation bubble exerts a thermocapillary stress that sets the liquid into motion and amplifies the displacement and flow.299,300 By compressing the rigid monolayer, lipid folds are created and used to partially block the flow. When the flow passes the fold for a vortex with streamlines circling around the centre. The vortical flow in the quasi-2D system resembles eddies forming behind objects in a high Reynolds number flow. This is a simple way of achieving two-dimensional mixing through formation of vortical flow behind the folds in a low Reynolds number Langmuir monolayer.
 Fig. 15  Method and concept of investigation of local heating of a quasi 2D Langmuir monolayer at the air/water interface. 
5.3. Current trends in unconventional amphiphiles and their assemblies
Exploratory research and novel applications are on the increase in the field of amphiphilic copolymers and their assembly on static surfaces.301–304 For instance, synthesis and self-assembly of light-sensitive photosurfactants and photopolymers have been briefly reviewed by Eastoe and Vesperinas.305

5.3.1. Amphiphilic polymer networks. 
Amphiphilic polymer networks represent by their diversity a class of compounds which are of great importance due to their unique properties and challenging targeted applications that conventional (homo)polymer-based hydrogels cannot provide. Indeed, association of hydrophilic and hydrophobic segments into the same structure confers to the final materials a set of reliable properties directly related to their individual microstructures.306 These polymeric networks are finding applications as switches, sensors, actuators, bioreactors, separation systems and drug delivery systems. Many synthetic approaches are still available for exploration. As has been pointed out by Mespouille et al. in their review article, “ongoing advances in polymer synthesis and mechanism understanding will complete the palette of tools accessible to polymer scientists to reach more and more complex structures as cross-linked materials in their diversities”.307


5.3.2. Amphiphilic homopolymers. 
The origin of amphiphilicity of a hydrophilic/lipophilic block copolymer is quite understandable where as the amphiphilicity of a hompolymer is counter-intuitive.308 Thayumanavan and coworkers have recently developed a molecular design based on homopolymers in which both the hydrophilic and the hydrophobic moieties are incorporated within the monomer unit.309,310 Here the molecular level conformational changes in each monomer unit are amplified to exhibit transformation from micelle-like assembly into reverse micelle-like assembly and vice versa depending on the solvent environment. Such assemblies from a homopolymer and their reversibilities are unique. The interior of these micelles was used as nanocontainers to carry out organic photochemical reactions. Interestingly, the selectivity in amphiphilic homopolymer nanocontainers is much higher than those obtained with micellar containers based on block copolymers or small molecule amphiphiles. This is an exciting area of development which offers potential for explorative studies as well as for chemical and biochemical applications.311


5.3.3. Amphoteric amphiphiles. 
Amphoteric amphiphiles contain two charged groups of different polarity (i.e. positive or negative). Whereas the positive charge is almost always ammonium, the source of the negative charge may vary (carboxylate, sulphate, sulphonate). Solubility of an amphiphile in aqueous solution is influenced by the charge on the polar head group. Generally, anionic amphiphiles are soluble from neutral to higher pH, cationic amphiphiles are soluble from very low to neutral pH. Nonionic amphiphiles are soluble around neutral pH. Amphoteric amphiphiles feature the intrinsic ability to change in charge from cationic via zwitterionic (net uncharged) to anionic going from low to high pH. They function well in high electrolyte formulations and are compatible with all other classes of amphiphiles. Their excellent dermatological properties make them particularly suited for use in personal care and household cleaning products. Most amphoteric amphiphiles are used in baby shampoos because they are gentle and do not cause painful irritation to the eyes. By far the most commonly used is cocamidopropyl betaine, or occasionally cocamido betaine.
An important property of the amphoterics is the ionization state of their molecules, which is dependent on the pH of the solution. Alargova et al. have studied the dissociation of the amphiphile ionizable groups, as well as the association of ions from the solution to the ionizable groups of the amphoteric adsorption layer.312 They have shown that the ionization state of the amphoteric amphiphile turns out to be markedly different when the molecule is in the bulk of the solution and when it is incorporated into an adsorption monolayer. Since amphoterics possess both positive and negative charges, they are soluble at almost any pH with minimal solubility at their isoelectric point, which is normally around neutral pH.313


5.3.4. Giant amphiphiles. 
Macromolecular amphiphiles with a hydrophobic polymer tail and a protein head-group, i.e. giant amphiphiles are a relatively new class of biohybrid compounds. In principle, a giant amphiphile is a diblock copolymer possessing a protein as one of the two polymer blocks. Giant amphiphiles can be formed by direct covalent attachment of the polymer to the protein, e.g. by a cycloaddition reaction or a reaction with a SH group on the surface of the protein.314–317 Biotinylated poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)–streptavidin protein hybrid is a good example of giant amphiphiles. Further studies in giant amphiphiles are directed at investigating the influence of different polymer tails (i.e., polystyrenes of different lengths with different hydrophilic spacer groups for attachment to the enzyme) upon the activity and the self-assembling behaviour of giant amphiphiles.


5.3.5. Cleavable and switchable amphiphiles. 
Amphiphiles are widely used in a range of applications including emulsions, microemulsions and miniemulsion polymerizations, separations, and recovery and transportation of oils in the petrochemical industries. In these applications, emulsions are used either for an efficient heat transfer or to lower the oil/water interfacial tension. Hence, the emulsions are only useful during one stage of the process after which the cleaning of the system of the stabilizing amphiphiles is cumbersome. The problem of how to deal with the “temporary emulsions” that are desired only during one stage of a process remains a challenge. One approach to address this issue is to develop a new class of amphiphiles that are cleavable or switchable. A cleavable amphiphile will possess a cleavable functional group such as an ester between the hydrophilic head group and the hydrophobic tail.318 By the application of a chemical or photochemical trigger the cleavable amphiphile can be irreversibly converted into one or more molecules with greatly reduced surface activity.
In contrast to cleavable amphiphiles which undergo irreversible changes, switchable amphiphiles undergo fully reversible interconversions between active and inactive forms. Additional advantages of switchable amphiphiles are that their activity can be delayed until required, they can be recovered and reused afterward, and their removal from the product stream can be facilitated by switching the amphiphile to form least soluble in the relevant medium. Different types of triggers have been used depending on the functional groups used in the cleavable and switchable amphiphiles. Recently, Liu et al. have reported that carbon dioxide and air can be used as on and off triggers to reversibly transform long-chain alkyl amidine compounds into charged amphiphiles. Self-immolative polymers are another development in the area of unique macromolecules that are able to react to multiple types of environmental influences with amplified response outputs.319,320 Fundamentally, this area will develop in the exploration of the rates of amphiphile switching and optimization of amphiphile designs for specific applications, especially in nanoparticle synthesis, polymerization, and in the oil industry.321


5.3.6. Graphene oxide (GO) sheets. 
Graphene oxide (GO) sheets consist of a single atomic layer of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms derivatized by phenol hydroxyl and epoxide groups. These functional groups are mainly located on the basal plane and ionizable carboxylic acid groups are located at the edges as shown in Fig. 16. Jiaxing Huang and coworkers were the first to demonstrate the amphiphilic nature of GOs.322–324 The surfactant-like properties of GO sheets can be used to assemble them controllably at interfaces by tuning their amphiphilicity. This 2D (unconventional) amphiphile is becoming a key component in the field of materials science and engineering.
 Fig. 16  Various patterns of functional group distributions on the surface of graphene oxide nano sheets. 


5.3.7. Nanoparticles as amphiphiles. 
Kramer and coworkers have shown that the surface chemistry of nanoparticles can be modified so that these particles behave like amphiphiles and can be localized at the interfaces between two fluids.325 In their recent work, they have shown that nanoparticles can act as amphiphiles for block copolymers, leading to stable bicontinuous morphologies with characteristic domain sizes of less than 100 nm. They have systematically varied the volume fraction of the nanoparticle amphiphiles using a method that involves blending symmetric AB diblock copolymers with amphiphile nanoparticles whose surfaces are treated to promote strong binding to the A/B interfaces while avoiding macrophase separation. This method has implications for a variety of applications that require a continuous phase for the transport of molecular species, ions, or electrons and a second phase for the mechanical support or the conduction of a separate species. Furthermore, the materials that can be fabricated using this method are potentially enhanced by the electrical, optical, magnetic, and/or catalytic properties of the inorganic nanoparticles incorporated into the bicontinuous structure.
With regard to the fabrication and controlled assembly of amphiphilic nanoparticles several strategies have been used.326 One among them is the “bricks and mortar” strategy where nanoparticles act as bricks while amphiphilic ligands (surfactants or polymers) act as mortars. This process is comprehensively summarized in Fig. 17 and in the review article by Rotello and coworkers.327
 Fig. 17  The ‘bricks and mortar’ strategy for nanocomposite formation where nanoparticles act as bricks while amphiphilic ligands (surfactants or polymers) act as mortars. 
Hu et al. have demonstrated that the Janus type biphasic, anisotropic nanoparticles can be prepared using a template-free synthetic process by exploiting the cooperative, multidentate gold nanoparticle binding with amphiphilic triblock copolymer poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(lipoic acid 2-hydroxy-3-(methacryloyloxy)-propyl ester-co-glycidyl methacrylate)-b-polystyrene (PEO-b-P(LAMP-co-GMA)-b-PS) (Fig. 18).328 In this amphiphilic block copolymer the middle block binds to the nanoparticles while the two outer blocks exert steric hindrance. Since the hydrophobic Au nanoparticles hybrid middle block is sandwiched between PEO and PS outer blocks, the Au nanoparticles would be expected to locate at the interface between the hydrophilic PEO and hydrophobic PS domains within the block copolymer's self-assembled nanostructures. Thus, the as-synthesized Au nanoparticle hybrid amphiphilic triblock copolymers have the potential to self-assemble into various morphologies, including hybrid micelles, (branching) rods, vesicles, and large compound micelles (LCMs), in aqueous media. This exploration of synthesis and self-assembly of nanoparticles at dynamic interfaces is attractive as it is a promising way for scale-up productions of highly efficient monofunctionalized ultrasmall anisotropic nanoparticles.
 Fig. 18  Janus type biphasic, anisotropic nanoparticles with amphiphilic triblock copolymers for further formation of hybrid nanostructures. 
A similar template-free method was reported by Niikura et al. who used semifluorinated oligo(ethylene glycol) ligands on <20 nm Au nanoparticle surfaces.329 In this case solvophobic interactions of fluorinated bundles are exploited to form sub-100 nm nanoparticle vesicles. These self-assembled hollow vesicular structures are of considerable interest in many fields ranging from materials sciences to biophysics and nanomedicine.330,331 However, unlike their molecular analogues, amphiphiles incorporating nanoscopic, inorganic cores allow for additional functionalities such as superparamagnetism, plasmonic excitation, and enhanced fluorescence, amongst others.332–334
In general, all the examples discussed above depend on non-covalent interactions such as dipole–dipole, electrostatic, van der Waals, hydrogen bonding, and hydrophobic interactions are largely used to dictate the self-assembly process. Another approach to develop amphiphilic nanoparticles is by grafting two chemically distinct (hydrophobic and hydrophilic) polymers. The nanoparticles grafted with a mixed hydrophobic and hydrophilic brush are analogous to block copolymers as a whole. This creates a new type of hybrid building block inheriting the amphiphilicity-driven self-assembly of block copolymers to form vesicular structures. Here the covalently anchored polymer grafts provide a means of modulating the interparticle coupling through their conformational changes. Both “grafting-to” and “grafting-from” approaches can be used to develop amphiphilic janus nanoparticles.335 Judicious selection of polymers could lead to directed assembly of nanoparticles into complex structures for targeted applications.336 If the grafted polymers are responsive to external stimulus then this approach can be potentially used for sensing and delivery applications as it was alluded by Duan and coworkers.337 Besides vesicular structures, by making use of directional interactions amphiphilic nanoparticles can be assembled into higher order aggregates, including well-defined clusters, disk-shaped and cylindrical micelles, colloidosomes, and lattices.338–348
Andala et al. have recently described a simple and reliable method to produce inorganic nanoparticles functionalized asymmetrically with domains of hydrophilic and hydrophobic ligands on their respective hemispheres.349 This is a thermodynamically controlled, spontaneous process, in which the particle cores and two competing ligands assemble at the interface between two immiscible liquids to reduce the interfacial energy. Results from this explorative study suggest that this functionalization strategy is not limited to photonic (Au) materials but should instead be applicable to any nanoparticle systems for which chemical ligation methods are well developed. To prove this hypothesis, magnetic amphiphiles of iron oxide nanoparticles were prepared using hydrophobic (1,2-decanediol, DCD) and hydrophilic (dihydrocinnamic acid, DCA; fully deprotonated at pH = 11) diol ligands. Assembly of these particles at the liquid–liquid interface is another area of emerging research.
Park and Lee have studied the equilibrium configuration (i.e., orientation and vertical displacement with respect to the interface) of nonspherical amphiphilic particles with asymmetric geometry and asymmetric wetting properties at the oil–water interface.350 Their results indicate that the orientation behaviour of amphiphilic ellipsoids at the interface strongly depends on the aspect ratio, the location of the wettability separation line, and the surface wettability of each side of the particles. Conversely, in the case of amphiphilic dumbbells, the coexistence of upright/tilted orientations was not observed in their phase diagram. This intermediate behaviour is unique to these asymmetric amphiphilic dumbbells and has not been observed in symmetric Janus dumbbells. Liquid–liquid interfaces can be used as a template to assemble asymmetric amphiphilic nanoparticles to form tunable suprastructures by controlling the particle–particle interactions at the fluid–fluid interface.351,352

6. Advanced topics from simulation to application
As described above, amphiphile assemblies are formed through rather simple and universal mechanisms. Therefore, these assemblies can be of a great variety and some of the most attractive examples cannot be easily categorized. In this section, uncategorized examples from recent research are summarized.
6.1. Theoretical, modeling and simulation studies on amphiphile assemblies
Developing a thorough fundamental understanding of amphiphiles is the first step in designing novel amphiphiles and advanced applications. There are several fundamental questions the answers to which will allow scientists the capability to design novel amphiphiles tuned to maximize the efficiency of the intended process or application. Some of these fundamental questions include, how do amphiphile characteristics such as relative numbers of hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups, their arrangement in the molecule, bond angle, and branching affect the structure of the interface, and how does this structure affect interfacial tension? A number of experimental techniques and instruments have been developed to probe the structure of interfacial systems such as neutron scattering, thin film pressure balance, surface tension meter, and sum-frequency spectroscopy.
Theoretical studies such as molecular simulations, atomistic molecular dynamic simulations, coarse grained molecular dynamics simulations, and more recently the mesoscale simulation techniques have been used to study interfacial systems.353–364 These studies help us to understand the detailed structure of amphiphilic monolayers at a fluid interface, to establish bulk amphiphile concentrations, to obtain detailed physical insight into liquid–liquid interfaces, and to study the effect of bulk amphiphile concentration on interfacial tension. Second-order classical density functional theory has also been applied to assess the effect of amphiphilic properties on the interfacial structure and interfacial tension of a planar oil/water interface. Specifically, the effect of the relative locations of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic portions, rigidity vs. flexibility, and bond angle of the amphiphile are exemplified using this approach. The second order density functional theory (DFT) studies demonstrate that bond angle and branching significantly affect the tendency of an amphiphile to adsorb on the interface and the degree to which the interfacial tension is lowered.
6.2. Amphiphilic assemblies in higher dimensions
Amphiphiles naturally self-assemble into 2D structures at interfaces as discussed earlier for Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers. These can be further processed to obtain 2D assemblies either by LB deposition or by applying excess surface pressure. In solution at the fluid/fluid interface, 3D assemblies in the form of lamellar vesicles, micelles, and other pseudodimensional structures are also seen. There have been considerable efforts made to design 3D nanostructures utilizing the self-assembly characteristics of the amphiphiles with exact precision.365 Drumund and co-workers have shown that small amphiphilic molecules self-assemble into periodic 3D geometries in protic ionic liquids and polar molecular solvents.366–370
Naturally occurring dipeptides such as l-carnosine (β-alanine-histidine, βAH) has a range of biological activities in the muscle and brain tissues of humans and other vertebrates at relatively high concentrations. These are highly water-soluble dipeptides that do not naturally have the ability to self-assemble in water. Castelletto, Hamely and others have been exploring various strategies for the construction of novel βAH supramolecular self-assemblies to expand the potential biochemical activities of this peptide particularly for regenerative medicine applications.371–373 One such approach is to induce fibrillization of βAH using a structure-directing agent. An alternative strategy to drive βAH self-assembly involves turning the dipeptide into a peptide amphiphile (PA) by the lipidation of βAH.374 It has been shown that self-assembly of lipid-βAH is driven by the hydrophobicity of the lipidating chain to form stacked layered structures of so called nanotapes. In nanotapes, bilayers are found to coexist with monolayers in which the PA molecules pack with alternating up–down arrangement so that the headgroups decorate both surfaces. The bilayers become dehydrated as PA concentration increases and the number of layers in the stack decreases to produce ultrathin nanotapes comprising 2–3 bilayers. Adding the PA to dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) multilamellar vesicles induces a transition to well-defined unilamellar vesicles and it is noteworthy that the C16-βAH does not self-assemble into fibers in the presence of DPPC. This may be due to the DLVO type electrostatic interactions between DPPC head groups and peptide amphiphile assemblies that may effectively screen electrostatic repulsions.
Studies on the self-assembly of helical structures are motivated by their biological and technological importance.375 Biopolymers such as double helix nucleic acids, a-helix proteins and some polysaccharides are chiral in nature. Cellular membranes are composed of chiral amphiphiles such as phospholipids and cholesterols though the membrane itself is achiral. Synthetic amphiphiles have exhibited distinct helical or twisted structures. Shimizu and Masuda were the first to show that the formation of chiral assemblies from the viewpoint of the even–odd effect of the connecting links and reported internal molecular arrangements of the self-assembled fibers from dumbbell-shaped bolaamphiphiles.376
Recently, Liu et al. have demonstrated a method to engineer the self-assembly of supra-amphiphiles based on dual charge transfer interactions.377 With this approach they could program the transformation of well-defined 1D nanosheets into 2D nanofibers. The directional charge transfer interactions of naphthalenediimide and naphthalene were used to form H-shaped supra-amphiphiles. Subsequently, these H-supra amphiphiles were complexed with pyrene derivatives as shown in Fig. 19. This line of research involving rational design and fabrication of dimensionally-controlled organic nanostructures will become a key research area in the field of macromolecular nanomaterials.
 Fig. 19  H-shaped supra-amphiphiles and their nanostructure formation. 
6.3. Multi-stimuli-responsive amphiphiles and their assemblies
Amphiphiles and their assemblies that are responsive to external stimuli are of considerable interest due to their role in developing technologically smart materials for use in various industrial applications. In particular, stimuli-responsive amphiphilic polymers have been studied in detail as they can self-assemble into various architectures that can accommodate guest molecules and release them upon triggering by an external stimuli. Light, temperature, pH, redox potentials, and solvents have been used as stimuli, largely in micellar systems. Until recently only a single stimulus had been used.378 Developments in the design and synthesis of novel block copolymers have enabled a new class of polymeric amphiphiles that are responsive to more than one stimulus. Dual-stimuli-responsive block copolymers that respond to pH and temperature or salinity have been reported.379–383 The lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of the proline derivatives was tuned between 18 and 55 °C by varying the pH.
Thayumanavan and coworkers have recently introduced a facile synthetic method for the synthesis of block copolymers linked via disulphide functionality for developing a triple stimuli sensitive polymeric system.384 The design involves two blocks in which one block is sensitive to temperature while the other block is sensitive to pH. The novelty of this design comes from the disulphide linker that not only connects those two sensitive blocks but also itself is sensitive to redox conditions. If the two sensitive blocks are amphiphilic in nature then one would envisage a supramolecular assembly that can respond to changes in temperature, pH and redox potential as shown in Fig. 20. Serial and parallel responses to multiple stimuli have also been demonstrated for encapsulation and release of hydrophobic guest molecules. As indicated elsewhere, these multiple-stimulus response systems have the prospect of being more broadly applied in fields such as controlled release, catalysis, and separation.
 Fig. 20  Block copolymers linked via disulphide functionality for the triple stimuli sensitive polymeric system. 
For biomedical applications, the design of multi-responsive-amphiphiles that are biocompatible is desirable. Besides developing new amphiphilic polymers that respond to multiple triggers, there is also considerable work in progress aimed at biomedical applications where responses to uncommon stimuli, which are inherently present in living systems, are required. Such stimuli include antigen–antibody interactions, enzymes, sugars, external fields such as light, electric, magnetic and sonic fields. For additional details refer to the review article by Sumerlin and coworkers.385 The control of amphiphile stabilized foams is very important in foods and cosmetics where controlled stability is needed in wastewater treatment, froth floating processes, etc. For example, antifoaming agents may be used to irreversibly break the foam bubbles.386
6.4. Amphiphile assembly with nanostructured materials
The partitioning of wormlike micelles between a bulk solution and nanopores can be controlled by tuning the amphiphile–wall interactions (Fig. 21).387 Self-assembly of a common nonionic amphiphile in tubular 8 nm nanopores is tuned by coadsorption of the amino acid lysine, which reduces the adsorption affinity for the amphiphile. An evolution of equilibrium morphologies of the amphiphile aggregates as a function of the level of surface modification θ was found using in situ small-angle neutron scattering (SANS), which is free from artifacts that can arise during the drying process prior to electron microscopy. At low lysine adsorption levels, the amphiphile formed patchy bilayer aggregates at the pore walls, as observed in the absence of lysine. At the highest degree of surface modification (θ = 0.9), the amphiphile was excluded from the pore space and formed wormlike micelles in the aqueous bulk phase, reminiscent of size exclusion of polymers from narrow pores with nonadsorbing walls.
 Fig. 21  Self-assembly of a nonionic amphiphile in tubular nanopores. 
Graphene is the state-of-the-art material for several fields because of its unique electrical, mechanical, and thermal characteristics.388–391 There are various ways to produce graphene but one of them is by the use of ultrasonic exfoliation. In this process, amphiphiles are used to lower the liquid/vapour interfacial energy of the solution to an optimum range that corresponds to the energy required to separate the graphite sheets beyond the range of the van der Waals forces. Moreover, the amphiphile adsorbs onto the exfoliated graphene sheets that creates an extra repulsive force which would prevent the re-aggregation of the graphene sheets. Depending on the amphiphile and the influence on the change in surface tension as a function of concentration, different concentrations of graphene in suspension have been produced. By continuously replacing the amphiphile to lower the surface tension during sonication and the production of the graphene surface area, the concentration of particles was significantly increased. Cationic, anionic, and nonionic amphiphiles were studied and all showed significant increases in the concentration of graphene produced using this continuous addition method.392
6.5. Amphiphile-assemblies in energy applications
Amphiphile assemblies play a vital role in energy technologies.393–396 One direct example is their significant role in petroleum industries for enhanced oil recovery using the froth flotation process. In this process, an ultralow interfacial tension is one of the most important criteria. Alkane carbon numbers and equivalent alkane carbon numbers of several hydrocarbon, hydrocarbon mixtures using amphiphiles of the same structural type have been an important recent subject of research.397 Effects of various electrolytes and temperature on interfacial tensions of alkylbenzene sulfonate amphiphile solutions were investigated by Cao et al.398
In hybrid solar cells semiconducting nanoparticles such as CdSe, Cds, Pbs, TiO2 and ZnO are used as acceptors (in the place of fullerenes) in bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices. Band-gap tunability of these semiconducting nanoparticles and a wide selection of geometries (rods, tripods, spheres) make them attractive as acceptor materials. Coating these semiconducting nanoparticles with non-semiconducting amphiphiles enables suppression of fast recombination but does not hinder the efficient quenching of excitons by charge transfer. Thus, the quantum efficiency can be improved by selecting the appropriate nanoparticle–amphiphile combination, which could further improve the power conversion efficiency of the device.399
6.6. Applications in advanced biological and clinical systems
Amphiphile self-assemblies have been traditionally used to mimic bio-membranes. Fundamental studies on these model systems are directly related to interactions in lung membranes with surrounding fluids, oxygen transport/permeation through lung membranes, lipid–lipoprotein interactions with cell membranes, etc. The biotechnological aspects of amphiphile assembly science are becoming an increasingly large area. Recently, Lindman and coworkers have provided detailed insight into condensation of DNA by cationic amphiphiles (Fig. 22).400 They showed that with an increasing concentration of CTAB, condensation of the DNA precedes macroscopic phase separation where a charge neutral precipitate forms. Furthermore, while mixing DNA with an excess of CTAB, positively overcharged mixed aggregates were formed.401
 Fig. 22  Aggregate formation from DNA coils and CTAB for DNA delivery to cell. 
A lipoprotein contains both proteins and lipids (amphiphile) that are bound to the proteins. The major function of lipoproteins is to transport lipids/fats such as triacylglycerols (glycerol esterified with three fatty acids, or triglycerides) around the body in the bloodstream, which allows fats to move through the water inside and outside cells. Since different lipoproteins contain different amounts of triglycerides and cholesterol, they may be separated by centrifuging them as particles with different densities, including low-density (LDL), high-density (HDL), and very low-density (VLDL) particles. Structurally these lipoprotein particles have hydrophilic groups of phospholipids, cholesterol, and apoproteins directed outward, as shown in Fig. 23.402 This structural arrangement solubilizes these lipoproteins in the salty, aqueous blood. Presently, there are numerous explorative research projects probing the usability of this natural self-assembly of bio-amphiphiles for clinical applications.403
 Fig. 23  Lipoprotein particles with hydrophilic groups of phospholipids, cholesterol, and apoproteins directed outward. 
In particular, the disposition of hydrophobic drugs in the aqueous environment of the blood is thermodynamically unfavourable and the use of self-assembled lipoproteins for targeted drug delivery (of lipophilic drugs) has become a key focus in recent years. For over a decade, Kishore Wasan and coworkers have experimentally investigated the roles of lipids and lipoproteins in modifying the biological activity of water-insoluble drugs.404 They have deduced the potential mechanisms by which water-insoluble drugs interact with lipids and lipoproteins and how these interactions impact on the absorption, distribution, efficacy, toxicity and metabolism of such compounds. Elucidation of the mechanisms that dictate drug–lipoprotein association and blood-to-tissue partitioning of lipoprotein-encapsulated drugs might yield valuable insight into the factors governing the pharmacological activity and potential toxicity of these compounds.
7. Short summary and message
This perspective summarizes research efforts on assemblies and properties of amphiphiles from their basic properties to recent advanced examples. Although amphiphiles have simple structures when compared with other biological components such as proteins, polysaccharides, and nucleic acids, the structural variety of their assemblies is immense. Complex molecules such as proteins perform specialized tasks and can form only predesignated structures that can be energetically well defined. In contrast, amphiphiles have only a few structural characteristics, solvophilic or solvophobic, and can form various stable and/or metastable structures depending on surrounding solution or interfacial conditions. Using these less complex molecules we can design and prepare a great variety of assembled structures with well-organized internal nanostructures. It could be said that amphiphiles including surfactants and lipids are the best building blocks for biological nanoarchitectonics. In amphiphile nanoarchitectonics, component structures are simple while assembled structures are complex. Applications based on these structures may be realized by applying our accumulated knowledge and understanding amphiphile design, characterization, analyses, interpretation and theoretical predictions based on physical chemistry and chemical physics. In addition, fusion of fields of emerging biomaterial assemblies405,406 and advanced evaluation techniques407,408 would further open many possibilities.
Acknowledgements
Partial support from the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy is greatly acknowledged. This work was also partly supported by World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI Initiative), MEXT, Japan and the Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) program of Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Japan.
Notes and references
M. C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33 CrossRef .
T. Hino, T. Hasegawa, K. Terabe, T. Tsuruoka, A. Nayak, T. Ohno and M. Aono, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 013003 CrossRef .
S. Wu, T. Tsuruoka, K. Terabe, T. Hasegawa, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga and M. Aono, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 93 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasegawa, K. Terabe, T. Tsuruoka and M. Aono, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 252 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill, M. V. Lee, A. Vinu, R. Charvet and S. Acharya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2008, 9, 014109 CrossRef .
K. Sakakibara, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Small, 2011, 7, 1288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Ishihara, Q. Ji, M. Akada, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2012, 13, 053001 CrossRef .
M. Ramanathan, S. M. Kilbey II, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10389 RSC .
M. Ramanathan, Y.-C. Tseng, K. Ariga and S. B. Darling, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2080 RSC .
S. Acharya, B. Das, U. Thupakula, K. Ariga, D. D. Sarma, J. Israelachvili and Y. Golan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. Ji, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8, 981 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, N. Kawazoe and G. Chen, Expert Opin. Biol. Ther., 2009, 9, 307 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 229, 51 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, M. Darder, P. Aranda and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 323 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 833 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. McShane, Y. M. Lvov, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2011, 8, 633 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, T. Mori, M. Naito, Y. Yamauchi, H. Abe and J. P. Hill, Chem. Soc. Rev. 10.1039/C2CS35475F .
D. J. McClements, E. A. Decker, Y. Park and J. Weiss, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2009, 49, 577 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kitamoto, T. Morita, T. Fukuoka, M. Konishi and T. Imura, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 315 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kralova and J. Sjoblom, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2009, 30, 1363 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Balachandran, S. R. Jadhav, P. K. Vemula and G. John, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 427 RSC .

          G. S. Hartley, Aqueous Solutions of Paraffinic-Chain Salts. A Study of Micelle Formation, Herman, Paris,  1936 Search PubMed .
This terminology was first proposed by Dr Masakazu Aono at 1st International Symposium on Nanoarchitectonics Using Suprainteractions (NASI-1) at Tsukuba in 2000.
P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. V. Lee, T. Mori, X.-Y. Yu and J. P. Hill, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 154, 20 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. Li, G. J. Richards and J. P. Hill, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aono, Y. Bando and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, M. J. McShane, Y. M. Lvov, A. Vinu and J. P. Hill, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 728 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, S. Ishihara, H. Abe, M. Li and J. P. Hill, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2369 RSC .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill, Y. Bando and M. Aono, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e17 CrossRef .
T. Mori, K. Sakakibara, H. Endo, M. Akada, K. Okamoto, A. Shundo, M. V. Lee, Q. Ji, T. Fujisawa, K. Oka, M. Matsumoto, H. Sakai, M. Abe, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Langmuir DOI:10.1021/la304293z .
Y. Ishikawa, H. Kuwahara and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 5579 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kuwahara, M. Hamada, Y. Ishikawa and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 3002 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kimizuka, T. Kawasaki, K. Hirata and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6360 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawasaki, M. Tokuhiro, N. Kimizuka and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6792 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Chem. Lett., 1999, 661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6709 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7892 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, K. Ariga, A. Okabe and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 988 CrossRef CAS .
W. Otani, K. Kinbara, Q. Zhang, K. Ariga and T. Aida, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, M. Hashizume, K. Ariga, T. Terashima and J. Kikuchi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5272 CrossRef CAS .

          I. W. Hamley, Introduction to Soft Matter: Polymers, Colloids, Amphiphiles and Liquid Crystals, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. N. Israelachvili, D. J. Mitchell and B. W. Ninham, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1976, 72, 1525 RSC .
P. J. Missel, N. A. Mazer, G. B. Benedek, C. Y. Young and M. C. Carey, J. Phys. Chem., 1980, 84, 1044 CrossRef CAS .
G. Porte and J. Appell, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 2511 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kachar, D. F. Evans and B. W. Ninham, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1984, 100, 287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1989, 114, 378 CrossRef .
H. Kunieda, K. Shigeta and M. Suzuki, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 3118 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, M. Masaya, T. Sato, D. P. Acharya, T. Iwanaga and H. Kunieda, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1449 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2009, 287, 1305 Search PubMed .
H. Rehage and H. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 4712 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Vinson, J. R. Bellare, H. T. Davis, W. G. Miller and L. E. Scriven, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1991, 142, 74 CrossRef CAS .
D. Danino, Y. Talmon, H. Levy, G. Beinert and R. Zana, Science, 1995, 269, 1420 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Raghavan and E. W. Kaler, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 300 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Dreiss, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 956 RSC .
R. G. Shrestha, L. K. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 311, 276 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, T. Sato and K. Aramaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 1664 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, Y. Yamamoto, S. Arima and K. Aramaki, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2340 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5862 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha, M. Abe and K. Ariga, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 10017 RSC .
L. K. Shrestha, T. Sato, R. G. Shrestha, J. Hill, K. Ariga and K. Aramaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4911 RSC .
N. T. Southall, K. A. Dill and A. D. J. Haymet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 521 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chandler, Nature, 2005, 437, 640 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nagarajan and E. Ruckenstein, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 2934 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Chen, S. Y. Lin and C. C. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, K. Nakamura and A. Uemoto, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1992, 150, 235 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, K. Ozawa and K. L. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 831 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Hai, H. X. Han, G. Y. Yang, H. K. Yan and Q. Y. Han, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, M. Horii, M. Koyama and K. Sakamoto, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 236, 78 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ozawa, U. Olsson and H. Kunieda, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2001, 22, 119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kahlweit and R. Strey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1985, 24, 654 CrossRef .
M. Abe, T. Yamazaki, K. Ogino and M. J. Kim, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 833 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda and M. Yamagata, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 3345 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, A. Nakamo and M. A. Pes, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 3302 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Funarit, M. C. Holmes and G. J. T. Tiddy, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 11029 CrossRef .
S. S. Funarit, M. C. Holmes and G. J. T. Tiddy, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3015 CrossRef .
C. E. Fairhurst, M. C. Holmes and M. S. Leaver, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 6336 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Funari and G. Rapp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 732 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sakya, J. M. Seddon, R. H. Templer, R. J. Mirkin and G. J. T. Tiddy, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3706 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Fairhurst, M. C. Holmes and M. S. Leaver, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 4964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nibu and T. Inoue, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1998, 205, 305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leaver, A. Fogden, M. C. Holmes and C. Fairhurst, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 35 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong and J. Hao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4978 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Magid, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gobe, K. Kon-no, K. Kandori and A. Kitahara, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1983, 93, 293 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kurihara, J. Kizling, P. Stenius and J. H. Fendler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 2574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Penfold, E. Staples, I. Tucker and P. Cummins, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1997, 185, 424 CrossRef CAS .
Md. H. Uddin, C. Rodriguez, K. Watanabe, M. A. Lopez-Quintela, T. Kato, H. Furukawa, A. Harashima and H. Kunieda, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5169 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rodriguez, Md. H. Uddin, K. Watanabe, H. Furukawa, A. Harashima and H. Kunieda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 22 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, T. Sato, D. P. Acharya, T. Iwanaga, K. Aramaki and H. Kunieda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12266 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, M. Dulle, O. Glatter and K. Aramaki, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7015 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ravey, M. Buzier and C. Picot, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1984, 97, 9 CrossRef CAS .
P. Debye and H. Coll, J. Colloid Sci., 1962, 17, 220 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Little and C. R. Singleterry, J. Phys. Chem., 1964, 68, 3453 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Little, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kon-no, H. Asano and A. Kitahara, Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci., 1983, 68, 20 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Correa, J. J. Silber, R. E. Riter and N. E. Levinger, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4569 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Eicke and H. Christen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1974, 48, 281 CrossRef CAS .
D. Attwood and C. M. McDonald, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1974, 252, 138 CAS .
T. H. Ibrahim and R. D. Neuman, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3114 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Tung, Y.-E. Huang and S. R. Raghavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5751 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Tung, Y.-E. Huang and S. R. Raghavan, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 372 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, A. M. Ketner and S. R. Raghavan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5405 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hashizaki, T. Chiba, H. Taguchi and Y. Saito, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 927 CAS .
K. Hashizaki, H. Taguchi and Y. Saito, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 1099 CAS .
H. Kunieda and K. Shinoda, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1980, 75, 601 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda and K. Shinoda, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 1982, 3, 233 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Friberg, I. Blute, H. Kunieda and P. Stenius, Langmuir, 1986, 2, 659 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, C. Solans and J. L. Parra, Colloids Surf., 1987, 24, 225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Solans, R. Pons, S. Zhu, H. T. Davis, D. F. Evans, K. Nakamura and H. Kunieda, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. De and A. Maitra, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1995, 59, 95 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Riter, J. R. Kimmel, E. P. Undiks and N. E. Levinger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8292 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Cason and C. B. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, T. Li and J. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9011 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanamaru and Y. Einaga, Polymer, 2002, 43, 3925 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, T. Sato and K. Aramaki, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6606 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2007, 28, 1236 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, J. Oleo Sci., 2009, 58, 235 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha, D. Varade and K. Aramaki, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 4435 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, O. Glatter and K. Aramaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 6290 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, T. Sato and K. Aramaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 4251 RSC .
L. K. Shrestha, R. G. Shrestha and K. Aramaki, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 4863 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, London,  1985 Search PubMed .

          J. H. Fendler, Membrane Mimetic Chemistry, Wiley, New York,  1983 Search PubMed .
R. Langer, Science, 1990, 249, 1527 CAS .
A. Memoli, L. G. Palermiti, V. Travagli and F. Alhaique, J. Soc. Cosmet. Chem., 1993, 44, 123 CAS .
A. Memoli, L. G. Palermiti, V. Travagli and F. Alhaique, J. Soc. Cosmet. Chem., 1994, 45, 167 CAS .
G. Gregoriadis, Trends Biotechnol., 1995, 13, 527 CrossRef CAS .
I. F. Uchegbu and S. P. Vyas, Int. J. Pharm., 1998, 172, 33 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Discher and A. Eisenberg, Science, 2002, 297, 967 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Gabriel and M. F. Roberts, Biochemistry, 1984, 23, 4011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Talmon, D. F. Evans and B. W. Ninham, Science, 1983, 221, 1047 CAS .
J. E. Brady, D. F. Evans, B. Kachar and B. W. Ninham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 4279 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Hargreaves and D. W. Deamer, Biochemistry, 1978, 17, 3759 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Kaler, A. K. Murthy, B. E. Rodriguez and J. A. N. Zasadzinski, Science, 1989, 245, 1371 CAS .
H. Kunieda, K. Nakamura and D. F. Evans, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 1051 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, K. Nakamura, H. t. Davis and D. F. Evans, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, M. Akimaru, N. Ushio and K. Nakamura, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1993, 156, 446 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kunieda, S. Makino and N. Ushio, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1991, 147, 286 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mollee, J. D. Vrind and T. D. Vringer, J. Pharm. Sci., 2000, 89, 930 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boettcher, B. Schade and J. H. Fuhrhop, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 873 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dominguez-Gutierrez, M. Surtchev, E. Eiser and C. J. Elsevier, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 145 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Tung, H. Y. Lee and S. R. Raghavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8813 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Arya, P. R. Solanki, M. Datta and B. D. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2810 CrossRef CAS .
T. Michinobu, S. Shinoda, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, K. Fujii, T. N. Player, H. Tsukube and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14478 CrossRef CAS .
S. Acharya, A. Shundo, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 3 CrossRef .
S. Acharya, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2959 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mori, K. Okamoto, H. Endo, J. P. Hill, S. Shinoda, M. Matsukura, H. Tsukube, Y. Suzuki, Y. Kanekiyo and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12868 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, S. Ishihara, H. Izawa, H. Xia and J. P. Hill, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4802 RSC .
T. Michinobu, S. Shinoda, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, K. Fujii, T. N. Player, H. Tsukube and K. Ariga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4895 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 15 RSC .
K. Ariga, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 158 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, H. Ito, J. P. Hill and H. Tsukube, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5800 RSC .
K. Sakakibara, L. A. Joyce, T. Mori, T. Fujisawa, S. H. Shabbir, J. P. Hill, E. V. Anslyn and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9643 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, J. P. Hill and Q. Ji, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319 RSC .
Q. Ji, I. Honma, S.-M. Paek, M. Akada, J. P. Hill, A. Vinu and K. Ariga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Ishihara, M. Akada, M. Liao, L. Sang, J. P. Hill, V. Krishnan, Y. Ma and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7348 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. M. Lvov, K. Kawakami, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 762 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10819 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Adamczyk and P. Weronski, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 83, 137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Boinovich, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 15, 297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brinck, B. Jönsson and F. Tiberg, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 1058 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Woods, J. Petkov and C. D. Bain, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 7341 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Woods, J. Petkov and C. D. Bain, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 7353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chevalier, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 7, 3 CrossRef .
E. Blomberg, R. Verrall and P. M. Claesson, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1133 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Ferrari, Self-Assembly of Surfactants at Solid Surfaces. Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules to Nanomaterials, John Wiley & Sons,  2012 Search PubMed .
R. Xing and S. E. Rankin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang and M. G. Khaledi, Anal. Chem., 1995, 67, 499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sjödahl, Å. Emmer, B. Karlstam, J. Vincent and J. Roeraade, J. Chromatogr., B: Biomed. Sci. Appl., 1998, 705, 231 CrossRef .
P. Boivin, R. K. Kobos, S. L. Papa and W. H. Scouten, Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem., 1991, 14, 155 CAS .
H. J. Barraza, M. J. Hwa, K. Blakley, E. A. O'Rear and B. P. Grady, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5288 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Rojas, L. Macakova, E. Blomberg, Å. Emmer and P. M. Claesson, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 8085 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Claesson and H. K. Christenson, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 1650 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Christenson, P. M. Claesson, J. Berg and P. C. Herder, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 1472 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuzuki, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2009, 6, 567 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trindade, P. O'Brien and N. L. Pickett, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3843 CrossRef CAS .
I. Matsui, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 2005, 38, 535 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, R. Voggu and A. Govindaraj, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5089 RSC .
Y.-W. Jun, J.-S. Choi and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3414 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gaponik, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. Eychmueller and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 803 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Kwon, Y. Piao, J. Park, S. Angappane, Y. Jo, N. M. Hwang, J. G. Park and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12571 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, H. Schnablegger, A. Kornowski, O. Festin, P. Svedlindh, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9090 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pileni, B. W. Ninham, T. Gulik-Kryzwicki, J. Tanori, I. Lisiecki and A. Filankembo, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link, M. B. Mohamed and M. A. El–Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3073 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin and G. B. Sukhorukov, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 671 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy and N. R. Jana, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 80 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, C. M. Bender and C. J. Murphy, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 9065 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Choi, C. R. Bealing, K. Bian, K. J. Hughes, W. Zhang, D. M. Smilgies, R. G. Hennig, J. R. Engstrom and T. Hanrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3131 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bealing, W. J. Baumgardner, J. J. Choi, T. Hanrath and R. G. Hennig, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, H. Schnablegger and S. Mann, Nature, 1999, 402, 393 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Sperling and W. J. Parak, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 1333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Filankembo and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5865 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nie, D. Fava, E. Kumacheva, S. Zou, G. C. Walker and M. Rubinstein, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 609 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 145 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Dahl, B. L. S. Maddux and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2228 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zabet-Khosousi and A. A. Dhirani, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4072 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bader, H. Ringsdorf and B. Schmidt, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1984, 123, 457 CrossRef .
M. Tirrell, S. Patel and G. Hadziioannou, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1987, 84, 4725 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Silver and C. Doillon, Biocompatibility Interactions of Biological and Implantable Materials, VCH Publishers, New York,  1989, vol. 1, pp. 1–24 Search PubMed .
E. Ruckenstein and S. V. Gourisankar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1984, 101, 436 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Jeon, J. H. Lee, J. D. Andrade and P. G. DeGennes, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1991, 142, 149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mori, S. Nagaoka, H. Takiuchi, T. Kikuci, N. Noguchi, H. Tanzawa and Y. Noishili, Trans. Am. Soc. Artif. lntern. Organs, 1982, 28, 459 CAS .
C. Freij-Larsson and B. Wesslén, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1993, 50, 345 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. H. Kopecek and J. D. Andrade, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1989, 23, 351 CrossRef CAS .
C. Freij-Larsson, T. Nylander, P. Jannasch and B. Wesslén, Biomaterials, 1996, 17, 2199 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Goddard and J. H. Hotchkiss, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 698 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Sakiyama-Elbert and J. A. Hubbell, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2001, 31, 183 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Griffith, Acta Mater., 2000, 48, 263 CrossRef CAS .

ACS Symposium Series 680, ed. J. M. Harris and S. Zalipsky, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1997 Search PubMed .
E. Třesohlavá, Š. Popelka, L. Machová and F. Rypáček, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 68 CrossRef .
S. Arifuzzaman, A. E. Ozcam, K. Efimenko, D. A. Fischer and J. Genzer, Biointerphases, 2009, 4, FA33 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, M. K. Yu, T. S. Lee, J. J. Park, Y. Y. Jeong and S. Jon, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 155101 CrossRef .
A. F. Thuenemann, Polym Int., 2000, 49, 636 CrossRef .
T. Yanagisawa, T. Shimizu, K. Kuroda and C. Kato, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 988 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2001, 412, 169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2012, 18, 2073 CrossRef .
K. K. R. Datta, B. V. Subba Reddy, K. Ariga and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5961 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Shrestha, Y. Yamauchi, J. P. Hill, K. Miyazawa and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 586 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14 CAS .
A. Vinu, M. Miyahara, V. Sivamurugan, T. Mori and K. Ariga, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 5122 RSC .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, M. Miyahara, J. P. Hill and T. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11022 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. R. Datta, A. Vinu, S. Mandal, S. Al-deyab, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 3084 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. R. Datta, A. Vinu, S. Mandal, S. Al-deyab, J. P. Hill and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 3959 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, M. Miyahara, J. P. Hill, S. Acharya, A. Vinu, S. B. Yoon, J.-S. Yu, K. Sakamoto and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, Q. Ji, O. Ohmori, J. P. Hill, S. Acharya, J. Koike and S. Shiratori, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7254 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, S. B. Yoon, J. P. Hill, A. Vinu, J.-S. Yu and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4220 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, S. Acharya, J. P. Hill, A. Vinu, S. B. Yoon, J.-S. Yu, K. Sakamoto and K. Ariga, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1792 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Q. Ji, J. P. Hill and A. Vinu, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 3562 RSC .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, J. P. Hill and T. Mori, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2562 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. C. Barnes, A. Bosoy, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2590 RSC .
W. Xuan, C. Zhu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1677 RSC .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu, Y. Yamauchi, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamaguchi, F. Uejo, T. Yoda, T. Uchida, Y. Tanamura, T. Yamashita and N. Teramae, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 337 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mukerjee and A. Y. S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem., 1976, 80, 1388 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kunitake, S. Tawaki and N. Nakashima, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1983, 56, 3235 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elbert, T. Folda and H. Ringsdorf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 7687 CrossRef CAS .
C. Singh, A. M. Jackson, F. Stellacci and S. C. Glotzer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gentilini, F. Evangelista, P. Rudolf, P. Franchi, M. Lucarini and L. Pasquato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pradhan, L. E. Brown, J. P. Konopelski and S. Chen, J. Nanopart. Res., 2009, 11, 1895 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lucarini and L. Pasquato, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 668 RSC .
A. Stewart, S. Zheng, M. R. McCourt and S. E. J. Bell, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3718 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Jackson, J. W. Myerson and F. Stellacci, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 330 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Jadzinsky, G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, D. A. Bushnell and R. D. Kornberg, Science, 2007, 318, 430 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jaskiewicz, A. Larsen, D. Schaeffel, K. Koynov, I. Lieberwirth, G. Fytas, K. Landfester and A. Kroeger, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramanathan, H.-J. Müller, H. Möhwald and R. Krastev, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 633 CAS .
M. Nedyalkov, R. Krustev, D. Kashchiev, D. Platikanov and D. Exerowa, Colloid Polym. Sci., 1988, 266, 291 CAS .
R. Krustev, D. Platikanov and M. Nedyalkov, Colloids Surf., A, 1993, 79, 129 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krustev, D. Platikanov and M. Nedyalkov, Colloids Surf., A, 1997, 123, 383 CrossRef .
R. Krustev, D. Platikanov, A. Stankova and M. Nedyalkov, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 1997, 18, 789 CrossRef CAS .
G. Andreatta, L. T. Lee, F. K. Lee and J. J. Benattar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19537 CrossRef CAS .
D. Matuszak, G. L. Aranovich and M. D. Donohue, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 5501 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Brown, W. C. Thuman and J. W. McBain, J. Colloid Sci., 1953, 8, 508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blank, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 1911 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Princen and S. G. Mason, J. Colloid Sci., 1965, 20, 353 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Princen, J. Th. G. Overbeek and S. G. Mason, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1967, 24, 125 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan, H.-J. Müller, H. Möhwald and R. Krastev, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12222 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan, R. Krastev, H.-J. Müller and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7981 CrossRef CAS .
R. Farajzadeh, R. Krastev and P. L. J. Zitha, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2881 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan, H.-J. Müller, K. Vedula, H. Möhwald and R. Krastev, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 354, 1 CrossRef .
R. M. Muruganathan, R. Krustev, H.-J. Müller, H. Möhwald, B. Kolaric and R. von Klitzing, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6352 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Claesson, M. Kjellin, O. J. Rojas and C. Stubenrauch, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5501 RSC .
C. Stubenrauch, O. J. Rojas, J. Schlarmann and P. M. Claesson, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4977 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krustev and H.-J. Müller, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2134 CrossRef CAS .
R. Farajzadeh, A. Andrianov, R. Krastev, G. J. Hirasaki and W. R. Rossen, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 183, 1 CrossRef .
S. E. Friberg, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 15, 359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J.-H. Seo, Z. Ma and X. D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nikoobakht and X. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1883 CrossRef CAS .

          D. K. Martin, Nanobiotechnology of Biomimetic Membranes, Springer, New York, 1st edn,  2006, vol. 1, p. 182 Search PubMed .
M. P. Goertz, L. E. Marks and G. A. Montaño, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Belegrinou, J. Dorn, M. Kreiter, K. Kita-Tokarczyk, E.-K. Sinner and W. Meier, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 179 RSC .
J. Dorn, S. Belegrinou, M. Kreiter, E.-K. Sinner and W. Meier, Macromol. Biosci., 2011, 11, 514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, V. Janout and S. L. Regen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12988 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, V. Janout, J. T. Hsu and S. L. Regen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8094 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, V. Janout and S. L. Regen, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 11224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, V. Janout and S. L. Regen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5065 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, E. Stedronsky and S. L. Regen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, V. Janout and S. L. Regen, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4614 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. McCullough III, V. Janout, J. Li, J. T. Hsu, Q. Truong, E. Wilusz and S. L. Regen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9916 CrossRef .
R. M. Crooks and A. J. Ricco, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 219 CrossRef CAS .
W. N Vreeland and A. E Barron, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2002, 13, 87 CrossRef .
R. Bruinsma, F. Rondelez and A. Levine, Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys., 2001, 6, 191 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. H. Köpf, S. V. Gurevich, R. Friedrich and L. Chi, Small, 2012, 8, 488 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Wegner, A. Okesli, P. Chen and C. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3474 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, J. S. Moore and D. J. Beebe, Science, 2001, 291, 1023 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan and Th. M. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22979 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan, Z. Khattari and Th. M. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21772 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Muruganathan and Th. M. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Collinet-Fressancourt, L. Leclercq, P. Bauduin, J.-M. Aubry and V. Nardello-Rataj, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 11619 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Janssen, E. Peeters, M. F. van Zundert, M. H. P. van Genderen and E. W. Meijer, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 8113 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat and D. Meisel, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 7, 282 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Jódar-Reyes, J. L. Ortega-Vinuesa and A. Martín-Rodríguez, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 282, 439 CrossRef .
T. Cohen-Karni, R. Langer and D. S. Kohane, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6541 CrossRef CAS .
J. Eastoe and A. Vesperinas, Soft Matter, 2005, 1, 338 RSC .
G. Kali, T. K. Georgiou, B. Iván, C. S. Patrickios, E. Loizou, Y. Thomann and J. C. Tiller, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10746 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mespouille, J. L. Hedrick and P. Dubois, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4878 RSC .
M. Moffitt, K. Khougaz and A. I. Eisenberg, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 95 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Sandanaraj, D. R. Vutukuri, J. M. Simard, A. Klaikherd, R. Hong, V. M. Rotello and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basu, D. R. Vutukuri and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16794 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arumugam, D. R. Vutukuri, S. Thayumanavan and V. Ramamurthy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13200 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Alargova, I. Y. Vakarelsky, V. N. Paunov, S. D. Stoyanov, P. A. Kralchevsky, A. Mehreteab and G. Broze, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 1996 CrossRef CAS .

Amphoteric Surfactants (Surfactant Science), ed. Eric G. Lomax, CRC Press,  1996 Search PubMed .
K. Velonia, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4224 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Boerakker, J. M. Hannink, P. H. H. Bomans, P. M. Frederik, R. J. M. Nolte, E. M. Meijer and N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4239 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Dirks, S. S. van Berkel, N. S. Hatzakis, J. A. Opsteen, F. L. van Delft, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan, J. C. M. van Hest, F. P. J. T. Rutjes and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4172 RSC .
J. F. Lutz and H. G. Boerner, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2008, 33, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Holmberg, in Reactions and Synthesis in Surfactant Systems, ed. J. Texter, Dekker, New York,  2001, pp. 45–58 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, P. G. Jessop, M. Cunningham, C. A. Eckert and C. L. Liotta, Science, 2006, 313, 958 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Peterson, M. B. Larsen and A. J. Boydston, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7317 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. J Middelberg, L. He, A. F. Dexter, H.-H. Shen, S. A. Holt and R. K. Thomas, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2008, 5, 47 CrossRef .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, Z. Zhang, C. Sun and J. Huang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 6096 RSC .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1356 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, G. H. Fredrickson, C. J. Hawker and E. J. Kramer, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7804 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, S. Zhou, Y. Sun, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4356 RSC .
P. Arumugam, H. Xu, S. Srivastava and V. M. Rotello, Polym. Int., 2007, 56, 461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, T. Wu, G. Zhang and S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7624 CrossRef CAS .
K. Niikura, N. Iyo, T. Higuchi, T. Nishio, H. Jinnai, N. Fujitani and K. Ijiro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7632 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Yang, B. Samanta, S. S. Agasti, Y. Jeong, Z.-J. Zhu, S. Rana, O. R. Miranda and V. M. Rotello, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 477 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, Q. Liu, Z. Xu and J. Masliyah, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1732 CrossRef CAS .
X. Batlle and A. Labarta, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2002, 35, R15 CrossRef CAS .
U. Resch-Genger, M. Grabolle, S. Cavaliere-Jaricot, R. Nitschke and T. Nann, Nat. Methods, 2008, 5, 763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .
B. Wang, B. Li, B. Zhao and C. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11594 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gentilini and L. Pasquato, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1403 RSC .
J. Song, L. Cheng, A. Liu, J. Yin, M. Kuang and H. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10760 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hartgerink, E. Beniash and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2001, 294, 1684 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and S. C. Glotzer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1407 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Zubarev, J. Xu, A. Sayyad and J. D. Gibson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15098 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, H. Usta, C. Risko, L. Wang, A. Facchetti, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7670 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. M. Jakobs, J. van Herrikhuyzen, J. C. Gielen, P. C. M. Christianen, S. C. J. Meskers and A. P. H. J. Schenning, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3438 RSC .
J. van Herrikhuyzen, G. Portale, J. C. Gielen, P. C. M. Christianen, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, S. C. J. Meskers and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Commun., 2008, 697 RSC .
L. Hong, A. Cacciuto, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, K. J. M. Bishop, J. Kim, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9477 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. M. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, B. Li, B. Dong, B. Zhao and C. Y. Li, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 9234 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, S. C. Bae and S. Granick, Nature, 2011, 469, 381 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Andala, S. H. R. Shin, H.-Y. Lee and K. J. M. Bishop, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1044 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Park and D. Lee, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 7690 RSC .
T. Brugarolas, B. J. Park, M. H. Lee and D. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3924 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Park, T. Brugarolas and D. Lee, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 6413 RSC .
M. M. Telo da Gama and K. E. Gubbins, Mol. Phys., 1986, 59, 227 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smit, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1988, 37, 3431 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smit, A. Schlijper, L. Rupert and N. Van Os, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 6933 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rekvig, M. Kranenburg, B. Hafskjold and B. Smit, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 63, 902 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rekvig, M. Kranenburg, J. Vreede, B. Hafskjold and B. Smit, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8195 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Jang, S. T. Lin, P. K. Maiti, M. Blanco, W. A. Goddard III, P. Shuler and Y. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chanda and S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23482 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shinoda, R. Devane and M. L. Klein, Mol. Simul., 2007, 33, 27 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shinoda, R. DeVane and M. L. Klein, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2454 RSC .
B. D. Marshall, K. R. Cox and W. G. Chapman, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 7415 RSC .
B. D. Marshall, C. Emborsky, K. Cox and W. G. Chapman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 2730 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Marshall, K. R. Cox and W. G. Chapman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17641 CAS .
X. B. Zhao, F. Pan, H. Xu, M. Yaseen, H. H. Shan, C. A. E. Hauser, S. G. Zhang and J. R. Lu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3480 RSC .
X. Mulet, D. F. Kennedy, T. L. Greaves, L. J. Waddington, A. Hawley, N. Kirby and C. J. Drummond, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2651 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Greaves, A. Weerawardena and C. J. Drummond, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9180 RSC .
T. L. Greaves, D. F. Kennedy, N. Kirby and C. J. Drummond, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13501 RSC .
Z. Chen, T. L. Greaves, C. Fong, R. A. Caruso and C. J. Drummond, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3825 RSC .
C. Fong, T. Le and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1297 RSC .
V. Castelletto, G. Cheng, C. Stain, C. J. Connon and I. W. Hamley, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11599 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Hamley, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4122 RSC .
J. B. Matson, R. H. Zha and S. I. Stupp, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 15, 225 CrossRef CAS .
V. Castelletto, G. Cheng, B. W. Greenl, I. W. Hamley and P. J. F. Harris, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2980 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Kim, T. Kim and M. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 72 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu and M. Masuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2812 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Yao, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Li and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Li and X. Li, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, N. C. Billingham and S. P. Armes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2328 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Jones, C. Y. Cheung, F. E. Black, J. K. Zia, P. S. Stayton, A. S. Hoffman and M. R. Wilson, Biochem. J., 2003, 372, 65 CrossRef CAS .
C. de las Heras Alarcón, S. Pennadam and C. Alexander, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 276 RSC .
X. Yin, A. S. Hoffman and P. S. Stayton, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 1381 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mori, I. Kato and T. Endo, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4985 CrossRef CAS .
A. Klaikherd, S. Ghosh and S. Thayumanavan, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 8518 CrossRef CAS .
D. Roy, J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salonen, D. Langevin and P. Perrin, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5308 RSC .
B. Bharti, M. Xue, J. Meissner, V. Cristiglio and G. H. Findenegg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, W. Zhiming, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lotya, P. J. King, U. Khan, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3155 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Smith, M. Lotya and J. N. Coleman, New J. Phys., 2010, 12, 125008 CrossRef .
A. Griffith and S. M. Notley, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 369, 210 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Notley, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 14110 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Guo, J.-X. Liu, X.-M. Zhang, R.-S. Feng, H.-B. Li, J. Zhang, X. Lv and P.-Y. Luo, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2116 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Liu, Y.-J. Guo, J. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Lv, X.-M. Zhang, X.-S. Xue and P.-Y. Luo, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2858 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, M. Dong and S. Zhao, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1829 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nguyen, N. Sadeghi and C. Houston, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2742 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mulqueen and D. Blankschtein, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, R.-H. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z.-C. Xu, Z.-Q. Jin, L. Luo, L. Zhang and S. Zhao, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meister, J. J. Amsden, I. A. Howard, I. Park, C. Lee, D. Y. Yoon and F. Laquai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2665 CrossRef CAS .
J. Carlstedt, D. Lundberg, R. S. Dias and B. Lindman, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7976 CrossRef CAS .
E. Grueso, C. Cerrillos, J. Hidalgo and P. Lopez-Cornejo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10968 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Wasan, D. R. Brocks, S. D. Lee, K. Sachs-Barrable and S. J. Thornton, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2008, 7, 84 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Wasan and J. S. Conklin, Clin. Infect. Dis., 1997, 24, 78 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tory, K. Sachs-Barrable, C.-B. Goshko, J. S. Hill and K. M. Wasan, Transplantation, 2009, 88, 62 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. A. Saracino, D. Cigognini, D. Silva, A. Caprini and F. Gelain, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 225 RSC .
W. Zheng, W. Zhang and X. Jiang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 95 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gode and D. A. Volmer, Analyst, 2013, 138, 1289 RSC .
M. Beneito-Cambra, J. M. Herrero-Martinez and G. Ramis-Ramos, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 341 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

Muruganathan Ramanathan
	Muruganathan “Nathan” Ramanathan is a materials scientist at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA. He received his PhD degree at the Max-Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany in physical chemistry and materials science. Prior to his current position, he was a postdoctoral fellow at Florida State University and Argonne National Laboratory, USA.

Lok Kumar Shrestha
	Lok Kumar Shrestha received his PhD degree from Yokohama National University, Japan in 2008. He is currently a MANA scientist at World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA) at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).

Taizo Mori
	Taizo Mori received his PhD from the Department of Polymer Chemistry at Kyoto University in 2009. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).

Qingmin Ji
	Qingmin Ji earned her PhD (2005) in chemistry from the University of Tsukuba. She started working as a post-doctoral fellow in National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) from 2006 and became a MANA scientist at World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA).

Jonathan P. Hill
	Jonathan P. Hill received his PhD degree from Brunel University, UK in 1995. He is currently a sub-group leader of the Supermolecules Group at the National Institute for Materials Science. His current research interests include synthesis and properties of tetrapyrroles and their supramolecular manifolds as well as unusual methods for preparing organic nanomaterials.

Katsuhiko Ariga
	Katsuhiko Ariga received his PhD degree from Tokyo Institute of Technology. He is currently the Director of the Supermolecules Group and the Principal Investigator of World Premier International (WPI) Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS).

 	Fig. 1  Typical examples of conventional amphiphiles.	 

 	Fig. 2  Changes in physical properties at critical micelle concentration (CMC): (A) surface tension; (B) various other parameters.	 

 	Fig. 3  A few examples of surfactant self-assembled structures of amphiphilic molecules in the bulk phase.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structure of amphiphilic molecules, preferred aggregate structures, and the related aggregate curvature.	 
lc ≤ lmax ≈ 0.154 + 0.1265n nm	(1)
v ≈ (27.4 + 26.9n) × 10−3 nm3	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of normal (unilamellar (A) and multilamellar (B)) and reverse (multilamellar) vesicles (C).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of amphiphile equilibrium with layered regions.	 

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of the structure of amphiphile assemblies on approaching surfaces at various concentrations.	 

 	Fig. 8  An example of the contribution of amphiphile assemblies to formation of the anisotropic shapes of the nanoparticles and nanocrystals.	 

 	Fig. 9  Effect of ligand coverage on equilibrium nanocrystal shapes ranging from octahedra to cuboctahedra to cubes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structures including rings, linear and bundled chains and nanospheres coated with amphiphiles and block copolymers.	 

 	Fig. 11  An example of hybrid nanoparticles (Au and Fe3O4) coated with amphiphilic polymers and amphiphilic molecules.	 

 	Fig. 12  Formation of zinc oxide nanostructures with Gibbs monolayers of SDS as a template.	 

 	Fig. 13  Growth of nanomembranes at the water surface (A) and in solution (B).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the concept of material separation through a glued LB bilayer.	 

 	Fig. 15  Method and concept of investigation of local heating of a quasi 2D Langmuir monolayer at the air/water interface.	 

 	Fig. 16  Various patterns of functional group distributions on the surface of graphene oxide nano sheets.	 

 	Fig. 17  The ‘bricks and mortar’ strategy for nanocomposite formation where nanoparticles act as bricks while amphiphilic ligands (surfactants or polymers) act as mortars.	 

 	Fig. 18  Janus type biphasic, anisotropic nanoparticles with amphiphilic triblock copolymers for further formation of hybrid nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 19  H-shaped supra-amphiphiles and their nanostructure formation.	 

 	Fig. 20  Block copolymers linked via disulphide functionality for the triple stimuli sensitive polymeric system.	 

 	Fig. 21  Self-assembly of a nonionic amphiphile in tubular nanopores.	 

 	Fig. 22  Aggregate formation from DNA coils and CTAB for DNA delivery to cell.	 

 	Fig. 23  Lipoprotein particles with hydrophilic groups of phospholipids, cholesterol, and apoproteins directed outward.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
