Construction of heterostructure materials toward functionality   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00222D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00222D
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4506-4524Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsConstruction of heterostructure materials toward functionality†

        
          
            Haiyan 
            Zheng
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yongjun 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Huibiao 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Yin
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yuliang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P.R. China. E-mail: liyj@iccas.ac.cn; ylli@iccas.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-10-82616576;   Tel: +86-10-62588934
bGraduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P.R. China
Received 
      24th December 2010
    First published on 23rd May 2011AbstractOne- and zero-dimensional organic/inorganic heterostructure materials have been attracting considerable attention in materials science because of their outstanding optical and electrical properties and high tailorability in terms of composition, structure, and morphology. Strong interactions between the organic and inorganic units can lead to novel or improved physical or chemical performance relative to that of the individual components, thereby realizing synergistic (“1 + 1 > 2”) performance. In this tutorial review, we discuss the synthetic methods available for preparing heterostructures incorporating diverse components; the functionality of the heterostructure materials; and their potential applications in the fields of electronics, optics, biology, and catalysis. The future development of such heterostructure materials will require deeper understanding of organic–inorganic or organic–organic interfaces on the nanoscale, collective phenomena, and interparticle coupling.
Haiyan Zheng
Haiyan Zheng was born in 1982 in Hebei, China. She is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a Master–Doctor combined program graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. Her research interest focuses on using “small-scale” molecular concepts in order to “synthesize-up” nanostructures.
Yongjun 
Li
Yongjun Li was born in 1975 in Sichuan, China. He received his Master degree in Chemistry from Sichuan University in 2001, and he earned his PhD in organic chemistry in 2006 at ICCAS. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the design and synthesis of functional organic molecules.
Huibiao Liu
Huibiao Liu was born in 1970 in Jiangxi, China. He received his PhD degree in 2001 at the Nanjing University. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, working on inorganic/organic hybrid nanomaterials.
Xiaodong Yin
Xiaodong Yin was born in 1983 in Jilin, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research interest focuses on design and synthesis of organic multi-responding materials.
Yuliang 
Li
Yuliang Li (Qingdao, China, 1949) is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and noncovalent supramolecular self-assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.
1. Introduction
Heterostructure materials—systems in which materials of different compositions meet at interfaces—comprise a relatively new, yet already immense, area of materials science; they are expected to greatly influence the future design and development of materials with defined functions. Many new concepts have been proposed for controlling the synthesis of such heterostructure materials as metal–metal junctions,1 metal–polymer junctions,2 inorganic semiconductor junctions,3 inorganic semiconductor–metal junctions,4 inorganic–organic semiconductor junctions,5–7 and semiconductor–carbon nanotube junctions.8 For example, inorganic–organic heterostructure materials comprise inorganic materials (preorganized nanostructures) with organic functional molecules attached or assembled on the surfaces of the inorganic scaffold in a covalent or noncovalent manner. The properties of these heterostructure materials arise from the sum of the contributions of the individual components as well as from processes that occur at the interfaces between the components. Completely novel or improved physical and chemical properties can result from strong interactions between the organic and inorganic units. The presence of aggregated nanostructures at the organic–inorganic interface can induce optical or electrical properties distinct from those of their individual components, thereby realizing synergistic performance (“1 + 1 > 2” or “more than the sum of its parts”).
Most of these studies have focused on the fabrication of heterostructures from inorganic metals or semiconductors. Inorganic and organic materials have their own particular electronic and optical properties. Organic materials are readily synthesized, can provide inorganic materials with remarkably improved stability, and can be polyfunctionalized to allow tailoring of the resulting optical, electronic, and chemical properties. Nanoscale materials integrating both inorganic and organic components are capable of performing as semiconductors. Assembling the organic and inorganic parts of hybrid nanowires into crossed junctions has led to the use of homogeneous hybrid nanowires as field effect transistors,9 photodetectors,10 sensors,11 and light emitting diodes.12 Although most studies to date have concentrated on the synthesis of homogenous structures, the realization of well-defined heterostructures is generating great interest because of their potential applications. The synthesis of heterostructures has been developed using several methods, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),13 controlled solid–solid reactions,14electrodeposition,15 template-assisted synthesis,16 and electrospinning techniques.17 Within these methodologies, many heterostructures comprising metals, semiconductors, and polymers have been prepared using porous templates as “molds”—for example, anodic alumina oxide (AAO) and nuclear track etch polymer membranes.18 Bottom-up processes based on solid-, solution-, and gas-phase syntheses have emerged as efficient approaches toward fabricating optical and photoelectronic elements for device integration, often with higher quality than the materials prepared using traditional approaches.
Although reviews exist that mainly emphasize the synthetic procedures used to obtain functional heterostructure materials,18,19 reports of the novel properties of heterostructure materials are scattered throughout the literature. In this tutorial review, we highlight the results of our and other's recent studies of heterostructure nanomaterials, aimed at providing new insight into the photo and electronic properties and functions of heterostructure materials. We focus on the synthetic methods available to prepare heterostructures featuring diverse components, with emphasis on template-directed synthetic methods [using “hard templates” with preformed nanoscale features or “soft templates” (surfactants that guide the growth of heterostructures in or around self-assembled micelles)] for preparing one-dimensional (1-D) heterostructures and assembly methods for preparing zero-dimensional (0-D) nanoparticle (NP)-based heterostructures. We also discuss the various sub-classifications, advantages, and disadvantages of these methods. More emphasis must be placed on the novel properties of heterostructure materials in the areas of electronics, optics, biology, and catalysis if we are to further understand the nature of organic–inorganic and organic–organic interfaces on the nanoscale, collective phenomena, and interparticle coupling among heterostructures.
2. Synthesis and self-assembly of the heterostructure materials
2.1 Synthesis and fabrication of 1-D nanoscale heterostructures
One-dimensional nanoscale heterostructure materials can be prepared using various methods, including vapor-phase methods, solution-phase methods, template-directed synthesis, lithography, and self-assembly.18 Template-directed methods have been used widely because they are simple and convenient and provide controllable properties. According to the physical state of the template, these techniques can be classified into hard template and soft template methods. The hard template is typically a thin porous film prepared from materials such as aluminium oxide (AAO), silica, nanochannel glass, or polycarbonate. AAO templates are used widely and available commercially in a limited number of pore diameters (e.g., 10, 20, 100, 200 nm). There are several methods for transforming materials deposited in the cylindrical pores of these films into nanotubes or nanowires, including pressure injection, vapor deposition, chemical deposition, and electro-deposition. The selection of a method for loading the pores is material-dependent; for example, the electro-deposition method requires electro-active materials. The diameters of the resulting nanostructures formed within these templates are determined by the pore diameters; their lengths are determined by the membrane thickness; both of these factors are variable. Thus, a major advantage of the hard template method is the ability to control the size and uniformity of the 1-D nanostructures. It can also be quite useful for producing nanostructures with spatially controllable compositions—for example, controlling the composition of a nanowire along its axis. In addition, hard template methods are simple, facile, and straightforward approaches toward constructing nanomaterials in different structures. For example, solid nanorods or hollow nanotubes can be obtained simply by changing the concentration, the reaction time, or the applied potential. Stabilization of aggregates in pores can be achieved through addition of a chemical oxidizing agent or, more commonly, through electrochemical polymerization. Difficulties in scalability and the harsh post-synthetic conditions required to purify the heterostructures are two major drawbacks of the hard template technique. In addition, the high costs and difficulties scaling up the preparation of the hard template are also disincentives for using this method industrially. Nonetheless, using hard templates is a very general approach that remains the most viable method for producing monodisperse nanostructures with spatially controlled compositions. Learning how to combine such approaches to synthesize heterostructure materials with complex components is, however, a significant and ongoing challenge within nanoscience and nanotechnology.

2.1.1 Combining hard template and electrochemical deposition to construct 1-D heterojunctions. 
The electrochemical approach allows great control over the architectural parameters of the resulting structures (in particular, the block length). It is a powerful method for deliberately producing structures with desirable electrical properties. This straightforward synthetic procedure offers a high degree of reproducibility. Fig. 1 presents the typical procedure. One side of the AAO template is modified with a conducting layer (e.g., Pt, Au). One component of the nanowires (commonly a metal, semiconductor, or polymer) is deposited into the AAO template electrochemically. The other component is then deposited in a three-electrode electrochemical cell. Finally, the AAO template is selectively etched using a NaOH solution. Several heterojunction materials have been synthesized using the template-assisted procedure. For example, Mirkin and co-workers prepared segmented Au–PPy (polypyrrole) with different ratios and Au–PPy–Au rods through electrochemical deposition of gold into the AAO template and subsequent electrochemical polymerization of pyrrole.20 Monitoring the current that passed during the electrodeposition process allowed control over the length of each block. Using a similar procedure, the Mirkin group also fabricated Au–PPy–Cd–Au four-segment nanorods that exhibited “diode” behavior at room temperature.21 Whitesides and co-workers deposited thioaniline on top of metal nanorods as a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) to nucleate the electropolymerization of aniline when synthesizing segmented polyaniline (PANI)–gold nanofibers (Fig. 2A).22Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) revealed (Fig. 2B) that the structures consisted of two fragments, with no detectable space between the metal and the polymer. Very little PANI was detected on top of the Au rods in the absence of the thioaniline SAM (Fig. 2C and D). Thus, a thioaniline SAM can act as an adhesion layer that stabilizes the composite.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of segmented heterojunction nanowires. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 23).] 
 Fig. 2  (A) Segmented polymer–metal nanocomposites; (B) SEM image of Au–PANI segmented nanostructures that resulted from (A) after dissolution of the membrane; (C) and (D) show SEM images of the sample which is not modified with a SAM of thioaniline on the top surface of the gold nanorods before the deposition of PANI. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 22).] 
A facile electrochemical disposition template method has been used to fabricate a new organic/inorganic semiconductor p–n junction nanowire that combines the functions of an organic semiconductor and an inorganic semiconductor.5Fig. 3A and B reveal a clear interface between the organic and inorganic materials in a single nanowire of CdS–PPy. The element mapping, the energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis spectrum (EDS), and the fluorescence spectra collected from the two different parts of the hybrid nanowires indicated that it was indeed composed of separate CdS and PPy units. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) revealed (Fig. 3C) the exact interface structure of the CdS–PPy nanowire, with the single-crystalline CdS attached firmly to amorphous PPy. The same strategy has been applied to construct a new kind of nanowire–diode switch, with well-defined heterojunction nanowire-aligned architectures comprising two carefully selected functional organic components: polythiophene (PTh) and PPy.23 These PTh–PPy heterojunction nanowires exhibit smart responses to electrochemical redox potentials.
 Fig. 3  (A) Typical TEM image of a single CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (B) interface of a CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (C) HRTEM image of the interface of a CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (D) large area of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (E) top view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (F) side view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 5 and 7).] 


2.1.2 Combination of template technology and electrochemical deposition to construct 1-D core/shell heterostructures. 
A PTh–CdS core/shell nanorod has been synthesized by controlling the current density during the electrochemical deposition process.7 The PTh nanorods were fabricated through template-assisted electrochemical deposition. CdS was then deposited at a current density of 2.5 mA cm−2 into the AAO template containing the PTh nanorods. After washing with solvents and etching the template, the PTh–CdS core/shell nanorods were obtained (Fig. 3D–F). In contrast, when the current density during CdS deposition was maintained at 5 mA cm−2, the PTh–CdS segmented nanorods were obtained.
Whitesides and co-workers have synthesized Au–polyaniline (PANI) core/shell structures (Fig. 4).22 They constructed PANI nanotubes through electrodeposition and subsequently deposited Au from an alkaline plating solution. Although the strongly alkaline Au solution caused dissolution and widening of the alumina pores, this process prevented the PANI nanotubes from swelling to the size of the pores. Thus, the Au atoms filled the annular space between the walls of the pores and the PANI, resulting in the core/shell structure. Xu and co-workers have also prepared a core/shell structure containing an array of Ni nanowires enveloped in PANI nanotubules.24 The initially grown PANI nanotubes acted as a “second-order template” during electrodeposition of the Ni atoms.
 Fig. 4  (A) Procedure for the preparation of the segmented polymer–metal nanostructures within the pores of a Cu-backed AAO membrane; SEM images of PANI fiber only (B); PANI–Au core–shell structures where the Au was deposited for 1 h (C), 1.5 h (D), and 2.5 h (E). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 22).] 


2.1.3 Combining hard template and pressure injection methods to construct 1-D homogeneous hybrid heterojunctions. 
The combination of pressure injection with the template method is another popular approach for the fabrication of 1-D nanostructures. For example, we have used template-assisted pressure injection to fabricate homogeneous hybrid nanorods comprising organic semiconductors oligo(phenylenevinylenes) (OPVs) and also inorganic semiconductors CdS.6 The growth phenomena depend on the selective use of the organic unit oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV3, Fig. 5a) in which two ester groups could undergo linking on the surface of the inorganic semiconductor CdS (Fig. 5b) to form a typical organic/inorganic hybrid interface with ordered arrays. Fig. 5c outlines the synthetic process toward the CdS–OPV3 nanorods. A porous AAO template was immersed into the transparent CdS–OPV3 mixture in a flask under reduced pressure. The mixture was then exposed to the atmosphere, causing the solution to be forced into the pores of the template as a result of the difference in pressure. The membrane was removed and dried immediately. After repeating these steps three times, we acquired CdS–OPV3 nanorods embedded into the channels of the AAO membrane. The SEM image in Fig. 5A reveals the high filling density of the membrane and the monodisperse diameters of the nanorods. EDS analysis, element mapping, confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) (Fig. 5E–G), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 5B–D), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of a single CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod indicated that the single-crystalline NPs of CdS were embedded into OPV3 homogeneously. Fig. 5H indicated that the combined organic/inorganic semiconductor nanorods exhibited optical properties that differed from those of their two individual component nanorods, presumably because of a large content of homogeneous hybrid interfaces.
 Fig. 5  Left: (a) molecular structure of OPV3. (b) TEM image of CdS nanocrystals. (c) Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods; right: (A) SEM images of large area of CdS–OPV3 nanorods; (B) TEM image of a typical CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod; (C) HRTEM image of the CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod; (D) HRTEM image of a CdS–OPV3 interface. CLSM images (λex = 405 nm) of a single CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod collected (E) from 366 to 929 nm; (F) from 470 to 490 nm; (G) from 557 nm to 651 nm. (H) The CLSM fluorescence spectrum of OPV3 nanorods, CdS nanorods and CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 6).] 


2.1.4 Soft template methods. 
Soft templates are typically surfactants that self-assemble into micellar structures that serve as platforms to template the growth of nanostructures. The generation of heterostructures based on soft-templates is rare. Yao and co-workers reported the synthesis of triblock microrods of 1,3-diphenyl-2-pyroline (DP, a blue-emissive molecule) doped selectively with an orange dye [4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM)] at both ends, mediated by cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) micelles.25Fig. 6A displays the mechanism of formation of the triblock microrods. First, some of the DP molecules dissolved within the hydrophobic cores of the spherical CTAB micelles to induce the formation of rodlike micelles. These rodlike micelles acted as templates, directing the primary growth of DP particles in one dimension. Finally, a micelle melting process (stage II), induced by the micellar sphere-to-rod transition (green arrows), led to co-deposition of the DP and DCM molecules at both ends of the as-formed primary 1-D particles, generating the triblock microrods. SEM (Fig. 6B) and TEM (Fig. 6C) images revealed smooth outer surfaces, with each rod having a quite-uniform diameter (∼1 μm) along its length (20–25 μm). Fluorescence microscopy images (Fig. 6D and E) revealed heterostructure microrods with the DP components in the middle stripe of the triblock microrod and DCM molecules distributed at both ends. The triblock microrods generated high-quality macroscopic white light emissions, with high photoluminescence efficiency, in both colloidal suspensions and the solid state.
 Fig. 6  (A) Molecular structures of DP and DCM and the formation mechanism of triblock microrods. (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of triblock microrods; fluorescence microscopy images of same microrods excited with unfocused (D) UV (330–380 nm) and (E) blue light (460–490 nm), respectively. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 25).] 
Similar to other template methods, one of the disadvantages of this method is that a post-synthetic step is typically required to selectively remove the surfactant and obtain the pure heterostructures; therefore, strong interactions between the components or in situpolymerization of the assembled components is required to stabilize the heterostructures.


2.1.5 Solid phase reaction methods. 
Organic charge-transfer complexes are important components of organic/inorganic hybrid materials because of their unique physical properties in the solid state. Early examples are the large-area Ag–tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) and Cu–TCNQ nanowires that were prepared on the surfaces of Ag and Cu foils through organic vapor–solid phase reactions, an inexpensive process that allows patterning on various substrates.26 Recently a facile approach was developed for the large-area synthesis of vertically aligned arrays of Cu–TCNQ nanotubes on conductive substrates.27 The morphologies of Cu–TCNQ complexes can be tuned by adjusting the heating velocity and thereby controlling the concentration of TCNQ vapor. Under a high concentration of TCNQ vapor (resulting from instantaneous heating), the growth rate (Rg) is low with respect to the rate of diffusion (Rf) at the vapor–solid interface, and the Cu concentration decreases intensely close to the top area of the Cu–TCNQ nanostructures, inducing the preferential growth of nanotubes. In contrast, when the TCNQ film is gradually heated from room temperature to 170 °C, a low concentration of TCNQ vapor is produced and, therefore, crystal growth is relatively fast with respect to the diffusion rate at the vapor–solid interface. Growth occurs over the entire vapor–solid interface, giving rise to nanowires. We have also synthesized large-area nanostructured Cu–TCNAQ (tetracyanoanthraquinodimethane) films through organic liquid–solid phase reactions.28

2.2 
          Self-assembly of 0-D nanoparticle-based heterostructures
Zero-dimensional NPs have attracted considerable attention because of their unique photonic, electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties.29 In recent years, the synthesis of NPs has been achieved with diverse size distributions and various shapes—that is, through nanoscale fabrication with atomic precision.30 Nevertheless, the multidimensional assembly of NPs with controlled morphologies in highly ordered arrays will be necessary for the successful applications of NP-based devices.31 In this section, we summarize the different methods available for NP assembly and the principles governing these processes. The assembly of NPs with controlled shapes and sizes requires the combination of specific binding interactions (e.g., covalent bonding, gold–thioether coordination, multidentate coordination, hydrogen bonding) and templating forces from capping molecules (e.g., π–π interactions, electrostatic interactions). This combination allows effective manipulation of interparticle structures and increased understanding of the aggregation phenomena of small particles, thereby rendering systems with new functionality in terms of the ligands and functional groups attached.

2.2.1 
            Assembly mediated by multidentate coordination of molecules. 
Multidentate coordination chemistry (e.g., using disulfide-,32 thioether-33 and terpyridine-based34 multidentate ligands) is often exploited in approaches toward NP assembly. Rotello and co-workers synthesized NPs bearing 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine (terpy) ligands and studied their self-assembly using a variety of transition metals.34 Coordination of the mixed monolayer-protected clusters (MMPCs) 4–6 to Fe atoms was monitored using UV–Vis spectroscopy (Fig. 7e) and TEM imaging (Fig. 7a). However, no aggregation was observed in the control systems by TEM when nonfunctionalized MPCs were drop-cast with added metal (Fig. 7b). Addition of the salts Ag(CH3CN)4BF4 and Cu(CH3CN)4PF6 to a solution of the MMPC 5 afforded much denser aggregates than those obtained after addition of the salts Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2 and Zn(H2O)4(BF4)2. The NPs within the Ag (Fig. 7c), Cu, and, to a lesser extent, Zn aggregates could be redispersed upon addition of a large excess of free terpy ligands (Fig. 7d), demonstrating the reversibility of these weaker coordinating systems. This versatile method facilitates NP aggregation through coupling of transition metals with terpy-functionalized MMPCs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Metal induced aggregation with MMPC5 + Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2; (b) TEM micrograph showing no aggregation with MPC2 + Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2; (c) metal induced aggregation with MMPC5 + Ag(CH3CN)4BF4, and (d) disaggregation of Ag aggregates upon addition of excess terpyridine; (e) changes in the UV-vis spectrum of a CHCl3 solution of MMPC5 as 2.5 μL aliquots of a (1:3) MeOH/CHCl3 solution of Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2 are added. Inset: 2.5 μL additions of the same Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2 solution to a CHCl3 solution of terpyridine thioacetate. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 34).] 


2.2.2 
            Assemblies mediated by π–π interactions. 
Various kinds of conjugated molecules have been explored as protective agents for gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) to induce tunable self-assemblyvia π–π interaction.35,36 For example, Miyake and co-workers described the self-assembly of AuNPs protected with discotic liquid crystalline molecules of hexaalkoxy-substituted triphenylene (TP) in a mixed toluene/MeOH solvent.37 A series of AuNPs capped with different discotic liquid crystalline molecules—so called AuTPs containing various alkyl chains—have exhibited different self-assembly behavior. Fig. 8a and b outline the mechanism of formation. The stripelike self-assembly of AuTPs can be achieved through the formation of column structures of TP, originating through strong π–π stacking. On one hand, smaller cores or longer alkyl chains will provide sufficient free space around the TP moieties, allowing the TP ligands on adjacent AuNPs to intercalate; on the other, a hydrophilic solvent [prepared by increasing the ratio of MeOH to toluene (RMT, v/v)] will promote strong intermolecular stacking of the TP moieties among the AuTPs. Fig. 8c–e reveal an example of the effect of solvent hydrophilicity. The value of RMT is adopted as a measure of the hydrophilicity index. The TEM images of AuTP12-2.8 (AuNPs protected by TP12; average size of the Au core: 2.8 nm) reveal a disordered sample at RMT = 1/1 (Fig. 8c), whereas the hcpassembly appears for RMT = 2/1 (Fig. 8d). When the hydrophilicity of the solvent was further increased (RMT = 3/1), the structure organized into a stripelike arrangement (Fig. 8e). Thus, the solvent hydrophilicity promotes strong intermolecular stacking of TP moieties among the AuTPs, leading to the formation of the stripelike arrangement.
 Fig. 8  (a) Three strategies to construct 1D arrangement of NPs; (b) the possible arrangement of AuTP depends on factors investigated; π–π interaction, space around TPs on Au, and solvent hydrophilicity; TEM images of AuTP12-2.8, RMT = (c) 1/1 (disorder), (d) 2/1 (hcp; interparticle separation is 4.0 nm), (e) 3/1(stripelike). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 37)]. 


2.2.3 
            Assemblies mediated by covalent bonding. 
Several reactions have been explored to control the self-assembly of AuNPs, including click reactions,38Grignard reactions,39 esterification,40Sonogashira coupling,41 and Diels–Alder reactions.42,43 Recently, the fabrication of organic/inorganic hybrid materials consisting of conjugated oligomers and AuNPs has been developed by performing mild Diels–Alder reactions on both sides of the counterparts.42 As shown in Fig. 9A, the MPCs remain dispersed within the first 1 h without obvious size and shape changes. After a reaction time of 12 h, monolayer-protected Au clusters (MPCs) had cross-linked to form large-scale assemblies consisting of densely packed M3–Au with an ordered internal structure (Fig. 9B and C). Upon thermal treatment at 110 °C after five heating cycles, the MPCs remained well dispersed with only slight increases in their particle diameter and size distribution (Fig. 9D). This process could also be followed by monitoring the UV-vis absorption spectrum (Fig. 9E) and fluorescence (Fig. 9F); M3 exhibits completely quenched fluorescence, mainly due to photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from the OPV backbone to the maleimide units. After Diels–Alder reactions with the furan-capped AuNPs, the succinimide group no longer possesses a strong quenching effect and the fluorescence of the chromophore is recovered. Upon thermal treatment, retro-Diels–Alder reactions occur and the fluorescence is quenched. This process can be repeated several times. Nanocomposites of poly-p-phenyleneethynylene AuNPs (PPE–Au), which exhibit homogeneous and well-defined interfaces, have also been prepared through direct grafting of maleimide-functionalized AuNPs onto PPE chains using the same method.43 Reactions between OPVs containing double epoxide units at their junction point and amino-functionalized AuNPs have also been explored to fabricate organic/inorganic nano-networks.44
 Fig. 9  Illustration for the Diels–Alder reaction leading to ordered AuNPs self-assemblies. TEM images obtained at different times of D–A reaction between M3 and F–Au: (A) 15 min, (B) 12 h, (C) magnification of (B), (D) treated at 110 °C after five heating cycles. (E) UV-vis absorption of M3–Au in toluene. Inset: time dependent PL enhancement on M3–Au; (F) PL spectra of M3 (black curve), M3–Au (red curve), and M3–Au after being treated at 110 °C for 2 h (blue curve). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 42).] 


2.2.4 
            Assemblies mediated by polymers and biomolecules. 

Polymer-capped AuNPs have played an important role in the fabrication of the multifunctional NPs. In NP/polymer composites, the polymer functions to assemble the NPs into clusters, as a matrix that induces an ordered orientation, and as a functional element.45 Rotello and co-workers have performed many studies related to assembly processes mediated by polymers; a typical example is their exploration of recognition element-functionalized diblock copolymers as mortars for the size-controlled formation of AuNP aggregates.46 Microphase separation of the diblock copolymer provided control over the aggregate size through changes in the block length of the recognition element-functionalized block (Fig. 10). The AuNPs were decorated with thymine (Thy) units, which interacted with the polymers 1–3 containing diaminotriazine units through the formation of three hydrogen bonds. MeThy (methyl-substituted thymine)-capped AuNPs, which could not undergo such hydrogen bonding, were prepared as a reference. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis and TEM imaging (Fig. 10d–f) both indicated that the core radius of the aggregates increased upon increasing the polymer length; no evidence existed for aggregate formation when polymers 1–3 were mixed with MeThy–Au (Fig. 10e). Thus, this assembly of AuNPs mediated by polymers was dependent on hydrogen bonding, with the size of the aggregate—both in solution and in thin films—controlled by the block length.
 Fig. 10  (a) Diblock copolymers 1–3 with different block lengths (block A/B (Mw): 14k/14k for 1, 26k/24k for 2, 30k/28k for 3), Thy–Au, and non-hydrogen bonding control MeThy–Au. (b) Schematic demonstrating an increase in both core diameter and outer corona as the polymer size increases. (c) MeThy–Au control with polymer 2 showing complete lack of aggregation. Spherical micellar structures formed by assembly of Thy–Au by polymers 1 (d), 2 (e), and 3 (f). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 46).] 
Several biomolecules, including DNA, have been explored to control the assembly of AuNPs. Relative to the non-biologically based methods, this approach offers several advantages. For example, DNA strands with controllable lengths and surface binding functionality can be prepared using an automated DNA synthesizer; in addition, DNA recognition can be used to trigger the reversible assembly of the AuNPs. Mirkin and co-workers reported the very reversibly controlled assembly of AuNPs into aggregated macroscopic structures through the application of DNA hybridization.47 Another versatile example is the use of DNA recognition properties to synthesize sophisticated nanostructured materials.48 In the example presented in Fig. 11, magnetic microparticles (MMPs) functionalized with 3′-thiol-terminated 30-mer oligonucleotides were used as a template. 3′-Hydroxyl-modified “extension” oligonucleotides 2 (complementary to half of the MMP oligonucleotides) and AuNPs functionalized with 3′-thiolated and 5′-phosphorylated 15-mer oligonucleotides 3 (complementary to the other half of the MMP oligonucleotides) were assembled to form the complex 4 through the template function of the MMP oligonucleotides. After the catalyst-mediated formation of phosphodiester bonds between the 3′-OH units of the extension oligonucleotides and the 5′-phosphate groups of the oligonucleotide chemisorbed to the AuNPs, new 30-mer oligonucleotides bound only to the sections of the AuNPs were afforded. Removal of the MMP template resulted in successful asymmetric functionalization of the AuNPs with oligonucleotides. AuNPs functionalized in this manner exhibit highly directional selectivity for hybridization with other NPs. Cat paw (Fig. 11A and B), satellite (Fig. 11C and D), and dendrimer-like (Fig. 11E and F) structures have been formed after hybridization between different asymmetrically functionalized NPs.
 Fig. 11  Directional assembly of asymmetrically functionalized AuNPs into (A and B) cat paw, (C and D) satellite, and (E and F) dendrimer-like structures. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 48).] 


2.2.5 
            Assemblies mediated by supramolecular interactions. 
In an early example, Kaifer and co-workers controlled the micellar assembly of AuNPs by means of interactions between γ-cyclodextrin hosts and C60 guests.49 This aggregation phenomenon was driven by the formation of inclusion complexes between two cyclodextrin units attached to different NPs and one molecule of C60. This assembly process was reversible under heating or the addition of the free γ-CD.


2.2.6 Theories and simulations of NP assembly. 
Recently, there has been much interest in understanding self-assembly from a more fundamental perspective, because of the relevance of self-assembly in nanofabrication applications. The coarse-grained lattice gas model has been developed to describe drying-mediated self-assembly of NPs in two50 or three51 dimensions. The Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory provides adequate description of the self-organization of several hundreds of NPs.52 Dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) has been used to study the distribution of NPs in lamellar and hexagonal diblock copolymer matrices.53 Combinations of self-consistent-field theory and density functional theory with hybrid particle field theory have been used to simulate the self-assembly behavior of amphiphilic diblock copolymer/NP mixtures in dilute solution54 or in confined environments.55 Molecular dynamics simulations have also been used to investigate the in situself-assembly of modified hydrocarbon NPs at liquid–liquid interfaces.56 A 2 nm-diameter AuNP functionalized with four single-stranded DNA units has been simulated at the atomistic level.57

2.3 
          Nanoparticles assembled into superlattice structures
Assembling two different types of NPs in a single material not only combines the properties of the building blocks but also provides model systems with which to explore the development of new collective properties that may emerge from NP interactions.58 Shevchenko, Murray, and co-workers have built a variety of binary superlattices from monodisperse PbS, PbSe, CoPt3, Fe2O3, Au, Ag, and Pd nanocrystals (NCs), relying on the evaporation of a binary NC solution on a solid substrate.59 As indicated in Fig. 12, the substrates (e.g., TEM grids, silicon nitride membranes) were placed in a glass vial containing a colloidal solution of NPs. The vial was tilted by 60°–70° and placed within a low-pressure chamber. Ordered binary assemblies formed upon evaporation of the solvent. To explain the observed diversity of binary nanocrystal superlattices (BNSLs), they developed a model that considered (in addition to entropic effects) the importance of coulombic, van der Waals, charge–dipole, and dipole–dipole interactions in the self-assembly of complex NP superstructures.59 Although the method of evaporation of a binary NC solution on a tilted solid substrate has been used extensively for the construction of BNSLs, it has some disadvantages. For example, the evaporation of high-boiling-point solvents requires several hours to reach completion. In addition, the substrate wetting properties have a significant influence on the formation of BNSLs. To date, the growth of BNSLs has been limited to the use of hydrophobic substrates (e.g., carbon-coated TEM grids), making it difficult to integrate BNSLs onto a desired substrate for device applications.60 Murray and co-workers developed a method based on drying-mediated self-assembly of multicomponent NCs on an immiscible liquid surface.60 They spread drops of hexane solutions containing NCs of selected sizes and concentrations over the surface of diethylene glycol (DEG) in a Teflon well. The evaporation of hexane resulted in a solid film supported on the DEG subphase surface. The centimetre-scale BNSL membranes were readily transferred to the substrate after drying. This approach allows the growth of macroscopic BNSL membranes with no substrate restrictions under ambient conditions. Hexane replaces the high-boiling-point solvents, allowing completion of the assembly process within several minutes. The structure and stoichiometry of the BNSL membranes can be tuned by changing the size and/or concentration ratio between the two NC components.
 Fig. 12  A scheme of the low-pressure chamber used for growing ordered binary assemblies. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 59).] 
3. Functions and applications of heterostructure materials
Low-dimension hybrid organic/inorganic nanostructures are materials that combine the functions of organic molecules and inorganic molecules. In addition, the produced organic/inorganic solid heterostructure materials might have distinct properties that are not observed in the individual components on the nanoscale or in their bulk materials. Such new or improved chemical and physical properties can be exploited to fabricate novel nanoscale devices. In this section, we present several examples in which heterostructures exhibit improved or completely novel optical and electrical properties compared with those of their individual components.
3.1 Electronics

3.1.1 Diodes. 
Diodes, devices that control current flow in one direction, are usually employed as switches in electrical circuits. They are usually realized by assembling n- and p-type semiconductor nanowires into cross-junctions. Recently, our group fabricated a single CdS–PPy semiconductor hybrid nanowire that exhibited remarkable performance on a light-controlled diode.5 The typical I–V curve of an individual CdS nanowire reveals highly insulating properties in the dark, with a photoresponse detected upon increasing the white-light illumination power (Fig. 13C). The I–V curve of the PPy nanowire revealed the properties of a semiconductor (Fig. 13D). The I–V properties of the CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire were similar to those of the individual CdS nanowires; it did not exhibit any diode effect (Fig. 13A). Nevertheless, we observed the unique phenomenon of a light-controlled diode on the single nanowire (Fig. 13B). With forward bias, the current increased upon increasing the applied bias. In reverse bias, the current transporting through the junction nanowire was close to zero. Upon increasing the illumination intensity, the conductivity of the CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire increased. At an applied bias of 5.0 V, the rectification ratio of the diode increased from 8.0 to 13 along with the enhancement of light intensity from 1.12 to 5.76 mW cm−2. We suspect that the interesting photoelectrical properties developed here will have great influence on both basic nanoscience research and the device application field of nanotechnology. Mirkin and co-workers systematically synthesized multicomponent rodlike structures that contained metals, inorganic semiconductors, and conducting polymersvia template-assisted in situelectrochemical deposition. They found that their rods exhibited resistor or diode-like behavior depending on the block composition.21 For their Au–PPy–Au system, the Au portions of the nanowire exhibited linear I–V characteristics and ohmic behavior at room temperature (Fig. 14A); the PPy portions also exhibited a linear response at room temperature, but nonlinear behavior at low temperature (<175 K), characteristic of a semiconductor (Fig. 14B). In contrast, the four-segment Au–PPy–Cd–Au nanorod (Fig. 14C–F) exhibits asymmetric and non-ohmic behavior—typical “diode” behavior—at room temperature (Fig. 14G). The rectifying ratio was approximately 200 at ±0.6 V. The I–V characteristics of the Au–PPy–Cd–Au nanorods at room temperature indicated that a Schottky-like junction existed at the PPy–Cd interface (due to the difference in work functions of the two materials) and an ohmic junction existed at the PPy–Au interface (due to the similarity of the work functions of the two materials). An organic/organic heterojunction nanowire array based on PTh and PPy exhibiting a strong response along the direction of the electrical potential has been constructed.23 The PTh–PPy heterojunction nanowire-array devices were prepared as models in Fig. 15A and a photograph of a typical PTh–PPy nanowire-aligned sample is shown in Fig. 15B. As indicated in Fig. 15C, PTh–PPy nanowires acted as resistors in the oxidation state, but as diodes in the reduction state (Fig. 15D). Fig. 15E and F reveal that the samples had good durability during three cyclic experiments, further confirming the stability of such diode–nanowire switches on both bias stations. From Fig. 15G, the conductivity of the oxidized PTh–PPy heterojunction nanowires for the forward and reverse bias were found to be almost the same value during the three redox circle, whereas the conductivity of the reduced PTh–PPy heterojunction nanowires on the forward bias (Fig. 15H) was on average about 5–6 times larger than the value at the reduction state, which acts as a diode with a rectification ratio of 5–6. Fully organic heterojunction nanowires with smart, controllable properties are likely to contribute to the development of intelligent organic devices and organic–electronic circuits on the nanoscale.
 Fig. 13  (A) Typical I–V curves of a CdS nanowire and CdS–PPy nanowire in the dark at room temperature. Typical I–V curves for a single CdS–PPy nanowire (B), CdS nanowire (C), PPy nanowire (D) under light illumination with different intensities at room temperature. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 5).] 
 Fig. 14  (A) I–V measurement for the gold blocks (1–2, 3–4) within a single nanorod at room temperature. (B) Temperature-dependent I–V curves for measurements across electrodes 2 and 3. The upper left inset is a plot of logσ(T)vs. 1/T; images of EDS mapping for (C) Au and (D) Cd domains in a single Au–PPy–Cd–Au rod. (E) SEM image of the rod. (F) Graph of the X-ray profile for Cd and Au domains over the dashed trace shown in the image represented in (C). (G) I–V characteristics for a single Au–PPy–Cd–Au rod at room temperature. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 21).] 
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the aligned PTh–PPy-nanowire-array devices; (B) photo of a typical PTh–PPy-nanowire-array; (C) I–V curve for the PTh–PPy nanowire array in the oxidized state; (D) I–V curve for the PTh–PPy nanowire array after being reduced. Reversible conductivity switches of PTh–PPy nanowires between the oxidation state and reduction state under (E) forward bias and (F) reverse bias. (G) and (H) conductivity of the oxidized PTh–PPy nanowires on the forward and reverse bias, respectively. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 23).] 


3.1.2 Field-emission properties. 
Low-voltage electronic field emission (FE) has attracted much attention because of its possible application in microwave power amplification, space propulsion, chemical analysis, e-beam lithography, display devices, and high-efficiency lighting. Large-area Ag–TCNQ and Cu–TCNQ nanowires prepared on the surfaces of Ag and Cu foils through organic vapor–solid phase reactions exhibit excellent FE properties.26 The Ag–TCNQ and Cu–TCNQ nanowire films exhibit turn-on fields (the macroscopic fields required to produce a current density of 10 μA cm−2) of 2.58 and 3.13 V μm−1, respectively. Therefore, the FE of the Ag–TCNQ nanowires is much better than that of the Cu–TCNQ nanowires, presumably because of the difference in electron affinity between the Ag–TCNQ and Cu–TCNQ. Because the work functions of the Cu–TCNQ and Ag–TCNQ nanowires are much smaller than that of graphite, they have great potential for use as very competitive field emitters. Cu–TCNQ nanotube arrays exhibit excellent and size-dependent FE properties, with a higher turn-on field and current density than those of Cu–TCNQ nanowires.27 Large-area nanowall and nanowire arrays have also been fabricated through the preparation of novel metal–organic charge-transfer complexes of Cu–TCNAQ under different growth parameters.28 The FE properties of Cu–TCNAQ materials of various morphologies have been studied; their nanowall array exhibited excellent FE performance, with a high current density and a low turn-on field. The maximum current density (10.9 mA cm−2) for the nanowall film, obtained under a field of 8 V μm−1, was better than that of a Cu–TCNQ nanowire film prepared in a previous study.26 In another example, subtle structural control over the PTh–CdS hybrid nanorod system provides an effective method for controlling the FE properties of the cold cathode.7 In Fig. 16, the PTh–CdS core/shell nanorod arrays exhibit a turn-on field of 3.62 V μm−1 and a threshold field of 5.85 V μm−1, while the PTh–CdS segmented nanorod arrays exhibit a much higher turn-on field (6.72 V μm−1) and threshold field (12.38 V μm−1). The PTh–CdS core/shell nanorod arrays and the PTh–CdS segmented nanorod arrays almost provide the same maximum current densities as those of the individual PTh nanorods and individual CdS nanorods. In contrast, the PTh–CdS core/shell nanorods exhibit the lowest turn-on field and threshold field, considerably lower than the turn-on field of the pure PTh nanorods, while the turn-on field of the PTh–CdS segmented nanorods is ranked between those of the individual PTh nanorods and CdS nanorods. We suspect that the difference in the FE properties between the core/shell nanorods and the segmented nanorods can be attributed to the PTh–CdS–vacuum triple junction. For the core/shell nanorod array, the triple junctions are almost vertical to the anode; electrons emitted from such triple junctions reach the anode easily, resulting in the low turn-on field and low threshold field. For the segmented nanorod array, the triple junctions are aligned almost parallel with the anode because of the end-to-end structure; the top fraction of CdS will shield the triple junction emissions, leading to a higher turn-on field and threshold field.
 Fig. 16  
              FE properties of CdS nanorods, PTh nanorods, PTh–CdS segmented nanorods and PTh–CdS core–shell nanorods: (A) J–E plot and (B) F–N plot. (C) SEM image of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod; (D) TEM of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod; (E) top view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (F) TEM image of a typical PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 7).] 


3.1.3 Solar cell. 
Organic/inorganic hybrid thin film solar cells attract great attention because they are inexpensive, easily solution-processed, and highly stable and because they display high carrier transport efficiency.61 Several studies on the photovoltaic properties of nanowires, especially a single nanowire of semiconductor and p–n junction, have been described recently. Having good control over the structures and compositions of the semiconductor nanowires makes them attractive as building blocks in studies leading toward an understanding of the factors determining and potentially improving photovoltaic device efficiency. Moreover, the nanowire morphology can increase the likelihood that all photo-generated electrons have a direct connection to the collection electrode. In recent research, Lieber et al. prepared photovoltaic devices incorporating single coaxial p-type/intrinsic/n-type (p–i–n) silicon nanowires (SiNWs).62 Under simulated one-sun irradiation, the optimized p–i–n SiNW devices exhibited an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.29 V, a maximum short-circuit current density (Isc) of 3.5 mA cm−2, and a maximum efficiency of 0.5%. Recently, the photovoltaic effect in a CdS–PPy single axial organic/inorganic p–n junction nanowire was investigated to understand the work mechanism of organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells on the nanoscale.63Fig. 17A reveals that excitons generated by the light reach the hybrid interface from the CdS side and effectively dissociate at the CdS–PPy interface. The electrons and holes generated in this process are also transported through the CdS and PPy phases, respectively, thereby efficiently generating the photocurrent in the CdS–PPy p–n junction nanowire. The wide light absorption range of the CdS–PPy nanowires should be helpful when attempting to improve the solar energy power conversion efficiency (Fig. 17B). The photovoltaic properties of the axial CdS–PPy nanowire diodes exhibited length-dependence (Fig. 17C). Most of the CdS–PPy axial p–n nanowire solar cell devices displayed efficiencies of approximately 0.016% under an illumination intensity of 6.05 mW cm−2; the maximum efficiency was 0.018% under these conditions. Neither the CdS nanowire nor the PPy nanowire provided power generation under the same conditions (Fig. 17D and E), confirming that the photovoltaic properties were characteristic of the CdS–PPy nanowire. This system is the first example of the generation of a photovoltaic response in a single-heterojunction wire that is not observed in the independent components. The light source intensity used in the experiment was only 6.05 mW cm−2 [ca. 17 times lower than that of AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2)]; irradiation was applied parallel to the CdS–PPy interface, leading to limited light absorption; the carrier collection distance is rather long and the exciton dissociation interface area is small, which will decrease the efficiency of the charge separation. These factors are directly responsible for the lower power conversion efficiency of this p–n nanowire, relative to that of a corresponding single Si wire. Nevertheless, there is still much room to improve the power conversion efficiency of CdS–PPy nanowire solar cells, through (i) the use of large-area nanowire arrays, (ii) the construction of uniform and ordered heterojunction interfaces, (iii) the connection of the nanowires in parallel or series, or (iv) the application of novel structures (for example, heterojunction coaxial nanowires, to deduce the carrier collection distance and increase the exciton dissociation interface area). This new photovoltaic element could provide a new nanoscale criterion for highly efficient photoinduced energy/charge transport in organic/inorganic interfaces for the generation of electrical power.
 Fig. 17  (A) Energy level diagram of a CdS–PPy nanowire. (B) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS–PPy p–n junction nanowires, CdS nanowire, and PPy nanowire. (C) Dark/light current density versus applied voltage bias (J–V) data of typical single CdS–PPy nanowire solar cells with device lengths of 7.428 (a), 6.922 (b), and 6.597 μm (c). Dark/light J–V data of a CdS nanowire device (D), PPy nanowire device (E). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 63).] 


3.1.4 Transistors. 
Transistors can be used for amplification, switching, voltage stabilization, and signal modulation. Nanowires have attracted enormous interest for use in organic electronics. Jung, Kuk, and co-workers fabricated Co–PPy–Co hybrid nanowires by means of template-induced electronic deposition and investigated the behavior of field-effect transistors (FETs) incorporating them.64 The measured output and transfer characteristics were as good as, or better than, film FETs of PPy. In addition, there are several advantages for FETs featuring a metal–organic–metal nanowire structure: the presence of reproducible metal–organic junctions with controllability over the diameter; ready integration into devices; and the ability to modify the electrical properties after fabricating the FET.
The small sizes and high surface-to-volume ratios of individual 0-D NPs impart distinct size-tunable physical and electronic properties that have prompted some59 to refer to them as “artificial atoms.” For PbSe NC transistors, the n-type transistor characteristics are far superior to the p-type characteristics.65 Nevertheless, precise assembly of NCs with desired electronic properties into binary NC superlattices provides a route to “metamaterials” with novel physical properties. From a study of the electronic behavior of binary NC systems based on monodisperse PbTe and Ag2Te NCs, Urban and co-workers demonstrated that the p-type conductance of the composite system exceeded the sum of the individual NP components.66 This observation, consistent with the role of Ag2Te as a p-type dopant in bulk PbTe, demonstrates that NCs can behave as dopants in nanostructured assemblies.

3.2 Optical properties

3.2.1 Fluorescence enhancement effect. 
The study of chromophore-functionalized AuNPs, with applications in photovoltaics and light-mediated binding, has emerged as one of the most exciting areas of scientific endeavor. Unfortunately, the fluorescence is usually quenched when the chromophore is bound to the AuNPs, due to the energy transfer or electronic transfer from the excited dye molecule to the AuNPs, thereby limiting the applications of chromophore-labeled AuNPs in photonic materials. Fluorescence enhancement of the carbazolyldiacetylene unit has been found in a 5-[1,2]dithiolan-3-ylpentanoic acid 1,6-bis[(N-carbazol-3-yl)methyl]-2,4-hexadiyne ester (DCHD-HS)-bound AuNP system.67 It was suggested that the two disulfide groups of the DCHD-HS units coordinated with the AuNPs, resulting in aggregation that restricted the torsional dynamics of the ligand and, thereby, enhanced the fluorescence. To understand the mechanism of the unusual emission enhancement, derivatives of perylene bisimide were prepared (Fig. 18).68 For 8SP, the perylene chromophores were firmly fixed among the particles through tetradentate binding on the surface of the AuNPs, making motions of the chromophore units quite difficult in the packed nanoclusters (Fig. 18E). Therefore, for the 8SP–AuNP composites, energy relaxation processes through nonradiant channels via intramolecular rotation/torsion were hampered; the radiant means of energy relaxation was activated, leading to emission enhancement of 8SP–AuNPs (Fig. 18H). The motions of perylene bisimide were restrained to a certain extent after linking the rigid carbazole unit to the perylene bisimide, leading to a faint emission enhancement of the 4SCP–AuNP composites (Fig. 18G). In contrast, the rotation/torsion of the perylene chromophore was almost not affected when the AuNPs were capped with 4SP, resulting in no enhancement in emission spectra (Fig. 18F). Therefore, aggregation of the AuNPs was the essential factor influencing the fluorescence enhancement, but the structure of the ligand was also a determining factor. These findings indicate that if appropriate building blocks are assembled into heterostructures such that interactions occur among the functional moieties, then the collective optical properties will be correlated with the interparticle spatial properties.
 Fig. 18  (A) Molecular structure of 4SP, 4SCP, and 8SP. The general model for ligand–AuNPs composites (B) and the local magnification of connection ways in the cases of 4SP–AuNPs (C), 4SCP–AuNPs (D), and 8SP–AuNPs (E). Fluorescence spectra of (F) 4SP, (G) 4SCP, and (H) 8SP before and after the addition of AuNPs (keeping for 12 h); (I) UV-vis absorption spectra of AuNPs in toluene solution with the titration of 8SP. Inset: TEM image of 8SP–AuNPs in toluene suspension. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 68).] 


3.2.2 Non-linear optical properties. 
Many studies have been performed regarding the potential applications of metal NPs and organic materials in nonlinear optics. The combination of conjugated organic chromophores and AuNPs produces new classes of organic/inorganic nanomaterials. Recently, the third-order optical nonlinear effects of AuNPs capped with conjugated small organic molecules69 and polymers70 were investigated. Open-aperture Z-scans of AuNPs capped with BPCP (Fig. 19A) and DCHD-HS (Fig. 19C) featured obvious nonlinear absorptions, whereas no signals were found from the solution of the BPCP, DCHD-HS, and NP colloid. Thus, the nonlinear optical response of the sample results from the light-excited surface plasmon resonance of the AuNPs interacting with the designed ligand. Fig. 19B and D present the pure nonlinear refractive data obtained through Z-scans with an aperture divided by those obtained without an aperture. The effective third-order nonlinear refractive indices (γ) of the BPCP–AuNPs and DCHD–AuNPs were 4.2 × 10−17 and 2.19 × 10−17 m2W−1, respectively. The stronger nonlinear refractive effect of BPCP–AuNPs indicates that the nonlinearity could be attributed to the larger π-conjugated system in the BPCP ligand as a result of introducing the biphenyl group. AuNPs capped with the conjugated polymer PPE–bipy–SS also exhibited a large third-order nonlinear effect (Fig. 19E and 19F). The open-aperture Z-scan curve reveals saturated absorption and reverse-saturated absorption simultaneously, attributable to two different effects: third-order nonlinear absorption and fifth-order nonlinear absorption (Fig. 19E). In contrast, both the PPE–bipy toluene solution and PPE–bipy–AuNPs colloid solution display effectively no nonlinear absorptions. The closed-aperture data indicate that the PPE–bipy–SS–AuNPs possess a strong nonlinear refractive response because of the interaction between the AuNPs and the highly conjugated system in PPE–bipy–SS.
 Fig. 19  Normalized transmission data of open-aperture Z scan without an aperture for (A) BPCP–AuNPs and (C) DCHD–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 87%; pure nonlinear refractive Z-scan data of (B) BPCP–AuNPs and (D) DCHD–AuNPs in toluene with a linear transmission of 87%; (E) normalized transmission data of the open-aperture Z-scan without an aperture for PPE–bipy–SS–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 51%; (F) pure nonlinear refractive Z-scan data of PPE–bipy–SS–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 51%. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 69), Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 70).] 

3.3 Magnetic properties
The synthesis and controlled assembly of monodisperse colloidal NCs into superlattice structures have attracted much attention because of the applications of such systems in magnetic storage.71 Single- and multicomponent superlattices raise the possibility of combining the properties of individual components with new properties that arise from the electronic and magnetic interactions between the constituents. Cheon and co-workers reported the unique ferromagnetic phase transformation behavior of superlattices based on Co and Fe3O4 NPs, prepared through nanoscale redox chemical reactions, leading to significant (25-fold) enhancement in ferrimagnetism.72 After thermal annealing, the Co and Fe3O4 binary superlattices transformed into core/shell–type Fe3O4@CoFe2O4 superlattices, which contributed to the huge enhancements in magnetism. The Co and Fe3O4 NPs are members of a class of soft magnets, but when such soft–soft magnet superlattices are transformed into the core/shell-type soft–hard Fe3O4@CoFe2O4 superlattices, it is possible to have strong magnetic coupling between a hard magnet CoFe2O4 shell and the soft Fe3O4 core generated through an exchange-coupled magnetic system with high magnetic coercivity.
3.4 
          Catalytic properties
Nanocatalysis, one of the most important fields of nanochemistry, is gaining increasing attention for its application to both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyses.73 Research on AuNPs modified with organic functional molecules for use as catalysts is a rapidly growing field because of the combination of the desirable physical and chemical properties of the encapsulated NPs with the tunable solubility, stimuli-response, and surface reactivity of the organic functional units. Recently, Chen and co-workers reported the preparation and characteristics of AuNPs capped with a thermo-responsive hyperbranched polyethylenimine featuring isobutyramide groups (HPEI–IBAm) for use as a recyclable responsive catalyst for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol mediated by NaBH4 (Fig. 20).74 There are two major advantages to using nanocatalysts modified with this responsive organic functional molecule. First, the nanocatalytic ability is enhanced after modification with the capping HPEI–IBAm polymer because its protonated amino groups decrease the net negative charge on the AuNP surface, enhancing the probability of collision of the AuNPs with the 4-nitrophenolate anions; the HPEI–IBAm units can also interact with the 4-nitrophenolate anions through electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding, making it more convenient for the 4-nitrophenolate anions to reach the surfaces of the AuNPs. Second, the combination of NP catalysts with thermo-responsive polymers can provide novel systems in which the exothermic reaction rate can be controlled and the thermo-related catalyst can be recovered.
 Fig. 20  Thermoresponsive AuNPs capped with hyperbranched polyethylenimine terminated with isobutyric amide groups. [Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (ref. 74).] 
3.5 Sensor
The presence of a large number of single (or several different) chemical units on the surfaces of NPs or nanostructured solids can lead to amplification of certain functional chemical processes. On the one hand, it can increase recognition ability, due to entropic factors associated with restriction of the movement of and the proximity of molecular entities on the surface; on the other, it usually provides amplified output signals, which arise from collective phenomena between the preorganized functional units. As a result, very rapid growth is occurring in the field of sensing based on the organic/inorganic hybrid materials.

3.5.1 Ion sensors. 
Metal NPs have been explored extensively in the field of ion sensing, with several kinds of detection methods based on various processes. The most popular method involves the use of metal NPs as colorimetric reporters because of their extremely high visible-region extinction coefficients. This method is based on variations in absorption that are related to the dispersion or aggregation status of the AuNPs. This mechanism has been used to detect a number of metal ions, including Pb2+ ions75 and Hg2+ ions.76 Unfortunately, AuNP-based metal ion sensors often suffer from poor selectivity and/or low water-solubility. A second sensing method is based on modulating the interactions of the chromophores and the AuNPs. In such systems, the photophysical properties of the chromophores are responsible for the detection signals. For example, Cu2+ ions can be detected through the AuNP-mediated modulation of the photoluminescent quenching efficiency of the chromophore N,N′-2,6-diisopropylphenyl-1,7-bis(4-hydroxypyridine) perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid bisimide (DPPCA).77 The pyridyl moieties of the fluorescent chromophore coordinate with AuNPs through weak N⋯Au interactions, leading to quenching of the fluorescence of the chromophore (Fig. 21). Upon addition of Cu2+ ions, the AuNPs are displaced from the chromophore because of the stronger coordination ability of the Cu2+ ions with the pyridyl moieties relative to that of the AuNPs. The fluorescence of the chromophore is, therefore, turned on when it binds to the Cu2+ ion. Selectivity experiments have revealed that DPPCA–AuNPs possess specific recognition ability for Cu2+ ions. In addition, naked-eye detection is also possible because the absorption maximum of the DPPCA–AuNPs changes in the presence of Cu2+ ions. A third sensing method takes advantage of the fluorescence signals of the AuNPs; this approach is less popular because the signals are too weak. Chang and co-workers created a series of water-soluble, alkanethiol–AuNPs having a tunable fluorescence wavelength through modification of the chain length of the alkanethiol.7811-Mercaptoundecanoic acid–AuNPs, which had a quantum yield comparable with those of the best currently available water-soluble alkanethiol-protected AuNPs, were explored for their ability to detect Hg2+ ions.79 Upon the addition of Hg2+ ions, aggregation-induced fluorescence quenching of the 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid–AuNPs occurred in aqueous solution, attributable to the interactions of the Hg2+ ions with the carboxylate groups present on the surfaces of the 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid–AuNPs.
 Fig. 21  Illustration of the Cu2+ sensor based on modulation of the photoluminescence quenching of the chromophore by AuNPs; TEM images of (a) monodispersed AuNPs, (b) DPPCA–AuNPs, (c) fluorescence titration of DPPCA–AuNPs by adding varying amounts of Cu2+ ions and fluorescence intensity of DPPCA–AuNPs versusCu2+ concentration; (d) DPPCA–AuNPs with the addition of Cu2+ ions. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 77).] 


3.5.2 Organic molecular and biomolecular sensors. 
The pockets generated in heterostructure materials can be explored to recognize various molecules as a result of entropic factors associated with the restricted movement and proximity of the molecular entities on the surface. One example is that of the detection of perylene without a functional recognition group, based on the molecular pockets (ZPDI) generated after the assembly of ZnO nanorods (NRs) and perylene diimide derivatives (PDI).80Fig. 22 reveals that supramolecular interactions between perylene and the ZPDI resulted in almost complete quenching of the emission of ZPDI at 544 nm. The competition experiments using ZPDI and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons indicated that ZPDI had unique selectivity for perylene, with a detection limit for perylene as low as 10−12 M. In addition to the pockets generated in heterostructure materials, systems based on AuNPs are also widely used in biological sensors. The most popular systems employ AuNPs as ideal color reporters that allow, for example, the detection of carbohydrates81 in biological systems and the environment. DNA-modified AuNPs have been used to detect enzyme activities82 and other DNA molecules.83Li and co-workers reported a strategy for detecting the activity of the DNase I, based on the assembly of well-dispersed AuNPs into aggregates, accompanied by a color change from red to purple.82 Another method is based on modulation of the interactions between a chromophore and the AuNPs. We have monitored the reduction of oxidized glutathione in the presence of the enzyme glutathione reductase, based on the AuNP-mediated modulation of the photoluminescence quenching efficiency of the perylene bisimide chromophore.84
 Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the ZPDI sensor for perylene (model of PDI and ZnO nanorods, O—red, Zn—gray, S—yellow, N—blue, H—white); (b)the emission spectra of ZnO NRs, ZPDI and ZPDI added perylene, anthracene, pyrene, and PAHs, respectively, λex = 325 nm. Images of confocal microscopy of (c) ZPDI, (d) ZPDI added 10−6 M perylene (λex = 470 nm). [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 80).] 
One-dimensional heterostructures, such as Si nanowire-based FETs, can be used for the label-free, direct, real-time electrical detection of various species, including DNA,85 viruses,86 and other biological macromolecules.87 The conductance of a nanowire changes in response to the binding of a chemical or biological species on its surface; that is, molecular or macromolecular species “gate” the FET and, thereby, change the conductance.88 Lieber and co-workers developed amine- and oxide-functionalized SiNWs89 exhibiting pH-dependent conductance that was linear over a large dynamic range; this behavior could be understood in terms of the change in surface charge during protonation and deprotonation. Biotin-modified SiNWs have been used to detect streptavidin at concentrations down to at least picomolar levels. In addition, antigen-functionalized SiNWs have exhibited reversible antibody binding and concentration-dependent detection in real time. Finally, detection of the reversible binding of the metabolic indicator Ca2+ has also been demonstrated. The small size and capability of these semiconductor nanowires for the sensitive, label-free, real-time detection of a wide range of chemical and biological species has the potential to be exploited in array-based screening and in vivo diagnostics.


3.5.3 Release of drugs. 
Organic/inorganic hybrid materials are promising candidates for use in drug release because they combine the physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic components. In such systems, the organic parts can behave as responsive components that are controllable using external stimuli. AuNPs have performed two different functions in the field of drug release. First, they have acted as capping blocks. Lin and co-workers fabricated AuNP-capped mesoporous silica nanospheres (MSNs) for the photoinduced intracellular controlled release of an anticancer drug (paclitaxel) within human fibroblast and liver cells.90 As indicated in Fig. 23, a model drug (fluorescein) was loaded in the PR–AuNPs–MSN system; the AuNPs were modified with a photo-responsive linker (thioundecyltetraethylene glycol ester-o-nitrobenzylethyldimethyl ammonium bromide, TUNA). The capping mechanism of this PR–AuNP–MSN system was based on electrostatic interactions between the positively charged PR–AuNPs and the negatively charged MSNs. Upon irradiation with UV light, the photoresponsive linker covalently attached to the surface of PR–AuNPs was cleaved, resulting in the formation of a cationic compound and negatively charged thioundecyltetraethylene glycol carboxylate (TUEC)-functionalized AuNPs (NC-AuNPs). Charge repulsion between the NC-AuNPs and MSNs led to uncapping of the mesopores, allowing the release of guest molecules. Lin and co-workers demonstrated that this photocontrollable system could indeed transport and release paclitaxel within live human cells. The second function of AuNPs, operating as a switch for controlling drug release, was based on their optical and photothermal properties. Shen and co-workers reported a thermo-sensitive liposome with embedded AuNPs in a bilayer, prepared using supercritical CO2.91Berberine, used as a model drug, was encapsulated in the central aqueous compartment of the AuNP–liposome structure. Upon irradiation with UV (λ = 250 nm) and visible light, the berberine was released at room temperature (Fig. 24A and B). The berberine encapsulated in the liposome was not, however, released in the absence of the AuNPs (Fig. 24C). Thus, the AuNPs acted as switches for drug release: they readily absorbed light, converted the optical energy into localized heat, induced a phase transition in the bilayer of the liposome, and released the drug.
 Fig. 23  Illustration of the Photoinduced Intracellular Controlled Release of PR–AuNPs–MSNa. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 90).] 
 Fig. 24  (A) Sketch map for AuNPs–liposome with selective photothermic effects induced drug release. (B) Berberine released from the AuNPs–liposome by irradiation with UV light (250 nm) and visible light at room temperature, respectively; (C) berberine released from the AuNPs–liposome with various AuNP concentrations by irradiation with UV light (250 nm). [Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (ref. 91).] 

4. Conclusions and perspectives
This review discusses recent advances in the synthesis, properties, and applications of 0- and 1-D nanoscale heterostructure materials. Many types of interactions—including coordination of molecules, π–π interactions, hydrogen bonding interactions, electrostatic interactions, covalent bonding, and hydrophobic interactions—have been used in conjunction with various synthetic methods—including vapor-phase methods, solution-phase methods, template-directed synthesis, lithography, and self-assembly—to prepare these heterostructures. The nanoscale heterostructure materials mentioned herein are based on combinations of organic and inorganic semiconductors, organic π-conjugated molecules, polymers, ion-coordinating supramolecules, metal–organic charge-transfer complexes, biomolecules, and NPs. Each of these different components possesses unique physical and chemical properties that impart their resulting heterostructure materials with optical and electrical properties distinct from those of their individual components. These properties supply the opportunity for realizing synergistic (“1 + 1 > 2”) performance or the ability to conduct several tasks simultaneously. Several applications of heterostructure materials have been developed in a wide range of areas, including electronics, optics, biology, and catalysis. Achievements have been made in the construction of various devices: diodes, FE systems, solar cells, transistors, ion and organic molecular or biomolecular sensors, and modulators of fluorescence and non-linear optical properties.
These nanoscale heterostructure materials have several advantageous features—particularly high tailorability in terms of composition, structure, morphology, dimensions, and properties—that make it possible for them to be rationally designed for specific applications. Three major challenges exist when attempting to broaden the types of building blocks that can be used to construct heterostructure materials. (i) Finding methods to organize the organic and inorganic components. The interactions between each unit can influence the performance of the resulting nanodevice. Methods must be developed to position the individual addressable components in the context of existing architectures. Controlling the growth of organic/inorganic segmented nanostructures through the use of modified template techniques, polymerizations, special reactions, and electrochemical technologies will all be important new strategies; for example, exploring hard templates for the generation of nanostructures with chemically active domains for the binding or coupling of other functional components (e.g., organics, inorganics, metals). (ii) Fabrication pathways leading to stable heterostructure materials should be optimized. The integration of individual functional elements into useful architectures varies significantly depending on the morphologies and synthetic methods. The interfaces of the heterostructure materials must also be strong and stable for their application and storage. (iii) Future device applications of heterostructure materials will require not only improve geometric structures, size distribution, and shape uniformity but also large-area alignment, because the properties of nanomaterials are dependent not only on their sizes and shapes but also on their arrangement over macroscopic areas. Selectively growing large-area-aligned and ordered inorganic semiconductors on the substrates as second templates to direct the assembly of organic semiconductors through in situ reactions, polymerizations, and other weak interactions might open up new opportunities for the fabrication of large-scale heterojunction structures. Despite current limitations regarding both element optimization and morphological control, such heterostructure materials are definitely promising materials for future devices exhibiting improved performance.
Acknowledgements
Our contributions to the results reported herein were supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (grants 21031006, 20831160507, 10874187, and 20873155) and the National Basic Research 973 Program of China.
Notes and references
K. Liu, K. Nagodawithana, P. C. Searson and C. L. Chien, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 51, 7381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bognitzki, H. Hou, M. Ishaque, T. Frese, M. Hellwig, C. Schwarte, A. Schaper, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 637 CrossRef .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mieszawska, R. Jalilian, G. U. Sumanasekera and F. P. Zamborini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10822 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Lv, C. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Cui, L. Jiang, H. Liu and S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Liu, Y. Li, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Song and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12669 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 93 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Che, C.-H. Li, S. S.-Y. Chui, V. A. L. Roy and K.-H. Low, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2965 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hayden, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 352 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nicewarner-Pena, R. G. Freeman, B. D. Reiss, L. He, D. J. Pena, I. D. Walton, R. Cromer, C. D. Keating and M. J. Natan, Science, 2001, 294, 137 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. McAlpine, R. S. Friedman and C. M. Lieber, Proc. IEEE, 2005, 93, 1357 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, D. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 420, 57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Ichihashi, E. Landree, F. Nihey and S. Iijima, Science, 1999, 285, 1719 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Xue, G. T. Fei, B. Wu, P. Cui and L. D. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15348 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, G. Wang, B. Xu, J. Jie, X. Han, G. Li, Q. Li and J. G. Hou, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 1378 Search PubMed .
R. Ostermann, D. Li, Y. Yin, J. T. McCann and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1297 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mieszawska, R. Jalilian, G. U. Sumanasekera and F. P. Zamborini, Small, 2007, 3, 722 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hurst, E. K. Payne, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2672 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. H. Lim, S. W. Chung and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2004, 303, 348 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. W. Chung and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11772 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lahav, E. A. Weiss, Q. Xu and G. M. Whitesides, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2166 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, G. Li, Y. Zhao and H. Lin, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 98 Search PubMed .
H. Cao, C. Tie, Z. Xu, J. Hong and H. Sang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1592 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, Q. Liao, H. Fu and J. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1742 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Qian, Y. Guo, S. Cui, L. Sun, Y. Song, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 237 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cui, Y. Li, Y. Guo, H. Liu, Y. Song, J. Xu, J. Lv, M. Zhu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 309 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lim and C.-J. Zhong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Shon, C. Mazzitelli and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7735 CrossRef CAS .
I.-I. S. Lim, C. Vaiana, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-J. Zhang, D.-L. An and C.-J. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5368 CrossRef .
T. B. Norsten, B. L. Frankamp and V. M. Rotello, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1345 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. He, T. Jiu, M. Yuan, J. Xu, J. Lv, H. Liu and Y. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 906 CrossRef CAS .
J. v. Herrikhuyzen, S. J. George, M. R. J. Vos, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, A. Ajayaghosh, S. C. J. Meskers and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1825 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, M. Yamada and M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14271 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fischler, A. Sologubenko, J. Mayer, G. Clever, G. Burley, J. Gierlich, T. Carell and U. Simon, Chem. Commun., 2008, 169 RSC .
C. J. Thode and M. E. Williams, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5988 Search PubMed .
E. R. Zubarev, J. Xu, A. Sayyad and J. D. Gibson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4958 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Gibson, B. P. Khanal and E. R. Zubarev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11653 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Liu, W. Zhou, H. Zheng, X. Yin, Y. Li, Y. Guo, M. Zhu, C. Ouyang, D. Zhu and A. Xia, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Zhu, S. Chen, M. Yuan, Y. Guo, Y. Song, H. Liu and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Liu, C. Huang, C. Zhou, Y. Li and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 659 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ofir, B. Samanta and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1814 RSC .
B. L. Frankamp, O. Uzun, F. Ilhan, A. K. Boal and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 892 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, N. L. Rosi, Y. Wang, F. Huo and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Alvarez, W. Ong and A. E. Kaifer, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 57 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rabani, D. R. Reichman, P. L. Geissler and L. E. Brus, Nature, 2003, 426, 271 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Sztrum, O. Hod and E. Rabani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6741 CrossRef .
A. Y. Sinyagin, A. Belov, Z. Tang and N. A. Kotov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7735 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Lin and S. Lin, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5582 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, C. Tong and Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 123 Search PubMed .
M. Luo, O. A. Mazyar, Q. Zhu, M. W. Vaughn, W. L. Hase and L. L. Dai, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6385 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ghorai and S. C. Glotzer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15857 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8741 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3620 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dong, J. Chen, P. M. Vora, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2010, 466, 474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, S.-W. Lai, Y. Li, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, C.-M. Che and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 327 Search PubMed .
H.-J. Chung, H. H. Jung, Y.-S. Cho, S. Lee, J.-H. Ha, J. H. Choi and Y. Kuk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 213113 Search PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 115 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Liu, M. Yuan, J. Li, Y. Guo, J. Xu, M. Zhu, J. Lv, H. Liu and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6754 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, Y. Zhao, G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Li, D. Zhu and S. Wang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, L. Jiang, C. Li, X. Liu, M. Yuan, J. Xu, W. Zhou, Y. Song, H. Liu, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8297 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, L. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Song, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2058 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheon, J.-I. Park, J.-s. Choi, Y.-w. Jun, S. Kim, M. G. Kim, Y.-M. Kim and Y. J. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3023 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bartz, J. Küther, R. Seshadri and W. Tremel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2466 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Liu, F. Cheng, Y. Liu, H.-J. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 360 RSC .
Y. Kim, R. C. Johnson and J. T. Hupp, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 165 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Huanga and H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1215 RSC .
X. He, H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Wang, Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Xu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2811 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Huang, Z. Yang, K.-H. Lee and H.-T. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6824 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, T. Huang, R. W. Murray, L. Menard and R. G. Nuzzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Zuo, Y. Guo, Y. Li and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2705 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, H. Zhao, Y. Lin, N. Zhu, Y. Ma and L. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4800 CAS .
W. Zhao, J. C. F. Lam, W. Chiuman, M. A. Brook and Y. Li, Small, 2008, 4, 810 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, P. Cao, Y. Tian and J. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4161 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Z. Zhong, Y. Guo, J. Lv, J. Xu, M. Zhu, Y. Li, H. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Zhu and D. Zhu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8815 CrossRef CAS .
J.-i. Hahm and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 51 CrossRef CAS .
F. Patolsky, G. F. Zheng, O. Hayden, M. Lakadamyali, X. W. Zhuang and C. M. Lieber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 14017 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, L. Wu and J. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2121 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Teo and X. H. Sun, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q. Wei, H. Park and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1289 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, I. I. Slowing, C.-W. Wu and V. S.-Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3462 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, F. Zhang, Y. Zhu and W. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7202 RSC .

Footnote† Dedicated to Professor Daoben Zhu, on the occasion of his 70th birthday (2011).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Haiyan Zheng
	Haiyan Zheng was born in 1982 in Hebei, China. She is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a Master–Doctor combined program graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. Her research interest focuses on using “small-scale” molecular concepts in order to “synthesize-up” nanostructures.

Yongjun 
Li
	Yongjun Li was born in 1975 in Sichuan, China. He received his Master degree in Chemistry from Sichuan University in 2001, and he earned his PhD in organic chemistry in 2006 at ICCAS. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, ICCAS, working on the design and synthesis of functional organic molecules.

Huibiao Liu
	Huibiao Liu was born in 1970 in Jiangxi, China. He received his PhD degree in 2001 at the Nanjing University. He is currently an associate professor in Prof. Yuliang Li's group, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, working on inorganic/organic hybrid nanomaterials.

Xiaodong Yin
	Xiaodong Yin was born in 1983 in Jilin, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research interest focuses on design and synthesis of organic multi-responding materials.

Yuliang 
Li
	Yuliang Li (Qingdao, China, 1949) is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and noncovalent supramolecular self-assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photo-, electro-active organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of segmented heterojunction nanowires. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 23).]	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Segmented polymer–metal nanocomposites; (B) SEM image of Au–PANI segmented nanostructures that resulted from (A) after dissolution of the membrane; (C) and (D) show SEM images of the sample which is not modified with a SAM of thioaniline on the top surface of the gold nanorods before the deposition of PANI. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 22).]	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Typical TEM image of a single CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (B) interface of a CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (C) HRTEM image of the interface of a CdS–PPy heterojunction nanowire; (D) large area of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (E) top view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (F) side view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 5 and 7).]	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Procedure for the preparation of the segmented polymer–metal nanostructures within the pores of a Cu-backed AAO membrane; SEM images of PANI fiber only (B); PANI–Au core–shell structures where the Au was deposited for 1 h (C), 1.5 h (D), and 2.5 h (E). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 22).]	 

 	Fig. 5  Left: (a) molecular structure of OPV3. (b) TEM image of CdS nanocrystals. (c) Schematic illustration of the template synthesis of CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods; right: (A) SEM images of large area of CdS–OPV3 nanorods; (B) TEM image of a typical CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod; (C) HRTEM image of the CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod; (D) HRTEM image of a CdS–OPV3 interface. CLSM images (λex = 405 nm) of a single CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod collected (E) from 366 to 929 nm; (F) from 470 to 490 nm; (G) from 557 nm to 651 nm. (H) The CLSM fluorescence spectrum of OPV3 nanorods, CdS nanorods and CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 6).]	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Molecular structures of DP and DCM and the formation mechanism of triblock microrods. (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of triblock microrods; fluorescence microscopy images of same microrods excited with unfocused (D) UV (330–380 nm) and (E) blue light (460–490 nm), respectively. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 25).]	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Metal induced aggregation with MMPC5 + Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2; (b) TEM micrograph showing no aggregation with MPC2 + Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2; (c) metal induced aggregation with MMPC5 + Ag(CH3CN)4BF4, and (d) disaggregation of Ag aggregates upon addition of excess terpyridine; (e) changes in the UV-vis spectrum of a CHCl3 solution of MMPC5 as 2.5 μL aliquots of a (1:3) MeOH/CHCl3 solution of Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2 are added. Inset: 2.5 μL additions of the same Fe(H2O)6(BF4)2 solution to a CHCl3 solution of terpyridine thioacetate. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 34).]	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Three strategies to construct 1D arrangement of NPs; (b) the possible arrangement of AuTP depends on factors investigated; π–π interaction, space around TPs on Au, and solvent hydrophilicity; TEM images of AuTP12-2.8, RMT = (c) 1/1 (disorder), (d) 2/1 (hcp; interparticle separation is 4.0 nm), (e) 3/1(stripelike). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 37)].	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration for the Diels–Alder reaction leading to ordered AuNPs self-assemblies. TEM images obtained at different times of D–A reaction between M3 and F–Au: (A) 15 min, (B) 12 h, (C) magnification of (B), (D) treated at 110 °C after five heating cycles. (E) UV-vis absorption of M3–Au in toluene. Inset: time dependent PL enhancement on M3–Au; (F) PL spectra of M3 (black curve), M3–Au (red curve), and M3–Au after being treated at 110 °C for 2 h (blue curve). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 42).]	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diblock copolymers 1–3 with different block lengths (block A/B (Mw): 14k/14k for 1, 26k/24k for 2, 30k/28k for 3), Thy–Au, and non-hydrogen bonding control MeThy–Au. (b) Schematic demonstrating an increase in both core diameter and outer corona as the polymer size increases. (c) MeThy–Au control with polymer 2 showing complete lack of aggregation. Spherical micellar structures formed by assembly of Thy–Au by polymers 1 (d), 2 (e), and 3 (f). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 46).]	 

 	Fig. 11  Directional assembly of asymmetrically functionalized AuNPs into (A and B) cat paw, (C and D) satellite, and (E and F) dendrimer-like structures. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 48).]	 

 	Fig. 12  A scheme of the low-pressure chamber used for growing ordered binary assemblies. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 59).]	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Typical I–V curves of a CdS nanowire and CdS–PPy nanowire in the dark at room temperature. Typical I–V curves for a single CdS–PPy nanowire (B), CdS nanowire (C), PPy nanowire (D) under light illumination with different intensities at room temperature. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 5).]	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) I–V measurement for the gold blocks (1–2, 3–4) within a single nanorod at room temperature. (B) Temperature-dependent I–V curves for measurements across electrodes 2 and 3. The upper left inset is a plot of logσ(T)vs. 1/T; images of EDS mapping for (C) Au and (D) Cd domains in a single Au–PPy–Cd–Au rod. (E) SEM image of the rod. (F) Graph of the X-ray profile for Cd and Au domains over the dashed trace shown in the image represented in (C). (G) I–V characteristics for a single Au–PPy–Cd–Au rod at room temperature. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 21).]	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the aligned PTh–PPy-nanowire-array devices; (B) photo of a typical PTh–PPy-nanowire-array; (C) I–V curve for the PTh–PPy nanowire array in the oxidized state; (D) I–V curve for the PTh–PPy nanowire array after being reduced. Reversible conductivity switches of PTh–PPy nanowires between the oxidation state and reduction state under (E) forward bias and (F) reverse bias. (G) and (H) conductivity of the oxidized PTh–PPy nanowires on the forward and reverse bias, respectively. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 23).]	 

 	Fig. 16  
              FE properties of CdS nanorods, PTh nanorods, PTh–CdS segmented nanorods and PTh–CdS core–shell nanorods: (A) J–E plot and (B) F–N plot. (C) SEM image of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod; (D) TEM of a single PTh–CdS segmented nanorod; (E) top view of a PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod array; (F) TEM image of a typical PTh–CdS core–shell nanorod. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 7).]	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Energy level diagram of a CdS–PPy nanowire. (B) UV-vis absorption spectra of CdS–PPy p–n junction nanowires, CdS nanowire, and PPy nanowire. (C) Dark/light current density versus applied voltage bias (J–V) data of typical single CdS–PPy nanowire solar cells with device lengths of 7.428 (a), 6.922 (b), and 6.597 μm (c). Dark/light J–V data of a CdS nanowire device (D), PPy nanowire device (E). [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 63).]	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Molecular structure of 4SP, 4SCP, and 8SP. The general model for ligand–AuNPs composites (B) and the local magnification of connection ways in the cases of 4SP–AuNPs (C), 4SCP–AuNPs (D), and 8SP–AuNPs (E). Fluorescence spectra of (F) 4SP, (G) 4SCP, and (H) 8SP before and after the addition of AuNPs (keeping for 12 h); (I) UV-vis absorption spectra of AuNPs in toluene solution with the titration of 8SP. Inset: TEM image of 8SP–AuNPs in toluene suspension. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 68).]	 

 	Fig. 19  Normalized transmission data of open-aperture Z scan without an aperture for (A) BPCP–AuNPs and (C) DCHD–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 87%; pure nonlinear refractive Z-scan data of (B) BPCP–AuNPs and (D) DCHD–AuNPs in toluene with a linear transmission of 87%; (E) normalized transmission data of the open-aperture Z-scan without an aperture for PPE–bipy–SS–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 51%; (F) pure nonlinear refractive Z-scan data of PPE–bipy–SS–AuNPs in toluene with linear transmission of 51%. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 69), Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 70).]	 

 	Fig. 20  Thermoresponsive AuNPs capped with hyperbranched polyethylenimine terminated with isobutyric amide groups. [Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (ref. 74).]	 

 	Fig. 21  Illustration of the Cu2+ sensor based on modulation of the photoluminescence quenching of the chromophore by AuNPs; TEM images of (a) monodispersed AuNPs, (b) DPPCA–AuNPs, (c) fluorescence titration of DPPCA–AuNPs by adding varying amounts of Cu2+ ions and fluorescence intensity of DPPCA–AuNPs versusCu2+ concentration; (d) DPPCA–AuNPs with the addition of Cu2+ ions. [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 77).]	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the ZPDI sensor for perylene (model of PDI and ZnO nanorods, O—red, Zn—gray, S—yellow, N—blue, H—white); (b)the emission spectra of ZnO NRs, ZPDI and ZPDI added perylene, anthracene, pyrene, and PAHs, respectively, λex = 325 nm. Images of confocal microscopy of (c) ZPDI, (d) ZPDI added 10−6 M perylene (λex = 470 nm). [Reproduced with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (ref. 80).]	 

 	Fig. 23  Illustration of the Photoinduced Intracellular Controlled Release of PR–AuNPs–MSNa. [Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 90).]	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Sketch map for AuNPs–liposome with selective photothermic effects induced drug release. (B) Berberine released from the AuNPs–liposome by irradiation with UV light (250 nm) and visible light at room temperature, respectively; (C) berberine released from the AuNPs–liposome with various AuNP concentrations by irradiation with UV light (250 nm). [Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry (ref. 91).]	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Professor Daoben Zhu, on the occasion of his 70th birthday (2011).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
