Biomass-derived tubular carbon materials: progress in synthesis and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02412D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02412D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13822-13850Biomass-derived tubular carbon materials: progress in synthesis and applications

        
          
            Jiaming 
            Sun
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhenwei 
            Wu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chunhui 
            Ma
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mingcong 
            Xu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sha 
            Luo
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Shouxin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Bio-based Material Science and Technology of the Ministry of Education, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China. E-mail: liwei19820927@126.com; liushouxin@126.com; sjmnlxx@126.com; wzwww0413@163.com; mchmchmchmch@163.com; m18846145637@163.com; luo.sha.85@163.com
bEngineering Research Center of Advanced Wooden Materials of the Ministry of Education, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China
Received 
      23rd March 2021
    , Accepted 23rd May 2021First published on 2nd June 2021AbstractTubular structures are unique naturally occurring morphologies that are the result of trillions of years of evolution. These structures can provide low density and minimal thermal conductivity, all of which are important advantages in harsh natural environments, and can also promote the transport of water and nutrients. In view of the intrinsic advantages of biomass-derived carbon materials, including their sustainability, porous structures, high conductivity, hydrophobicity, ready modification and chemical stability, such materials with tubular structures may show even better performance. Inspired by these unique properties, various studies of biomass-derived tubular carbon materials (BTCMs) have fabricated specimens showing exceptional performance. In this review, we provide a timely overview of the advantages of tubular structures and also discuss strategies for preparing BTCMs by various routes, including efficient top-down direct carbonization from tubular fibers or wood and more controllable bottom-up assembly from building blocks such as cellulose, lignin, and chitosan. The hard-template synthesis, freeze casting and electrostatic spinning methods are all examined. Potential applications of BTCMs are also discussed, including those in environmental remediation, energy storage and conversion, and the production of lightweight compressible materials and thermal insulating materials. Finally, the current challenges within the field of BTCMs are highlighted, and the future prospects for the fabrication of truly high-performance functional carbon materials from biomass are summarized.Jiaming SunJiaming Sun received her B.S. degree in chemical processing of forest product from Northeast Forestry University in 2017. She is now a PhD student in the research group of Prof. Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. Her current research interests focus on the functional development of cellulose-derived aerogels.Zhenwei WuZhenwei Wu is currently a third-year PhD student under the supervision of Professor Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. He received his B.E. degree in Forest Product Chemicals from Northeast Forestry University at 2018. His current research focuses on liquefied wood based ordered mesoporous carbon materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.Chunhui MaChunhui Ma received her PhD degree in 2013 from the Northeast Forestry University working on extraction of active components from forest source under the supervision of Prof. Yuangang Zu. She now works at the Northeast Forestry University as an associate professor. Her main research interests are the application of ionic liquid-supported catalysts and structural modification functional materials of natural products.Mingcong XuMingcong Xu received his master degree in Forestry Engineering from Northeast Forestry University in 2018. He is now a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. His current research focuses on cellulose nanocrystal based chiral liquid crystal photonic materials.Sha LuoSha Luo received his PhD degree on chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2014. He now works at the Northeast Forestry University, and his main research interests are the catalytic conversion of biomass materials.Wei LiWei Li received his PhD degree in 2012 from the Northeast Forestry University working on cellulose nanocrystals materials under the supervision of Prof. Shouxin Liu. He now works at the Northeast Forestry University as an associate professor. His main research interests are cellulose nanocrystals and cellulose-based carbon materials.Shouxin LiuShouxin Liu is a professor of the Key laboratory of Bio-based Material Science and Technology of Ministry of Education at Northeast Forestry University, China. He received his PhD degree on chemical process and engineering of forest products from Prof. Shirun Zhang in 2002. He was granted Yangtse River Scholar due to his excellent achievements in the area of carbon materials research in 2015. His main research interests are focused on biomass-derived carbon materials. Till date, he has published over 180 peer-reviewed research articles, and received a number of competitive career awards in China.
1. Introduction
Carbon-based materials have been utilized extensively for millennia because of their unique properties, including developed porosity, uniform microstructure, superior chemical stability and significant insulating or conducting properties.1 The application of these materials has been expanded from dehumidification2,3 to adsorption,4–6 and also to catalyst carriers,7–9 energy storage substances,10–12 super-thermal insulators13–15 and solar steam generators.16–18 In addition, new uses are constantly being evaluated. In particular, carbon materials having special structures can exhibit useful properties.19,20 As an example, nanocarbons with many exceptional characteristics can be formed by varying the arrangement of carbon atoms.21,22 Fullerenes, which are considered to be a zero-dimensional form of nanocarbon, show photosensitizing and electron-acceptor properties, and have been suggested for applications in medicinal chemistry, photovoltaics and biological systems.23,24 Presently, both carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, which offer superior mechanical properties, conductivities and ultrahigh electron mobilities, are the subjects of much research.25–28
There are currently numerous issues related to the combustion of fossil fuels and associated waste generation, and there is much interest in the subject of sustainable industrial growth. Consequently, biomass, which is an environmentally friendly, renewable resource, has been suggested as a raw material for the production of specific carbon-based substances. Biomass is readily sourced, inexpensive and easily modified, and so replacing nonrenewable petroleum-based materials with biomass in a wide range of applications could effectively alleviate resource shortages and environmental pollution. These factors, together with the high carbon content of biomass, make it an attractive raw material for the preparation of advanced functional carbon materials.
Many natural systems have remarkable functionality as a result of the formation of unique structures on the microscale.29 Tubular morphologies in particular are ubiquitous in biomass, and are found in wood, catkin, polar bear hair and cancellous bone.30–34 As example, the anisotropic tubular channels in wood or vascular bundles provide plants with efficient mass transport and load-bearing functions,35,36 while hollow bird skeletons and tubular willow catkin fibers provide lightweight yet strong structures, which realizes farther flying ability and spread for fertility,37,38 and hollow polar bear and mink hairs give insulation in extremely cold environments.39,40 Inspired by the distinctive advantages of natural tubular materials, much effort has been devoted to creating functional tubular carbon materials. These have been widely investigated with regard to applications as extremely elastic and ultra-lightweight materials, as well as in environmental remediation, energy storage and conversion and thermal insulation.41–44
In this report, we discuss recent progress in the research and development of BTCMs. One kind of BTCMs originate from tubular raw materials, and the other (bio-mimicry type BTCMs) is often prepared by bottom-up fabrication process. A graphical overview of the merits, fabrication procedures and potential applications of BTCMs is shown in Fig. 1. It should be noted that the tubular-structured materials examined in this article can be defined as macroscopic monoliths containing numerous continuous microscopic voids filled with gases, in which the spatial distributions of the immiscible gaseous and solid phases are controlled to provide new properties. We first discuss the intrinsic advantages of making carbon materials into tubular structures, together with the resulting properties. The preparation strategies and formation mechanisms of various tubular structures are then introduced. Next, we examine the various applications of these materials, with a focus on the relationship between the tubular structures and various properties. Finally, the challenges and future perspectives of BTCMs are discussed.
 Fig. 1  Characteristics, fabrication processes and applications of BTCMs. (a) A photograph showing the sorption of chloroform with a twisted carbon fiber (TCF) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) The adsorption of heavy metal ions using cotton derived porous carbon oxide (CDPCO). Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c)The desalination capacity of cotton-derived carbon sponge (CCS) at different equilibrium concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) The water extraction capabilities of bilayer wood in conjunction with groundwater (from sand or soil) and seawater. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (e) The flame retardancy of an ultralight, compressible and multifunctional (UCM) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) A thermographic image of a cylindrical carbon tube aerogel (CTA) sample on a hot plate. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Schematic (left) and thermographic (right) images of a cellulose nanofibers/graphene oxide/boric acid/sepiolite (CNF–GO–BA–SEP) nanocomposite foam in which the tubular pores are oriented normal to the heat source. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (h) The strain-controlled on–off of an LED lamp using a pressure-sensitive and conductive (PSC) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) The response and relaxation of a pressure sensor upon loading and unloading of a pea with a pressure of 10 Pa. (j) Measurement of a human neck pulse at 72 beats per min. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (k) Optical images of a red LED bulb brightly powered by two symmetrical supercapacitors in series after 5 min. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (l) New bundled carbon tubes taken from a loofah sponge used as the backbone for MoS2–N doped carbon composites with enhanced lithium/sodium storage properties. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (m) Infrared thermal images obtained from carbonized wood (CW), carbonized wood-based phase change energy storage material (TDCW) and pure wood (PW) samples at temperatures from 14 to 100 °C. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
2. Why a tubular structure for carbon materials?
2.1 Advantages of the natural tubular structure of biomass

2.1.1 Thermal insulation. 
Nature is a gifted designer that can endow flora and fauna with structures that are well-suited to their environments. The multifunctional properties of natural materials have been studied for many years, from which we can draw inspiration.57,58 As an example, the transverse and longitudinal cross-sections of a polar bear hair and a penguin feather are shown in Fig. 2a and b.59 The hollow core in this structure effectively reduces thermal conductivity, while the aligned struts of the hairs provide mechanical support that avoids the poor strength commonly associated with tubular materials.60–62 This unique tubular structure thus provides superior thermal insulation and the ability to adapt to a cold climate.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the transverse and longitudinal cross-sections of (a) a polar bear hair and (b) a penguin hair. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Micro computerized tomography scans of the wing bones of the wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans). Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Copyright 2017, Elsevier. SEM images of (d) kapok fibers. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Calotropis gigantea fibers. Reproduced from ref. 66 and 67 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Catkin fibers. Reproduced from ref. 68 and 69 with permission from Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The pappi of S. oleraceus L. reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Loofah sponge. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (i) Enteromorpha prolifera. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (j) Milkweed. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (k) A cross-section of natural basswood (the inset shows a side view). Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


2.1.2 Lightweight. 
In addition to heat preservation, a hollow tube provides an extremely lightweight structure that can assist the flight of birds and the migration of plant seeds. In fact, many birds have hollow tubular pneumatic bones (Fig. 2c) that reduce their mass and increase skeletal buoyancy while also improving resistance to bending in response to wind stress.63–65 This tubular morphology is also widespread in the plant kingdom, and SEM images of kapok fibers,11Calotropis gigantea fibers,66,67 catkin fibers68,69 and the pappi of S. oleraceus L.70 are presented in Fig. 2f–i, respectively. These fibers all contain tubular cavities that decrease density and thereby facilitate propagation.


2.1.3 Transportation. 
Tubular structures can also be used to provide rapid pathways for the transport of nutrients in plants. Loofah, which is often used as a scrubbing tool, is actually a type of vascular bundle (Fig. 2j).71 In nature, its main function is to support plants and transport water, inorganic salts and organic nutrients. Besides, wood is a common example of a tubular structure that contains numerous aligned vertical channels (Fig. 2m) responsible for the transportation of water, ions and nutrients. Together, these specimens demonstrate the numerous possible functions of tubular structures, and provide a source of inspiration for the design of advanced functional materials.

2.2 Merits of biomass-derived tubular carbon materials
Given that tubular structures provide superior physical properties, BTCMs are expected to exhibit exciting features that are different from those of conventional solid bulk materials. These may include better heat insulation performance, higher strength-to-weight ratios and enhanced transportation capacities. In view of the intrinsic advantages of carbon materials, including their porous structures, high conductivity, hydrophobicity, ready modification and chemical stability, such materials with tubular structures may show even better performance, thus expanding the application range of carbon materials.

2.2.1 Fire retardancy with improved heat insulation. 
Carbon materials can be used as flame retardants because of their high thermal stability.75 Meanwhile, the factors associated with the thermal conductivity through thermal-insulated materials comprise convection, radiation and conduction. Grashof number (Gr) can be used to evaluate the influence of convection as follows:76  where g is the gravitational acceleration constant (9.81 m s−2), ΔT represents the temperature difference across individual voids, d is the diameter of the voids, α is the volume expansion coefficient of the gas, and ρg and η are the density and dynamic viscosity of the gas, respectively. Only when Gr ≥ 1000, that is, the void diameter of BTCMs is larger than 10 mm, convection should be considered.77 Therefore, gas convection in typical BTCMs with diameter of several micrometers or less is suppressed completely, making essentially no contribution to thermal conductivity.76 Typically, an BTCM for thermal insulation is optically thick compared to the mean free path of infrared photons,76,78 making the radiative heat transport a local phenomenon mainly influenced by the scattering and absorption in the BTCMs. In this case, the thermal radiative conductivity can be calculated by:79  where σ represents the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, ni is the mean index of refraction of the specimen, e(T) is the specific Rossland mean extinction coefficient (m2 kg−1), and ρ is the apparent density. Carbon material as a strong infrared opacifiers has high e(T), which can effectively decrease the thermal radiation.80 In summary, BTCMs can reduce thermal conductivity effectively by suppressing thermal convection and radiation. Consequently, the flame retardant properties of BTCMs can be maintained while improving the thermal insulation performance.


2.2.2 Elasticity-based multifunctional materials. 
One of the most important characteristics of tubular materials is low density, which can greatly extend the physical property ranges of bulk carbon materials.81 The large hollow voids in BTCMs allow the formation of continuous three-dimensional (3D) networks that significantly reduce the density of the carbon, and BTCMs with low density have been successfully fabricated in recent years.82,83 These materials exhibit many intriguing features, including elasticity, and highly efficient structures. The large cavities associated with their tubular morphology also permit significant bending deformation without cracking based on the compression of cavities. This phenomenon is associated with the bending of plant cell walls and can improve the overall compressibility of certain bulk materials.84 Large structural deformations can be withstood by these materials based on an elastic buckling mode of the large hollow tubes. This effect, in turn, provides structural stability even though every tubular unit has an ultralow density and a low wall-thickness-to-size ratio.85–87
This potential combination of high elasticity and other unique properties demonstrated by certain carbon materials allows BTCMs to act as multifunctional materials. For instance, because of their low density and elasticity coupled with the selective adsorption of carbon, BTCMs can be used as adsorbents for crude oil spills.88,89 The tubular structures of such materials provide channels for rapid uptake as well as large reservoirs for the adsorbate, both of which improve the adsorption efficiency.90 Following this rapid adsorption, BTCMs will also tend to float on a liquid medium and so can be easily recovered. In addition, the combination of elasticity and conductivity of carbon materials is highly desirable in a number of emerging fields, such as in the design of sensors and flexible electronics.91,92 The conductivity of carbon can be changed by densification and so it can serve as an ideal pressure-sensitive material. Furthermore, various shapes, such as blocks or sheets, can be prepared using bottom-up fabrication methods, to provide materials that are suitable for a wide range of applications.


2.2.3 Prominent structural superiorities in energy storage and conversion systems. 
Hollow tubular structures can also play significant roles in various functional materials, because the shells of these structure may provide active sites for functionalization while the inner voids can promote mass or charge transport and reduce density.93 For energy storage and conversion systems, the ion transport time (τ) can be expressed by the equation τ = L2/d, where L is the ion transport length and d is the ion transport coefficient.94 In traditional electrode, the active particles were connected by conductive carbon black and polymer binders in a random architecture resulting in poor electrolyte diffusion and long Li-ion transport pathway (Fig. 3a).95 In contrast, the tubular microchannels endow the reduced tortuosity to improve the electrolyte diffusion and shorten ion transport distance in the electrode (Fig. 3b).96 In this context, electrode architectures with tubular channels are highly desirable to achieve a low tortuosity by shortening the ion transport distance and get high ion/electron diffusivity. And this view has been proved by many researches (Fig. 3c–e).96,97 Additionally, carbon-based complex structures dramatically reduce costs compared with noble metals, metal oxides or conductive polymers for electrocatalysts or electrodes.98 Owing to their tunable properties, BTCMs have prominent structural superiorities in the field of energy storage and conversion systems, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors (SCs), deionization devices and fuel cells.99,100 In such applications, the tubular structures of BTCMs will promote the migration of various particles and can also reduce ion diffusion lengths.101
 Fig. 3  (a) The illustration of traditional electrode with poor electrolyte diffusion and long Li-ion transport path. (b) The illustration of wood-inspired electrode with vertical channels to shorten the Li-ion transport path. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley. Graphical illustration of the influence of tortuosity on the ion transportation behaviors (mainly the distance): comparison between two typical structures: (c) low-tortuosity structure with straight channels and (d) high-tortuosity structure with random particles. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e) Graphical illustrations of a tubular carbon aerogel whose tubular structure acts highway for electrons and electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Except for these structural properties, tuning the compositions of BTCMs can bridge the performance gap between materials with different energy storage mechanisms102 and likely provide new functionalities that will be beneficial in many current and emerging technologies.103 In contrast to single-phase materials, a tubular morphology provides a helpful platform for the integration of different functional materials, allowing each component to perform optimally.104,105 In the following section, several representative BTCMs are highlighted to demonstrate that the proper adjustment of the tubular structure and composition can provide useful properties for applications in various fields.

3. Synthesis of biomass-derived tubular carbon materials
The final step in the preparation of BTCMs is carbonization, and the carbonization conditions (temperature and time) greatly affect the porous structure, which in turn will modify the performance of the functional materials.106–110 However, it is difficult to control the morphology (for example, to select between spheres, films, aerogel, fibers, tubes or sheets) of the carbon material during this process. In fact, the key to the preparation of tubular carbon is to employ a tubular precursor. The tubular structure of a BTCM can be produced by retaining the morphology of a specific biomass precursor (such as kapok fiber, wood or catkin) or by assembling bulk tubular materials based on bottom-up fabrication techniques employing cellulose, lignin, chitosan or other natural polymers.
3.1 Direct carbonization
As shown in Fig. 2, many natural tubular materials contain high proportions of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, all of which can be directly carbonized to prepare BTCMs while maintaining a unique tubular structure. Because stems and grass comprise tubular vascular bundles, Kang et al.111 proposed a method of converting grass to MCNTs by heating grass at 250 °C for 1 h in air. The tubular vascular bundles were clearly visible in the product and were found to remain connected to one another (Fig. 4a). Following this preliminary process, the material was rapidly heated to 600 °C and held at that temperature for approximately 20 min in the presence of oxygen in a sealed gallipot. Following approximately 50 such heat treatments and oven drying, grass-based MCNTs were obtained (Fig. 4b). The individual fibers in this product clearly exhibited a hollow tubular structure with inner diameters of 10–30 nm and outer diameters of 30–50 nm.
 Fig. 4  Grass-based carbon nanotubes: (a) SEM images of vascular bundles after heat treatment at approximately 250 °C. (b) TEM images of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) obtained from grass. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
In addition to CNTs, carbon microtubes have also been frequently researched. Poplar catkin (PC) fibers, the seed hairs of the poplar, are rich in cellulose and are characterized by large tubular lumen. Li and co-workers112 synthesized PSC aerogels having a special tubular structure based on a simple process (Fig. 5a). In this method, the PC fibers were treated with NaClO2 to generate a cellulose suspension, following which a wet PC gel was obtained by the filtration of this suspension. Finally, a black PSC aerogel was generated via the carbonization of the dried PC aerogel. Interestingly, this PC aerogel could be directly obtained simply by filtration and drying in air, thus avoiding the typical sol–gel process that is associated with more complicated drying methods (freeze drying or supercritical drying). This simplifies the preparation process and reduces costs. Other flocculent tubular biomass materials, such as cotton,113 catkin,114 willow catkin115 and milkweed,116 can also be directly carbonized to synthesize BTCMs. This phenomenon can be ascribed to the high aspect ratio and abundant hydrogen bonds of the fibers. However, this tubular structure will partly flatten after carbonization at high temperatures (Fig. 5b). To overcome this problem, our group97 previously demonstrated a protective layer that maintains the tubular structure during carbonization. The in situ polymerization of pyrrole on the surfaces of kapok fibers prior to formation of the aerogel was examined (Fig. 5c), and was found to generate an even covering of polypyrrole on the outer (Fig. 5d) and inner layers (Fig. 5e) of the tubular carbon. This polypyrrole thickened the tube walls after transitioning to a protective layer of carbon during the carbonization process. The resulting protective layer completely preserved the integrity of the tubular structure (Fig. 5f). In addition to conductive polymers, protective layers made of metal oxides have also proven to be effective.117,118
 Fig. 5  Flocculent cellulose-based carbon microtubes: (a) a diagram showing the preparation of a PSC aerogel. (b) SEM images of the resulting PSC aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The synthetic route to a tubular carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls. SEM images of the (d) outer layer and (e) inner layer of carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls (CA-1-800). (f) A comparison of the tubular morphologies with and without N-containing sandwich-like walls. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Wood, which has an anisotropic tubular structure, has recently received much attention.119–121 Tang et al.122 directly carbonized a lignin-free basswood slice and then activated the specimen with trithiocyanuric acid and NH3 to prepare a N,S-co-doped carbon material with a unique tubular structure (Fig. 6). Owing to the anisotropic tubular structure together with the high specific surface aera (SSA) and plentiful active sites, this material has applications in both supercapacitors and could also be used to promote the oxidation–reduction reaction (ORR).
 Fig. 6  Wood-based carbon microtubes: a diagram showing the fabrication of N,S co-doped wood carbons. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
3.2 Bottom-up fabrication with biomass precursors
Natural systems are able to assemble sophisticated hierarchical structures with unique functions from simple building blocks including cellulose, lignin and chitosan. Artificial bottom-up fabrication methods mimic the relationship between macrostructures and microscale compositions in natural substances, as a means of developing advanced materials with exceptional architectures and properties.123 In this section, we present an overview of methods developing for the synthesis of tubular carbon precursors by bottom-up fabrication using biomass-derived building blocks.

3.2.1 Hard-template synthesis. 
Hard-template synthesis, which uses removable or expendable templates, has emerged as an effective method for the assembly of BTCMs.124 Using a typical hard-template synthesis process, a tubular structure can be achieved based on the preparation of a core–shell hybrid intermediate with a one-dimensional (1D) nanostructured template, followed by removal of the template.125 The advantages of this method are that the size of the tubular architecture can be easily tuned through selection of the template and functional materials or groups can be evenly introduced based on compounding of the precursor. Because of high degree of flexibility in terms of controlling the chemical composition and morphology of the product in both the lateral and longitudinal dimensions, hard-template synthesis has become one of the most popular routes to the synthesis of BTCMs.
It is common to use 1D nanowires (NWs) as templates for preparing BTCMs. As an example, Zhan and co-workers50 fabricated a super-elastic CTA based on mimicking polar bear hair, and were able to adjust the shell thickness and diameter of the material (Fig. 7a). In this process, a mixture of Te NWs (as sacrificial templates) and D-glucose (as the carbon source) was heated in an autoclave to form a core–shell hybrid intermediate termed NW-CA (Fig. 7b). The Te NWs were completely removed by carbonization, giving a CTA with a uniform morphology (Fig. 7c). The ability to tune the shell thickness and inner diameter of the carbon tubes, both of which increased with increasing glucose proportions and at higher Te NW diameters, is demonstrated in Fig. 7d and e.
 Fig. 7  Hard-template synthesis: (a) diagram summarizing the bioinspired fabrication of a CTA. (b) A TEM image of nanowire-carbon aerogel (NW-CA) (inset: a magnified TEM image of a single cable fiber). (c) A TEM image of a CTA (inset: an optical microscopy image). (d) Characterization of the shell thicknesses of aerogels with increasing concentrations of glucose. (e) Characterization of CTA specimens with different inner diameters synthesized from Te NWs with 25, 35 and 55 nm diameters: (A1) 9, (A2) 31, (A3) 52 nm shell thickness with 25 nm inner diameter; (B1) 25 nm shell thickness with 35 nm inner diameter; (C1) 53 nm shell thickness with 55 nm inner diameter. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) An SEM image of a bundle of CNTs in the macropore of a composite synthesized via the addition of NiCl2, and a TEM image of a CNT. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Copyright 2013, Springer. (g) A TEM image of hollow carbon tube (HCT). (h) TEM micrographs of an HCT-PNiPAAm specimen. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
The use of catalysts was also found to have a pronounced effect on the formation of tubular structures. In one study, cellulose acetate was combined with polyisocyanate together with a fumed silica template and NiCl2 as a catalyst to fabricate CNTs.126 In this process, a cellulose acetate solution in acetone was initially mixed with polymeric diphenylmethane diisocyanate (PIC), a NiCl2·6H2O solution and fumed silica to prepare cellulose acetate on a silica template. After drying and carbonization, CNTs with diameters of 24–38 nm and wall thicknesses of 9–11 nm were obtained (Fig. 7f). It is worth noting that CNTs could not be obtained from cellulose acetate and PIC if NiCl2 was absent. The catalytic effect of the NiCl2 generated macropores in the composite that acted as chemical vapor deposition microreactors, allowing the necessary reactions to be maintained without using the special equipment required for conventional chemical vapor deposition.
In addition to carbonization, pickling is also commonly used to remove the template. Kubo and co-workers127 employed an anodic alumina membrane (AAO) as a template together with the biomass derivative 2-furaldehyde to fabricate carbonaceous tubular nanostructures by a hydrothermal route. In a typical synthesis, an AAO was mixed with 2-furaldehyde and water for 48 h at 180 °C and the resulting material was then washed, dried and carbonized. The AAO template was subsequently removed by washing with H3PO4 and carbonaceous tubular materials were obtained after sonicating, washing and drying. This substance possessed a tubular structure with smooth surfaces (Fig. 7g) and the morphology remained intact after decorating with the thermo-responsive polymer PNiPAAm (Fig. 7h).


3.2.2 Freeze casting. 
Freeze casting, which is also known as ice templating, is a wet-processing technique based on the directional solidification of water-based suspensions to promote the self-assembly of particles into well-controlled biomimetic structures.128–131 This process employs the controlled solidification of a solution, suspension, or gel, during which phase separation occurs and the water solidifies to act as a template. After sublimation of the ice, the structural skeleton is retained and a well-shaped monolith forms.132 The freezing conditions, including the freezing speed and direction, have a significant effect on the morphology of the bulk material, and there have been some excellent reviews summarizing these factors.133–136 In general, a faster freezing rate (that is, a lower freezing temperature) will give a denser pore structure. Different freezing directions (unidirectional, bidirectional or radial) will also lead to various microstructural morphologies (tubular, lamellar or radial).137–140 It is common to use ice crystals grown in one direction in association with the structure-directing property of cellulose to prepare well-controlled anisotropic tubular structures. Consequently, unidirectional freeze casting (UDF) is an effective technique for the fabrication of BTCMs from cellulose.
The properties of the precursor sol have a large effect on the microstructure of the monolith obtained from the UDF process, and cellulose (which provides a strong structure-directing effect) is commonly used for this purpose. Pan et al.141 successfully fabricated a uniform tubular structure with cellulose by UDF (Fig. 8a). During this process, the bottom part of the interior of a polypropylene tube was filled with glass beads to provide steady ice growth. Because of the high viscosity of the cellulose solution and its strong structure-directing effect, the cross-sectional (Fig. 8a) and longitudinal sections (Fig. 8b) of the product exhibited fairly regular xylem-like morphologies. This ability of cellulose to generate a tubular xylem-like structure in conjunction with UDF was also studied while introducing additional components, including polyurethane, lignin and GO (Fig. 8c–e). In each case, a tubular morphology resulted even when polyurethane was the major component.
 Fig. 8  Unidirectional freeze casting synthesis: (a) diagram showing the preparation of xylem-liked monoliths (XMs) with an illustration of ice crystal growth during the UDF process (central part). The image on the left is of a viscous TEMPO-mediated oxidized cellulose nanofibers (TOCN) sol, while that on the right is an SEM image of the cross-section of XMs prepared by immersion into liquid nitrogen at 50 cm h−1. (b) SEM image of the longitudinal section of the XMs. SEM images of the cross-sections of monoliths prepared from mixtures of TOCNs and (c) poly urethane-1 (UCECOAT 7655, Daicel-Allnex Ltd.), (d) hemicellulose and lignin (TOCNs:hemicellulose:lignin = 2:1:1) and (e) GO (TOCNs:GO = 9:1 by mass). Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Diagram of the synthetic route to a xylem-like carbon aerogel. SEM images of (g) a cross-section and (h) a longitudinal section of an NP1 aerogel. (i) Diagram of the dual-activation process. (j) and (k) TEM images acquired at different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Freeze casting is a convenient means of structural modification. Specifically, the diameter and length of the resulting cells can be easily adjusted by tuning both the freezing time and speed. Moreover, by adjusting the composition of the suspension, the composition and porous structure of the cell walls can be readily controlled. In prior work, an N,P-co-doped mesoporous carbon monolith was fabricated using a creative combination of freeze casting and dual activation (Fig. 8f).142 In this system, NH4H2PO4, acting as a source of N and P and also as an activator, was mixed with a cellulose suspension, following which the orderly growth of ice crystals generated vertical channels in the suspension (Fig. 8g and h). During carbonization, the NH4H2PO4 decomposed to NH3 and H3PO4, thus doping N and P into the cell walls. During the second activation phase, CO2 reacted with carbon from the edges of the micropores formed by the previous H3PO4 activation, and this increased the sizes of some micropores to generate mesopores (Fig. 8i–k). This dual activation strategy gave this carbon aerogel with a large SSA (1553 m2 g−1), a high mesopore ratio (70.37%), and N and P contents of 4.29 and 3.05 atom%, respectively. This material has potential applications in supercapacitors and desalination. Moreover, the tubular structure provides a high strength-to-weight ratio and extremely high compressibility (up to 90% strain) together with low density (3.8 mg cm−3).


3.2.3 Electrostatic spinning. 
Electrospinning is a common method of preparing fibers with unique morphologies from simple building blocks.143–148 By carefully controlling the electrospinning parameters and designing spinnerets and collectors with special configurations, nanofibers with different structures have been prepared. These have included ribbon,149 branched,150 multichannel,151 porous,152 tube153 and other morphologies.154 Therefore, electrospinning is a suitable technique for preparing tubular materials and a variety of such substances153,155–157 have been developed using non-biomass raw materials (Fig. 9b–e). Recently, the fabrication of tubular morphologies from biomass by electrospinning has also received attention.
 Fig. 9  Electrospinning synthesis: (a) diagram showing the synthesis procedure for NiCo2O4-hollow carbon nanofibers (HCNFs). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b)SEM image of ZnO hollow tubes. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. SEM images of (c) hollow polyurethane nanofibers prepared through coaxial electrospinning. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Anatase hollow nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society and (e) the inner surfaces of poly(p-xylylene) tubes obtained by coating rough poly(L-lactide). Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (f) and (g) Mapping of NiCo2O4–HCNF. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. SEM images of carbonized (h) polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/lignin hollow fibers and (i) CNFs-lignin/PAN core–shell fibers. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Copyright 2013 Elsevier. SEM images of HCNFs with different ratios of lignin to Fe(acac)3: (j) HCNFs-5, (k) HCNFs-10 and (l) HCNFs-25 specimens. (m) High resolution TEM image of an HCNFs-25 specimen. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Coaxial electrospinning is a common technique for preparing tubular or composite fibers. In this process, two concentric hollow needles make up a coaxial needle146 and dual syringe pumps drive a fluid into this needle to form a compound Taylor cone that produces core–sheath nanofibers or hollow fibers. Based on this principle, Yang et al.158 fabricated PAN/lignin-based HCNFs using a coaxial electrospinning method followed by a carbonization process (Fig. 9a). The resulting carbon tubes were suitable carriers for pseudo-capacitor materials and their inner and outer surfaces could be coated with NiCo2O4 nanosheets by a facile hydrothermal technique, such that Co and Ni were evenly distributed over the tubes (Fig. 9f and g). The NiCo2O4 on the HCNFs provided a high contact area between the samples and electrolytes that increased the number of active sites to enhance the capacitance performance. Xu et al.159 also generated hollow core–shell carbon fibers via the electrospinning of lignin with PAN as a co-spinning polymer (Fig. 9h). In this material, lignin formed the shell of the fibers while a CNF network formed the porous cores (Fig. 9i). The resulting hollow core–shell fibers exhibited a higher SSA and porosity compared with conventional solid fibers, and were expected to show better performance in potential applications.
In addition to loading certain materials on the outside/inside of the tubular structure, it is common to add dopants to the spinning solution and then electrospin the compounds together. In one study, iron(III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3), acting as an iron oxide precursor, was mixed with lignin solutions to manufacture HCNFs that incorporated iron oxide particles, to produce electrodes of supercapacitors.160 This composite was reported to exhibit a well-shaped tubular morphology (Fig. 9j–l) and changing the ratio of lignin to Fe(acac)3 did not affect the formation of the tubular structure. The micromorphology of the HCNF-25 was tubular and large numbers of Fe particles were found to be contained within the fibers (Fig. 9m).

4. Applications of biomass-derived tubular carbon materials
4.1 Environmental remediation of water
Because of their hydrophilicity/oleophobicity, high porosity, ready modification and chemical inertness, carbon materials are traditionally considered ideal adsorbents for water/oil separation, wastewater treatment and deionization.161–163 Tubular structured carbon materials show promise with regard to the environmental remediation of water for several reasons. Firstly, these materials are typically used in bulk form and so are easier to recover than powder-like adsorbents. Secondly, capillary effects often occur in the tubular structure, which makes the adsorption process easier. Compared with randomly porous materials, another advantage is that the high-speed transmission of fluids through the tubes can reduce mass transfer resistance and realize a high throughout.164 Based on these characteristics, BTCMs have the potential to mitigate contamination by dyes, oil, organic solvents and heavy metals, as well as applications in water desalination systems.165–167

4.1.1 Oil and organic adsorption. 
Kapok, cotton, catkins and other tubular flocculent fibers can become good adsorbents directly after carbonization because their high aspect ratios and hollow structures render them light, elastic and porous, all of which promote adsorption. A kapok fiber-based hydrophobic CMA with significant adsorption capacity was fabricated via direct carbonization.168 After carbonization, the CMA had a clear tubular structure with a hydrophobic surface (Fig. 10a). This material was able to absorb organic solvents and oils with high capacities reaching 78–348 times its own mass. Its outstanding thermal stability and mechanical properties also suggest that this CMA could be recycled through combustion distillation and extrusion (Fig. 10b and c). Bi et al.45 used cotton fibers to prepare CDPC aerogels with a low density of approximately 12 mg cm−3 and a level of hydrophobicity sufficiently high to produce a uniform mirror reflection on its surface (Fig. 10d). When this aerogel was placed in contact with a heptane layer on a water surface (Fig. 10e) or a chloroform layer under a layer of water (Fig. 10f), it completely and rapidly adsorbed both organic liquids. The maximum absorption capacity was 192 times the mass of the original monolith.
 Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of a carbon microtube aerogel (CMA) (inset: an optical microscopy photograph). Recycling of CMA by (b) combustion and (c) squeezing. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) The mirror reflection of the cotton-derived porous carbon (CDPC) aerogels surface. Photographs showing the adsorption of (e) heptane and (f) chloroform with the CDPC aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) A schematic showing the preparation of Biomass-C/MOFs-C carbon aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (h) Light-trapping effects in the channels of OTS-rGO-WS and solar-motivated capillary flow for promotion of crude oil through the channels. (i) No obvious oil leakage from OTS-rGO-WS at high (85.9 °C) and ambient (29.5 °C) temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the direct carbonization of tubular flocculent fibers, surface modification followed by carbonization is also common. Zhao and co-workers169 prepared roughened metal–organic framework (MOF) carbon fibers by depositing the MOF onto the surfaces of kapok fibers followed by carbonization (Fig. 10g). This structure was inspired by the bionics of the lotus leaf. Specifically, the carbonized kapok fibers had a high degree of hydrophobicity that imitated the waxy layers on these leaves, while the MOF nanoparticles mimicked the papillary structures on the lotus leaf surfaces. This double-layer structure of the sample resulted in a water contact angle of 140° and a good adsorption capacity of 119.5 times the mass of the pristine monolith. Additionally, 77.2–96.7% of the initial adsorption capacity was retained after eight adsorption–squeezing cycles.
The above samples are generally for the adsorption of common solvents or oil. The effective clean-up of high viscosity crude oil spillages is still a great challenge up to now. Previous works170 have demonstrated that decreasing the viscosity of the crude oil by using heat is an effective method to deal with this issue. Coincidentally, carbon materials are ideal light-trapping materials.171,172 Chao et al.173 proposed a new material of thermally-reduced GO coating and decoration of hydrophobic-layer over a compressible wood-sponge (OTS-rGO-WS), which could be easily prepared by removal of lignin and hemicellulose, coating with GO, and subsequently decoration with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS). Owing to the preferable photothermal conversion of GO, an in situ solar-assisted thermogenesis process could increase the temperature to 88 °C within 100 s under 1 sun illumination and decrease the viscosity of crude-oil for easy adsorption. Furthermore, the capillary-force of the channels of wood is benefit to draw high viscosity crude oil (Fig. 10h). No obvious oil leakage from OTS-rGO-WS at high (85.9 °C) or ambient (29.5 °C) temperatures after a period of 2 h, suggesting the favorable retention of oil by the capillary-force of the channels.


4.1.2 Heavy metal adsorption. 
The unique multi-channels in luffa sponge fibers can minimize diffusive resistance to mass transport and are extremely beneficial with regard to the preparation of hierarchical porous materials (Fig. 11a). Li et al.71 took advantage of this characteristic to prepare MBNFs, with maximum adsorption capacities of 2989, 1885, 723 and 453 mg g−1 for Cd2+, Zn2+, Cr3+ and Pb2+, respectively. The channels in this material acted to promote diffusion, leading to rapid pollutant transport from the outer surfaces into the inner porous network. Chen et al.46 processed natural cotton waste using an alkaline etching method to fabricate a CDPCO. The raw cotton fibers exhibited a hollow tube structure, providing a large contact surface between the fibers and the KOH etchant (Fig. 11b), such that the material showed maximum uptake capacities of 71.4, 40.2, 111.1 and 33.3 mg g−1 for Co(II), Cd(II), Pb(II) and Sr(II), respectively. These adsorption capacities were increased compared with those of CDPC (12.5, 8.4, 21.2 and 6.8 mg g−1), and this improved performance was ascribed to the high concentration of –COOH and –OH functional groups on the CDPCO (Fig. 11c). This result confirmed that interactions between heavy metal ions and functional groups on the adsorbent surface have a significant impact on the adsorption capacity.
 Fig. 11  (a) A diagram summarizing the synthesis and reaction mechanism involved in producing hierarchical BN fibers (MBNFs) from luffa sponge. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) SEM images of the cotton fibers. (c) The adsorption of heavy metal ions using CDPCO. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Optical and (e) SEM images of the CCS-1100. (f) The desalination capacity of CCS at different equilibrium concentrations. (g) The electro-sorption and regeneration cyclability of the CCS in 500 mg L−1 NaCl. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


4.1.3 Capacitive deionization. 
In recent years, as a result of rapid population growth and industrialization, fresh water scarcity has become a pressing issue.174 Capacitive deionization (CDI) and solar steam generation are two common approaches to obtaining potable water from saline.175,176 CDI is an environmentally friendly and cost-effective electro-sorption process that is usually used in seawater deionization.177 In such systems, charged particles are forced to move to an oppositely charged electrode plate by electrostatic force under a low electrical potential (0.6–2.0 V) and are temporarily stored in the electric double layer. When the electric field is removed or the power supply is reversed, the ions adsorbed on the electrode return to the solution to achieve desorption.178 In contrast to typical powder-like CDI electrode materials,179–181 the cotton-derived carbon sponge (CCS) reported by Li et al.47 was flexible and could be assembled as a binder-free electrode. As demonstrated in Fig. 11d, this material had a tubular structure (Fig. 11e) along with excellent flexibility such that it could be folded into a “U” shape without breaking. The carbonization temperature was found to greatly impact the deionization performance of the CCS. CCS pyrolyzed at 1100 °C was shown to exhibit the highest charge efficiency of 0.77 (Fig. 11f) and electro-sorption capacity of 16.1 mg g−1 in 500 mg L−1 NaCl (Fig. 11g).


4.1.4 Solar steam generation. 
Recently, solar steam generation has also become a popular desalination method. The major challenges associated with this technology are salt blockage and low thermal conversion efficiency. Inspired by the process by which trees draw water from the soil against gravity (Fig. 12a), Zhang et al.182 have engineered a wood-based solar steam generation device (W-SSGD) with improved solar steam generation efficiency by using p-TsOH-assisted hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 12b). Notably, the carbonized surface of R-CW directly absorbed and utilized solar energy for solar steam generation, without the need for an additional solar-to-thermal layer. p-TsOH thus not only acts as a catalyst to promote carbonization and change large lumens to small lumens (Fig. 12c), but also enhances the hydrophilicity of the wood lumens. The experiment suggests that smaller lumens, which have stronger capillary forces, do indeed enhance water transportation speed. These rationally introduced changes lowered the enthalpy of vaporization of water and greatly enhanced the capacity of the wood for transportation of water (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  (a) Nature-inspired design of p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TsOH)-catalyzed carbonized wood (R-CW) for solar steam generation. (b) Schematic illustration of fabrication of R-CW using p-TsOH-assisted hydrothermal treatment; (c) magnified structure of R-CW and properties of R-CW lumens; (d) schematic illustration of solar steam generation using R-CW under solar irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Solar thermal desalination mechanism in detail of loofah-based solar steam generation device. The evaporator has several characteristics of interconnected microchannels for vapor transportation. (f) Photograph showing salt-blockages at the surface of a conventional carbon felt evaporator and no salt-blockages at the surface of the carbonized loofah sponge after 10 h in a 20% NaCl solution with a solar irradiance of 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photographic images of the original F-wood, F-wood/CNTs and flexed F-wood/CNTs membranes. (h) Diagram of the flexible solar steam system made from a CNT-coated flexible wood membrane. (i) Diagram of the interaction between the CNT coating and the flexible wood matrix. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Loofah-based solar evaporator with bilayer structure has been applied to generate solar steam.183 In this process, the surface of loofah is partially carbonized to provide a light-absorbing layer while the hydrophilic bottom layer acts as a water pump to provide a path for rapid water transport. The well aligned microchannels inside each fiber increased the light transfer path and therefore increased the light (Fig. 12e). In addition, microchannels allowed for efficient salt drainage in loofah and prevented the accumulation of salt on the surface of the evaporator, thus ensuring long-term stability (Fig. 12f). This economical light absorber and water-pumping natural fibers exhibited a steam generation rate of ∼1.42 kg m−2 h−1 and an efficiency of 89.9% under 1 sun.
In addition to carbonization, modification is also common way to produce light trapping layer. A flexible wood-based solar steam generation device was fabricated by Chen et al.184 based on a membrane made of flexible chemically treated wood (so-called F-wood). This material was subsequently modified with CNTs rather than by carbonization to obtain a light-absorbing layer. The resulting F-wood/CNT membrane was so flexible that it could be easily bent without obvious damage to the structure (Fig. 12g). The CNT-coated surface had a large SSA that maximized light absorption by elongating the optical path for multiple scattering and promoted photothermal conversion (Fig. 12h). Furthermore, the strong interactions between the abundant –OH and –COOH groups on the surfaces of the CNTs and the –OH groups on the cellulose provided the F-wood/CNT membrane with excellent stability (Fig. 12i). A solar thermal efficiency as high as 81% with an evaporation rate of 11.22 kg m−2 h−1 at 10 kW m−2 was achieved.

4.2 Flame retardant and thermal insulation materials
Flame retardancy and thermal insulation are effective means of improving energy efficiency and reducing energy consumption. Many tubular structured materials have been used as thermal insulation because their morphology effectively inhibits both convection and conduction.185,186 Tubular carbon can provide a high degree of thermal protection for several reasons. Firstly, the gas convection that can occur in typical tubular materials is completely suppressed, because this process requires the void diameter to be larger than 10 mm under a pressure of 1 atmosphere.187,188 In addition, the thermal conductivity is efficiently decreased because the existence of large gaseous voids breaks the continuity of the heat transport pathways. Extremely low radiative thermal conductivity is also achieved as a consequence of the high infrared extinction coefficient of the carbon monolith (more than 1000 m2 kg−1). Finally, the presence of air in the pores of the carbon monolith leads to very low thermal conductivity values. For these reasons, BTCMs can be considered to be ideal candidates for thermal insulation applications.76
Inspired by the microstructure of polar bear hair, Zhan et al.50 fabricated a carbon tube aerogel (CTA) with exceptional thermal insulation abilities and a minimum thermal conductivity of 23 mW m−1 K−1. The resulting carbon tubes had an inner diameter of about 35 nm (lower than the mean free path of air of 75 nm) with a very uniform morphology (Fig. 13a), and could effectively prevent convection. When a specimen of this material was placed on a hot plate at 400 °C, a thermal image showed that the top side of the CTA reached an average temperature of only 94 °C after 10 min, indicating remarkable thermal insulation (Fig. 13b). In addition, the thermal conductivities of the CTA were always lower than those of the cable aerogel for different shell thicknesses (Fig. 13c). This result confirmed the important role of the tubular structure in improving thermal insulation. In other trials, a tube aerogel exhibited better thermal insulation performance than the cable aerogel (Fig. 13d).
 Fig. 13  Flame retardant and thermal insulation materials: (a) A TEM image of the CTA (inset: an optical microscopy image). (b) A thermographic image of a CTA specimen on a 400 °C hot plate. (c) Thermal conductivities of cable and tube aerogels with different shell thicknesses at room temperature. (d) The thermal insulation performances of cable and tube aerogels (left). The corresponding thermographic images of the cable aerogel (bottom) and tube aerogel (top) on a 350 °C heating stage (right). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Flame retardancy of the UCM aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The vertical burning test (UL94) of a nanocomposite foam containing 77% cellulose nanofibers (CNFs), 10% GO, 10% SEP and 3% BA (by mass). (g) Schematic (left) and thermographic (right) images of a CNF–GO–BA–SEP nanocomposite foam with tubular pores oriented normal to the heat source. (h) A diagram showing the contributions to thermal conductivity in the radial and axial directions of a foam with oriented pores. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The superior thermal and chemical stability of carbon-based materials could also allow them to function as flame retardant substances. As an example, Zhang et al.49 fabricated carbon aerogels via the pyrolysis of kapok fibers and these aerogels were able to withstand the flame of a spirit lamp for at least 5 min without any burning or other effects (Fig. 13e). Wicklein et al.51 prepared an anisotropic foam with a thermal conductivity of 15 mW m−1 K−1 by freeze-casting suspensions of cellulose nanofibers, GO and sepiolite. The vertical burning tests (UL 94; Fig. 13f) showed that this composite foam self-extinguished after a methane flame was applied for 11 s, indicating high fire retardancy. Furthermore, a thermographic image (Fig. 13g) showed that this material provided a high degree of thermal insulation in the radial direction. The apparent thermal conductivity in this direction was low because gas convection was effectively suppressed by the tubular voids (Fig. 13h).
4.3 Energy storage and conversion
The excessive use of fossil fuels has resulted in the depletion of nonrenewable energy resources and increased interest in energy storage and conversion devices, including SCs, rechargeable batteries and phase change energy storage systems.189–191 Biomass-derived carbon materials are widely used for these purposes because they are renewable and provide large SSAs, adjustable pore size distributions, high conductivities and stable chemical properties, and are also easily modified.192–194 Furthermore, because the tubular channels in wood allow the efficient transport of water and nutrients, tubular carbon frameworks can ensure the rapid migration of electrolyte ions, and thus have great potential as highly active electrochemical materials.195,196

4.3.1 Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalytic reactions are important in energy generation and environmental work, especially those associated with new types of sustainable energy. These reactions may be involved in fuel cells, lithium ion batteries, the electrolysis of water and CO2 and N2 reduction reactions.197–199 Because of the very high reaction energy barriers of electrocatalytic reactions, catalysts are frequently used to lower the reaction barriers and thus reduce energy consumption.200,201 Recently, owing to their durability, high electrochemical activity and cost effectiveness, heteroatom-doped carbon materials have emerged as efficient alternatives to traditional noble-metal materials as metal-free catalysts to enhance the ORR.
Because wood-derived carbon frameworks can facilitate rapid mass transfer and generate a large number of accessible active sites,202 basswood has been developed as an ORR catalyst based on doping with S followed by NH3 activation.122Fig. 14a–c show the CV curves, LSV curves and RRDE voltammograms obtained from an optimized sample (referred to as TARC-N). This material showed an onset potential of 0.98 V, a half-wave potential of 0.86 V and a limiting current density of −5.31 mA cm−2 at 1600 rpm, together with exceptional durability. This superior performance was attributed to the efficient transport system formed by the numerous anisotropic channels in the natural basswood and the dual doping of N and S heteroatoms, which evidently resulted in an improved electron donating ability as well as synergistic enhancement of the spin and charge densities of the carbon atoms. Peng et al.203 used an enzyme-assisted approach to fabricate a quasi-solid-state battery electrode (Fig. 14d). In this process, cellulose was hydrolyzed with an enzyme to form numerous shallow nanoholes on the pore walls. After carbonization and N doping, the resulting N/E-HPC-900 plate exhibited a high electrical conductivity of 70.4 S m−1 in the vertical cutting direction and extremely enhanced mechanical strength such that the plate could support more than 650 times its own mass. In contrast to conventional powder-based gas diffusion electrodes, this material contained natural ion-transport channels and demonstrated the high-value utilization of biomass without requiring polymeric binders or conductive agents (Fig. 14e–g). The quasi-solid-state Zn–air battery developed by Peng exhibited an open circuit voltage of approximately 1.34 V and a specific capacity of 749 mA h g−1 at 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) obtained from an optimized sample referenced to Pt/C in N2 and O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH as recorded at 20 mV s−1. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves obtained from the optimized sample at different rotational speeds (inset: K–L plots at different potentials and the electron transfer numbers). (c) Rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms for the optimized sample and Pt/C samples at 1600 rpm, with the ring currents amplified by a factor of 5 for better resolution. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Diagram showing the bulk transformation process using an enzyme-assisted method. (e) Diagrams of a rechargeable quasi-solid-state Zn–air battery with an N-doped hierarchically porous carbon pyrolyzed at 900 °C (N/E-HPC-900) plate cathode. (f) A photograph of LEDs powered by two rechargeable quasi-solid-state Zn–air batteries with an N/E-HPC-900 plate. (g) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves acquired at 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (h) A diagram showing the preparation of catkins/MoS2 hybrids. (i) Theoretical (black dots) and experimental (red dots) H2 yields as functions of time in a 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids. (j) Data from stability tests of catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids comprising the initial polarization curve and the curve after 1000 cycles. (k) Current density–time (J–t) curves obtained from catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids (η = 150 mV vs. RHE) over 100 h. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to investigating the application of wood-based materials for use in the ORR, the potential of other tubular structured materials as catalysts in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) has also been assessed. Willow catkin carbon microtubes have been applied to construct 3D catkin/MoS2 hybrids for the HER via the in situ growth of MoS2 nanoflakes (Fig. 14h).68 After carbonization, the conductivity of the microtubes increased rapidly while maintaining the tubular structure. As a consequence, the natural tubular morphology was transformed to provide interconnected conductive paths that promoted the rapid transport of the electrolyte, which in turn enhanced the electrocatalytic reactions. Consequently, excellent HER activity with a remarkably small onset overpotential of 50 mV, a Tafel slope of 62 mV per decade, an overpotential of 136 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Faraday yield close to 100% was achieved (Fig. 14i–k).


4.3.2 Supercapacitor electrodes. 
Supercapacitors are capable of rapid charging and can also have extremely long cycle lifetimes (>100000 cycles),204–206 and so have been studied extensively. Based on their charge storage mechanisms, supercapacitors can be classified as electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) or pseudo-capacitors. Charge storage in an EDLCs is based on the electrostatic adsorption of electrolyte ions on the electrode surface, while that in a pseudo-capacitor results from reversible faradaic reactions.207,208 Carbon materials can have intrinsically large SSAs, highly porous structures and good conductivities, and so are candidates for supercapacitors electrode materials. However, the energy density values of commercially available electrodes of supercapacitors (approximately 5 W h kg−1) are still significantly lower than those of batteries (up to 200 W h kg−1) and fuel cells (up to 350 W h kg−1).209 Therefore, there has been much research with the aim of increasing the energy densities of structured electrodes, especially tubular structured electrodes, by providing shortened diffusion lengths for ion transport and robust architectures that extend the cycling capability.164

Enteromorpha prolifera (EP) is a slender green algae with a hollow tubular structure composed of a single layer of cells. This algae has an especially rapid growth rate and represents an environmental hazard in many regions.210–212 Cui and co-workers72 developed a hierarchical porous carbonaceous aerogel (HPCA) from EP as an supercapacitor electrode material. This HPCA maintained its microtubular structure after carbonization (Fig. 15a) and showed excellent rate performance in EDLCs (190.0 F g−1 at 50 A g−1) (Fig. 15b and c). To further increase the energy density, the HPCA was used as a support for Co3O4 nanowires (Co3O4@HPCA) and the microtubes were found to provide a large number of sites for uniform growth of these nanowires (Fig. 15d). This material was used to fabricate a high performance pseudocapacitor electrode with a maximum specific capacitance of 1167.6 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 15e and f).
 Fig. 15  (a) An HRTEM image of HPCA-700-800. (b) CV curves and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves obtained from HPCA-700-800 at different scan rates. (d) An FESEM image of Co3O4@HPCA-700-800. (e) CV curves and (f) GCD curves obtained from Co3O4@HPCA-700-800 at different scan rates. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) A diagram summarizing the preparation of HPHCT from cotton. (h) A digital photograph of a lightweight, flexible and strong hollow carbon textile (HPHCT) specimen. (i) An SEM image of KOH-coated cotton. (j) GCD curves acquired at current densities of 0.5 to 20 A g−1. (k) Capacitance retention during 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1 (inset shows GCD curves before and after cycling). (l) CV curves obtained at scan rates of 5 to 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (m) A diagram showing ion and charge transfer inside a porous carbon wood (PWC)/MnO2/GQDs 15 mg electrode. (n) SEM images of PWC/MnO2/GQD specimens with GQD concentrations of 5 and 15 mg. (o) CV curves obtained at various scan rates and (p) GCD curves obtained at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
The leaking of electrolyte can be an extremely serious safety concern, and so the study of all-solid-state supercapacitors has become a research hotspot. For this purpose, an all-solid-state freestanding electrode was made from hollow carbon textile (HPHCT) based on carbonized cotton fabric coated with KOH and Al2O3/SiO2 (Fig. 15g).213 The unique tubular structure of HPHCT (Fig. 15i) makes it lightweight and flexible but strong, such that this material can be stretched, folded and rolled into complex structures (Fig. 15h). These qualities suggest potential applications as an all-solid-state freestanding electrode in supercapacitors. In prior work, HPHCT provided a high capacitance of 220 F g−1 with 100% retention after 10000 cycles when used as a freestanding electrode in a symmetric device (Fig. 15j–l).
In addition to various tubular fibers, carbonized wood (CW) can be directly assembled as a self-standing and binder-free electrode without additional conductive agents or current collectors, making it an ideal candidate for the construction of high-performance electrodes. Zhang et al.214 prepared free-standing supercapacitor electrodes based on porous wood carbon (PWC) decorated with MnO2 and graphene quantum dots (GQDs). PWC has straight channels that reduce the curvature of the electrode and facilitate rapid mass transfer (Fig. 15m), both of which are desirable in a high-performance electrode. The GQDs content was found to greatly affect the morphology of MnO2. As the amount of GQDs was increased from 5 to 15 mg, the shape of the MnO2 crystals in the material was found to transition from spherical to needle-like (Fig. 15n). The experimental results showed that this unique needle-like nanostructure dramatically reduced agglomeration of the MnO2 nanoparticles and accelerated ion diffusion and electron transport to promote complete redox reactions. Consequently, the PWC/MnO2/GQDs 15 mg exhibited an area capacitance of 2712 mF cm2 at 1 mA cm2 and improved cycling stability with 95.3% retention after 2000 cycles (Fig. 15o and p).


4.3.3 Electrodes for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. 
Rechargeable LIBs are one of the most important portable power sources because they provide low self-discharge rates with high energy densities and do not show a memory effect.215,216 Nevertheless, the practical applications of these devices are limited because of issues related to rapid capacity fading and volume changes during lithiation/delithiation.217 This volume variation can result in cracking of the carbon material, which in turn can greatly reduce rate performance. Recently, electrodes with hollow structures have been examined as a means of addressing these issues.218,219 Sustainability should also be taken into account when developing next generation rechargeable LIBs, and so there has been recent progress in incorporating BTCMs in LIBs.
The fibers in a loofah sponge have a 3D bundled microtube structure (Fig. 16a) and its skeleton was used to grow of MoS2 nanoflakes by hydrothermal process. After self-polymerization of dopamine and annealing process, this material has been used to prepare LSDCM/MoS2/N–C composites for use in LIBs (Fig. 16b).55 The 3D tubular morphology of the original material was found to be well maintained after carbonization and the porous cross-linked walls of the N–C layer and the LSDCM suppressed the shuttling of polysulfide intermediates by providing multileveled blocking “dams.” This composite tube structure exhibited an impressive initial discharge capacity of 732 mA h g−1 and maintained a capacity of 534 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of close to 100%, thus showing exceptional capacity retention (Fig. 16c). In other work by Cheng et al., natural willow catkins were directly carbonized to fabricate hollow carbon tubes (HCTs) capable of hosting Li metal.175 The conductive skeleton of this material and the large void spaces between the carbon tubes allowed uniform Li deposition and were able to accommodate volume change, thus providing a stable anode. This composite anode material showed a high capacity of 3026 mA h g−1, excellent cycling stability and high coulombic efficiency. In addition, carbonized mesoporous wood fiber (CMWFs) have been used as the host material in a sulfur-based cathode.220 The anisotropic channels in the wood and the mesopores and micropores formed after carbonization generated a hierarchical porous structure that permitted a high sulfur loading of 76 wt% in the CMWF electrodes. Functionalized carbonized mesoporous wood fiber accommodated with sulfur was also assembled as a free-standing cathode without a current collector, a binder or a conductive additive, and showed an initial capacity of 1115 mA h g−1 while maintaining a value of 859 mA h g−1 after 450 cycles (Fig. 16d–g).
 Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of a pristine loofah sponge fiber and (b) schematic illustration of fabrication of LSDCM/MoS2/N–C composite. (c) The cycling stability and corresponding coulombic efficiency at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) CV data for an S/f-carbonized wood fiber (CMWF) electrode during the first three cycles. (e) The GCD performance of an S/f-CMWF electrode. (f) The cycling stability test data for S/CMWF and S/f-CMWF electrodes. (g) Specific capacity data obtained at various current densities for an S/f-CMWF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


4.3.4 Other applications. 
Carbon-based materials can also be used to fabricate current collectors that make full use of the advantages of their tubular channels and high conductivity. Inspired by natural wood materials in which channels are aligned along the tree growth direction, Chen et al.96 produced an ultrathick 3D current collector that provided both high conductivity and low tortuosity by directly carbonizing natural wood. A 3D electrode with a high mass-based loading of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) was made by adding LFP nanoparticles and epoxy followed by carbonization (Fig. 17a). This 3D current collector overcame the primary limitations of traditional thick electrode designs related to poor ion and electron transport across the thick electrode and ready deformation. The conductive carbon framework of this design (Fig. 17b) provided continuous low-tortuosity pathways for fast electron and ion transport (Fig. 17c) while the tubular structure allowed an ultrahigh LFP loading of approximately 60 mg cm−2. Consequently, the ultrathick 3D electrode showed a high capacity of 7.6 mA h cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2 and an energy density of 26 mW h cm−2 (Fig. 17d–f).
 Fig. 17  (a) Diagram of the design concept for an ultrathick electrode using a 3D conductive carbon framework as a current collector. (b) Illustrations of the ion and electron transport in the 3D LFP-CF electrode and the LFP-CF|separator|Li metal battery system during charging. (c) Magnified cross-section view SEM images of the LFP-CF composite. (d) Charge–discharge profiles and (e) CV curves of the ultrathick LFP-CF electrode. (f) Data showing the ready deformation of a conventional thick LFP electrode and the lack of deformation of the 3D ultrathick LFP-CF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) Diagram summarizing the TDCW formation process. (h) Thermal conductivity of TD, PW, CW and TDCW at radial and axial direction at 25 °C and 50 °C. (i) TG curves for TD, PW, CW, TDPW and TDCW. (j) Diagram showing radial and axial heat transport in wood. (k) Surface temperature over time from 14 to 100 °C and (l) the corresponding infrared thermal images of CW, TDCW, PW and TDPW samples. (m) The infrared thermal images of the CW, TDCW, PW and TDPW samples obtained during cooling. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In addition to electrochemical energy storage, tubular carbon materials have also been applied to thermal energy storage. Phase change materials have received much attention because they can store and release thermal energy in the form of latent heat during phase transition processes.221 Carbonized woods tend to show high latent heats, suitable thermal conductivities and large SSAs and so may have applications as supports for phase change materials. Yang et al.56 prepared a carbonized wood-based phase change energy storage material (TDCW) by impregnating carbonized wood with 1-tetradecanol (Fig. 17g). The continuous channels and abundant pits on the lumen promoted the transport and encapsulation of the 1-tetradecanol in the channels of the carbonized wood. A capillary effect and surface tension forces in the carbonized wood also effectively suppressed leakage of the 1-tetradecanol. Furthermore, axial heat transport also had a greater effect on phonon conductance than that in the radial direction because of the solid continuity of the material. Thermal conductivities of PW, CW, TDCW measured at axial direction are all higher than that at radial direction (Fig. 17h, j). The carbonized material did not show degradation or mass loss during thermogravimetric analysis between 25 and 800 °C (Fig. 17i), which established that carbonized wood was a superior support for phase change materials. Fig. 17l and m present infrared thermal images of various samples, in which surface temperature variations are reflected in color changes.

4.4 Lightweight and compressible materials
The structure of a bulk material can greatly affect its density and strength. The unique large cavities in tubular structures tend to provide low densities that allow more applications and more functions than are possible with traditional rigid devices.222 Generally, the compressibility and elasticity of bulk materials can be achieved via the bending deformation of their constituent units.223 Specifically, the large cavities in these substances permit bending deformation by compressing without generating cracks, based on bending of the cell walls.84 Tubular units with low densities and minimal wall-thickness-to-size ratios can tolerate large structural deformations as a result of elastic buckling of the cavities, resulting in structural stability.85–87 In anisotropic bulk materials, the thin cell walls are aligned and show a high degree of flexibility in the out-of-plane direction, and are also able to transmit stress through their tight arrangement. In the case of isotropic bulk materials, tubular structural units with a high aspect ratio are intertwined to produce a compact structure and gaps between the intertwined units can also store stress by deformation.224 Carbon-based materials often exhibit high conductivity and a porous structure, and so have significant potential as adsorbents with reversible elasticity, or as pressure sensors and wearable flexible devices.
Most flocculent fibers with a natural tubular structure, such as kapok fibers, cattail fibers, cotton and Calotropis gigantea, can maintain their structure and continue to show good elasticity after carbonization. Because of the high length-to-diameter ratio and low density originating from their hollow structures, these soft fibers entangle into natural aerogels. After carbonization, these aerogels retain the voids between the fibers and the tubular structures, and are also elastic because of the tight winding of the material. Zhang et al.49 fabricated ultra-lightweight, compressible carbon (UCM) aerogels via the pyrolysis of kapok fiber aerogels. These materials had ultralow densities (on the order of 1.0 mg cm−3) and high compressibility (Fig. 18a), such that they could recover to their original state after bearing a compressive strain of 80%. These aerogels could also withstand 1000 loading–unloading cycles at 60% strain (Fig. 18b). Because of their excellent compressibility and high electrical conductivity (0.1 S cm−1), these UCM aerogels could serve as elastic conductors and, in one trial, the brightness of a diode was observed to change when compressive strain was applied to a UCM aerogel incorporated into the circuit (Fig. 18c). This substance also exhibited very high absorption capacities for organic solvents (147–292 g g−1) and could be easily regenerated by mechanical compression (Fig. 18d).
 Fig. 18  (a) Reversible compression of a UCM aerogel. (b) Compressive stress–strain curves for a UCM aerogel; (c) the strain-controlled on–off of a light-emitting diode using a UCM aerogel. (d) Variations in Rt/R0 values of a UCM aerogel with repeated compressive strain (50%) over 10 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A diagram showing the synthetic steps. (f) Compressive σ versus ε curves for carbonaceous nanofibers aerogels (CNFAs) along the loading direction (insets: profiles of the CNFAs during a compression cycle with ε = 80%). (g) Diagram showing inversion of the nanofibrous cell walls with compression. (h) Response and relaxation of a pressure sensor upon loading and unloading of a pea with a pressure of 10 Pa. (i) Measurement of a human neck pulse under normal conditions, indicating 72 beats per min. (j) The magnified curve of a typical neck pulse wave signal, in which P1, P2 and P3 are clearly evident. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Carbon aerogels with neatly aligned channels can be prepared by freeze casting, in which case energy is reversibly stored by the significant elastic deformation as the cells are compressed. Si et al.53 used konjac glucomannan (KGM) and flexible SiO2 nanofibers to created super elastic carbonaceous nanofibrous aerogels (CNFAs) by freeze casting (Fig. 18e). These materials showed an extremely low density (0.14 mg cm−3) and could bear large deformations with a zero Poisson's ratio (Fig. 18f). This outstanding performance can possibly be attributed to isotropic inversion of the nanofibrous cell walls under compressive stress (Fig. 18g). As a result of their ultralow density, superior compressibility, zero Poisson's ratio and good electrical conductivity, these CNFAs could be used to detect dynamic pressure changes over a wide temperature range from −50 to 200 °C while displaying high durability. The repeated loading and unloading of a pea while observing changes in the current demonstrated the high sensitivity of this sensor to very small pressure variations (Fig. 18h). These CNFAs could also be used to detect the neck pulse of a human (Fig. 18i) as well as the pulse pressure (Fig. 18j), demonstrating the viability of constructing sensors for monitoring in real time.
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
Tubular-structured materials are a class of macroscopic monoliths containing numerous microscopic continuous voids filled with gases. The spatial distributions of the immiscible gaseous and solid phases in these materials can be adjusted to give new properties. Inspired by nature's ingenious designs, various functional materials with tubular structures have been produced using a variety of techniques. This report described the fabrication methods and various applications of BTCMs. However, despite progress to date, maximizing the value of tubular-structured materials will require several challenges to be overcome.
The first challenge is optimizing the preparation process. On the one hand, because direct carbonization provides a convenient process that does not necessitate a template, it has emerged as a popular synthetic technique. However, this treatment may disrupt the tubular morphology. Although a protective layer can be used, this may weaken the bonding forces between the fibers, thereby reducing the strength and having a negative effect on applications in various fields. Therefore, retaining the tubular structure without reducing the strength of the material will be a major focus of future research related to direct carbonization. On the other hand, the use of biomass materials such as cellulose and chitosan allows the assembly of sophisticated tubular advanced carbon materials with tailorable properties by bottom-up fabrication. These tubular structures together with functional doping can be readily adjusted through the design of a template, and by controlling the freezing conditions and tuning the composition/concentration of the precursor. At present, complex operating steps, expensive templates and long preparation times are the main factors that limit bottom-up fabrication and make large-scale production problematic. The scale-up of such processes is a particular concern because realizing large-scale freeze casting within an acceptable time frame can be challenging. Thus, the development of both rapid freeze casting and cheap templates will be necessary to optimize the bottom-up fabrication process.
The second difficulty is expansion and interdisciplinary blend of application scope. The unique tubular structures of these materials have special advantages, such as providing low density, heat insulation and efficient mass transport, which further extend the potential of BTCMs in terms of designing functional materials. With regard to the development of new energy-related materials, tubular carbon frameworks can provide pathways for the rapid transport of electrolyte ions and thus has great potential for applications as highly active electrochemical materials. There is currently a trend related to the design of electrodes with high energy densities and low tortuosity. However, most such electrodes are presently based on wood, even though biomimetic tubular-structured carbon electrodes prepared from other biomasses are also worthy of attention. Besides, other work has shown that compressible conductive monoliths with tubular structures can be employed as pressure sensors or flexible capacitors/batteries and applied to wearable human health monitoring systems and flexible electronics.Significant research efforts in these areas have only just begun. Furthermore, the unique large void spaces in tubular structures can result in lightweight bulk materials with superior adsorption performance, although these may also suffer from low strength. Taking the adsorption of oils as an example, weak adsorbents can potentially be degraded during recycling. Thus, it is necessary to develop tubular-structured carbon materials having both high strength and super-compressibility. Adsorbents with reversible elasticity and high strength together with enhanced flame retardancy that can be easily regenerated by mechanical compression or combustion would be well suited to oil spill cleanup and water treatment.
Using biomass as raw materials has the intrinsic advantages of being readily available, low cost, environmentally friendly and renewable, and so could address concerns regarding nonrenewable resources and increasing energy requirements. BTCMs can permit the high-value utilization of biomass and have applications in a range of functional materials based on rational structural design. For all these reasons, we anticipate that research regarding tubular-structured carbon-based materials will continue to increase, and we look forward to the development of novel synthetic routes and new functional materials with unique properties tuned for specific applications.
List of abbreviations

1DOne-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
AAOAnodic alumina membrane
BTCMBiomass-derived tubular carbon materials
CVCyclic voltammogram
CMACarbon microtube aerogel
CWCarbonized wood
CTACarbon tube aerogel
CACellulose acetate
CDPCCotton derived porous carbon
CDICapacitive deionization
CCSCotton-derived carbon sponge
CDPCOCotton derived porous carbon oxide
CA-1-800Carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls
CNFAsCarbonaceous nanofibrous aerogels
CNF–GO–BA–SEPCellulose nanofibers/graphene oxide/boric acid/sepiolite
CMWFCarbonized wood fiber
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
EDLCsElectrical double-layer capacitors
EP
Enteromorpha prolifera

F-woodFlexible chemically treated wood
GCDGalvanostatic charge–discharge
GQDsGraphene quantum dots
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HPCAHierarchical porous carbonaceous aerogel
HCNFHollow carbon nanofiber
HPHCTHollow carbon textile
HCTHollow carbon tube
KGMKonjac glucomannan
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
LSDCMLoofah sponge fiber carbon materials
LFP-CFLithium iron phosphate filled carbon framework
MCNTsMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
MBNFsHierarchical boron nitride fibers
MOFMetal–organic framework
MCNTsMulti-wall carbon nanotubes
NWsNanowires
N/E-HPC-900N-Doped hierarchically porous carbon pyrolyzed at 900 °C
N/E-HPC-900N-Doped hierarchical porous carbon
ORROxidation-reduction reaction
PSC aerogelsPressure-sensitive and conductive carbon aerogels
PCPoplar catkin
PANPolyacrylonitrile
PWCPorous wood carbon

p-TsOH
p-Toluenesulfonic acid
PICPolymeric diphenylmethane diisocyanate
RRDERotating ring disk electrode
R-CW
p-Toluenesulfonic acid-catalyzed carbonized wood
SCsSupercapacitors
SSASpecific surface aera
TOCNSTEMPO-mediated oxidized cellulose nanofibers
TCFTwisted carbon fibers
TDCWCarbonized wood-based phase change energy storage material
UDFUnidirectional freeze casting
UCM aerogelsUltralight, compressible and multifunctional carbon aerogels
W-SSGDWood-based solar steam generation device
XMsXylem-like monoliths

Author contributions
Jiaming Sun: conceptualization, software, investigation, visualization, writing-original draft preparation. Zhenwei wu: investigation, visualization, comment, editing. Chuihui Ma: project administration, comment. Mingcong Xu: investigation, visualization, comment. Sha Luo: project administration, comment. Wei Li: editing, supervision, project administration, funding acquisition. Shouxin Liu: funding acquisition, editing, supervision, project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The present work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31890773, 31971601, 32071719), and the National Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (YQ2020C016). We thank Michael D. Judge, MSc, from Liwen Bianji, Edanz Editing China (http://www.liwenbianji.cn/ac), for editing the English text of a draft of this manuscript.
References
C. Chen, Y. Kuang, S. Zhu, I. Burgert, T. Keplinger, A. Gong, T. Li, L. Berglund, S. J. Eichhorn and L. Hu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 642–666 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Aladekomo and R. H. Bragg, Carbon, 1990, 28, 897–906 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Huang, Q. Huang, X. Xiong and T. Cheng, Carbon, 2003, 41, 610–612 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liao, M. N. Nguyen, G. Wan, J. Xie, L. Ni, J. Qi, J. Li and A. I. Schafer, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 397, 122779–122789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ou, J.-X. Wang, Y. Wu, S. Zhao and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122600–122612 CrossRef CAS .
W.-G. Cui, T.-L. Hu and X.-H. Bu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, Y.-P. Wei, S.-Q. Wang, X.-Y. Zhang, F.-M. Wang and W.-Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26490–26495 RSC .
Y. Lin, X. Wu, Y. Han, C.-P. Yang, Y. Ma, C. Du, Q. Teng, H.-Y. Liu and Y.-Y. Zhong, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117969 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hanprerakriengkrai, H. Fujitsuka, K. Nakagawa, H. Nakagawa and T. Tago, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 377, 120276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomez-Martin, J. Martinez-Fernandez, M. Ruttert, M. Winter, T. Placke and J. Ramirez, Carbon, 2020, 164, 261–271 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Sun, L. E, C.-H. Ma, Z.-W. Wu, Z. Xu, Y.-S. Liu, W. Li and S.-X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 300, 225–234 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. A. M. Abdah, N. H. N. Azman, S. Kulandaivalu, N. A. Rahman, A. H. Abdullah and Y. Sulaiman, J. Power Sources, 2019, 44, 227324 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, S. Zhao, G.-B. Chen, J. Feng, J.-Z. Feng and Z.-C. Yang, Micropor. Mesopor. Mater., 2020, 296, 109997 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Alifanov, S. A. Budnik, A. V. Nenarokomov and M. O. Salosina, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2020, 173, 115252 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Afroze, M. J. Abden, Z.-W. Yuan, C.-J. Wang, L. Wei, Y. Chen and L.-Y. Tong, Carbon, 2020, 162, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, Q. Nie, Y. Wu, H. Fang, P. Zhang and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter., 2020, 12, 26200–26212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-H. Chen, S.-J. Zhao, Q. M. Hasi, X.-F. Luo, C.-T. Zhang, H.-L. Li and A. Li, Global Challenges, 2020, 4, 1900098 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-F. Yu, P.-F. Shao, P.-W. Meng, T. Chen, J. Lei, X.-F. Yu, R. He, F. Yang, W.-K. Zhu and T. Duan, J. Hazar. Mater., 2020, 392, 122350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Sun, Y.-S. Liu, Z.-W. Wu, M.-C. Xu, L. E, C.-H. MA, S. Luo, J. Huang, W. Li and S.-X. Liu, Carbohyd. Polym., 2021, 252, 117209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, Z. He and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704850 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal’ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. A. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 868–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 695–703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dasbach, M. Pyschik, V. Lehmann, K. Parey, D. Rhinow, H. M. Reinhardt and N. A. Hampp, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8181–8190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. H. De Slilva, H. H. Huang, R. Joshi and M. Yoshimura, Carbon, 2020, 166, 74–90 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, B. Xu, J. Ding, Z. Wang and H. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18819–18825 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Martin-Martinez, K. Jin, D. L. Barreiro and M. J. Buehler, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Sun, Z.-W. Wu, B. An, C.-H. Ma, L.-F. Xu, Z.-S. Zhang, S. Luo, W. Li and S.-X. Liu, Compos. Part B, 2021, 220, 108997 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, C. Wu, W. Wu, C. Zhou, Z. Xi, Y. Deng, X. Wang, P. Quan, X. Li and Y. Luo, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, T. Zhao, M. Wang and J. Wang, Color. Technol., 2013, 139, 448–453 Search PubMed .
N. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Cai, H. Shen, F. Liang, D. Wang, C. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Liu, C. Duan, H. Wang, Y. Mao, H. Dong, X. Zhang and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6994–7017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tao, W. Shang, C. Song, Q. Shen, F. Zhang, Z. Luo, N. Yi, D. Zhang and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 428–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Berglund and I. Burgert, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704285 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fahlén and L. Salmén, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 119–126 CrossRef .
F. Fanti, A. Cau, M. Hassine and M. Contessi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2080 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Zhu and Q. Wang, J. Environ. Sci., 2015, 27, 21–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stegmaier, M. Linke and H. Planck, Philos. Trans. R Soc. A, 2009, 367, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Z. Shao, W. Gao, W. Fan, T. Liu and H. Bai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124623 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Bi, Q.-Q. Kong, Y.-F. Cao, G.-H. Sun, F.-Y. Su, X.-X. Wei, X.-M. Li, A. Ahmad, L.-J. Xie and C.-M. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16028–16045 RSC .
H. Bi, I.-W. Chen, T.-Q. Lin and F.-Q. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5943–5949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zheng and Q. Wang, Ind. Crop. Prod., 2012, 40, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
V.-D. Dao and H. S. Choi, Global Challenges, 2018, 2, 1700094 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bi, Z. Yin, X. Cao, X. Xie, C. Tan, X. Huang, B. Chen, F. Chen, Q. Yang, X. Bu, X. Lu and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5916–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6073 RSC .
G.-X. Li, P.-X. Hou, S.-Y. Zhao, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2016, 101, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Wan, Y. Yao, A. Gong, B. Yang, Z. Yu, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704107 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, B. Li, L. Li and A. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2069 RSC .
H.-J. Zhan, K.-J. Wu, Y.-L. Hu, J.-W. Liu, H. Li, X. Guo, J. Xu, Y. Yang, Z.-L. Yu, H.-L. Gao, X.-S. Luo, J.-F. Chen, Y. Ni and S.-H. Yu, Chem, 2019, 5, 1–12 Search PubMed .
B. Wicklein, A. Kocjan, G. Salazar-Alvarez, F. Carosio, G. Camino, M. Antonietti and L. Bergstrom, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 277–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, T. Hu, H. Sun, J. Zhang and A. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18001–18007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si, X. Wang, C. Yan, L. Yang, J. Yu and B. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9512–9518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Zhou, H. Qu, C. Zhang, M. Guo, X. Liu, Q. Zhang and B. Gao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xie, X.-H. Xia, W.-J. Tang, Y. Zhong, Y.-D. Wang, D.-H. Wang and X.-L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7578–7585 RSC .
H. Yang, Y. Wang, Q. Yu, G. Cao, X. Sun, R. Yang, Q. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Di, J. Li, C. Wang and G. Li, Energy, 2018, 159, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simonis, M. Rattal, E. M. Oualim, A. Mouhse and J. P. Vigneron, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 1940 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jia, J. Guo and J. Zhu, J. Bionic. Eng., 2017, 14, 616–621 CrossRef .
S. Metwally, S. M. Comesana, M. Zarzyka, P. K. Szewczyk, J. E. Karbowniczek and U. Stachewicz, Acta Biomater., 2019, 91, 270–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Y. Chen, A. Y. M. Lin, A. G. Stokes, Y. Seki, S. G. Bodde, J. Mckittick and M. A. Meyers, Biological Mater. Sic., 2008, 53, 1–206 Search PubMed .
I. M. Weiss and H. O. K. Kirchner, J. Exp. Zool. A: Ecol. Genet. Physiol., 2010, 313, 690–703 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Grojean, J. A. Sousa and M. C. Henry, Appl. Opt., 1980, 19, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cubo and A. Casinos, Zool. J. Linn. Soc., 2000, 130, 499–510 CrossRef .
E. Novitskaya, C. J. Ruestes, M. M. Porter, V. A. Lubarda, M. A. Meyers and J. Mckittrick, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed, 2017, 76, 85–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. O'Connor and L. P. A. M. Claessens, Nature, 2005, 436, 253–256 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Cao, W. Xiao, W. Duan, N. Wang, A. Wang and Y. Zheng, Ind. Crop. Prod., 2018, 115, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tu, W. Duan, W. Xiao, C. Fu, Q. Wang and Y. Zheng, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 192, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, S. Ma, Y. Su, Q. Li, X. Wang and X. Han, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11255–11264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, H. Su, P. Xiong and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8303–8309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Li, Y. Chen, M. Yin, T. Jia, S. He, Q. Deng and S. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 858–866 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, F. Liu, Y. Su, N. Shao, D. Yu, Y. Liu, W. Liu and Z. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 378, 120669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, Y. Xi, S. Chen, D. Li, X. She, J. Sun, W. Han, D. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8487–8495 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Rengasamy, D. Das and C. P. Karan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 526–532 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, C. Chen, Y. Pei, S. He, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, M. Jiao, W. Gan, D. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 12319 Search PubMed .
T. Nosaka, R. Lankone, P. Westerhoff and P. Herckes, Polym. Test., 2020, 86, 106497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, S. Wu and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801001 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Feng, Y. Bai, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Karthik, R. Gabriella, A. M. Rhoda, K. N. Kyeun, J. Lin, X. Qiang, R. Agoston, E. N. Rasoul, H. Mikael, F. Michael, B. Alexandra and D. Oisik, Polymer, 2020, 12, 1518 Search PubMed .
X. Lu, R. Caps, J. Fricke, C. T. Alviso and R. W. Pekala, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 188, 226 CrossRef CAS .
L. Glicksman, M. Schuetz and M. Sinofsky, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 1987, 30, 187 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, Z. He and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704850 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Li, G.-L. Wang, T. Wei, Z.-J. Fan and P. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Qin, H.-W. Tang, K. Chang, B. Li, Y.-H. Yan, Y. Hou and Z.-R. Chang, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 015403 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Schaedler, A. J. Jacobsen, A. Torrents, A. E. Sorensen, J. Lian, J. R. Greer, L. Valdevit and W. B. Carter, Science, 2011, 334, 962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lei, V. N. Mochalin, D. Liu, S. Qin, Y. Gogotsi and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Li, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, I.-W. Chen, T. Lin and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, W.-P. Jia, M.-Z. Xu, J.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Li, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-N. Wang, L. Zheng, Q. Li, J.-N. Yun, J.-F. Yan, X.-W. Wang and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9352–9361 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Kumar, D. Grekov, P. Pre and B. J. Alappa, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 124, 109743 CrossRef .
R. Wahi, L. A. Chuah, T. S. Y. Choong, Z. Ngaini and M. M. Nourouzi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 113, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, J.-Z. Liu, S.-L. Chang, Y. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bi, I.-W. Chen, T. Lin and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, X.-Y. Lai, J.-Y. Wang, H.-J. Tang, H. Ren, Y. Yang, Q. Jin, L.-J. Zhang, R.-B. Yu, G.-H. Ma, Z.-G. Su, H.-J. Zhao and D. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6749 RSC .
J. B. Joo, M. Dahl, N. Li, F. Zaera and Y. D. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2082 RSC .
L. Lu, Y. Lu, Z. Xiao, T. Zhang, F. Zhou, T. Ma, Y. Ni, H. Yao, S. Yu and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706745 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Luo, Y. Wang, Y. Yao, G. Pastel, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700595 CrossRef .
J.-M. Sun, W. Li, L. E, Z. Xu, C.-H. Ma, Z.-W. Wu and S.-X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, K. Qu, Y. You, Z. Huang, S. Liu, J. Li, Q. Hu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7278 RSC .
X. Zhang, Q. Huang, M. Zhang, M. Li, J. Hu and G. Yuan, J. Alloy Compd., 2020, 822, 153718 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, J. Chen, G. Zheng, J. Yang, X. Guan, P. Liu and X. Zheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 436, 27–336 CrossRef .
X.-H. Xia, Y. Wang, A. Ruditskiy and Y.-N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, B.-Y. Guan, B.-Y. Xia and X.-W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5590 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Sun, Z.-W. Wu, B. An, C.-H. Ma, L.-F. Xu, Z.-S. Zhang, S. Luo, W. Li and S.-X. Liu, Composites, Part B, 2021, 220, 108997 CrossRef .
C.-Z. Yuan, H.-B. Wu, Y. Xie and X.-W. Lou, Angew Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, X. Wu, Y. Yang, C. Ma, W. Li, H. Yu, Z. Chen, J. Li, K. Zhang and S. Liu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11130–11139 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, C. Ma, J. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Luo, M. Xu, P. Wu, W. Li and S. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng, 2019, 7, 18801–18809 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z.-J. Chen, H.-P. Yu, J. Li and S.-X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000596,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202000596 .
Y.-S. Liu, W. Li, O. Wu, C.-H. Ma, X.-Y. Wu, M.-C. Xu, S. Luo, Z. Xu and S.-X. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 281, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, S.-T. Yu, N.-J. Hao, T. Wells, X.-Z. Meng, M. Li, Y. U. Pu and S.-X. Liu, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 244, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, E. Wang, B. Mao, Z. Su, L. Chen and L. Xu, Nanotechnol., 2005, 16, 1192–1195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. Hu, H. Sun, J. Zhang and A. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18001–18007 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Meng, W.-W. Wang, X.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. Yue, H.-Y. Xia, Q.-C. Wang, X.-X. Wang, Z.-W. Fu, X.-Z. Wu and Y.-N. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2020, 465, 228291 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Li, W.-J. Wan, X.-J. Liu, H.-X. Liu, S.-B. Shen, F. Lv and J. Luo, Chemelectrochem, 2018, 5, 1113–1119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X.-X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, J.-B. Wu, J.-Z. Wang and J.-Y. Wang, Mater. Letters, 2020, 261, 127079 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Y. Han, Y. Li, J. Li and L. Wang, Carbohyd. Polym., 2018, 199, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, B. Mu and A. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mu, W. Zhang, W. Xu and A. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 709–720 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Wu, W. Wu, C. Zhou, Z. Xi, Y. Deng, X. Wang, P. Quan, X. Li and Y. Luo, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Teng, G. Siegel, M. C. Prestgard, W. Wang and A. Tiwari, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
M. Culebras, A. Barrett, M. Pishnamazi, G. M. Walker and M. N. Collins, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 2515–2522 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, H. Li, J. Zeng, Z. Ruan, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Q. Xue, J. Yu and C. Zhi, Carbon, 2018, 130, 532–543 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kontturi, P. Laaksonen, M. B. Linder, A. H. N. Groschel, O. J. Rojas and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703779 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Feng, Y. Bai, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-X. Cai, Z.-L. Wang, J. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804903 CrossRef .
L. Dubrovina, O. Naboka, V. Ogenko, P. Gatenholm and P. Enoksson, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1144–1149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kubo, I. Tan, R. J. White, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Zhang, I. Hussain, M. Brust, M. F. Butler, S. P. Rannard and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 787–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deville, E. Saiz, R. K. Nalla and A. P. Tomsia, Science, 2006, 311, 515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Munch, M. E. Launey, D. H. Alsem, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Science, 2008, 322, 1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. France, Z. Zeng, T. Wu and G. Nystrom, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000657 CrossRef .
S. Deville, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2005, 10, 155 CrossRef .
K. L. Scotti and D. C. Dunand, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 94, 243 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, C. Huang and A. P. Tomsia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703155 CrossRef .
G. Shao, D. A. H. Hanaor, X. Shen and A. Gurlo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-P. Liu, T.-T. Xu and C.-A. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 2907–2925 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barg, F. M. Perez, N. Ni, P. do Vale Pereira, R. C. Maher, E. Garcia-Tuñon, S. Eslava, S. Agnoli, C. Mattevi and E. Saiz, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Gao, Y.-B. Zhu, L.-B. Mao, F.-C. Wang, X.-S. Luo, Y.-Y. Liu, Y. Lu, Z. Pan, J. Ge, W. Shen, Y.-R. Zheng, L. Xu, L.-J. Wang, W.-H. Xu, H.-A. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Chen, B. Wang, M. Huang, B. Wang, Y. Jiang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, K. L. Yeo, Y. Chen, L. W. Yap, W. Xiong and W. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6723 RSC .
Z.-Z. Pan, H. Nishihara, S. Iwamura, T. Sekiguchi, A. Sato, A. Isogai, F. Kang, T. Kyotani and Q.-H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10689–10697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Sun, J. Huang, L. E, C.-H. Ma, Z.-W. Wu, Z. Xu, S. Luo, W. Li and S.-X. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11114–11122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Angew Chem. Int. Ed., 2007, 19, 5670 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Reneker, A. L. Yarin, E. Zussman and H. Xu, Adv. Appl. Mech., 2007, 41, 44 Search PubMed .
J. Xue, J. Xie, W. Liu and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1976–1987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, T. Wu, Y. Dai and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5298–5415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dzenis, Science, 2004, 304, 1917–1919 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hou, N. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Cui, L. Jiang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801114 CrossRef .
S. Koombhongse, W.-X. Liu and D.-H. Reneker, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys., 2001, 39, 2598 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y.-N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Cao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 764–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Rezabeigi, P. M. Wood-Adams and N. R. Demarquette, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 4094–4107 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balusamy, A. Senthamizhan, A. Celebioglu and T. Uyar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 593, 162–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, D. Yang, D. Kang and X. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1186–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, P. Wang, Z. Su, G. Ma and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 181–190 RSC .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bognitzki, H. Hou, M. Ishaque, T. Frese, M. Hellwig, C. Schwarte, A. Schaper and J. H. Wendorff, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 637 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Mao, W. Peng, J. Jin, S. Yang and G. Li, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 2602–2609 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, J. Zhou, L. Jiang, G. Lubineau, Y. Chen, X.-F. Wu and R. Piere, Mater. Letter., 2013, 109, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yu, A. Gele and L. Wang, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 118, 478–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, T. Ji, L. Brisbin and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12230–12237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E, W. Li, C.-H. Ma and S.-X. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phy., 2018, 214, 291–296 CrossRef .
D. Xu, Y. Tong, T. Yan, L. Shi and D. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5810–5819 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, H. Hu, H.-B. Wu and X.-W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604563 CrossRef PubMed .
V.-D. Dao and H. S. Choi, Global Challenges, 2018, 2, 1700094 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
W. Li, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, Q. Huo, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Tian and Z. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1831–1839 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, J. Cui, J. Di, D. Liu, M. Xu, B. Tang, Q. Zeng, J. Xiong, C. Wang, Q. He, L. Kang, J. Zhou, R. Duan, B. Chen, S. Guo, F. Liu, J. Shen and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 595–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Wang, W. Li, Y. Wu and Z. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 17529–17536 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, Z. Wei, Y. Huang and Y. Fu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 127772 Search PubMed .
N. Hu, Y. Xu, Z. Liu, M. Liu, X. Shao and J. Wang, Carbohyd. Polym., 2020, 243, 116480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, Y. Xing, J. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Cui, D. Li, D. Guo, C. Li, A. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7930–7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chao, S. Wang, Y. Li, G. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, C. Wang and S.-H. Ho, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 40, 125865 CrossRef .
J.-L. Xu, Z.-Z. Wang, C. Chang, B.-W. Fu, P. Tao, C.-Y. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, Desalination, 2020, 484, 114423 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, G. Zhang, C. Xu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29706–29716 CAS .
G. Wang, T. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 8411–8419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Teow and A. W. Mohammad, Desalination, 2019, 451, 2–17 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ratajczak, M. E. Suss, F. Kaasilk and F. Beguin, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 126–145 CrossRef .
T.-T. Yan, J. Liu, H. Lei, L.-Y. Shi, Z.-X. An, H. S. Park and D.-S. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 2722–2730 RSC .
T. Wu, G. Wang, Q. Dong, F. Zhan, X. Zhang, S. Li, H. Qiao and J. Qiu, Environ. Sci. Techno., 2017, 51, 9244–9251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Gaikwad and C. Balomajumder, Chemosphere, 2017, 184, 1141–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Yang, B. Dang, J. Tao, S. Li, S. Zhao, W. Li, J. Li, Z. Chen and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105322 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, K. Hong, X. Sun, A. Natan, P. Luan, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12323–12333 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J.-Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 19, 1701756 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, J. Song, X. Zhao, Z. Yang, G. Pastel, S. Xu, C. Jia, J. Dai, C. Chen, A. Gong, F. Jiang, Y. Yao, T. Fan, B. Yang, L. Wagberg, R. Yang and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 3724–3731 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Mu, W. Bai, Z. Zhang, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18183–18190 RSC .
W. Villasmil, L. J. Fischer and J. Worlistschek, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 103, 71–84 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Ni, C. Li, B. You and G. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9701–9712 RSC .
M. Cao, W. Cheng, X. Ni, Y. Hu and G. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 345, 136172 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Z. Cao, S. Wang, L. Sun, L. Zhou, H. Xue, Y. Wu, L. Cavallo, L. Wang and J. Ming, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228128 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ji, S. Wei, Y. Xia, C. Huang, Y. Huang, H. Zhang, F. Xu, L. Sun and X. Liu, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101134 CrossRef .
L. Ji, B. Wang, Y. Yu, N. Wang and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135348 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Meng, W.-W. Wang, X.-Y. Yue, H.-Y. Xia, Q.-C. Wang, X.-X. Wang, Z.-W. Fu, X.-J. Wu and Y.-N. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2020, 465, 228291 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, B. Xie, Z. He, J. Chen and Y. Long, Renewable Energy, 2019, 140, 862–873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, J. Song, T. Li, A. Gong, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, D. Henderson and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, B. Zhao, T. Liu, J. Mou, Z. Jiang, Z. Liu, H. Li and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902255 CrossRef .
C. Lafforgue, R. W. Atkinson III, K. Swider-Lyons and M. Chatenet, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 341, 135971 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, C. Ma, W. Li, S. Luo, Y. Liu, X. Wu, Z. Wu and S. Liu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 160, 113091 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, K. Pang, X. Xu, P. Yuan, Z. Zhang, X. Wu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang and R. Song, Carbon, 2020, 157, 153–163 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Jamesh and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 31–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Jamesh and X. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 34, 111–160 CrossRef .
S. S. Shinde, C. H. Lee, A. Sami, D. H. Kim, S. U. Lee and J. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 347–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, L. Zhong, D. Zhao, X. Chi, X. Zhao, L. Li, X. Lu, K. Leng, C. Liu, W. Liu, W. Tang and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900341 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wu, M. Gao, C. Jiang, X. Gu, Z. Wang, L. Huang and S. Yu, J. Power Source, 2021, 497, 229878 CrossRef CAS .
L. E., J. Sun, W. Gan, Z. Wu, Z. Xu, L. Xu, C. Ma, W. Li and S. Liu, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 28, 102414 CrossRef .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5336–5342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Aldridge and M. Trimmer, Hydrobiologia, 2009, 629, 107–122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Aveytua-Alcázar, V. F. Camacho-Ibar, A. J. Souza, J. I. Allen and R. Torres, Ecol. Modell, 2008, 218, 354–366 CrossRef .
J. Cui, J. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Fan, Z. Xu, Y. Huo, Q. Zhou, Y. Lu and P. He, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2018, 130, 223–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Wang, C. Liu, S. M. Fakhrhoseini, D. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Lei and M. Naebe, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Yang, R. Xia, Y. Li, J. Zhao, L. Lin, J. Cao, Q. Wang, Y. Liu and H. Guo, Carbon, 2020, 162, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, T. Li, C. Chen, J. Dai, I. M. Kierzewski, J. Song, Y. Li, C. Yang, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 366 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scrosati, J. Hassoum and Y. K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3287 RSC .
A. Rosenman, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and F. F. Chesneau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500212 CrossRef .
X.-W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, C. Tang, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Q. Wei, M. Yan, J. Sheng, J. Hu, B. Wang and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26572–26578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, H. Zhu, W. Luo, F. Shen, X. Fan, J. Dai, Y. Liang, C. Wang and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14801–14807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, T. Zhao, W. Zhu, F. Qiu, Y. Wang and L. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20828–20837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, Z. He and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704850 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Yeo, M. J. Oh and P. J. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803670 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, T.-Y. Han, E. B. Duoss, A. M. Golobic, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini and M. A. Worsley, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6962 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Jiaming Sun	Jiaming Sun received her B.S. degree in chemical processing of forest product from Northeast Forestry University in 2017. She is now a PhD student in the research group of Prof. Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. Her current research interests focus on the functional development of cellulose-derived aerogels.
Zhenwei Wu	Zhenwei Wu is currently a third-year PhD student under the supervision of Professor Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. He received his B.E. degree in Forest Product Chemicals from Northeast Forestry University at 2018. His current research focuses on liquefied wood based ordered mesoporous carbon materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Chunhui Ma	Chunhui Ma received her PhD degree in 2013 from the Northeast Forestry University working on extraction of active components from forest source under the supervision of Prof. Yuangang Zu. She now works at the Northeast Forestry University as an associate professor. Her main research interests are the application of ionic liquid-supported catalysts and structural modification functional materials of natural products.
Mingcong Xu	Mingcong Xu received his master degree in Forestry Engineering from Northeast Forestry University in 2018. He is now a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Shouxin Liu at Northeast Forestry University. His current research focuses on cellulose nanocrystal based chiral liquid crystal photonic materials.
Sha Luo	Sha Luo received his PhD degree on chemical engineering from Dalian University of Technology in 2014. He now works at the Northeast Forestry University, and his main research interests are the catalytic conversion of biomass materials.
Wei Li	Wei Li received his PhD degree in 2012 from the Northeast Forestry University working on cellulose nanocrystals materials under the supervision of Prof. Shouxin Liu. He now works at the Northeast Forestry University as an associate professor. His main research interests are cellulose nanocrystals and cellulose-based carbon materials.
Shouxin Liu	Shouxin Liu is a professor of the Key laboratory of Bio-based Material Science and Technology of Ministry of Education at Northeast Forestry University, China. He received his PhD degree on chemical process and engineering of forest products from Prof. Shirun Zhang in 2002. He was granted Yangtse River Scholar due to his excellent achievements in the area of carbon materials research in 2015. His main research interests are focused on biomass-derived carbon materials. Till date, he has published over 180 peer-reviewed research articles, and received a number of competitive career awards in China.

 	Fig. 1  Characteristics, fabrication processes and applications of BTCMs. (a) A photograph showing the sorption of chloroform with a twisted carbon fiber (TCF) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) The adsorption of heavy metal ions using cotton derived porous carbon oxide (CDPCO). Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c)The desalination capacity of cotton-derived carbon sponge (CCS) at different equilibrium concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) The water extraction capabilities of bilayer wood in conjunction with groundwater (from sand or soil) and seawater. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (e) The flame retardancy of an ultralight, compressible and multifunctional (UCM) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) A thermographic image of a cylindrical carbon tube aerogel (CTA) sample on a hot plate. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Schematic (left) and thermographic (right) images of a cellulose nanofibers/graphene oxide/boric acid/sepiolite (CNF–GO–BA–SEP) nanocomposite foam in which the tubular pores are oriented normal to the heat source. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (h) The strain-controlled on–off of an LED lamp using a pressure-sensitive and conductive (PSC) aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (i) The response and relaxation of a pressure sensor upon loading and unloading of a pea with a pressure of 10 Pa. (j) Measurement of a human neck pulse at 72 beats per min. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (k) Optical images of a red LED bulb brightly powered by two symmetrical supercapacitors in series after 5 min. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (l) New bundled carbon tubes taken from a loofah sponge used as the backbone for MoS2–N doped carbon composites with enhanced lithium/sodium storage properties. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (m) Infrared thermal images obtained from carbonized wood (CW), carbonized wood-based phase change energy storage material (TDCW) and pure wood (PW) samples at temperatures from 14 to 100 °C. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the transverse and longitudinal cross-sections of (a) a polar bear hair and (b) a penguin hair. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Micro computerized tomography scans of the wing bones of the wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans). Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Copyright 2017, Elsevier. SEM images of (d) kapok fibers. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Calotropis gigantea fibers. Reproduced from ref. 66 and 67 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Catkin fibers. Reproduced from ref. 68 and 69 with permission from Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The pappi of S. oleraceus L. reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) Loofah sponge. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (i) Enteromorpha prolifera. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (j) Milkweed. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (k) A cross-section of natural basswood (the inset shows a side view). Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The illustration of traditional electrode with poor electrolyte diffusion and long Li-ion transport path. (b) The illustration of wood-inspired electrode with vertical channels to shorten the Li-ion transport path. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley. Graphical illustration of the influence of tortuosity on the ion transportation behaviors (mainly the distance): comparison between two typical structures: (c) low-tortuosity structure with straight channels and (d) high-tortuosity structure with random particles. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e) Graphical illustrations of a tubular carbon aerogel whose tubular structure acts highway for electrons and electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Grass-based carbon nanotubes: (a) SEM images of vascular bundles after heat treatment at approximately 250 °C. (b) TEM images of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) obtained from grass. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Copyright 2005, IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  Flocculent cellulose-based carbon microtubes: (a) a diagram showing the preparation of a PSC aerogel. (b) SEM images of the resulting PSC aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The synthetic route to a tubular carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls. SEM images of the (d) outer layer and (e) inner layer of carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls (CA-1-800). (f) A comparison of the tubular morphologies with and without N-containing sandwich-like walls. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Wood-based carbon microtubes: a diagram showing the fabrication of N,S co-doped wood carbons. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Hard-template synthesis: (a) diagram summarizing the bioinspired fabrication of a CTA. (b) A TEM image of nanowire-carbon aerogel (NW-CA) (inset: a magnified TEM image of a single cable fiber). (c) A TEM image of a CTA (inset: an optical microscopy image). (d) Characterization of the shell thicknesses of aerogels with increasing concentrations of glucose. (e) Characterization of CTA specimens with different inner diameters synthesized from Te NWs with 25, 35 and 55 nm diameters: (A1) 9, (A2) 31, (A3) 52 nm shell thickness with 25 nm inner diameter; (B1) 25 nm shell thickness with 35 nm inner diameter; (C1) 53 nm shell thickness with 55 nm inner diameter. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) An SEM image of a bundle of CNTs in the macropore of a composite synthesized via the addition of NiCl2, and a TEM image of a CNT. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from Copyright 2013, Springer. (g) A TEM image of hollow carbon tube (HCT). (h) TEM micrographs of an HCT-PNiPAAm specimen. Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Unidirectional freeze casting synthesis: (a) diagram showing the preparation of xylem-liked monoliths (XMs) with an illustration of ice crystal growth during the UDF process (central part). The image on the left is of a viscous TEMPO-mediated oxidized cellulose nanofibers (TOCN) sol, while that on the right is an SEM image of the cross-section of XMs prepared by immersion into liquid nitrogen at 50 cm h−1. (b) SEM image of the longitudinal section of the XMs. SEM images of the cross-sections of monoliths prepared from mixtures of TOCNs and (c) poly urethane-1 (UCECOAT 7655, Daicel-Allnex Ltd.), (d) hemicellulose and lignin (TOCNs:hemicellulose:lignin = 2:1:1) and (e) GO (TOCNs:GO = 9:1 by mass). Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Diagram of the synthetic route to a xylem-like carbon aerogel. SEM images of (g) a cross-section and (h) a longitudinal section of an NP1 aerogel. (i) Diagram of the dual-activation process. (j) and (k) TEM images acquired at different magnifications. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrospinning synthesis: (a) diagram showing the synthesis procedure for NiCo2O4-hollow carbon nanofibers (HCNFs). Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b)SEM image of ZnO hollow tubes. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. SEM images of (c) hollow polyurethane nanofibers prepared through coaxial electrospinning. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Anatase hollow nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society and (e) the inner surfaces of poly(p-xylylene) tubes obtained by coating rough poly(L-lactide). Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (f) and (g) Mapping of NiCo2O4–HCNF. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. SEM images of carbonized (h) polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/lignin hollow fibers and (i) CNFs-lignin/PAN core–shell fibers. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Copyright 2013 Elsevier. SEM images of HCNFs with different ratios of lignin to Fe(acac)3: (j) HCNFs-5, (k) HCNFs-10 and (l) HCNFs-25 specimens. (m) High resolution TEM image of an HCNFs-25 specimen. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) An SEM image of a carbon microtube aerogel (CMA) (inset: an optical microscopy photograph). Recycling of CMA by (b) combustion and (c) squeezing. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) The mirror reflection of the cotton-derived porous carbon (CDPC) aerogels surface. Photographs showing the adsorption of (e) heptane and (f) chloroform with the CDPC aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) A schematic showing the preparation of Biomass-C/MOFs-C carbon aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (h) Light-trapping effects in the channels of OTS-rGO-WS and solar-motivated capillary flow for promotion of crude oil through the channels. (i) No obvious oil leakage from OTS-rGO-WS at high (85.9 °C) and ambient (29.5 °C) temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A diagram summarizing the synthesis and reaction mechanism involved in producing hierarchical BN fibers (MBNFs) from luffa sponge. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) SEM images of the cotton fibers. (c) The adsorption of heavy metal ions using CDPCO. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Optical and (e) SEM images of the CCS-1100. (f) The desalination capacity of CCS at different equilibrium concentrations. (g) The electro-sorption and regeneration cyclability of the CCS in 500 mg L−1 NaCl. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Nature-inspired design of p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TsOH)-catalyzed carbonized wood (R-CW) for solar steam generation. (b) Schematic illustration of fabrication of R-CW using p-TsOH-assisted hydrothermal treatment; (c) magnified structure of R-CW and properties of R-CW lumens; (d) schematic illustration of solar steam generation using R-CW under solar irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Solar thermal desalination mechanism in detail of loofah-based solar steam generation device. The evaporator has several characteristics of interconnected microchannels for vapor transportation. (f) Photograph showing salt-blockages at the surface of a conventional carbon felt evaporator and no salt-blockages at the surface of the carbonized loofah sponge after 10 h in a 20% NaCl solution with a solar irradiance of 1 sun. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photographic images of the original F-wood, F-wood/CNTs and flexed F-wood/CNTs membranes. (h) Diagram of the flexible solar steam system made from a CNT-coated flexible wood membrane. (i) Diagram of the interaction between the CNT coating and the flexible wood matrix. Reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 13  Flame retardant and thermal insulation materials: (a) A TEM image of the CTA (inset: an optical microscopy image). (b) A thermographic image of a CTA specimen on a 400 °C hot plate. (c) Thermal conductivities of cable and tube aerogels with different shell thicknesses at room temperature. (d) The thermal insulation performances of cable and tube aerogels (left). The corresponding thermographic images of the cable aerogel (bottom) and tube aerogel (top) on a 350 °C heating stage (right). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Flame retardancy of the UCM aerogel. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) The vertical burning test (UL94) of a nanocomposite foam containing 77% cellulose nanofibers (CNFs), 10% GO, 10% SEP and 3% BA (by mass). (g) Schematic (left) and thermographic (right) images of a CNF–GO–BA–SEP nanocomposite foam with tubular pores oriented normal to the heat source. (h) A diagram showing the contributions to thermal conductivity in the radial and axial directions of a foam with oriented pores. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) obtained from an optimized sample referenced to Pt/C in N2 and O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH as recorded at 20 mV s−1. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves obtained from the optimized sample at different rotational speeds (inset: K–L plots at different potentials and the electron transfer numbers). (c) Rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms for the optimized sample and Pt/C samples at 1600 rpm, with the ring currents amplified by a factor of 5 for better resolution. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Diagram showing the bulk transformation process using an enzyme-assisted method. (e) Diagrams of a rechargeable quasi-solid-state Zn–air battery with an N-doped hierarchically porous carbon pyrolyzed at 900 °C (N/E-HPC-900) plate cathode. (f) A photograph of LEDs powered by two rechargeable quasi-solid-state Zn–air batteries with an N/E-HPC-900 plate. (g) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves acquired at 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (h) A diagram showing the preparation of catkins/MoS2 hybrids. (i) Theoretical (black dots) and experimental (red dots) H2 yields as functions of time in a 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids. (j) Data from stability tests of catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids comprising the initial polarization curve and the curve after 1000 cycles. (k) Current density–time (J–t) curves obtained from catkins-900/MoS2 hybrids (η = 150 mV vs. RHE) over 100 h. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) An HRTEM image of HPCA-700-800. (b) CV curves and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves obtained from HPCA-700-800 at different scan rates. (d) An FESEM image of Co3O4@HPCA-700-800. (e) CV curves and (f) GCD curves obtained from Co3O4@HPCA-700-800 at different scan rates. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) A diagram summarizing the preparation of HPHCT from cotton. (h) A digital photograph of a lightweight, flexible and strong hollow carbon textile (HPHCT) specimen. (i) An SEM image of KOH-coated cotton. (j) GCD curves acquired at current densities of 0.5 to 20 A g−1. (k) Capacitance retention during 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1 (inset shows GCD curves before and after cycling). (l) CV curves obtained at scan rates of 5 to 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (m) A diagram showing ion and charge transfer inside a porous carbon wood (PWC)/MnO2/GQDs 15 mg electrode. (n) SEM images of PWC/MnO2/GQD specimens with GQD concentrations of 5 and 15 mg. (o) CV curves obtained at various scan rates and (p) GCD curves obtained at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) SEM images of a pristine loofah sponge fiber and (b) schematic illustration of fabrication of LSDCM/MoS2/N–C composite. (c) The cycling stability and corresponding coulombic efficiency at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) CV data for an S/f-carbonized wood fiber (CMWF) electrode during the first three cycles. (e) The GCD performance of an S/f-CMWF electrode. (f) The cycling stability test data for S/CMWF and S/f-CMWF electrodes. (g) Specific capacity data obtained at various current densities for an S/f-CMWF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Diagram of the design concept for an ultrathick electrode using a 3D conductive carbon framework as a current collector. (b) Illustrations of the ion and electron transport in the 3D LFP-CF electrode and the LFP-CF|separator|Li metal battery system during charging. (c) Magnified cross-section view SEM images of the LFP-CF composite. (d) Charge–discharge profiles and (e) CV curves of the ultrathick LFP-CF electrode. (f) Data showing the ready deformation of a conventional thick LFP electrode and the lack of deformation of the 3D ultrathick LFP-CF electrode. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. (g) Diagram summarizing the TDCW formation process. (h) Thermal conductivity of TD, PW, CW and TDCW at radial and axial direction at 25 °C and 50 °C. (i) TG curves for TD, PW, CW, TDPW and TDCW. (j) Diagram showing radial and axial heat transport in wood. (k) Surface temperature over time from 14 to 100 °C and (l) the corresponding infrared thermal images of CW, TDCW, PW and TDPW samples. (m) The infrared thermal images of the CW, TDCW, PW and TDPW samples obtained during cooling. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Reversible compression of a UCM aerogel. (b) Compressive stress–strain curves for a UCM aerogel; (c) the strain-controlled on–off of a light-emitting diode using a UCM aerogel. (d) Variations in Rt/R0 values of a UCM aerogel with repeated compressive strain (50%) over 10 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A diagram showing the synthetic steps. (f) Compressive σ versus ε curves for carbonaceous nanofibers aerogels (CNFAs) along the loading direction (insets: profiles of the CNFAs during a compression cycle with ε = 80%). (g) Diagram showing inversion of the nanofibrous cell walls with compression. (h) Response and relaxation of a pressure sensor upon loading and unloading of a pea with a pressure of 10 Pa. (i) Measurement of a human neck pulse under normal conditions, indicating 72 beats per min. (j) The magnified curve of a typical neck pulse wave signal, in which P1, P2 and P3 are clearly evident. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 
1D	One-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
AAO	Anodic alumina membrane
BTCM	Biomass-derived tubular carbon materials
CV	Cyclic voltammogram
CMA	Carbon microtube aerogel
CW	Carbonized wood
CTA	Carbon tube aerogel
CA	Cellulose acetate
CDPC	Cotton derived porous carbon
CDI	Capacitive deionization
CCS	Cotton-derived carbon sponge
CDPCO	Cotton derived porous carbon oxide
CA-1-800	Carbon aerogel with N-containing sandwich-like walls
CNFAs	Carbonaceous nanofibrous aerogels
CNF–GO–BA–SEP	Cellulose nanofibers/graphene oxide/boric acid/sepiolite
CMWF	Carbonized wood fiber
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
EDLCs	Electrical double-layer capacitors
EP	
Enteromorpha prolifera

F-wood	Flexible chemically treated wood
GCD	Galvanostatic charge–discharge
GQDs	Graphene quantum dots
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HPCA	Hierarchical porous carbonaceous aerogel
HCNF	Hollow carbon nanofiber
HPHCT	Hollow carbon textile
HCT	Hollow carbon tube
KGM	Konjac glucomannan
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
LSDCM	Loofah sponge fiber carbon materials
LFP-CF	Lithium iron phosphate filled carbon framework
MCNTs	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
MBNFs	Hierarchical boron nitride fibers
MOF	Metal–organic framework
MCNTs	Multi-wall carbon nanotubes
NWs	Nanowires
N/E-HPC-900	N-Doped hierarchically porous carbon pyrolyzed at 900 °C
N/E-HPC-900	N-Doped hierarchical porous carbon
ORR	Oxidation-reduction reaction
PSC aerogels	Pressure-sensitive and conductive carbon aerogels
PC	Poplar catkin
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile
PWC	Porous wood carbon

p-TsOH	
p-Toluenesulfonic acid
PIC	Polymeric diphenylmethane diisocyanate
RRDE	Rotating ring disk electrode
R-CW	
p-Toluenesulfonic acid-catalyzed carbonized wood
SCs	Supercapacitors
SSA	Specific surface aera
TOCNS	TEMPO-mediated oxidized cellulose nanofibers
TCF	Twisted carbon fibers
TDCW	Carbonized wood-based phase change energy storage material
UDF	Unidirectional freeze casting
UCM aerogels	Ultralight, compressible and multifunctional carbon aerogels
W-SSGD	Wood-based solar steam generation device
XMs	Xylem-like monoliths

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
