Towards establishing standard performance metrics for batteries, supercapacitors and beyond  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00581H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00581H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1272-1341Towards establishing standard performance metrics for batteries, supercapacitors and beyond

        
          
            Abolhassan 
            Noori
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maher F. 
            El-Kady
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad S. 
            Rahmanifar
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Richard B. 
            Kaner
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Mir F. 
            Mousavi
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, 14115-175, Iran. E-mail: mousavim@modares.ac.ir
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, and California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. E-mail: kaner@chem.ucla.edu
cFaculty of Basic Sciences, Shahed University, Tehran 3319118-651, Iran
Received 
      1st September 2018
    First published on 11th February 2019AbstractOver the past decade, electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices have greatly improved, as a wide variety of advanced electrode active materials and new device architectures have been developed. These new materials and devices should be evaluated against clear and rigorous metrics, primarily based on the evidence of real performances. A series of criteria are commonly used to characterize and report performance of EES systems in the literature. However, as advanced EES systems are becoming more and more sophisticated, the methodologies to reliably evaluate the performance of the electrode active materials and EES devices need to be refined to realize the true promise as well as the limitations of these fast-moving technologies, and target areas for further development. In the absence of a commonly accepted core group of metrics, inconsistencies may arise between the values attributed to the materials or devices and their real performances. Herein, we provide an overview of the energy storage devices from conventional capacitors to supercapacitors to hybrid systems and ultimately to batteries. The metrics for evaluation of energy storage systems are described, although the focus is kept on capacitive and hybrid energy storage systems. In addition, we discuss the challenges that still need to be addressed for establishing more sophisticated criteria for evaluating EES systems. We hope this effort will foster ongoing dialog and promote greater understanding of these metrics to develop an international protocol for accurate assessment of EES systems.
Abolhassan Noori
Abolhassan Noori received his PhD under the supervision of Professor A. Abbaspour from Shiraz University in 2011. During his PhD he spent 6 months in the group of (late) Prof. Marco Mascini at the University of Florence, Italy, as a Visiting Student Researcher, working on the implementation of nanostructured materials in biosensors. After that, he was awarded five one-year fellowships sponsored by the Tarbiat Modares University (TMU) Research Council and another one from the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) to pursue his postdoctoral research in the laboratory of Professor Mir F. Mousavi. In 2015, he began pursuing Electrochemical Energy Storage (EES) systems. Recently, Dr Noori joined the Department of Chemistry at TMU as a Research Associate Professor, working with Prof. Mousavi to continue expanding his expertise and knowledge in energy storage/conversion systems. He is a fellow of the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS) and Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS). His current research interests focus on the rational design of nanostructured materials, bioinspired from nature, to solve problems in bioanalytical chemistry and materials science, ranging from challenges in targeted drug delivery to energy-related applications.
Maher F. El-Kady
Maher F. El-Kady is a postdoctoral research fellow at UCLA and chief technology officer at Nanotech Energy, Inc. For more than 12 years, Dr El-Kady has been studying the chemistry and physics of materials with applications in energy storage, electronic devices, medical and healthcare devices, chemical sensors and biosensors, nanogenerators, solar cells, water splitting, hydrogen energy, water remediation and environmental monitoring. This work resulted in 16 US and international patents issued and pending and 40+ papers in prestigious journals. His groundbreaking work on graphene supercapacitors led to the development of Nanotech Energy, Inc. where he is leading a team of scientists and engineers for developing more powerful batteries, supercapacitors, printed electronics, nanomaterials, conductive inks and adhesives. He has received numerous awards for his research including the UCLA Herbert Newby McCoy Award, the Lindau Graduate Student Award, the Amgen Postdoctoral Award, the Cairo University Presidential Award for Excellence in Research and the 2012 Excellence in Research Award from the Government of Egypt.
Mohammad S. Rahmanifar
M. S. Rahmanifar received his BSc (1995) from Kharazmi University, and MSc (1998) and PhD (2003) from Tarbiat Modarres University under the supervision of Prof. M. F. Mousavi. He then began his academic career at Shahed University in 2005 and was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure starting in 2017. His research interests focus on the design and fabrication of electrochemical power sources (EPSs) and the electrochemistry of materials and their application in EPSs.
Richard B. Kaner
Richard Kaner received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1984 working with Prof. Alan MacDiarmid (Nobel Laureate 2000, deceased). After postdoctoral research at Berkeley, he joined the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 1987, earned tenure in 1991, became a Distinguished Professor in 2012 and was appointed to the Dr Myung Ki Hong Endowed Chair in Materials Innovation in 2017. He has published over 400 papers in top peer reviewed journals and holds more than 40 U.S. patents. According to the latest Thomson-Reuters rankings, he is among the world's most highly cited authors. Professor Kaner has received awards from the Dreyfus, Fulbright, Guggenheim, Packard and Sloan Foundations along with the Materials Research Society Medal, the Royal Society of Chemistry Centenary Prize, and the American Chemical Society's Buck-Whitney Research Award, Tolman Medal and Award in the Chemistry of Materials for his work on refractory materials including new synthetic routes to ceramics, intercalation compounds, superhard metals, graphene and conducting polymers. He has been elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the American Chemical Society (ACS), the European Academy of Sciences (EurASc), the Materials Research Society (MRS) and the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC).
Mir F. Mousavi
Mir F. Mousavi received a PhD from Shiraz University in 1992. He then joined the Chemistry Department of Tarbiat Modares University (TMU) in 1992 as an Assistant Professor, became an Associate Professor in 1998, and was promoted to Full Professor in 2002. He has been listed as one of the Leading Scientists and Engineers in the OIC Member States in 2006, and an ISI (ESI) scientist (Top 1% Most Cited Scientist) in 2007. Prof. Mousavi has been recognized as the First Laureate in Modern Technology at the 14th Annual Razi International Research Festival in 2008, and has received many awards including the ISESCO Award in 2008, the Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS) Award in 2009, the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS) Award in 2009, and the ICS Award for Distinguished Professor of Analytical Chemistry in 2011. He is a member of many academies, including the American Chemical Society (ACS), the International Society of Electrochemistry (ISE), the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS), the Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS), the Iran Science Elites Federation (ISEF), and was elected as a Regional Representative for ISE from 2007 to 2012. Prof. Mousavi has been a Visiting Professor in Prof. Richard Kaner's laboratory at UCLA from 2013–2014. His current research interests involve advanced nanostructured materials and technologies for energy storage and conversion devices, including rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, as well as hybrid systems, along with the applications of nanomaterials in nanobiotechnology.
Introduction
Due to limited crude oil resources and growing concerns about their negative environmental impacts, particularly global warming and the emission of toxic chemicals, there is an increasing interest in renewable energy. Switching from fossil-based energy to renewable energy offers the possibility of saving energy and simplifying energy distribution by sending electrons over the grid, or even generating the energy from renewable sources on-site, instead of transporting fossil-based fuels. However, intermittency of renewable energy sources such as sunlight, wind, and tide calls for energy storage to ensure efficient, continuous, reliable and affordable energy supplies. Electrochemical energy storage (EES) technologies along with materials development constitute essential elements to tackle the challenges to provide a stable supply of energy. Over the past decade, steady progress has been made towards this goal through the development of advanced electrode active materials. Thus, high power supercapacitors and high-energy rechargeable batteries have been developed. However, each of these stand-alone technologies by itself lacks the requisite qualities to meet the commercial needs that have been shaped by the consumption of fossil fuels. Consequently, hybrid energy storage devices that strive to advance along the diagonal of a so-called Ragone plot, by combining the high power characteristics of supercapacitors with the high energy content of rechargeable batteries, have been explored1 (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot showing the specific power vs. specific energy of various energy storage devices. Adapted with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. with modifications. 
The introduction of advanced nanostructures for a new generation of energy storage systems has contributed to the blurring of the distinctions between batteries and supercapacitors based on two fundamentally different energy-storage mechanisms. However, increasing the energy content of supercapacitors to approach that of batteries, or improving the power performance of batteries to approach that of supercapacitors, usually comes at the cost of losses in power and/or cyclability of supercapacitors and deteriorations in the energy of batteries.2,3 Thus, the outstanding properties reported for some devices, e.g. supercapacitors with energy densities that approach or even exceed that of batteries,4 do not necessarily translate into reality. Although some metrics seem to support the claims of having both high power and high energy densities, the actual performance of a given device almost always contradicts the assertions being made. Thus, in spite of many attempts that have been made to standardize the evaluation methods of EES systems, there is still a lack of clear rules for evaluating the performance of EES systems in a fair and systematic way.
Herein, we first present an introduction to the basic principles of different energy storage systems. Then we describe some of the most important and commonly employed characterization techniques to guide newcomers of the EES community as well as scientists and engineers who may not be familiar with the electrochemical terms through the steps that are necessary to effectively and accurately evaluate their EES systems. We hope this effort will serve as a resourceful starting point, and as a step forward along with the efforts that others have made, to sharpen the distinction between different charge storage modalities. We also expect that the push into the evaluation of EES systems with appropriate metrics that give a real picture of the performance of EES systems will help in reaching a point where we can all speak the same language.
Overview of energy storage technologies
Electrical energy storage technology can be classified by the form of storage into a variety of categories including mechanical energy storage (e.g. flywheels), chemical energy storage and conversion (e.g. water splitting, fuel cells), thermal and thermochemical energy storage (e.g. heat storage, solar hydrogen, solar thermal energy), as well as electrical energy storage (e.g. physical capacitors, electrical double layer capacitors) and electrochemical energy storage (e.g. pseudocapacitors, batteries).6 Herein, we keep the focus on capacitors, supercapacitors, and batteries that are three different classes of energy storage devices, which share some similarities and have several key differences. These are different technologies with different capabilities and of course different applications. These energy storage devices are generally complementary (rather than competing) and combining them, especially a supercapacitor and a battery, should be considered an opportunity to help guarantee that the needs of our energy future can be met.7,8
Physical capacitors represent the first and simplest form of an energy storage device. They are usually made up of two parallel plates separated by a thin insulating material known as the dielectric (Fig. 2a). One plate of the capacitor has a positive charge, while the other maintains a negative charge. Thus, in a capacitor, the charge becomes stored in the form of an electric potential energy between the two plates. Electrolytic capacitors are considered as the latest evolutionary step of capacitor technology. In electrolytic capacitors the dielectric is replaced with an ionic (but not electronic) conductive medium, which is also often called the electrolyte.9 In an electrolytic capacitor the ions are freely mobile in the bulk of the electrolyte, thus providing a much greater charge density at the electrode/electrolyte interface than is possible at the electrode/dielectric interface.9 Therefore, the capacitance of electrolytic capacitors is often in the mF range, but only in the μF range for dielectric capacitors.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a conventional capacitor (a) and a supercapacitor (b). The detailed structure of the electrical double layer is presented as insets. 
Supercapacitors (also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors) do not use conventional dielectrics between the plates; instead, they consist of two electrodes separated by an ion-permeable separator (such as cardboard, ceramic, glass, plastic or paper) and an electrolyte that ionically connects the two electrodes (Fig. 2b). In a supercapacitor, the charge becomes stored either by separation of charge in a Helmholtz double layer at the electrode–electrolyte interface (known as the electrical or electrochemical double layer capacitance, EDLC) or by Faradaic charge-transfer via redox reactions (known as pseudocapacitance).10,11
Batteries are another intriguing class of energy storage devices. Batteries consist of two electrodes separated by an electrolyte. However, batteries do not actually store electrical energy. Batteries are devices that store energy in the form of chemical energy inside electrode active materials via chemical bonds, and convert the chemical energy into direct current electricity via redox reactions or via intercalation as with Li-ion batteries.12 In a battery, the energy is stored in a particular compound or compounds that make up the negative and positive poles, as well as the electrolyte.
Along with the two most popular research areas focusing on batteries and supercapacitors, in recent years, some supercapacitor-type electrode materials have been coupled with battery-type materials to produce hybrid energy storage systems, for which the term supercapattery (= supercapacitor + battery) has been coined.1,13,14 In hybrid energy storage devices, two electrodes with different charge storage behaviors, e.g. one capacitive (supercapacitor) and one Faradaic (battery), are combined, where the former serves as the power source, while the latter serves as the energy source. The behavior of a hybrid system resembles that of a rechargeable battery with a higher power and/or cycle life, or a supercapacitor with a higher energy.1 Such an integration offers opportunities for further advancement in the energy storage realm, and performance of such devices is generally in between that of a supercapacitor and a battery.
In general, electrical energy storage devices, like a hydroelectric power plant (Fig. 3), give potential energy to the charges.
 Fig. 3  A hydroelectric power plant is analogous to an electrical energy storage system. Water from the upper reservoir flows through the pipes to turn a turbine generator, the same way that electrons flow through the wires of a battery from the negative pole to the positive one to produce light. The inset shows the energy diagram of the devices. The symbols c and a are the electrochemical potentials of the electrons (i.e. the Fermi energy of the electrons) of the negative pole (the anode during the discharge step) and the positive pole (the cathode during the discharge step), respectively. Vg is the voltage window of the electrolyte. VOC is the open-circuit voltage of the device. 
A pumped storage hydropower technology gives gravitational potential energy to water, while electrical energy storage devices give electrical potential energy to their charges. In a pumped storage plant, water is pumped from a lower reservoir to an upper reservoir. Then, water flows through the pipes from the upper reservoir to the lower one. While passing through the pipes, the gravitational potential energy of water is changed into kinetic energy by turning a rotor, and then the kinetic energy is partially converted into electrical energy using a generator. In an energy storage device, charges flow through wires and their potential energy is converted to e.g., light energy or thermal energy, by a bulb or a resistor, respectively. Analogous to a water pump, the charges that have lost all their potential energy receive a potential boost from a power provider (like the pump) and the cycle begins again.
Generally, electrical charge can be stored either on the surface (double layer charging) or in the bulk of a material (Faradaic reactions). Thus, an ideal material for an EDLC must have a highly accessible effective surface area. For example, the charge storage in carbon-based materials is founded on the accumulation of electrical charge at the interface between the electrode active material and the electrolyte, giving rise to an EDLC (Fig. 4a). In this process, no Faradaic reactions take place across the electrode/electrolyte interface and no electrochemical reactions take place inside the bulk of the electrode active material. In rechargeable batteries, charge storage occurs through reversible Faradaic reactions throughout the bulk of the electrode materials in combination with the electrolyte (Fig. 4b). Thus, the material must be designed to allow the easy insertion/de-insertion of the reacting species throughout the material. Charge storage in pseudocapacitors is based on Faradaic redox reactions on the surface or near the surface of the electrode active materials, without ion diffusion within the bulk of the electrode active materials (Fig. 4c). In this case, l, the diffusion length, is much smaller than the thickness of the diffusion layer, i.e., where l is the diffusion length, D is the diffusion coefficient and t is time. As the name implies, hybrid energy storage systems are a hybrid between batteries and supercapacitors, with a behavior intermediate between EDLC and Faradaic processes as the two extremes (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  Different electrochemical energy storage systems. Schematic representation of (a) an electric double layer capacitor (EDLC), (b) a battery, (c) a pseudocapacitor, and (d) a hybrid system that comprises an EDLC and an intercalative charge storage process. 
It should be pointed out that both EDLC and pseudocapacitive charge storage processes are capacitive in nature and/or behavior, with near-rectangular cyclic voltammograms (CVs) or quasi-triangular galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) profiles, and the prefix “pseudo-” just reflects the difference in the mechanism of charge storage. On the other hand, well-defined peak-shaped CVs or nonlinear GCD profiles with one or more obvious potential plateaus are characteristics of rechargeable batteries and/or hybrid devices. Thus, different charge storage mechanisms can be categorized as (1) capacitive non-Faradaic charge storage (CNFS), (2) capacitive Faradaic charge storage (CFS), and (3) non-capacitive Faradaic charge storage (NCFS). The correct metrics for characterization of capacitive charge storage processes is capacitance (F, i.e. q/V) and that of non-capacitive Faradaic processes is the specific charge capacity (mA h, i.e. q/3.6). Thus, if the correct evaluation criteria had been used, many of the extremely high specific capacitance values derived from peak shaped CVs that have been reported in the literature would not have been exciting at all.
Now, the question is how to differentiate among the three charge storage mechanisms. It is clear what EDLCs are and how they differ from Faradaic charge storage processes. The confusion arises, however, when researchers try to distinguish between batteries and pseudocapacitors, both of which are Faradaic processes in nature. Two key features that help differentiate between the two mechanisms are15–17 (1) phase transformation(s) of the host material(s) in batteries that translates into peak-shaped CVs and plateaus in GCD profiles, where the pseudocapacitive material(s) either present rectangular shaped CVs or CVs with significantly broadened peaks; (2) intrinsic kinetics of the Faradaic processes where the redox reactions in batteries are diffusion-controlled processes (i.e. I ∝ ν0.5), while in pseudocapacitors the current is directly proportional to the scan rate (I ∝ ν). Hybrid energy storage systems show a behavior in between a capacitor and a battery. Contributions from each of the above-mentioned categories can be identified by analyzing the CV data, which is explained in detail subsequently. Contributions from EDLC and pseudocapacitance to the total capacitive charge storage can also be deconvoluted by step potential electrochemical spectroscopy techniques.

Table 1 illustrates and summarizes the main characteristics of energy storage systems including physical capacitors, supercapacitors (either EDLCs or pseudocapacitors), hybrid energy storage systems and batteries that distinguish them from each other.
Table 1 Characteristics of different energy storage devices






Capacitor
Supercapacitor
Hybrid system
Battery


EDLC
Pseudocapacitor





a CNFS: capacitive non-Faradaic storage.
b Sym.: symmetric device.
c Asym.1: asymmetric device with different materials but the same charge storage mechanism.
d CFS: capacitive Faradaic storage.
e Asym.2: asymmetric device with different materials and a different charge storage mechanism.
f NCFS: non-capacitive Faradaic storage.
g LDH: layered double hydroxide.
h PANI: polyaniline.
i Polypyrrole.
j MOF: metal–organic framework.






CV


















Effect of nanosizing15

















Cycle life
Almost infinite
>1000000
>500000
>10000018
Up to >25000019


Typically, <10000


Cycle life limitation
—
—
Decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials
Decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials
The loss in mechanical stability and chemical reversibility of the reactions along with decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials


Cell voltage (V)
Max: 1 kV
Max: 3.8 V
Max: 4.0 V
Max: 5.0
Max: 523


Min: 0 V20
Min: 0 V10
Min: 0 V21
Min: 022
Min: 3.2 (Li-ion)










∼1 (NiMH)


Capacitance/capacity
pF to mF range
∼300 F g−1@1 A g−124
∼4000 F g−1@1.4 A g−127
∼80 mA h gelectrode−1@1200C (1C = 175 mA h g−1)28
∼265 mA h ganode+cathode−1@50 mA g−130


∼7.3 mF cm−2 @10 mV s−125
200 mA h g−1@0.2C29


∼950 F cm−3@1 A g−126




Specific energy or energy density
Very low
Low
Moderate
High
Very high


<1 W h kg−131,32
<12 W h kg−133
∼1090 W h kg−1@∼2 kW kg−127
150 W h kg−1@150 W kg−135
1835 W h kgcathode−1




∼60 W h L−1@8.6 kW L−134


230 W h kgelectrode−1@1.75 kW kgelectrode−136
2317 W h Lcathode−1 Li–S battery38








220 W h kganode+cathode−1@225 W kg−137
< 400 W h kgAnode+cathode−1 Li & Na ion batteries30,39


Specific power or power density
Very high
High
High
Moderate to high
Low to moderate


≫10 kW kg−140
0.5–10 kW kg−140
∼197 kW kg−1@∼120 W h kg−127
>30 kW kgelectrode−1@141 W h kgelectrode−136
<1 kW kg−140




340 kW kg−1@∼10 W h kg−141


67.5 kW kg−1@23.4 W h kg−142






∼75 kW L−1@∼10 W h L−134








Power limitation
—
Electrode and electrolyte resistivity
Kinetic limitation
Kinetic limitation
Mass transport and reaction kinetic limitations


Active material conductivity


Self-discharge
High
High
Moderate
Low
Very low


∼40% loss in energy per day6
∼20–40% loss in energy per day6
∼20–40% loss in energy per day6
18% loss in voltage after 48 h44
∼1% (Li-ion) to 8–15% (Li–S) loss in capacity per month45,46




∼50–80% loss in energy per day43








Operating temperature (°C)
Max: silicon, 25047
Max: metal pyrophosphate electrolyte, 20049
Typical Li-ion capacitor, Max: 70
Max: liquid metal batteries ∼100054


Min: tantalum, −5548
SiC nanowire, 50050
Min: −4053
Na–S batteries ∼40055




Min: ionic liquid electrolyte, −7051


Min: liquified gas electrolyte, −6052




Liquefied gas electrolyte, ∼−8052


Ethyl acetate-based electrolyte −7056


Nature of charge storage
Physical
Physical
Physico-chemical
Physico- chemical
Chemical


The charge is stored at the surface of the electrodes through an excess of electrons on one side and holes on the other side
Reversible ion adsorption
Redox reaction, intercalation, doping, or underpotential deposition
Intercalation and change in oxidation state or ion adsorption
Intercalation/deintercalation, or change in oxidation state


Kinetics
Ultra-fast
Very fast
Fast
Moderate to fast
Slow to fast


Storage mechanism
CNFSa//CNFS (Sym.b)
CNFS//CNFS (Sym. or Asym.1c)
CNFS//CFSd
CNFS//NCFSf
NCFS//NCFS (Sym. or Asym.1)


CFS//CNFS (Asym.2e)
NCFS//CNFS (Asym.2)


CFS//CFS (Sym. or Asym.1)
CFS//NCFS




NCFS//CFS (Asym.2)


Materials
Metals
Carbon-based materials e.g. CNT, graphene, activated carbon, fullerene, porous carbon
Metal oxides/hydroxides/nitrides/sulfides, e.g. RuO2, MnO2, V2O5, NiO, Co(OH)2, Co3Mo3N, NiCo2S2; LDHsg conducting polymers e.g. PANI,h PPY;i MXenes e.g. Ti3C2(OH)2 MOFsje.g. Ni/Co–MOF
Composites of carbon-based materials with metal oxides/hydroxides or conducting polymers e.g. graphene//PANI, AC//Ni(OH)2
Materials with a high theoretical capacity e.g. LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, LiMnPO4, LiNixMnxCo1−2xO2


Phase change
No phase change
No phase change
Phase change
Phase change


Charge/discharge time
10−6–10−3 s
s to min
s to min
0.3–10 h


Charge/discharge efficiency (%)
∼100
Up to 99.9
∼99
70–99


Environmental impact
Very low
Very low
Low/medium
Low/medium/high



C–V relationship
Constant capacitance/full discharge
Constant capacitance/full discharge
Non-constant capacitance/full discharge
Non-constant capacitance/full or partial discharge
Non-constant capacity/partial discharge



i–ν relationship

i ∝ ν

i ∝ ν

i ∝ νb (0.5 < b < 1)

i ∝ ν0.5




Basic principles of physical capacitors

Constant current charging–discharging a capacitor. 
To gain a deeper understanding of energy storage systems, and of how to design and develop more efficient ones, fundamental principles of the capacitive energy storage phenomenon need to be intensively investigated. We can utilize system theory for analysis of the energy storage process, since this provides an analytical framework for viewing an energy storage device as a unified whole (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  System theory as a way of studying the energy storage process in its entirety. In such a system, the input could be the voltage or current that is applied to the energy storage device and the output could be the current or voltage that can be readily monitored. The feedback of the output to the input could provide information about the system under study, e.g. the minimum and maximum cut-off voltages. 
A capacitor is an energy storage device. It accumulates energy by storing electric charge on two sides of a break in a conductor. The most basic model is that of a parallel plate capacitor. As electric charges (electrons) move from one plate to another, a positive charge, +q, builds up on one plate and a negative charge, −q, builds up on the other. In the initial stage of charging, electrons move freely from the positive plate to the negative plate. As time passes, the electrons that accumulate on the negative plate repel the incoming electrons. These later electrons encounter even more repulsion. Thus, as the time continues, the potential across the plates rises. Now, consider what happens when the direction of the applied current is reversed. The electrons stored on the capacitor flow through the external circuit and this process continues until the capacitor is fully discharged and the voltage across the plates of the capacitor drops to zero.
The fundamental equation that describes the operation of a capacitor is: q(t) = CV(t)(1)in which q is the stored charge in Coulombs, C is the capacitance in Farads, and V is the voltage between the terminals of the capacitor in volts. The subscript t indicates the time dependency of the parameters. By differentiating each side of the equation with time, we obtain: (2)Note that capacitance is assumed to be constant, thus, it is not part of the differentiation. On the other hand: (3)From the definition of constant current charging/discharging; i(t) = i. Thus, (4)In practice, the capacitance of a capacitor depends on the voltage. However, assuming a linear capacitor in which the capacitance is constant: (5) (6)Assuming that t1 = 0 and Vi = 0; (7)This means that the voltage across the plate of the capacitor will change linearly with time and the rate or slope of the change is i/C (Fig. 6a). It also shows that:
 Fig. 6  
V–t (a) and V–q (b) plots of the output signal of an ideal capacitor charged with a constant current, i, for a definite time, t, and then discharged with the same current. 
The higher the capacitance, the more sluggish the voltage across the capacitor changes.
The higher the current, the quicker the voltage across the capacitor changes.
The charging and discharging processes depend on the sign or direction of the current. Obviously, if the current flows into the capacitor (charging), then the voltage will increase, if current flows out of the capacitor (discharge), then the voltage will decrease.
From what is presented in Fig. 6a, the time of charging, tc, and discharging, td, that can be obtained from the x-axis in the figure, gives us some information about the characteristics of the capacitor. The period of time that the capacitor can do work can be obtained from the plot. Moreover, equality of tc and td indicates that the coulombic efficiency of the device is 100% (i.e. qc = qd), with almost unlimited cyclability. The operating potential window of the capacitor can be deduced from the y-axis of the plot. The potential across the plates of the capacitor increases from Vi to a maximum value of Vf. However, to get more useful information out of the plot, the variables of both axes should be simultaneously taken into consideration. For example, the total energy that a capacitor stores during the charging process and delivers when discharging is one of the most important parameters. The stored and delivered energy of a capacitor can be obtained by integrating the area under the V–q plot (i.e. the area of the triangle), during the charge and discharge processes (Fig. 6b). The slope of the plot is the reciprocal of capacitance, 1/C, of the capacitor. One of the main advantages of capacitors as energy storage devices is that they can quickly store and deliver a large amount of electricity. The advantage of being able to be charged and discharged almost instantaneously means that capacitors are high power energy storage devices since power is the rate of energy transfer, i.e. the amount of energy that is stored or delivered per unit of time, as given in eqn (8). (8)


Energy conservation in charging a capacitor. 
If a total charge of q flows through an energy storage device, then the total work (W) done by the device is: W = qV = CV2(9)The stored energy (E) in the capacitor is the work carried out to charge up the capacitor with a charge q: (10)The other half of the energy is dissipated by the resistance R of the circuit: (11) (12)

Electrochemical energy storage devices
Historical background of electrochemical energy storage
Batteries are by far the most common form of energy storage devices. The ancient Persians had probably known about electricity before it was officially discovered.57 The “Parthian Battery”, which was found in 1936 during archaeological excavations near Baghdad, appeared to be a prehistoric battery that dates back to the Parthian empire (247 B.C.–224 A.D.).58 The battery consisted of a clay jar filled with a vinegar solution into which an iron rod surrounded by a cylinder made of a rolled copper sheet was inserted. The jar might have been used to generate electricity (1.1 to 2.0 V) for the purpose of silver and gold plating. The history of modern batteries can be traced back to around 1800 when Alessandro Volta developed the so-called voltaic pile, consisting of alternating discs of zinc and copper separated by cardboard.59 The Volta cell evolved into the two-electrolyte Daniel cell in 1836, and then into the Leclanche cell in 1866 which used a zinc anode and a carbon cathode.60 The next major milestone was the development of rechargeable (secondary) batteries which began with the invention of the lead–acid battery in 1859 and then evolved over the years through nickel–cadmium (1899) and nickel–metal hydride (patented in 1986) to Li-ion batteries59 (announced in 1972 by Whittingham; turned into a breakthrough in energy storage by Goodenough in the 1980s; and commercialized in the 1990s).
The beginning of capacitor technology is generally attributed to the invention of the Leyden jar in 1745.7 Next, paper capacitors, made by sandwiching a strip of wax-impregnated or metalized paper between two metal foils and rolled up tightly into a cylinder, were invented in 1876.61 Aluminum and tantalum are the so-called “valve metals” that develop a stable passivating oxide layer (Al2O3 and Ta2O5) when immersed in an appropriate electrolyte.62 Valve metals are able to conduct electricity in one direction, but impede the current flow in the opposite direction as a result of the formation of oxide dielectrics. On account of this property, the first electrolytic capacitor, based on a high-purity etched aluminum foil with aluminum oxide as a dielectric, was patented in 1896.62 Other notable capacitors include the mica dielectric capacitor invented in 1909, the polyethylene terephthalate based capacitor patented in 1941, and plastic dielectric capacitors developed beginning in 1959. The first patent describing the concept of electric double-layer charge storage was filed by General Electric in 1957 using porous carbon coated on a metallic current collector in a sulfuric acid solution. However, the device was highly impractical and never commercialized.61 The first commercial double layer capacitor (1.0 F, 5.5 V) was introduced in 1971 by Nippon Electric Corporation based on a patent filed by Standard Oil of Ohio.3 This can be considered as the starting point for the development and use of electrochemical capacitors in commercial devices. It was NEC, Inc. (Tokyo, Japan) that coined the term “supercapacitor” for the first commercially successful EDLC, and Pinnacle Research Institute (USA) that termed the device “ultracapacitor”,63 although currently electrochemical capacitors are generally referred to as supercapacitors or ultracapacitors (Note: within this review, the technology will be generally referred to by the term “electrochemical capacitors”, but we also use the term “supercapacitor” for the purpose of being consistent with the majority of the current literature). The concept of pseudocapacitance was first reported by Trasatti and Buzzanca in 1971,64 which opened up a new world of opportunities to enhance the specific capacitance of different systems. The first planar interdigitated micro-supercapacitor was reported in 2003 with polypyrrole electrodes.65 After the first micro-supercapacitor report, more and more innovative strategies,66 such as lithographic microfabrication,67 inkjet printing,68 layer-by-layer assembly,69 laser scribing,70,71 and screen printing,72 were developed. Despite many revolutionary developments from the Volta pile to lithium-ion batteries as well as advanced capacitive energy storage devices, each of the individual technologies still lags behind the demands of industry. A combination of the high energy of batteries and the high power and quick charging of supercapacitors offers opportunities for improved properties with respect to the individual components. Thus, many battery–supercapacitor hybrid devices have been developed during the past two decades.73–76 Later on, high-tech energy storage devices with more advanced functions and properties, such as being flexible, bendable, stretchable, foldable and wearable, were fabricated.77 This continuous research and development on battery-type and supercapacitive materials has led to today's high-performance energy storage devices. However, before getting down to the details of feature identification, a deeper understanding of the physico-chemical nature of the charge storage processes and the type of the electrode active material will help us steer a straight course and select the proper criteria for assessment.
Classification of electrochemical energy storage systems
Electrochemical energy storage systems are currently classified into three main categories: (1) batteries (including primary and secondary batteries), (2) supercapacitors, and (3) hybrid systems. Each energy storage cell/device contains a positive electrode, a negative electrode, an electrolyte, and a separator as well as current collectors and a casing (Fig. 7). Electrodes are active components of the energy storage system and are used for loading the active materials. They allow electrons to pass from one half-cell through an external circuit to the other. The electrolyte is a chemically stable liquid, gel or solid substance that provides conduction for the ions in the cell. In modern supercapacitors, the inert electrolytes can be replaced with redox electrolytes; either redox-active electrolytes which are inherently able to undergo Faradaic electron transfer reactions or redox-additive electrolytes in which redox active species are included to enable Faradaic electron transfer reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces.78,79 A separator is a permeable membrane placed between the positive and negative terminals of the cell. The separator prevents instant self-discharge and electrical short circuits between the two electrodes, while allowing for the transport of ionic conductors that are essential for closing the circuit during the flow of current in the cell. However, by the use of either solid-state, polymer or gel electrolytes, the separator is no longer needed, which is considered to be an additional improvement in energy storage technology. Current collectors are used for the efficient transfer of electrons from the electrodes to the terminals of the battery. However, the development of highly conductive and freestanding electrode active materials, such as well-interconnected carbon nanotubes, graphene or 2D metal carbides with metallic conductivity, can eliminate the need for current collectors.15 The casing provides mechanical stability, protects the electrolyte from evaporation, and prevents negative influences from outside of the system.
 Fig. 7  Components of a typical energy storage device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
In many papers in the field of energy storage, the negative electrode is called the anode, while the positive electrode is called the cathode. Such a notation is probably an adaptation from primary batteries that can only be discharged, for which the anode is always the negative electrode and cathode is the positive one. A secondary cell, for example, a rechargeable battery, is a cell in which the chemical reactions are reversible. When a secondary cell, such as a rechargeable battery or a supercapacitor, is being charged, the anode becomes the positive terminal and the cathode the negative terminal. Thus, by calling an electrode the “anode”, it is impossible to know if it is the positive terminal or the negative terminal of the system. Note that the positive terminal always remains the positive end, and the negative terminal always remains the negative end. It is the anode/cathode designations that switch depending on whether the cell/device is charging or discharging. During the charging process, the negative pole of the cell/device is the cathode. During the discharge process, the situation reverses and the negative pole of the cell/device is the anode. To avoid misleading the readers, we use positive and negative notation throughout this article.
Batteries
Batteries are one of the energy storage devices that convert the chemical energy stored in their active electrode materials directly into electrical energy through electrochemical redox reactions or charge-transfer reactions. The reaction at the negative electrode gives up electrons to the external circuit and the reaction at the positive electrode accepts them. In a cell, the electrolyte provides a medium for the transfer of charge, as ions, between the positive and negative electrodes.

Classification of batteries. 
There are two fundamental types of batteries: (i) primary cells, commonly referred to as non-rechargeable batteries, and (ii) secondary cells, also known as rechargeable batteries.80 Within this classification, other sub-genres are also used to better classify batteries based on particular structures or designs.81
(a) Stationary vs. flow batteries
Conventional batteries employ non-flowing stationary electrolytes, whereas flow batteries contain two electrolyte solutions in two separate reservoirs that flow through or along the stationary electrodes. It should be noted that in stationary batteries, the charge is stored on solid electrode active materials, whereas in flow batteries the charge is stored on redox moieties dissolved in solution phases. The most common flow batteries are Zn–Br2 and V2+/V3+–V4+/V5+ batteries. One of the most advantageous properties of flow batteries is that they can be almost instantly recharged by simply replacing the electrolyte and recovering the spent material for re-energizing.
(b) Dissolution/deposition- vs. intercalation/de-intercalation-based batteries
Dissolution/deposition-based batteries store energy as a result of chemical reactions occurring inside the cell. The basic mechanism of intercalation/de-intercalation-based batteries is that charged ions (e.g. Li+ or Na+) are shuttled back and forth between the positive and the negative electrodes during charge and discharge processes.
(c) Closed vs. open batteries
A closed battery contains all of the active materials within the cell and the battery is sealed forming a closed system, whereas in an open battery the active material (e.g. oxygen) is not part of the electrodes and is provided from the atmosphere.
On the basis of the electrolyte nature and physical state, batteries are classified as:
(d) Aqueous vs. non-aqueous batteries
The most commonly used aqueous batteries are lead–acid, nickel–cadmium, and nickel–metal hydride batteries that use a water-salt solution as an electrolyte. Non-aqueous batteries use polar-aprotic electrolyte solutions that have no reactive protons or hydrogen atoms. Most Li-ion batteries use lithium salts such as LiPF6, LiAsF6, LiN(SO2CF3)2, or LiSO3CF3 dissolved in solvents such as acetonitrile, ethylene carbonate, diethyl carbonate, propylene carbonate, 1,2-dimethoxyethane, DMSO, THF, or a binary or ternary combination of these to form the electrolyte and are classified as non-aqueous batteries. Non-aqueous electrolytes may be further divided into organic electrolytes, polymeric electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, and solid-state electrolytes.
(e) Solid electrolyte (dry) vs. liquid electrolyte (wet) batteries
Most batteries utilize a liquid as the electrolyte between the two electrodes to regulate the flow of current. However, in some cases, e.g. Li-ion batteries, the liquid electrolyte can lead to safety hazards. Thus, all-solid-state batteries are being developed that have both solid electrodes and solid electrolytes. Solid electrolytes are very good bulk ion conductors but are essentially insulating toward electrons. Examples of such materials include Ag4RbI5 for Ag+ conduction and LiI/Al2O3 mixtures for Li+ conduction. All solid-state batteries can be stacked in a bipolar configuration for better space savings. However, solid-state batteries typically suffer from higher ion-transfer resistance at the electrode–electrolyte interface.
(f) Acidic vs. alkaline batteries
Aqueous batteries can also be classified based on the type of electrolyte used in their construction. There are three common classifications: (i) acidic batteries, such as lead–acid batteries, (ii) near neutral batteries, such as zinc-air batteries, and (iii) alkaline batteries, such as nickel–cadmium and zinc–manganese dioxide batteries.


Thermodynamic principles of batteries. 
Active materials in batteries are usually well-defined, three-dimensional (3D) phases. As such, ideally, active materials have unique chemical potentials, and the Gibbs free energy is used to estimate their equilibrium potential. Thus, their conversion from one oxidation state to another proceeds ideally at a constant potential until almost all of the active materials change from one phase to another. Overall reactions of some well-established battery materials and their performance figures of merit are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Chemical reactions and performance figures of merit for commercially relevant rechargeable battery technologiesa




Battery type
Electrolyte
Overall reaction
Cell voltage (V)
Specific energy (W h kg−1)
Operating temp. (°C)





a Adapted with permission from ref. 83, copyright 2016, The American Association for the Advancement of Science, with modifications.
b The electrolyte (sulfuric acid, d = 1.27 g cm−3) and electrolyte solvent (water) participate in the reaction, being consumed during discharging and regenerated upon charging.
c Typically, a mixture of KOH, NaOH, and LiOH with the overall concentration of 4.5 to 8.0 M. NaOH and LiOH are added to improve chargeability through an increase of the oxygen release overpotential.
d The anode is an alloy, most frequently AB5, where A is a rare earth (mostly mischmetal to limit cost) and B is Ni, Co, Mn, and/or Al.
e Not to be confused with Li-ion chemistry with liquid electrolyte embedded in a polymer, sometimes commercially (and misleadingly) denoted “polymer Li-ion.”
f Commonly LiN(CF3SO2)2 (usually denoted LiTFSI).
g More recently, LiFePO4 has also been introduced as a positive electrode material without a major change in performance.
h With graphite (C) anode and layered transition metal oxide cathode such as LiCoO2, LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2, LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2, or other compositions containing Ni, Mn, and Co, which exhibit more stable crystal structures upon lithium de-insertion and thus larger capacity. Alternative cathodes such as LiMn2O4 or LiFePO4 yield cell potentials of 3.6 V and 3.2 V, respectively, and somewhat (15%) reduced energy densities due to lower specific capacity and lower voltage, respectively.
i The lower figure corresponds to industrial long-life batteries; the higher figure applies to low-power, limited-life batteries for portable applications.
j Can reach somewhat expanded low or high limits in particular applications with specifically designed batteries.
k Nominal cell voltage of a Zn–air battery is 1.65 V, but the practical cell voltage in discharge is less than 1.65 V, ref. 84.





Pb/acid
Sulfuric acid (aq.)b



2.04
30
−25 to +50


Ni/Cd
Alkali hydroxide (aq.)c



1.4
50
−40 to +60


Ni/MHd
Alkali hydroxide (aq.)c



1.35
65
−20 to +60


Li polymere
Li saltf (polyethylene oxide)





3
140
60 to 100


Li-ion
LiPF6 (organic)



3.6h
150 to 270i
−30 to +60j


Zn/air
Alkali hydroxide, e.g. KOH, NaOH, LiOH (aq.)



1.65k
550 to 85082
−10 to +55


Neutral electrolytes, e.g. NH4Cl (aq.)




Potentials of typical batteries are almost constant in the operating potential window, evidenced with a plateau in charge–discharge profiles. The potential of a cell is a measure of the maximum amount of energy per unit charge that is available to do work when the charge is transferred through an external circuit. (13)Thus, one joule of work is the work done to move one Coulomb of electric charge between two points with a potential difference of one volt. However, if the work flows out of the system, it is assigned a negative sign, whereas the potential of such a system is positive. Therefore: (14)The charge of 1 mole of electrons is a constant called the Faraday constant (F = 96485 C mol−1 e−1). Thus, W = −qE = −nFE(15)where n is the number of electrons transferred per mole. In batteries, via redox reactions, electrons are transferred from one molecule or atom to another. The principles of thermodynamics can be applied to predict the direction of electron flow from one species to another based on the free energy change of the system. Gibb's free energy is defined as the energy available to do useful work in a system. Maximum possible work obtained from a process is equal to the change in Gibbs free energy, ΔG, in the reaction.80 Wmax = ΔG(16)Substituting eqn (16) in eqn (15), we come up with a relationship between Gibbs free energy and cell potential: ΔG = −nFE(17)For a reaction such as aA + bB ⇄ cC + dD(18)at any stage of completion, the change in free energy is given by (19)After dividing both sides by −nF and collecting all the constants together at 25 °C (298 K), we have the Nernst equation that is used to calculate the potential of a cell: (20)The standard free-energy change of formation, ΔG0f, for a reaction can be calculated using the free energies of formation of each component by using the following equation: (21)For example, in lead–acid batteries, the oxidation half-reaction is: Pb(s) + H2SO4(aq) → PbSO4(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e−(22)and the reduction half-reaction is: PbO2(s) + H2SO4(aq) + 2H+ + 2e− → PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)(23)The overall cell reaction is then: Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2H2SO4(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)(24)Substituting the appropriate ΔG0f values from the literature85 gives: (25)ΔG0f(rxn) = −371.5 kJWe then calculate the equilibrium cell voltage from (26)the result of which is E0cell = 1.92 V, which applies to aH+; aHSO4−, and aH2O = 1 mole L−1. Electrochemical theory, based on the Nernst equation, eqn (20), can predict how the voltage of the battery changes. Assuming the sulfuric acid in the electrolyte as a strong monoprotic acid and neglecting the dissociation of HSO4−, which is itself a weak acid (Ka = 1.2 × 10−2), the overall reaction of a lead–acid cell can be written as:86 (27)The Nernst equation for this reaction can be expressed as: (28)Since the activity of the pure solid and water equals 1, the equation can be simplified as: (29)Considering the sulfuric acid in batteries as 10 M, Ecell would be 2.04 V, which is equal to the value indicated in Table 2. Thus, the battery delivers nearly constant voltage while discharging, until either or both of the electrodes run out of reactants for their reactions. Thus, near the end of the discharge step, the potential sharply drops to a minimum threshold value. In primary batteries, this means the end of their useful lives; however, secondary batteries can be recharged once they have reached this point. During the recharge process, an external source of energy forces the chemical reactions to reverse by removing electrons from the positive pole and delivering them to the negative pole until the cell is fully recharged.
The charge/discharge rate for batteries is often quoted in a unit called the C-rate. Note that it should not be confused with Coulombs or capacitance that bears the same symbol. A rate of 1C corresponds to the current at which the entire battery would be discharged in one hour. For example, a 1000 mA h battery provides 1000 mA for 1 h if discharged at a 1C rate. If the same battery is discharged at 0.5C it will provide 500 mA for 2 h, likewise at 2C it will deliver 2000 mA for 30 min. Thus a 0.1C (or C/10) discharge rate would take 10 h, and at 10C the discharge process would take 1/10 h. To calculate the C-rate, we have to calculate the theoretical specific capacity of the electrode active material(s). Then we calculate the theoretical specific capacity of the cell based on the amount of the electrode active material used in the cell. This gives us the theoretical current value to charge/discharge the cell at 1 h, i.e. at a 1C rate. Let's consider PbO2 as an example for which the theoretical capacity is 224.1 mA h g−1. If we had one gram and wanted to discharge the PbO2 in one hour, we would put a negative current of 224.1 mA. For an electrode with a mass loading of 15 mg we have: (30)For discharging the above-mentioned battery at a rate of C/5, the current would be 3.36/5 = 0.67 mA h. In the case where the electrode active material is a composite, contributions from all the components should be taken into consideration, so the capacity is calculated as: (31)Since the C-rate is based on the theoretical capacity, the charge/discharge time of the cell would typically be shorter than the one predicted by theory due to a number of kinetic limitations. Note that what the battery manufacturers mean by C-rate is completely different from what scientists mean. In industry, they rate the battery based on the nominal capacity of the battery, not the theoretical capacity.


Advanced electrode materials for batteries. 
As indicated earlier, charge storage in batteries occurs through reversible Faradaic redox reactions throughout the bulk of the electrode active material(s). The amount of electrical energy that a battery delivers is a function of the cell potential that follows certain well-established physico-chemical (thermodynamic and kinetic) principles as explained before. A battery is composed of a negative electrode, a positive electrode, and an electrolyte that allows for ionic conductivity, along with a separator. Thus far, a variety of metal-based species and conductive polymers have been studied to realize advanced technologies in various types of non-lithium ion batteries.87–93 However, Li-ion batteries are considered the best among all battery types because of their superior performance across multiple characteristics. Generally, Li-ion batteries, as state-of-the-art batteries, are based on intercalation and extraction of Li ions for both positive and negative electrodes. When a Li-ion battery is charging, the positive electrode active material gives up some of its Li ions, which flow through the electrolyte to the negative electrode and remain there, thus the energy is stored during this process in the battery. The reverse processes occur when the battery is discharging. The chemical potential of Li in the two electrodes drives Li ions to diffuse out of the negative electrode, thus generating a flow of Li ions from the negative electrode to the positive electrode through the electrolyte. At the same time, to keep the electrodes electrically neutral, the electrons move through an external circuit and travel toward the positive electrode. So, the flow of ions through the electrolyte and the movement of electrons via the external circuit are interconnected processes, and if either stops so does the other. The energy that a battery provides depends on the charge storage capability (Li-ion release and uptake) of the electrode active materials and the redox reactions that take place at the two electrodes.94 Thus, the active material must be designed to allow the easy intercalation/de-intercalation of the reacting species throughout the material.
A number of nice reviews addressing advancements from synthesis to development of the battery electrode active materials have been published.95–98 The positive pole of the Li-ion batteries are typically made of LiMO2 (M = Co, Ni, Mn),99,100 LiMn2O4,101 LiMPO4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn).102,103 However, the major limitations of LiCoO2 are high cost and capacity fading during deep cycling.96 The main limitation of LiNiO2 is its thermal instability that Ni3+ is readily reduced at high temperatures. LiMnO2 suffers from low cycling performance, because of the conversion of the layered structure of LiMnO2 into a spinel structure during the Li-ion de-intercalation, as well as the leaching of Mn out of the LiMnO2 structure during cycling.96 The major weakness of LiMPO4 compounds is their poor electrical and ionic conductivity or low energy and power density.96 To circumvent these limitations, the pure phases of the electrode active materials are doped with other elements to further improve their energy storage performance. As such, many advanced electrode active materials including LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2,104 LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4,105 LiNixCoyMnzO2 (x + y + z = 1),106,107 LiNi0.5Co0.5PO4,108 Li3V2(PO4)3,109,110 and LiMnxFeyCozPO4 (x + y + z = 1)111,112 are being developed. The choice for the negative electrode active material is almost limited to carbon-based materials96,113 as well as conversion anode materials114 and titanium-based anode materials.115
Lithium transition metal oxides typically have a low intrinsic electronic conductivity and provide a low capacity when produced as micron-sized particles.116 To enhance the energy storage performance of new types of electrode active materials, various strategies have been adopted which are summarized in Fig. 8.96 In one of the most effective approaches, to circumvent these limitations, researchers have explored nanostructured electrode active materials both to increase the effective surface area to boost the charge transfer and to reduce the Li-ion diffusion pathways.98,101,105,117–120
 Fig. 8  General strategies for boosting the energy storage performance of electrode active materials: (a) nanosizing the active materials, (b) compositing the active material, (c) doping and functionalization, (d) tuning morphology of the particles, (e) protecting the material with formation of coatings or shells, and (f) modification of the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96, copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Despite the remarkable progress made in Li-ion batteries, battery-type energy storage technology still requires extensive further improvement to meet the projected demand. As such, a wide range of post-Li ion materials and systems that could play a pivotal role in meeting such demands are developed for which Choi and Aurbach have provided a nice review.121

Supercapacitors
Capacitance (C) represents the ability of a capacitor to store an electrical charge on its plates. The capacitance of a capacitor can be expressed as: (32)where ε0 is the permittivity or the dielectric constant of air (8.84 × 10−12 F m−1), εr is the permittivity of the dielectric medium used between the two plates, A is the area of the plate in m2, and d denotes the distance between the two plates in m. Thus, the larger and nearer the plates, the higher is the amount of charge stored on a capacitor for the same amount of voltage. Although demonstrating high power capability, the total energy that a physical capacitor stores is very low. It is highly desirable to increase the energy content of an energy storage device without sacrificing its power capability. Nanotechnology provides a popular way to achieve a very high surface area. Reduction of the critical dimensions of energy-storage materials to the nanoscale reduces the diffusion path lengths for ions, and therefore dramatically enhances the surface areas available for capacitive charge storage. The use of an electrolyte with a separator considerably decreases the distance between the plates. Thus, upon cell polarization, the ions of the electrolyte move towards the electrode surface of opposite charge leading to charge separation at the electrode–electrolyte interface in a fast (sub-second to a few seconds timescales) and reversible manner. With such an intriguing approach, the plates of the capacitor are separated with a separator that is exceedingly thin (about just one-molecule-thick compared to dielectric materials in conventional capacitors that might range in thickness from a few microns to a millimeter or more). The resulting capacitor, which is often called a supercapacitor, differs from the conventional capacitors in two important ways: (1) the plates of a supercapacitor have a much bigger surface area, and (2) the distance between the plates is much smaller. As a result, the charge that a supercapacitor can store is thousands, millions, or even billions of times higher than that of an ordinary capacitor. Typical capacitors are usually rated in the pF, nF, and μF range, whereas commercial supercapacitors such as the ones made by Maxwell Technologies® have capacitances rated up to several thousand Farads.122 Please note that the electric double layer is formed on both the positive and negative electrodes, thus a supercapacitor cell actually comprises two capacitors connected in series.
All the methods to test supercapacitors are based on the assumption that, in certain cases, the equivalent circuit of the supercapacitors can be simplified as a resistor–capacitor (R–C) circuit123 (please see the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy section for more explanation on the equivalent circuits of the energy storage devices). Thus, we consider a system consisting of a resistor and an ideal capacitor in series to demonstrate the physical principle of charge storage in supercapacitors (Fig. 9). Such a system can be charged with either a constant current or a constant voltage, though in practical applications, constant current charging–discharging a supercapacitor is more common.

Constant current charging–discharging an R–C circuit. 
With constant current charging an R–C circuit, the potential of the system, across the plates of the capacitor, VC, changes with time (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 9  A system consisting of a resistor and an ideal capacitor in series (an R–C circuit). 
 Fig. 10  Charging an R–C circuit. R–C circuit for t < 0 (a) and t ≥ 0 (b). At t < 0 the switch is open and no current flows through the circuit and the charge on the plates is zero. At t = 0 and later, the current i flows through the circuit and charges q+ and q− are stored on the positive and negative plates, respectively. When the voltage across the capacitor reaches that of the supply voltage, the current diminishes to zero. 
The change in potential of the cell, as is schematically presented in Fig. 11, can be expressed as: (33)in which qtotal represents the total charge.
 Fig. 11  Constant current charge–discharge profile of an R–C circuit. Contributions from VR and VC in the total voltage of the circuit are presented for the discharge step. 
The potential across the plates of the capacitor at any time (t) can be given by: (34) (35)Substituting eqn (35) in eqn (33) and by subsequent integration we have: (36) (37)Thus: (38)


Constant voltage charging–discharging an R–C circuit. 
We consider here an R–C circuit, with a steady source of electromotive force (V), in which the current will vary in time.
Charging an RC circuit. 
The capacitor initially is uncharged, i.e. qt=0 = 0 (Fig. 10a). At time t = 0, the switch is closed and current starts to flow through the circuit (Fig. 10b). As the capacitor starts to charge, the potential difference across the capacitor increases with time (eqn (34)). The voltage across the resistor and capacitor, current, and charge are functions of time, but Kirchhoff's rules are valid at any instant in time.124 Thus, we now use the Kirchhoff's loop rule that the sum of the potential differences around a closed loop (Fig. 10b) equals zero; (39) (40)As time passes, the current flow in the circuit will continue to decrease because the charge already stored on the capacitor makes it more difficult to put more charge on the capacitor. Once the charge on the capacitor plates reaches its maximum value, qtotal, the current in the circuit will drop to zero. During the charging process ; (41) (42)By putting the terms involving dq and q on one side and the terms involving dt on the other side of the equality, we then obtain: (43)Now we can integrate both sides of the above equation, which yields: (44) (45)Exponentiating both sides of the equation yields: (46) (47)where the maximum amount of charge stored on the plates is: qt=∞ = VC = qtotal(48)Thus (49)At that time (t = ∞), the charging process effectively ends, and the potential difference across the capacitor is equal to the source emf, V: (50)The current that flows in the circuit is equal to the derivative in time of the charge: (51) (52)Fig. 12 shows the variation of q and i of the R–C circuit with time.
 Fig. 12  A plot of the change in charge (green, circle) and current (blue, triangle) of a capacitor as a function of time during a constant voltage charging process. 
Discharging an RC circuit. 
Suppose that the capacitor has initially been charged to the maximum value of qtotal. For t < 0, the switch is open and the potential difference across the capacitor is given by . At this time the potential difference across the resistor is zero since there is no flow of current through it (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  Discharging an R–C circuit. (a) An R–C circuit charged to the maximum value of q (t < 0). (b) An R–C circuit that starts to discharge in which the potential across the plates of the capacitor is going to drop to zero. 
Now suppose that at t = 0 the switch is closed. The capacitor will start to discharge, during which electrons flow from the negative plate through the wire to the positive plate, consequently, the potential difference across the capacitor decreases and finally drops to zero (Fig. 13b).
Based on Kirchhoff's rules: (53)During a discharge process: (54) (55) (56)By integrating the equation, we obtain: (57) (58)and after exponentiation we have: (59) (60)

Mechanisms of charge storage in supercapacitors
As indicated before, the charge/discharge processes in supercapacitive active materials are fundamentally different from those in batteries. Charge storage processes in supercapacitors are, ideally, 2-D and proceed via two main mechanisms: (i) accumulation of static charge within the double layer (that results in EDLC), and (ii) charge storage based on Faradaic redox reactions on the electrode surfaces.125,126
Electrical double layer capacitance
The energy storage mechanism in EDLCs is based on the electrostatic adsorption of the electrolyte ions on the surface of the electrode active materials. Thus, the key to the high capacitance of EDLCs is in using a highly accessible surface area and electronically conducting electrode materials. Nanostructured carbon-based materials with a high specific surface area and good electrical conductivity are the materials of choice for EDLCs. Carbon-based materials3,127,128 including graphene derivatives,34,129–134 activated carbon,128,135 carbon nanotubes,136–138 carbon nanohorns,139–142 carbon nanocoils,143,144 carbon onions,145,146 carbon fibers,147–149 carbon fabrics,150–152 carbon cloth,153,154 carbon aerogels,128,155,156 carbide-derived carbons,67,157,158 zeolite-templated carbons,159,160 and porous carbons161–164 with electrical conductivity, electrochemical stability, and highly accessible surface area as well as low cost satisfy all the requirements for this application. The double layer capacitance of the carbon-based materials is governed by their structure, especially the porosity and specific surface area.
Simon and Gogotsi experimentally investigated the relationship between the capacitance and the pore size in solvent-free ionic liquid electrolytes.165,166 Their studies reveal that the maximum capacitance can be achieved when the pore size optimally matches the ion size. Ji et al. analyzed the relationship between the capacitance and the specific surface area for various carbon-based electrodes.33 The gravimetric capacitance (F g−1) increases with an increase in the specific surface area of the carbon electrode, but the true area normalized capacitance, which is the ratio of the specific capacitance to the specific surface area, gradually decreases and finally stabilizes at about 5 μF cm−2 when the specific surface area exceeds 1500 m2 g−1. However, we have made a breakthrough in this direction by laser reduction of graphene oxide to grow and pattern reduced graphene oxide on flexible substrates70,71 (Fig. 14). The approach effectively prevents the aggregation of graphene sheets and enables the laser-scribed graphene to feature a high specific surface area (1520 m2 g−1) and a significantly high electrical conductivity (1738 S m−1), thereby exhibiting a high geometric area normalized capacitance of up to 4.04 mF cm−2 at a specific current of 1 A g−1. Thus, the carbon-based materials, made with fine pore size and controlled specific surface area, enable optimized ionic diffusion and high capacitance.
 Fig. 14  (a–f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based supercapacitors and (g–i) micro-supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (j and k) Fabrication of more than 100 micro-supercapacitors can be realized in a single run; the micro-supercapacitors are completely flexible. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Gravimetric double layer capacitance of carbon-based materials can exceed 300 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in aqueous electrolytes,167–169 but barely approaches 300 F g−1 in organic electrolytes.70,170–173 Discovery and development of heteroatom-doped carbon-based materials has become a fast-growing branch of electrode active materials and provides an important alternative to pristine carbon-based materials. The doping of heteroatoms such as nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), boron (B), sulfur (S) and phosphorus (P) into the lattice of carbon-based materials leads to enhanced chemical activity, improved wettability, increased conductivity and can also boost pseudocapacitive characteristics.174,175 B and N as neighbors to C in the periodic table have a rather similar atomic size, but one electron less (B) or more (N), which makes them appropriate candidates for heteroatom doping. Doping with N plays a more critical role in modifying the carbon frameworks, because N forms strong covalent bonds with carbon atoms and imposes electronic conductivity and serves as active sites that ultimately leads to a superior energy storage performance.140,144,176,177
Generally, EDLCs offer great power performance and cycle life and are characterized by nearly rectangular CVs and triangular GCD profiles. The rectangular-shaped CV for EDLCs stems from the fundamental nature of the double-layer charge storage mechanism. In EDLCs, adsorption and desorption of ions at the electrode–electrolyte interface, in the absence of diffusion limitations, is almost instantaneous, so that dV/dt is a constant.15 The first and simplest EDL model is the Helmholtz model. Based on this model, under an applied cell voltage, an electrode immersed in an electrolyte attracts counter-ions, while repelling co-ions. Thus, two compact layers of charges form at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces, which are called the “electric double layer”. The double layer capacitance, Cdl, at each electrode–electrolyte interface resembles that of a conventional parallel plate capacitor, eqn (32). In contrast to the Helmholtz assumption, the charged ions are mobile in the electrolyte solutions and are under the influence of both diffusion and electrostatic forces. Consequently, the Gouy–Chapman model was developed, in which the ions are treated as point charges and the concentration of the ions in the solution near the surface follows a Boltzmann distribution. Although this makes a better approach to reality, the Gouy–Chapman model fails for highly charged double layers.178 The most sophisticated post-Helmholtz EDL model is the Gouy–Chapman–Stern model, which combines the Helmholtz and the Gouy–Chapman ideas (Fig. 15). On this account, the Gouy–Chapman–Stern model more accurately describes the detailed structure of the electric double layer.179 Based on the Gouy–Chapman–Stern model, the EDL has, in fact, a multi-layer structure, including the inner Helmholtz plane (IHP), outer Helmholtz plane (OHP), and a diffuse layer that is next to the bulk electrolyte solution. In the Stern layer, which comprises the IHP and OHP, counter-ions are unsolvated or partially solvated due to the strong interactions with the ions and the electrode surfaces and pores. It is worth mentioning that the potential decays linearly from the surface potential to both the inner and the outer compact layers, but with different gradients or slopes. Approaching the diffuse layer, the change in potential deviates from linearity and reaches a plateau and remains almost constant through the bulk of the electrolyte. Thus, the total double layer capacitance, Cdl, of the electrode can be expressed as: (61)in which CStern is the double layer capacitance of the Stern layer, and CDiff represents the double layer capacitance of the diffuse region.
 Fig. 15  Double layer models. The Gouy–Chapman–Stern electric double-layer model of a planar surface. IHP and OHP stand for the inner Helmholtz plane and outer Helmholtz plane, respectively. A Stern layer and a diffuse layer developed in the electrolyte due to the thermal motions of electrolyte ions are represented. The scheme also shows the potential gradient across the double layer. The inset circuit shows the in-series capacitors of the Stern and diffuse layers. 
In recent years, porous structures of electrode active materials, which provide a very high specific surface area and well-defined pathways to electrolyte access, have drawn considerable attention. Although the above-mentioned models provide a satisfactory description of the EDL on plane surfaces, they fail to appropriately describe charge distribution in porous materials. Movement of ions in the bulk electrolyte is completely different from that within the pores of the electrode active material. Pore size has a great influence on the mobility of ions inside the pores. An appropriate pore size substantially enhances the capacitance of carbon-based materials. The highest capacitances could be obtained when the pore size matches with the radius of the solvated ions in the electrolyte (Fig. 16).180
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the anomalous increase in capacitance of porous carbon-based materials because of the ion-sized pores. 
The pores with a diameter less than 0.5 nm are not accessible to hydrated ions, and those with a diameter less than 1.0 nm are too small to be accessible to organic electrolytes, thus, based on the Gouy–Chapman–Stern model, they do not contribute to the EDLC. Among mesoporous materials, electrode active materials with small mesoporosity (about 3 to 5 nm in diameter) demonstrate the best capacitive performance, since the diameter of the pores is about two times that of the radius of the solvated ions to allow for proper ion adsorption on both adjacent pore walls.181 However, later on, Gogotsi's group teamed up with Simon and reported an anomalous increase in capacitance at pores smaller than the size of the solvated electrolyte ions (Fig. 17).180 Although the whole mechanism is still not completely understood, the increase in capacitance of the microporous materials can be ascribed to the partial desolvation of the ions when they enter the sub-nano-size pores of carbon.182,183 With the distortion of the solvation shell and decrease in distance between the ion and carbon surfaces, the capacitance of the system increases based on eqn (32).
 Fig. 17  (A) A plot of areal capacitance normalized by BET specific surface area vs. average pore size for different carbon samples. All the samples were tested in the same electrolyte (NEt4BF4 in acetonitrile). The traditional view is based on an assumption that the normalized capacitance continually decreases with decreasing pore size. The results presented in this figure show that the normalized capacitance decreases with decreasing pore size until a critical value is reached after which a huge increase in the capacitance is observed. (B–D) Schematic representation of solvated ions residing in pores with the distance between adjacent pore walls (B) greater than 2 nm, (C) between 1 and 2 nm, and (D) less than 1 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180, copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Moving beyond the planar capacitor model, the influence of pore curvature on the capacitance of the porous carbon materials should be taken into consideration. There have been tremendous attempts to properly formulate the capacitance of porous carbon materials based on the shape and size of the pores.184 Pores of carbon materials have various shapes including cylindrical, spherical and slit types, depending on the synthesis approach. Assuming that the mesopores are cylindrical, the capacitance of the system is given by: (62)in which L is the pore length and b and a are the radii of the outer and inner cylinders, respectively (Fig. 18I). Since the area of a cylinder is 2πbL, the normalized double-cylinder capacitance can be expressed as: (63)But in micropores, the ions line up in the center of a cylindrical pore, thus adsorption of the ions can be described by an ‘electrical wire-in-cylinder’ model (Fig. 18II) and the capacitance is given by:181,184 (64)where a0 is the effective (fully desolvated) size of the ion. With eqn (64), Gogotsi and Simon were able to explain the reason behind an anomalous increase in capacitance with decreasing pore size to less than 1 nm.
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagrams (top views) of (I) a negatively charged mesopore with solvated cations approaching the pore wall to form an electric double-cylinder capacitor, where a is the radius of the inner cylinder, b is the pore radius, and d is the distance of approach of the cation to the pore wall. (II) A negatively charged micropore of radius b with the cation size of a0 that forms an electric wire-in-cylinder capacitor. (III) Cross-section of an exohedral capacitor with the inner and outer sphere/cylinder radii of a and b, respectively, separated by the effective double-layer thickness d. Panels I and II are adapted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., and panel III is adapted with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2011, Cambridge University Press. 
In reality, the pores of the electrode active materials are not unimodal, instead they comprise multimodal pores in the range from sub-nanometer to a few nanometers. Thus, one should take the contributions to capacitance from macro-, meso-, and micropores into consideration, that is:185 (65)In addition to porous carbon-based materials, other carbon materials have also been extensively studied as electrode active materials for supercapacitors. However, in sharp contrast to porous carbon-based materials that have a negative surface curvature where the counter-ions can enter the pores to form endohedral supercapacitors, for zero-dimensional (0D) fullerenes and carbon nano-onions (i.e. multilayer fullerenes), and 1D end-capped single-/multi-walled carbon nanotubes as well as carbon nanowires, the materials have a positive surface curvature and the counter-ions can only reside on the outer surfaces, leading to exohedral supercapacitors (Fig. 18III). The capacitance of an exohedral electric double-sphere capacitor is given as:184 (66)For which the normalized capacitance is: (67)The normalized capacitance of an exohedral double-cylinder capacitor is given as:184 (68)In these equations, a is the radius of the inner sphere/cylinder, b the radius of the outer sphere/cylinder, and d the effective double-layer thickness. Graphene-based materials with near-zero curvature do not belong to either of the above-mentioned categories, instead they reside in between and can be treated with the classical EDLC approach.
EDLC proceeds simultaneously on both the positive and negative electrodes. Thus, each electrode–electrolyte interface represents a capacitor, and the whole cell can be considered as two capacitors in series: (69)where Cp and Cn are the capacitance of the positive and negative electrodes, respectively.
Pseudocapacitance
In spite of the outstanding improvements in properties of carbon-based materials, their limited energy generally restricts EDLC-based supercapacitors to applications requiring power delivery over only a few seconds at a time. Consequently, many research efforts are focused on designing other electrode active materials to overcome the challenge of the low energy of supercapacitors. Supercapacitors with higher energy densities can be achieved by using pseudocapacitive materials. RuO2 was the first material to demonstrate pseudocapacitance.64 RuO2 has a wide potential window (1.2 V), high proton conductivity, good thermal stability, and metallic-type conductivity. In an acidic medium, the highly reversible redox behavior of RuO2 is as follows: RuO2 + δH+ + δe− → RuO2−δ(OH)δ(70)where the Ru oxidation states can change from (II) up to (IV) (0 ≤ δ ≤ 2). However, the high cost of the ruthenium-based materials has limited their applications to a few high value electronic devices.
Manganese oxides with a relatively low cost, low toxicity, environmental safety, and theoretical high capacitance of up to 1300 F g−1 seem to be an appropriate alternative to RuO2. The general form of the Faradaic reaction of manganese oxides is (Fig. 19a):3 MnIVO2 + xH+ + yM+ + (x + y)e− → MnIII(x+y)MnIV1−(x+y)OOMyHx (0 ≤ x + y ≤ 1)(71)where M+ can be H+, Li+, Na+, or K+ and the redox reaction involves transitions between different oxidation states.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic CV for a MnO2 electrode in a mild aqueous electrolyte (0.1 M K2SO4) that shows the successive multiple surface redox reactions leading to the pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism. The red (upper) part is related to the oxidation from Mn(III) to Mn(IV) and the blue (lower) part refers to the reduction from Mn(IV) to Mn(III). (b) Schematic representation of different charge-storage mechanisms of MnO2 as a function of operating potential window; B: battery behavior; PC: pseudocapacitance; (IV), (III), and (II): Mn ions in the oxidation states of 4, 3, and 2, respectively. The red and blue lines are the dq/dV plots of the Mn–Si–O composite electrode obtained at scan rates of 2 and 100 mV s−1, respectively. Panel a is adapted with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2008, Springer Nature, and panel b is adapted with permission from ref. 186, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. with slight modifications. 
It should be noted that although RuO2 and MnO2 are considered as pseudocapacitive metal oxides, upon changing the experimental conditions, redox peaks can appear in their CV curves. For example, the CV of MnO2 recorded in the potential range from −1.0 to 1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) displays a clear set of redox peaks (Fig. 19b), whereas the voltammogram in the potential range from 0 to 0.9 V is quite rectangular. This observation implies that pseudocapacitance likely originates from a unique state of the metal oxides. From Fig. 19b it can also be deduced that the overall pseudocapacitive characteristics of MnO2 over the entire 2 V range is estimated to involve 0.65 e− per MnO2, which accounts for nearly 40% of the total charge-storage capacity of MnO2 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1.
Materials used for building pseudocapacitors include various transition metal oxides/nitrides/phosphides/sulfides, as well as conducting polymers.187 Metal oxides188,189 such as RuO2,64,190–197 MnO2,198–201 cobalt oxides (CoO, CoOOH, Co2O3, Co3O4),202–209 NiO,210–216 CuO,217–226 iron oxides (FeOOH, Fe2O3, and Fe3O4),227–232 and V2O5,233 binary metal oxides234 such as AB2O4 (A = Ni, Co, Mn, Cu or Zn B = Mn, Co or Fe),235,236 CoMoO4, and NiMnO3,237 metal nitrides,238,239 such as VN, RuN, TiN, WN, Ni3N, NbN, Ta3N5, and Co3Mo3N, metal phosphides240 such as amorphous Ni–P,241 Ni2P, Ni5P4, and Co2P, metal sulfides such as FeCo2S4,242 NiCo2S4,242,243 NiS2, CoS2244 and the binary NixCo1−xS2,245 MxSy (M = Cu, Ag, Au),246 Ni3S2@MoS2,247 MxCo3−xS4 (M = Ni, Mn, Zn),248 CuCo2S4249 and CoCu2S4250 as well as electronically conducting polymers251–257 including polyaniline and polypyrrole have extensively been studied as pseudocapacitive materials. Note that, based on the criteria presented here, the reported values of capacitance and the metrics for evaluating the energy storage processes that are truly involved in the above-mentioned studies may need to be revisited. Besides metal oxides and conducting polymers that have long been sought for pseudocapacitive energy storage, 2D carbides and nitrides (known as MXenes),258–262 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),263–269 and layered double hydroxides (LDHs)270–275 are the latest promising pseudocapacitive materials, and are now undergoing intensive investigations. One of the most efficient and attractive ways to boost pseudocapacitive performance of the materials is conjugation of the (mostly planar) organic/inorganic redox active species to carbon-based materials (via covalent, non-covalent, or π–π stacking interactions), in which the former gives a significant boost to energy performance of the system and the latter guarantees its high power capability.276–281
Charge storage mechanisms in a pseudocapacitive electrode can be classified as (1) redox pseudocapacitance, (2) intercalation pseudocapacitance, (3) doping pseudocapacitance, and (4) underpotential deposition based pseudocapacitance (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Different types of redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance. (a) Redox pseudocapacitance, as in RuO2·xH2O. (b) Intercalation pseudocapacitance, as in Nb2O5. (c) Doping pseudocapacitance, as in polypyrrole and (d) underpotential deposition based pseudocapacitance, as in the deposition of lead on the surface of a gold electrode. CVs of panels a, b, c, and d are reproduced with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2002, American Chemical Society; ref. 283, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co.; ref. 284, copyright 2006, Elsevier; and ref. 285, copyright 2014, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, respectively. 
Charge storage in pseudocapacitive materials involves redox reactions, thus is Faradaic in nature but capacitive in behavior. However, not all Faradaic processes contribute to pseudocapacitive charge storage.14 Although both battery-type and pseudocapacitive electrodes involve Faradaic redox reactions, the kinetics and electrochemical profiles of the two processes are completely different. The relation between the current and potential scan rate can be generally expressed as:286,287 i = aνb(72)with the value of b providing insight into the mechanism of charge storage. In pseudocapacitive electrodes, the current changes linearly with the sweep rate (i.e. b = 1) according to:10 |i| = ACυ(73)where A is the surface area of the active materials and C represents the capacitance, whereas in a typical battery the peak current of a reversible redox process is proportional to the square root of the sweep rate (i.e. b = 0.5), according to:288 (74)in which C* is the concentration of the species (mol cm−3), D is the diffusion coefficient (cm2 s−1), the χ function at any given point on the wave is a pure number, and the other symbols have their usual meaning. Thus, the relationship can be simply expressed as: (75)Thus, the kinetics of pseudocapacitance resembles an adsorption-controlled electrochemical process (i.e. i ∼ ν), which is opposed to a diffusion-controlled redox process (i.e. i ∼ ν1/2) governing the electrochemical response of battery-type electrodes. As such, the kinetic information obtained from CV can be used to differentiate between batteries and pseudocapacitors. The power of the sweep rate in the aforementioned relationship for hybrid systems is in between (i.e., i ∼ ν0.5<b<1).
In redox pseudocapacitors, the charge is stored through Faradaic charge-transfer reactions when ions are electrochemically adsorbed onto the surface or near the surface of a material. Intercalation pseudocapacitance occurs when ions (e.g. Li+, K+, Na+, or H+) are reversibly inserted into and extracted from the tunnels or layers of a rigid and layered host material, which is accompanied by a Faradaic charge-transfer, but not phase transformations. This mechanism of charge storage makes use of the advantages of batteries in storing the charge in the bulk of the active material, yet the process is not limited by the diffusion of cations within the crystalline lattice of the electrode active materials. However, intercalation pseudocapacitance is rarely observed, and most of these materials exhibit a hybrid charge storage mechanism. For example, the current response of orthorhombic Nb2O5 can be described as a combination of two separate mechanisms, namely capacitive behavior, and battery-like character.287 For sweep rates ranging from 0.1 to 20 mV s−1, the b-value, eqn (72), for both the cathodic and anodic peaks is 1, demonstrating a fast kinetic and capacitive response. However, at sweep rates >50 mV s−1 the b-value decreases to 0.8 and 0.7 for the cathodic and anodic currents, respectively, indicating considerable battery-like behavior. It is possible to discriminate between contributions from intercalative pseudocapacitance and a battery-type energy storage mechanism, the details of which are provided in the Resolving the capacitor-like and battery-like behavior section.
Doping pseudocapacitance involves reversible electrochemical doping and dedoping in conductive polymers. Underpotential deposition usually takes place when metal ions or hydrogen form an adsorbed monolayer at a surface of a noble metal well above their redox potential. With underpotential deposition of hydrogen on platinum, eqn (76), a monolayer of H atoms covers a Pt surface in which the electrosorption/electrodesorption processes are associated with charge storage. Pt + H+ + e− ↔ Pt–Hads(76)For this 2D surface process, an electrochemical adsorption/desorption isotherm can be written. Assuming no lateral interactions and a random distribution of the H atoms over the Pt surface, the electrosorption process can be explained by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. Thus, a Nernst-like relationship for the above-mentioned process can be written: (77)in which θPt–H is the surface occupied by the H atoms (0 < θPt–H < 1). Pseudocapacitance of the system can be expressed as: (78) (79)where q0Pt–H is the surface charge required for completion of a monolayer of H atoms on Pt. Two important points arise from these expressions: (1) there is a continuous range of potentials, due to the continuous possible range of θPt–H values from 0 to ∼1, and (2) the maximum value of CPC appears at θPt–H = 0.5, thus: (80)Therefore, the discharge process in a supercapacitor is associated with a continuing linear decline of voltage, whereas the discharge process of well-defined battery materials takes place at a nearly constant voltage until near the end of the discharge step.
The common CV feature in these four mechanisms is that the current is proportional to the scan rate and that the shape of the CVs is near rectangular and if peaks are present, they are broad with a small peak-to-peak separation. The Faradaic character of the so-defined pseudocapacitive processes is given by a Nernst-like equation, eqn (81), summarized in Table 3. (81)In addition to the linear proportionality of i–ν, high coulombic efficiency and fast kinetics (highly reversibly CVs) are indicative of a pseudocapacitive behavior. Thus, an electrode material with well-separated redox peaks in the CV and a discharge curve with a plateau in the GCD profile should not be considered a supercapacitor.
Table 3 Charge storage mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance and their correlation with a Nernst-like equation, eqn (81)




Pseudocapacitive mechanism
Nernst-like equation

X meaning in eqn (81)




Redox




X = [Red] [Ox] = 1 − [Red]


Intercalation




X = occupancy of the lattice sites of a layered structure


Doping




X = occupancy of the polymer's redox active sites


Underpotential deposition




X = θ that is fractional surface coverage




Pseudocapacitive materials typically exhibit a higher capacitance and energy compared to EDLCs. In general, the specific capacitance of a pseudocapacitive material is 1–2 orders of magnitude greater than that of EDLC processes (Table 1). However, pseudocapacitive processes often demonstrate a low power performance and suffer from lack of long cycle life and mechanical stability. This is because pseudocapacitive processes generally involve metal oxides with poor electrical conductivity and sluggish ion diffusion,8,289 or conducting polymers that swell, shrink and crack during doping/de-doping of charged ions and degrade at relatively high over-potentials.290,291 Thus, while individual EDLC and pseudocapacitive materials show some of the required properties, none of them can offer all the desirable properties to achieve the desired energy content, high-power performance and long cycle life.
Merging the best properties of each of the components into a composite design or hybrid architecture opens up opportunities to develop electrode active materials that possess the advantages of the individual building blocks, while eliminating the associated shortcomings. This appealing approach may also allow synergistic activities between the components that are unattainable by individual components.235,292–297 Thus, huge efforts have been devoted worldwide by researchers to fabricate composite electrode materials with enhanced energy storage performance. To date, the composite electrode materials that have been introduced to promote energy storage efficiency of the systems mainly include composites of transition metal dichalcogenides with conducting polymers,298 composites of MXenes with conducting polymers, carbon-based materials, and metal oxides,299,300 composites of metal oxides (including RuO2, MnO2, V2O5, Fe3O4, Co3O4, NiO, CuO and TiO2) with carbon-based materials,188,226,234,301–304 composites of organic electroactive molecules (including quinone and its derivatives) with activated carbon301 and conducting polymers,294,305 composites of conducting polymers with carbon-based materials,306–308 and metal oxides,188,303,307 composites of layered double hydroxide (LDH) with carbon-based materials and conducting polymers,271 composites of transition metal nitrides, bimetal oxides, and hydroxides,188,237,309,310 as well as lithium metal species,304,311 and a variety of graphene-containing nanocomposites.134,312–315
Hybrid energy storage systems
An ideal energy storage device is one that exhibits both high energy and high power. In spite of significant improvements in increasing the energy content of supercapacitors, their energy is still low. Hybrid energy storage systems aim to accomplish comparable performance to batteries in energy content, and to maintain the high power characteristic and good cycle life of supercapacitors. A hybrid energy storage system can be achieved by hybridization at either the device or the materials level, which is also known as external and internal hybrids, respectively.75
At the device level, an EDLC and a battery can be integrated in tandem in modules. In addition to an EDLC and a battery, a device level hybrid energy storage system requires power conversion electronics to independently manage the two energy storage devices. Because of these requirements, device level hybrid systems are multicomponent and typically suffer from manufacturing complexity, higher cost, and higher weight or volume. Current research on energy storage aims to accomplish battery level energy and supercapacitor level power and cyclability in a single device. Materials level hybridization is a step forward to achieve something better than the externally hybridized systems. In materials level hybridization, a hybrid system involves one battery-like charge storage process and one capacitive (either EDLC-type or pseudocapacitive) charge storage process (Fig. 21). For example, we have previously reported hybridization of an asymmetric supercapacitor based on activated carbon (which can be used alone as a supercapacitor electrode material) with zinc (which is an electrode active material for batteries) in a parallel combination.76 In the fabricated hybrid energy storage system, activated carbon is the negative electrode of the asymmetric supercapacitor, Zn serves as the negative electrode of the secondary battery, and self-doped polyaniline performs as a shared positive electrode. Since the operating potential window of the supercapacitive material matches that of the battery material, the hybrid system benefits from the high-energy advantages of the battery and the high-power capabilities of the supercapacitor.
 Fig. 21  Hybrid energy storage systems. (a) Schematic representation of the energy storage mechanism and structure of a battery–supercapacitor hybrid (BSH) device. (b) Various types of battery–supercapacitor hybrid devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. 
More recently Ding, Mitlin, and coworkers have presented a nice review of hybrid ion capacitors, which are a relatively new class of hybrid devices.316 Hybrid ion capacitors are intermediate in energy between batteries and supercapacitors, while, in principle, demonstrating supercapacitor-like power performance and cyclability.

Capacitance from redox electrolytes. 
As already indicated, the main charge storage mechanism to increase the energy content of supercapacitors beyond electric double layer capacitance is the incorporation of solid-state redox-active electrode materials that employ fast Faradaic redox reactions for charge storage (known as pseudocapacitive materials). Inspired from pseudocapacitive charge storage processes, hybrid energy storage systems can utilize liquid-state redox-active electrolytes to supply extra-capacity. Note that redox electrolytes contribute to charge storage via Faradaic non-capacitive processes, thus, are not part of supercapacitors. Redox electrolytes have made substantial progress as a means to boost Faradaic charge storage in hybrid systems, and several excellent reviews on redox electrolytes can be found elsewhere.78,317,318 Redox electrolytes are classified under two main categories; (a) redox-active electrolytes which are inherently able to undergo redox reactions, and (b) redox-additive electrolytes in which redox active species are introduced into the electrolyte to enable fast Faradaic reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface.78 The utilization of redox electrolytes has several advantages:317 (1) the approach is readily scalable because redox active species are simply dissolved into the existing electrolyte. (2) Synthesis of solid-state electrode active materials, some of which involve complicated multi-step processes, can be avoided. Instead, simple electrodes, such as commercially available carbon-based materials, can be used. (3) High-power performance is maintained because the redox reactions are not limited by the kinetics of solid-state diffusion. (4) The redox potential of the system, consequently, the sloping plateaus of the discharge profile of the device, can be tuned by the design of custom organic redox-active molecules. (5) The dead weight of the electrochemically inert electrolyte of the conventional energy storage systems is utilized as an active component to augment energy storage performance of the device. To date, different classes of redox additives have been introduced including halides (especially iodide and bromide),319,320 ionic liquids,321 transition metal cations (Cu, V, Fe, etc.),78 inorganic and organometallic complexes (such as metal bipyridine complexes, ferro/ferricyanide, etc.),322–324 and organic ring compounds (viologens, dihydroxybenzenes, quinone derivatives, etc.).27,32,79,294 Redox additives should have (i) high stability, (ii) reversible redox reactions, (iii) chemical and electrochemical stability in the investigated voltage window, (iv) compatibility with other cell components, and ideally (v) a standard redox potential close to the oxygen evolution potential for the positive electrode electrolyte and near the hydrogen evolution potential for the negative electrode electrolyte. The latter characteristic shifts the voltage plateau of the hybrid device to a higher voltage value, resulting in a huge increase in energy content of the device.
We have recently introduced another paradigm into the subdomain of Faradaic charge storage based on redox electrolytes, that is catalytic interactions between electrode active materials and solution-phase redox species.27 Thus, charge storage mechanisms can be generally categorized as: qtot = qNon-Faradaic + qFaradaic = (qElectric + qElectrolytic) + (qSurface + qInterface + qSurf.–Interf.interaction)(82)In this relation, qNon-Faradaic is composed of contributions from electrical charge storage (as in physical capacitors and EDLCs). qFaradaic is composed of contributions from surface reactions of the immobilized active materials (as in batteries and pseudocapacitors), and reactions of redox electrolytes at the interface (as in flow batteries), along with the q provided via the interactions between electrode active materials and solution-phase redox species.
A summary of some reported redox additives and their corresponding redox potentials is presented in Fig. 22. It should be noted that although the requirements for supercapacitors, hybrid systems and batteries are substantially different, redox active electrolytes are a common concept involved in the description of the energy storage mechanism of all the devices, especially hybrid systems and flow batteries. However, to truly realize the promise of redox-active electrolytes, hybrid systems must simultaneously utilize two independent redox couples, one for the positive electrode electrolyte and the other one for the negative electrode electrolyte.317 When just a single redox couple is included in the electrolyte, the potential of the EDLC electrode will reach the edge of the electrolyte voltage stability window, while the electrode with its redox couple will not yet have been fully charged. Mass balancing the electrode active materials on the two electrodes can somewhat alleviate this problem. However, the increased device mass or volume will decrease the mass-/volume-normalized energy of the system (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 22  The redox potential of representative redox-active species with potential for hybrid energy storage systems, redox batteries, as well as flow batteries. (a) Redox potential and the demonstrated volumetric capacity for some aqueous redox couples. The suitable pH ranges for each species is also demonstrated. The redox-active electrolytes illustrated in red, violet, and blue operate under acidic, neutral, or basic conditions, respectively. Potential of various inorganic (b), and organic & organometallic (c) redox couples. Chemical abbreviations: DHAQ, 2,6-dihydroxyanthraquinone; AQDS, 9,10-anthraquinone-2,7-disulfonic acid; EV, ethyl viologen; MV, methyl viologen; PV, pentyl viologen; HV, heptyl viologen; TEMPO, (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl [(–OH), 4-hydroxy-TEMPO; (–SO4), TEMPO-4-sulfate; FcNCl, (ferrocenylmethyl) trimethylammonium chloride; (–NMe3), 4-trimethylammonium-TEMPO]; TCNQ, tetracyanoquinodimethane; AQ, 9,10-anthraquinone; BQ, 1,4-benzoquinone. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, (b and c) ref. 325, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry, with slight modifications. 
 Fig. 23  Balancing the capacity of a redox EC electrode (“redox EC” stands for the redox-enhanced electrochemical capacitor that we refer to as a class of hybrid energy storage systems). (a) Galvanostatic charging voltage profiles for a single redox couple EC electrode with an EDLC counter electrode of equal mass, an EDLC counter electrode with four times higher mass (left), and a dual-redox EC (right). (b) GCD profiles of the devices with different combinations. The energy stored/recovered by each combination is proportional to the area under the charge/discharge profiles. (c) The total and normalized (gravimetric or volumetric) energy stored by systems are presented here. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
To achieve an understanding of the charge/discharge profile of a hybrid energy storage system, it's necessary to realize what the charge/discharge behaviors of a typical battery and supercapacitor look like. The voltage provided by a battery drops quickly at the beginning of the discharge. After this period, the voltage remains relatively constant (which is also called the discharge voltage plateau) until the battery is near complete exhaustion, then the voltage drops off sharply. Since batteries deliver a relatively constant operating voltage over an extended period of time, it is often difficult to precisely determine the state-of-charge of a battery. Whereas batteries deliver a steady voltage in the vast majority of their whole discharge time (∼95%), the voltage output of a supercapacitor, especially EDLCs, decreases nearly linearly as current flows, thus preventing the use of its full energy spectrum (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Charge–discharge profiles of a battery, an EDLC, and a hybrid device. The area under the discharge profile of the devices reflects their energy levels. Note that charge–discharge profiles of the pseudocapacitors resemble that of a hybrid energy storage device. 
From a practical point of view, this means that while there still remains a lot of energy in a supercapacitor, a connected device will not work after a certain voltage drop. Since the operating voltage of supercapacitors changes linearly with time during the charge/discharge process, the state-of-charge of a supercapacitor can be precisely measured. Fig. 24 clearly shows the differences between the energy of a battery and a supercapacitor. The discharge profile of the battery exhibits a fixed voltage line. The area under the discharge line, qV, shows the energy of the battery. The voltage across a capacitor device that is charged to a total charge of q varies linearly with the stored charge. Thus, the total energy that a capacitor stores equals the area under the straight line of the EDLC, i.e. that can also be expressed as . Therefore, to charge a battery and a supercapacitor to a terminal charge of q with a potential of V, the charge that is stored with a supercapacitor is half that of a battery. It should be noted that the charge and discharge profiles of an EDLC are nearly superimposed, confirming that EDLC-based processes, by nature, are highly reversible, thus their coulombic efficiency approaches 100%. Considering the charge–discharge profiles of the energy storage devices presented in Fig. 24:
To be “high power” the time of discharge should not be increased.
To be “high energy” the area under the q–V profile should be increased.
The current of charging/discharging is also constant.
Thus, to achieve higher energy in a hybrid system, the charge–discharge profile inevitably deviates from linearity and approaches that of battery-like behavior (Fig. 24). The steadier output voltage allows hybrid systems to provide more constant power over an extended period of a discharge step, which is a significant advantage over EDLCs. Consequently, a much bigger fraction of the total energy can be utilized, compared to EDLCs for which the unusable fraction of the energy reaches about 25%.317,326 Note that in EDLC systems the time-voltage response is linear, therefore, under a constant current condition the power decreases steadily with time. As the voltage is reduced, maintaining constant power draws more and more current. Once an EDLC has discharged below 50% of its maximum voltage, because of the increase in the IR drop and limitations of power electronics, the remaining energy that accounts for 25% of the total energy is essentially unusable (the area of a right triangle with height h/2 is 1/4th of the triangle with height h).
Considering the V–q relationship of batteries and conventional capacitors, along with non-idealities i.e. convex or concave slope GCD profiles that are associated with supercapacitors and hybrid systems, the amount of energy that an energy storage device of any type stores can be generally represented as: E = nqV; 0 < n ≤ 1(83)As indicated in Fig. 25, charge–discharge profiles of a hybrid energy storage system can deviate considerably from the one that is expected from an ideal capacitor. Thus, the use of  does not hold anymore, because it could result in either an overestimation or an underestimation of the energy that a supercapacitor stores/delivers.14
 Fig. 25  Charge–discharge profiles of two supercapacitors that deviate considerably from an ideal capacitive behavior. 
In charge storage based on the EDLC mechanism, the active materials will not be decomposed, thus the device can survive up to a million charge/discharge cycles. At high rates of charge and discharge, where redox reactions cannot proceed to any great extent, EDLC can provide the required energy. Thus, charge storage based on the EDLC mechanism allows the system to be charged and discharged much faster than batteries. In addition, the equivalent series resistance of EDLCs is negligible, allowing them to work at close to 100% efficiency.
Unlike EDLCs, energy storage and delivery in batteries rely on chemical reactions. Redox-active materials are prone to decomposition; thus, the lifetime of the system will be continually diminished. In addition, the kinetics of the redox reactions limit the applicability of the device where high rates of charge and discharge are required. However, at slower rates of charge and discharge, the Faradaic charge storage mechanism provides much more energy for the system compared to that of EDLC based materials.
The energy and power of energy storage devices can be significantly boosted by combining positive and negative electrodes of different chemical natures into a hybrid configuration. In a hybrid energy storage system, battery-like materials, as energy sources, are combined with supercapacitor-like materials, as power sources. The energy density or specific energy demonstrates how long a device can be used and the power density or specific power represents how quickly a device can deliver energy. Integrating the two energy storage technologies into a single device can assure the best of both worlds and is considered as a practical key to unlocking the full benefits of energy storage. In addition, in a hybrid/asymmetric configuration, the positive and negative electrodes operate in different potential ranges, thus the operating potential window of the device can be significantly extended.125

2E and 3E cell setup
Generally, the electrochemical characteristics of electrode active materials are evaluated in either a 2E or a 3E system. A 2E cell setup is composed of a pair of closely spaced electrodes containing the electrode active materials and separated by an ion permeable, but electrically insulating, separator. Electrochemical performance of a 2E cell configuration depends on both the electrodes in a given electrolyte. Depending on the type of the electrode active material on each of the electrodes, supercapacitors are grouped into two major categories known as symmetric and asymmetric supercapacitors31 (Fig. 26). Electrodes in a symmetric device contain the same active materials with the same mass loading (m+ = m−) for both the positive and the negative electrodes. Symmetric supercapacitors are generally made of EDLC-based materials or materials consisting of contributions from both EDLC and Faradaic capacitances. Symmetric supercapacitors based on just Faradaic materials are rarely used since the redox reactions only take place either at the positive voltages or the negative voltages, but not at both.327 Asymmetric supercapacitors bring two different electrode active materials, i.e. one EDLC and one pseudocapacitive, together in the same electrolyte. Supercapacitors with the same type of electrode active material, but different masses of materials (m+ ≠ m−) on each electrode, are also considered as asymmetric supercapacitors (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the symmetric, asymmetric and hybrid configurations. (a) A symmetric supercapacitor that is constructed by using the same material for both the positive and negative electrodes. Symmetric supercapacitors commonly use carbon-based materials. Asymmetric supercapacitors cover a wide range of electrode combinations including (b) two EDLC electrodes with different materials, (c) electrodes of the same material, but with different mass loadings, (d) two pseudocapacitive electrodes with different compositions, (e) one EDLC electrode with a pseudocapacitive electrode, e.g. an activated carbon//MnO2 aqueous supercapacitor, (f) one EDLC electrode with a composite electrode (that can be a composite of carbon-based material with a metal-based species). (g) A hybrid configuration that is fabricated by using a capacitor-type negative electrode and a battery-like positive electrode, and (h) a hybrid architecture, typical of a Li ion capacitor, that is fabricated by using a battery-type negative electrode and an EDLC positive electrode. 
Optimization of the mass ratio between the positive and negative electrodes is even important in EDLC-based devices having the same electrode active material328 (Fig. 26c). Since the sizes of the hydrated anions and cations in the electrolyte differ, the surface area that is accessible for the anions or cations differs. The smaller the hydrated ions are, the better the kinetics is. Therefore, equal mass loading of the electrode active materials may prevent the EDLC-based supercapacitor from having the highest possible supercapacitive performance.328 In addition, considering the CV curve of the activated carbon electrode, it can be clearly seen that the voltammogram is liver-shaped, i.e. wide at one end and narrow at the other (Fig. 27). Ideally, the potential of zero voltage (PZV) of a symmetric supercapacitor should be in the middle of the capacitive potential range of the device, although this is not always the case.329 Supposing this, it can be clearly seen that the hatched area, corresponding to the discharge step, of the negative electrode is significantly larger than that of the positive electrode, which comes as a cost of putting a strong restriction on supercapacitive performance of the device. Therefore, to counterbalance the specific capacitance and energy of the device, mass loading of the negative and positive electrodes should be balanced.
 Fig. 27  The impact of mass balancing. CV of the activated carbon in a 3E cell setup. The contributions from each of the positive and negative electrodes to the overall voltammetric signature of the device are indicated with + and − signs, respectively, and the hatched areas represent the discharge step in each electrode. PZV stands for the potential of zero voltage in which the potentials of the negative and positive electrodes are equal and the voltage of the device is zero, i.e. the supercapacitor is fully discharged. CV in a 3E cell configuration is adapted with permission from ref. 330, copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
It has also been reported that appropriate unequalization of the capacitance of the positive and negative electrodes could also widen the operating voltage window of a supercapacitor that is fabricated by using the same material for both the positive and negative electrodes.331,332 This is because PZV is not necessarily in the middle of the capacitive potential range. Thus, the potentials at which the electrode active materials start to discharge on the positive and/or negative electrodes are not always symmetrical with reference to the PZV (see e.g.Fig. 28). In most cases a positive electrode has usually a narrower operating potential window than a negative electrode. Thus, at equal capacitance, the positive electrode will reach its maximum potential before the negative electrode attains its potential limit. Consequently, the positive electrode limits the operating voltage window of a symmetrical device, and causes the operating voltage to be smaller than the sum of the potential windows provided by each of the positive and negative electrodes. For extending the operating voltage window of the device it is thus important to properly measure the open circuit potential of each electrode. Then, the capacitance of the negative and positive electrodes must be calculated in the potential windows ranging from the open circuit potential to the limiting potentials of the electrodes. With proper implementation of this strategy the electrodes are forced to work across their entire operating potential range.332
 Fig. 28  CVs of the Cabot Monarch 1300 pigment black-poly tetrafluoroethylene (CMPB-PTFE) film electrode in a tube cell setup. Mass loading: 1.0 mg, electrolyte: 0.3 M K2SO4. The tube cell comprises two CMPB-PTFE electrodes and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The electrodes were connected to two potentiostat units to concurrently track the potential of either the positive or negative electrode against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, as well as the voltage between the positive and negative electrodes. (a) Equal and (b) unequal (C+:C− ratio of 4:3) electrode capacitances that result in 1.60 V and 1.9 V operating potential ranges, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 331, copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Note that energy storage systems that contain one supercapacitive and one battery-type material in negative and positive electrodes are named here hybrid energy storage systems, not asymmetric supercapacitors. In general, asymmetric supercapacitors combine the advantages of the two different electrode materials that can operate at different potential windows, thus, achieving a high energy and a high power because of an extended operating voltage window (up to about 2.0 V in aqueous electrolytes, 2.7 V in organic solvents, and even up to 4.0 V in ionic liquids). It is worth mentioning that the charges stored on each of the positive and negative electrodes should be balanced between the two electrodes according to q+ = q−. (84)where m is the mass of the active material (g), ΔV is the potential range for the charge/discharge process (V), and CS is the specific capacitance (F g−1).
Optimization of the mass ratio between the negative and positive electrodes is of paramount importance. Let us look at the capacitance of a supercapacitor to clarify and better realize the importance of mass balancing in energy storage performance of the devices. For a two-electrode system, total capacitance, Ctot, can be obtained using: (85)The weight of active materials in each individual electrode is assumed to be m, while m− and m+ are the mass of the negative and positive electrodes, respectively. Thus, the specific capacitance of a single electrode can be calculated as: (86)and that of a cell is given by: (87)From eqn (85) and (87) the specific capacitance of a cell is given by: (88)Rearranging the above-mentioned equation, the specific capacitance of a supercapacitor is given by: (89)In a symmetric device, C+ = C− and m+ = m−, thus CS of the cell is 25% of either electrode's capacitance. In an asymmetric cell setup, C+ ≠ C−, and in most cases the specific capacitance of the pseudocapacitive materials (typically as a positive pole) can be regarded as extremely large compared to the specific capacitance of the EDLCs (typically as a negative pole), i.e. C− ≪ C+. In such a case, CS cell is given by: (90)The above-mentioned equation demonstrates that the specific capacitance of an asymmetric device is dominated by the electrode that exhibits a lower amount of specific capacitance. Thus, unbalancing the specific capacitance between the positive and negative electrodes of a supercapacitor severely limits its specific energy and overall supercapacitive performance.
As indicated previously, the operating voltage window of a carbon–carbon supercapacitor can be increased from 1.6 V to 1.9 V by increasing the C+:C− ratio from 1:1 to 4:3. For a cell with equal electrode capacitances, the cell capacitance, Ctot, as a function of the specific capacitance of the active material, CS±, is given by: (91)
Considering the point that for a cell with equal electrode capacitances V = 1.6 V, the specific energy, ES, can be expressed as: (92)The same expression for a cell with unequal electrode capacitances (in which m+/m− = 4/3 and V = 1.9 V) can be expressed as: (93) (94)It can be seen from the above expressions that the capacitance of the cell with unequal electrode capacitances is decreased slightly by 2.0% (i.e. 1/4 divided by 12/49), but the specific energy is increased significantly by 38.1% (i.e. 0.442/0.320), in comparison with the cell with equal electrode capacitances.331
We also simulated variation of CS,tot over the different m+/m− ratios ranging from 0.01 to 10 as well as the different C+/C− ratios from 1 to 50 (Fig. 29). The lowest and highest values of all the curves fall nearly at the same point. However, the distribution is not symmetric and the maxima of the distributions do not, therefore, correspond to the mean. As C+/C− becomes large, the distribution becomes more and more skewed to the right. From Fig. 29 it can also be obtained that by a 50-fold increase in capacitance of one electrode (here the positive one), the capacitance of the device just increases about 3 fold. Thus, concurrent improvement in capacitance of both the positive and negative electrodes is necessary to attain a high capacitance at the device level. Until now, while significant progress has been made in the fabrication of high energy positive electrode active materials, negative electrode active materials with high energy are much less explored. To enhance performance at the device level, the development of advanced negative electrode active materials is a must.
 Fig. 29  Variation of the total capacitance, eqn (89), as a function of the m+/m− ratio. The ratio of m+/m− changes from 0.01 to 10. The value of C− is fixed at 300 F g−1 as the typical capacitance of a carbon-based negative electrode active material, and the ratio of C+/C− changes from 1 to 50 by changing the value of C+ from 300 to 15000 F g−1. 
To optimize the energy storage performance of a hybrid system, masses of the e.g. battery-type positive electrode and supercapacitor-type negative electrode should be optimized as follows: (95)Without effective balancing in all kinds of the electrochemical energy storage devices, the electrode with the smaller capacity can be easily overcharged/over-discharged while the electrode with the larger capacity is only partially discharged/charged. It should also be noted that when synthesizing an electrode active material, it is not always clear if the material is in the charged, partially charged, or discharged state. Thus, to utilize the full charge storage capabilities of the materials in a cell, one should charge the electrodes individually, then, assemble the two fully charged electrodes in a cell/device and then discharge them. In this way the next time that the cell is charged, it should work properly and its charge storage capability will be fully utilized.
A 2E cell setup does not provide any information about the components of the cell and only considers the device as a whole. Thus, although the ultimate purpose of researchers is to fabricate a supercapacitor device (i.e. a 2E system), for an in-depth study of the active materials, and for obtaining detailed information on the individual components of a device, there is no other choice than to use a 3E cell configuration (this is also sometimes known as single electrode, 1E, measurement). The importance of a device depends on its performance. In designing a cell, all the components must be precisely designed and appropriately optimized to attain the best possible performance out of the materials. Thus, the importance of a 3E cell setup is that it provides us with plenty of information about each component of the cell.

Fig. 30 summarizes typical CVs and GCD profiles of a rechargeable battery, a hybrid device and a supercapacitor in both 2E and 3E cell setups. As can be seen, during the charging step (green traces) the potential of the positive electrode goes positive and the potential of the negative electrode goes negative, thus the potential window gets wider. During the discharge step (red trace) this process is reversed, and the potential of the negative electrode goes positive and the potential of the positive electrode goes negative. The potential separation between the negative and positive electrodes needs to be as high as possible to increase the energy content of the system. Potential differences between the battery electrodes in their fully charged and fully discharged states are indicated in Fig. 30. As denoted in the figure, a battery cell shows a potential difference even at a fully discharged state that equals the potential difference between the two near endpoints of the CV peaks. This is why batteries cannot be discharged to zero potential. In the case of a hybrid system, after full discharge, the minimum voltage of the cell can be zero, but doesn’t have to be zero.333 However, when a supercapacitor is fully discharged, the cell voltage is zero, and the potentials of the positive and the negative electrodes are equal.
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustrations of the CVs of the positive and negative electrodes in a 3E cell setup (left), CV of the device, i.e. 2E cell setup (middle) and GCD profiles in both 2E and 3E cell setups (right) of rechargeable batteries (top), hybrid systems (middle), and supercapacitors (bottom). The arrows indicate the direction of the potential sweeps and the green and red traces represent the charge and discharge processes, respectively. The potential difference between a fully charged and discharged battery cell is also represented in CV. Vavg.dis. denotes the average discharge voltage of a battery. Vmin can decrease to zero in hybrid systems (dotted line in CVs) and is typically zero in supercapacitors, but not in batteries because of the possible irreversible changes to the stable operating potential windows of the positive and negative electrodes. The light gray and golden areas under the CV curves or GCD profiles correspond to charge and discharge processes, respectively. 
As explained earlier, when the time of charging and discharging is the same, the coulombic efficiency of the device is 100%. However, the energy efficiency of the system is not necessarily 100%. This is especially the case in systems that show considerable pseudocapacitive behavior. Coulombic efficiency just looks at the x-axis of a GCD profile, whereas the energy efficiency uses the information that is obtained from both the x- and y-axes. Consequently, the area under the V–q plot that integrates the information of both the axes provides a more precise criterion for the real characterization of a system.
Note also that the quality of the delivered energy is not a state function (that depends only on the starting and ending conditions), instead it is a path function (that depends on the way from the initial to the final value). Thus, although the net values of energy and power of a system are extremely important, the way that the device delivers the energy is also crucial. In other words, two devices may have the same energy, but different performances for specific applications, since the ways of delivering the energy in the two devices are different. This is especially the case for Faradaic supercapacitors and hybrid devices in which the charge/discharge curves deviate considerably from linearity. Consequently, depending on whether a voltage plateau appears at a higher or a lower voltage, performance and real applicability of the system will be different. For example, the performance of the two devices with the same energy content could be different in lighting up a set of blue, green, yellow and red light-emitting diodes (LEDs) each of which is driven within a specific potential range. The device with a high voltage plateau can light up a blue LED for a prolonged time, whereas the one with a low voltage plateau could light up a blue LED for just a moment.
Cell/device notation
There is a large body of literature reporting on electrode active materials for both positive and negative electrodes, and therefore, there are many possible cell configurations. It becomes very cumbersome to indicate the positive and negative electrode active materials each time you would like to discuss a cell or device. As such, a shorthand notation, which electrochemists commonly use to describe electrochemical cells, should be followed. Operation of an energy storage device requires at least a negative electrode, a positive electrode and a separator that serves as a salt-bridge. To implement shorthand notation we move from left to right, starting from the solid material of the negative electrode on the far left, to the solution-phase components of the negative electrode half-cell, then we denote the solution-phase components of the positive electrode half-cell, and finally we indicate the solid materials of the positive electrode on the far right. In this notation, the phases are separated by a single vertical line “|” and the salt bridge or separator is shown by double vertical lines “‖”. Thus, an electrochemical cell may be represented by a negative electrode | a negative electrolyte ‖ a positive electrolyte | a positive electrode. For example, the overall reaction of the Daniell cell, which consists of Zn and Cu, is: Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) ↔ Zn2+(aq) + Cu(s)(96)for which the cell notation is: Zn(s)|Zn2+(aq)‖Cu2+(aq)|Cu(s)
For simplicity, researchers in the energy storage community can content themselves with the illustration of just the electrode active materials, i.e. the negative electrode ‖ the positive electrode such as Zn‖Cu, or even more simply Zn//Cu, which seems to be known to the general public for this field of research. Reading this simple and most generic symbolic cell notation we know that the left side of the cell notation, i.e. Zn, implies the negative pole and the right side of the cell notation, i.e. Cu denotes the positive pole of the cell. It should be noted that, by convention, the left-hand electrode in this cell notation is always taken to be the anode, and the electrode written on the right side is therefore always the cathode. Having this point in mind, the cell notation is a shorthand description of galvanic cells, equivalent to the discharge process of any energy storage device.
Measurement of the key parameters
Electrochemical performances of energy storage devices are commonly characterized by cyclic voltammetry, galvanostatic charge/discharge, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. These methods are essentially used to measure the three fundamental parameters: current, voltage, and time. All the other parameters including energy, power, capacitance/capacity, equivalent series resistance (ESR), and the operating potential window can be obtained from them. Aside from the above-mentioned parameters, there are some other tests, namely, retention capability, cycling stability, coulombic efficiency, self-discharge, and time constant that provide insights into the performance of an energy storage system. There are still some other parameters that have not yet been well formulated, such as shelf life and temperature effects. Thus, it is essential to establish an improved process for their assessment, to support continuous improvement, and to unify the evaluation tests. However, these two parameters are better suited for field-testing and industry rather than laboratory experiments, thus they are not considered here. Additionally, testing a supercapacitor material (i.e. a 3-electrode cell setup) differs from a supercapacitor device (i.e. a 2E cell configuration), and the differences are clearly indicated here. It should also be noted that although almost all of the three main electrochemical techniques can be used for the measurement of each of the key parameters, each of these techniques has a particular advantage in determining some of these parameters. For example, EIS is better suited for the measurement of ESR, GCD profiles for the determination of capacitance, energy, and power, and CV for the differentiation between capacitor-type and battery-type characteristics. Before going deeper into the measurements of the parameters that are mainly used to show the performance of energy storage devices, we first define exactly what each of these terms means.
The operating potential window/cell voltage
The operating potential window is the maximum potential range that guarantees (i) chemical stability of the electrolyte against anodic and cathodic reactions, and (ii) stability of the electrode active materials against decomposition. A potential window is typically used for electrodes and a voltage window is commonly used for devices.329 The concept of potential/voltage window for batteries and supercapacitors differs slightly. In batteries, the potential/voltage window is defined as the potential range in which the changes of the electrode/device during the charging and discharging processes are reversible, whereas in supercapacitors in addition to being reversible during the charging and discharging processes, the behavior of the electrode/cell must be capacitive (with a rectangular CV or triangular GCD profile).329 Unlike batteries that display a discharge voltage plateau until the battery is nearly completely exhausted, the voltage of a supercapacitor is proportional to the amount of stored electrical charge. The maximum voltage of a supercapacitor is provided when the supercapacitor is in its fully charged state. The decomposition of solvent and irreversible reactions on one of the electrodes (i.e. over-oxidation or over-reduction of the electrode active materials) are among the parameters that restrict the operating potential window of an energy storage system. Let's denote the lower and upper potential limits of the negative electrode as EN1 and EN2, and that of the positive electrode as EP1 and EP2, respectively. The potential windows of the negative and positive electrodes are thus, EN2–EN1 and EP2–EP1, respectively.329
In many cases, especially in supercapacitors, the operating potential window of the positive electrode overlaps with that of the negative electrode, i.e. EN2 > EP1, which means the operating voltage window of the supercapacitor is narrower than the sum of the operating potential windows of the two electrodes. In an extreme case where the operating potential window of one electrode completely covers that of the other electrode, the operating voltage window of the supercapacitor is then restricted by the electrode with the narrower operating potential window. Referring to Fig. 31, this happens when EN1 < EP1 and EN2 > EP2 for a wider operating potential window of the negative electrode or EP1 < EN1 and EP2 > EN2 in the case of a wider operating potential window for the positive electrode. On the other hand, if the operating potential windows of the two electrodes are not connected, i.e. EN2 < EP1, which is commonly the case in batteries, the device would then have a minimum discharging voltage.
 Fig. 31  Operating potential/voltage window (OVW). Schematic illustration of the operating potential windows of the negative and positive electrodes as well as an asymmetric device, along with the potential of zero voltage (PZV). Reproduced with permission from ref. 329 copyright 2015, Springer Nature, with slight modifications. 
In a fully discharged state, the voltage across the supercapacitor terminals is zero and the potentials of the positive and negative electrodes are equal. The potential of zero voltage (PZV) affects the operating voltage window of the supercapacitor. If the difference between PZV and EN2 is greater than the difference between PZV and EP1 (PZV–EN2 > EP1–PZV), the positive electrode will be the voltage-determining electrode, and vice versa. The operating voltage window (OVW) of the supercapacitor device, with equal electrode capacitances, is then:OVW = 2 × (EP2–PZV); if PZV–EN2 > EP1–PZVOVW = 2 × (PZV–EN2); if EP1–PZV > PZV–EN2However, the operating voltage window of a supercapacitor with unequal electrode capacitances will be EP2–EN1. It has also been suggested that to widen the operating voltage window of a supercapacitor, the capacitance of the voltage-determining electrode should be further increased relative to that of the other electrode.332 Because the rate of the potential change on each of the positive and negative electrodes is largely determined by the capacitance of the electrodes, the higher the capacitance, the lower is the rate of the potential change.
Capacity/capacitance
Capacity is the amount of electric charge that a battery can deliver at the rated voltage (for more details on C-rate please see the section on Batteries). The total capacitance of a supercapacitor is given by: (97)Normalized capacitance, CN, is defined as the capacitance per unit mass, volume, or area of either the active materials or the whole package, eqn (98): (98)where x can be the mass, volume or surface area of the active material or even the whole device. The resulting normalized capacitance based on each of the aforementioned parameters is often defined as the gravimetric (or specific) capacitance (F g−1), the volumetric capacitance (F cm−3), or the areal capacitance (F cm−2), respectively.

Theoretical assessment. 
The theoretical capacity of a material can be easily calculated from Faraday's first law of electrochemistry that states one equivalent-weight (i.e. the atomic or molecular mass of a substance divided by the number of electrons involved in the redox reaction) of a material delivers 96485 Coulombs (or 26.8 A h), i.e.: (99)Thus, the amount of charge passed through an electrode is directly proportional to the amount of material deposited on or liberated from it. For example, the half-cell reactions during the discharge of a typical Li-ion battery are: Negative pole: LiC6 → C6 + Li+ + e−(100) Positive pole: CoO2 + Li+ + e− → LiCoO2(101) (102)Let us also refer to a lead–acid battery, which is characterized by the following half-cell reactions: Negative pole: PbO2 + H2SO4 + 2H+ + 2e− → PbSO4 + 2H2O(103) Positive pole: Pb + H2SO4 → PbSO4 + 2H+ + 2e−(104) (105)Thus, the theoretical capacity of a battery is defined as the number of electrons involved in the redox reaction multiplied by 26.8 A h. However, when comparing different batteries, the theoretical capacity per unit mass or volume of the material (CTheoretical(Bat.)) is of more interest than the absolute value of capacity. (106)where M and Vol are the molecular weight and volume of the electrode active materials, respectively. The values of capacity per unit mass, which is defined as specific capacity, for Li and Pb are: (107) (108)However, for most state-of-the-art applications, a battery has to occupy a limited space. Thus, it is even more important to know the capacity of a battery per unit volume of the material, i.e. A h cm−3. The capacity per unit volume of Li (densityLi = 0.534 g cm−3) is 2.06 A h cm−3, and that of Pb (densityPb = 11.34 g cm−3) is 2.93 A h cm−3.
In practice, we determine the practical specific capacity (CPractical(Bat.)) of the materials from the GCD profile by means of: (109)in which tcutoff is the time to reach the cut off potential (Vcutoff) in seconds, m is the mass of the materials, ∫Vdt is the area under the discharge profile, and V is the potential in the midway of the discharge step, i.e. at . The practical capacity is almost always less than the theoretical capacity, since the utilization ratio of the electrode active materials, which is defined as the mass ratio of the electrode active materials actually participating during the discharge process to the total mass of the active materials (ranging from 0 to 1.0), is very often less than 1.0. For example, in the case of Li-ion batteries, not all the Li ions can be removed from the lattice of the host material in the operating potential window and some of the Li ions are removed above the cutoff potential. In addition, to evaluate the practical specific capacity of a battery or cell, one has to take into account not only the integrated mass of the positive and negative electrodes, but also other essential components of a battery or cell, such as binders, conductive additives, separators, electrolyte, current collectors, and casing. Thus, in reality, the practical specific capacity of a battery or cell can be significantly different from the value calculated theoretically.
While the theoretical capacity of a battery can be easily calculated from the moles of available active materials, calculating the theoretical capacitance of a supercapacitive material is rather challenging. For EDLC-based materials, the capacitance is not only dependent on the type of the electrode active materials used, but also is very much dependent on the electrolyte used. For pseudocapacitive materials, there is not a fixed stoichiometry between the number of atoms and the number of electrons transferred in the redox reaction.1 For example, the oxidation products of RuO2, eqn (70), and MnO2, eqn (71), as well-established pseudocapacitive materials are most accurately referred to as RuO2−δ(OH)δ (0 ≤ δ ≤ 2) and MnIII(x+y)MnIV1−(x+y)OOMyHx (0 ≤ x + y ≤ 1). Thus, charge/discharge processes in metal oxides involve just a partial oxidation/reduction of the metal species. Moreover, the capacitance of a supercapacitor, either being EDLC or pseudocapacitive, is equal to the electric charge divided by the voltage. Thus, in contrast to the charge capacity, which is an absolute value, the capacitance is the charge capacity normalized to the voltage (potential), so the concept of theoretical specific capacitance without giving the voltage (potential) range does not make sense. Some pseudocapacitive materials, in a specified potential window, show a battery-like behavior with plateaus in their GCD profiles, for which one should not report capacitance, rather capacity. The limitations imposed by these factors on reporting the theoretical specific capacitance make such a criterion unreliable to be used for the assessment of the supercapacitive materials. However, to have an approximate assessment of the supercapacitive performance of the electrode active materials, the following approaches can be followed. The theoretical specific capacitance of an EDLC (CTheoretical(EDLC)) is measured as: (110)The theoretical specific capacitance of a typical activated carbon is about 354 F g−1 and the corresponding areal capacitance is about 18 μF cm−2 which are in good agreement with the experimental values of about 358 F g−1 (for a 2060 m2 g−1 carbon sample)334 and 15 μF cm−2.335 As can be seen, theoretically, the specific capacitance of an EDLC-based material is directly proportional to the specific surface area. However, in reality, it may not necessarily happen, especially for materials with very fine porosity and rich surface chemistry.336 For example, an activated carbon sample with a BET surface area of 1538 m2 g−1 gives a specific capacity of 321 F g−1, while another activated carbon sample with a BET surface area of 3038 m2 g−1 gives a specific capacity of just 207 F g−1.336
Theoretical specific pseudocapacitance (CTheoretical(PS)), which originates from Faradaic electron transfer processes across the electrode–electrolyte interface, is calculated as:337 (111)where n is the mean number of electrons transferred in the redox reaction, F is Faraday's constant (96485 C mol−1), M is the molecular weight of the pseudocapacitive material and V is the operating voltage window. For instance, in the case of the conducting polymer polyaniline (PANI), one electron is transferred per one aniline unit in the potential window from 0.0 to 0.8 V. –(An–An)n– + Cl− → –(An–An+·Cl−)n– + e−(112)where An represents the monomer of aniline in the polymer chain. The molecular weight of aniline repeat units in PANI is 91 g mol−1. Thus, (113)The theoretical specific capacitance of PANI is a combination of theoretical specific pseudocapacitance and EDLC of PANI. EDLC is typically on the order of a few tens to a few hundreds of F g−1. Thus, in an optimistic state and by generalizing the EDLC characteristics of the carbon-based materials to PANI, one can make an estimate of the theoretical capacitance of PANI. In practice, the total capacitance of an electrode active material is determined from GCD profiles and the contribution from EDLC and pseudocapacitance can be estimated using the step potential electrochemical spectroscopy technique, which is described later on.


Differential vs. integral capacitance. 
The integral or static capacitance of a physical capacitor, CInt, is a constant and can be calculated using: (114)in which q is the total charge stored in a capacitor and V is the total voltage difference of the system. However, in supercapacitors, C is very evidently not a constant. Thus in supercapacitors, we may instead write the following statement:288 (115)In this equation, Cdiff stands for the differential capacitance of the supercapacitor and indicates the rate of change in the charge that is stored in the supercapacitor with respect to the potential. Rearranging eqn (115) results in: (116)Integration of eqn (116) and substitution of the results in eqn (114) lead to: (117)Eqn (117) provides a means of calculating the CInt from the Cdiff.. CV and GCD measurements can be used to retrieve both differential and integral capacitances, but EIS just measures the differential capacitance. Table 4 summarizes the formula for the measurement of differential and integral capacitances from CV, GCD and EIS measurements.338
Table 4 Calculation of differential and integral capacitance using CV, GCD, and EIS methodsa




Capacitance

CV

GCD
EIS





a Reproduced with permission from ref. 338, copyright 2012, Elsevier, with modification of the Cint equation using CV based on ref. 288 and 339.






C
Diff.













C
Int







N.A.





Equivalent series resistance
Equivalent series resistance (ESR) is often defined as the sum of the resistances of the bulk electrolyte, contact resistance between the electrode and the current collector, as well as the resistance of the electrode.340 ESR is an important parameter that limits the speed at which a supercapacitor can be charged or discharged, thus a high ESR leads to a low power performance of the supercapacitor.341
Energy and power
Energy and power are the two most important parameters for characterization of electrochemical energy storage devices. Specific energy (W h kg−1) or energy density (W h L−1, or W h cm−2) is the amount of energy stored in an energy storage device per unit mass or volume/area of the electrode active materials or the whole device, respectively. Specific power (W kg−1) or power density (W L−1, or W cm−2) is the amount of power an energy storage device can deliver per unit mass or volume/area of the electrode active materials or the whole device, respectively. The relationship between these two important parameters can be expressed by the so-called Ragone plot, which is a very important plot for performance comparison of different energy storage devices.
Rate capability
Rate capability is defined as the capability of an energy storage device to preserve the capacitance/capacity as the current density or specific current increases.342 A system with fast kinetics of electrode processes (i.e. short diffusion pathway and fast electron/ion transport) exhibits a high rate capability and demonstrates a high power performance.343 Adequate control over the specific surface area and pore size distribution of the electrode active materials is crucial to attain a high rate capability. In a hierarchically structured porous material, the macropores shorten the ion diffusion distances to the interior surfaces, the mesopores provide low resistant pathways for the ions to diffuse through the porous particles, and the micropores are strongly desired to reinforce the electric double layer capacitance.344,345 As a result, three-dimensional hierarchical porous carbon demonstrates a better rate capability along with an enhanced electrochemistry performance compared with single-sized pore carbon-based materials or flat graphene sheets, because of the effectiveness of the processes occurring in a porous structure. Note that although a macroporous structure is beneficial for the high rate capability of the system, the large pore volume that is induced by the macropores reduces the packing density and the volumetric characteristics of the devices.345 Rate capability of batteries is assessed by the C-rate system, which is widely used to scale the charge and discharge current for batteries.123
Similar to the well-stablished C-rate system for batteries, a 60 s charge/discharge time has been recommended for supercapacitors.17,123 This 60 s charge/discharge time, referred to as a discharge rate of 60C, can remedy the inconsistencies that arose from the different test conditions in GCD experiments, i.e., A g−1, A cm−2, A cm−3, etc. In addition, it can be used to identify the proper scan rate in CV tests as ν = potential window/60 V s−1: ν = 1/60 V s−1 (∼16.7 mV s−1) for a 1 V system; ν = 2.3/60 V s−1 (∼38.3 mV s−1) for a 2.3 V one.123
Cycle life/stability test
Generally, the capacitance/capacity of an energy storage device decreases as it continues charging and discharging. There is not a generally accepted definition for cycle life of a device, and it strongly depends on the application. In some cases, cycle life is defined as the number of complete charge–discharge cycles before capacitance/capacity of the device falls below 80% of the beginning-of-life value.264,346,347 The death state of a battery for an electric or hybrid electric vehicle is also defined as 80% of its initial capacity.348 Note that in ordinary applications, we generally recharge the battery after using 70–80% of the full charge capacity, which increases the cycle life of the battery by several fold. Cycle life of batteries are typically limited to a few hundred to a few thousand cycles, due to the lack of stability of materials and reversibility of redox reactions during the consecutive discharge–recharge cycles, whereas supercapacitors can undergo millions of cycles, which makes them experimentally burdensome (if not impossible) to directly measure.123
As an equivalent to cycle life, cycle stability is a measure of how well an energy storage device deals with being consecutively charged and discharged. Cycle stability is commonly reported as a certain percentage of the initial capacitance/capacity that the device preserves after a specified number of cycles. In spite of the fact that redox reactions are involved in the pseudocapacitive charge storage, cycle life of pseudocapacitors far exceeds that of rechargeable batteries. This is because batteries store energy based on redox reactions in the bulk or through the intercalation of ions into the layered structure of active materials via bulk reactions of the electrodes. The intercalation process and the bulk redox reactions, however, are severely limited by the diffusion kinetics of the ions. Redox reaction-induced phase transformations may degrade the layered structure of the electrode active material with cycling, particularly at high rates.349,350 The non-ideal reversibility of redox reactions in electrode active materials is due to slow reaction kinetics, particularly if the reactions are driven at high rates, complicating the achievement of an ultra-long cycle life and a stable performance in batteries.349 In redox supercapacitors, electrochemical redox reactions take place at the surface or near the surface of the electrode active materials, but not through the bulk materials; thus, the negligible destruction of the electrode active materials structure ensures longevity of the redox supercapacitors.73 However, although research studies have shed some light on the main characteristics of the energy storage mechanisms of various systems, their molecular aspects remain mostly unknown. There is, therefore, an explicit need to conduct in situ experiments and simulations that can provide valuable mechanistic information, although conducting these experiments is a problematic task due to the difficulty in obtaining well-defined interfaces in redox supercapacitors.351
During a cycling test, most of the time is consumed at voltages that are not critical for device stability. Therefore, a more demanding test to evaluate the stability of a system is a constant voltage held at the maximum cell voltage known as the voltage-hold test.352 Typically, the voltage hold test takes a shorter time than the cycling test before a clear result can be obtained. In this test, the critical voltage is applied to the cell and by occasional (e.g. every 10 h during the voltage hold procedure) cycling the cell in a potential window that is harmless to the cell, capacity/capacitance of the cell is measured. Performing this test on energy storage devices, especially hybrid systems that utilize solution-phase redox species, gives more information on the long-term stability of the system because the voltage-hold test allocates more time for charged redox probes to diffuse away from the electrode surface and interact with other solution-phase redox species or the opposite electrode. Please see Fig. 32 to compare the fundamental difference between the two aging test procedures. In the case of cycling experiments and up to 12000 cycles, there are some capacitance fluctuations but no significant capacitance loss for both upper voltage limits of 3.5 V and 3.75 V (Fig. 32a). However, the results of the voltage-hold experiment for the test performed at 3.5 V and at 3.75 V are clearly different (Fig. 32b). While the voltage hold test at 3.5 V shows a stable performance with no significant capacitance loss, capacitance of the system for the voltage hold test at 3.75 V starts to decrease after just 200 h, demonstrating that the voltage hold test is better than respective cycling tests with identical upper voltage limits, and takes a shorter time than the cycling test.352
 Fig. 32  Cycling stability test for a supercapacitor utilizing a mesoporous carbon black and ionic liquid electrolyte [EMIM][BF4]. (a) Cycle test with upper voltage limits of 3.5 V (open squares, green) and 3.75 V (filled circles, red). Lower voltage limit during cycling is 0.0 V. (b) Constant voltage hold tests with hold voltages of 3.5 V (open squares, green) and 3.75 V (filled circles, red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 352, copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
Coulombic/energy/voltage efficiency
Coulombic efficiency (also called charge efficiency) is defined as the ratio of the charge drawn out from an energy storage device/electrode during the discharging step to the amount of charge that is stored in the device/electrode during the charging step. In a typical battery, coulombic efficiency is defined as the ratio of the discharge capacity to the charge capacity in one cycle.353,354 In Li-ion batteries, coulombic efficiency is also defined as the ratio between the Li ions that are stripped from the working electrode and the Li metal that is replated.355 For a system with 100% coulombic efficiency, charging and discharging times are the same in the GCD profile (if of course the rates of charging and discharging are the same).
Energy efficiency is a critical parameter to evaluate the performance of energy storage devices. While coulombic efficiency is deduced from the data along the x-axis of the i–V curve, energy efficiency utilizes the information of both the x- and the y-axes. Energy efficiency is defined as the ratio of electrical energy drawn out from a device to the electrical energy required to put the energy storage device back to the same state of charge. Voltage efficiency is defined as the ratio of discharge voltage to charge voltage of the energy storage system. Fig. 33 schematically shows the charge/discharge time and voltage of the different energy storage systems as well as their recovered and stored energy.
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the coulombic, energy, and voltage efficiencies of the electrochemical energy storage systems. 
Self-discharge and leakage current
In an ideal energy storage device, the electrons just flow from the negative pole to the positive pole when the circuit is closed. However, in reality, under an open circuit condition, a slow discharge does occur which is known as self-discharge. This is because of an effective thermodynamic driving force that tends to move the charges back into the equilibrium condition. Often the self-discharge rate in supercapacitors is higher than that in batteries, thus this can have a severe adverse effect on the performance of a supercapacitor. From a practical point of view, it means that replacing, for instance, a vehicle's lead–acid battery with a supercapacitor is currently impractical since self-discharge can result in a supercapacitor having insufficient voltage to start the vehicle. The chemical and physical processes responsible for self-discharge are often complex. However, self-discharge processes are commonly classified under three main categories (Fig. 34):356,357 (i) charge redistribution, (ii) parasitic Faradaic reactions, and (iii) ohmic leakage of current between the electrodes. If one of the self-discharge mechanisms or a combination among them is available, self-discharge takes place.
 Fig. 34  Schematic illustration of self-discharge mechanisms: (a) charge redistribution is the main mechanism of self-discharge in EDLCs. Movement of ions between the Stern layer and the electrolyte and subsequently across the electrolyte due to movement of charge through the electrode active materials causes self-discharge in supercapacitors. (b) Self-discharge in redox pseudocapacitors, as well as in hybrid systems, is mainly caused by redox shuttling between charged redox species in solution (b, top magnified panel) or via cross-diffusion of charged redox couples between the oppositely charged electrodes (b, bottom magnified panel). Panel b is adapted with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

Charge redistribution. 
With many electrode active materials (e.g. porous carbon-based materials as well as pseudocapacitive materials), the outer portion of the electrode active material charges more rapidly than the interior of the materials. As a result, the surface-exposed portion of the electrode active material reaches the desired potential before the interior parts of the material. Inequality in the potential between the interior and exterior surfaces of the electrode active material is a driving force leading to movement of charge through the material to equalize charge propagation, called charge redistribution.356 In a supercapacitive energy storage system, the electrode potential is measured at the outer surface of the electrode active materials. Thus, as the charge moves deeper into the material, the measured voltage at the outer surface drops, i.e. the electrode self-discharges (Fig. 34a). Note that one of the characteristics of self-discharge by charge redistribution is that the self-discharge process will be attenuated by repeated charge/self-discharge cycles since with repeated charging more of the interior parts of the pseudocapacitive materials will be in higher oxidation states and/or more of the pores will be available for the electrolyte.


Parasitic Faradaic reactions. 
Self-discharge is also one of the critical challenges facing the realization of high-performance hybrid energy storage systems.317 In a hybrid system, solution-phase redox species diffuse across the cell and shuttle electrons between oppositely charged electrodes by exchanging electrons with either the electrode surfaces or other solution-phase redox species (Fig. 34b). Thus, one of the big advantages of a hybrid energy storage system, i.e. the storage of energy with the aid of solution-phase redox species, presents a major challenge for practical applications. Cross-diffusion of redox species also weakens the structure of the double layer. For example, on the positive electrode, the positive charge of the electrode is balanced by electrolyte anions in the double layer. The potential of the positive electrode may be higher than the thermodynamic oxidation potential of species on the electrode surfaces or at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The redox species that undergo oxidation reactions on the positive electrode pass their electrons across the double-layer into the electrode surface, thus, reducing the positive charge on the surface and releasing the anions from the double layer. In self-discharge due to Faradaic reactions, the processes are controlled by either an activation-controlled or a diffusion-controlled self-discharge mechanism. In a self-discharge process based solely on an activation-controlled Faradaic reaction, the reacting species are at high concentrations or are attached to the electrode, thus, transport limitations are removed. The self-discharge profile under this circumstance results in a linear voltage drop as a function of log time after a plateau.358 If the self-discharge profile is governed purely by impurities (e.g. O2, H2O2, Fe2+/Fe3+, etc.) at a nonporous electrode, the voltage would decay with t1/2, to satisfy the semi-infinite, diffusion-controlled Faradaic reaction.359


Ohmic leakage. 
In an energy storage device (full cell), there is the possibility of a short circuit between the positive and negative electrodes. The self-discharge due to charge transfer through this short circuit is called ohmic leakage. For a self-discharge process resulting from ohmic leakage, a plot of ln voltage versus time would give a linear relationship.359

Table 5 provides an overview of the self-discharge mechanisms. Of course, real energy storage systems are often complex and can have several governing self-discharge mechanisms, and the shape of the self-discharge profile is governed by the relative degree of each self-discharge mechanism. For more detailed mechanistic evaluation of self-discharge processes, readers are referred to some nice articles.356,358–363 To counteract the self-discharge current, which is the sum of the currents of all of the processes related to self-discharge, supercapacitors require the application of a small constant current, the so-called leakage current, to keep the device fully charged.
Table 5 Overview of different self-discharge mechanisms




Self-discharge mechanisms

V–t relationship




Self-discharge due to Faradaic reactions
Activation-controlled mechanism

V

t
 = Vi − Blog(t + θ)



B: a constant related to the Tafel slope, θ: an integration constant


Diffusion-controlled mechanism






c
0: initial concentration of the reacting species, C: capacitance


Self-discharge due to Ohmic leakage of current






R
L: resistance of the leakage pathway


Self-discharge due to charge redistribution
Diffusion-limited charge redistribution (e.g. diffusion of protons through the RuO2 film)

V

t
 ∝ t1/2


Resistance-limited charge redistribution (e.g. solution resistance which limits the transfer of the ions in the pores or high electrical and ionic resistance of the MnO2 film.)

V

t
 ∝ logt




In the next step, we utilize CV, GCD and EIS techniques for extraction of the key parameters of energy storage systems. However, self-discharge and leakage current can be simply measured using a voltmeter. Self-discharge processes can be examined in either a 2-electrode or 3-electrode cell setup. The most common method to assess the self-discharge of a cell is to leave a charged cell under the open-circuit condition and measure the voltage decay over time. Measurement of self-discharge in a 2-electrode cell configuration provides a realistic picture of the self-discharge as it may occur in a commercial device. However, mechanistic studies of the self-discharge processes in detail and the kinetics of each electrode cannot be studied in a 2-electrode system. To differentiate the self-discharge process of each electrode and identify its mechanism, a 3-electrode cell setup should be used. However, measurements of self-discharge in a 3-electrode cell configuration are blind to shuttle mechanisms, where the solution-phase redox species of one electrode diffuse to the other and undergo a redox reaction at that electrode. The evaluation of the leakage current and self-discharging processes by potential step methods is discussed next.
As a standard protocol for testing the leakage current, we recommend the procedure reported in Maxwell Technologies datasheets.364 For measuring the leakage current, an external resistor (Rext, e.g. 1 Ω) is connected in series with the energy storage device. The positive and negative terminals of the voltage power supply are connected to the positive and negative terminals of the cell, respectively, whereas the positive and negative terminals of the Rext are connected to the positive and negative terminals of the data acquisition unit, respectively. Meanwhile, a jumper is installed across Rext to expedite the charge cycle. For recording the leakage current, the cell is charged to the rated voltage by a charging current within the maximum current limit of the device, e.g. 1 mA. The voltage is held for 1 h and the jumper is removed. Then, the voltage is held for 72 h and the voltage across the Rext is recorded. Leakage current is given by: (118)The typical test setup proposed by Maxwell Technologies for the measurement of the self-discharge is to charge the energy storage device to the rated voltage and measure the voltage over 72 hours of open circuit at room temperature.364 For measuring the self-discharge, the cell is first charged to the rated voltage by a charging current within the maximum current limit of the device, e.g. 1 mA. The voltage is held for 1 h. Then, the voltage is recorded over 72 h while the cell is open circuited. Self-discharge can be expressed as: (119)

Cyclic voltammetry
Cyclic voltammetry is one of the most commonly used electrochemical methods and is based on the application of a triangular potential-time waveform to the electrode while monitoring the current that develops in an electrochemical cell. In a 2E cell setup, the voltage is applied between the positive and negative electrodes, whereas in a 3E system the potential is applied between the working and reference electrodes. The rate of change of voltage/potential with time is referred to as the scan rate. In CV, the current that flows through an electrochemical cell is plotted versus the voltage or time. CV is a very powerful technique and one of the most commonly utilized methods to evaluate energy storage performance of the electrodes (in a three-electrode cell setup) and devices (a two-electrode cell setup). The reversibility of the electrode reactions and mechanistic studies of the processes that are involved in energy storage systems as well as many other complicated characteristics of the systems can be readily studied by CV.123
Redox reactions of different species can be affected quite significantly by the adsorption of these species on the electrode surfaces. For the treatment of such a problem, one must choose an appropriate adsorption isotherm to study the system. Assuming only the oxidized form of a species is present initially, and that the number of species adsorbed onto an electrode surface is independent of potential, then:288 (120)where ΓOx(t) and ΓRed(t) are the amounts (mol cm−2) of oxidized and reduced forms of the species adsorbed at time t, respectively. This equation implies that reduction of adsorbed Ox produces adsorbed Red, and the sum of the two adsorbates is constant and equals Γtotal, i.e. equals the initial surface concentration of Ox, ΓOx(t = 0). Assuming a Langmuir adsorption isotherm: (121)in which bOx and bRed are the relative strength of adsorption of Ox and Red. For a Nernstian reaction: (122)From eqn (121) and (122), (123)Assuming adsorption of the Ox and Red species is essentially of the same strength, bOX = bRed, the equation can be rearranged as: (124)where θ is the fractional surface coverage. This equation is a unique form of the Nernst equation.
A GCD profile of the adsorbed species, or a thin layer of electrode active materials coated on an electrode, follows eqn (124). The area under the CV curve represents the charge required for the full reduction of the adsorbed species and is related to the surface concentration of the species as: (125)From the combination of the above-mentioned equations with: ΓOx(t) + ΓRed(t) = ΓOx,total(126)the expression for the current can be obtained as:288 (127)Assuming the number of electrons in the redox reaction n = 1, the geometric area of the electrode A = 1.0 cm2, the total surface concentration of the Ox species at t = 0, ΓOx,total = 2 × 10−9 mol cm−2, temperature T = 298 K (25 °C), the CVs calculated from eqn (127) at three different scan rates of 10, 30 and 50 mV s−1 are presented in Fig. 35a. For pseudocapacitive materials, the GCD profiles follow eqn (124) (Fig. 35b).
 Fig. 35  
CV and GCD profiles of a supercapacitor and an ideal capacitor. (a) CVs derived from eqn (127) at three different potential scan rates of 10, 30, and 50 mV s−1 with an assumption that the number of electrons in the redox reaction n = 1, geometric area of the electrode A = 1.0 cm2, total surface concentration of the species Γ = 2 × 10−9 mol cm−2, and temperature T = 298 K (25 °C). (b) GCD profiles derived from eqn (124) at the indicated constant currents of i, i/2, and i/3, considering the point that θ = it/nFΓOx,total. (c) CVs of an ideal capacitor of 50 mF at three different potential scan rates of 10, 20, and 30 mV s−1, derived from eqn (128). (d) GCD profiles of a capacitor at the indicated constant currents, derived from eqn (128). Panels b, c, and d are obtained with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016, Taylor & Francis. 
Generally, the amount of charge that is stored on the plates of a capacitor is proportional to the voltage across the plates. This proportionality is referred to as the capacitance of the system, and thus can be generally expressed as: C = q/V. In CV, the applied voltage of the system varies linearly with time, i.e. V = V0 + νt. Thus, the capacitance of the system can be expressed as: (128)Eqn (128) indicates that the current flowing through a capacitor is linearly proportional to the scan rate and is independent of potential. Therefore, an I–V plot of the capacitor that stores charge in the electric double layer gives a rectangular shaped CV (Fig. 35c). It should be noted that ν is positive when charging the capacitor and is negative when discharging it. The GCD profile of an EDLC demonstrates a constant rate of voltage increase/decrease in charge/discharge steps, resulting in a triangular shape as demonstrated in Fig. 35d. CVs of EDLC and pseudocapacitors are quite different in shape (Fig. 35a and c), but they share two common characteristics;1 (1) the proportionality between i and ν, and (2) producing a current of reverse polarity with reversing ν.
In contrast to pseudocapacitance that occurs when reversible redox reactions occur at or near the surface of an electrode, batteries demonstrate less reversible CVs and kinetically slower processes. In batteries, the oxidation and reduction peak potentials of the voltammograms shift to more positive and negative values, respectively. The oxidation and reduction reactions are illustrated as plateaus on the GCD profile. Less reversibility of the CVs translates into an upward shift of the charge plateau and a downward shift of the discharge plateau in a GCD curve (Fig. 33c). Such a trend is basically responsible for the relatively low energy efficiency of a battery.
Resolving the capacitor-like and battery-like behavior
In CV, the current response to an applied potential varies depending on whether the redox reaction is a diffusion-controlled or an adsorption-controlled process. CVs of the active material in a 3E cell setup can be analyzed based on the shape of the curves. Active materials of batteries are characterized by distinct peaks in the CV. An almost rectangular CV curve is indicative of an ideal capacitive behavior. Pseudocapacitive materials are characterized either by rectangular CVs or CVs with highly reversible and significantly broadened peaks. Hybrid systems also display the characteristic CV curves of batteries or supercapacitors in a 3E cell setup. However, unlike the sharp redox peaks of batteries or rectangular CVs of supercapacitors in a 3E cell setup, hybrid energy storage systems, as well as some pseudocapacitors, display a relatively quasi-rectangular CV with a hump for the redox peaks, indicating a combination of battery-like and supercapacitive behaviors. As such, it is impossible to differentiate between battery-like and supercapacitive behaviors based solely on the shape of the voltammograms. Trasatti was the first to propose an approach to quantify contributions from diffusion-controlled and capacitive charge storage processes.365 He, and then others,236,366–369 examined the dependency of the voltammetric charge, q(ν), calculated by the integration of the internal area in the CV, on scan rate. The value of q(ν) can be deconvoluted into two terms: (1) qout that represents the contribution of the outer surface of the electrode active material to the charge storage (i.e. corresponds to the region directly accessible to the electrolyte), and (2) the inner voltammetric charge, qin, that comes from the partially accessible sites, such as pores, grain-boundaries, cracks, and so forth, for which the charge is proportionally related to ν1/2. (129)On the other hand (130)where qtotal is the total amount of charge (qout + qin).
The diffusion rate of the species into the bulk of the electroactive material could be controlled by the scan rate during a CV test. Utilizing eqn (129), as ν → ∞, more of the diffusion-controlled redox sites are excluded from being accessed by the species, since the Faradaic charge storage processes are too slow to occur at very high scan rates. Thus, extrapolation of the linear fit to q(ν) vs. ν−1/2 plot to the y-intercept (i.e. ν−1/2 = 0) gives the capacitive charge storage, qcapacitive. On the other hand, utilizing eqn (130), as ν → 0, the diffusion-controlled processes could access almost all available pores inside the bulk of the electroactive material. Thus, both Faradaic and capacitive charge storage processes occur concurrently and extrapolation of a 1/q(ν) vs. ν1/2 plot gives the total charge, qtotal. The difference between the capacitive charge storage and the total charge is assumed to equal the contribution from the Faradaic charge storage.
As a second analysis to develop a more quantitative interpretation of the data from a CV test and to separate the contributions from each of the aforementioned characteristics to the total charge, the dependency of the two charge storage mechanisms on scan rate should be explicitly considered. For a battery-type material, the current response varies with ν1/2, whereas for a supercapacitive process the current response varies directly with ν. Thus, as indicated before, the whole process can be described as: (131)To distinguish between contributions from each of these processes, the equation should be solved for the values of k1 and k2 at different potentials.

Eqn (131) can also be rearranged as: (132)By plotting i/ν1/2vs. ν1/2 the values of k1 and k2, as scan rate independent constants, are obtained from the slope and intercept, respectively.236,370–372 For example, Dunn and co-workers have studied the charge storage properties of MoO3−x (Fig. 36) and shown that capacitor-like charge storage in reduced R-MoO3−x occurs to a much greater extent compared with the fully oxidized F-MoO3 (75% versus 37%).372
 Fig. 36  Deconvolution of the capacitive and diffusion-controlled currents for reduced R-MoO3−x and fully oxidized F-MoO3 based on eqn (132). Capacitive charge storage for R-MoO3−x is 75% and that of F-MoO3 is 37%. Adapted with permission from ref. 372, copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Although this method has been widely used to deconvolute capacitive and diffusion-controlled charge storage processes, a plot such as this is sometimes non-linear in a particular potential window and usually only gives a straight line in a very narrow sweep rate range.373 It has also been argued that the data obtained in a particular potential range probably cannot be used for the determination of the charge storage mechanism(s) in another potential range.374,375 To deconvolute the total capacitive current into the contribution from Faradaic pseudocapacitance and double layer capacitance, step potential electrochemical spectroscopy has also been proposed; this is discussed in the chronoamperometry/chronocoulometry (potential step methods) section.
Operating potential window/cell voltage
The maximum operating potential window is determined by gradually increasing the potential window and recording the voltammograms to reach a potential close to the stability limits of the electrode active materials, or until the polarization trend of the solvent becomes very obvious. Moreover, the stability of the potential window is examined over extended times by the shape and intensity of the CVs. A decrease in intensity of the CVs may indicate that the electrode active materials are dissolving or losing contact with the substrate surfaces such as is seen in polymeric materials upon consecutive cycling. The change in shape of the voltammograms may indicate that the electrode active materials are being decomposed. In addition, gas formation could also block the pores of porous materials, thus shifting the shape of the CVs from a capacitive to a resistive curve. The type of electrolyte, configuration of the cell, and the electrode active materials significantly influence the operating voltage of a cell. An overwhelming advantage of non-aqueous electrolytes over their aqueous counterparts is their much wider stable operating potential window that spans experimentally up to 4 V in ionic liquids (and theoretically operate at up to 6 V).376 To avoid limited ionic conductivity, poor safety and toxicity of organic electrolytes, researchers have adopted another strategy that is moving from a symmetric to an asymmetric configuration. With a proper selection of the electrode active materials for both positive and negative electrodes and fabricating the device in an asymmetric configuration, one can make full use of the complementary potential windows of the electrode materials, thus achieving a maximum potential window in an aqueous cell system.329,377 Two- and three-electrode cell setups provide different information about the operating potential window. A three-electrode cell setup provides information about the electrode active materials (since the reference electrode provides a constant potential).378 To know what the redox behavior of each electrode looks like individually and how they contribute to the overall operating potential window of the cell, three-electrode studies of the electrode active materials are necessary. From a two-electrode cell setup, in which one electrode is assigned as a working electrode and the other electrode serves as both the counter electrode and the reference electrode, only general information about the operating potential window of the cell can be obtained (Fig. 37). However, from a practical point of view, a 2E cell setup is a straightforward way to obtain the practical operating voltage of the cell.
 Fig. 37  Potential/voltage window determination. (a) CV curves of activated carbon and Ni–Co–Fe layered double hydroxide (LDH) electrodes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in a three-electrode cell setup. (b) CV curves of an AC//Ni–Co–Fe LDH asymmetric supercapacitor (i.e. two-electrode cell setup) at different potential windows from 0.5 to 1.5 V at a 1 scan rate of 20 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 275, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
One piece of critical information emerging from the CVs in a 3E cell setup is that the area under the CV curve of the positive electrode active material multiplied by its weight should equal that of the negative electrode at the same scan rate in a well-balanced cell. This is a simple approach to assess whether the energy storage performance of the positive and negative electrodes counterbalance each other. To use this method of balancing, a slow scan rate should be selected, because a slow scan rate will not influence the electron transfer kinetics of the electrode active materials.
Capacitance
The capacitance of a cell can be obtained from the CV curve using: (133)where i is the current (A),  is the voltammetric charge obtained by integration of the area under the reverse peak of the CV with a dimension of “Amp. Volt”. ν is the potential scan rate (V s−1), ΔV is the capacitive potential interval (V), and x can be the volume, mass, surface area of either the electrode active material or the whole device. In eqn (133), and in an ideal situation, it should not matter either the area under the forward or the backward scan we choose. In such an ideal case, one can also use the integrated charge over the entire potential range divided by two. However, the efficiency is usually less than 100%, and non-idealities may make the capacitance obtained from the area under the forward scan higher than that obtained from the reverse scan. Non-ideality manifests itself in a number of different ways, e.g. rounding of the corners of the CV or the CV tilted from the horizontal (Fig. 38). Considering this point, and to account for non-idealities in typical supercapacitors, the calculation should be made using the data from the backward (discharge) scan.361
 Fig. 38  Schematic representation of the equivalent circuit models and the corresponding CV curves of (a) an ideal electrical double layer capacitor, (b) a capacitor in parallel with a Faradaic charge transfer process, and (c) a simplified supercapacitor model comprising an ESR, Faradaic resistance, and double layer capacitor. 
When using CV to study an energy storage device, there is always a trade-off between the energy and power, which can be determined from the potential sweep rate. The Faradaic current varies with ν1/2, whereas the capacitive current varies with ν, so the capacitive current becomes relatively more important at higher sweep rates. This is mainly due to the kinetic limitations of Faradaic reactions at high scan rates.379 Thus, in addition to the proper selection of the electrode active materials and device architecture,380 utilization of a suitable scan rate would essentially allow an optimal trade-off between energy and power densities of the energy storage device.381,382
Equivalent series resistance
The equivalent series resistance (ESR) of a system, which is composed of the electrolyte resistance, the inherent resistance of the electrode active material, and the contact resistance between the electrode active materials and the current collectors, slows down the rise in the current and rounds off the two corners of the CV at the beginning of the charge and the discharge processes. Therefore, the sharper the curve goes up, the less resistance the cell will have. Fig. 38 displays the CV curves of three different simplified equivalent circuits. An ideal EDLC exhibits a perfect rectangular CV curve (Fig. 38a). In reality, energy storage devices display much more complex behaviors; two simplified cases are presented in Fig. 38b and c. Fig. 38b displays a circuit comprising a Faradaic charge transfer process in parallel with double layer charging. The CV profile of such a system shows a sloping curve, the slope of which is equal to the reciprocal of the Faradaic resistance of the system (1/R). A simplified equivalent circuit of a pseudocapacitive system is also presented in Fig. 38c.
Since the current, i, is dq/dt, eqn (47) can be rearranged as: (134)where C is the capacitance (F), ν is the potential sweep rate (V s−1), and R is the resistance of the R–C circuit (equivalent to ESR in electrode/device). By fitting the initial part of the CV with the above-mentioned equation, one can obtain the ESR of the system.
As shown in Fig. 39a and c, the shape of a CV curve strongly depends on the scan rate. At low scan rates, the shape of a CV curve is close to rectangular, which resembles the characteristics of an EDLC. At high scan rates, the shape of a CV curve deviates seriously from its original rectangular shape and becomes tilted toward the vertical axis with rounded corners, thereby becoming a quasi-rectangle. Deviation of a CV from the rectangular shape can be ascribed to the overlapping effect of the double-layer and Faradaic (pseudocapacitive) charge storage mechanisms between the active materials and electrolyte and an increase in the internal resistance of the system.230,383
 Fig. 39  The effect of ESR (IR drop) on the shape of CV curves. (a) CV curves of carbonized bamboo fibers at different scan rates ranging from 1 mV s−1 to 300 mV s−1 in 3M KOH electrolyte. (b) Variation of specific capacitance as a function of scan rate in different electrolytes. (c) CV curves of a symmetric carbonized bamboo fiber-based device at different scan rates. (d) Variation of capacitance as a function of scan rate for a supercapacitor device. The steeper nature of the CV curve at the beginning of the CVs in panel (a) reflects their lower ESRs compared to the ones in panel (c). Adapted with permission from ref. 384, copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Energy and power
Energy and power of an electrode/device can be calculated from the capacitance of the electrode/device. However, the most widely used calculation method for the maximum specific power (W kg−1) or power density (W L−1) from the initial discharge process is:14 (135)where PN is the maximum normalized power, V is the potential (V), ESR is equivalent series resistance (Ω) and x can be the volume, mass, or surface area of either the electrode material or even the whole package.
Typical testing of an energy storage system does not provide direct information on the mechanism(s) that result in efficiency loss of the system. The plot of specific power and cell voltage as a function of current density, which is a common test in fuel cells and flow batteries,385–389 can provide plenty of useful information about the cell. Fig. 40 shows a plot of both specific power and cell voltage versus current density during a discharge process of a supercapacitor at time 10 s.390 As can be seen, specific power increases with increasing current density, reaching a maximum nearly halfway through the discharging of the cell voltage, and then decreases at higher current densities. The polarization curve (current–voltage curve) can be obtained in two ways: one is to fix the current density and monitor the changes in cell voltage, the other is to fix the cell voltage and record the current density.391 The power of the system can be obtained by multiplying current density by the cell voltage.
 Fig. 40  Specific power and cell voltage as a function of the cell's current density at the discharge moment at 10 s. Rct = 10000 Ω cm2, Cdl = 0.4 F cm−2, ESR = 0.05 Ω cm2, and the maximum value of voltage across the supercapacitor is 2.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 390, copyright 2013, Taylor and Francis. 
Rate capability
In CV studies, rate capability is a measure of capacity/capacitance as a function of scan rate. Rate capability can be evaluated by plotting the variation of capacitance with increasing scan rate (Fig. 39b and d). As can be seen, the highest specific capacitance is obtained at the lowest scan rate, and the capacitance diminishes with increasing scan rate. A high rate capability demonstrates that most of the surface area and pores of the electrode active materials are accessible to the electrolyte ions even at high scan rates.392 Thus, the large specific surface and suitable porosity are extremely important to attain a high rate capability. However, in practice, the penetration distance of the electrolyte ions inside the electrode active materials diminishes with increasing scan rate, so that the inner portions of the active materials do not play a significant role in the charge storage process at high scan rates, thereby leading to a moderate or poor rate capability.390,393
Galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements
GCD is the most widely used method for analysis and prediction of the energy storage performance of the electrode active materials under practical operating conditions. In a GCD test, a constant current is applied to the electrode and the electrode is charged and discharged between two potential limits, while the change in voltage vs. time is recorded. Analogous to CV plots, supercapacitors, hybrid systems, and batteries demonstrate different responses in a GCD plot. The voltage output of EDLC and some pseudocapacitive materials increases and decreases linearly as current flows, while some other pseudocapacitive materials, as well as hybrid systems, demonstrate nonlinear charge and discharge curves with one or more tiny sloping voltage plateau regions. The GCD profiles of batteries exhibit a long steady voltage plateau derived from common thermodynamic principles. Because of this discrepancy among the GCD profiles of different energy storage devices, each type of material should be handled in a unique way to calculate its characteristic metrics.
Similar to CV for which the contributions from capacitive and Faradaic currents depend on scan rate, the current density of GCD testing affects the contributions from capacitive and Faradaic components to the total capacitance/capacity of the system. At high current densities, only the external surfaces of the active materials contribute to charge/discharge processes. Thus, the response of a hybrid device is dominated by the EDLC component, which results in a considerable decrease in its energy. However, at a sufficiently low current density, both the outer and inner sites of the active material(s) will be accessible to the electrolyte ions, leading to a higher value of the specific capacitance. A GCD test is also conveniently used to study the cycling stability of the device. Note that CV and GCD methods should both give the same result for analysis of an energy storage device, provided that ν for CV and i for GCD are given appropriate values. However, generally, CV analysis of an energy storage device is typically carried out in a shorter time interval than a GCD test. It should be noted that an extremely low current density should be avoided since this induces self-discharge.
The operating potential window/cell voltage
The cell voltage can be determined using the GCD test, by slowly increasing the voltage until a spike is observed. When there exists a plateau at a high cell voltage region of the charge profile, it implies that the current is consumed by the decomposition of the solvent. In such a case, the charging process should be immediately switched to the discharging step to preserve the stability of the system. Besides, it can be observed in a GCD profile that, with an increase in the voltage window beyond the stability limit of the electrolyte or electrode active materials, the coulombic efficiency of the system decreases (Fig. 41a).
 Fig. 41  (a) GCD profiles of a polypyrrole//self-doped polyaniline (PPy//SDPA) device at different potential windows from 0.75 to 1.5 V at a current density of 5 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KCl. The inset shows the plot of specific capacitance vs. applied voltage that increases to 98 F g−1 at an applied voltage window of 1.3 V and then starts to decrease with further increases in the voltage window. The coulombic efficiency of the system is 95% at applied voltage windows of up to 1.3 and decreases to approximately 90% at a voltage window of 1.5 V. (b) GCD profile of the PPy//SDPA device, charged up to 1.3 V as well as the GCD profiles of the individual positive and negative electrodes charged to potentials of 0.7 V and 0.6 V vs. an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, respectively. Current density is 5 mA cm−2, and the electrolyte is 1.0 M KCl. Adapted with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
Thus, the optimal operating potential window is a trade-off between maximizing the energy storage performance of the system and minimizing the negative effect of the decomposition of the electrolyte and/or other materials. Furthermore, the behavior and contribution of individual positive and negative electrodes in the operating voltage window of a full cell can be monitored via GCD (Fig. 41b). For example, Fig. 41b shows that during a GCD test, a self-doped polyaniline positive electrode actually swings between 0 and 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl, while a polypyrrole negative electrode moves between 0 and −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, and the full cell therefore operates in the voltage range of 1.3 V.
Capacitance
As we mentioned previously, non-idealities cause the CV curve to deviate from a perfectly rectangular shape; therefore, the integrated area in the forward direction may be larger than that of the backward sweep. Therefore, for accuracy, capacitance should be calculated based on the area under the reverse scan of the CV. The same reasoning holds in GCD experiments, thus, capacitance should be measured from the GCD test during a discharge step. More importantly, the calculation of capacitance using GCD profiles of each kind of system, including double-layer capacitive, pseudocapacitive, and hybrid systems, as well as being symmetric or asymmetric, requires selection of suitable mathematical expressions as standardized by Santamaría and co-workers.394
For an EDLC system, which exhibits a linear variation in voltage with time during the constant current discharge process, capacitance can be obtained using: (136)For a pseudocapacitive or hybrid system in which the GCD profile deviates from a perfect triangle, one should use eqn (137), which is a differential form of eqn (136). (137)However, whatever shape the discharge curve has, i.e. linear or nonlinear, the q/V value (which is not always equivalent to capacitance since the term capacitance cannot be used for hybrid systems) is calculated from the following general expression:78,394 (138)where q is the amount of charge, V is the voltage range (V), i is the discharge current (A), V is the potential (V), and x is a normalizing factor; i.e. mass (g), volume (cm3) or area (cm2) of the electrode active material or even the whole device. Note that if we use normalized current, ix, instead of i, the x must be removed from the denominator of the equation. The above-mentioned equation can be derived from the following principal equation: (139)If we multiply the right side of the equation by V/V and integrate the equation we obtain: (140)Note that in a GCD experiment, i is a constant, thus, not part of the integration. Rearranging the above-mentioned equation and dividing it by a normalizing factor, x, we can obtain eqn (138).
When the shape of the discharge profile displays the characteristics of a pure EDLC, i.e. a linear GCD profile, the above-mentioned equation is simplified as q/V = it/V = C in which t is the discharge duration(s). However, since an IR drop is unavoidable in a GCD test, for more accurate calculation of the capacitance in an EDLC system, the formula should adjust ΔV by excluding the ESR as follows: (141)It should also be noted that in some supercapacitive systems, internal resistance or equivalent distributed resistance (EDR) is represented as ESR plus an additional resistance that comes from the charge redistribution processes in the electrode pores. Contributions from the latter part to the total resistance manifest as a curvature at the beginning of the discharge profile, just after the ESR. Thus, for a practically useful linear approximation of eqn (138), one should also exclude the part with curvature from the discharge profile178 (Fig. 42a), and the equation can then be simplified as: (142)Note that eqn (138) holds in all cases; however, for a nonlinear GCD profile, q/V is not the capacitance. In other words, for a non-linear GCD profile, the capacitance concept should not be applied, although the q/V ratio can always be obtained with the unit of F. Instead, for a fair comparison of the energy storage capability of the systems with nonlinear GCD profiles, charge storage capacity and energy should be used.
 Fig. 42  (a) Discharge profile of a supercapacitor in which the equivalent series resistance (ESR) and the equivalent distributed resistance (EDR, that represents ESR and the resistance in the pores) are indicated. GCD profiles of the positive (b) and negative (c) electrodes in a 3-electrode cell setup. The direction and the area corresponding to the charge and discharge steps are indicated in the panels. 
One of the most common mistakes we are all likely to make is in calculating the capacitance, as well as the other parameters, from the GCD profiles of the negative electrode active materials in a 3-electrode cell setup. In such a case, the charging step is falling and the discharge step is rising. One should take care to consider the area under the discharge step for extraction of the parameters. The area under the discharge step is actually located on top of the curve as schematically presented in Fig. 42c.
Generally, the mass of the active materials or the thickness of the electrode in energy storage devices significantly influences the performance of the device. In some cases, especially for commercial applications, to optimize a device for a particular application, mass loading and thickness of the electrode active materials are tuned. For example, a supercapacitor with 10 μm thick electrodes may be optimal for high power applications whereas one with several hundred μm thick electrodes may be more suitable for high energy applications.395 Thus, for a supercapacitor with an extremely thin active layer or very minute amounts of active materials, the calculated specific capacitance, CS, is superior in quantity, but is often not practically usable.396 While the gravimetric performance of the electrodes/devices decreases with increasing mass loading, the areal performance increases almost linearly with mass loading. Therefore, to avoid over-estimation of a material's performance, it is necessary that mass loading, volume, area and thickness of the active material be reported to provide more reliable criteria for comparison of different devices.123
Energy and power
The energy contents of a supercapacitor during a charging/discharging process under a constant current can be generally described as:78 (143)For a linear GCD plot, Vt is a linear function of t, and eqn (143) is simplified as E = 1/2CV2. Boosting the voltage can significantly increase both power and energy performance of the system. Since energy storage is the primary role of an energy storage device, energy and power are key parameters to compare energy storage performance of all the devices. However, confusion arises when some researchers attempt to use the C = Δq/ΔV equation for nonlinear GCD profiles, derived from peak-shaped CVs, as the capacitance for the calculation of energy and power of the system. The energy (E) stored in the capacitor is the work done to charge up the capacitor with a charge q. When the potential is a linear function of time, eqn (143) is simplified as eqn (10). However, for a non-linear GCD profile eqn (10) cannot be applied, instead the integral of the area under the GCD profile should be used. On the other hand, CVs and GCDs are recorded for both 2E and 3E systems and the corresponding capacitances can be obtained. However, energy and power densities can only be realized in a 2E system, but not from a 3E cell setup. The exception is the symmetric supercapacitor for which the specific capacitance estimated from the three-electrode configuration is simply four times higher than that from the two-electrode system. Because, in contrast to a 3E cell setup that measures the performance of an individual electrode, a 2E system is interpreted as two pairs of capacitors connected in series. The total capacitance of the two capacitors connected in series is obtained from eqn (69). In the case of symmetrical supercapacitors, it is reasonable to assume that the capacitance of the positive electrode is equal to that of the negative electrode. With this assumption (Cp = Cn): (144) Celectrode = 2Ccell(145)where Celectrode is the capacitance of a single electrode. Dividing both sides of eqn (145) by the normalization factor, N, provides: (146)The normalizing factor of a symmetric supercapacitor is twice the value of the mass or volume of a single electrode, Ncell = 2Nelectrode, thus: (147)In this equation, Ccell/Ncell is the capacitance of the device normalized to the total weight or volume of the device, whereas Celectrode/Nelectrode is the capacitance of a single electrode normalized to the weight or volume of an individual electrode. Consequently, Celectrode,N = 4Ccell,N(148)eqn (148) can be used to extrapolate the capacitance of an electrode, measured in a 3E cell setup, to the performance of a symmetric device. Since the operating potential window of a symmetric device is the same as that of a single electrode measured in a 3E cell configuration, the estimated energy of the device is correlated with the capacitance of an individual electrode as: (149)However, the real or practical energy content of a device can only be calculated once the device is fabricated and its energy is calculated by means of eqn (10) or eqn (143) as appropriate. Note that, for a supercapacitor device, the area-normalized capacitance (F cm−2) is only meaningful if the device is of the planar type. Areal capacitance is simply the ratio of the cell capacitance, Ccell, to the geometric area of the device, which is actually the same for the positive and negative electrodes and the separator. In this case, eqn (145) still holds, but Ncell = Nelectrode, i.e. the geometric area of a device for which each of the positive and negative electrodes has a geometric area of 1 cm2 is 1 cm2, thus: (150)To calculate the specific energy of an asymmetric supercapacitor, Ccell and potential window should be obtained from the GCD profile of an asymmetric device, not an individual electrode. The normalized Ccell can be obtained as follows: (151) (152)where mp and mn are the masses of the positive and negative electrode materials, respectively (mcell = mp + mn). The calculated value for the CSP can then be put into eqn (10) to obtain the specific energy of the device.
Equivalent series resistance
ESR or IR drop can be readily obtained from the initiation part of a discharge profile,326,397 using: (153)The value of EDR can be obtained from the discharge profile, using: (154)The values of ΔVESR and ΔVEDR are schematically represented in Fig. 42a. Since the energy that is stored in supercapacitors is not a result of a bulk electrochemical reaction, supercapacitors can be charged and discharged at the same rate. In this case, the above-mentioned equations can be simplified as presented in the far right side of each equation. Note that in the measurement program of some energy storage devices, the device is charged to its rated voltage at a specified current, rested at open-circuit voltage for a specific period of time, then discharged to a low safe voltage at its specified current. In such a case, open circuit voltage immediately drops by the IR and the ESR/EDR values are thus calculated using:398 (155) (156)
Rate capability
Rate capability is one of the most important characteristics for energy storage devices and is studied by measuring the capacitance/capacity of a device at different current densities (Fig. 43). A device with a high rate capability shows almost stable capacitance at each current density.399 EDLC materials often demonstrate high rate capabilities, whereas pseudocapacitive materials, which rely of Faradaic redox reactions for charge storage and typically suffer from high internal resistance (intrinsically low conductivity), often result in compromises of rate capability.400
 Fig. 43  (a and b) GCD profiles of a nanostructured CuCo2O4 electrode at different current densities from 1 to 50 A g−1. (c) Rate capability of the system at various current densities. (d) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the system at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cycling stability
Cycling stability, which is a crucial factor for characterization of an energy storage device, can be readily measured by continuously repeating GCD cycles at a given current density for a few hundred (in batteries) to several thousand (in supercapacitors) cycles.401 The result is often reported as the percent of the initial capacitance/capacity that the device retains after a specified number of cycles. This test can also be performed by recording the GCD cycles at ascending current densities (for tens to thousands of cycles each) that finally return to the initial value (Fig. 43d). The cycle life of a rechargeable energy storage system depends heavily on the operating conditions such as the depth of discharge, current of charge and discharge, and operating temperature. Choosing a standard cycling lifetime value depends entirely on the nature of the energy storage system. Non-Li-ion batteries deliver 500 full charge/discharge cycles, Na- and Li-ion batteries can on average last ∼2000 cycles, for supercapacitors ∼10000 cycles have been proven feasible by the literature, and cycling lifetime of the hybrid system is in between (∼5000).316,402 We recommend this as a standard protocol for consistent assessment of energy storage systems.
Coulombic/energy/voltage efficiency
Coulombic efficiency, CE, is one of the criteria for the characterization of energy storage devices that quantifies the efficiency of electron transfer within an electrode/device. CE is calculated using the following equation:403,404 (157)where qd and qc are electronic charge extracted from and inserted into the electrode active materials, respectively, td and tc are discharging and charging times, respectively, and id and ic are discharging and charging currents, respectively (Fig. 43d). When charging and discharging a cell with the same current, the formula can be simplified as:405 (158)Coulombic efficiency is influenced by current density and temperature, so the values of these parameters should be specified when reporting cell characteristics.
Energy efficiency, EE, can be obtained via:403 (159)where Ed and Ec are discharging and charging energies, i.e. the areas under the discharge and charge profiles, respectively, and Vd and Vc are the discharge and charge voltages, respectively. A supercapacitor is able to be charged and discharged much faster than a battery with nearly 100% efficiency.406 Voltage efficiency, VE, can be simply obtained from the CE and EE by the following expression:407 (160)
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EIS is a widely used and non-invasive technique for characterization of a variety of energy storage systems, especially supercapacitors (since batteries are inherently non-linear systems, i.e. they demonstrate a non-linear i–V relationship, and, on the other hand, linearization is inherent to the EIS technique, EIS studies of batteries may be prone to degeneracy).408 EIS testing measures the impedance of a system as a function of frequency at a fixed potential. EIS can be used to measure the capacitive behavior of either an individual electrode or a device comprising two or more electrodes.409 In an EIS measurement, a small amplitude sinusoidal voltage (normally from 5 to 10 mV) is superimposed on a steady-state voltage and the resulting impedance is recorded as a function of the modulation frequency. The read-out signal of an EIS study is conveniently represented as a Bode plot (magnitude and phase response vs. frequency) or a Nyquist plot (imaginary vs. real part of the impedance). Practically, EIS testing can be used to study the impedance, specific capacitance, equivalent series resistance, and charge storage mechanisms for electrode active materials.123 More interestingly, adjusting the frequency makes it possible to act on the different conduction paths in an equivalent circuit. It means that depending on the applied frequency the physio-chemical characteristics of the material can be tuned so that the material behaves like a pure resistor, capacitor, etc.
A rewarding approach to analyzing EIS data is fitting the experimental data to a suitable equivalent circuit model. However, scientists may know little about the processes or mechanisms that are involved in the system. As such, the relative ease with which a set of experimental impedance data can be fit to different equivalent circuits makes the quantitative EIS analysis a challenging task. Thus, scientists should take care so that when they do EIS analysis, the equivalent model and consequently the resulting data make sense. Before going deeper into EIS-based characterization of an EES system, it's very important to understand the principles on which the EIS technique was conceived and developed.
As is well known, the electrical resistance (R) is the ability of a circuit element to resist the flow of electrical current (I) when a voltage (V) is placed across two points of a conductor. When current flows through a circuit, the relationship between I and V can be described by Ohm's law: (161)
However, in the real world, circuit elements exhibit much more complex behavior. Thus, the simple concept of resistance cannot properly explain a system, and in its place, we use impedance (Z) as a more general circuit parameter. Although impedance is similar to resistance, it is a time- or frequency-dependent parameter and is defined as: (162)in which Vt and It are time-dependent voltage and current, respectively. Electrochemical impedance is usually measured by applying a sinusoidal potential excitation to an electrochemical cell and then measuring the current flow through the cell. The general formula for the sinusoidal voltage is given by: Vt = V0sin(ωt)(163)where Vt is the voltage at time t, V0 is the amplitude of the sinusoidal voltage wave, ω (rad s−1) is the angular frequency (ω = 2πf, f (Hz) is frequency, i.e. the number of cycles completed in one second), and t is the time. In a linear system, the current response, It, is shifted in phase (φ) and the equation for the resulting sinusoidal current wave is: It = I0sin(ωt + φ)(164)in which It is the current at time t, and I0 is the amplitude of the sinusoidal current wave. It should be noted that direct current or voltage can be considered as a special type of alternating current or voltage whose frequency is zero.
Based on eqn (162), the impedance of the system can be calculated as: (165)Complex algebra is commonly used in electrical engineering, when a quantity has a phase as well as a magnitude, to simplify analyses of linear circuits. Let the symbol Z represent a complex number while Zre (or Z′) and Zim (or Z′′) are its real and imaginary parts: (166)If the real part, Zre, is plotted on the x-axis and the imaginary part, Zim, is plotted on the y-axis, a “Nyquist plot” is obtained, in which the impedance is represented as a vector of length ∣Z∣ and the angle between the∣Z∣and the y-axis is the phase angle, φ (Fig. 44a). As represented in the complex plane, the length of the vector Z can be expressed as: (167)Looking at Fig. 44a, one can see that Zre = |Z|cosφ(168) Zim = |Z|sinφ(169)So, the complex number (eqn (166)) can be written as: Z = |Z|cosφ + j|Z|sinφ = |Z|(cosφ + jsinφ) = |Z|ejφ(170)where the last step makes use of Euler's formula: ejφ = cosφ + jsinφ(171)Generally, the EIS spectrum of a cell can be presented in either a Nyquist or a Bode plot (Fig. 44).
 Fig. 44  (a) The complex plane of the complex number Z. (b) An equivalent modified Randles’ circuit. Representation of the (c) Nyquist plot and (d) Bode plots for the modified Randles circuit simulated over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, ESR = 100 Ω, Rct = 200 Ω, a = 0.001 Ω−1 s0.8 and n = 0.8 (see eqn (195)), and Rw = 1000 Ω, X = 5000, and α = 0.5 (see eqn (193)). The parameters that can be extracted from the Nyquist and Bode plots are presented in the figures. The points marked with I–III in the Bode phase (circles) and magnitude (diamonds) plots are obtained from the I–III vectors presented in the Nyquist plot. φ is obtained from the angle that each vector makes with the x-axis and |Z| is the length of the vector. 
More popularly, EIS spectra are presented as a Nyquist plot, since a Nyquist plot provides more visible characterization information about the system under study.361 However, a Bode plot provides a clearer description of the frequency-dependent electrochemical behavior of the system than a Nyquist plot. In a Bode plot, the logarithm of impedance magnitude |Z| and the phase angle (φ) are plotted vs. the logarithm of the frequency (f).
Serial and parallel combinations of circuit elements in an AC circuit
Let us recall the general mathematical expressions for sinusoidal voltage, eqn (163), and current, eqn (164) that can be displayed in related complex numbers: Vt = V0sin(ωt + θ); V = V0ejθ(172) It = I0sin(ωt + φ); I = I0ejφ(173)In an AC circuit, the current through a resistor, based on Ohm's law, is: (174)As can be seen in eqn (174), IR(t) and VR(t) have the same frequency and phase and I0 = V0/R. The AC impedance of a resistor, ZR, can be expressed as: (175)In an AC circuit, the current through a pure capacitor can be expressed as: (176)As can be seen in eqn (176), VC(t) lags IC(t) by 90 degrees and I0 = CV0ω. The AC impedance of a capacitor, ZC, can be described by: (177)Since based on eqn (171): ej(−90°) = cos(−90°) + jsin(−90°) = −j(178)in a series R–C circuit, the overall impedance of the system is expressed as: (179)Based on eqn (166), the real, Zre, and imaginary, Zim, components in the AC impedance of the series R–C circuit are given by: (180)Impedance spectra (Nyquist and Bode plots) for a circuit containing a resistor in series with a capacitor is presented in Fig. 45, in which the impedance of a series R–C circuit is a straight vertical line with a constant Zre value of R. The phase angle, φ(f), is obtained from the real and the imaginary parts of the impedance via: (181)From eqn (181), the more negative the φ is, the more capacitive the nature of the equivalent circuit is. Ultimately, for a purely capacitive system, φ = −90°, and the slope of the plot of log ∣Z∣ vs. logf approaches −1.
 Fig. 45  Simulated Nyquist plot (a) and Bode magnitude and phase plots (b) of a resistor in series with a capacitor over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, R = 100 Ω, and C = 0.01 F. The inset of panel (a) shows the equivalent circuit. Points a–k in the Nyquist and Bode plots are equivalent and correspond to the log frequencies of 6, 4.5, 2.8, 1.1, 0.4, −0.12, −0.75, −1.3, −1.8, −2.4, and −3, respectively. Note that the Nyquist plot masks the high-frequency response where impedance is low, whereas the Bode plots, which are representations in the log frequency domain, provide a much better resolution for the high-frequency data. 
In a parallel R/C circuit, the overall impedance of the system is expressed as: (182)Then: (183)Transferring eqn (183) to the standard form of a complex number, we have: (184)Therefore, Zre, Zim, and φ of the parallel R/C circuit are given by: (185) (186) (187)Impedance spectra (Nyquist and Bode plots) for a circuit containing a resistor in parallel with a capacitor are presented in Fig. 46. As can be seen, the impedance of a parallel R/C circuit is a semicircular arc. At low frequencies, ωCR ≪ 1, Zre ≈ R, and Zim ≈ 0, thus the R/C circuit acts as a resistor. At sufficiently high frequencies, ωCR ≫ 1, Zre ≈ 0, and Zim ≈ 1/ωC, thus the R/C circuit acts as a capacitor. If ωCR = 1, Zim has a maximum value of R/2 that is the peak point of the semicircle.
 Fig. 46  Simulated Nyquist plot (a) and Bode plots (b) of a resistor in parallel with a capacitor over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, R = 100 Ω, and C = 0.01 F. The inset of panel (a) shows the equivalent circuit. 
In an ideal supercapacitor, the current passing through the cell is either the double layer charging/discharging current or the Faradaic current. However, several undesired processes including: ohmic leakage, unwanted Faradaic redox reactions, and charge redistribution356,357 can cause a leakage current and lead to charge transfer across the double layer. Thus, the equivalent circuit for a supercapacitor, comprising both EDLC and pseudocapacitance, involves: an equivalent series resistance (ESR), a double layer capacitance, Cdl, a Faradaic resistance, Rct, a pseudocapacitance, CPC, and a parallel resistance of the leakage reaction, RL (Fig. 47).
 Fig. 47  Three equivalent circuits that are commonly used for the description of supercapacitors (a–c). The circuit elements are as follows: ESR, the equivalent series resistance of the cell; Cdl, the double layer capacitance; Rct, the charge transfer resistance corresponding to the process of charging the pseudocapacitor through an electron transfer process; CPC, pseudocapacitance; and RL, the leakage resistance. 
Note that pseudocapacitance of the system is parallel to the double-layer capacitance. The total impedance of the circuit presented in Fig. 47a can be expressed as:390 (188)where a = 1 − ω2CdlCPCESRRctRL and b = ω(CdlRct + CPCRL + CPCRct). The simulated Nyquist plots for the equivalent circuit presented in Fig. 47a are presented in Fig. 48.
 Fig. 48  Simulation of the Nyquist plots with different values of Cdl and RL. Simulated Nyquist plots of the equivalent circuit presented in Fig. 47a showing the effect of (a) Cdl with three different values of 1, 0.3, and 0.01 F and (b) RL with three different values of 5, 50, and 5000 Ω on the shape of the resulting Nyquist plots. The magnitudes of the other parameters used to simulate these plots are shown on the plots. 
For the circuit presented in Fig. 47a, if the kinetics of the leakage reaction is very slow, RL → ∞ then the equivalent circuit is simplified as Fig. 47b. The equivalent circuit presented in Fig. 47b has previously been used to model a pseudocapacitive system.390 For such a circuit, two limiting cases arise:
At very low frequencies (ω → 0) or fast kinetics of the Faradaic reactions (Rct is low): (189)At sufficiently high frequencies (ω → ∞) or slow kinetics of the Faradaic reactions where jωCdl ≫ 1/Rct: (190)If the kinetics of the Faradaic reactions responsible for pseudocapacitance of the system are very slow, Rct → ∞ and Cpc → 0 and the equivalent circuit is simplified as shown in Fig. 47c. It should be noted that the equivalent circuits presented in Fig. 47 are for a non-porous electrode active material. The classic equivalent circuit to model energy storage systems, especially supercapacitors with porous electrode active materials, could be a modified Randles equivalent circuit (Fig. 44). An ideal Randles circuit involves a double layer capacitor, Cdl, whereas a modified Randles circuit uses a constant phase element (CPE) in place of Cdl. A modified Randles circuit is composed of an equivalent series resistance (ESR) in series with a parallel circuit characterized by a branch with CPE and another branch composed of Faradaic impedance (i.e. a combination of a charge transfer resistance, Rct, and a Warburg impedance, W). The Warburg element is seen where the charge transfer process is also influenced by diffusion to and from the electrode–solution interface. Thus, in such a cell, polarization is controlled by a combination of both kinetic and diffusion processes. The impedance of the Warburg element can be calculated from: (191)in which: (192)where R is the ideal gas constant, T is the temperature, n is the number of electrons, F is Faraday's constant, DO and DR are the diffusion coefficients of the Ox and Red species, and CO* and CR* are the bulk concentrations of Ox and Red species, respectively. The impedance of the Warburg element corresponding to open circuit finite diffusion with a reflective boundary condition is given by:410 (193)and that for a short circuit terminus is given by: (194)where Rw is a resistance, X is equal to L2/D (L is the effective diffusion thickness, and D is the effective diffusion coefficient), and α is the Warburg exponent.
The impedance of the CPE is given by: ZCPE = a−1(jω)−n(195)where a is the frequency-independent constant relating to the surface properties, and the exponent n arises from the slope of log Z vs. logf (−1 ≤ n ≤ 1). The physical meanings of the coefficient a for n = −1, 0, 0.5, and 1 are listed in Table 6.
Table 6 The physical meaning of the coefficient aa





n

CPE designation

a meaning
Unit





a From ref. 411.





−1
Inductance

L
−1

Ω−1 s−1


0
Resistance

R
−1

Ω−1


0.5
Warburg element

σ
−1

Ω s−1/2


1
Capacitance

C


F = Ω−1 s




Total impedance of the modified Randles circuit is thus calculated by: (196)We have (197)then (198)If the rate of charge transfer is extremely faster than the rate of mass transfer, the Nyquist plot will consist of just a Warburg element as a diagonal line with a slope of 45°. If the electrochemical system is kinetically sluggish, the semicircular region will be significantly larger and the Warburg impedance may not be visible. Thus, the shape of the Nyquist plot for a Randles equivalent circuit is determined by a combination of the diffusion process and electrode reaction kinetics. Fig. 49 shows simulated Nyquist plots for the modified Randles circuit with different values of CPE and Warburg element. It should be generally noted that EIS characterization of batteries and hybrid systems should be performed while the cell is in its fully discharged state to obtain reliable information.
 Fig. 49  The impact of Warburg and CPE elements on EIS spectra. Simulated Nyquist (a and c) and Bode plots (b and d) of the modified Randles circuit with different values of Warburg element (a and b) and CPE (c and d) over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, ESR = 100 Ω, Rct = 200 Ω, n = 0.8, X = 100, and α = 0.5. Please see eqn (193) and (195) for the definition of the parameters. In the Bode plots, the solid curves are for the phase angle vs. logf plot and the dashed curves are for the logZ vs. logf plot. 
Capacitance
EIS (both in the form of Nyquist plots and Bode plots) is a powerful technique for characterization of energy storage systems.412 The Randles circuit and its modified versions are the most common equivalent circuit models that describe the behavior of a supercapacitor quantitatively. Neglecting the Warburg impedance, the Nyquist plot can be simplified as a semicircle. The total impedance of a cell can be represented as: Z = Zs + Zdl(199) Zs = Rs(200) (201)Thus, (202)Let us consider two limiting cases for eqn (202): (1) at a low frequency, where ω → 0, and Z approaches the sum of the solution resistance and the charge transfer resistance (Z → Rs + Rct), and (2) at high frequency, where ω → ∞, and Z approaches the solution resistance (Z → Rs). In other words, the intercept of the Nyquist plot with Zre at the highest frequency is Rs (more precisely, the ESR), and the diameter of the semicircle is the charge transfer resistance, Rct. The maximum value of Z (top of the semicircle) occurs when ωRctCdl = 1, from which the capacitance can be simply measured using: (203)Simon and co-workers introduced another method for the calculation of C,413 that is:31,381 (204) (205) (206)where Z is the overall complex impedance, ω is the angular velocity given by 2πƒ, Zre is the real part of the total impedance, Zim is the imaginary part of the total impedance, and Cre and Cim are the real and imaginary capacitances, respectively.413 The specific capacitance on a one-electrode basis can be calculated as:414 (207)where m is the mass of the materials on the working electrode.
Equivalent series/distributed resistance
EIS is a typical method for the evaluation of the ESR and EDR of a system. An ideal capacitor is represented by a straight line in a Nyquist plot that is vertical to the real axis with the real part of Z being the ESR. However, a supercapacitor approaches a near vertical line at low frequencies shifted on the real axis by the total internal resistance. The equivalent circuit of a pseudocapacitive system at high frequencies is reduced to a simple R–C circuit. The second term on the right side of eqn (202) will be much smaller than the first term at the high end of the AC frequency, therefore the corresponding impedance will be the ESR.288 So, ESR is obtained from the intercept of the Nyquist plot with the real axis, Zre, at the highest frequency.
EDR is calculated as the projected value of the vertical portion of the Nyquist plot at low frequencies onto the real axis, Zre (after subtraction of the ESR value and the contact resistance of the active materials on the current collector), as schematically represented in Fig. 50, RBC.415–418 Kötz and co-workers have also experimentally obtained EDR as the difference between the intersection point of the 45° line in the Nyquist plot with the real axis and the point where extrapolation of the low frequency part and the 45° line of the Nyquist plot coincide.419 Unfortunately, although there has been much work on EIS characterization of electrochemical energy storage systems, there are multiple and sometimes contradictory interpretations of the Nyquist plots based on the ESR and EDR values.415,419–421 In a nice study, Pilon and co-workers have tried to provide an unequivocal interpretation of the numerically simulated Nyquist plots for both EDLC electrodes and devices, and experimentally confirmed the results and interpretations by fabricating an AC//AC device (Fig. 50).340 EDR can also be approximated from the fit data as: (208)where WR corresponds to the resistance for the open-circuit Warburg model and the series combination of diffusion resistance.419 The intersection between the low frequency vertical line and the Zre axis corresponds to internal resistance (Rint) or the overall resistance of the electrode or the device.422
 Fig. 50  Schematic representation of a Nyquist plot for EDLC electrodes/devices. RA stands for ESR, and RBC is ascribed to EDR. Note that there are multiple interpretations of the RA, RB, RAB, RC, and RBC values for the details of which the readers are referred to ref. 340 from which the scheme has been obtained. Adapted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. The inset shows a schematic representation of the Nyquist plot of an ideal capacitor (line 1) and an electrochemical capacitor with porous electrodes (line 2). Adapted with permission from ref. 416, copyright 2000, Elsevier, with slight modifications. 
Note that the ESR of the cell is not significantly influenced by the electrode active materials’ parameters and is mainly determined by the various interfacial (contact) resistances in the cell, the electrolyte resistance, and the electronic resistance of the electrode active materials. In contrast to the ESR, the value of EDR is markedly influenced by the electrode active materials’ parameters (Fig. 51).415 Densification of the electrode significantly increases the EDR value, i.e. an electrode with a high density presents a higher EDR value than an electrode with the same mass loading but less density.415 The EDR value also increases with increasing thickness of the electrode active materials since the pore length increases with increases in the thickness of the electrode. Another difference between ESR and EDR is that the former is independent of the current value, whereas the latter depends on testing the current value, being higher for low current densities.398
 Fig. 51  Nyquist plots of various graphite G31 electrodes with (A) the same mass loading (5.8 mg cm−2), but different densities in the range from 1.01 to 1.60 g cm−3. P, the electrode porosity, is a dimensionless parameter indicating the fraction of void volume in the electrode, (B) the same porosity (P = 0.54) but different thicknesses from 22 to 150 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 415, copyright 2016, Elsevier. 

RC time constant
The RC time constant can be provided from: (209)In eqn (209), the RC product is the capacitive time constant and is denoted by τ. For a capacitor (RC circuit) that is initially fully charged, the voltage across the capacitor is Vmax, and q = qtotal. After every τ, the charge falls by a factor of 1/e = 0.37 relative to its value at the start of the interval. Thus, after one time constant, q = 1–0.37 = 0.63 of its initial value, indicating that at the given time interval, just 63% of the total charge can be achieved. After five time constants, the supercapacitor is said to be fully charged.390 The time constant can also be obtained from the Bode plot. The time constant can be generally expressed as:423,424 (210)At φ = 45 degrees the real and imaginary parts of the impedance are equal (i.e. the voltages across the capacitor and resistor are equal). At this point, the characteristic time constant, τ0, is calculated using eqn (211), where f0 is the frequency at an angle of −45°. (211)The time constant is a nice demonstration of the ultra-high rate charge and discharge characteristics of EDLCs (Fig. 52).
 Fig. 52  (a) Nyquist plots of two titanium nitride (TiN) devices derived from 20 and 50 nm atomic layer deposition of TiO2 named TiN-20 and TiN-50, respectively. The inset shows the zoomed-in view of the Nyquist plots in the high-frequency region. (b) The Bode phase plot versus frequency of the TiN devices in comparison with a commercial electrolytic capacitor and an activated carbon (AC) supercapacitor. Adapted with permission from ref. 424, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., with slight modifications. 
In summary, CV, GCD and EIS are complementary techniques for the in-depth characterization of energy storage systems. However, due to the differences in ease with which the parameters can be obtained by these techniques, the reliability and applicability of each test method for extraction of the required information are different.
Chronoamperometry/chronocoulometry (potential step methods)
As discussed earlier, many attempts have been made toward differentiating between different charge storage mechanisms. CV can provide several useful pieces of information to differentiate between the capacitive and diffusion-limited charge storage mechanisms by altering the sweep rate. Aside from the well-established CV, GCD and EIS techniques, energy storage systems can also be studied potentiostatically. The Donne research group has successfully used the prospect of these techniques (by using step potential electrochemical spectroscopy, SPECS) to effectively differentiate between capacitive and pseudocapacitive contributions to charge storage.373,425 In these techniques, the potential of the electrode is abruptly changed from the equilibrium state (Vi) to some desired value (Vf) and the output signal is recorded as a function of time. Two types of response are normally monitored: (a) the transient current as a function of time (chronoamperometry) and (b) the charge as a function of time (chronocoulometry). The SPECS method is based on applying a series of positive or negative pulses, each of equal magnitude, over the electrochemical window of the electrode active materials. After each potential step, sufficient time is given to the electrode to establish equilibrium. This slow multi-step chronoamperometry method enables electrode active materials to approach their maximum charge storage capability.
Let us model an energy storage device as an RC circuit. When the switch is closed a voltage V is imposed on the circuit and the current across the resistor and the capacitor are monitored. At open circuit (t < 0) VR and VC are zero. At t < 0 there is no charge yet residing on the capacitor. Thus, when the switch is closed V = VR and the instantaneous current, i0, is given by: (212)As time passes the double layer capacitive current decays exponentially and is given by: (213)The voltage across the capacitor (VC) rises exponentially with time and is given by: (214)As time progresses, the voltage across the resistor approaches zero, thus at t → ∞ V = VC. The long current decay observed in energy storage systems is caused by slower, diffusion-limited pseudocapacitive reactions that contribute to the high charge storage capabilities in addition to EDL charging. For a diffusion-controlled redox reaction, the i–t response is given by: (215)which is known as the Cottrell equation. Thus, when the potential goes from its initial value, Vi, to its final value, Vf, the current rises rapidly to a maximum value and then decays as a function of t1/2. If only the two processes described above were occurring, the current decay would approach zero over time. Thus, if the measured system presents a Faradaic current due to other redox reactions at the electrode surface, the residual current when t → ∞ will not be zero, which is represented as a self-discharge current, iSelf-dis.. Thus, the total current (itotal) for each potential step can be considered to be a combination of three components:373,425 (216)The capacitance of each process, calculated by integrating the corresponding current response, can also be added together to obtain the total capacitance: Ctotal = CDL + CFaradaic + CSelf-dis.(217)Fig. 53 shows a schematic representation of the chronoamperogram in which contributions from capacitive charge storage (DL + pseudocapacitance), battery-like diffusion-controlled processes, and residual current to the total capacitance of the system can be seen.
 Fig. 53  Step potential electrochemical spectroscopy (SPECS) analysis for decoupling the contribution from different sources to the overall current. Example of the step potential electrochemical spectroscopy current response for an electrolytic manganese dioxide electrode in a 0.5 M K2SO4 electrolyte with a step potential from rest potential to 1.3 V and a rest period of 300 s for equilibration. The inset displays the de-convolution of the fitted data into current from double layer capacitance of the geometric (DL geometric) and porous surface area (DL porous), as well as the current related to the diffusion-controlled processes (diffusional). Reproduced with permission from ref. 373, copyright 2018, Electrochemical Society Inc., with modification. 
The EDL process equilibrates very fast (exponentially; eqn (214)) which results in an initial sharp decay in the current, whereas equilibration of a diffusion-controlled Faradaic process progresses slowly (eqn (215)), resulting in a slower current decay over the equilibration time. If a charged energy storage device is discharged on itself while the circuit is kept open, the device can have a leakage current. The leakage current can be easily determined by chronoamperometry, which is schematically represented in Fig. 54.
 Fig. 54  Leakage current analysis. A simple equivalent circuit for a pseudocapacitor with (a) and without (b) the leakage current, and the corresponding current transient of the system in response to a potential step from Vi to Vf. 
Chronocoulometric data actually come from the integrated chronoamperometric response, where: (218)We can integrate the Cottrell relationship to give: (219)However, the total charge, qtotal, consists of two other components: qdl due to charging the double layer, and qads = nFAΓ, due to adsorption of electroactive species on the electrode surfaces, i.e.: (220)Since the latter two terms are time independent, a plot of qtotalvs. t1/2 gives a straight line with the extrapolated intercept at t = 0 due to qdl + qads. Chronocoulometry provides practically the same information that is provided by chronoamperometry with several important experimental advantages. First, the latter part of the transient response can be detected more accurately. Second, integration of the current eliminates random noise as well as the time-independent current. Third, contributions from the double layer and any pseudocapacitance on the surface to the overall charge passed as a function of time can be discriminated from those due to the diffusing redox reactions on the electrode surfaces.
Challenges of normalization
As mentioned before, the charge storage ability of supercapacitors is normalized to different metrics, mainly mass, volume and area. The resulting capacitance, C, is named gravimetric or specific capacitance (F g−1), volumetric capacitance (F cm−3), and areal capacitance (F cm−2), respectively. However, sometimes C is normalized by the weight or volume of the active materials, but at other times by the weight or volume of the whole device. On the other hand, there are two types of area-normalized capacitance: (1) the true area normalized capacitance, and (2) the geometric area normalized capacitance. The true areal capacitance, which is the well-known EDLC, is actually the ratio of the capacitance to the specific surface area of the materials. The true area normalized capacitance is a difficult metric to obtain due to the variability in surface area measurements, especially in the case of porous active materials. Thus, inconsistencies arise when researchers prefer one type of normalization in advance, but use a different one when the time of implementation arrives. Moreover, the reported value for the capacitance strongly depends on the evaluation technique (CV or GCD), charging rate, the maximum operating potential window, as well as the mode of charge and discharge (i.e. constant current or constant voltage), in GCD. The lack of a consistent normalization parameter along with discrepancies among the results of different electrochemical testing methods makes comparisons between different energy storage devices rather challenging. Supercapacitors can deliver more energy than state-of-the-art batteries can release in short timeframes (<10 s). Thus, supercapacitors are high power energy storage devices with virtually unlimited cyclability, but generally suffer from lower energy compared to batteries. Trying to boost the energy of supercapacitors usually comes at the cost of turning high power supercapacitors into low energy batteries. In recent years, some researchers have argued that supercapacitors can approach or even outdistance batteries in energy performance. Such outstanding properties do not necessarily translate into real-world effectiveness, for which Gogotsi and Simon have provided a specific example (Fig. 55).2
 Fig. 55  Ragone plots for the same supercapacitors on a gravimetric (a) and volumetric (b) basis. The plots show that excellent properties of ultrathin films (with extremely high apparent specific power and energy values) will not translate to medium- and large-scale devices with thicker films and larger mass loadings. Adapted with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Thus, with a huge rise in the number of researchers who have focused on boosting the energy of supercapacitors as well as developing hybrid energy storage devices, the challenge of selecting an illustrative normalization parameter is more urgent than ever.426 The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) model is commonly used to calculate surface areas; however, this method only provides a qualitative measurement of the surface area of porous materials with small pores. Moreover, the entire surface area is not necessarily accessible to the electrolyte under all operational conditions. Gravimetric and volumetric energy/power densities are more common in the literature. However, considering a very porous carbon material, such as a graphene aerogel that has recently gained considerable attention, the gravimetric energy/power (normalized solely to the mass of the active material) would be extremely high. But the electrolyte fills in the pores of the aerogel and considerably increases the total weight of the material. Therefore, the volumetric energy/power density of such a material will be very low. Thus, particular attention should be paid to each normalization parameter. Preferentially, a combination of two or three normalization methods, based on mass/volume/area of both the active material and the whole device should be reported to paint the whole picture of the energy storage device in a more accurate way.
Performance metrics of energy storage devices are obtained from CV, GCD or EIS methods. It is generally accepted that a higher scan rate in CV or a higher current density in GCD results in a lower energy/power density. Zuliani et al. studied the electrochemical performance of two types of activated carbon; one derived from coconut shells and the other from fluid petroleum coke.426 The results show that the rate performance of the two samples differs so that a single correction factor or correlation cannot be used to explain the trend. Thus, to back up claims with facts, the materials/devices should be compared at a comparable scan rate or current density. Moreover, CV and GCD methods operate on fundamentally different mechanisms, thus the metrics derived from each of the methods are only comparable when the sweep rate of the CV curve and current density of the GCD profile are low. Generally, to compare various energy storage devices, it is strongly recommended that the criteria of assessment be limited to similar normalization factors to ensure a reasonable comparison. To provide a more realistic picture of the energy storage device, both the gravimetric and volumetric normalization factors should be presented. The gravimetric and volumetric energy/power not only should be presented based on the mass/volume of the active material(s), but also for the whole package, because all the energy storage devices need supporting components, such as current collectors, binders, separators, electrolytes, and casing.
The mass of active materials in supercapacitors is usually very low. The contribution of EDLC significantly diminishes with increasing mass of the active materials since the EDLC is limited to the accessible surface of the materials. Typically, in a supercapacitor, 100% of the active material contributes to energy storage, whereas in batteries the contribution is significantly lower. In a typical commercial supercapacitor based on activated carbon, the thickness of the electrode is about 100–200 μm or about 10 mg cm−2 of a carbon film. In such a case, the weight of carbon accounts for only 30% of the whole package, thus dividing by a factor of 3 to 4 is needed to extrapolate energy and power of the active material to those of the device. Such an extrapolation is only valid for electrodes with a comparable thickness or loading. Thus, mass normalizing the energy and power in a micro-supercapacitor, a thin film supercapacitor or the one with a negligible mass loading is erroneous compared to the energy normalized by the volume and area of the electrode. Since limited space is a key constraint, volumetric/areal capacitance, energy and power are more meaningful evaluation criteria.
Mechanical flexibility of electrodes and devices
The ever-growing demands for flexible electronics in applications of consumer electronics, activity trackers, implantable/wearable healthcare devices, environmental monitoring and many more require concerted mechanical flexibility in energy storage devices.77,427–430 Significant progress has therefore been made in the fabrication of bendable, stretchable, shape-memory, transparent and self-healing energy storage devices over recent years (Fig. 56).71,430–437 Flexible energy storage devices have been made as 1D fibers,433,438–440 2D films,70,300,428 and 3D foams173,441–443 with ordered porous structures. For applications in portable and wearable electronics, performance stability of the energy storage devices under different mechanical bending, knotting, twisting, compressing, and stretching conditions, as well as harsh environmental situations (including extremely high or low temperature, high humidity levels, exposure to radiation and vibration), is an important performance metric.431 The main purpose of mechanical testing in the energy storage realm is to get a qualitative sense of flexibility and to ensure that products meet or exceed the minimum requirements for modern electrical equipment. For example, a common test of a material's mechanical properties involves fracturing a cylinder of the material. The load on the cylinder is increased gradually until the test specimen breaks or fractures suddenly into two or more pieces. For example, besides a quantitative analysis, Ling et al. reported hollow MXene/PVA cylinders (6 mm in diameter and 10 mm high) made by rolling Ti3C2Tx-based films with a thickness of 4–5 μm that were capable of supporting ∼15000 times their own weight.444 However, a detailed and quantitative description of a specimen's flexibility cannot be obtained by just one such routine test. For a quantitative assessment, the mechanical properties of electrodes/devices must be evaluated using (1) stress–strain curves, (2) monitoring the in situ change in resistance of the system, (3) studying the in situ electrochemical performance of the system under different mechanical deformations, and (4) recording spectroscopic information or microscopic images of the materials at different levels of applied strains.431
 Fig. 56  Mechanical tests of the devices. (a) Schematic representation of an all-solid-state integrated supercapacitor based on a polyaniline–SWCNT–sponge. (b) The patterns for assembling four supercapacitors into one unit in series. Real-time photographs of the resultant four supercapacitors in series showing the performance of the device assembly in (c) free, (d) compressed, and (e) uncompressed states. (f) The shape memory process of a solid-state shape memory asymmetric supercapacitor induced by touching with a human wrist. PTT: phase transition temperature. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of an aligned CNT/Si composite fiber electrode used for a fiber-shaped Li-ion battery. (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a super-stretchy fiber-shaped Li-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from (a–e) ref. 445, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., (f) ref. 446, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., (g) ref. 447, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., and (h) ref. 448, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Stress–strain curve
The stress–strain test is used to determine mechanical properties of a material, including the tensile, compressive, shear, or torsional strength. An object under tensile stress experiences an increase in length, whereas an object under compressive stress undergoes a decrease in length. If instead of applying a force perpendicular to the surface, we apply pairs of equal, but opposing forces on the two opposite sides of an object, we are applying a shear stress. Torsional stress is the twisting of a straight object that tends to produce rotation about the longitudinal axes of the object. While stress measures the applied force per unit area of the specimen, strain measures the relative change in length caused by the applied force. The stress, σ (N m−2 or Pa), is defined as: (221)where F is the tensile/compressive/shear force (N), and A0 is the initial cross-sectional area of the specimen (m2). In the case of tensile and compressive strains, which are normal strains in response to normal stresses, the mathematical expression is the change in length divided by the original length of the specimen and is typically expressed as a percentage. (222)where ε is the normal strain, ΔL is the change in specimen's length (L − L0), and L0 is the initial length of the specimen (since both quantities have the dimension length, ε as their ratio is dimensionless). Note that under biaxial tensile/compressive strain elongation/compression occurs along two dimensions of the material. Therefore, the percentage of strain should be reported for both the x and y dimensions, or simply the areal strain of the sample can be reported as: (223)where Δa is the change in the area, and a0 is the area in an unstrained state.449 An important aspect of mechanical testing is the preparation of the proper specimen. A typical tensile specimen has enlarged shoulders for gripping and a gage section in between (Fig. 57a). The reduced cross-sectional area of the gage section localizes stress and ensures that deformation and failure consistently occur in this region. The distances between the ends of the gage section and the shoulders should be long enough (at least as great as the diameter) so that the shoulder sections do not constrain deformation within the gage section, and the length of the gage region should be at least four times the diameter.450 In compressive tests, specimens are typically cylinders. For analytical purposes, σ is plotted against ε during a tensile test experiment. Fig. 57b displays a typical stress–strain curve. For most materials, the initial part of the stress–strain curve is linear. The slope of this linear region is called the elastic modulus or Young's modulus (N m−2 or Pa), and the area under the elastic portion of the curve represents the elastic strain energy in units of J m−3. (224)Measurement of the stress at which plastic deformation first occurs is sometimes difficult. The onset of plasticity is therefore usually described by an offset yield strength, which can be obtained by constructing a straight line parallel to the Young's modulus region but offset by ε = 0.002 or 0.2%. The intersection of this line and the stress–strain profile defines the 0.2% yield point. Sometimes the offset values are 0.1 or 0.5%. In any case, the criterion should be clearly stated so that the user can interpret the data accurately.
 Fig. 57  Stress–Strain plot. (a) A typical tensile specimen, showing a reduced gage section and enlarged shoulders. For a proper test, the length of the transition region, x, should be equal to or greater than the diameter, and the total length of the reduced section should be at least four times the diameter. (b) A typical stress–strain curve for a material undergoing tensile strain testing. 
Stress–strain profiles have recently been utilized by many scientists as a method for quantitative assessment of the energy storage materials/devices.443,444,451–456 For example, Di et al. reported a flexible CNT film using aligned few-walled nanotubes that exhibited tensile strengths of up to ∼2 GPa and Young's modulus of up to ∼90 GPa, which is remarkably superior to other types of carbon-based films, including commercial graphite foils (tensile strengths of up to ∼15 MPa, Young's modulus of up to ∼3 GPa), buckypapers (tensile strengths of up to 80 MPa, Young's modulus of up to 14 GPa), and graphene-related papers (tensile strengths of up to ∼300 MPa, Young's modulus of up to 42 GPa).457 Zhang's research group reported size-controlled MoS2/graphene hybrid aerogels with a Young's modulus of up to 59.2 kPa and recoverable deformability of 90% elastic strain, indicating their applicability in flexible Li-ion batteries.458 Seo et al. reported mechanically robust and highly ionic conductive gels based on random copolymers that exhibited both a large Young's modulus of ∼0.1 MPa and an ionic conductivity of ∼1.2 mS cm−1 at room temperature.459 Wang et al. also reported a SWCNT-PANI film electrode with tensile strength and Young's modulus of 10.9 and 655 MPa, respectively.460

In situ resistance measurements

In situ changes in resistance have also been employed to test the flexibility of electrodes.443,461,462 For example, we reported 3D macroporous laser-scribed graphene (LSG)–MnO2 electrodes and evaluated the foldability of the LSG–MnO2 electrodes by in situ measurements of the electrode resistance under successive bending cycles (Fig. 58).173 The change in resistance of the electrode was negligible up to a bending radius of 5.0 mm and was completely recovered after straightening no matter whether the bending was positive (convex) or negative (concave). Notably, after 1000 cycles of bending and straightening in a concave configuration, with a radius of curvature of 5.0 mm, the resistance was increased by only ∼2.8%, demonstrating excellent mechanical integrity under large mechanical deformation. This is in contrast to MnO2 by itself, which undergoes serious strain-induced performance degradation because of its rigid structure.
 Fig. 58  Fabrication and characterization of flexible LSG/MnO2 electrodes. (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the LSG–MnO2 electrodes. (b) Variation of the resistance of an LSG–MnO2 electrode as a function of bending radius both in concave and convex configuration. (c) The change in resistance of an LSG–MnO2 electrode under repeated bending cycles for a concave bending radius of 5 mm. The inset photograph shows the flexibility of an LSG–MnO2 electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
In another study, we introduced a supercapacitor based on polyaniline-functionalized carbon cloth.27 To test the flexibility of the device, we monitored the change in electrical resistance of the device under different bending angles from flat to bent at 180°. We also investigated the performance of the device under repeated bending cycles to a bending angle of 180°. Notably, we observed 96% capacity retention with only a slight decrease in resistance (<4%) after bending at an angle of 180° for 1000 cycles. It should be noted that when the bending radius is large relative to the device/electrode thickness, besides bending angle, the radius of curvature should also be reported to give a real picture of the device/electrode bendability. If a device has a radius of curvature between zero to twice the thickness of the device, it can be regarded as a foldable device.

In situ electrochemical study
Mechanical tests of the energy storage materials/devices are generally performed by recording electrochemical performances under different mechanical deformations. For example, Zang et al. reported supercapacitor electrodes based on crumpled graphene paper that exhibited extremely high stretchability with a uniaxial strain of ∼300% and a biaxial strain of 200% × 200%, which is equivalent to 800% areal strain (Fig. 59).453 They have demonstrated that the capacitances of the electrodes are insensitive to large deformations of the electrodes. The Hamedi research group introduced a flexible and compressible three-dimensional supercapacitor based on layer-by-layer self-assembly of interdigitated thin films that is fully functional at a bending angle of 90° and compressions up to 75%.442 To demonstrate this flexibility, in situ CV experiments were performed while the device was under operation.
 Fig. 59  Stretchability test of the graphene paper. Photographs of the procedure for crumpling graphene paper (a–c) and the corresponding SEM images (d–f): photograph (a) and SEM image (d) of a flat graphene paper bonded on a biaxially pre-stretched (εpre1 = εpre2 = 400%) elastomer film. Photographs (b and c) and SEM images (e and f) of the microscopic patterns formed in the graphene paper after the biaxially pre-stretched elastomeric substrate is uniaxially (b and e) and biaxially (c and f) relaxed to parallel ridges (e) and crumpled patterns (f), respectively. CV curves at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 (g) and gravimetric capacitance at different charge/discharge current densities from 0.5 to 80 A g−1 (h) of the crumpled-graphene-paper electrodes subjected to uniaxial strains of 0%, 100%, 200%, and 300%. (i) CV curves of the crumpled-graphene-paper electrodes subjected to biaxial strains of 0% × 0% and 200% × 200%. Adapted with permission from ref. 453, copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
Spectroscopic and microscopic characterization
A few other methods have also been used for studying the mechanical flexibility of materials. For example, Lee et al. estimated the Young's modulus of single- and bilayer graphene by Raman spectroscopy as 2.4 ± 0.4 and 2.0 ± 0.5 TPa, respectively,463 while the Hone research group used atomic force microscopy (AFM) nanoindentation and measured the Young's modulus of a freestanding monolayer of graphene as 1 TPa.464
Conclusions and perspective
Personal electronic devices and transportation technologies are now more dependent on energy storage systems than at any previous time in history, with a strong demand for enhanced energy and power densities. Therefore, a vast variety of advanced electrode active materials for batteries, supercapacitors, and hybrid energy storage systems have been reported. However, when critically evaluating energy storage systems under realistic conditions, it appears that in some cases, the characteristics assigned to an energy storage system (especially those based on the gravimetric performance of the active materials) have been overestimated. This is because of the low mass loadings of the electrode active materials and the dead volume in cells that prevent material-based gravimetric characteristics to be translated into realistic device-level volumetric performances. These common challenges of energy storage systems call for an attempt towards clarifying the importance of a balanced view of the active materials and devices.
In this Review, a comprehensive survey of the basic principles of energy storage systems and the protocols for their evaluation are presented. We have briefly described the physico-chemical principles of conventional capacitors, electrical double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors, hybrid energy storage devices, and batteries. In parallel with improvements in advanced engineering and the development of high-performance electrode active materials, a fundamental understanding and further development of the criteria for their proper evaluation are also needed to meet the challenges of new energy storage technologies. In this continuum, from conventional capacitors to supercapacitors to batteries, (super)capacitors are generally exploited to meet high-power demands, while batteries are generally employed to meet high-energy needs. Unlike conventional capacitors, the concomitant Faradaic reactions in pseudocapacitors and hybrid energy storage devices result in nonlinear galvanostatic charge–discharge behavior, and cyclic voltammograms that significantly deviate from the rectangular-shaped voltammograms expected for capacitors. Characterizations of pseudocapacitors and hybrid energy storage devices with metrics of capacitors or electric-double layer supercapacitors sometimes lead to false negative or positive results for the energy content and power performance of the device. We have emphasized here that the metrics for evaluation of energy storage devices vary depending on the type, since each energy storage device sets out specific characteristics with special use cases.
While desirable advancements have been achieved for the evaluation of energy storage devices, drawbacks still exist. For example, when pseudocapacitive materials are used in an energy storage device, the mass loading and thickness of the electrode active materials must be indicated. When the mass loading or thickness of the electrode active material is very low, or the charge–discharge processes are conducted using a very low current density, the energy performance of the material may be erroneously regarded as high, while finding a correction factor for this overestimation may not be easy. In this regard, the combination of computational modeling and experimental investigations should become an effective method for extrapolating and predicting the properties of both materials and devices. We hope that this Review will provide a useful contribution to the energy-storage community as a roadmap for ameliorating the hurdles for evaluating electrochemical energy storage systems.
List of symbols/abbreviations


A
Area (cm2)

a
Frequency-independent constant in CPE

C
Capacitance (F)/capacity (A h)

C
dl
Double layer capacitance (F)

C
PC
Pseudocapacitance (F)
CVCyclic voltammetry

d
Distance (m)

E
Electrode potential (V)

E
Energy (W h)/specific energy or energy density (W h g−1, W h cm−2, W h cm−3, …)
EDLCElectric double layer capacitors
EESElectrochemical energy storage
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ESREquivalent series resistance (Ω)

ε
0
Permittivity or the dielectric constant of air (F m−1)

ε
r
Permittivity or the dielectric constant

F
Faradays’ constant (C mol−1)

f
Conventional frequency (Hz)

G
Gibbs free energy (J mol−1)
GCDGalvanostatic charge/discharge

η
Coulombic efficiency

I
Current (A)/specific current (A g−1)/current density (A cm−2)

φ
Phase angle

M
Molecular weight (g mol−1)

m
Mass of active material (g)

P
Power (W)/specific power or power density (W g−1, W cm−2, W cm−3,…)

q
Charge (Coulomb, C)

R
ct
Charge transfer resistance (Ω)

R
L
Leakage resistance (Ω)

σ
Warburg coefficient

t
Time (s)

V
Cell voltage (V)

ω
Angular frequency (rad s−1)

Z
Impedance

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Yasin Shabangoli, a PhD student in the M. F. M group, for valuable comments. This work was made possible through financial support from Tarbiat Modares University Research Council, and Iran Science Elites Federation, grant number M94142 (M. F. M) and the Dr Myung Ki Hong Chair in Materials Innovation at UCLA (R. B. K.).
References
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2016, 62, 173–202 CrossRef .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Choudhary, C. Li, J. Moore, N. Nagaiah, L. Zhai, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605336 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li and Y. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS .

          B. K. Kim, S. Sy, A. Yu and J. Zhang, Electrochemical Supercapacitors for Energy Storage and Conversion, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2015 Search PubMed .
W. Bai, H. Tong, Z. Gao, S. Yue, S. Xing, S. Dong, L. Shen, J. He, X. Zhang and Y. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21891–21898 RSC .
G. Z. Chen, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2013, 23, 245–255 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
X. Zhao, B. M. Sánchez, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 839–855 RSC .
C. Liu, Z. G. Neale and G. Cao, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 109–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chae, X. Zhou and G. Z. Chen, Green, 2012, 2, 41–54 CAS .
L. Guan, L. Yu and G. Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 464–478 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Brousse, D. Bélanger and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5185–A5189 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, K. Cui, D. Karpuzov, X. Tan, A. Kohandehghan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 941–955 RSC .
H. Chen, H. Xu, S. Wang, T. Huang, J. Xi, S. Cai, F. Guo, Z. Xu, W. Gao and C. Gao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao7233 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park and J. M. Rivas, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2018, 33, 2282–2294 Search PubMed .
Z. Le, F. Liu, P. Nie, X. Li, X. Liu, Z. Bian, G. Chen, H. B. Wu and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2952–2960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero and F. Béguin, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, C. H. Chiang, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Yan, F. Hu, G. Gao, G. Wu and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705713 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zheng, Z. Li, Z.-S. Wu, Y. Dong, F. Zhou, S. Wang, Q. Fu, C. Sun, L. Guo and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Zhang, X. J. Ma, A. Loh, X. Li, F. C. Walsh and L. B. Kong, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 336–341 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hashemi, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 489–498 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J.-I. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, H. Xu, T. Zhou, Z. Guo, L. Chen, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, S. Cheng, Y. Huang and J. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600322 CrossRef .
M. Lee, J. Hong, J. Lopez, Y. Sun, D. Feng, K. Lim, W. C. Chueh, M. F. Toney, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 861–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 818–841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Chen and W. T. Zheng, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2015, 58, 1779–1798 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Y. Zhu, Y. Lu, L. L. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3317 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Yang, L. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1623–1632 RSC .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 RSC .
Q. Xia, H. Yang, M. Wang, M. Yang, Q. Guo, L. Wan, H. Xia and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701336 CrossRef .
H. Pan, J. Chen, R. Cao, V. Murugesan, N. N. Rajput, K. S. Han, K. Persson, L. Estevez, M. H. Engelhard, J.-G. Zhang, K. T. Mueller, Y. Cui, Y. Shao and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 813–820 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16161 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lu, F. Beguin and E. Frackowiak, Supercapacitors: Materials, Systems, and Applications, Wiley,  2013 Search PubMed .
X.-F. Jiang, X.-B. Wang, P. Dai, X. Li, Q. Weng, X. Wang, D.-M. Tang, J. Tang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Ang, Y. Zhang, H. T. Tan, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, J. B. Franklin, X. L. Wu, M. Srinivasan, H. J. Fan and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3082–3093 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xia, J. Nie, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, X. You, X. Feng, J. Wu, D. Liu, D. Zheng, Z.-Z. Xie, D. Qu, J. Li and H. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 463, 879–888 CrossRef CAS .
G. Benveniste, H. Rallo, L. Canals Casals, A. Merino and B. Amante, J. Environ. Manage., 2018, 226, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Kolosnitsyn and E. V. Karaseva, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2008, 44, 506–509 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Bunel and L. Lengignon, International Conference and Exhibition on High Temperature Electronics Network, HiTEN 2013, 2013, 8–12.

          A. Peter, M. H. Azarian and M. Pecht, Quality and Reliability Technical Symposium, QRTS 2015: Connecting Innovation to Application for Next Gen Design – Proceedings, 2015.
T. Hibino, K. Kobayashi, M. Nagao and S. Kawasaki, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, B. Hsia, J. P. Alper, S. Wang, L. E. Luna, C. Carraro, S.-Y. Lu and R. Maboudian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26658–26665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Newell, J. Faure-Vincent, B. Iliev, T. Schubert and D. Aradilla, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Rustomji, Y. Yang, T. K. Kim, J. Mac, Y. J. Kim, E. Caldwell, H. Chung and Y. S. Meng, Science, 2017, 356, eaal4263 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Cappetto, W. J. Cao, J. F. Luo, M. Hagen, D. Adams, A. Shelikeri, K. Xu and J. P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D. A. Boysen, J. M. Newhouse, B. L. Spatocco, B. Chung, P. J. Burke, D. J. Bradwell, K. Jiang, A. A. Tomaszowska, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. A. Ortiz, S. A. Barriga, S. M. Poizeau and D. R. Sadoway, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2075–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, Y. Hu, X. Wu, J. Han and Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1005–1018 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, Z. Guo, Z. Guo, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2018, 2, 902–913 CrossRef CAS .
O. Razbani and M. Assadi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 581–586 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Kanani, The Parthian Battery: Electric Current 2000 Years Ago? the History of Surface Finishing, Leuze,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1518–1534 CAS .

          D. S. Ginley and D. Cahen, Fundamentals of Materials for Energy and Environmental Sustainability, Cambridge University Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. Ho, T. R. Jow and S. Boggs, IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., 2010, 26, 20–25 Search PubMed .
J. Both, IEEE Electr. Insul. Mag., 2015, 31, 24–34 Search PubMed .

          P. T. Moseley and J. Garche, Electrochemical Energy Storage for Renewable Sources and Grid Balancing, Elsevier Science,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. Trasatti and G. Buzzanca, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1971, 29, A1–A5 CrossRef .
J.-H. Sung, S.-J. Kim and K.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, N. Fabre, F. Mesnilgrente, V. Conédéra and H. Durou, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1266–1269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beidaghi and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4501–4510 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Pei and C. Ye, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 82–102 CrossRef .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
D. Cericola and R. Kötz, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 72, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Ghenaatian, M. F. Mousavi and M. S. Rahmanifar, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 2017–2023 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Akinwolemiwa, C. Peng and G. Z. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5054–A5059 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frackowiak, M. Meller, J. Menzel, D. Gastol and K. Fic, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 179–198 RSC .

          T. Reddy, Linden's Handbook of Batteries, McGraw-Hill Education, 4th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. D. Yoo, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon and D. Aurbach, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 110–121 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gu, M. Zheng, Q. Zhao, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7651–7666 RSC .
M. R. Palacín and A. De Guibert, Science, 2016, 351, 1253292 CrossRef .
J.-S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, Taylor & Francis, 84th edn,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. S. Treptow, J. Chem. Educ., 2002, 79, 334–338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karami, M. Shamsipur, S. Ghasemi and M. F. Mousavi, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 896–904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall’Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Chen, T. Chen, H. Lv, G. Zhu, L. Ma, C. Wang, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 103–129 CrossRef .
N. S. Hudak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5203–5215 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karami, M. F. Mousavi, M. Shamsipur and S. Riahi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 154, 298–307 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiang, X. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Li, B. Xiao, L. Li and K. Deng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 24945–24954 RSC .
D. A. Scherson and A. Palencsár, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2006, 15, 17–22 CAS .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 385–418 CrossRef .
N. Mahmood and Y. Hou, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400012 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, S. Jeong, R. Kloepsch, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 490–495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Koyama, H. Arai, I. Tanaka, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3886–3894 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kiani, M. F. Mousavi and M. S. Rahmanifar, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 2581–2595 CAS .
B.-K. Zou, Y. Shao, Z.-Y. Qiang, J.-Y. Liao, Z.-F. Tang and C.-H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 336, 231–239 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. J. Fisher, V. M. Hart Prieto and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5907–5915 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, S. Dou and W.-L. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 489–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kiani, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, R. B. Kaner and M. F. Mousavi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 50433–50439 RSC .
F. Schipper, E. M. Erickson, C. Erk, J.-Y. Shin, F. F. Chesneau and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A6220–A6228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, T. He, Y. Su, Y. Lu, L. Bao, L. Chen, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, R. Chen and F. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29732–29743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vijaya Babu, L. Seeta Devi, V. Veeraiah and K. Anand, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., 2016, 4, 269–276 CrossRef .
C. Liu, R. Massé, X. Nan and G. Cao, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 15–58 CrossRef .
X. Rui, Q. Yan, M. Skyllas-Kazacos and T. M. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 19–38 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Gardiner and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1242–1248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Liu, B. Zhu and F. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 14354–14359 RSC .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664–2680 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta and G. Yushin, Part. Part. Syst. Char., 2014, 31, 317–336 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, I. Belharouak, Y. K. Sun and K. Amine, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 959–969 CrossRef CAS .

          K. I. Ozoemena and S. Chen, Nanomaterials in Advanced Batteries and Supercapacitors, Springer International Publishing,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. A. Kiani, M. F. Mousavi and S. Ghasemi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5794–5800 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. Proietti Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Braun and R. G. Nuzzo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pendashteh, M. F. Mousavi, M. A. Kiani, S. H. Kazemi and M. S. Rahmanifar, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2012, 9, 389–395 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
Maxwell ultracapacitor: Enabling energy's future, http://www.maxwell.com/products/ultracapacitors, accessed 6 March 2017.
S. Zhang and N. Pan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401401 CrossRef .

          E. D. Gates, Introduction to Basic Electricity and Electronics Technology, Delmar Learning,  2013 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Wang, C. Xu, H. Jiang, C. Li, L. Zhang, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Sci., 2017, 5, 1700322 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu and G. Yushin, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2014, 3, 424–473 CAS .
L. J. Wang, M. F. El-Kady, S. Dubin, J. Y. Hwang, Y. Shao, K. Marsh, B. McVerry, M. D. Kowal, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500786 CrossRef .
Y. Liu and X. Peng, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 7, 1–12 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 724–740 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, Y. Shao and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10756–10775 RSC .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
A. Davies and A. Yu, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2011, 89, 1342–1357 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2017, 122, 462–474 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, C. Hu and L. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14350–14360 RSC .
Y. Yu, C. Cui, W. Qian, Q. Xie, C. Zheng, C. Kong and F. Wei, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 8, 234–245 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Lou, X. Yuan, W. Dong, C. Dong, H. Bi and F. Huang, Carbon, 2017, 118, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Lin, W. D. Wang, Q. F. Lü, Y. Q. Jin, Q. Lin and R. Liu, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1339–1345 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, S. Han, C. Wang, J. Li and G. Xu, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 1732–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Izadi-Najafabadi, T. Yamada, D. N. Futaba, M. Yudasaka, H. Takagi, H. Hatori, S. Iijima and K. Hata, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 811–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Leela Mohana Reddy, R. I. Jafri, N. Jha, S. Ramaprabhu and P. M. Ajayan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16103–16107 RSC .
W. H. Choi, M. J. Choi and J. H. Bang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19370–19381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeiger, N. Jäckel, V. N. Mochalin and V. Presser, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3172–3196 RSC .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Cheng, W. Zhou, J. Jia, L. Yang, M. Yao, M. Wang, P. Wu, H. Luo and M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13173–13180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Song, R. Yan, N. Zhao, X. Tian, X. Li, Q. Guo and Z. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 394, 569–577 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Su, C. M. Wang, K. W. Lu and W. C. Shih, Fibers Polym., 2014, 15, 1708–1714 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jin, Z. H. Peng, W. M. Tang and H. L. W. Chan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33022–33028 RSC .
K. Kalinathan, D. P. DesRoches, X. Liu and P. G. Pickup, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Babel and K. Jurewicz, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, T. Shi, X. Zhan, Y. Huang and Z. Tang, Ionics, 2016, 22, 1881–1890 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Song, K. Song and L. Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4257–4264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Hong, J. J. Wie, Y. Xu and H. S. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30946–30962 RSC .
P.-C. Gao, W.-Y. Tsai, B. Daffos, P.-L. Taberna, C. R. Pérez, Y. Gogotsi, P. Simon and F. Favier, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arulepp, J. Leis, M. Lätt, F. Miller, K. Rumma, E. Lust and A. F. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1460–1466 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Rosas, R. Ruiz-Rosas, R. Berenguer, D. Cazorla-Amoros, E. Morallon, H. Nishihara, T. Kyotani, J. Rodriguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4610–4618 RSC .
J. S. Moon, H. Kim, D. C. Lee, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5070–A5076 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Liu, G. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Chen and J. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 677, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Luo, H. Chen, Y.-Z. Chen, P. Li, J.-Q. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2016, 46, 703–712 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Shen and D. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12873–12880 RSC .
Y. S. Yun, M. H. Park, S. J. Hong, M. E. Lee, Y. W. Park and H.-J. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3684–3690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3392–3395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Khan, A. Badshah, I. Khan, D. Zhao and M. A. Nadeem, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 253, 169–176 CrossRef .
X.-L. Su, M.-Y. Cheng, L. Fu, J.-H. Yang, X.-C. Zheng and X.-X. Guan, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 27–38 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yao, D. T. Pham and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2284–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Li, F. Lou, M. E. Melandsø Buan, E. Sheridan and D. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23859–23865 RSC .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Zhou, E. Sheridan, J. C. Walmsley, D. Ren and D. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 232–239 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, M. Ihns, M. Li, J. Y. Hwang, M. F. Mousavi, L. Chaney, A. T. Lech and R. B. Kaner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4233–4238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nanjundan Ashok and B. Jong-Beom, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 492001 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, H.-L. Gao and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5104–5111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, X. Han, Y. Du, B. Zhang and P. Xu, Polymers, 2016, 8, 366 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, K. Xiao, H. Guo, X. Ning, A. Hu, Q. Tang, B. Fan, Y. Zhu and X. Chen, Carbon, 2017, 117, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
H. Wang and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16711–16719 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 3457–3467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Griffin, A. C. Forse, W.-Y. Tsai, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 812–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi and H. Yoon, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 906–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter, V. Meunier, G. Yushin, C. Portet and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 1525–1531 CrossRef .
J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, Chem. – Eur. J, 2008, 14, 6614–6626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Weng, H.-A. Pan, R.-C. Lee, T.-Y. Huang, Y. Chu, J.-F. Lee, H.-S. Sheu and N.-L. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500772 CrossRef .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
F. Shi, L. Li, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Guo, T. Wang, J. Shao, D. Wang and Y. W. Yang, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 1667–1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Patake and C. D. Lokhande, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2820–2824 CrossRef CAS .
U. M. Patil, S. B. Kulkarni, V. S. Jamadade and C. D. Lokhande, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 1677–1682 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Hwang, M. F. El-Kady, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Shao, K. Marsh, J. M. Ko and R. B. Kaner, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 57–70 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lin, K. H. Chang, C. C. Hu and Y. Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4574–4581 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kim, J. H. Nam, Y. G. Lee, W. I. Cho and J. M. Ko, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 1702–1706 CrossRef .
A. Devadas, S. Baranton, T. W. Napporn and C. Coutanceau, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4044–4053 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yoshida, Y. Yamada, S.-I. Nishimura, Y. Oba, M. Ohnuma and A. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12003–12009 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, F. Li, F. Dong, Y. X. Zhang and L. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21380–21423 RSC .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, D. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18806–18814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Dey, P. K. Sahoo and A. K. Satpati, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 788, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xie, X. Liu, Q. Li, H. Lin, Y. Li, M. Nie and L. Qin, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 10915–10926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, S. Duan, H. Fan, X. Su, Y. Cui and R. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 100–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aloqayli, C. K. Ranaweera, Z. Wang, K. Siam, P. K. Kahol, P. Tripathi, O. N. Srivastava, B. K. Gupta, S. R. Mishra, F. Perez, X. Shen and R. K. Gupta, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 8, 68–76 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Q. Long, C. Jiang, B. Zhan, C. Li, S. Liu, Q. Zhao, W. Huang and X. Dong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6525–6529 RSC .
L. Zhu, W. Wu, Y. Zhu, W. Tang and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7069–7075 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Wang, C. Qing, G. Qu, W. Ma and Y. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 726, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nie, X. Lu, M. Chi, Y. Jiang and C. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 54693–54701 RSC .
D. S. Dhawale, S. Kim, D. H. Park, J. H. Choy, S. S. Al-deyab, K. Ariga, E. Kim and A. Vinu, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 497–502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, L. Kang, G. Bai, Y. Li, P. Li, X. Liu, Y. Yang, F. Gao and W. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sk, C. Y. Yue, K. Ghosh and R. K. Jena, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 121–140 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, C. Lu and Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23143–23148 RSC .
G. Meng, Q. Yang, X. Wu, P. Wan, Y. Li, X. Lei, X. Sun and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 831–839 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Gao, H. Gao, Z. Shi, J. Wu, M. Zhi and Z. Hong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 112620 RSC .
M. Aghazadeh, A. Rashidi, M. R. Ganjali and M. G. Maragheh, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 11002–11015 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdalla, R. P. Sahu, C. J. Wallar, R. Chen, I. Zhitomirsky and I. K. Puri, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 075603 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xiao, F. Qu and X. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen and D. Xue, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2014, 7, 1430001 CrossRef .
D. P. Dubal, G. S. Gund, C. D. Lokhande and R. Holze, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 923–928 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Dong, C. Zhao, X. Qian and Y. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Bhise, D. V. Awale, M. M. Vadiyar, S. K. Patil, B. N. Kokare and S. S. Kolekar, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 2585–2591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X. Liu, K. Qiu, J. Cheng, W. Wang, H. Yan, C. Tang, J. K. Kim and Y. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9682–9690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Shinde, D. Y. Kim, G. S. Ghodake, N. C. Maile, A. A. Kadam, D. S. Lee, M. C. Rath and V. J. Fulari, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 40, 314–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Singh, A. K. Das, G. Hatui and G. C. Nayak, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 198, 16–34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Wang, Q. Yang, M. S. Javed, Q. Liu, W. Xu, C. Hu and D. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 234, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pendashteh, M. S. Rahmanifar and M. F. Mousavi, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2014, 21, 643–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pendashteh, M. F. Mousavi and M. S. Rahmanifar, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 347–357 CrossRef CAS .
L. O'Neill, C. Johnston and P. S. Grant, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 907–915 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, X. Shao, Y. Zhang and X. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30133–30142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Jiang, Q. Liu, X. Zhu, L. Liu, L. Ni and C. Shen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91127–91133 RSC .
Y. S. Lim, C. W. Lai and S. B. Abd Hamid, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23030–23040 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Ji, S. Wang, L. Kong, X. Jiang and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3793–3799 RSC .
V. D. Nithya and N. Sabari Arul, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10767–10778 RSC .
H. Y. Lee and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 148, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Su, W. Huang and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 43–59 RSC .
A. Pendashteh, M. S. Rahmanifar, R. B. Kaner and M. F. Mousavi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1972–1975 RSC .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
P. Kakvand, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Pendashteh, M. A. Kiani, M. Hashami, M. Najafi, A. Abbasi, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 315401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dong, X. Chen, X. Zhang and G. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1946–1956 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, W. Wang, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1364–1387 RSC .
X. Wang, H.-M. Kim, Y. Xiao and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14915–14931 RSC .
D. Wang, L.-B. Kong, M.-C. Liu, W.-B. Zhang, Y.-C. Luo and L. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1107–1113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, S. Tang, J. Wu, X. Shi, B. Zhu and X. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601234 CrossRef .
W. Cai, T. Lai, J. Lai, H. Xie, L. Ouyang, J. Ye and C. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, L. Li, H. Tan, R. Cai, W. Shi, C. Li, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Srinivasan, S. Ramakrishna and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2155–2162 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, B. Liu, Y. Wu, S. Thanneeru and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36837–36848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, B. Li, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703949 CrossRef .
J. Wang, D. Chao, J. Liu, L. Li, L. Lai, J. Lin and Z. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Chen, Z. Li and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10521–10524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, T. Shi, C. Chen, Y. Zhong, Y. Huang, X. Tao, J. Li, G. Liao and Z. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6681 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Guo, J. Balamurugan, T. D. Thanh, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17560–17571 RSC .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng and Z. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Shown, A. Ganguly, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 2–26 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, T. Maiyalagan and R. N. Basu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6921–6947 RSC .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Ghenaatian, M. F. Mousavi and M. S. Rahmanifar, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 212–222 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Ghenaatian, M. F. Mousavi, S. H. Kazemi and M. Shamsipur, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, D. Chen and Z. Liang, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 22–36 CrossRef .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Kajiyama, H. Iinuma, E. Hosono, S. Oro, I. Moriguchi, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1656–1683 RSC .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Han, X. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Qi and B. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bon, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 4, 44–49 CrossRef .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y. B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, P. Nie, H. Dou, B. Ding, L. Li and X. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 191–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rahmanifar, H. Hesari, A. Noori, M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali and M. F. Mousavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, R. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15880–15893 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Lu and W. Yang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 19, 1933–1948 CrossRef CAS .
X. Long, Z. Wang, S. Xiao, Y. An and S. Yang, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 213–226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarfraz and I. Shakir, J. Energy Storage, 2017, 13, 103–122 CrossRef .
Y. Shabangoli, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 282–293 CrossRef .
Y. Shabangoli, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802869 CrossRef .
A. Bakandritsos, D. D. Chronopoulos, P. Jakubec, M. Pykal, K. Čépe, T. Steriotis, S. Kalytchuk, M. Petr, R. Zbořil and M. Otyepka, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801111 CrossRef .
R. Shi, C. Han, H. Duan, L. Xu, D. Zhou, H. Li, J. Li, F. Kang, B. Li and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802088 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC .
F. Li, X. Wang and R. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20643–20650 RSC .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K.-H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dmowski, T. Egami, K. E. Swider-Lyons, C. T. Love and D. R. Rolison, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12677–12683 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Woung, A. Veronica and D. Bruce, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 141–148 CrossRef .
L.-Z. Fan and J. Maier, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 937–940 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bromberg, J. Xia, R. Rooney and N. Dimitrov, Coatings, 2014, 4, 416–432 CrossRef .
H. Lindström, S. Södergren, A. Solbrand, H. Rensmo, J. Hjelm, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7717–7722 CrossRef .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, John Wiley, New York, Chichester, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
T. Kou, B. Yao, T. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17151–17173 RSC .
C. Yang, H. Wei, L. Guan, J. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Yan, X. Zhang, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14929–14941 RSC .
C. Xia, W. Chen, X. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, N. Wei and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401805 CrossRef .
J. Tang, P. Yuan, C. Cai, Y. Fu and X. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600813 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Zhang, S. Xin, Z. Yang, Y. Li, D. Zhang and P. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21373–21380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Mousavi, M. Hashemi, M. S. Rahmanifar and A. Noori, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 290–298 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7231–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rehman, T. Tang, Z. Ali, X. Huang and Y. Hou, Small, 2017, 13, 1700087 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Choi, M. Kim and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23793–23801 RSC .
A. Sajedi-Moghaddam, E. Saievar-Iranizad and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8052–8065 RSC .
V. M. Hong Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
L. Borchardt, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 4, 64–71 CrossRef .
V. C. Lokhande, A. C. Lokhande, C. D. Lokhande, J. H. Kim and T. Ji, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 682, 381–403 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Agubra, L. Zuniga, D. Flores, J. Villareal and M. Alcoutlabi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 529–550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miroshnikov, K. P. Divya, G. Babu, A. Meiyazhagan, L. M. Reddy Arava, P. M. Ajayan and G. John, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12370–12386 RSC .
V. V. S. S. Srikanth, G. V. Ramana and P. S. Kumar, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 2418–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Simotwo and V. Kalra, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2016, 13, 150–160 CrossRef .
K. Ghanbari, M. F. Mousavi, M. Shamsipur and H. Karami, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 513–519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Yue, P. X. Han, S. M. Dong, K. J. Zhang, C. J. Zhang, C. Q. Shang and G. L. Cui, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 4111–4118 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. ten Elshof, H. Yuan and P. Gonzalez Rodriguez, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600355 CrossRef .
L. Dimesso, C. Förster, W. Jaegermann, J. P. Khanderi, H. Tempel, A. Popp, J. Engstler, J. J. Schneider, A. Sarapulova, D. Mikhailova, L. A. Schmitt, S. Oswald and H. Ehrenberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5068–5080 RSC .
S. Wu, R. Xu, M. Lu, R. Ge, J. Iocozzia, C. Han, B. Jiang and Z. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500400 CrossRef .
S. R. Azari, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 2017, 14, 2579–2590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. Chang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5296–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Liu, B. Lin, Y. Sun, H. Yang and X. Zhang, Prog. Chem., 2015, 27, 404–415 CAS .
J. Ding, W. Hu, E. Paek and D. Mitlin, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6457–6498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Evanko, S. W. Boettcher, S. J. Yoo and G. D. Stucky, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2581–2590 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and W. H. Zhong, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 22–36 CrossRef CAS .
S.-E. Chun, B. Evanko, X. Wang, D. Vonlanthen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Xie, B. Gélinas and D. Rochefort, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 66, 42–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Choudhury, D. Weingarth, D. Kim and V. Presser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23676–23687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Hwang, M. F. El-Kady, M. Li, C.-W. Lin, M. Kowal, X. Han and R. B. Kaner, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, M. Dong, E. Feng, H. Peng, G. Ma, G. Zhao and Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 22419–22425 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, Y. Li, L. Peng, H. R. Byon, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7968–7996 RSC .
A. Burke and M. Miller, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7538–7548 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, L. Li, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600382 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Andres, A.-C. Engström, N. Blomquist, S. Forsberg, C. Dahlström and H. Olin, PLoS One, 2016, 11, e0163146 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Dai, C. Peng, J. H. Chae, K. C. Ng and G. Z. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, X. Yang, B. Zhu, P.-F. Liu and H.-T. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 584–590 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chae and G. Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 86, 248–254 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, S. Zhang, X. Zhou and G. Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1499–1502 RSC .

          X. Feng, Nanocarbons for Advanced Energy Storage, Wiley,  2015 Search PubMed .
W. Li, Y. Ding, W. Zhang, Y. Shu, L. Zhang, F. Yang and Y. Shen, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2016, 64, 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nanjundiah, S. F. McDevitt and V. R. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3392–3397 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bleda-Martínez, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, D. Lozano-Castelló, E. Morallón, D. Cazorla-Amorós and A. Linares-Solano, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2677–2684 CrossRef .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
H. Wang and L. Pilon, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 529–531 CrossRef CAS .
V. Srinivasan and J. W. Weidner, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
B.-A. Mei, O. Munteshari, J. Lau, B. Dunn and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
R. Zhou, C. Meng, F. Zhu, Q. Li, C. Liu, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 345701 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, H. Liu, J. Zeng, J. Zhou, H. Li and H. Xia, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 314 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-H. Kim, K.-B. Kim, S.-M. Park and K. C. Roh, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Zhou, F. Lou, Y. Li, M. E. Buan, X. Duan, J. C. Walmsley, E. Sheridan and D. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3093–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Chemali, M. Preindl, P. Malysz and A. Emadi, IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Power Electron., 2016, 4, 1117–1134 Search PubMed .
E. Talaie, P. Bonnick, X. Sun, Q. Pang, X. Liang and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. F. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Ren, C. J. Sun, W. Lu, Y. Zhou, L. Stanciu, E. A. Stach and J. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6127 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, B. Krüner, A. Tolosa, S. Sathyamoorthi, D. Kim, S. Choudhury, K.-H. Seo and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3392–3398 RSC .
A. Mukhopadhyay and B. W. Sheldon, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 63, 58–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P. L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16070 CrossRef CAS .
D. Weingarth, A. Foelske-Schmitz and R. Kötz, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 84–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Jiang, S. Wei, S. Liu and W. Zhang, Energies, 2017, 10, 597 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, T. Tan and T. Yang, Materials, 2018, 11, 1537 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Z. Zhao, P.-Y. Chen, R. Zhang, X. Chen, B.-Q. Li, X.-Q. Zhang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat3446 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Andreas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5047–A5053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewandowski, P. Jakobczyk, M. Galinski and M. Biegun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8692–8699 RSC .
H. A. Andreas, J. M. Black and A. A. Oickle, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Black and H. A. Andreas, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3568–3574 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Ike, I. Sigalas and S. Iyuke, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 661–680 RSC .

          A. Yu, Electrochemical supercapacitors for energy storage and delivery: fundamentals and applications, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,  2013 Search PubMed .
Y. Diab, P. Venet, H. Gualous and G. Rojat, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2009, 24, 510–517 Search PubMed .
J. Niu, B. E. Conway and W. G. Pell, J. Power Sources, 2004, 135, 332–343 CrossRef CAS .
Maxwell ultracapacitor: Ultracapacitor Technical Note Documents, http://www.maxwell.com/products/ultracapacitors/downloads, accessed 29 August 2018.
S. Ardizzone, G. Fregonara and S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 263–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Cook, H.-S. Kim, Y. Yan, J. S. Ko, S. Robbennolt, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501937 CrossRef .
C. Jo, I. Hwang, J. Lee, C. W. Lee and S. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11880–11886 CrossRef CAS .
S.-B. Yoon, H.-K. Song, K. C. Roh and K.-B. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A137–A141 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Hatzell, M. Beidaghi, J. W. Campos, C. R. Dennison, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 888–897 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, J. Y. Kim, W. Xing, K. C. Donavan, T. Ayvazian and R. M. Penner, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2382–2390 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Dong, Y. Pang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Forghani and S. W. Donne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A664–A673 CrossRef CAS .
M. Opitz, J. Yue, J. Wallauer, B. Smarsly and B. Roling, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yue, C. Suchomski, P. Voepel, R. Ellinghaus, M. Rohnke, T. Leichtweiss, M. T. Elm and B. M. Smarsly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1978–1988 RSC .
K. L. Van Aken and Y. Gogotsi, Meet. Abstr., 2016, 2, 964 Search PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Tang, Y. Qiao, Z. Liu, W. Guo, J. Song, S. Mu, S. Yu, Y. Zhao and F. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Costard, M. Ender, M. Weiss and E. Ivers-Tiffée, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A80–A87 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, G. Han, Y. Chang, Y. Xiao, M. Li and W. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601257 CrossRef .
A. Ghosh, V. T. Le, J. J. Bae and Y. H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2939 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, M. Morris and K.-Y. Chan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8880 RSC .
H.-Y. Liu, K.-P. Wang and H. Teng, Carbon, 2005, 43, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zequine, C. K. Ranaweera, Z. Wang, S. Singh, P. Tripathi, O. N. Srivastava, B. K. Gupta, K. Ramasamy, P. K. Kahol, P. R. Dvornic and R. K. Gupta, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aaron, Z. Tang, A. B. Papandrew and T. A. Zawodzinski, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1175 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Boysen, T. Uda, C. R. I. Chisholm and S. M. Haile, Science, 2004, 303, 68–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-M. Weng, Z. Li, G. Cong, Y. Zhou and Y.-C. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 735–741 RSC .
Y. H. Huang, R. I. Dass, Z. L. Xing and J. B. Goodenough, Science, 2006, 312, 254–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Cascos, J. A. Alonso and M. T. Fernandez-Diaz, Materials, 2016, 9, 579 CrossRef PubMed .

          V. C. Aiping Yu and J. Zhang, Electrochemical supercapacitors for energy storage and delivery, CRC Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          J. Zhang, PEM fuel cell electrocatalysts and catalyst layers: fundamentals and applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Daraghmeh, S. Hussain, I. Saadeddin, L. Servera, E. Xuriguera, A. Cornet and A. Cirera, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 639 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lü, Y. Zhang, Z. Lü, X. Huang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu and B. Wei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 5858–5862 RSC .
S. Roldán, D. Barreda, M. Granda, R. Menéndez, R. Santamaría and C. Blanco, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1084–1092 RSC .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 RSC .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
M. Notarianni, J. Liu, K. Vernon and N. Motta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 149–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Goikolea and R. Mysyk, in Emerging Nanotechnologies in Rechargeable Energy Storage Systems, ed. L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez and N. Omar, Elsevier, Boston,  2017, pp. 131–169 Search PubMed .
A. Ramadoss, K.-N. Kang, H.-J. Ahn, S.-I. Kim, S.-T. Ryu and J.-H. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4718–4727 RSC .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, S. Yao, H. Liu, F. Qu, X. Zhang and X. Wu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2016, 26, 271–275 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peters, D. Buchholz, S. Passerini and M. Weil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1744–1751 RSC .
A. Laheäär, P. Przygocki, Q. Abbas and F. Béguin, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 21–25 CrossRef .
Y. Lim, J. Yoon, J. Yun, D. Kim, S. Y. Hong, S.-J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11639–11650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, L. Zhu, L. Sun, Y. Liu and L. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 982–985 RSC .
J. R. Miller, Science, 2012, 335, 1312–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kabtamu, J.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Chang and C.-H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11472–11480 RSC .
M. D. Murbach, V. W. Hu and D. T. Schwartz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A2758–A2765 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Zuo, C. Cui, W. Yang, H. Ma and X. Wang, Sensors, 2013, 13, 8551–8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Z. Yuan, C. Song, H. Wang and J. Zhang, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy in PEM Fuel Cells: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer, London,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. D. Levi, M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Sigalov, M. Beidaghi, N. Shpigel, L. Daikhin, D. Aurbach, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400815 CrossRef .
P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and J. F. Fauvarque, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A292–A300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, L. Yu, C. O. Ania and M.-M. Titirici, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 2138–2145 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cericola and M. E. Spahr, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 558–566 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kötz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 CrossRef .
G. A. Ferrero, A. B. Fuertes and M. Sevilla, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gaberscek, J. Moskon, B. Erjavec, R. Dominko and J. Jamnik, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A170–A174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Sasaki, N. Tatsuda, D. Weingarth, K. Yano and R. Kötz, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 81, 138–148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bera, T. Kar, A. Chakraborty and M. Neergat, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 805, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, N. Islam and S. B. Bayne, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 306–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, F. Markoulidis, Z. Ashitaka and C. Lekakou, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nathan-Walleser, I.-M. Lazar, M. Fabritius, F. J. Tölle, Q. Xia, B. Bruchmann, S. S. Venkataraman, M. G. Schwab and R. Mülhaupt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4706–4716 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Sun, B. K. Tay, Z. X. Shen, W. Mai and H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500299 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Dupont and S. W. Donne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5096–A5105 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Zuliani, J. N. Caguiat, D. W. Kirk and C. Q. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2015, 290, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lv, Y. Luo, Y. Tang, J. Wei, Z. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Qi, S. Pan, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704531 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. Ge, Y. Chao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 57–72 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 1701827 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Guo, N. Yu, Z. Hou, L. Hu, Y. Ma, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16–30 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, S. Chen and Q. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4218–4235 RSC .
Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Hu, L. Zhu, X. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pan, J. Ren, X. Fang and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501867 CrossRef .
Y. Huang and C. Zhi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 273001 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Z. Lou, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1805596 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Fu, C. Zhong, T. Wu, Z. Chen, W. Hu, K. Amine and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1802605,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201802605 .
J. Wu, Y. Hong and B. Wang, J. Semicond., 2018, 39, 011004 CrossRef .
T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li and T. Chen, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 644–660 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17023 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. Chen and L. Dai, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nyström, A. Marais, E. Karabulut, L. Wågberg, Y. Cui and M. M. Hamedi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7259 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, W. Zhou, X. Chen, J. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6002–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, B. Shen, D. Jiang, R. Guo, L. Kong and X. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600763 CrossRef .
H. Lin, W. Weng, J. Ren, L. Qiu, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Chen, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Bai, J. Ren, W. Weng, H. Lin, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11054–11059 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Song, G. K. H. Madsen, K. F. F. Fischer, W. Zhang, X. Shi and B. B. Iversen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Davis, Tensile Testing, ASM International, 2nd edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Hu, S. Li and Y. He, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 46441 CrossRef .
J. Xu, B. Liu and D. Hu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zang, C. Cao, Y. Feng, J. Liu and X. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Senokos, Y. Ou, J. J. Torres, F. Sket, C. González, R. Marcilla and J. J. Vilatela, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3407 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-L. Wu and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4852–4864 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, D. Hu, H. Chen, Z. Yong, M. Chen, Z. Feng, Y. Zhu and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5457–5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. He, K. Zhao, B. Huang, B. Zhang, Q. Huang, T. Chen and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 53, 4482–4493 CrossRef .
D. G. Seo and H. C. Moon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706948 CrossRef .
R. Wang, Q.-R. Wang, M.-J. Yao, K.-N. Chen, X.-Y. Wang, L.-L. Liu, Z.-Q. Niu and J. Chen, Rare Met., 2018, 37, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793–4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, H. Dong, B. Zhu, J. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. U. Lee, D. Yoon and H. Cheong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4444–4448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Abolhassan Noori
	Abolhassan Noori received his PhD under the supervision of Professor A. Abbaspour from Shiraz University in 2011. During his PhD he spent 6 months in the group of (late) Prof. Marco Mascini at the University of Florence, Italy, as a Visiting Student Researcher, working on the implementation of nanostructured materials in biosensors. After that, he was awarded five one-year fellowships sponsored by the Tarbiat Modares University (TMU) Research Council and another one from the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) to pursue his postdoctoral research in the laboratory of Professor Mir F. Mousavi. In 2015, he began pursuing Electrochemical Energy Storage (EES) systems. Recently, Dr Noori joined the Department of Chemistry at TMU as a Research Associate Professor, working with Prof. Mousavi to continue expanding his expertise and knowledge in energy storage/conversion systems. He is a fellow of the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS) and Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS). His current research interests focus on the rational design of nanostructured materials, bioinspired from nature, to solve problems in bioanalytical chemistry and materials science, ranging from challenges in targeted drug delivery to energy-related applications.

Maher F. El-Kady
	Maher F. El-Kady is a postdoctoral research fellow at UCLA and chief technology officer at Nanotech Energy, Inc. For more than 12 years, Dr El-Kady has been studying the chemistry and physics of materials with applications in energy storage, electronic devices, medical and healthcare devices, chemical sensors and biosensors, nanogenerators, solar cells, water splitting, hydrogen energy, water remediation and environmental monitoring. This work resulted in 16 US and international patents issued and pending and 40+ papers in prestigious journals. His groundbreaking work on graphene supercapacitors led to the development of Nanotech Energy, Inc. where he is leading a team of scientists and engineers for developing more powerful batteries, supercapacitors, printed electronics, nanomaterials, conductive inks and adhesives. He has received numerous awards for his research including the UCLA Herbert Newby McCoy Award, the Lindau Graduate Student Award, the Amgen Postdoctoral Award, the Cairo University Presidential Award for Excellence in Research and the 2012 Excellence in Research Award from the Government of Egypt.

Mohammad S. Rahmanifar
	M. S. Rahmanifar received his BSc (1995) from Kharazmi University, and MSc (1998) and PhD (2003) from Tarbiat Modarres University under the supervision of Prof. M. F. Mousavi. He then began his academic career at Shahed University in 2005 and was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure starting in 2017. His research interests focus on the design and fabrication of electrochemical power sources (EPSs) and the electrochemistry of materials and their application in EPSs.

Richard B. Kaner
	Richard Kaner received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania in 1984 working with Prof. Alan MacDiarmid (Nobel Laureate 2000, deceased). After postdoctoral research at Berkeley, he joined the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 1987, earned tenure in 1991, became a Distinguished Professor in 2012 and was appointed to the Dr Myung Ki Hong Endowed Chair in Materials Innovation in 2017. He has published over 400 papers in top peer reviewed journals and holds more than 40 U.S. patents. According to the latest Thomson-Reuters rankings, he is among the world's most highly cited authors. Professor Kaner has received awards from the Dreyfus, Fulbright, Guggenheim, Packard and Sloan Foundations along with the Materials Research Society Medal, the Royal Society of Chemistry Centenary Prize, and the American Chemical Society's Buck-Whitney Research Award, Tolman Medal and Award in the Chemistry of Materials for his work on refractory materials including new synthetic routes to ceramics, intercalation compounds, superhard metals, graphene and conducting polymers. He has been elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the American Chemical Society (ACS), the European Academy of Sciences (EurASc), the Materials Research Society (MRS) and the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC).

Mir F. Mousavi
	Mir F. Mousavi received a PhD from Shiraz University in 1992. He then joined the Chemistry Department of Tarbiat Modares University (TMU) in 1992 as an Assistant Professor, became an Associate Professor in 1998, and was promoted to Full Professor in 2002. He has been listed as one of the Leading Scientists and Engineers in the OIC Member States in 2006, and an ISI (ESI) scientist (Top 1% Most Cited Scientist) in 2007. Prof. Mousavi has been recognized as the First Laureate in Modern Technology at the 14th Annual Razi International Research Festival in 2008, and has received many awards including the ISESCO Award in 2008, the Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS) Award in 2009, the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS) Award in 2009, and the ICS Award for Distinguished Professor of Analytical Chemistry in 2011. He is a member of many academies, including the American Chemical Society (ACS), the International Society of Electrochemistry (ISE), the Iranian Chemical Society (ICS), the Iranian Nanotechnology Society (INS), the Iran Science Elites Federation (ISEF), and was elected as a Regional Representative for ISE from 2007 to 2012. Prof. Mousavi has been a Visiting Professor in Prof. Richard Kaner's laboratory at UCLA from 2013–2014. His current research interests involve advanced nanostructured materials and technologies for energy storage and conversion devices, including rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, as well as hybrid systems, along with the applications of nanomaterials in nanobiotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot showing the specific power vs. specific energy of various energy storage devices. Adapted with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. with modifications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of a conventional capacitor (a) and a supercapacitor (b). The detailed structure of the electrical double layer is presented as insets.	 

 	Fig. 3  A hydroelectric power plant is analogous to an electrical energy storage system. Water from the upper reservoir flows through the pipes to turn a turbine generator, the same way that electrons flow through the wires of a battery from the negative pole to the positive one to produce light. The inset shows the energy diagram of the devices. The symbols c and a are the electrochemical potentials of the electrons (i.e. the Fermi energy of the electrons) of the negative pole (the anode during the discharge step) and the positive pole (the cathode during the discharge step), respectively. Vg is the voltage window of the electrolyte. VOC is the open-circuit voltage of the device.	 

 	Fig. 4  Different electrochemical energy storage systems. Schematic representation of (a) an electric double layer capacitor (EDLC), (b) a battery, (c) a pseudocapacitor, and (d) a hybrid system that comprises an EDLC and an intercalative charge storage process.	 




CV
	

	

	

	

	


Effect of nanosizing15	

	

	

	

	


Cycle life	Almost infinite	>1000000	>500000	>10000018	Up to >25000019
Typically, <10000
Cycle life limitation	—	—	Decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials	Decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials	The loss in mechanical stability and chemical reversibility of the reactions along with decomposition and degradation of active material at high over-potentials
Cell voltage (V)	Max: 1 kV	Max: 3.8 V	Max: 4.0 V	Max: 5.0	Max: 523
Min: 0 V20	Min: 0 V10	Min: 0 V21	Min: 022	Min: 3.2 (Li-ion)

	
	
	
	∼1 (NiMH)
Capacitance/capacity	pF to mF range	∼300 F g−1@1 A g−124	∼4000 F g−1@1.4 A g−127	∼80 mA h gelectrode−1@1200C (1C = 175 mA h g−1)28	∼265 mA h ganode+cathode−1@50 mA g−130
∼7.3 mF cm−2 @10 mV s−125	200 mA h g−1@0.2C29
∼950 F cm−3@1 A g−126	

Specific energy or energy density	Very low	Low	Moderate	High	Very high
<1 W h kg−131,32	<12 W h kg−133	∼1090 W h kg−1@∼2 kW kg−127	150 W h kg−1@150 W kg−135	1835 W h kgcathode−1

	∼60 W h L−1@8.6 kW L−134	
	230 W h kgelectrode−1@1.75 kW kgelectrode−136	2317 W h Lcathode−1 Li–S battery38

	
	
	220 W h kganode+cathode−1@225 W kg−137	< 400 W h kgAnode+cathode−1 Li & Na ion batteries30,39
Specific power or power density	Very high	High	High	Moderate to high	Low to moderate
≫10 kW kg−140	0.5–10 kW kg−140	∼197 kW kg−1@∼120 W h kg−127	>30 kW kgelectrode−1@141 W h kgelectrode−136	<1 kW kg−140

	340 kW kg−1@∼10 W h kg−141	
	67.5 kW kg−1@23.4 W h kg−142	


	∼75 kW L−1@∼10 W h L−134	
	
	

Power limitation	—	Electrode and electrolyte resistivity	Kinetic limitation	Kinetic limitation	Mass transport and reaction kinetic limitations
Active material conductivity
Self-discharge	High	High	Moderate	Low	Very low
∼40% loss in energy per day6	∼20–40% loss in energy per day6	∼20–40% loss in energy per day6	18% loss in voltage after 48 h44	∼1% (Li-ion) to 8–15% (Li–S) loss in capacity per month45,46

	∼50–80% loss in energy per day43	
	
	

Operating temperature (°C)	Max: silicon, 25047	Max: metal pyrophosphate electrolyte, 20049	Typical Li-ion capacitor, Max: 70	Max: liquid metal batteries ∼100054
Min: tantalum, −5548	SiC nanowire, 50050	Min: −4053	Na–S batteries ∼40055

	Min: ionic liquid electrolyte, −7051	
	Min: liquified gas electrolyte, −6052

	Liquefied gas electrolyte, ∼−8052	
	Ethyl acetate-based electrolyte −7056
Nature of charge storage	Physical	Physical	Physico-chemical	Physico- chemical	Chemical
The charge is stored at the surface of the electrodes through an excess of electrons on one side and holes on the other side	Reversible ion adsorption	Redox reaction, intercalation, doping, or underpotential deposition	Intercalation and change in oxidation state or ion adsorption	Intercalation/deintercalation, or change in oxidation state
Kinetics	Ultra-fast	Very fast	Fast	Moderate to fast	Slow to fast
Storage mechanism	CNFSa//CNFS (Sym.b)	CNFS//CNFS (Sym. or Asym.1c)	CNFS//CFSd	CNFS//NCFSf	NCFS//NCFS (Sym. or Asym.1)
CFS//CNFS (Asym.2e)	NCFS//CNFS (Asym.2)
CFS//CFS (Sym. or Asym.1)	CFS//NCFS

	NCFS//CFS (Asym.2)
Materials	Metals	Carbon-based materials e.g. CNT, graphene, activated carbon, fullerene, porous carbon	Metal oxides/hydroxides/nitrides/sulfides, e.g. RuO2, MnO2, V2O5, NiO, Co(OH)2, Co3Mo3N, NiCo2S2; LDHsg conducting polymers e.g. PANI,h PPY;i MXenes e.g. Ti3C2(OH)2 MOFsje.g. Ni/Co–MOF	Composites of carbon-based materials with metal oxides/hydroxides or conducting polymers e.g. graphene//PANI, AC//Ni(OH)2	Materials with a high theoretical capacity e.g. LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, LiMnPO4, LiNixMnxCo1−2xO2
Phase change	No phase change	No phase change	Phase change	Phase change
Charge/discharge time	10−6–10−3 s	s to min	s to min	0.3–10 h
Charge/discharge efficiency (%)	∼100	Up to 99.9	∼99	70–99
Environmental impact	Very low	Very low	Low/medium	Low/medium/high

C–V relationship	Constant capacitance/full discharge	Constant capacitance/full discharge	Non-constant capacitance/full discharge	Non-constant capacitance/full or partial discharge	Non-constant capacity/partial discharge

i–ν relationship	
i ∝ ν	
i ∝ ν	
i ∝ νb (0.5 < b < 1)	
i ∝ ν0.5

 	Fig. 5  System theory as a way of studying the energy storage process in its entirety. In such a system, the input could be the voltage or current that is applied to the energy storage device and the output could be the current or voltage that can be readily monitored. The feedback of the output to the input could provide information about the system under study, e.g. the minimum and maximum cut-off voltages.	 
q(t) = CV(t)	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 6  
V–t (a) and V–q (b) plots of the output signal of an ideal capacitor charged with a constant current, i, for a definite time, t, and then discharged with the same current.	 
	(8)
W = qV = CV2	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 7  Components of a typical energy storage device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15, copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 


Pb/acid	Sulfuric acid (aq.)b	

	2.04	30	−25 to +50
Ni/Cd	Alkali hydroxide (aq.)c	

	1.4	50	−40 to +60
Ni/MHd	Alkali hydroxide (aq.)c	

	1.35	65	−20 to +60
Li polymere	Li saltf (polyethylene oxide)	



	3	140	60 to 100
Li-ion	LiPF6 (organic)	

	3.6h	150 to 270i	−30 to +60j
Zn/air	Alkali hydroxide, e.g. KOH, NaOH, LiOH (aq.)	

	1.65k	550 to 85082	−10 to +55
Neutral electrolytes, e.g. NH4Cl (aq.)
	(13)
	(14)
W = −qE = −nFE	(15)
Wmax = ΔG	(16)
ΔG = −nFE	(17)
aA + bB ⇄ cC + dD	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
Pb(s) + H2SO4(aq) → PbSO4(s) + 2H+(aq) + 2e−	(22)
PbO2(s) + H2SO4(aq) + 2H+ + 2e− → PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)	(23)
Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2H2SO4(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)	(24)
	(25)
ΔG0f(rxn) = −371.5 kJ
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(31)

 	Fig. 8  General strategies for boosting the energy storage performance of electrode active materials: (a) nanosizing the active materials, (b) compositing the active material, (c) doping and functionalization, (d) tuning morphology of the particles, (e) protecting the material with formation of coatings or shells, and (f) modification of the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96, copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 
	(32)

 	Fig. 9  A system consisting of a resistor and an ideal capacitor in series (an R–C circuit).	 

 	Fig. 10  Charging an R–C circuit. R–C circuit for t < 0 (a) and t ≥ 0 (b). At t < 0 the switch is open and no current flows through the circuit and the charge on the plates is zero. At t = 0 and later, the current i flows through the circuit and charges q+ and q− are stored on the positive and negative plates, respectively. When the voltage across the capacitor reaches that of the supply voltage, the current diminishes to zero.	 
	(33)

 	Fig. 11  Constant current charge–discharge profile of an R–C circuit. Contributions from VR and VC in the total voltage of the circuit are presented for the discharge step.	 
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
	(40)
	(41)
	(42)
	(43)
	(44)
	(45)
	(46)
	(47)
qt=∞ = VC = qtotal	(48)
	(49)
	(50)
	(51)
	(52)

 	Fig. 12  A plot of the change in charge (green, circle) and current (blue, triangle) of a capacitor as a function of time during a constant voltage charging process.	 

 	Fig. 13  Discharging an R–C circuit. (a) An R–C circuit charged to the maximum value of q (t < 0). (b) An R–C circuit that starts to discharge in which the potential across the plates of the capacitor is going to drop to zero.	 
	(53)
	(54)
	(55)
	(56)
	(57)
	(58)
	(59)
	(60)

 	Fig. 14  (a–f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based supercapacitors and (g–i) micro-supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (j and k) Fabrication of more than 100 micro-supercapacitors can be realized in a single run; the micro-supercapacitors are completely flexible. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 
	(61)

 	Fig. 15  Double layer models. The Gouy–Chapman–Stern electric double-layer model of a planar surface. IHP and OHP stand for the inner Helmholtz plane and outer Helmholtz plane, respectively. A Stern layer and a diffuse layer developed in the electrolyte due to the thermal motions of electrolyte ions are represented. The scheme also shows the potential gradient across the double layer. The inset circuit shows the in-series capacitors of the Stern and diffuse layers.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the anomalous increase in capacitance of porous carbon-based materials because of the ion-sized pores.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) A plot of areal capacitance normalized by BET specific surface area vs. average pore size for different carbon samples. All the samples were tested in the same electrolyte (NEt4BF4 in acetonitrile). The traditional view is based on an assumption that the normalized capacitance continually decreases with decreasing pore size. The results presented in this figure show that the normalized capacitance decreases with decreasing pore size until a critical value is reached after which a huge increase in the capacitance is observed. (B–D) Schematic representation of solvated ions residing in pores with the distance between adjacent pore walls (B) greater than 2 nm, (C) between 1 and 2 nm, and (D) less than 1 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180, copyright 2006, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(62)
	(63)
	(64)

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagrams (top views) of (I) a negatively charged mesopore with solvated cations approaching the pore wall to form an electric double-cylinder capacitor, where a is the radius of the inner cylinder, b is the pore radius, and d is the distance of approach of the cation to the pore wall. (II) A negatively charged micropore of radius b with the cation size of a0 that forms an electric wire-in-cylinder capacitor. (III) Cross-section of an exohedral capacitor with the inner and outer sphere/cylinder radii of a and b, respectively, separated by the effective double-layer thickness d. Panels I and II are adapted with permission from ref. 185, copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., and panel III is adapted with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2011, Cambridge University Press.	 
	(65)
	(66)
	(67)
	(68)
	(69)
RuO2 + δH+ + δe− → RuO2−δ(OH)δ	(70)
MnIVO2 + xH+ + yM+ + (x + y)e− → MnIII(x+y)MnIV1−(x+y)OOMyHx (0 ≤ x + y ≤ 1)	(71)

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic CV for a MnO2 electrode in a mild aqueous electrolyte (0.1 M K2SO4) that shows the successive multiple surface redox reactions leading to the pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism. The red (upper) part is related to the oxidation from Mn(III) to Mn(IV) and the blue (lower) part refers to the reduction from Mn(IV) to Mn(III). (b) Schematic representation of different charge-storage mechanisms of MnO2 as a function of operating potential window; B: battery behavior; PC: pseudocapacitance; (IV), (III), and (II): Mn ions in the oxidation states of 4, 3, and 2, respectively. The red and blue lines are the dq/dV plots of the Mn–Si–O composite electrode obtained at scan rates of 2 and 100 mV s−1, respectively. Panel a is adapted with permission from ref. 3, copyright 2008, Springer Nature, and panel b is adapted with permission from ref. 186, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. with slight modifications.	 

 	Fig. 20  Different types of redox mechanisms that give rise to pseudocapacitance. (a) Redox pseudocapacitance, as in RuO2·xH2O. (b) Intercalation pseudocapacitance, as in Nb2O5. (c) Doping pseudocapacitance, as in polypyrrole and (d) underpotential deposition based pseudocapacitance, as in the deposition of lead on the surface of a gold electrode. CVs of panels a, b, c, and d are reproduced with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2002, American Chemical Society; ref. 283, copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co.; ref. 284, copyright 2006, Elsevier; and ref. 285, copyright 2014, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, respectively.	 
i = aνb	(72)
|i| = ACυ	(73)
	(74)
	(75)
Pt + H+ + e− ↔ Pt–Hads	(76)
	(77)
	(78)
	(79)
	(80)
	(81)

Redox	

	
X = [Red] [Ox] = 1 − [Red]
Intercalation	

	
X = occupancy of the lattice sites of a layered structure
Doping	

	
X = occupancy of the polymer's redox active sites
Underpotential deposition	

	
X = θ that is fractional surface coverage

 	Fig. 21  Hybrid energy storage systems. (a) Schematic representation of the energy storage mechanism and structure of a battery–supercapacitor hybrid (BSH) device. (b) Various types of battery–supercapacitor hybrid devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co.	 
qtot = qNon-Faradaic + qFaradaic = (qElectric + qElectrolytic) + (qSurface + qInterface + qSurf.–Interf.interaction)	(82)

 	Fig. 22  The redox potential of representative redox-active species with potential for hybrid energy storage systems, redox batteries, as well as flow batteries. (a) Redox potential and the demonstrated volumetric capacity for some aqueous redox couples. The suitable pH ranges for each species is also demonstrated. The redox-active electrolytes illustrated in red, violet, and blue operate under acidic, neutral, or basic conditions, respectively. Potential of various inorganic (b), and organic & organometallic (c) redox couples. Chemical abbreviations: DHAQ, 2,6-dihydroxyanthraquinone; AQDS, 9,10-anthraquinone-2,7-disulfonic acid; EV, ethyl viologen; MV, methyl viologen; PV, pentyl viologen; HV, heptyl viologen; TEMPO, (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl [(–OH), 4-hydroxy-TEMPO; (–SO4), TEMPO-4-sulfate; FcNCl, (ferrocenylmethyl) trimethylammonium chloride; (–NMe3), 4-trimethylammonium-TEMPO]; TCNQ, tetracyanoquinodimethane; AQ, 9,10-anthraquinone; BQ, 1,4-benzoquinone. Reprinted with permission from (a) ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, (b and c) ref. 325, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry, with slight modifications.	 

 	Fig. 23  Balancing the capacity of a redox EC electrode (“redox EC” stands for the redox-enhanced electrochemical capacitor that we refer to as a class of hybrid energy storage systems). (a) Galvanostatic charging voltage profiles for a single redox couple EC electrode with an EDLC counter electrode of equal mass, an EDLC counter electrode with four times higher mass (left), and a dual-redox EC (right). (b) GCD profiles of the devices with different combinations. The energy stored/recovered by each combination is proportional to the area under the charge/discharge profiles. (c) The total and normalized (gravimetric or volumetric) energy stored by systems are presented here. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Charge–discharge profiles of a battery, an EDLC, and a hybrid device. The area under the discharge profile of the devices reflects their energy levels. Note that charge–discharge profiles of the pseudocapacitors resemble that of a hybrid energy storage device.	 
E = nqV; 0 < n ≤ 1	(83)

 	Fig. 25  Charge–discharge profiles of two supercapacitors that deviate considerably from an ideal capacitive behavior.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the symmetric, asymmetric and hybrid configurations. (a) A symmetric supercapacitor that is constructed by using the same material for both the positive and negative electrodes. Symmetric supercapacitors commonly use carbon-based materials. Asymmetric supercapacitors cover a wide range of electrode combinations including (b) two EDLC electrodes with different materials, (c) electrodes of the same material, but with different mass loadings, (d) two pseudocapacitive electrodes with different compositions, (e) one EDLC electrode with a pseudocapacitive electrode, e.g. an activated carbon//MnO2 aqueous supercapacitor, (f) one EDLC electrode with a composite electrode (that can be a composite of carbon-based material with a metal-based species). (g) A hybrid configuration that is fabricated by using a capacitor-type negative electrode and a battery-like positive electrode, and (h) a hybrid architecture, typical of a Li ion capacitor, that is fabricated by using a battery-type negative electrode and an EDLC positive electrode.	 

 	Fig. 27  The impact of mass balancing. CV of the activated carbon in a 3E cell setup. The contributions from each of the positive and negative electrodes to the overall voltammetric signature of the device are indicated with + and − signs, respectively, and the hatched areas represent the discharge step in each electrode. PZV stands for the potential of zero voltage in which the potentials of the negative and positive electrodes are equal and the voltage of the device is zero, i.e. the supercapacitor is fully discharged. CV in a 3E cell configuration is adapted with permission from ref. 330, copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  CVs of the Cabot Monarch 1300 pigment black-poly tetrafluoroethylene (CMPB-PTFE) film electrode in a tube cell setup. Mass loading: 1.0 mg, electrolyte: 0.3 M K2SO4. The tube cell comprises two CMPB-PTFE electrodes and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The electrodes were connected to two potentiostat units to concurrently track the potential of either the positive or negative electrode against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, as well as the voltage between the positive and negative electrodes. (a) Equal and (b) unequal (C+:C− ratio of 4:3) electrode capacitances that result in 1.60 V and 1.9 V operating potential ranges, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 331, copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 
	(84)
	(85)
	(86)
	(87)
	(88)
	(89)
	(90)
	(91)
	(92)
	(93)
	(94)

 	Fig. 29  Variation of the total capacitance, eqn (89), as a function of the m+/m− ratio. The ratio of m+/m− changes from 0.01 to 10. The value of C− is fixed at 300 F g−1 as the typical capacitance of a carbon-based negative electrode active material, and the ratio of C+/C− changes from 1 to 50 by changing the value of C+ from 300 to 15000 F g−1.	 
	(95)

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustrations of the CVs of the positive and negative electrodes in a 3E cell setup (left), CV of the device, i.e. 2E cell setup (middle) and GCD profiles in both 2E and 3E cell setups (right) of rechargeable batteries (top), hybrid systems (middle), and supercapacitors (bottom). The arrows indicate the direction of the potential sweeps and the green and red traces represent the charge and discharge processes, respectively. The potential difference between a fully charged and discharged battery cell is also represented in CV. Vavg.dis. denotes the average discharge voltage of a battery. Vmin can decrease to zero in hybrid systems (dotted line in CVs) and is typically zero in supercapacitors, but not in batteries because of the possible irreversible changes to the stable operating potential windows of the positive and negative electrodes. The light gray and golden areas under the CV curves or GCD profiles correspond to charge and discharge processes, respectively.	 
Zn(s) + Cu2+(aq) ↔ Zn2+(aq) + Cu(s)	(96)

 	Fig. 31  Operating potential/voltage window (OVW). Schematic illustration of the operating potential windows of the negative and positive electrodes as well as an asymmetric device, along with the potential of zero voltage (PZV). Reproduced with permission from ref. 329 copyright 2015, Springer Nature, with slight modifications.	 
OVW = 2 × (EP2–PZV); if PZV–EN2 > EP1–PZV
OVW = 2 × (PZV–EN2); if EP1–PZV > PZV–EN2
	(97)
	(98)
	(99)
Negative pole: LiC6 → C6 + Li+ + e−	(100)
Positive pole: CoO2 + Li+ + e− → LiCoO2	(101)
	(102)
Negative pole: PbO2 + H2SO4 + 2H+ + 2e− → PbSO4 + 2H2O	(103)
Positive pole: Pb + H2SO4 → PbSO4 + 2H+ + 2e−	(104)
	(105)
	(106)
	(107)
	(108)
	(109)
	(110)
	(111)
–(An–An)n– + Cl− → –(An–An+·Cl−)n– + e−	(112)
	(113)
	(114)
	(115)
	(116)
	(117)



C
Diff.
	

	

	



C
Int
	

	

	N.A.

 	Fig. 32  Cycling stability test for a supercapacitor utilizing a mesoporous carbon black and ionic liquid electrolyte [EMIM][BF4]. (a) Cycle test with upper voltage limits of 3.5 V (open squares, green) and 3.75 V (filled circles, red). Lower voltage limit during cycling is 0.0 V. (b) Constant voltage hold tests with hold voltages of 3.5 V (open squares, green) and 3.75 V (filled circles, red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 352, copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the coulombic, energy, and voltage efficiencies of the electrochemical energy storage systems.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic illustration of self-discharge mechanisms: (a) charge redistribution is the main mechanism of self-discharge in EDLCs. Movement of ions between the Stern layer and the electrolyte and subsequently across the electrolyte due to movement of charge through the electrode active materials causes self-discharge in supercapacitors. (b) Self-discharge in redox pseudocapacitors, as well as in hybrid systems, is mainly caused by redox shuttling between charged redox species in solution (b, top magnified panel) or via cross-diffusion of charged redox couples between the oppositely charged electrodes (b, bottom magnified panel). Panel b is adapted with permission from ref. 317, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

Self-discharge due to Faradaic reactions	Activation-controlled mechanism	
V

t
 = Vi − Blog(t + θ)

B: a constant related to the Tafel slope, θ: an integration constant
Diffusion-controlled mechanism	



c
0: initial concentration of the reacting species, C: capacitance
Self-discharge due to Ohmic leakage of current	



R
L: resistance of the leakage pathway
Self-discharge due to charge redistribution	Diffusion-limited charge redistribution (e.g. diffusion of protons through the RuO2 film)	
V

t
 ∝ t1/2
Resistance-limited charge redistribution (e.g. solution resistance which limits the transfer of the ions in the pores or high electrical and ionic resistance of the MnO2 film.)	
V

t
 ∝ logt
	(118)
	(119)
	(120)
	(121)
	(122)
	(123)
	(124)
	(125)
ΓOx(t) + ΓRed(t) = ΓOx,total	(126)
	(127)

 	Fig. 35  
CV and GCD profiles of a supercapacitor and an ideal capacitor. (a) CVs derived from eqn (127) at three different potential scan rates of 10, 30, and 50 mV s−1 with an assumption that the number of electrons in the redox reaction n = 1, geometric area of the electrode A = 1.0 cm2, total surface concentration of the species Γ = 2 × 10−9 mol cm−2, and temperature T = 298 K (25 °C). (b) GCD profiles derived from eqn (124) at the indicated constant currents of i, i/2, and i/3, considering the point that θ = it/nFΓOx,total. (c) CVs of an ideal capacitor of 50 mF at three different potential scan rates of 10, 20, and 30 mV s−1, derived from eqn (128). (d) GCD profiles of a capacitor at the indicated constant currents, derived from eqn (128). Panels b, c, and d are obtained with permission from ref. 1, copyright 2016, Taylor & Francis.	 
	(128)
	(129)
	(130)
	(131)
	(132)

 	Fig. 36  Deconvolution of the capacitive and diffusion-controlled currents for reduced R-MoO3−x and fully oxidized F-MoO3 based on eqn (132). Capacitive charge storage for R-MoO3−x is 75% and that of F-MoO3 is 37%. Adapted with permission from ref. 372, copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 37  Potential/voltage window determination. (a) CV curves of activated carbon and Ni–Co–Fe layered double hydroxide (LDH) electrodes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in a three-electrode cell setup. (b) CV curves of an AC//Ni–Co–Fe LDH asymmetric supercapacitor (i.e. two-electrode cell setup) at different potential windows from 0.5 to 1.5 V at a 1 scan rate of 20 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 275, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 
	(133)

 	Fig. 38  Schematic representation of the equivalent circuit models and the corresponding CV curves of (a) an ideal electrical double layer capacitor, (b) a capacitor in parallel with a Faradaic charge transfer process, and (c) a simplified supercapacitor model comprising an ESR, Faradaic resistance, and double layer capacitor.	 
	(134)

 	Fig. 39  The effect of ESR (IR drop) on the shape of CV curves. (a) CV curves of carbonized bamboo fibers at different scan rates ranging from 1 mV s−1 to 300 mV s−1 in 3M KOH electrolyte. (b) Variation of specific capacitance as a function of scan rate in different electrolytes. (c) CV curves of a symmetric carbonized bamboo fiber-based device at different scan rates. (d) Variation of capacitance as a function of scan rate for a supercapacitor device. The steeper nature of the CV curve at the beginning of the CVs in panel (a) reflects their lower ESRs compared to the ones in panel (c). Adapted with permission from ref. 384, copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 
	(135)

 	Fig. 40  Specific power and cell voltage as a function of the cell's current density at the discharge moment at 10 s. Rct = 10000 Ω cm2, Cdl = 0.4 F cm−2, ESR = 0.05 Ω cm2, and the maximum value of voltage across the supercapacitor is 2.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 390, copyright 2013, Taylor and Francis.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) GCD profiles of a polypyrrole//self-doped polyaniline (PPy//SDPA) device at different potential windows from 0.75 to 1.5 V at a current density of 5 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KCl. The inset shows the plot of specific capacitance vs. applied voltage that increases to 98 F g−1 at an applied voltage window of 1.3 V and then starts to decrease with further increases in the voltage window. The coulombic efficiency of the system is 95% at applied voltage windows of up to 1.3 and decreases to approximately 90% at a voltage window of 1.5 V. (b) GCD profile of the PPy//SDPA device, charged up to 1.3 V as well as the GCD profiles of the individual positive and negative electrodes charged to potentials of 0.7 V and 0.6 V vs. an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, respectively. Current density is 5 mA cm−2, and the electrolyte is 1.0 M KCl. Adapted with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 
	(136)
	(137)
	(138)
	(139)
	(140)
	(141)
	(142)

 	Fig. 42  (a) Discharge profile of a supercapacitor in which the equivalent series resistance (ESR) and the equivalent distributed resistance (EDR, that represents ESR and the resistance in the pores) are indicated. GCD profiles of the positive (b) and negative (c) electrodes in a 3-electrode cell setup. The direction and the area corresponding to the charge and discharge steps are indicated in the panels.	 
	(143)
	(144)
Celectrode = 2Ccell	(145)
	(146)
	(147)
Celectrode,N = 4Ccell,N	(148)
	(149)
	(150)
	(151)
	(152)
	(153)
	(154)
	(155)
	(156)

 	Fig. 43  (a and b) GCD profiles of a nanostructured CuCo2O4 electrode at different current densities from 1 to 50 A g−1. (c) Rate capability of the system at various current densities. (d) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the system at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(157)
	(158)
	(159)
	(160)
	(161)
	(162)
Vt = V0sin(ωt)	(163)
It = I0sin(ωt + φ)	(164)
	(165)
	(166)
	(167)
Zre = |Z|cosφ	(168)
Zim = |Z|sinφ	(169)
Z = |Z|cosφ + j|Z|sinφ = |Z|(cosφ + jsinφ) = |Z|ejφ	(170)
ejφ = cosφ + jsinφ	(171)

 	Fig. 44  (a) The complex plane of the complex number Z. (b) An equivalent modified Randles’ circuit. Representation of the (c) Nyquist plot and (d) Bode plots for the modified Randles circuit simulated over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, ESR = 100 Ω, Rct = 200 Ω, a = 0.001 Ω−1 s0.8 and n = 0.8 (see eqn (195)), and Rw = 1000 Ω, X = 5000, and α = 0.5 (see eqn (193)). The parameters that can be extracted from the Nyquist and Bode plots are presented in the figures. The points marked with I–III in the Bode phase (circles) and magnitude (diamonds) plots are obtained from the I–III vectors presented in the Nyquist plot. φ is obtained from the angle that each vector makes with the x-axis and |Z| is the length of the vector.	 
Vt = V0sin(ωt + θ); V = V0ejθ	(172)
It = I0sin(ωt + φ); I = I0ejφ	(173)
	(174)
	(175)
	(176)
	(177)
ej(−90°) = cos(−90°) + jsin(−90°) = −j	(178)
	(179)
	(180)
	(181)

 	Fig. 45  Simulated Nyquist plot (a) and Bode magnitude and phase plots (b) of a resistor in series with a capacitor over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, R = 100 Ω, and C = 0.01 F. The inset of panel (a) shows the equivalent circuit. Points a–k in the Nyquist and Bode plots are equivalent and correspond to the log frequencies of 6, 4.5, 2.8, 1.1, 0.4, −0.12, −0.75, −1.3, −1.8, −2.4, and −3, respectively. Note that the Nyquist plot masks the high-frequency response where impedance is low, whereas the Bode plots, which are representations in the log frequency domain, provide a much better resolution for the high-frequency data.	 
	(182)
	(183)
	(184)
	(185)
	(186)
	(187)

 	Fig. 46  Simulated Nyquist plot (a) and Bode plots (b) of a resistor in parallel with a capacitor over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, R = 100 Ω, and C = 0.01 F. The inset of panel (a) shows the equivalent circuit.	 

 	Fig. 47  Three equivalent circuits that are commonly used for the description of supercapacitors (a–c). The circuit elements are as follows: ESR, the equivalent series resistance of the cell; Cdl, the double layer capacitance; Rct, the charge transfer resistance corresponding to the process of charging the pseudocapacitor through an electron transfer process; CPC, pseudocapacitance; and RL, the leakage resistance.	 
	(188)

 	Fig. 48  Simulation of the Nyquist plots with different values of Cdl and RL. Simulated Nyquist plots of the equivalent circuit presented in Fig. 47a showing the effect of (a) Cdl with three different values of 1, 0.3, and 0.01 F and (b) RL with three different values of 5, 50, and 5000 Ω on the shape of the resulting Nyquist plots. The magnitudes of the other parameters used to simulate these plots are shown on the plots.	 
	(189)
	(190)
	(191)
	(192)
	(193)
	(194)
ZCPE = a−1(jω)−n	(195)


−1	Inductance	
L
−1
	Ω−1 s−1
0	Resistance	
R
−1
	Ω−1
0.5	Warburg element	
σ
−1
	Ω s−1/2
1	Capacitance	
C
	
F = Ω−1 s
	(196)
	(197)
	(198)

 	Fig. 49  The impact of Warburg and CPE elements on EIS spectra. Simulated Nyquist (a and c) and Bode plots (b and d) of the modified Randles circuit with different values of Warburg element (a and b) and CPE (c and d) over the frequency range from 1 MHz to 1 mHz, ESR = 100 Ω, Rct = 200 Ω, n = 0.8, X = 100, and α = 0.5. Please see eqn (193) and (195) for the definition of the parameters. In the Bode plots, the solid curves are for the phase angle vs. logf plot and the dashed curves are for the logZ vs. logf plot.	 
Z = Zs + Zdl	(199)
Zs = Rs	(200)
	(201)
	(202)
	(203)
	(204)
	(205)
	(206)
	(207)
	(208)

 	Fig. 50  Schematic representation of a Nyquist plot for EDLC electrodes/devices. RA stands for ESR, and RBC is ascribed to EDR. Note that there are multiple interpretations of the RA, RB, RAB, RC, and RBC values for the details of which the readers are referred to ref. 340 from which the scheme has been obtained. Adapted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. The inset shows a schematic representation of the Nyquist plot of an ideal capacitor (line 1) and an electrochemical capacitor with porous electrodes (line 2). Adapted with permission from ref. 416, copyright 2000, Elsevier, with slight modifications.	 

 	Fig. 51  Nyquist plots of various graphite G31 electrodes with (A) the same mass loading (5.8 mg cm−2), but different densities in the range from 1.01 to 1.60 g cm−3. P, the electrode porosity, is a dimensionless parameter indicating the fraction of void volume in the electrode, (B) the same porosity (P = 0.54) but different thicknesses from 22 to 150 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 415, copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 
	(209)
	(210)
	(211)

 	Fig. 52  (a) Nyquist plots of two titanium nitride (TiN) devices derived from 20 and 50 nm atomic layer deposition of TiO2 named TiN-20 and TiN-50, respectively. The inset shows the zoomed-in view of the Nyquist plots in the high-frequency region. (b) The Bode phase plot versus frequency of the TiN devices in comparison with a commercial electrolytic capacitor and an activated carbon (AC) supercapacitor. Adapted with permission from ref. 424, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., with slight modifications.	 
	(212)
	(213)
	(214)
	(215)
	(216)
Ctotal = CDL + CFaradaic + CSelf-dis.	(217)

 	Fig. 53  Step potential electrochemical spectroscopy (SPECS) analysis for decoupling the contribution from different sources to the overall current. Example of the step potential electrochemical spectroscopy current response for an electrolytic manganese dioxide electrode in a 0.5 M K2SO4 electrolyte with a step potential from rest potential to 1.3 V and a rest period of 300 s for equilibration. The inset displays the de-convolution of the fitted data into current from double layer capacitance of the geometric (DL geometric) and porous surface area (DL porous), as well as the current related to the diffusion-controlled processes (diffusional). Reproduced with permission from ref. 373, copyright 2018, Electrochemical Society Inc., with modification.	 

 	Fig. 54  Leakage current analysis. A simple equivalent circuit for a pseudocapacitor with (a) and without (b) the leakage current, and the corresponding current transient of the system in response to a potential step from Vi to Vf.	 
	(218)
	(219)
	(220)

 	Fig. 55  Ragone plots for the same supercapacitors on a gravimetric (a) and volumetric (b) basis. The plots show that excellent properties of ultrathin films (with extremely high apparent specific power and energy values) will not translate to medium- and large-scale devices with thicker films and larger mass loadings. Adapted with permission from ref. 2, copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 56  Mechanical tests of the devices. (a) Schematic representation of an all-solid-state integrated supercapacitor based on a polyaniline–SWCNT–sponge. (b) The patterns for assembling four supercapacitors into one unit in series. Real-time photographs of the resultant four supercapacitors in series showing the performance of the device assembly in (c) free, (d) compressed, and (e) uncompressed states. (f) The shape memory process of a solid-state shape memory asymmetric supercapacitor induced by touching with a human wrist. PTT: phase transition temperature. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of an aligned CNT/Si composite fiber electrode used for a fiber-shaped Li-ion battery. (h) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a super-stretchy fiber-shaped Li-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from (a–e) ref. 445, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., (f) ref. 446, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., (g) ref. 447, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co., and (h) ref. 448, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(221)
	(222)
	(223)
	(224)

 	Fig. 57  Stress–Strain plot. (a) A typical tensile specimen, showing a reduced gage section and enlarged shoulders. For a proper test, the length of the transition region, x, should be equal to or greater than the diameter, and the total length of the reduced section should be at least four times the diameter. (b) A typical stress–strain curve for a material undergoing tensile strain testing.	 

 	Fig. 58  Fabrication and characterization of flexible LSG/MnO2 electrodes. (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the LSG–MnO2 electrodes. (b) Variation of the resistance of an LSG–MnO2 electrode as a function of bending radius both in concave and convex configuration. (c) The change in resistance of an LSG–MnO2 electrode under repeated bending cycles for a concave bending radius of 5 mm. The inset photograph shows the flexibility of an LSG–MnO2 electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2015, National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 59  Stretchability test of the graphene paper. Photographs of the procedure for crumpling graphene paper (a–c) and the corresponding SEM images (d–f): photograph (a) and SEM image (d) of a flat graphene paper bonded on a biaxially pre-stretched (εpre1 = εpre2 = 400%) elastomer film. Photographs (b and c) and SEM images (e and f) of the microscopic patterns formed in the graphene paper after the biaxially pre-stretched elastomeric substrate is uniaxially (b and e) and biaxially (c and f) relaxed to parallel ridges (e) and crumpled patterns (f), respectively. CV curves at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 (g) and gravimetric capacitance at different charge/discharge current densities from 0.5 to 80 A g−1 (h) of the crumpled-graphene-paper electrodes subjected to uniaxial strains of 0%, 100%, 200%, and 300%. (i) CV curves of the crumpled-graphene-paper electrodes subjected to biaxial strains of 0% × 0% and 200% × 200%. Adapted with permission from ref. 453, copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

A
	Area (cm2)

a
	Frequency-independent constant in CPE

C
	Capacitance (F)/capacity (A h)

C
dl
	Double layer capacitance (F)

C
PC
	Pseudocapacitance (F)
CV	Cyclic voltammetry

d
	Distance (m)

E
	Electrode potential (V)

E
	Energy (W h)/specific energy or energy density (W h g−1, W h cm−2, W h cm−3, …)
EDLC	Electric double layer capacitors
EES	Electrochemical energy storage
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ESR	Equivalent series resistance (Ω)

ε
0
	Permittivity or the dielectric constant of air (F m−1)

ε
r
	Permittivity or the dielectric constant

F
	Faradays’ constant (C mol−1)

f
	Conventional frequency (Hz)

G
	Gibbs free energy (J mol−1)
GCD	Galvanostatic charge/discharge

η
	Coulombic efficiency

I
	Current (A)/specific current (A g−1)/current density (A cm−2)

φ
	Phase angle

M
	Molecular weight (g mol−1)

m
	Mass of active material (g)

P
	Power (W)/specific power or power density (W g−1, W cm−2, W cm−3,…)

q
	Charge (Coulomb, C)

R
ct
	Charge transfer resistance (Ω)

R
L
	Leakage resistance (Ω)

σ
	Warburg coefficient

t
	Time (s)

V
	Cell voltage (V)

ω
	Angular frequency (rad s−1)

Z
	Impedance

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
