Organic semiconductors for artificial vision  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TB20213E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TB20213E
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3768-3780Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOrganic semiconductors for artificial vision

        
          
            N. 
            Martino
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            D. 
            Ghezzi
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            F. 
            Benfenati
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Lanzani
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            M. R. 
            Antognazza
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Nanoscience and Technology @PoliMi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via Pascoli 70/3, 20133 Milan, Italy. E-mail: mariarosa.antognazza@iit.it
bPolitecnico di Milano, Dip.to di Fisica, P.zza L. Da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
cIstituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
Received 
      14th February 2013
    , Accepted 11th April 2013First published on 11th April 2013AbstractOrganic semiconductors have emerged in the past two decades as promising materials for many technological applications. Thanks to their unique optoelectronic properties, they represent an ideal system to mimic natural photoreceptor functioning. This similarity has been exploited, on one hand, to realize organic-based devices for image detection, taking advantage of typical features of natural visual systems, such as trichromatic sensing; on the other hand, these materials can be interfaced with biological tissues for cell photo-stimulation, with the main goal of restoring light sensitivity in the case of retinas affected by photoreceptor degeneration.N. MartinoNicola Martino obtained his master's degree in Physics Engineering at Politecnico di Milano in 2010, with a study on microspectroscopy of organic semiconductors. He is currently a PhD Student at the Center for Nano Science and Technology of the Italian Institute of Technology in Milan. His main interests are the study of the optoelectronic properties of organic semiconductors, mainly through optical spectroscopy techniques, and their use as active materials in hybrid interfaces with biological systems.D. GhezziDiego Ghezzi graduated in Biomedical Engineering in 2004 and obtained his PhD in Bioengineering in 2008. Currently, he holds a post-doc position at Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Genova, Italy). His work interests range from hard- and soft-technologies to bionics, brain technologies and physiology. He is an expert in optical stimulation and optogenetics combined with electrophysiology. For 3 years, he has been involved in a long-term project involving the use of organic semiconducting polymers to restore light sensitivity in degenerate retinas, with the final aim of providing and implanting a fully organic artificial photoreceptor layer.F. BenfenatiFabio Benfenati is the director of the Department for Neuroscience and Brain Technology at the Italian Institute of Technology in Genova and Full Professor of Physiology at the University of Genova. His scientific background is in cellular neurophysiology; he is an internationally acknowledged expert in the molecular mechanisms of synaptic communication and the problem of how neurons can change synaptic strength to adapt to diverse environmental situations. He has recently used the most advanced electrophysiological and optical techniques to study the cellular mechanisms of neural plasticity and create neurohybrid interfaces with inorganic and organic substrates that stimulate and/or compute neuronal activity.G. LanzaniGuglielmo Lanzani is the head of the Center for Nano Science and Technology of the Italian Institute of Technology and full professor in physics at Politecnico di Milano. His research involves the photophysics of conjugated carbon materials (organic semiconductors, polyconjugated compounds and carbon nanotubes) and nanostructures, including devices and applications, as reported in more than 200 papers. Leading activities are on solar energy conversion and artificial retina.M. R. AntognazzaMaria Rosa Antognazza obtained the Laurea degree in physics from Università degli Studi of Milano and the PhD degree in Physics from Politecnico of Milano. She is now a Research Technologist at the Center for Nano Science and Technology in Milan. Her main research interests concern the optical spectroscopy of organic semiconductors and the realization and electro-optical characterization of organic devices for biological applications, with a special focus on artificial retinal prosthesis.
1 Introduction – retina, eye and vision
Vision in primates is a complex process starting with the representation of the external world in an image onto the retina, at the back of the eye.1 The retina is part of the central nervous system and consists of multiple layers of neurons (Fig. 1, top) with highly specialized functions.2 The outer layer is populated by the input elements, namely the photoreceptors, which transduce the optical image into a pattern of electric activity. The innermost layer is formed by ganglion cells, which are the final pathway connecting the retina to the brain through their axons constituting the optic nerve. These two layers are interconnected by an intricate network of bipolar, horizontal and amacrine cells that are involved in early processing of the visual information. The optic nerve conveys the retinal output to the visual cortex, where an intricate elaboration leads to visual perception.
 Fig. 1  
Top panel: section through the human eye with a schematic magnification of the retinal layers, reprinted from ref. 5 and 73. Bottom panel: spectral responsivities of the natural photoreceptors: S, M, and L cones (solid lines) and rods (dashed line), reprinted from ref. 7. 
As a whole the retina can be considered as a camera with integrated signal pre-processing electronics. However, it should be noted that the order of the retinal layers is the opposite to what any engineer would ever do, since signal processing equipment is just in front of the photo-detectors. As a consequence of this geometry, which is shared by most mammals with vision characterized by medium/high resolution and color sensing, light has to pass through the retinal layers before reaching the photoreceptors. On the other hand, this architecture facilitates the interactions between the photoreceptors and the retinal pigmented epithelium, which plays an essential role in providing nutrients to photoreceptors and in recycling of photoreceptor outer segments. Moreover, it also has the important function of absorbing scattered photons not converted by the photoreceptors. Despite the number of interfaces that light rays shall pass before reaching the photoreceptors (i.e. cornea, lens, vitreous and inner retinal layers), the eye has a remarkable small loss of intensity, estimated in the range of 10–20%.3 It has been recently proposed that Mueller cells (a type of glial cells present in the retina), which span the entire retina thickness, behave like natural waveguides thus contributing to the efficient light transmission across the retinal layers.4
The human retina contains two types of photoreceptors, rods and cones, approximately in a ratio 120:1, respectively.5 Cones are distributed radially from the fovea, a disc of few millimeters in diameter, in a peculiar log-polar geometry. They are small (2.3 μm) and closely packed in the fovea and become sparse and larger (10 μm) in the periphery. This arrangement provides an important benefit. The human eye has a broad field of view, covering 150 degrees horizontally and 120 vertically, and yet 1/60 degree resolution when focusing on a spot. Such a modulation of the resolution power allows catching details when needed, while preserving the broad field of view without overloading the connecting system and the brain. The broad view is required for early spotting of moving objects on the larger possible field, as a warning, security or hunting feature. This is a distinguished advantage in evolution. In fact, keeping the highest possible resolution over the entire field of view, in a “Cartesian” array (like in any commercial camera), would require a 104 times larger brain,6 without any evident and successful advantage in survival.
Cones are responsible, although less sensitive than rods, for daily color vision through the so-called trichromatic vision. Three sub-types of cones have been identified, namely S-, M- and L-, with different spectral responses,7 in the blue, green and red wavelength regions respectively (Fig. 1, bottom). However, a unique chromophore is present in all cones, namely retinal, and the spectral tuning of the light response is achieved by modifying the local environment around the retinal molecule. During daylight activity, the more sensitive rods are saturated, while under dim light they become active and cones become insensitive. Rods come in one type only, do not provide color vision, as we are used to noticing in moonlight, and have lower spatial resolution with respect to foveal vision. Because rods are not present in the fovea, a dim light can better be seen gazing at an angle. This trick was adopted by early spectroscopists who detected weak light signals by the eye. The practice led sometime to misconception such as the hypothesized form of radiation called N-rays. It was initially confirmed by many experiments, but subsequently found to be illusory.8
The amazing characteristics of human vision have encouraged the realization of devices and technologies mimicking its features. Photographic cameras, for instance, are obviously inspired by the eye. Other areas of applications based on vision are colorimetry, imaging, color printing and video projection. Recently, even the space distribution of the photoreceptors has been included into the design of special cameras. Such log-polar photodiode arrays may be used in early warning, security camera, video surveillance systems and robots, where the volume of the wiring connections is a serious issue.9 On the other hand, bio-mimetic technology can also be exploited to restore functions in the case of impairments to the visual system. In particular, Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) and Macular Degeneration (MD) represent the main causes of legal blindness in the western world, related to the degeneration of the photoreceptor layer. Implants able to substitute degenerate photoreceptors and to excite retinal output neurons can thus in principle restore visual perception.10 This can be achieved by pre-processing an image recorded with an external camera to control an array of electrodes implanted in the retina, or by an intrinsically photosensitive implant able to transduce the optical energy into electric stimuli.
Bio-inspired applications can be based on many materials. For the purpose of this review, however, we are considering only semiconductors, since they can be both electrically and optically active, thus mimicking both characteristics of photoreceptors. Inorganic semiconductors, like silicon, are at the basis of the vast majority of electronic components presently in use; they are characterized by very high efficiencies and good stability in time. Organic semiconductors, however, do have specific advantages in some applications. They comprise single crystals, small molecules and conjugated polymers (CPs). They are based on conjugated carbon atoms, similar to natural molecules (and retinal molecule in particular), thereby bearing an intrinsic affinity to biological systems. They have π-electrons delocalized along their backbone that induce strong coupling with light; indeed, many optically active compounds in nature are based on conjugated carbons (e.g. carotenoids and chlorophylls in light harvesting complexes) and the most successful applications of organic semiconductors are dealing with light (e.g. organic light-emitting diodes, displays and lightning). Since their optical band-gap is in the visible range and can be properly engineered by chemical tailoring, CPs are intrinsically sensitive to visible light, and a proper selection of materials allows the realization of trichromatic sensing. In particular, CPs combine the outstanding mechanical properties and simple processing technologies typical of plastic with the opto-electronic properties of semiconductors. Because of their inherent softness and low degree of toxicity, they represent excellent biocompatible materials for biological applications, both in vitro and in vivo, allowing for a more intimate interface with a liquid bioenvironment. Finally, CPs are able to conduct both electrons and ions and form stable interfaces with water, opening a new communication channel between electronics and biology.11
For all these reasons, CPs are optimal candidates for some specific applications, such as biologically inspired artificial visual systems and prosthetic implants.
In this review, we focus on the use of CPs for light detection in bio-mimetic and biological applications. First, we give an overview of organic-based devices for visual imaging and color sensing applications (Section 2), specifically focusing our attention on biologically inspired systems. At the end of the section, novel photo-detectors, based on hybrid polymer–electrolyte interfaces and able to work in a biological environment, are also introduced. Then, Section 3 reports a novel technique, based on the use of CPs, for the optical activation of neuronal cells. Promising results for the fabrication of a polymer-based retinal prosthesis are highlighted in Section 4. Finally, present challenges, possible improvements and future developments are critically discussed in Section 5.
2 Biologically inspired light detection applications
2.1 Image detection
In the past few years, CPs have been used in a variety of optoelectronic devices, reaching sometimes the high level of maturity required for the commercial distribution, as in the case of organic light emitting diodes used in monitors, screens and displays, or focusing enormous efforts at a research stage, as in the case of solar cells. In the field of image detection, the organic technology represents a much more cost-effective approach, as compared to inorganic technology. Highly sensitive organic photo-detectors (OPDs) and image sensors have been extensively exploited in various configurations12 (Fig. 2a–d). Heeger and his collaborators13–15 realized arrays of polymeric photo-detectors with a quantum efficiency of 45% at −10 V, thus demonstrating the possible and reliable use of CPs in photo-detection. Moreover, a large area image sensor covering the visible spectral range from 400 nm to 700 nm and based on the blend poly(3-octylthiophene)/(6,6)-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3OT/PCBM) was demonstrated to have true-color resolution; the red, green and blue primary colors were achieved by coupling the polymer sensor with a set of color filters. A process for recovering the image from the pixelated photocurrent data was developed and large size color images were successfully scanned by the linear array of polymer photodiodes. After that, other polymer image sensors were proposed, with sensing areas of few tens of square centimeters and thousand pixels.16 A flexible and lightweight image scanner was fabricated on a plastic film by integrating organic transistors and OPDs.17
 Fig. 2  Examples of polymer-based imagers, both on planar and flexible substrates. (a) Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 21), copyright 2009; (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 14, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA; (c) reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 19), copyright 2012; (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics. (e) Realization of biologically inspired artificial eyes, made possible by the adoption of the organic technology, from ref. 23, reprinted with permission from AAAS, and from ref. 25, reprinted with permission from Elsevier. 
Another potential approach for image detection has been developed by combining OPDs, as light sensitive components, with amorphous silicon thin-film transistor circuitry. A detector consisting of 256 × 256 pixels was realized and characterized by excellent figures of merit: fill factor close to 100%, external quantum efficiency up to 60%, dark current lower than 7 × 10−6 mA cm−2, and high signal to noise ratios.18 Very recently, a novel, hybrid organic–inorganic imager device has been reported, in which CPs, deposited by low-cost spray coating techniques, replace the silicon photodiodes and cover a conventional CMOS-pixel array as a continuous film, without further structuring.19
In most recent years, efforts have also been focused on the realization of organic sensor arrays with sensitivity over wider spectral regions, trying to move towards the near infrared (NIR) region. Current NIR sensors can distinguish more than what a human eye can see, but require a sophisticated cooling system. Many animals (like snakes, vampire bats and several insects) are characterized by a NIR vision capability, without any need for a cooling system. This is one example of how it is primarily nature's designs that are superior to man-made equivalents. High detectivity photo-detectors based on a low-band gap polymer poly(5,7-bis(4-decanyl-2-thienyl)-thieno(3,4-b)diathiazole-thiophene-2,5) (PDDTT) doped with PCBM with a broad spectral response up to 1450 nm and working at room temperature were demonstrated by Gong et al.20
Another possible approach based on hybrid organic–inorganic devices has been initially reported in ref. 21: the active layer is a common organic bulk-heterojunction, sensitized by nanocrystalline quantum dots, and integrated with amorphous silicon active matrix backplanes. By this approach, it is possible to obtain spectral responsivities of up to 1.8 μm, rectification ratios of ∼6000, lifetimes longer than one year, external quantum efficiencies up to 51% (at −5 V), and temporal responses suitable for bio-imaging applications.
2.2 Anthropomorphic visual arrays
The human eye-ball provides a quasi-ideal imaging system: it is compact and simple, possesses a wide field of view free of image distortion, and has a very low f-number22 due to the use of only two lens elements. This type of configuration is extremely difficult to be achieved using established optoelectronic technologies, due to the intrinsically planar nature of the patterning, deposition, etching, material growth and doping methods.23,24 In fact, commercial camera systems employ multiple, high f-number lens elements to create a distortion-free image on a flat focal or film plane.
Nowadays, technological advances in the realization of flexible organic photodiodes allow building of anthropomorphic detectors mimicking the form and function of the eye through the fabrication of a matrix of micrometric photo-detectors onto a three-dimensional (3D) curved surface. Several examples of such architecture have been reported in the literature (Fig. 2e). Forrest and co-workers25,26 demonstrated the patterning of indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes with micrometer resolution and fabricated an organic (copper phthalocyanine/C60) array of planar photo-detectors (100 pixels) onto a hemispherical plastic surface, with a curvature radius of 1 cm. Biologically inspired compound eyes, geometrically and functionally very similar to those found in nature (e.g., the honeybee eye), were also realized by Lee et al.23,27 by 3D polymer synthesis. The artificial ommatidium consisted of a refractive polymer microlens, a curved-shape polymer cone, and a self-aligned polymer waveguide to collect light. Other examples of organic-based image sensors on flexible substrates are also reported,28,29 based on pentacene and the polymer blend poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene-vinylene] (MEH-PPV):PCBM, respectively.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that OPD performances are directly comparable to the current state of the art detectors, particularly commercial a-Si detectors, opening a number of new, low-cost solutions in the field of visible photo-detection, imaging and biological applications. Compared with conventional photo-detectors, OPDs display higher sensitivity, wider dynamic range, broader spectral range and better responsivity.30 Moreover, currently available deposition technologies allow fabrication of biologically inspired optical structures, closely mimicking smart solutions found in nature.
2.3 Color sensing
Colorimetry is the science of measuring colors:31 this is a complex task, mainly because the unique ‘physical’ characterization of light does not correspond to a unique perception of color by a human observer. The goal of colorimetry is to provide an objective, quantitative and repeatable evaluation of color, matching a standardized human perception. To quantitatively characterize the color of an object, three independent sensors are needed, similar to the natural three-chromatic vision, peculiar to primates. The most obvious choice seems to be represented by the action spectra of the three retinal cones, but colorimetry was developed as a science much before than the spectral sensitivity of human cones was experimentally measured.32,33 For this reason, on the basis of statistical data, the International Commission for Eclairage defined in 1932 a ‘standard observer’, characterized by three Color Matching Functions (CMF), and this system is still the one used in the colorimetric practice. Without entering into details that are beyond the scope of this review, we notice that the most common commercial colorimeters are all based on silicon photodiodes, whose spectral response is properly corrected by color filters, to reproduce the standard observer CMF. In most cases, a post-processing algorithm (matrixing and demosaicing) converts the measured signals into the conventional tristimulus space, allowing the expression of the object color in terms of three numeric coordinates. The detection and measurement of true colors are thus based on indirect methods, and on a color system quite different from the natural one. In addition, sets of metameric colors vary in a considerable way among different sets of photoreceptors: this implies that different combinations of the reflected light from two (different) objects can produce an equivalent receptor response, i.e. the same color perception, in a specific color system, but not in another one (e.g.: in an artificial system and in the natural system).
State-of-the-art organic imaging systems (Section 2.2) have been realized with only one active material, thus allowing only black and white detection unless tuning their spectral response by color filter arrays. The use of organic materials now opens new possibilities in color vision and colorimetry: the possibility to chemically engineer their spectral band gap allows direct mimicking of the retinal three-chromatic vision, with several benefits.
First, it provides a much closer output to the natural photoreception, permitting a more direct and retina-like signal analysis and re-elaboration; second, it offers a simple and direct response to the problem of metamerism; third, it avoids the use of filters, thus being more suitable for bio-integration. Based on this concept, a bio-inspired color-sensing device, working with the tristimulus approach, has been reported in ref. 34. The original system comprised three photodiodes based on three distinct organic semiconductors: in this way the detection and measurement of the color of an object without any spectral filtering, at a discrete level of accuracy, could be demonstrated. Other approaches have been reported based on adjustment of both thickness and applied voltage,35 and on a stacked structure of three organic photodetectors, individually sensitive to the primary colors.36 Even the spectral responsivity of a single polymer photodetector can be tuned over a wide spectral region by changing the active layer thickness.37 An interesting development of this concept has recently led to the fabrication of a single-polymer pixel array, yet capable of multicolor sensing. The smart design does not require any color filtering and works without external bias; instead it is based on an appropriate thickness of the active polymer layer that results in a characteristic polarity and temporal profile of the photovoltage signal in response to various incident colors.38 Interestingly, the authors highlight nice similarities between the device characteristics and certain biological systems, such as purple membrane proteins, photosynthetic membranes with chlorophyll and, even more strikingly, mammalian retinas.
2.4 Organic photo-detectors working in biological environments
Cells live in an ion rich watery environment. Ionic transport is a key phenomenon in cell metabolism and signaling, mediated by pumps and ion channels. Thus, the use of organic photo-detectors in medical and biological applications raises an important issue in the design of bio-organic interfaces: the intimate contact between the organic semiconductor and the physiological liquid environment. In addition, the liquid electrolyte challenges organic device survival, as degradation of the metal electrode is greatly accelerated in a liquid environment. A solution to the latter problem is the realization of devices in which the metal electrode is substituted by aqueous saline solutions (Fig. 3). It is clear that hybrid solid–liquid interfaces play a key role in bio-organic electronics, and a number of studies aiming at characterizing such an interface have been reported.39–41 Aqueous solutions have been extensively used as gate electrodes in field-effect transistors for biological sensing, demonstrating, in some cases, optimal electronic performances and outstanding biocompatibility properties; a detailed report of such studies, not involving optical excitation, is beyond the goal of this review, and we refer the readers to the specialized literature.11
 Fig. 3  Realization of hybrid solid–liquid photodetectors able to work for multicolor sensing under biological conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2011, and ref. 43, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Restricting the field to photo-sensing devices, several conjugated polymers have been demonstrated to work as active layers in direct contact with liquid electrolytes.38,42–44 In these examples, the device structure comprises an anodic contact (usually ITO) covered by the organic photosensitive layer and a saline electrolyte. Reported materials include regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (rr-P3HT), poly[N-90-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(40,70-di-2-thienyl-20,10,30-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT), P3OT, poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT), MEH-PPV, poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV), poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) as photoactive polymers, and poly{[N,N0-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,50-(2,20-bithiophene)} (N2200) and PCBM as electron acceptors. Various electrolytes can be used for the saline solution, such as sodium iodide, sodium and potassium chloride, and sodium bromide. For direct interfacing to living cells, sodium chloride is the most interesting case, since it represents the most abundant component of the biological extracellular fluids and of any cell culture medium. Indeed, the same device configuration shows the generation of a photocurrent in the presence of common culturing and buffering media such as Dulbecco's modified Minimal Essential Medium or buffered Krebs–Ringer's solutions. The main difference between hybrid and conventional OPDs is related to interface phenomena between the polymer film and the electrolyte: in the hybrid device the conductance type changes from mainly electronic to ionic; in the solid-state cell, the mechanism is that of a standard Schottky barrier photodiode. The equilibrium conditions at the interface are qualitatively similar: chemical potential (Fermi level) is equalized by charge transport across the interface. Yet the microscopic setting is dramatically different. In the solid device charge carrier migration leads to space charge separation across the interface generating local electric fields that cause band bending. In the hybrid system, ion adsorption at the surface competes with charge transfer, also mediated by chemical reactions. A dipole layer forms at the surface, while a diffused ion layer spreads in the solution (i.e. Helmholtz layer).
In general, hybrid photodetectors offer the opportunity to directly investigate the semiconducting polymer–electrolyte interface phenomena that appear interesting for multiple applications, such as photoelectrochemical cells, electrolyte-gated field effect transistors, electrochemical transistors, tandem photovoltaic cells and dye-sensitized solar cells. More specifically, they have a noticeable potential in the field of neuromorphic engineering for the development of artificial neural systems, whose design principles are based on those of biological nervous systems, as well as in bio-inspired light-harvesting systems, highlighted in the following section.
3 Molecular materials for photo-control of neural activity
The most common strategies to control electrical activity in excitable cells are based on electrical (e.g. deep brain stimulation, cochlear implants, retinal prostheses and functional electrical stimulation) or chemical (e.g. growth factor release, local release of neurotransmitter or neuroactive drugs) stimulation. However, in recent years, techniques relying on optical stimuli are emerging as promising alternatives with peculiar advantages over more traditional methods,45–47 particularly for the high degree of temporal and spatial resolution that can be achieved. Light-induced excitation of neural tissue can be obtained directly48–50 with high-intensity pulsed lasers or IR illumination, relying on distinct mechanisms such as local poration of the cell membrane,50 exploitation of endogenous chromophores51 or heating.52 However, most of the research in the field is based on sensitization of cells to light stimuli by means of exogenous chromophores.53–55 The most successful technique based on this concept is optogenetics,56,57 in which, cells are made sensitive to light by the genetic expression of light-sensitive proteins, able to modulate their biological activity. In particular, expression of light-gated ion-channels or pumps (e.g., channelrhodopsins-2 and halorhodopsin, respectively) allows the precise control of cell excitation and inhibition.58,59 An alternative method exploits the use of caged compounds, such as glutamate or GABA that can be activated by removal of the caging group after photon absorption.60–62 A complete discussion of these techniques is however beyond the scope of this review.
Another way to optically excite biological systems is to exploit the optoelectronic properties of semiconducting materials.63–65 It has been demonstrated that the photocurrent generated by a silicon chip kept at reverse bias is able to stimulate electrical activity in neurons grown on top of it.66,67 Pappas et al. obtained similar results by using a thin film of semiconducting HgTe nanoparticles.68
Organic semiconductors are also being investigated as active interfaces with live cells. The biocompatibility of organic semiconductors, both molecular and polymeric materials, has been reported in various studies. Biscarini and co-workers69 demonstrated the adhesion and growth of primary rat neurons on pentacene thin-films. While on the bare semiconductor cells rapidly aggregated into large assemblies, when pentacene was coated with adhesion molecules (e.g., laminin or poly-L-lysine) the growth of neurons was comparable to that observed on glass substrates coated with the same molecules (Fig. 4a and b). It is however to be noted that more recent studies suggest that the nanoscale morphology of the pentacene layer, which controls its hydrophilicity properties, can promote adhesion and differentiation of neural stem cells also in the absence of adhesion coatings.70 Moreover, pentacene proved to be a suitable substrate also for the adhesion and differentiation of neural stem cells. Studies on the biocompatibility of polymeric semiconductors were first performed by Scarpa et al.71 with mouse fibroblasts grown onto P3HT films. Also in this case, the bare film proved to be a poor substrate for cellular cultures; however, after treatment with adhesion proteins or oxygen plasma, cell adhesion and growth significantly increased (Fig. 4c and d). Successively, Ghezzi et al. prepared cultures of primary rat hippocampal neurons onto both P3HT:PCBM blends72 and pure P3HT73 films coated with poly-L-lysine, observing no difference in vitality up to 28 days in vitro with respect to cultures on control substrates.
 Fig. 4  Phase contrast images of primary neural cells on bare pentacene (a) and poly-L-lysine coated pentacene (b) 24 hours after plating. Mouse fibroblasts cultured on bare P3HT (c) or collagen-coated P3HT (d), reproduced with permission from ref. 69 and 71, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA. 
Only very recently organic semiconductors have been proposed as photoactive materials in bio-interfaces. In 2011 we demonstrated that an organic photovoltaic blend (namely P3HT:PCBM) coated on a transparent ITO conducting layer is able to elicit electrical activity in primary neurons grown on top of it upon photo-stimulation.72 By recording membrane potentials by means of whole-cell patch-clamp under current-clamp configuration, it was shown that a 20 ms green light pulse (532 nm, 10–15 mW mm−2) (where P3HT is strongly absorbing) evoked the generation of action potentials in neurons with great reproducibility (Fig. 5a). The response time was very rapid (around ten milliseconds to reach the peak of the spike) and the photo-stimulation process was highly spatially selective: if the light spot was moved just outside the cell body, no significant activity could be elicited in the neuron (Fig. 5b). The photo-physics of the photovoltaic blend used in this study suggest a role for bulk charge photo-generation in the excitation mechanism. However, it has been found that the same transduction process of light pulses into neuronal electrical activity is obtained by using a neat P3HT film (deposited on ITO).73 This observation indicates that the functioning of such a hybrid interface can be quite different from that of conventional organic photovoltaic devices (P3HT only solar cells have much lower efficiencies than bulk-heterojunction cells with PCBM) and that faradaic currents, injected in the cleft between the device and the neuron, are not relevant. Indeed, a large body of experimental evidence suggests the presence of a capacitive coupling between the organic layer and the neuron grown on top of it. The proposed model assumes that upon photon absorption, positive charges generated in the proximity of the ITO electrode migrate into it, leaving the polymer layer negatively charged. The negative surface causes a rearrangement of the ions in the cleft, subtracting positive charges from the extracellular face of the facing cell membrane, eventually resulting in the depolarization of the cell membrane. The high spatial and temporal resolution of the photo-excitation, together with the good biocompatibility properties demonstrated for the organic semiconductors, open the way to potential applications in the field of retinal prosthetics.
 Fig. 5  A P3HT layer is able to induce neuronal firing and to restore light sensitivity in explanted blind retinas. Panel a: generation of action potentials in primary neurons cultured on P3HT:PCBM substrates upon photostimulation by a train of 20 ms per pulses at 1 Hz (green bars). Panel b: spatial selectivity of the photostimulating organic interface: a grid of 9 spots (diameter 20 μm) was overlaid to a patched neuron and the spike counts were used to calculate PSTHs (bins 10 ms) shown in the 9 adjacent fields (reprinted from ref. 72). Panel c: comparison of mean peri-stimulus time histograms obtained from control retinas on glass:ITO (black bars), degenerate retinas on glass:ITO (open bars) and degenerate retinas on P3HT-coated glass:ITO (red bars) in response to light illumination (10 ms, 4 mW mm−2; green arrow). Panel d: dose–response analysis of the mean (±s.e.m.) firing rate versus light intensity performed in degenerate retinas over P3HT-coated glass:ITO (red circles) or glass:ITO alone (open circles) (reprinted from ref. 73). 
4 The molecular way to artificial retina
An interesting approach to restore light sensitivity in blind retinas was proposed in 2012 by Polosukhina et al.74 The treatment is based on a small photo-switchable molecule (acrylamide-azobenzene-quaternary ammonium, AAQ) that can modulate the conductivity of potassium channels, enabling the optical control of neuronal excitability. In particular, AAQ is isomerized by UV-blue light to the cis form, which unblocks potassium channels decreasing neuronal excitability, while green light illumination rapidly brings back the molecule to the trans form. It was demonstrated that illumination of ex vivo blind retinas with UV/blue light resulted in an increase of ganglion cell firing, mainly mediated by a photoregulation of the amacrine cell activity. The recovery of the pupillary reflex and behavioural tests in mice confirmed light-sensitivity also in vivo. Compared to optogenetic techniques or retinal implants, this method has the advantage that it does not require genetic expression or complicated surgery, since the molecule is simply injected into the vitreous cavity of the eye; however, the sensitization is reversible and vanishes after 24 h from the injection.
The phenomenon of cell stimulation by polymer photo-excitation (CSP), as discussed in Section 3 above, seems naturally fitting for the artificial retina application. The goal here is to restore photosensitivity in retinas whose natural photoreceptors are damaged or lost. The retinal photoreceptors, however, are in contact with bipolar cells, and both photoreceptors and bipolar cells behave quite differently from primary brain neurons in which they do not develop action potential and the glutamate neurotransmitter stored in synaptic vesicles is continuously released as a function of the membrane potential. In addition, the released glutamate, known to be the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, is recognized by distinct receptors that alternatively mediate an excitatory or an inhibitory effect on the post-synaptic cells.75 For this high complexity of retinal physiology, a success of the polymer approach, as demonstrated for neurons, in restoring light sensitivity in retinas deprived by photoreceptors is thus not granted for free.
Nevertheless very recently, Ghezzi et al.73 reported that such a bio-organic interface is capable of restoring light sensitivity in blind retinas ex vivo. Acutely dissected blind retinas from albino rats were placed on P3HT-coated glass:ITO substrates with the external layers in contact with the polymer. A 10 ms light pulse (4 mW mm−2) was able to stimulate intense activity (detected by extracellular recordings in the ganglion cell layer), at levels indistinguishable from those of control retinas of normal rats (Fig. 5c), while no significant activity could be recorded in blinded retinas placed on glass:ITO only substrates. The analysis of the temporal and pharmacological characteristics of the excitation proved that ganglion cell spiking was mediated by the activation of the external cell layer in contact with the polymer. Dose–response measurements (Fig. 5d) revealed a threshold intensity for photostimulation of about 0.3 μW mm−2, closely matching the range of retinal irradiance during outdoor activity (0.1–10 μW mm−2).
The reported results demonstrate that organic semiconductors can be a valid alternative to the more traditional devices used for retinal implants, mostly based on inorganic semiconductors and/or metallic electrodes.76 The most successful retinal prostheses, namely the epi-retinal Argus device (Second Sight Medical Products)77 and the sub-retinal device Alpha (Retina Implant AG),78 have obtained promising results and are currently under clinical testing. However, all these metal–silicon artificial devices still have to face and solve major common problems: need for power supply, scarce biocompatibility, low compliance, complexity of the fabrication process, electrode number, size and geometry, high impedance levels, resistive currents and pronounced heat production, which is very detrimental to the retinal tissue. All these reasons have strongly limited the success of these metal–silicon-based prostheses. Although the coupling mechanism between neural cells and the semiconducting polymer is still only partially understood, its potential impact is clear-cut. The advantages offered by organic semiconductors are manifold, and rely on material softness, reduced invasivity, very low toxicity and enhanced biocompatibility, no need for external biasing, very limited and spatially confined heat production, and reduced oxidation–reduction reactions at the interfaces, as a consequence of the capacitive-like coupling between the artificial and the natural tissue. Another major advantage is the spatial confinement of the stimulation, which could in principle improve the limited resolution of traditional implants. There are however many open issues, regarding in particular the long-term stability of the polymeric material, the tolerability over prolonged time in vivo and the optimization of the device response.
5 Perspectives and next-future challenges
The use of organic semiconductors for the realization of artificial visual systems with unprecedented performances is a new, challenging research topic and will certainly continue to play an increasingly important role in imaging, humanoid technologies and biomedicine. Thus, their application offers exciting opportunities for researchers in several fields from electronics and physics, materials science and chemistry to biology, neuroscience and medicine. Nature will continue to serve as a source of inspiration for the realization of artificial visual systems: new applications and devices can be derived from full exploitation of some of the concepts highlighted in this review, while many others, for sure the majority, still wait to be fully conceptualized and demonstrated.
Just to give an example, the realization of a space-variant organic photodetector matrix, mimicking the spatial distribution of natural photoreceptors, represents a very intriguing technological challenge, where the organic semiconductor technology might play a key role. The peculiar pixel arrangement, borrowed from nature, would result in a much higher acuity than what can be achieved with a uniform resolution, with the advantage of a significant reduction of the quantity of data that needs to be transmitted, processed and stored for one single image. This is extremely important in robotics, where the problem of congestion of connection wires is a serious obstacle to further developments, but also in several other fields, such as imaging, security systems, and target tracking applications.
The human visual system is characterized by a natural robustness against abrupt variations of the surrounding environment (changes in light dynamic range, chromatic contrast, and illumination conditions). To implement this robustness, the visual system uses mechanisms of spatial comparison both at the retinal and the cortical levels. In this way, it extracts the visual information from the spatial differences of the scene and not only from the signal from the single photoreceptor. The performances of natural systems in terms of field observation and adaptivity are exceeding by far any existing artificial camera: taking inspiration from biology and implementing some of these mechanisms in an artificial visual system would have major advantages, even though this seems to be out of current technologies' reach.
The most intriguing opportunity demonstrated very recently and highlighted in this review is the capability of the organic semiconducting polymers to optically address neuronal activity: this offers a new method for diagnosis, control and healing of living neurons, and will lead to new and unforeseen possibilities in neuroscience and medicine. A broad experimental effort is in demand to understand the basic rules of the interaction between organic semiconductors and live cells, to elucidate the so-called CSP mechanism, to identify its strengths and weaknesses. Detailed studies of the polymer–cell coupling mechanisms are urgently needed, focusing both on the synthetic and the living parts of the hybrid interface. Appropriate experimental techniques, suitable for addressing the complex study of the hybrid polymer–liquid interface in the restricted space of the cleft region (few tens of nanometers, usually), should be implemented. Theoretical investigations and mathematical modeling might also serve as useful guides to improve the coupling between the polymer component, the aqueous environment and the biological counterpart.
The demonstration that an organic polymer acts as an artificial photoreceptor layer in explanted retinas and is able to restore light sensitivity opens a new avenue for the development of a new generation of fully organic prosthetic devices for sub-retinal implants, with sensitivity to irradiances compatible with physiological levels of illumination. Of course many issues still remain to be addressed and solved, particularly concerning the implant durability and biocompatibility. Chemical engineering of substrates, anodic contacts, active materials, and encapsulation layers is expected to play a central role in the future development and implementation of organic-based retinal implants.
Finally, we remark that application of the CSP process is huge, and can be usefully broadened to other areas of vision, like directional neuronal growth, signal transmission and neuronal repair. Fabrication of functional systems as components in animaloids and humanoids should be explored, possibly enhancing the level of technology involved and involving industrial players.
All these aspects can represent a new dawn for organic semiconductors, perhaps the one leading to a full maturity as never before. Indeed, since their birth in 1970, conjugated polymers have displayed a large potential, but also a lot of constraints. Initially proposed as new conductors, replacing copper, and then semiconductors, challenging silicon, they found a way into optoelectronics and lighting, always in competition with other materials and with success in niche markets. Below expectations in non-linear optics and photonics, they struggle to emerge now in the energy arena. Perhaps the molecular way to neuroscience will be the ultimate, winning application.
References

          D. H. Hubel, Eye, brain, and vision, Scientific American library series, no. 22, New York, US,  1995 Search PubMed .

          E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, T. M. Jessell, S. A. Siegelbaum and A. J. Hudspeth, Principles of Neural Science, Mc. Graw Hill Int. Ed., 5th edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
D. H. Sliney, Exposure geometry and spectral environment determine photobiological effects on the human eye, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
K. Franze, J. Grosche, S. N. Skatchkov, S. Schinkinger, C. Foja, D. Schild, O. Uckermann, K. Travis, A. Reichenbach and J. Guck, Müller cells are living optical fibers in the vertebrate retina, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 8287 CrossRef CAS .

          http://webvision.med.utah.edu
        .

          M. V. Srinivasan and S. Venkatesh, From Living Eyes to Seeing Machines, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1997 Search PubMed .
J. K. Bowmaker and H. J. A. Dartnall, Visual pigments of rods and cones in a human retina, J. Physiol., 1980, 298, 501–511 CAS .
R. T. Lagemann, New light on old rays: N rays, Am. J. Phys., 1977, 45, 281–284 CrossRef .

          F. Berton, G. Sandini and G. Metta, Anthropomorphic Visual Sensors, in Encyclopedia of Sensors,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Zrenner, Will retinal implants restore vision?, Science, 2002, 295, 1022–1025 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Organic Electronics at the Interface with Biology, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 449 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Baeg, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Caironi and Y.-Y. Noh, Organic Light Detectors: Photodiodes and Phototransistors, Adv. Mater., 2013 DOI:10.1002/adma.201204979 .
A. J. Heeger, D. J. Heeger, J. Langan and Y. Yang, Image Enhancement with Polymer Grid Triode Arrays, Science, 1995, 270, 1642 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Wang, J. McElvain and A. J. Heeger, Large-Area, Full-Color Image Sensors Made with Semiconducting Polymers, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1431 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, Y. Cao, J. Wang, J. McElvain and A. J. Heeger, High sensitivity polymer photosensors for image sensing applications, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, G. Yu, G. Srdanov and A. J. Heeger, Color characterization of large area polymer image sensors, Org. Electron., 2000, 1, 33 CrossRef CAS .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi, T. Sekitani, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Integration of organic FETs with organic photodiodes for a large area, flexible, and lightweight sheet image scanners, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2005, 52, 11 CrossRef .
S. Tedde, E. S. Zaus, J. Fürst, D. Henseler and P. Lugli, Active pixel concept combined with organic photodiode for imaging devices, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2007, 28, 893–895 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baierl, L. Pancheri, M. Schmidt, D. Stoppa, G. Dalla Betta, G. Scarpa and P. Lugli, A hybrid CMOS-imager with a solution processable polymer as photoactive layer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1175 CrossRef .
X. Gong, M. Tong, Y. Xia, W. Cai, J. S. Moon, Y. Cao, G. Yu, C.-L. Shieh, B. Nilsson and A. J. Heeger, High-Detectivity Polymer Photodetectors with Spectral Response from 300 nm to 1450 nm, Science, 2009, 325, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rauch, M. Böberl, S. Tedde, J. Fürst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Near-infrared imaging with quantum-dot-sensitized organic photodiodes, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Hecht, Optics, Addison-Wesley, 4th edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
K.-H. Jeong, J. Kim and L. P. Lee, Biologically Inspired Artificial Compound Eyes, Science, 2006, 312, 557 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Ko, M. P. Stoykovich1, J. Song, V. Malyarchuk, W. M. Choi, C.-J. Yu, J. B. Geddes, J. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, A hemispherical electronic eye camera based on compressible silicon optoelectronics, Nature, 2008, 454, 748 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, M. Davanco, X. Qi and S. R. Forrest, Direct transfer patterning on three dimensionally deformed surfaces at micrometer resolutions and its application to hemispherical focal plane detector arrays, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1122–1127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, M. Mihnev, A. Taylor and S. R. Forrest, Organic photodetector arrays with indium tin oxide electrodes patterned using directly transferred metal masks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043313 CrossRef .
L. P. Lee and R. Szema, Inspirations from Biological Optics for Advanced Photonic Systems, Science, 2005, 310, 1148 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Hoshino, K. Matsumoto and I. Shimoyama, Compound eye shaped flexible organic image sensor with a tunable visual field, Proc. of the 18th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),  2005, vol. 96–99 Search PubMed .
T. N. Ng, W. S. Wong, M. L. Chabinyc, S. Sambandan and R. A. Street, Flexible image sensor array with bulk heterojunction organic photodiode, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 213303 CrossRef .
J. Clark and G. Lanzani, Organic photonics for communications, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 438 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Wyszecki and W. S. Stiles, Color Science, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
T. D. Lamb, Photoreceptor Spectral Sensitivities: Common Shape in the Long-Wavelength Region, Vis. Res., 1995, 35, 3083 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Mollon, Color vision: opsins and options, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 4743 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Antognazza, U. Scherf, P. Monti and G. Lanzani, Organic-based tristimuli colorimeter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 163509 CrossRef .
E. Chen, 
            et al., Polymer photodetector with voltage-adjustable photocurrent spectrum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 043507–043509 CrossRef .
H. Seo, 
            et al., Color sensors with three vertically stacked organic photodetectors, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2007, 46, L1240–L1242 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Antognazza, D. Musitelli, S. Perissinotto and G. Lanzani, Spectrally selected photodiodes for colorimetric application, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 357 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gautam, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, Single-Pixel, Single-Layer Polymer Device as a Tri-Color Sensor with Signals Mimicking the Retinal Cone Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17942 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cramer, T. Steinbrecher, T. Koslowski, D. A. Case, F. Biscarini and F. Zerbetto, Water-induced polaron formation at the pentacene surface: quantum mechanical molecular mechanics simulations, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 155316 CrossRef .
K. B. Eisenthal, Liquid Interfaces Probed by Second-Harmonic and Sum-Frequency Spectroscopy, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1343–1360 CrossRef CAS .
K. Svennersten, K. C. Larsson, M. Berggren and A. Richter-Dahlfors, Organic bioelectronics in nanomedicine, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2011, 1810, 276 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Antognazza, D. Ghezzi, D. Musitelli, M. Garbugli and G. Lanzani, A hybrid solid–liquid polymer photodiode
for the bioenvironment, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 243501 CrossRef .
E. Lanzarini, M. R. Antognazza, M. Biso, A. Ansaldo, L. Laudato, P. Bruno, P. Metrangolo, G. Resnati, D. Ricci and G. Lanzani, Polymer-Based Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10944–10949 CAS .
V. Gautam, M. Bag and K. S. Narayan, Dynamics of Bulk Polymer Heterostructure/Electrolyte Devices, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3277–3282 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sjulson and G. Miesenböck, Photocontrol of Neural Activity: Biophysical Mechanisms and Performance in Vivo, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108(5), 1588–1602 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Callaway and R. Yuste, Stimulating neurons with light, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 2002, 12, 587–592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Szobota and E. Y. Isacoff, Optical control of neuronal activity, Annu. Rev. Biophys., 2010, 39, 329 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Fork, Laser Stimulation of Nerve Cells in Aplysia, Science, 1971, 171(3974), 907–908 CAS .
N. Smith, S. Iwanaga, T. Beppu, K. Fujita, O. Nakamura and S. Kawata, Photostimulation of two types of Ca2+ waves in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells by ultrashort pulsed near-infrared laser irradiation, Laser Phys. Lett., 2006, 3(3), 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hirase, V. Nikolenko, J. H. Goldberg and R. Yuste, Multiphoton stimulation of neurons, J. Neurobiol., 2002, 51(3), 237–247 CrossRef .
A. Uzdensky and V. Savranskyb, Single neuron response to pulse-periodic laser microirradiation. Action spectra and two-photon effect, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1997, 39(3), 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Shapiro, K. Homma, S. Villarreal, C.-P. Richter and F. Bezanilla, Infrared light excites cells by changing their electrical capacitance, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 736 CrossRef .
I. Farber and A. Grinvald, Identification of presynaptic neurons by laser photostimulation, Science, 1983, 222(4627), 1025–1027 CAS .
M. Scanziani and M. Häusser, Electrophysiology in the age of light, Nature, 2009, 461, 930–939 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gorostiza and E. Y. Isacoff, Optical switches for remote and noninvasive control of cell signaling, Science, 2008, 322, 395 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fenno, O. Yizhar and K. Deisseroth, The Development and Application of Optogenetics, Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 2011, 34(1), 389–412 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hegemann and A. Möglich, Channelrhodopsin engineering and exploration of new optogenetic tools, Nat. Methods, 2011, 8, 39–42 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, L.-P. Wang, M. Brauner, J. F. Liewald, K. Kay, N. Watzke, P. G. Wood, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel, A. Gottschalk and K. Deisseroth, Multimodal fast optical interrogation of neural circuitry, Nature, 2007, 446(7136), 633–639 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Boyden, F. Zhang, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel and K. Deisseroth, Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural activity, Nat. Neurosci., 2005, 8, 1263–1268 CrossRef CAS .
E. Callaway and L. Katz, Photostimulation using caged glutamate reveals functional circuitry in living brain slices, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1993, 90(16), 7661–7665 CrossRef CAS .
P. Molnár and J. Nadler, γ-Aminobutyrate, α-carboxy-2-nitrobenzyl ester selectively blocks inhibitory synaptic transmission in rat dentate gyrus, Eur. J. Pharmacol., 2000, 391(3), 255–262 CrossRef .
G. C. R. Ellis-Davies, Caged compounds: photorelease technology for control of cellular chemistry and physiology, Nat. Methods, 2007, 4, 619–628 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fromherz, Electrical Interfacing of Nerve Cells and Semiconductor Chips, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3(3), 276–284 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fromherz, Joining microelectronics and microionics: nerve cells and brain tissue on semiconductor chips, Solid-State Electron., 2008, 52, 1364–1373 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kotov, J. O. Winter, I. P. Clements, E. Jan, B. P. Timko, S. Campidelli, S. Pathak, A. Mazzatenta, C. M. Lieber, M. Prato, R. V. Bellamkonda, G. A. Silva, N. Wong Shi Kam, F. Patolsky and L. Ballerini, Nanomaterials for Neural Interfaces, Adv. Mater., 2009, 31, 3970 CrossRef .
M. A. Colicos, B. E. Collins, M. J. Sailor and Y. Goda, Remodeling of Synaptic Actin Induced by Photoconductive Stimulation, Cell, 2001, 107, 605–616 CrossRef CAS .
A. Starovoytov, J. Choi and H. S. Seung, Light-Directed Electrical Stimulation of Neurons Cultured on Silicon Wafers, J. Neurophysiol., 2005, 93, 1090–1098 CrossRef .
T. C. Pappas, W. S. Wickramanyake, E. Jan, M. Motamedi, M. Brodwick and N. A. Kotov, Nanoscale Engineering of a Cellular Interface with Semiconductor Nanoparticle Films for Photoelectric Stimulation of Neurons, Nano Lett., 2007, 7(2), 513–519 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bystrenova, M. Jelitai, I. Tonazzini, A. N. Lazar, M. Huth, P. Stoliar, C. Dionigi, M. G. Cacace, B. Nickel, E. Madarasz and F. Biscarini, Neural Networks Grown on Organic Semiconductors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18(12), 1751–1756 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cramer, B. Chelli, M. Murgia, M. Barbalinardoa, E. Bystrenova, D. M. de Leeuw and F. Biscarini, Organic Ultra-Thin Film Transistor with Liquid Gate for Extracellular Stimulation and Recording of Electric Activity of Stem Cell-Derived Neuronal Networks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3897–3905 RSC .
G. Scarpa, A.-L. Idzko, S. Götz and S. Thalhammer, Biocompatibility Studies of Functionalized Regioregular Poly(3-hexylthiophene) Layers for Sensing Applications, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 378–383 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, M. Dal Maschio, E. Lanzarini, F. Benfenati and G. Lanzani, A hybrid bioorganic interface for neuronal photoactivation, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2(1), 166 CrossRef .
D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, R. Maccarone, S. Bellani, E. Lanzarini, N. Martino, M. Mete, G. Pertile, S. Bisti, G. Lanzani and F. Benfenati, A polymer-based interface restores light sensitivity in rat blind retinas, Nat. Photonics, 2013 DOI:10.1038/nphoton.2013.34 .
A. Polosukhina, J. Litt, I. Tochitsky, J. Nemargut, Y. Sychev, I. De Kouchkovsky, T. Huang, K. Borges, D. Trauner, R. N. VanGelder and R. H. Kramer, Photochemical Restoration of Visual Responses in Blind Mice, Neuron, 2012, 75(2), 271–282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wässle, Parallel processing in the mammalian retina, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2004, 5, 747–757 CrossRef .
E. Zrenner, Artificial Vision. Solar Cells for the Blind, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 342–343 CrossRef .
M. S. Humayun, J. D. Dorn, L. da Cruz, G. Dagnelie, J.-A. Sahel, P. E. Stanga, A. V. Cideciyan, J. L. Duncan, D. Eliott, E. Filley, A. C. Ho, A. Santos, A. B. Safran, A. Arditi, L. V. Del Priore and R. J. Greenberg, Interim Results from the International Trial of Second Sight's Visual Prosthesis, Ophthalmology, 2012, 119, 779–788 CrossRef .
E. Zrenner, K. U. Bartz-Schmidt, H. Benav, D. Besch, A. Bruckmann, V.-P. Gabel, F. Gekeler, U. Greppmaier, A. Harscher, S. Kibbel, J. Koch, A. Kusnyerik, T. Peters, K. Stingl, H. Sachs, A. Stett, P. Szurman, B. Wilhelm and R. Wilke, Subretinal electronic chips allow blind patients to read letters and combine them to words, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2011, 278, 1489–1497 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
N. Martino	Nicola Martino obtained his master's degree in Physics Engineering at Politecnico di Milano in 2010, with a study on microspectroscopy of organic semiconductors. He is currently a PhD Student at the Center for Nano Science and Technology of the Italian Institute of Technology in Milan. His main interests are the study of the optoelectronic properties of organic semiconductors, mainly through optical spectroscopy techniques, and their use as active materials in hybrid interfaces with biological systems.
D. Ghezzi	Diego Ghezzi graduated in Biomedical Engineering in 2004 and obtained his PhD in Bioengineering in 2008. Currently, he holds a post-doc position at Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Genova, Italy). His work interests range from hard- and soft-technologies to bionics, brain technologies and physiology. He is an expert in optical stimulation and optogenetics combined with electrophysiology. For 3 years, he has been involved in a long-term project involving the use of organic semiconducting polymers to restore light sensitivity in degenerate retinas, with the final aim of providing and implanting a fully organic artificial photoreceptor layer.
F. Benfenati	Fabio Benfenati is the director of the Department for Neuroscience and Brain Technology at the Italian Institute of Technology in Genova and Full Professor of Physiology at the University of Genova. His scientific background is in cellular neurophysiology; he is an internationally acknowledged expert in the molecular mechanisms of synaptic communication and the problem of how neurons can change synaptic strength to adapt to diverse environmental situations. He has recently used the most advanced electrophysiological and optical techniques to study the cellular mechanisms of neural plasticity and create neurohybrid interfaces with inorganic and organic substrates that stimulate and/or compute neuronal activity.
G. Lanzani	Guglielmo Lanzani is the head of the Center for Nano Science and Technology of the Italian Institute of Technology and full professor in physics at Politecnico di Milano. His research involves the photophysics of conjugated carbon materials (organic semiconductors, polyconjugated compounds and carbon nanotubes) and nanostructures, including devices and applications, as reported in more than 200 papers. Leading activities are on solar energy conversion and artificial retina.
M. R. Antognazza	Maria Rosa Antognazza obtained the Laurea degree in physics from Università degli Studi of Milano and the PhD degree in Physics from Politecnico of Milano. She is now a Research Technologist at the Center for Nano Science and Technology in Milan. Her main research interests concern the optical spectroscopy of organic semiconductors and the realization and electro-optical characterization of organic devices for biological applications, with a special focus on artificial retinal prosthesis.

 	Fig. 1  
Top panel: section through the human eye with a schematic magnification of the retinal layers, reprinted from ref. 5 and 73. Bottom panel: spectral responsivities of the natural photoreceptors: S, M, and L cones (solid lines) and rods (dashed line), reprinted from ref. 7.	 

 	Fig. 2  Examples of polymer-based imagers, both on planar and flexible substrates. (a) Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 21), copyright 2009; (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 14, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA; (c) reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 19), copyright 2012; (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 29, copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics. (e) Realization of biologically inspired artificial eyes, made possible by the adoption of the organic technology, from ref. 23, reprinted with permission from AAAS, and from ref. 25, reprinted with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Realization of hybrid solid–liquid photodetectors able to work for multicolor sensing under biological conditions (reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2011, and ref. 43, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Phase contrast images of primary neural cells on bare pentacene (a) and poly-L-lysine coated pentacene (b) 24 hours after plating. Mouse fibroblasts cultured on bare P3HT (c) or collagen-coated P3HT (d), reproduced with permission from ref. 69 and 71, copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  A P3HT layer is able to induce neuronal firing and to restore light sensitivity in explanted blind retinas. Panel a: generation of action potentials in primary neurons cultured on P3HT:PCBM substrates upon photostimulation by a train of 20 ms per pulses at 1 Hz (green bars). Panel b: spatial selectivity of the photostimulating organic interface: a grid of 9 spots (diameter 20 μm) was overlaid to a patched neuron and the spike counts were used to calculate PSTHs (bins 10 ms) shown in the 9 adjacent fields (reprinted from ref. 72). Panel c: comparison of mean peri-stimulus time histograms obtained from control retinas on glass:ITO (black bars), degenerate retinas on glass:ITO (open bars) and degenerate retinas on P3HT-coated glass:ITO (red bars) in response to light illumination (10 ms, 4 mW mm−2; green arrow). Panel d: dose–response analysis of the mean (±s.e.m.) firing rate versus light intensity performed in degenerate retinas over P3HT-coated glass:ITO (red circles) or glass:ITO alone (open circles) (reprinted from ref. 73).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
