Temperature and environmentally stable titanium carbide as an electron-selective heterocontact for crystalline silicon solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TC01388J View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3TC01388J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, Advance Article Temperature and environmentally stable titanium carbide as an electron-selective heterocontact for crystalline silicon solar cells†
Yang Ding‡
a, 
Zhiping Huang‡ab, 
Deyuan Wei*ad, 
Jingwei Chena, 
Biao Suna, 
Chong Dia, 
Jianming Wangc, 
Kangping Zhangc, 
Ying Xu*a and 
Guangsheng Fu*a
aHebei Key Laboratory of Optic Electronic Information and Materials, College of Physics Science and Technology, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China. E-mail: weideyuan@jfslab.com.cn; xuying@hbu.edu.cn; fugs@hbu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Information Engineering, Quzhou College of Technology, Quzhou 324000, China
cDAS SOLAR CO., Ltd, Green Industrial Cluster Zone, Quzhou 324000, China
dJiufengshan Laboratory, Wuhan 430206, China
Received 
19th April 2023
, Accepted 29th June 2023First published on 29th June 2023AbstractDopant-free carrier-selective contacts (CSCs) are promising for application in crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells to enhance efficiency by optimizing carrier collection from lightly doped silicon wafer while avoiding the efficiency losses due to heavy doping. However, the industrial applications of these materials have been constrained by their inadequate thermal stability and reliability. Thermally stable titanium carbide (TiCx) is proposed as a novel electron-selective contact (ESC) material for n-type c-Si solar cells and achieves an extremely low contact resistivity of 4.24 mΩ cm2, significantly reduces the series resistance of n-type c-Si solar cells to 0.22 Ω, and improves efficiency by 2.6%, resulting in a champion efficiency of 17.37%. TiCx ESC-based n-type c-Si solar cells maintain 91% of the initial performance after 770 °C thermal annealing and exhibit excellent reliability in tests such as light soaking, damp heat, and highly accelerated temperature and humidity stress tests. This is the first application of metal carbide as a CSC material in c-Si solar cells and demonstration of a thermally stable and reliable carrier-selective contact that endures the maximum process temperature of current industrial solar cells. Our work offers a promising approach to developing thermally stable and reliable high-efficiency industrial c-Si solar cells without heavy doping.
Introduction
Silicon heterojunction (SHJ) solar cells using dopant-free carrier-selective contacts (CSCs) have received considerable attention because they have become an efficient alternative for all crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells with heavily doped regions. When directly comes into contact with a metal electrode of a solar cell, the heavily doped region can narrow the width of the depletion region to trigger quantum tunnelling of carriers through the Schottky barrier, forming an Ohmic contact with a low contact resistivity to effectively extract the photogenerated carriers. However, owing to the intrinsic characteristics of doped semiconductors, heavy doping also introduces unavoidable efficiency losses due to Auger recombination, free carrier recombination, etc., fundamentally limiting the further improvements of cell efficiency.1–4
According to Schottky–Mott theory, the contact resistivity (ρc) of a metal/silicon contact is given by ρc ∝ exp(ΦB/Nd0.5), where ΦB and Nd are the Schottky barrier height and doping concentration of silicon, respectively. Thus, besides the high doping method, the other approach to minimize contact resistivity is to reduce the Schottky barrier height. When a low (or high) work function metal or metal compound comes into electrical contact with the lightly doped n-type (or p-type) silicon, the energy band of silicon would bend downwards (or upwards) near the interface to form a small Schottky barrier height, leading to electron (or hole) transport. Meanwhile, this bending of the energy band also forms a large Schottky barrier height for the oppositely charged carrier, which is blocked and bounded back by electrical field, reducing the carrier recombination rate at the interface and improving the selectivity of carrier transport. Therefore, a dopant-free CSC structure working in this principle could form a low contact-resistivity Ohmic contact with low carrier recombination loss.
Dopant-free CSCs were first successfully applied to c-Si solar cells using MoOx5 and LiFx/Al6 (or TiOx7) as electron- and hole-selective contact materials, respectively. Recently, transition metal oxides (TMOs) and alkali metal fluorides have been widely investigated as electron-selective contact (ESC) materials, forming excellent Ohmic contacts to the lightly doped n-type c-Si with mΩ cm2 scale contact resistivities.8–38 The studies of ESC materials have further extended to low-work-function alkali or alkaline earth metals,39,40 transition metals,22 and their compounds such as halides,36,41 oxides,14,42,43 nitrides,28,29 sulfides,30,44 silicides,45 carbonates46 as well as organic compounds.47,48 As a result, c-Si solar cells with dopant-free ESC have exhibited a high conversion efficiency beyond 23%.25
Nevertheless, dopant-free ESCs still face the challenges in thermal stability. In fact, thermal instability of transition metal oxides43 and alkali fluorides20 has been widely reported. This temperature-dependent deterioration of the solar cells can be attributed to two degradation mechanisms. First, the high temperature can change the structure or stoichiometric ratio of the ESC material itself, or even drive parts of its elements to migrate into the adjacent layer. Second, the high temperature also drives metal atoms inside the neighbouring electrode layer to diffuse into the ESC or even passivation layer. These two mechanisms would change the work function of the ESC film or induce the Fermi level pinning effect, reducing the band bending for carrier-selective transport.49
Currently, three main strategies are being used to address the thermal instability problem in dopant-free ESCs. The first strategy involves inserting a protective TMO (e.g., TiOx) interlayer between the ESC and the metal electrode. This TiOx layer acts as a barrier, preventing metal atoms from diffusing into the ESC layer at high temperatures. It also functions as an additional passivation layer, resulting in stacked layers for improved passivation. Researchers have demonstrated the blocking effect of the TiOx layer on ytterbium (Yb) diffusion in the ESC structure, maintaining 98% of the initial efficiency of the SHJ solar cell after a 30 minute post-annealing at 180 °C.22 By incorporating a thin TiOx interlayer, the critical temperature of stable ESCs has been increased to 300 °C in the full-area ESC structure and up to 400 °C in the partial rear contact (PRC) structure.20,50 However, the thermal instability of the TiOx interlayer at higher temperatures, possibly due to phase transition effects, limits its effectiveness as a final solution for thermal instability in ESCs.17
The second strategy focuses on inserting a more thermally stable non-metallic oxide interlayer, such as SiOx, instead of the TMO film.51 The insertion of the SiOx interlayer has shown improved thermal stability and enhanced passivation stability. SiO2/TiO2 stacked layers, combining chemical passivation of the SiO2 film and field-effect passivation of the TiO2 film, have been considered as an alternative approach.17
The third strategy involves developing new ESC materials with intrinsic thermal stability. Yb-based silicide ESCs have demonstrated good thermal stability, maintaining contact resistivity even after post-annealing at 180 °C.45 The other candidate for thermal stability is alkaline earth metal acetylacetone (Acac). Solar cells with c-Si(n)/a-Si:H(i)/CaAcac/Al ESC are thermally stable in forming gas for 10 min at 300 °C without efficiency degradation.48 The critical temperature of thermal stability has been further increased to 350 °C by using alkali and alkaline earth metal carbonates in ESC structures.46 Heat-resisting ceramic materials like MgO have also exhibited thermally stable performance in ESCs after annealing at 400 °C.38
Table S1 (ESI†) provides a summary of the current solutions for addressing thermal instability in ESCs and their corresponding solar cell performance.
Previous studies have raised the critical temperature of ESC thermal stability up to 400 °C. However, this temperature is still far lower than the practical sintering temperature of 770 °C for screen-printed Ag electrodes in industrial passivated emitter and rear cell (PERC) solar cell processes. To realize this target, we infer that the ESC material should be thermally stable without the change in stoichiometry or structure at high temperature. On the other hand, it should be an excellent diffusion barrier to block the migration of the adjacent metal layer at high temperature.
In fact, besides the metal silicide or alkaline earth metal salts mentioned above, transition metal nitrides or carbides can also endure the high temperature and have been widely used as metal barriers in the semiconductor industry, showing great potential as thermally stable ESC materials. Actually, TiNx27,28 and TaNx29 have been applied to c-Si solar cells as ESCs, but their thermal stability has not been studied yet. On the other hand, to our knowledge, no transition metal carbides have been reported to be applied as ESC materials of c-Si solar cells yet. In fact, among transition metal carbides, titanium carbide (TiCx) has been verified as a heat-resisting and Cu blocking material for semiconductor devices, exhibiting good thermal stability at 600 °C.52–55 Furthermore, TiCx also has a theoretical low work function of about 3.9 eV, which makes it a potential candidate for an ideal ESC material with good thermal stability at high temperature.
In this work, to our knowledge, we explored the first transition-metal carbide, namely, titanium carbide, as a new electron-selective contact material for c-Si solar cells. We systematically investigated the electron-selective transport properties of the TiCx film and obtained an extremely low contact resistivity of 4.24 mΩ cm2 for ESC. We applied this TiCx to the rear-side ESC of n-type c-Si solar cells and achieved a champion conversion efficiency of 17.37% in the absence of a rear-side passivation film. Furthermore, TiCx-based c-Si solar cells maintained 91% of their initial performance after 770 °C thermal annealing, which is comparable to the sintering temperature of commercial PERC solar cells, exhibiting excellent thermally stability. In addition, the performance of unencapsulated solar cells also nearly does not degrade in the light soaking test, highly accelerated temperature and humidity stress test (HAST), and a standard 1000 h damp heat test, showing high-degree environmental stability and reliability. This is the first proof-of-concept demonstration of a thermally stable carrier-selective contact whose process is thermally comparable with the high-temperature processes of industrial solar cells. Although the efficiency of the TiCx-based solar cell is still lower than those of commercial c-Si solar cells, the presented results pave a new route toward the thermally and environmentally stable high-efficiency c-Si solar cells without high doping.
Results and discussion
Characteristics of TiCx thin films
Fig. 1a shows the XPS core-level spectra of Ti 2p for the TiCx film. The core level of Ti 2p is composed of three doublets (Ti 2p1/2-Ti 2p3/2) with a fixed area ratio of 2:1 and a doublet separation of 5.9–6.2 eV. The Ti 2p3/2 component is located at binding energies of 454.74, 455.70, and 458.57 eV. The main Ti 2p3/2 peak located at the low binding energy of 454.74 eV is associated with Ti–C bonding, while the Ti 2p3/2 subcomponent with a binding energy at 455.70 eV is considered a peak for the Ti–Cx bond. The peak at 458.57 eV is attributed to the titanium oxide (TiOx) species.56–58 The calculated Ti atomic percentages for TiCx and TiOx are 97.07% and 2.93%, respectively. The presence of the TiOx phase may be mainly attributed to the reaction of TiC with residual oxygen in the sputtering chamber. However, for the samples before surface etching with Ar+, the TiOx content was high (31.38%), probably due to the oxygen adsorption of the TiCx films at the surface (see Fig. S7, ESI†). The survey scan XPS spectrum (Fig. S6, ESI†) demonstrates the presence of Ti, C, and O elements of the TiCx sample which was measured before and after Ar+ etching. In conclusion, XPS measurements showed that TiCx was the major component and the presence of a small amount of TiOx impurities in the deposited films.
 Fig. 1  (a) XPS core-level spectra of Ti2p of the TiCx film. Local etching via the Ar beam is carried out to avoid the effect of surface contamination and oxidation. (b) UPS spectra of the TiCx film and Ti electrode. Local etching was also done for accurate measurement. (c) Optical Taus plot versus photon energy for optical bandgap measurement of the TiCx thin film. (d) Schematic diagram of the band diagram at the interface of the n-Si/TiCx/Ti heterocontact. Since the work function (φ) of the Ti electrode (3.9 eV), TiCx (4.14 eV), is smaller than that of n-Si (4.3 eV), the balanced band alignment of the n-Si/TiCx/Ti heterocontact leads to the selectivity of carrier transport. Electrons can smoothly go out from n-Si to TiCx due to a very small energy barrier (ΔEc = 0.01 eV), while holes are blocked by the high energy barrier of 1.67 eV (ΔEv = 1.67 eV). 
To elucidate the mechanism of electron-selective transport properties of the Ti/TiCxTiCx/n-Si heterocontact, we investigated the energy band alignment of the Ti/TiCx/n-Si structure. Fig. 1b shows the UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra of TiCx and Ti films on TiCx using He-I excitation (21.22 eV). The work functions of TiCx and Ti on TiCx, about 4.14 eV and 3.90 eV, respectively, were calculated by making the intersection of the tangent line with the binding energy by the secondary cutoff edge in the UPS spectrum. The gap between the Fermi level and the top of the valence band (Ef − Ev) of the TiCx film obtained from the Fermi cutoff of the UPS spectrum is about 2.7 eV. The TiCx film exhibits an optical band gap of ≈2.8 eV, demonstrated via UV-Vis spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 1c. For the n-type Si substrate (3 Ω cm, Nd ≈ 1.6 e15 cm−3), the Fermi level lies at about 4.3 eV, and the bandgap is about 1.12 eV. From the above information, we can obtain the energy band alignment diagram of the Ti/TiCx/n-Si structure as shown in Fig. 1d. The result illustrates a small conduction band shift (ΔEc ≈ 0.01 eV), which allows electrons to pass through the TiCx layer, and a large valence band shift (ΔEv ≈ 1.67 eV), which can effectively form a barrier to holes. Such electron transport and hole-blocking properties are consistent with the observed dark I–V behavior shown in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  Contact property of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact. (a) Dark I–V curves of TiCx/n-Si TLM structures with and without a TiCx interlayer. (b) Dark I–V curves of 4 nm TiCx on the n-Si substrate with increasing electrode space and linear fit of Rt to extract ρc. (c) Dependence of contact resistivity of TiCx/n-Si heterocontacts on the TiCx film thickness. (d) Summary of contact resistivity of common electron transport materials. 
The passivation effect of the TiCx thin film on the surface of the silicon wafer was assessed by the minority carrier lifetime measurements. After the TiCx thin film was deposited, the minority carrier lifetime of the silicon substrate (3 Ω cm, FZ, n-type) keeps at 387 μs. This result indicates that the deposition process of the TiCx thin film by sputtering does not damage the silicon surface and the TiCx thin film provides a medium passivation effect on the wafer surface (see Fig. S8, ESI†).
Electron-selective contact transportation properties of TiCx
To evaluate the electron-transfer capability of TiCx/n-Si contacts, a series of experiments were conducted to investigate the electrical properties of TiCx films. For different sputtering powers and deposition pressures, we tested the square resistance of 300 nm thick TiCx films deposited on glass substrates using a Hall effect tester as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The results indicate that the prepared TiCx films are of the low-mobility, high-carrier-concentration mode. Titanium carbide is usually regarded as a semi-metallic material, and its ultra-high carrier concentration is determined by its crystal structure. We infer that the high free electron concentration in TiCx films may be due to the presence of localized Ti–Ti metal bonds or even crystals or clusters of titanium in part of its structure, resulting in the appearance of free electrons in the inner part of the material. The mechanism of conductivity in amorphous and crystalline mixed-phase TiCx materials requires subsequent more in-depth theoretical analysis and experimental verification.
The contact resistivity can be obtained using the TLM method.59 The device structure diagram for the TLM method to test contact resistivity is shown in Fig. 2a by inserting a thin TiCx interlayer between the n-Si substrate and Ti electrode; the I–V curve exhibits a perfectly linear, Ohmic contact characteristic. However, on a p-Si substrate where holes are the majority carriers, the I–V behavior indicates a very high resistance under applied bias, which exhibits a Schottky behavior. These results demonstrate that a TiCx/n-Si heterocontact can block holes effectively. On this basis, we use the TLM method to calculate the contact resistivity of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact. The contact resistivity between the substrate and the electrodes is extracted by linear fitting the calculated Rt of the response curves at a fixed current and voltage range as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†) according to the study of Schroder et al.60 The measurement results with different electrode spacings are shown in Fig. 2b. We tested the effect of film thickness on contact resistivity using 0.5 to 9 nm TiCx deposited with the above structure. As shown in Fig. 2c, the lowest contact resistivity (4.24 mΩ cm2) was achieved at 200 W sputtering power, 2.0 Pa operating pressure, and 4 nm TiCx film thickness. The low contact resistivity is likely attributed to Fermi-level depinning between n-type c-Si and Ti/Al electrodes,61 and as the thickness of the TiCx film increases, the bulk effect becomes more apparent, increasing the contact resistivity, which shows a similar feature to that observed for fluorides and oxides.10,62 A summary of the existing work in Fig. 2d shows that this result achieves a lower contact resistivity on a high-resistance substrate (3 Ω cm), which indicates that the TiCx contact can be suitable for the fabrication of high-efficiency c-Si solar cells.
n-Type back contact silicon solar cells
Simulation use SCAPS-1D. We use SCAPS-1D to simulate the performance of back contact TiCx electron transport solar cells. The principal used parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†).The simulation results in Fig. 3a show that the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current density of the cell are improved from 574 mV to 608 mV and from 33.23 mA cm−2 to 35.48 mA cm−2 after the addition of the TiCx electron transport layer, respectively. Fig. 3b shows that in the long-wave range, the external quantum efficiency of the cell is significantly improved after the application of the TiCx electron transport layer. Moreover, the filling factor of the cell is also significantly improved.
 Fig. 3  (a) SCAPS-1D simulated I–V curve. (b) SCAPS-1D simulated QE response. 
The above enhancement can be attributed to the fact that the smaller conduction band deviation after the addition of the TiCx electron transport layer is favorable for electron transport, while for holes, a higher potential is formed, which hinders the hole transport, thus reducing the hole recombination at the corresponding interface, thus allowing better collection of the photogenerated carriers. The above simulated results corroborate the actual cell performance well.

Device performance of solar cells. N-type silicon solar cells featuring a full-area electron-selective TiCx contact (Fig. 4a) are fabricated to verify the performance of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact on the device. The front emitter was passivated by Al2O3 and capped with SiNx as an antireflection layer. A 4 nm TiCx ETL layer was fabricated by RF sputtering at a power of 200 W and a working pressure of 2.0 Pa. Then the TiCx layer was capped with a full-area Ti/Ag electrode. This structure is shown by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) cross-sectional image in Fig. 4b and c. The obvious hierarchical structure can be seen in the graph which shows the existence of the amorphous phase TiCx layer. A control cell without TiCx interlayer was made in the same batch.
 Fig. 4  (a) Sketch of the n-type silicon solar cell with a full-area electron-selective TiCx contact at the rear. (b and c) Cross-sectional image of the rear TiCx/n-Si heterocontact. (d) Light J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the cells with and without a TiCx contact. (e) External quantum efficiency and reflectance of the cells with and without a TiCx contact. 
The light J–V curves of silicon solar cells under AM1.5 conditions, with and without a TiCx interlayer, are shown in Fig. 4d. The corresponding photovoltaic parameters, series resistance, and shunt resistance are also included. The control cell exhibits a low Voc value (574 mV) and fill factor (FF) (74.93%) as well as a high series resistance (1.17 Ω cm2) due to the high carrier recombination rate and the contact resistivity at the Ti/n-Si interface, resulting in a low PCE of 14.76%. By inserting a thin TiCx electron-selective transport layer between the n-type silicon and titanium, both FF and Voc were significantly improved, from 74.93% to 80.34% and from 574 mV to 604 mV, respectively. This leads to a substantial improvement in PCE, bringing it to 17.37%, a relative improvement of 17.68% over the control device. The improved FF and Voc can be directly attributed to the presence of the TiCx layer, which simultaneously reduces the contact resistivity and carrier recombination at the rear surface. Fig. 4e shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and the reflectance of the devices, with and without a TiCx ETL. Both devices show a very high EQE in the short-wavelength range (<800 nm), which indicates a high-quality front surface with low reflection and carrier recombination, attributed to the good surface passivation of Al2O3 and the anti-reflection of the SiNx layer. In the long-wavelength range, the EQE is improved by the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact, which reduces carrier recombination at the rear side by blocking holes at the rear surface of the n-Si substrate, resulting in an improved Jsc (from 34.31 to 35.81 mA cm−2). To investigate the reproducibility of the devices with TiCx ETL, we fabricated 10 solar cells in one batch following the same process and tested the performance. The results are shown in Fig. S9, ESI,† which indicates that the cells exhibit excellent reproducibility of Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE.

Thermal stability of TiCx electron-selective n-Type back contact silicon solar cells. Many existing electron transport materials are difficult to utilize in industrial production due to their inability to withstand high temperatures or humidity. To evaluate the applicability of TiCx/n-Si heterocontact structures in practical production, we investigated their thermal and environmental stability. One set of solar cells with ≈4 nm TiCx interlayers was annealed in vacuum with a pressure under 5.0 e−3 Pa for 30 min at different temperatures in the range of 200–770 °C, whereas other sets were subjected to the light soaking test, the highly accelerated temperature and humidity stress test technique (HAST), and a standard 1000 h damp heat test to investigate the stability of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact structure. The relative change of the electrical parameters of the solar cells concerning the control devices before treatment is plotted in Fig. 5 for the four tests. As can be seen in Fig. 5a, the cell performance is essentially stable up to 650 °C and then starts to degrade when the annealing temperature is further increased, which is probably caused by damage of the front surface. This indicates the possibility of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact for high-temperature sintering processes, enabling the expansion of its application. Damp heat test is carried out in an environmental test chamber. The temperature of the environmental test chamber is set to 85 °C, and the relative humidity is set to 85%. After exposing the solar cells for 40, 100, 200, 300, 500, 700, 800, 900, and 1000 hours, the performance of the devices is tested, which shows that Voc remained almost constant throughout the test, and the reduction in conversion efficiency was mainly due to a slight decrease in FF above 800 hours (see Fig. 5b; the perfomance of the cell as a function of damp heat test time is listed in Table S3, ESI†). But over the entire test range, the cell performance dropped by just 5.7%. For the HAST test, the test cell was kept in a self-made environmental test box controlled by the Arduino platform at 150 °C, 85% relative humidity. As reported, the acceleration factor for 150 °C, 85% relative humidity against 85 °C, 85% relative humidity is about 266.63 The 3.75-hour HAST test is equivalent to the standard 1000 h standard test at 85 °C and 85% relative humidity. Fig. 5c shows that the cell performance did not drop dramatically after different test durations of the HAST test. Subsequently, the impact of light soaking was investigated. A 200 W halogen lamp with an intensity of 1.0 Suns AM1.5 condition at a distance of 20 cm was used. As can be seen from Fig. 5d, the performance of the cell has not changed significantly in the whole test time range. In the first 5 hours, it is considered that about 3% of the attenuation is due to the light-induced degradation (LID) effect. In the subsequent test cycle, the performance of the cell does not change.
 Fig. 5  Thermal and humidly stability of the TiCx contacted photovoltaic cells. The relative changes in electrical parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE) are plotted as a function of (a) annealing temperature, (b) damp heat test time, (c) accelerated temperature and humidity stress test time, and (d) light soaking time. 
The stability of the TiCx electron transport material was demonstrated by the thermal and environmental tests described previously, which offers the possibility of preparing novel electron transport materials for high-efficiency silicon solar cells. It is important to note in particular that a variety of existing high-efficiency crystalline silicon solar cell technologies, such as PERC and TOPCon, include high-temperature processes above 700 °C. For example, the sintering of electrode grids requires the silver grids to be screen-printed and then melted in a sintering process at 380–790 °C to form an alloy to achieve a reliable Ohmic contact. The above tests confirmed the high-temperature stability of TiCx materials, achieved extremely low contact resistivity and enhanced the device conversion efficiency, showing the potential for the application in industrial cell production.
TEM tests were conducted to investigate the changes of the TiCx material before and after the high-temperature process. The results showed that before annealing, the TiCx layer had a clear delamination boundary with the n-Si and Ti electrode layers with a thickness of about 1.8 nm in an amorphous state (see Fig. 6a). As shown in Fig. 6b, after vacuum annealing at 770 °C, the thickness of the TiCx layer did not change significantly and measured about 1.7 nm. By Fourier transforming the high-resolution images of the TiCx films, the images did not show obvious diffraction points, indicating that the TiCx layers remained amorphous after the high-temperature process. According to the literature, the TiCx layer prepared by the ALD method formed an effective barrier to Cu.52 Similarly, for the sputtered TiCx material involved in this study, the EDS line scan and mapping results shown in Fig. 6c–6i demonstrated that the Ti elements did not diffuse into the Si layer after annealing, indicating that TiCx acted as a good barrier to the diffusion of the metal electrode at high temperature. Extending to industrial solar cell production, the TiCx layer can act as both a barrier layer and an ETL to promote carrier transport while blocking the diffusion of metal elements into the passivation layer, which is more conducive to achieving and maintaining a high lifetime and thus promoting Voc.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Cross-sectional images of the rear TiCx/n-Si heterocontact before and after 770 °C annealing. (c–f) EDS line scan of Ti and Si before and after annealing. (g–j) EDS mapping shows that there was no obvious diffusion of Ag and Ti elements into the Si substrate. 
To further confirm the property changes of the TiCx material after annealing, the contact resistivity of the TiCx/n-Si structure under different annealing temperatures was tested by the TLM method. As can be seen from Fig. 7c, the contact resistivities after annealing were all within 20% above and below the original values without major changes. Thus, the stability of the TiCx material as ETL is proven from another aspect.
 Fig. 7  (a) XPS core-level spectra of Ti 2p of the TiCx film at different annealing temperatures. (b) UPS spectra of the TiCx film with annealing temperatures up to 770 °C. (c) Change of contact resistivity at different annealing temperatures. 
Meanwhile, the chemical bonding state and work function of TiCx at different annealing temperatures were tested, and the results are shown in Fig. 7a and b. The results illustrated that the Ti2p core level peak positions did not change significantly at 770 °C, and the atomic percentage changes of Ti and C elements were within 1%. Moreover, as shown by the UPS spectra, the work function of TiCx remains almost unchanged at different annealing temperatures, which is around 4.1 eV.
Through the above study, we found that TiCx can be applied to n-type back-contact crystalline silicon solar cells as an electron transport layer, which not only achieves extremely low contact resistivity and thus benefits carrier transport but also provides strong environmental stability and barrier properties, enabling it to adapt to existing crystalline silicon solar cell processes.

Experimental section
TiCx films deposition and characterization
TiCx thin films were deposited at room temperature by magnetron RF sputtering from a 2 inches TiC target with a distance of 60 mm from the sample to the target with different powers. The chamber was pumped down to below 3 e−4 Pa to reduce the oxygen content. Prior to deposition, target pre-sputtering was always performed at 200 W for over 15 min. The growth speed is tested against sputtering power with a stylus profilometer DektakXT from Bruker (see Fig. S1, ESI†). Fig. S2 and S3 (ESI†) demonstrate that the lowest sheet resistance can be achieved as the optimized sputtering parameters under a working pressure of 2.0 Pa and an RF power of 200 W. The sputtered 5 nm TiCx films on the Si substrate at 200 W and 2.0 Pa under room temperature were used for the subsequent property characterization. Prior to sputtering, the natural oxide layer of the silicon substrate is removed by dipping in 3% hydrofluoric acid for 3 minutes, followed by drying with nitrogen gas and immediate transfer into the sputtering chamber. The chemical bonding states, the valence band region and the work function of the TiCx film were determined by high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, UPS, ESCALAB250Xi from ThermoFisher) equipped with a monochromatic Al K X-ray source (1486.6 eV) and He I radiation (21.2 eV) under an ultrahigh vacuum chamber with a base pressure of 2 × 10−9 mbar. We obtained the UPS spectra with a sample bias of −5 V in a normal emission geometry to obtain secondary electron cutoffs. For both XPS and UPS tests, 10 seconds surface etching with Ar+ was performed to avoid the effect of surface contamination and oxidation. The bandgap of the TiCx film was determined optically using a UV-vis spectrometer (U4100 from HITACHI). The effective carrier lifetimes were measured using a Sinton WCT-120 photoconductance tester via quasi-steady-state photoconductance (QSSPC) method.
Electrical property characterization of RF-sputtered TiCx
Electrical properties were characterized at room temperature using a four-point probe and the Hall effect (Ecopia HMS-3000 Van de Pauw system) measurements. The electron selective property of TiCx thin films was determined by making heterocontact structures on n-Si and p-Si substrates (3.0 Ω cm) with and without a TiCx interlayer. The contact resistivity of the TiCx films prepared by various thicknesses was extracted using the TLM method. The Ti electrode was fabricated by magnetron RF sputtering in the same chamber with TiCx without breaking vacuum. Dark I–V for TLM measurements was measured using an electrochemical workstation (Zahner Ennium) using the I/E module.
Device fabrication and characterization
N-type silicon solar cells with a rear TiCx heterocontact were fabricated on double-side polished 1.0 Ω cm n-type c-Si wafers (170 μm). The substrate surface damage was etched in an alkaline solution. After texturing with random pyramids and RCA cleaning, the front p+ region was obtained by BBr3 diffusion in a tube furnace and then passivated by the Al2O3/SiNx (20/55 nm) stack deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The Al2O3/SiNx passivation stack was activated by forming gas annealing at 400 °C for 30 min. The front contact regions were patterned by screen-printing and annealed at 850 °C for 3s. The full-area TiCx (4 nm) rear contact was applied immediately by RF sputtering with the power of 200 W at the reaction pressure of 2.0 Pa. The 20 nm Ti cathode was fabricated by magnetron RF sputtering in the same chamber with TiCx. An additional Ag layer (900 nm) was deposited on the Ti interlayer by thermal evaporation. A control cell with a Ti/Ag rear contact was also prepared together. The light I–V characteristics of the devices were measured using a light emitter diode (LED)-based solar simulator under standard one-sun conditions. The light intensity was calibrated with a reference cell. An Enlitech QE-R measurement system was used for measuring EQE in a wavelength range of 300–1100 nm. Cross sections of the TiCx contacts were observed by high-resolution TEM (HRTEM, FEI Titan 80-300ST).
Stability of TiCx electron- selective n-type back contact silicon solar cells
The device is manufactured as described in the above paragraph. Then, to test the environmental stability, especially the thermal stability, the corresponding structures and devices are tested, including annealing test, damp heat test, accelerated temperature and humidity stress test (HAST), and light soaking test.
For the annealing test, the device is vacuum-annealed 30 min at 200, 350, 500, 650, 700, and 770 °C, respectively, and the chamber pressure is controlled below 5 e−3 Pa. It is worth mentioning that 770 °C is the maximum temperature of the vacuum annealing equipment. Due to the performance of the equipment, the maximum temperature of other subsequent environmental tests is also set at 770 °C. After annealing, the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, filling factor, and conversion efficiency of the solar cell are tested, respectively, to verify the environmental stability of the device.
Damp heat test is carried out in an environmental test chamber. The temperature of the environmental test chamber is set to 85 °C, and the relative humidity is set to 85%. After exposing the solar cells for 40, 100, 200, 300, 500, 700, 800, 900, and 1000 hours, the performance of the devices is tested.
To verify the results of the damp heat test, accelerated temperature and humidity stress test (HAST) was performed on the corresponding solar cells. HAST is carried out using a self-built humidity control heating table. The heating platform is composed of a heating plate, spray humidifier, and temperature and humidity probe. The temperature and humidity are controlled using an Arduino controller. As reported by Jeffrey E. Gunn, at 150 °C and 85% relative humidity, the acceleration factor is 266.63 That is, 3.75 hours of HSAT is equivalent to 1000 hours of damp heat test. The performance of solar cells at the corresponding time was tested at 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8, 1, 2, 3, and 3.75 hours of the HAST test.
The light soaking test is carried out using the SS-L16x Photoaging test equipment made by Enli Technology Co., Ltd. The wavelength range of the LED light source is 400–780 nm, and the light intensity is set to 1.0 SUN.
To investigate the environmental stability of the TiCx electron transport layer, the contact resistivity at different annealing temperatures was measured using the TLM method. The corresponding annealing conditions are the same as those in the device test. In addition, the microstructure changes of the titanium carbide layer before and after annealing at 770 °C were tested by TEM, and the thermal diffusion resistance performance was tested by EDS. XPS and UPS tests were carried out to characterize the chemical bond states and work functions of TiCx films at different annealing temperatures.
Conclusions
We developed a novel electron-selective contact structure for crystalline silicon solar cells. TiCx/n-Si hetero-contacts were shown to significantly reduce the contact resistivity with the silicon substrate, achieving contact resistivities as low as 4.24 mΩ cm2. Implementing a full-area TiCx based hetero-contact on the backside of the n-Si solar cell resulted in a PCE of 17.37%, equivalent to a 17.68% increase of the control device. Meanwhile, the TiCx films showed excellent environmental and temperature stability in damp heat tests, light soaking tests, HAST tests, and high temperature annealing tests up to 770 °C. These results open up the possibility of using metal carbides as carrier transport layers in photovoltaic devices not only for silicon but also for perovskite solar cells and organic solar cells due to the suitable electrical properties and chemical stability, and they show excellent industrial applicability to existing mass-produced high-efficiency silicon solar cells.
Author contributions
Yang Ding contributed to the data curation, formal analysis, methodology, visualization, and writing – original draft; Zhiping Huang helped perform the conceptualization and contributed to the data curation, methodology, and writing – original draft; Jingwei Chen contributed to the conceptualization and funding acquisition; Biao Sun, Chong Di, Jianming Wang, and Kangping Zhang helped perform data curation and the methodology; Deyuan Wei, Ying Xu, and Guangsheng Fu contributed to the conceptualization, supervision, validation, funding acquisition, resources, and writing – review and editing the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThe work presented in this publication was supported by the National Key R & D Program of China (no. 2018YFB1500500), the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61704045), the Post-graduate's Innovation Fund Project of Hebei Province (no. CXZZBS2021012), and the Key R & D Program of Hebei Province (no. 20314305D).
ReferencesL. E. Black and D. H. Macdonald, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2022, 234, 111428 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Kerr and A. Cuevas, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 2473–2480 CrossRef CAS .A. Richter, S. W. Glunz, F. Werner, J. Schmidt and A. Cuevas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165202 CrossRef .J. Stuckelberger, P. Loper, C. Ballif, G. Nogay, P. Wyss, A. Ingenito, C. Allebe, J. Horzel, B. A. Kamino, M. Despeisse and F.-J. Haug, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2018, 8, 389–396 Search PubMed .C. Battaglia, S. M. de Nicolas, S. De Wolf, X. T. Yin, M. Zheng, C. Ballif and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 113902 CrossRef .F. H. Hsu, W. Na-Fu, Y. Z. Tsai, C. Y. Wu, Y. S. Cheng, M. H. Chien and M. P. Houng, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 573, 159–163 CrossRef CAS .S. Avasthi, W. E. McClain, G. Man, A. Kahn, J. Schwartz and J. C. Sturm, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203901 CrossRef .J. Bullock, M. Hettick, J. Geissbühler, A. J. Ong, T. Allen, C. M. Sutter-Fella, T. Chen, H. Ota, E. W. Schaler, S. De Wolf, C. Ballif, A. Cuevas and A. Javey, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15031 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, L. Meng, L. Cai, Z. Chen, W. Lin, N. Chen, W. Wang, H. Shen and Z. Liang, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2100057 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wan, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, T. Allen, M. Hettick, D. Yan, P. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Cui, J. McKeon, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14671–14677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Wang, J. He, L. Cai, Z. Wang, S. K. Karuturi, P. Gao and W. Shen, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000569 CrossRef CAS .G. Chistiakova, B. Macco and L. Korte, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2020, 10, 398–406 Search PubMed .B. Macco, L. E. Black, J. Melskens, B. W. H. van de Loo, W.-J. H. Berghuis, M. A. Verheijen and W. M. M. Kessels, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wan, S. K. Karuturi, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, D. Yan, J. Peng, P. R. Narangari, S. Mokkapati, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 125–131 CrossRef .W. Wang, J. He, D. Yan, C. Samundsett, S. P. Phang, Z. Huang, W. Shen, J. Bullock and Y. Wan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110291 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang, P. Zheng, Q. Bi and K. Weber, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 150, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang, Q. Bi, H. Ali, K. Davis, W. V. Schoenfeld and K. Weber, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5891–5897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yang, K. Weber, Z. Hameiri and S. De Wolf, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2017, 25, 896–904 CrossRef CAS .J. He, M. A. Hossain, H. Lin, W. Wang, S. K. Karuturi, B. Hoex, J. Ye, P. Gao, J. Bullock and Y. Wan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 6356–6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Bullock, Y. Wan, Z. Xu, S. Essig, M. Hettick, H. Wang, W. Ji, M. Boccard, A. Cuevas, C. Ballif and A. Javey, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 508–513 CrossRef CAS .J. Cho, J. Melskens, M. Debucquoy, M. Recamán Payo, S. Jambaldinni, T. Bearda, I. Gordon, J. Szlufcik, W. M. M. Kessels and J. Poortmans, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 835–845 CrossRef CAS .J. Cho, J. Melskens, M. R. Payo, M. Debucquoy, H. S. Radhakrishnan, I. Gordon, J. Szlufcik, W. M. M. Kessels and J. Poortmans, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1393–1404 CrossRef CAS .K. Gotoh, T. Mochizuki, Y. Kurokawa and N. Usami, phys. status solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900495 CrossRef CAS .V. Titova and J. Schmidt, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2021, 15, 2100246 CrossRef CAS .J. Bullock, Y. Wan, M. Hettick, X. Zhaoran, S. P. Phang, D. Yan, H. Wang, W. Ji, C. Samundsett, Z. Hameiri, D. Macdonald, A. Cuevas and A. Javey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803367 CrossRef .Z. Zhang, M. Liao, H. Tong, D. Wang, C. Quan, P. Gao, J. Sheng, W. Guo, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Gong, X. Zhang, B. Yan, X. Zhou, Y. Zeng and J. Ye, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800241 CrossRef .X. Yang, W. Liu, M. De Bastiani, T. Allen, J. Kang, H. Xu, E. Aydin, L. Xu, Q. Bi, H. Dang, E. AlHabshi, K. Kotsovos, A. AlSaggaf, I. Gereige, Y. Wan, J. Peng, C. Samundsett, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Joule, 2019, 3, 1314–1327 CrossRef CAS .J. Yu, P. Phang, C. Samundsett, R. Basnet, G. P. Neupan, X. Yang, D. H. Macdonald, Y. Wan, D. Yan and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26177–26183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yang, E. Aydin, H. Xu, J. Kang, M. Hedhili, W. Liu, Y. Wan, J. Peng, C. Samundsett, A. Cuevas and S. Wolf, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800608 CrossRef .L. Meng, Z. Yao, L. Cai, W. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Qiu, W. Lin, H. Shen and Z. Liang, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 759–766 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, J. He, W. Wang, H. Lin, Z. Xu, Q. Liu, S. Peng, J. Hou, D. He and P. Gao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3644–3650 CrossRef CAS .G. Yang, P. Guo, P. Procel, A. Weeber, O. Isabella and M. Zeman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 193904 CrossRef .Z. Yao, L. Cai, L. Meng, K. Qiu, W. Lin, J. Jin, W. Duan, K. Ding, S. Li, B. Ai, Z. Liang and H. Shen, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2020, 14, 2000103 CrossRef CAS .W. Ji, T. Allen, X. Yang, G. Zeng, S. De Wolf and A. Javey, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 897–902 CrossRef CAS .L. Yao, Z. Ying, W. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Sun, X. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Zeng, B. Yan, X. Xu and J. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2021, 215, 410–415 CrossRef CAS .W. Wang, L. Cai, L. Meng, L. Zhang, N. Chen, H. Shen and Z. Liang, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2021, 15, 2100135 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, C. Guo, Y. Bai, W. Liu, Y. Chen, J. He, D. Li, X. Yang, Q. Qiu, T. Chen, J. Yu, Y. Huang and J. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2202400 CrossRef PubMed .Y. M. Wan, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, T. Allen, D. Yan, J. Peng, Y. L. Wu, J. Cui, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601863 CrossRef .T. G. Allen, J. Bullock, Q. Jeangros, C. Samundsett, Y. M. Wan, J. Cui, A. Hessler-Wyser, S. De Wolf, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602606 CrossRef .Y. M. Wan, C. Samundsett, D. Yan, T. Allen, J. Peng, J. Cui, X. Y. Zhang, J. Bullock and A. Cuevas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 113901 CrossRef .W. L. Wu, W. J. Lin, S. H. Zhong, B. Paviet-Salomon, M. Despeisse, Q. Jeangros, Z. C. Liang, M. Boccard, H. Shen and C. Ballif, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2020, 14, 1900688 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, Y. R. Zhou, G. Q. Dong, W. J. Wang, J. O. Wang, C. Liu, F. Z. Liu and D. H. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109996 CrossRef CAS .J. Cho, H. Sivaramakrishnan Radhakrishnan, R. Sharma, M. Recaman Payo, M. Debucquoy, A. van der Heide, I. Gordon, J. Szlufcik and J. Poortmans, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110324 CrossRef CAS .L. Cai, W. X. Wang, L. Jin, Z. R. Yao, W. J. Lin, L. X. Meng, B. Ai, Z. C. Liang, Y. L. Huang, F. Q. Zhang, P. P. Altermatt and H. Shen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900367 CrossRef .J. Cho, H. Sivaramakrishnan Radhakrishnan, M. Recaman Payo, M. Debucquoy, A. van der Heide, I. Gordon, J. Szlufcik and J. Poortmans, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3826–3834 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Wan, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, Z. R. Xu, C. Samundsett, D. Yan, J. Peng, J. C. Ye, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800743 CrossRef .J. He, W. J. Zhang, J. C. Ye and P. Q. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .J. He, W. J. Wang, L. Cai, H. Lin, Z. L. Wang, S. K. Karuturi and P. Q. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005554 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, M. Schaekers, T. Schram, S. Demuynck, N. Horiguchi, K. Barla, N. Collaert, A. V. Y. Thean and K. De Meyer, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2016, 63, 2671–2676 CAS .J. Bullock, Y. M. Wan, M. Hettick, Z. R. Xu, S. P. Phang, D. Yan, H. C. Wang, W. B. Ji, C. Samundsett, Z. Hameiri, D. Macdonald, A. Cuevas and A. Javey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803367 CrossRef .C. Quan, H. Tong, Z. H. Yang, X. X. Ke, M. D. Liao, P. Q. Gao, D. Wang, Z. Z. Yuan, K. M. Chen, J. Yang, X. Y. Zhang, C. H. Shou, B. J. Yan, Y. H. Zeng and J. C. Ye, Solar Rrl, 2018, 2, 1800071 CrossRef .S.-K. Choi, H. Kim, J. Kim, T. Cheon, J. H. Seo and S.-H. Kim, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 590, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .J. Moon, H. J. Ahn, Y. Seo, T. I. Lee, C.-K. Kim, I. C. Rho, C. H. Kim, W. S. Hwang and B. J. Cho, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2016, 63, 1423–1427 CAS .F. Santerre, M. A. El Khakani, M. Chaker and J. P. Dodelet, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 148, 24–33 CrossRef CAS .J. C. F. Rodríguez-Reyes, C. Ni, H. P. Bui, T. P. Beebe and A. V. Teplyakov, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5163–5169 CrossRef .L. Zhang and R. V. Koka, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1998, 57, 23–32 CrossRef CAS .D. Ren, Y. Liu and N. Huang, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2007, 22, 630–633 CrossRef CAS .E. Restrepo Parra, P. J. Arango Arango and V. J. Benavides Palacio, Dyna, 2010, 77, 64–74 Search PubMed .S. Luan and G. W. Neudeck, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 766–772 CrossRef CAS .D. K. Schroder, Semiconductor material and device characterization, John Wiley & Sons,  2015 Search PubMed .X. Yang, E. Aydin, H. Xu, J. Kang, M. Hedhili, W. Liu, Y. Wan, J. Peng, C. Samundsett and A. Cuevas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800608 CrossRef .J. Bullock, P. Zheng, Q. Jeangros, M. Tosun, M. Hettick, C. M. Sutter-Fella, Y. Wan, T. Allen, D. Yan and D. Macdonald, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600241 CrossRef .J. E. Gunn, S. K. Malik and P. M. Mazumdar, Highly accelerated temperature and humidity stress test technique (HAST), 19th International Reliability Physics Symposium, IEEE,  1981, pp. 48–51 Search PubMed.
Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc01388j‡ Yang Ding and Zhiping Huang contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XPS core-level spectra of Ti2p of the TiCx film. Local etching via the Ar beam is carried out to avoid the effect of surface contamination and oxidation. (b) UPS spectra of the TiCx film and Ti electrode. Local etching was also done for accurate measurement. (c) Optical Taus plot versus photon energy for optical bandgap measurement of the TiCx thin film. (d) Schematic diagram of the band diagram at the interface of the n-Si/TiCx/Ti heterocontact. Since the work function (φ) of the Ti electrode (3.9 eV), TiCx (4.14 eV), is smaller than that of n-Si (4.3 eV), the balanced band alignment of the n-Si/TiCx/Ti heterocontact leads to the selectivity of carrier transport. Electrons can smoothly go out from n-Si to TiCx due to a very small energy barrier (ΔEc = 0.01 eV), while holes are blocked by the high energy barrier of 1.67 eV (ΔEv = 1.67 eV).	 

 	Fig. 2  Contact property of the TiCx/n-Si heterocontact. (a) Dark I–V curves of TiCx/n-Si TLM structures with and without a TiCx interlayer. (b) Dark I–V curves of 4 nm TiCx on the n-Si substrate with increasing electrode space and linear fit of Rt to extract ρc. (c) Dependence of contact resistivity of TiCx/n-Si heterocontacts on the TiCx film thickness. (d) Summary of contact resistivity of common electron transport materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SCAPS-1D simulated I–V curve. (b) SCAPS-1D simulated QE response.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Sketch of the n-type silicon solar cell with a full-area electron-selective TiCx contact at the rear. (b and c) Cross-sectional image of the rear TiCx/n-Si heterocontact. (d) Light J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of the cells with and without a TiCx contact. (e) External quantum efficiency and reflectance of the cells with and without a TiCx contact.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermal and humidly stability of the TiCx contacted photovoltaic cells. The relative changes in electrical parameters (Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE) are plotted as a function of (a) annealing temperature, (b) damp heat test time, (c) accelerated temperature and humidity stress test time, and (d) light soaking time.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Cross-sectional images of the rear TiCx/n-Si heterocontact before and after 770 °C annealing. (c–f) EDS line scan of Ti and Si before and after annealing. (g–j) EDS mapping shows that there was no obvious diffusion of Ag and Ti elements into the Si substrate.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XPS core-level spectra of Ti 2p of the TiCx film at different annealing temperatures. (b) UPS spectra of the TiCx film with annealing temperatures up to 770 °C. (c) Change of contact resistivity at different annealing temperatures.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3tc01388j
‡ Yang Ding and Zhiping Huang contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
