Investigation of local compositional uniformity in Cu 2 ZnSn(S,Se) 4 thin film solar cells prepared from nanoparticle inks   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA02205J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA02205J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13464-13470Investigation of local compositional uniformity in Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin film solar cells prepared from nanoparticle inks†

        
          
            Katherine E. 
            Roelofs‡
, 
      
        
          
            Qijie 
            Guo
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Shekhar 
            Subramoney
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jonathan V. 
            Caspar
          
        
      
DuPont Central Research and Development, Experimental Station, Wilmington, DE 19880, USA. E-mail: qijie.guo@dupont.com
Received 
      2nd May 2014
    , Accepted 12th June 2014First published on 13th June 2014AbstractCu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) is a promising material for low-cost photovoltaics (PV), however despite rapid improvements in recent years, the performance of CZTSSe based solar cells has yet to reach the level required for commercial relevance. In order to understand the sources of efficiency losses in CZTSSe thin film solar cells, a detailed analysis of a solution-processed CZTSSe solar cell with a power conversion efficiency of 8.6% was performed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The composition of the CZTSSe active absorber layer was found to be highly non-uniform laterally which contributed to efficiency losses due to band gap and potential fluctuations. To further understand how compositional non-uniformity develops during the annealing process, the microstructure and local composition of a series of CZTSSe thin films annealed for differing lengths of time were investigated using TEM. It was found that longer annealing times improved both the microstructure of the CZTSSe layer and the compositional uniformity across the thickness of the layer. However, the lateral grain-to-grain variation in composition increased with increasing annealing time. As a result, despite improvements in the short circuit current resulting from larger CZTSSe grains with increased annealing time, no significant net gain in efficiency was obtained due to a counterbalancing decrease in open circuit voltage as a result of the increased lateral CZTSSe composition non-uniformity. The results show a challenging need to improve the control of CZTSSe thin film compositional uniformity at all length scales in order to improve the PV device performance.
Introduction
Thin film solar cells offer exceptional promise as low-cost photovoltaic technologies, as the use of thin, direct band gap absorber materials allows for flexible substrates for roll-to-roll processing and lightweight modules for easy installation. While Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) is currently the highest efficiency thin film technology, the scarcity of In has motivated the development of Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 (CZTSSe) devices, in which In and Ga are replaced by the corresponding group II and group IV earth-abundant metals Zn and Sn. The 1.5 eV band gap of the pure sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4 is nearly ideal for a single junction solar cell, and the band gap can be controllably tuned to as low as 1.0 eV by substituting selenium for sulfur.1–3 Due to the tunable band gap, CZTSSe devices are expected to have the same theoretical Shockley–Queisser upper efficiency limit as CIGS.4 In addition, due to the material similarities, CZTSSe technology is expected to benefit from the progress that has been made with CIGS devices.
CZTSSe devices have recently reached a record efficiency of 12.6%, using a hydrazine-solution based synthesis method.5 An alternative solution-based synthesis route employing nanoparticle precursor solutions has also demonstrated relatively high efficiency devices,6–9 while avoiding the use of hydrazine which is both highly toxic and highly reactive. In this report, following the approach used in prior work reported by our group,10 precursor inks were prepared by blending mixtures of binary and ternary metal-chalcogenide nanoparticles in order to simplify the control over the metal ratios in the ink composition and also in the resulting CZTSSe thin film. Precursor inks were prepared by blending stock solutions of tin sulfide (SnS), zinc sulfide (ZnS), and copper tin sulfide (CTS) nanoparticles in appropriate ratios to deliver required composition targets.
For compound semiconductors, compositional uniformity within the active absorber layer is critically important in achieving the required material properties for high-efficiency solar cells. Compositional non-uniformities can induce band gap and potential fluctuations within the absorber layer which will significantly lower the maximum attainable efficiency.11 We report the results from detailed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) characterization of high-efficiency CZTSSe solar cell devices fabricated using a solution-based process. Large lateral composition non-uniformities in the active absorber film were observed which likely in part contributed to the large open-circuit voltage deficit, ΔVOC, observed in the device. The open-circuit voltage deficit is defined as ΔVOC = Eg/q − VOC, where Eg is the CZTSSe band gap, q is the electron charge and VOC is the measured open-circuit voltage. To investigate how compositional non-uniformity evolves during the thermal annealing and selenization process which converts the solution coated ink precursors into CZTSSe thin films, TEM studies were carried out on a series of CZTSSe thin films annealed for differing lengths of time. We observed that while larger grains were observed with longer annealing times, this improved microstructure did not result in notable enhancements in device performance, possibly due to the higher lateral grain-to-grain variations in composition observed at longer annealing times.
Experimental section
Binary and ternary metal chalcogenide nanoparticles of SnS, ZnS, and CTS were synthesized as described previously.10 The nanoparticles were dispersed in a mixture of toluene and hexanethiol to yield stock inks. These stock inks were then blended to yield nanoparticle inks with the desired metal ratios. The metal ratios in the resulting nanoparticle ink solutions were confirmed by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Nanoparticle ink solutions were deposited by spin-coating or bar coating techniques onto Mo-coated glass substrates, and soft-baked on a hot plate in air at 150 °C for 2 min and then 350 °C for 2 min. The coating and soft-baking steps were repeated sequentially to yield soft-baked precursor films with thicknesses of approximately 2 μm.
Two different selenization configurations were employed in this study. The configuration used for routine CZTSSe device fabrication utilizes a graphite box annealing process as reported previously.10 For the time-series annealing studies, a different configuration referred to as flow-Se annealing was employed. In the flow-Se process, elemental Se is evaporated from a heated Se source and carried downstream in an argon carrier gas to the independently-heated CZTSSe precursor film. The flow-Se furnace allows simultaneous independent control of both Se vapor pressure and sample annealing temperature, which is ideal for controlled annealing studies. A series of three devices was prepared employing varying annealing times for selenization. The samples were prepared from a common batch of ink to minimize sample-to-sample variation in initial composition. The samples were annealed in the flow-Se furnace configuration for 30, 60, and 90 minutes respectively. The substrate temperature was held at 560 °C for the annealing procedure and the Se evaporation source temperature was held at 450 °C. The partial pressure of Se at the evaporation source temperature of 450 °C is estimated to be 16.2 torr. Completed devices were fabricated using a conventional Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO device architecture, as described in detail previously.10 CdS was deposited by chemical bath deposition, while i-ZnO and ITO layers were deposited by radio frequency (RF) sputtering. A patterned Ag top contact electrode was deposited by evaporation through a shadow mask.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) data of CZTSSe films were obtained with a Philips X'PERT automated powder diffractometer, Model 3040. The diffractometer was equipped with automatic variable anti-scatter and divergence slits, X'Celerator RTMS detector, and Ni filter. The radiation was Cu Kα (45 kV, 40 mA). Data were collected at room temperature from 4 to 80 degrees 2θ; using a continuous scan with an equivalent step size of 0.02 degree; and a count time of 80 seconds per step in theta–theta geometry. Using the diffraction pattern from the underlying Mo substrate as a 2θ calibration reference, the position of the (112) kesterite diffraction peak was determined by peak profile fitting. The corresponding d-spacing of this peak is assumed to vary linearly between that of CZTS and CZTSe as sulfur is replaced by selenium.
Device cross-sections roughly 100 nm in thickness and 15 microns in length for TEM analysis were prepared using a Ga ion focused-ion beam (FIB) in a Zeiss Auriga 60 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microstructure of the thin sections was analyzed by high-resolution TEM and its associated elemental analysis by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) using a Technai F-20 STEM equipped with a field-emission electron source. The microscope was operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The elemental analysis was accomplished with an Oxford Instruments INCA x-sight EDS system attached to the microscope column and capable of identifying elements as light as boron. The EDS system has a Li-doped Si detector and an ATW ultra-thin window. For the calculation of relative standard deviation (RSD%) in the atomic percentages of the constituent elements, STEM-EDS measurements from six to ten different areas within each sample were used.
Current (I) versus voltage (V) measurements were performed on the finished devices using two Agilent 5281B precision medium power SMUs in an E5270B mainframe in a four-point probe configuration. Devices were illuminated with an Oriel 81150 solar simulator under 1 sun AM 1.5G. External quantum efficiency (EQE) characterization of the devices was accomplished using a custom built apparatus employing lock-in detection of the photocurrent as a function of incident wavelength. The incident optical power of the probe beam was determined using a Laser Probe RM6600 power meter equipped with an RkP-575 probe.
Results and discussion
CZTSSe absorber layers were prepared from binary and ternary nanoparticles of SnS, ZnS, and CTS. The nanoparticle ink mixtures were deposited on substrates and subsequently annealed in the presence of Se vapor to form CZTSSe thin films. As noted previously,10 this synthesis route results in the formation of a bi-layered CZTSSe film, with a top layer of photoactive crystalline CZTSSe grains (the large-grain layer) and a bottom carbon-rich layer (the fine-grain layer) that exhibits similar microstructure to the precursor film prior to annealing. The source of carbon in the fine-grain layer is from residual stabilizing ligands on the sulfide nanoparticles. The resistivity of the fine-grain layer has been measured to be less than 5 ohm-cm,12 and we speculate that this layer can effectively conduct the photo-excited carriers to the back Mo contact, but does not itself generate photocurrent. This interpretation is supported by recent EBIC measurements which showed no evidence of current generation from the fine-grain layer of these bilayer devices.13 While the fine-grain layer acts as a passive conductor, the large-grain layer is the active absorber and its materials properties, including its compositional uniformity, will have a significant impact on the device performance.
Before examining the results of the annealing time dependence series, we first consider the results of TEM analysis of a high-efficiency device fabricated from a CZTSSe thin-film annealed in a graphite box, which inspired the time series investigation. Fig. 1a shows the high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) TEM image of a FIB-prepared thin cross-section (∼100 nm in thickness) obtained from an 8.6% efficient CZTSSe device (VOC = 461 mV, JSC = 29.0 mA cm−2, FF = 64.9%). This device was fabricated following the method presented in our previous report.10 All of the layers within the device structure are clearly observable in the TEM image. Utilizing the STEM-EDS line scan, we first investigated the uniformity of the large-grain layer perpendicular to the substrate through a single grain as indicated in Fig. 1a. As the TEM specimen is only 100 nm thick, and grains are on the order of 1 μm, the TEM specimen only has grain overlap (one grain in front of another, causing the STEM-EDS to sample two grains at a single point) right at grain boundaries. For the line scans, the EDS probe size is approximately 3 nm. The relative concentrations of the constituent elements obtained from the STEM-EDS line scan are plotted in Fig. 1b and c where the dashed lines indicate the boundaries of the large-grain layer. The elemental profiles are generally uniform across the thickness of the large-grain layer. The S and Se profiles in Fig. 1c vary in a complementary fashion and exhibit a small amount of bowing about the middle of the large-grain layer, with Se-levels relatively higher near both the top and bottom of the large-grain layer, and S-levels relatively higher in the center of the layer.
 Fig. 1  (a) HAADF-TEM image of the device cross-section of a high-efficiency CZTSSe device. (b) Cu, Zn, and Sn elemental profiles and (c) S and Se elemental profiles determined from the STEM-EDS line scan across the thickness of the large grain layer from top to bottom. The CdS/large-grain layer interface is indicated by the left dashed black line and the large-grain layer/fine-grain layer interface by the right dashed black line. The Sn and Zn signals at the beginning of the line scan in (b) and the S peak in (c) demarcate the ITO, intrinsic-ZnO, and CdS layers respectively. 
In contrast to the uniformity across a single grain normal to the substrate as described above, the STEM-EDS in-plane line scan taken laterally across multiple grains within the large-grain layer of the device indicated a high degree of lateral non-uniformity, as shown in Fig. 2. The compositions from representative areas within the individual grains are also determined by EDS as shown in Fig. S1 of ESI.† The relative standard deviation (RSD%) in the atomic percentage of the constituent elements from six different grains is used to indicate grain-to-grain compositional variation, Fig. S1b.† That is, a uniform composition will show low values of RSD% and small variation in the line scans of the corresponding elements. Herein, the non-uniformities observed in the STEM-EDS line scans in Fig. 2 are consistent with the grain-to-grain variation observed by EDS measurements from individual grains, in particular S and Se. In addition, STEM-EDS line scans across different regions within the large-grain layer also showed similar lateral non-uniformities. The elemental profile of S and Se showed the largest degree of grain-to-grain variation and to a lesser degree within the individual grains, while the metal compositions varied only slightly. The variation in the S and Se line profile appears to have no correlation with the elemental profiles of the metal species. Unfortunately, the observed lateral fluctuation in the distribution of sulfur can have a profound impact on the performance of the resulting device. Since the band gap energy of CZTSSe depends directly upon the fraction of Se substitution (%Se = 100 × (fSe/(fSe + fs)) where fSe and fS are respectively the mole fraction of Se and S in the sample), band gap fluctuation is expected due to local variations in the concentration of S or Se. Band gap fluctuation lowers the effective band gap of the absorber film and hence yields a lower attainable VOC. A large ΔVOC is one of the most challenging problems in CZTSSe photovoltaic devices, and can be partly attributed to lateral composition non-uniformity of the type observed here.14 It is, therefore, important to understand how compositional non-uniformity develops during the selenization process, which in turn could potentially identify approaches to improving both VOC and efficiency.
 Fig. 2  (a) HAADF-TEM image of the same high-efficiency CZTSSe device as shown in Fig. 1. (b) STEM-EDS line scan taken laterally across the large-grain layer, tracking Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and Se elemental profiles. Dashed black lines in (b) correspond to the black arrows in (a), and indicate the approximate position along the TEM line scan of CZTSSe grain boundaries in the large-grain layer. The sulfur profile showed the largest positional variation; this variation does not appear to correlate with any variations of the metal components. 
Due to the limited Se supply and intrinsically varying Se vapor pressure obtained in the graphite-box during the annealing process, this type of apparatus is of limited utility for mechanistic studies. Consequently the flow-Se process described in the Experimental section, which allows constant and continuous introduction of Se throughout the entire time course of the annealing run, was employed in the follow-up studies described below. In order to investigate the time-progression of composition uniformity during the selenization process, a series of CZTSSe samples were annealed at 560 °C in the flow-Se furnace configuration with varying annealing times: 30, 60, and 90 minutes. Fig. 3 shows the powder XRD patterns of the resulting films; all three samples exhibited the expected diffraction peaks for the kesterite CZTSSe phase and no secondary phases were observed. The shift in the main (112) peak towards lower 2θ indicates a greater %Se substituted in CZTSSe with increased annealing time, as expected. From the positions of the (112) diffraction peaks, the overall Se% was calculated to be 52%, 68%, and 78% for the 30 min, 60 min, and 90 min samples respectively.
 Fig. 3  XRD pattern of CZTSSe thin film samples on Mo/SLG substrates, after annealing at 560 °C for 30, 60 and 90 minutes. The inset shows the shift of the (112) peak over time in accordance with increasing Se content in the film. A preferred orientation is observed for the 30 minutes annealed sample as indicated by the strong (112) diffraction peak. 
In Fig. 4, representative cross-sectional HAADF-TEM images capture the progression in CZTSSe grain growth as a function of annealing time. After annealing for 30 minutes, formation of a thin, continuous large-grain layer was observed (Fig. 4a). This thin large-grain layer contained crystals of varying sizes resulting in relatively rough film morphology. At longer annealing times, the CZTSSe large-grain layer increases in z-direction thickness (Fig. 4b). Also, at longer annealing times, the grains present are fewer in number and larger in size, suggesting that grain coarsening has occurred. Extending the annealing time to 90 minutes, however, did not result in further noticeable changes in either grain size or large-grain layer thickness (Fig. 4c), suggesting that growth had terminated. In fact, rather than showing further changes in the large-grain CZTSSe, the 90 minute sample showed evidence of the onset of growth of secondary CZTSSe grains within the bulk of the fine-grain layer, as confirmed by STEM-EDS.
 Fig. 4  HAADF-TEM images of solar cells fabricated using CZTSSe thin films annealed at 560 °C for (a) 30 minutes, (b) 60 minutes, and (c) 90 minutes. Scale bar is 0.5 μm. The STEM-EDS line scans taken across representative sections of the large grain layer normal to the substrate for the corresponding samples are shown in (d), (e), and (f) respectively. TEM images of the exact sections chosen for the line scan, including the line scan trace, are shown in ESI Fig. S2.† The CdS/large-grain layer interface is indicated by the left dashed black line and large-grain layer/fine-grain layer by the right dashed black line. 
Local compositional information collected by STEM-EDS provides further insight into the growth process of the large-grain layer. EDS spectra collected in each region on the TEM samples indicated a ratio between Cu, Zn, and Sn consistent with CZTSSe; no evidence was found for the presence of other crystalline phases (such as ZnSe, Cu2−xSe or SnSe) within the detection limit of STEM-EDS. Fig. 4d–f show STEM-EDS line scans across the large-grain layer of cross-sections of samples annealed for 30, 60 and 90 minutes respectively. These line scans were taken across a single grain which spanned the thickness of the large-grain layer, in order to understand the top-to-bottom compositional variation within a single grain (the exact TEM images showing the location of the EDS line scan traces are given in ESI Fig. S2†). In Fig. 4d–f, the dotted black lines to the left and right denote where the line scans pass through the top and bottom of the large grain layer respectively. In the elemental profiles of the 30 minute annealed sample shown in Fig. 4d, a pronounced gradient in the %Se substitution is observed, varying from low %Se at the bottom of the large-grain layer to high %Se CdS/CZTSSe boundary. This gradient is consistent with Se incorporation from Se vapor present above the film surface during annealing; only sulfides are present in the initial nanoparticle precursor. The depth profiles of Se (and likewise, S) become more uniform with extended annealing time. Although a slight gradient in %Se is still observed at 60 minutes (Fig. 4e), the %Se is only very slightly elevated at the top of the large grain layer at 90 minutes (Fig. 4f). On the other hand, the depth-profiles of the Cu, Zn and Sn metals remained relatively uniform with little evidence of change throughout the range of annealing times examined. The results suggest that the diffusion of the chalcogens within the large-grain layer is likely slower than that of the metals,15,16 consistent with the higher grain-to-grain variations in the S profile observed in the high-efficiency device discussed above.
EDS composition data were also collected from multiple grains within the large-grain layer of each sample in the annealing time series. The average %Se quantified from these spectra, reported in Table 1, closely match with those calculated from the XRD results. Fig. 5 shows the RSD% of the constituent elements as a function of annealing time. It is interesting to note that the compositions of individual grains within the sample annealed for 30 minutes are relatively uniform as judged by the lower values of RSD%. However, as the samples were annealed for longer lengths of time, the variation in composition as judged by RSD% increased. A relative standard deviation of constituent elements in the order of a few percents will induce potential and band gap fluctuations and will in turn lead to shortcomings in device performance.
Table 1 Device parameters for the solar cells with J–V curves shown in Fig. 6a. Also listed for the respective devices are the band gap energies as determined from the EQE spectra in Fig. 6b, ΔVOC, the %Se of the large grain layer from EDS, and the %Se calculated from XRD patterns




Annealing time

η (%)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

V
OC (V)

E
g (V)
ΔVOC (mV)
%Se (EDS)
%Se (XRD)




30 min
5.8
22.5
56.5
0.453
1.24
787
58
52


60 min
6.0
25.1
59.0
0.405
1.14
735
71
68


90 min
4.8
26.4
53.0
0.343
1.1
757
83
78




 Fig. 5  In order to capture the degree of grain-to-grain compositional variation, relative standard deviation (RSD%) values are shown for (a) Cu, (b) Zn, (c) Sn, and (d) %Se for the 30 min, 60 min, and 90 min annealed samples demonstrating an increase in lateral grain-to-grain compositional non-uniformity as a function of annealing time. RSD% is calculated based on multiple EDS measurements obtained from several different grains within the large-grain layer in the respective CZTSSe thin films. 
Current-density vs. voltage (J–V) curves of these devices are shown in Fig. 6a with device parameters extracted from the J–V curves reported in Table 1. Surprisingly, the 30 minute annealed sample with its rather thin large-grain layer and smaller grain sizes yielded higher device efficiency than did the 90 minute sample. The improved microstructure of the large-grain layer in the 90 min sample (i.e. increased thickness and grain size) did result in higher short circuit current (JSC); however, no notable net gain in efficiency was achieved. This is due to the decrease in VOC with annealing time which counterbalanced the slight gains in JSC. A possible cause for low VOC values obtained in these devices is due to the high degree of lateral compositional variations which became worse at longer annealing times, as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQEs of solar cells fabricated using CZTSSe thin films annealed at 560 °C for (a) 30 minutes, (b) 60 minutes and (c) 90 minutes. Extracted device parameters are summarized in Table 1. 
In Fig. 6b, EQE measurements of the finished devices offer further insights into the deficiencies in the corresponding devices. Compared to the 90 minute sample, both the 30 minute and 60 minute samples showed inferior carrier collection efficiencies in the visible and near-infrared wavelength ranges. A possible cause for the poor quantum efficiencies is the gradient observed in the Se elemental profile normal to the substrate of the corresponding samples, as illustrated in Fig. 4d and e. The band gap energy as well as the energy positions of the conduction and valence bands of CZTSSe depend on the Se% within the film.17 Higher Se% results in a down-shift of the conduction band minimum as well as an up-shift in the valence band maximum. The decrease in Se% away from the hetero-junction interface as shown in Fig. 4d results in a conduction band gradient that facilitates the transport of photo-generated electrons. However, it also induces an unfavorable valence band gradient which hinders the transport of photo-generated holes. This will increase the concentration of holes within the large-grain CZTSSe layer and leads to higher recombination losses. The band gap energies of the CZTSSe absorbers in the finished devices as determined by analysis of Tauc plots of the EQE spectra are summarized in Table 1. The CZTSSe band gap decreased with increasing annealing time due to the higher %Se substitution of the longer-annealed films.17,18 The measured ΔVOC of the resulting devices is slightly misleading since the band gap derived from the EQE is an average of the large grain CZTSSe layer in the completed devices. Due to the presence of the Se-rich layer near the hetero-junction interface in the 30 minute and 60 minute samples, the interfacial band gap which underpins VOC is smaller than the average Eg extracted from EQE, hence the larger ΔVOC in those two samples.
Conclusions
STEM-EDS analysis of a high-efficiency CZTSSe solar cell fabricated using a solution-based process revealed that local lateral compositional non-uniformity is a potential source of VOC loss due to band-gap and potential fluctuations. To gain further insight into these deficiencies, the impact of annealing time on local compositional uniformity and device characteristics was investigated. Although thicker CZTSSe large-grain layers with larger grain size were observed at longer annealing times, the grain-to-grain compositions also varied more significantly and, as a result, increased annealing time did not lead to a net gain in device performance. The results suggest that a brief annealing at a high Se vapor concentration is likely the preferred method for achieving higher uniformity – that is, a process similar to the graphite-box based selenization process but under a stringently controlled temperature profile. Furthermore, there is a need for understanding the fundamental cause of compositional non-uniformity in CZTSSe thin films, in particular the impact of different thin film deposition methods that have been demonstrated for CZTSSe. Improved compositional uniformity is likely to yield CZTSSe PV devices with improved solar conversion efficiency.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all members of the DuPont CZTSSe research team for helpful discussions. We thank our colleagues at the DuPont Corporate Center for Analytical Science for their assistance in material characterization, especially Leland G. Hanna. We are also grateful for the consistent support and guidance from Joseph Dennes and Steve C. Freilich. We would also like to thank the University of Delaware W. M. Keck Electron Microscopy Facility staff for their support.
References
J. He, L. Sun, N. Ding, H. Kong, S. Zuo, S. Chen, Y. Chen, P. Yang and J. Chu, Single-Step Preparation and Characterization of Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 Thin Films Deposited by Pulsed Laser Deposition Method, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 529, 34–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Levcenco, D. Dumcenco, Y. P. Wang, Y. S. Huang, C. H. Ho, E. Arushanov, V. Tezlevan and K. K. Tiong, Influence of anionic substitution on the electrolyte electroreflectance study of band edge transitions in single crystal Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 solid solutions, Opt. Mater., 2012, 34, 1362–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mellikov, D. Meissner, M. Altosaar, M. Kauk, J. Krustok, A. Öpik, O. Volobujeva, J. Iljina, K. Timmo and I. Klavina, 
            et al., CZTS monograin powders and thin films, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 222, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, Detailed Balance Limit of Efficiency of p–n Junction Solar Cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Device Characteristics of CZTSSe Thin-Film Solar Cells with 12.6% Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301465 Search PubMed .
Q. Guo, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, Synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystal ink and its use for solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11672–11673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Solution-based synthesis and characterization of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12054–12055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shavel, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, Synthesis of quaternary chalcogenide nanocrystals: stannite Cu2ZnxSnySe1+x+2y, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4514–4515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Steinhagen, M. G. Panthani, V. Akhavan, B. Goodfellow, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, Synthesis of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanocrystals for use in low-cost photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12554–12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich and D. Radu, 
            et al., High-Efficiency Solution-Processed Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 Thin-Film Solar Cells Prepared from Binary and Ternary Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644–15647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Rau and J. H. Werner, Radiative efficiency limits of solar cells with lateral band-gap fluctuations, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3735–3737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Y. Cao, J. V. Caspar, Q. Guo, L. K. Johnson, I. Malajovich, H. D. Rosenfeld and K. R. Choudhury, Studies of the Fine-Grain Sub-Layer in the Printed CZTSSe Photovoltaic Devices, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3777–3781 RSC .
To be submitted for publication.
A. Polizzotti, I. L. Repins, R. Noufi, S.-H. Wei and D. B. Mitzi, The state and future prospects of kesterite photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3171–3182 CAS .

          C. E. Birchenall, in Geochemical Transport and Kinetics, ed. A. W. Hofmann, B. J. Giletti, H. S. Yoder and R. A. Yund, Carnegie Institution of Washington,  1974, pp. 53–59 Search PubMed .
B. D. Chernomordik, A. E. Béland, D. D. Deng, L. F. Francis and E. S. Aydil, Microstructure evolution and crystal growth in Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films formed by annealing colloidal nanocrystal coatings, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3191–3201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, A. Walsh, J. H. Yang, X. G. Gong, L. Sun, P. X. Yang, J. H. Chu and S. H. Wei, Compositional dependence of structural and electronic properties of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 alloys for thin film solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 125201 CrossRef .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, Compositionally Tunable Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 Nanocrystals: Probing the Effect of Se-Inclusion in Mixed Chalcogenide Thin Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15272–15275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02205j‡ Current address: Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) HAADF-TEM image of the device cross-section of a high-efficiency CZTSSe device. (b) Cu, Zn, and Sn elemental profiles and (c) S and Se elemental profiles determined from the STEM-EDS line scan across the thickness of the large grain layer from top to bottom. The CdS/large-grain layer interface is indicated by the left dashed black line and the large-grain layer/fine-grain layer interface by the right dashed black line. The Sn and Zn signals at the beginning of the line scan in (b) and the S peak in (c) demarcate the ITO, intrinsic-ZnO, and CdS layers respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) HAADF-TEM image of the same high-efficiency CZTSSe device as shown in Fig. 1. (b) STEM-EDS line scan taken laterally across the large-grain layer, tracking Cu, Zn, Sn, S, and Se elemental profiles. Dashed black lines in (b) correspond to the black arrows in (a), and indicate the approximate position along the TEM line scan of CZTSSe grain boundaries in the large-grain layer. The sulfur profile showed the largest positional variation; this variation does not appear to correlate with any variations of the metal components.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD pattern of CZTSSe thin film samples on Mo/SLG substrates, after annealing at 560 °C for 30, 60 and 90 minutes. The inset shows the shift of the (112) peak over time in accordance with increasing Se content in the film. A preferred orientation is observed for the 30 minutes annealed sample as indicated by the strong (112) diffraction peak.	 

 	Fig. 4  HAADF-TEM images of solar cells fabricated using CZTSSe thin films annealed at 560 °C for (a) 30 minutes, (b) 60 minutes, and (c) 90 minutes. Scale bar is 0.5 μm. The STEM-EDS line scans taken across representative sections of the large grain layer normal to the substrate for the corresponding samples are shown in (d), (e), and (f) respectively. TEM images of the exact sections chosen for the line scan, including the line scan trace, are shown in ESI Fig. S2.† The CdS/large-grain layer interface is indicated by the left dashed black line and large-grain layer/fine-grain layer by the right dashed black line.	 

30 min	5.8	22.5	56.5	0.453	1.24	787	58	52
60 min	6.0	25.1	59.0	0.405	1.14	735	71	68
90 min	4.8	26.4	53.0	0.343	1.1	757	83	78

 	Fig. 5  In order to capture the degree of grain-to-grain compositional variation, relative standard deviation (RSD%) values are shown for (a) Cu, (b) Zn, (c) Sn, and (d) %Se for the 30 min, 60 min, and 90 min annealed samples demonstrating an increase in lateral grain-to-grain compositional non-uniformity as a function of annealing time. RSD% is calculated based on multiple EDS measurements obtained from several different grains within the large-grain layer in the respective CZTSSe thin films.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQEs of solar cells fabricated using CZTSSe thin films annealed at 560 °C for (a) 30 minutes, (b) 60 minutes and (c) 90 minutes. Extracted device parameters are summarized in Table 1.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta02205j
‡ Current address: Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
