Light trapping in thin film silicon solar cells via phase separated disordered nanopillars   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR00455B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00455B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6651-6659Light trapping in thin film silicon solar cells via phase separated disordered nanopillars†

        
          
            Yidenekachew J. 
            Donie
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Smeets
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Amos 
            Egel
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Florian 
            Lentz
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jan B. 
            Preinfalk
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Adrian 
            Mertens
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vladimir 
            Smirnov
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Uli 
            Lemmer
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Karsten 
            Bittkau
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Guillaume 
            Gomard
          
        
      *ab
aLight Technology Institute, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Engesserstr. 13, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. E-mail: yidenekachew.donie@kit.edu; guillaume.gomard@kit.edu
bInstitute of Microstructure Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
cIEK5-Photovoltaik, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany
Received 
      17th January 2018
    , Accepted 1st March 2018First published on 5th March 2018AbstractIn this work, we have improved the absorption properties of thin film solar cells by introducing light trapping reflectors deposited onto self-assembled nanostructures. The latter consist of a disordered array of nanopillars and are fabricated by polymer blend lithography. Their broadband light scattering properties are exploited to enhance the photocurrent density of thin film devices, here based on hydrogenated amorphous silicon active layers. We demonstrate that these light scattering nanopillars yield a short-circuit current density increase of +33%rel with respect to equivalent solar cells processed on a planar reflector. Moreover, we experimentally show that they outperform randomly textured substrates that are commonly used for achieving efficient light trapping. Complementary optical simulations are conducted on an accurate 3D model to analyze the superior light harvesting properties of the nanopillar array and to derive general design rules. Our approach allows one to easily tune the morphology of the self-assembled nanostructures, is up-scalable and operated at room temperature, and is applicable to other photovoltaic technologies.
1. Introduction
Over the last decade, considerable research efforts have been dedicated to the development of light trapping structures in thin film photovoltaics (PV), essentially to improve the absorption of photons with energy just above the active layer bandgap. To this end, several research groups took advantages of the easily-adjustable optical properties of diffraction gratings and planar photonic crystals,1–5 achieving absorption enhancement factors that exceeded those obtained with state-of-the-art, randomly textured substrates. As periodic photonic structures are optimized for a limited spectral and angular range, light trapping elements relying on a controlled amount of structural disorder were additionally employed to harvest sunlight over a larger bandwidth and set of incidence angles, while preserving deterministic optical properties. By using disordered structures, the constraint of periodicity is released, opening the route to up-scalable and potentially high-throughput fabrication processes. Aside e-beam lithography, which enables one to precisely tailor structural disorder but over small areas only, various methods were thus investigated, including colloidal lithography,6,7 as well as spontaneous and self-assembly approaches.8–11 Among the latter, the thermally induced dewetting technique was widely employed because of its compatibility with large area patterning and its capacity to produce multisized scattering nanostructures with tunable geometries. It was reported that dewetted silver nanoparticles integrated in a plasmonic back reflector configuration lead to superior power conversion efficiencies compared to state-of-the-art random textures in hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) solar cells.8 However, such light scatterers suffer from significant parasitic absorption losses due to their irregular contour profiles,8–11 hampering the ultimate efficiency gain they can provide. Moreover, the annealing step involved in the dewetting process necessitates a high temperature of up to 400–500 °C, which calls for more energy- and cost-efficient fabrication routes. In this context, the realization of disordered nanostructures by the phase separation of immiscible polymer blends is a relevant alternative, as it can be carried out at room temperature and over large surfaces.12 So far, this approach has been restricted to the transfer of the polymer blend nanodomains into substrates12–15 and into isolated photovoltaic absorbers.16 Although diffusely recognized, its potential remains largely untapped for functional PV devices.
In the present study, we therefore exploit the light trapping properties of phase separated nanopillars (NPs) integrated in the back reflector of thin film solar cells. Our approach is demonstrated using a-Si:H active layers, and can also be applied to other thin film technologies. The design considered herein consists of a light scattering back reflector conformally deposited onto the disordered polymer NPs (see Fig. 1). Owing to their in-plane regularity and moderate aspect ratio, these nanostructures limit parasitic absorption effects, facilitate the growth of high quality silicon layers atop them, and minimize the risks of an electrical failure within the devices. In the next sections, we first show that the geometrical parameters describing the disordered NP arrays can be tuned using our polymer blend lithography (PBL) approach, and can be optimized to achieve broadband light scattering under varying illumination conditions. These properties enable us to then engage the deposition of functional (n-i-p) a-Si:H solar cell stacks on the patterned back reflectors, with a view of improving their light harvesting properties. The light trapping capability of the resulting devices is evaluated by comparison with solar cells processed on the top of planar reflectors and of state-of-the-art randomly textured Asahi substrates.17,18 We note that the latter are primarily designed for use as a superstrate in p-i-n a-Si:H solar cells, yet are commonly utilized as benchmarking references to assess the performance of photonic structures in n-i-p configurations.8,19 Finally, we extend the optical analysis of our patterned devices by performing simulations based on the finite element method (FEM), which account for the exact nano-corrugation at all interfaces. These complementary numerical results allow us to investigate the light distribution within the solar cell stacks and to derive general rules for the design of disordered NP arrays.
 Fig. 1  Schematic view of the thin film solar cells integrating the light trapping disordered NP array in their back reflector. The fabricated stack, deposited on the polymer NP array, consists of a Ag back reflector, a rear transparent and conductive oxide (TCO) layer made of ZnO:Al, an n-i-p type a-Si:H active layer, and a front TCO layer (hydrogenated indium oxide, denoted “IOH”) capped by a thin ZnO:Al layer. 
2. Results and discussion
The light scattering disordered NPs were fabricated by PBL following the sequence illustrated in Fig. 2(a). A blend of two immiscible polymers, namely poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS), was spin-coated over 5 cm × 5 cm substrates in order to achieve phase separation initiated by solvent extraction. It should be noted that the dimensions of the substrates were selected to comply with the solar cell fabrication process. Complementary tests (not reported here) carried out on 4 inch substrates resulted in the same quality and homogeneity of the nanostructures produced, highlighting the up-scalability of the present approach. We tuned the morphology of the phase-separated nanostructures (i.e. the shape, the diameter and the height distribution of the NPs together with their density and mean inter-distance) by adjusting the polymer blend composition and the deposition conditions, as described in section 4. The morphology of the NP array leading to the best light scattering properties was experimentally analyzed (see Fig. 2(b)–(g)), and can be compared to other investigated configurations exhibiting different size distribution and density (in ESI Fig. S1 and S2†). The SEM image displayed in Fig. 2(b) gives a qualitative impression of PS NP self-organization. Although arranged in a disordered fashion, the NPs retain a certain degree of correlation, are uniformly distributed over the substrate and do not form large clusters. To further ascertain their spatial distribution, we derived the corresponding pair correlation function (radial distribution),20 which is related to the probability of finding the center of a NP at given distance from the center of another NP. The nearest neighbor peak is around 0.5 μm on the deduced pair correlation function shown in Fig. 2(c), indicative of short-range order. A moderate level of disorder, which is achieved by short-range order, is desirable to achieve efficient light trapping with low angular sensitivity.19 The diameter size distribution of the NPs is another controllable parameter and is reported in Fig. 2(d) for the selected configuration. We conclude that it follows a Gaussian distribution, here with a mean NP diameter of 357 nm and a resulting mean surface coverage (SC) of 30%. In addition to the in-plane arrangement of the NPs, we investigated their height distribution by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM). Fig. 2(e)–(f) reveal an average height of 80 nm, leading to a mean aspect ratio (height/diameter) of around 0.22. As motivated above, such a moderate value promotes the growth of high quality layers on the top of the patterned substrate and the good reproducibility of the fabricated devices. Fig. 2(g) exemplifies the vertical profile of a single NP. It is characterized by a smooth transition from the base to its apex and as will be discussed in the following, it is free from sharp edges responsible for high parasitic absorption losses.21,22 Equally important is the regularity of the NP (in-plane) contour profile, known to also impact the magnitude of light scattering and parasitic absorption.8–10 More precisely, regularly shaped scatterers exhibit negligible parasitic absorption loss and are therefore desired for PV applications. From Fig. 2(b) we calculated an average circularity  of ∼1. This is notably higher than the typical values obtained with dewetted nanostructures,8 making our approach well-suited for the fabrication of low-loss scattering back reflectors.
 Fig. 2  Fabrication and topographical characterization of the disordered NP array. (a) Overview of the phase separation process, leaving PS NPs on the substrate after the selective development of the PMMA matrix and prior to the deposition of the solar cell stack. (b) A SEM top-view image of the disordered and uniformly distributed PS NPs. The pair correlation function (PCF) and diameter size distribution of this array are reported in (c) and (d), respectively. The solid red line in (d) represents the Gaussian fit. The height distribution within the NP array can be appreciated in the 5 μm × 5 μm AFM image in (e), and is analyzed in more details in (f). The vertical profile of a single NP is measured in (g) and emphasizes a smooth transition from the base to apex. Both SEM and AFM images are representative of the whole patterned surface (5 cm × 5 cm). 
Such reflectors were obtained by conformally depositing a 200 nm thick silver film on the PS NP array. It was found that the resulting root mean square (RMS) roughness is around 20 nm, which is lower than that obtained with state-of-the-art textured back reflectors (measured RMS of 35 nm)18,19 and sufficiently smooth to avoid electrical shorts in our devices. For efficient light trapping, our patterned back reflectors should additionally allow a proper scattering of the incoming light, regardless of the incidence angle. Consequently, the angle-resolved scattering properties of Ag and ZnO:Al-coated substrates were analyzed. Fig. 3(a) displays photographs of the patterned reflectors for viewing angles ranging from 10° to 60°. We observe that the scattering NPs lead to homogeneous hues over the sample surface, confirming that they are uniformly distributed over few cm2, and that they do not feature any long-range order. The reflector haze, defined as the diffused fraction of the overall reflected light, was also measured over the wavelength range of interest for a-Si:H solar cells (300–800 nm) and under various incidence angles. Irrespective of the illumination conditions, a broadband peak is measured above 600 nm and reaches a maximum value exceeding 85% (see Fig. 3(b)). Combined with the high reflectance of our scattering reflectors (65% in average between 400 nm and 800 nm, see Fig. 3(c)), this measurement supports the light trapping potential of our structures, especially in the weakly absorbing spectral range.
 Fig. 3  Light scattering properties of the patterned back reflectors. (a) Photographs of the patterned reflectors taken under varying incidence angles, after the deposition of the Ag and ZnO:Al layers on the top of the NP array. (b) Corresponding haze spectra showing a high scattering coefficient above 600 nm. The arrows follow the increase of the angle of incidence. (c) Total reflectance of the scattering back reflectors. 
In order to explore the impact of the scattering NP array on the performance of functional thin film solar cells, devices were subsequently fabricated according to the layout introduced in Fig. 1. The light trapping capability of this design (“NP”) was assessed by characterizing two additional references based on a planar back reflector (“planar”) and on a randomly textured Asahi substrate (“Asahi”). Fig. 4(a) and (b) exhibit the SEM cross-section view of the stacks grown on the Asahi substrate and on the NP array. We observe that the “Asahi” configuration incorporates sharp-edged nano-features which create undesired local thickness inhomogeneities and, in turn, potential electrical shorts. Conversely, the smooth and low aspect ratio profile of the NPs enables the conformal deposition of all layers and the implementation of a reproducible fabrication process.
 Fig. 4  Improved light harvesting properties of thin film solar cells integrating the scattering NP array. SEM cross-sections of (a) the a-Si:H solar cell deposited on the Asahi substrates (“Asahi”) and of (b) a similar thin film stack processed atop the disordered NP array (“NP”). The scale bar represents 500 nm. (c) The absorptance spectrum of the solar cell based on the “NP” design, benchmarked against “Asahi” type devices and equivalent but planar solar cells (“planar”). The improved light trapping properties of the “NP” configuration translate into a substantial increase of its external quantum efficiency (EQE) above 600 nm, as shown in (d). All spectra were acquired under normal incidence. 
The light harvesting properties of all devices were evaluated by measuring the absorption spectra of the overall PV stacks (see Fig. 4(c)). Consistent with the haze values reported in Fig. 3(b), these spectra demonstrate the remarkable light trapping performance of the NP array above 600 nm, where the absorption is plummeting for a solar cell equipped with a planar reflector. Moreover, a significant absorption increase is achieved at lower wavelengths (300–450 nm) with respect to the planar design. This enhancement originates from the densely-packed nano-domes shaping the solar cell front side (see also ESI Fig. S3†), and from the resulting decrease of reflection losses. Fig. 4(c) also shows the absorption within the “Asahi” solar cell stack, which overcomes that of the “NP” configuration over almost the whole spectral range considered. To analyze how these trends translate for the generation and collection of the charge carriers, external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were acquired (Fig. 4(d)). We first note that the EQE of the planar configuration dominates or equals that obtained with the patterned devices below 450 nm. This indicates a higher amount of parasitic absorption in the corrugated front layers (IOH and ZnO:Al) that counterbalances the reduction of reflection losses. However, both the “NP” and “Asahi” solar cells exhibit improved EQE above 600 nm compared to the planar reference. We additionally observe that the NP array yields the best EQE in this spectral range, and we hence conclude that the “Asahi” design suffers from higher parasitic absorption losses (compare with Fig. 4(c)). Thus, the NP-based reflector enables the increase of EQE over a wavelength of larger than 520 nm thanks to its excellent light scattering properties and to its topography that allows capitalizing on most of the absorption gains. The performance data of the three types of solar cells are summarized in Table 1. They were derived by averaging the values of 16 devices (each with an active area of 5 mm × 5 mm) fabricated on 5 cm × 5 cm substrates. The standard deviation of the efficiency measured on a single substrate is 0.5% for the “Asahi” based devices and 0.1% for the “NP” and “planar” based solar cells. Compared to the planar design, the scattering NPs improve the short-circuit current density and the power conversion efficiency by ∼33% and ∼65% (relative values), respectively. The higher efficiency gain is attributed to the improved open-circuit voltage and fill factor of the NP cells, whereby the higher fill factor could be the consequence of an increased conductivity of the nanostructured ZnO:Al layers.8 Furthermore, we demonstrate that both the short-circuit current density and the power conversion efficiency achieved by the NP design overcome those measured with the Asahi solar cells, emphasizing the superior light harvesting properties of the scattering NP array.
Table 1 Influence of the reflector design on the short-circuit current density (Jsc), the open-circuit voltage (Voc), the fill factor (FF) and the power conversion efficiency (η) of the a-Si:H solar cells (measured under normal incidence)




Reflector design

J
sc [mA cm−2]

V
oc [mV]
FF [%]

η [%]




Planar
10.2
873
51.9
4.6


Asahi
12.7
900
64.4
7.3


NP
13.6
901
62.3
7.6




The previous results suggest that analyzing how the absorbed light distributes within the patterned solar cell stacks is of paramount importance to understand the improved performance of the NP design. Consequently, we conducted complementary optical simulations based on the FEM and accounting for the exact morphology of all the layers (see section 4 for details). The 3D model used for that purpose is represented in Fig. 5(a). It consists of a supercell integrating 124 disordered NPs in order to compute statistically relevant optical properties. Fig. 5(b) gives an overview of absorptance in the different layers of the 3D model considered. We note that the doped (n- and p-) a-Si:H layers possess high material defect densities,23 meaning that photons absorbed in these layers will not contribute to the generation of photocurrent. Our numerical results confirm that high parasitic absorption losses take place in the front layers (ZnO:Al, IOH and p-a-Si:H) at short wavelengths. More precisely, they represent 24% of the overall spectrally weighted absorptance between 300 nm and 500 nm, which cancels the benefits of the front side nano-corrugation for enhancing the EQE in this range, as observed in Fig. 4(d). With 13.5% of the total spectrally weighted absorptance, optical losses in the rear layers (mainly n-a-Si:H and Ag) negatively affect the performance of the solar cells above 500 nm. In particular, parasitic absorption in the Ag reflector becomes increasingly detrimental towards the a-Si:H optical bandgap. At 720 nm, it even contributes to half of all parasitic absorption losses.
 Fig. 5  Numerical analysis of the parasitic absorption effects in the patterned solar cells. (a) a 3D model developed to accurately compute the optical properties of the a-Si:H solar cells integrating the disordered NP array with a mean diameter of 357 nm, SC of 30% and average height of 80 nm. These parameters correspond to the best fabricated structure shown in Fig. 2. (b) Distribution of the absorptance in the different layers of the PV stack shown in (a). The reported values correspond to the integrated absorptance for each layer. (c) Comparison of the parasitic absorption in the Ag reflector between solar cells based on the NP and on the Asahi designs (in the 500–800 nm range). (d) Normalized electromagnetic power loss density simulated in the NP- and Asahi-based solar cells at λ = 665 nm (cross-section views). All the simulations are performed under normal incident light. 
To gain further insights into the impact of these optical losses, we computed the parasitic absorption stemming from the reflector integrated in the “NP” and “Asahi” type solar cells. Fig. 5(c) shows that, in the spectral range where the assistance of light trapping is necessary (500–800 nm), the Ag layer processed atop the randomly textured substrates (Asahi) absorbs more light than when it is deposited onto the NP array. This trend is explained by the larger surface roughness of the Asahi substrates and by the higher average peak-to-peak height of the nano-features involved (up to 200 nm, to be compared to the mean NP height of 80 nm). This effect can also be visualized in Fig. 5(d), showing in cross-section view the normalized electromagnetic power density inside each layer of the a-Si:H solar cells for a normally incident plane wave at λ = 665 nm (corresponds to a wavelength for which Asahi-based solar cells possess a much higher absorptance but a lower EQE value compared to NP-based devices, see Fig. 4(c) and (d)). Herein, the higher power density in the Ag layer for the Asahi texture compared to the NP case implies larger parasitic absorption for the former, which again advocates the use of the scattering NPs possessing a low surface roughness and a smooth profile.
Lastly, we investigated the robustness of the NP design following a variation of the NP mean height or of their surface coverage. This was realized numerically in order to modify only one parameter at once. Details on the methodology and on the implementation of the different configurations can be found in section 4. Fig. 6(a) and (b) illustrate the effect of decreasing (−30 nm) or of increasing (+50 nm) the mean NP height from the measured value of 80 nm. In the former situation, both the overall absorptance and the EQE spectra of the solar cells are negatively impacted. The integrated absorption (IA) value, calculated in the sole intrinsic a-Si:H layer, thus drops from 52.8% to 49.9%. Indeed, absorptance is decreased over almost the entire spectral range, and especially in the red/near-infrared region. Below 500 nm, the increase of reflection losses originates from the change of the front texture morphology, leaving many planar areas exposed (see ESI Fig. S4†). Inversely, for a mean NP height of 130 nm, the front side texture is not dramatically affected, and hence the overall absorptance and EQE spectra are nearly untouched. The weaker response between 600 and 700 nm leads to a reduced IA of 51.6% in the i-a-Si:H layer, which is nevertheless less severe than for the lowest NP height. Besides this, we tested the influence of SC by varying this parameter between 13%, which is the limiting value for keeping all the NPs, and 49%, above which the NPs would otherwise overlap (not observed in actual samples, see Fig. 2(b)). The different configurations generated are displayed in ESI Fig. S5.† The corresponding spectra shown in Fig. 6(c) point out a weak influence of SC below 500 nm. Above this wavelength, they are mostly impacted by the increase of SC. As an example, we report a maximum EQE decrease of 3.5% for SC = 49%, against only 1.4% for SC = 13%. It can therefore be inferred that the geometrical parameters of the fabricated NPs introduced in Fig. 2 lie in an optimized range, and that the light harvesting properties of such scattering reflectors can be globally preserved even for a large variation of the mean NP height and SC. Moreover, the simulations in Fig. 6 show that too short or too large NPs should be avoided in order to increase the EQE over the full spectral range. However, the optical absorption and EQE value are relatively immune to small surface coverage changes such as by ±5% (see Fig. S6†). Interestingly, PS NPs with different mean height but with the same in-plane morphology can be fabricated by treating the NPs by oxygen plasma, as illustrated in Fig. S2 of the ESI.†
 Fig. 6  Guidelines for the design of efficient light harvesting disordered NPs. (a) Cross-sectional view of the simulated solar cells deposited on the NPs with mean heights (H) of 50 nm, 80 nm, and 130 nm. The EQE and overall absorptance spectra of the complete solar cell stack depicted in Fig. 5(a) are simulated as a function of the NP mean height H (b), and of their surface coverage SC (c). A normal incidence of the light was considered in all the simulations. 
3. Conclusions
In this work, we have developed light scattering NPs integrated in the rear reflector of thin film solar cells in order to achieve broadband light trapping. To this end, we have exploited the polymer blend lithography technique, which allows controlling the morphology of the disordered NP array (diameter and height distributions, and pair correlation function) and to uniformly pattern substrates over few cm2 at room temperature. Thus, we have fabricated scattering reflectors with a haze reaching up to 85% in the 580–800 nm spectral range, and tested their light trapping potential in n-i-p a-Si:H solar cells.
Owing to their moderate aspect ratio and smooth profile, the disordered NPs can be easily integrated in functional thin film devices and limit parasitic absorption losses. We have demonstrated that they dramatically improve the short-circuit current density with respect to devices based on planar reflectors (Jsc relative increase of +33%), and even outperform randomly textured Asahi solar cells (+7%rel in Jsc), thereby yielding the highest power conversion efficiency measured. Optical simulations carried out on an accurate 3D model revealed that the superior light harvesting properties of the disordered NPs notably stem from reduced absorption losses in the reflector above 500 nm, when compared to Asahi devices that integrate sharp-edged textures. Moreover, we have numerically shown that our design is tolerant to NP height and diameter variations. Our approach can be used to ameliorate light absorption in other PV thin film technologies, and is relevant for the implementation of light outcoupling structures applied to organic light emitting diodes.
4. Materials and methods
Fabrication of disordered nanopillars by polymer blend lithography
The PBL technique was employed to produce the disordered NP array. In this route, polymer blend solutions of PS (MW = 34 kg mol−1) and PMMA (MW = 15 kg mol−1) were used. PS and PMMA were purchased from PSS Polymer Standards Service GmbH (PSS). The PS:PMMA solutions with a weight ratio of 2:8 and a concentration of 20 mg ml−1 were prepared by dissolving each mixture of PS and PMMA precursor in methyl ethyl ketone (MEK, Sigma-Aldrich). A blend film was formed by spin coating the solutions on c-Si substrates (5 cm × 5 cm) at a speed of 500 rpm for 30 s. Prior to this, the substrates (p-type silicon wafers with an orientation of (100)) were subjected to standard ultrasonic cleaning with acetone and isopropanol. After phase separation of the polymer blends, PMMA was selectively developed using acetic acid. Relative humidity was maintained between 40% and 50% during spin coating.
Deposition of the thin film solar cells
The thin film solar cells used in this work are based on hydrogenated amorphous silicon active layers. The silicon layers were prepared in an n-i-p deposition sequence by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition. Additional details can be found in refs. 1 and 19. The solar cell stacks were deposited onto planar c-Si substrates, onto the disordered NP array and onto glass substrates covered with an as-grown textured, SnO2:F layer, provided by the Asahi Glass Company (cross-section views available in Fig. 4). More precisely, these substrates were sputter-coated with a 200 nm thick Ag layer and with a 80 nm thick ZnO:Al buffer layer. Subsequently, the a-Si:H active layer was deposited following an n-i-p sequence by using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (thickness of the intrinsic a-Si:H layer around 210 nm). A 50 nm thick hydrogenated indium oxide (IOH) layer with 5 mm × 5 mm pads was then deposited through a contact mask in order to define the solar cell active areas. Lastly, a 20 nm thick ZnO:Al layer was used as a capping layer. The fabrication of the solar cells was finalized by evaporating Ag grids with a finger width of around 100 μm, periods in the mm-range and a finger thickness of 700 nm. All the devices were annealed at 160 °C for 30 minutes so as to improve their electrical performance.
Characterization methods

Topographical investigation. 
The morphology of the investigated samples was probed by using scanning electron microscopy (SUPRA® 60 VP, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Germany) and top-view and cross-section view images were acquired. In the latter case (see Fig. 4), the samples were FIB cut beforehand. The NP height and profile analysis displayed in Fig. 2 was performed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The samples were scanned under ambient conditions in tapping mode using a dimension icon from Veeco with a NanoScope V controller.


Optical characterization. 
The wavelength-dependent complex optical indices of the ZnO:Al, IOH and a-Si:H layers were determined by spectral ellipsometry using a parameterized oscillator approach and subsequently used for our optical simulations. The reflectance (R) of the scattering reflectors and of the thin film solar cells was measured using a UV-VIS spectrometer (Lambda 1050, PerkinElmer Inc.) equipped with a 150 mm integrating sphere (overall reflectance) or with an universal reflectance accessory module (specular reflectance). Angle resolved measurements were performed by fixing the samples in the middle of the integrating sphere using a vise-type center-mount and the sample holder was rotated around its vertical axis. The absorptance (A) of the samples was then derived by applying A = 1 − R for every wavelength. The haze was measured by making the ratio of the sole diffused reflected light to the overall reflected light.


Characterization of the solar cells. 
The devices’ external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a differential spectral response setup with a lens, in order to display the exit slit of the monochromator again with its smaller size to avoid partial shading by the front grid. Data were acquired using 10 nm intervals. The values of the short-circuit current density (Jsc) reported in this work were derived from the measured EQE spectra. The I–V characteristics of the solar cells (not shown here) were obtained under simulated AM1.5G illumination conditions at room temperature following standard calibration and measurement procedures using a WACOM-WXS-140s-super (Class A) AM 1.5 sun simulator. The solar cells are defined by a mask during the sun simulator measurements in order to avoid current collection at the solar cell boundaries.

Optical simulations
The optical properties of the thin film solar cells were simulated by the finite element method (FEM) available in COMSOL Multiphysics® version 5.2a. A 3D model (see Fig. 5(a)) was developed to simulate the fabricated solar cells as accurately as possible. The exact morphology of the different interfaces in the solar cell stacks was reproduced in the 3D FEM model using the approach described in ref. 24, which exploits the surface morphology of the NPs and the layer thickness as input data. It was obtained by first extracting, using AFM, the topology of 124 phase-separated NPs (as shown in Fig. 2(e)). We slightly modified this topology to impose continuity at the boundaries of the simulation window (Floquet boundary conditions in horizontal plane). Considering the total computational time and memory requirements, a lateral simulation window of 5 μm by 5 μm was used with a spatial grid of λ/10. Its size was chosen sufficiently large to ensure the convergence of our results.25 Moreover, a perfectly matched layer was introduced on the top of the simulation window to avoid the reflection of the backward propagating light back to the simulated stack. The absorption properties of the solar cell stacks were simulated as a function of the NP mean height and surface coverage by maintaining the same correlation length (scattering centers) for each configuration. To generate these different designs, we modified the measured AFM data shown in Fig. 2(e) to adjust the height and diameter sizes of the NP using the Gwyddion software package.26 The optical indices of Ag were taken from the literature,27 and those of the other layers were extracted from ellipsometric measurements.
For a normally incident plane wave with transverse-electric (TE) and transverse-magnetic (TM) orthogonal states, the integrated absorption was obtained using28,29 (1)where  is the incident solar radiation intensity per unit wavelength, and A(λ) is the absorption (2)

P
incident(λ) is the incident power in watt, and  is the power absorbed per unit volume calculated from the divergence of the Poynting vector. |E(λ)2| is the magnitude of the electric field intensity, and  is the angular frequency of the light, where c is the speed of light under vacuum and ε‖ is the imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity.
The EQE spectra were calculated by multiplying the polarization-averaged absorption efficiency of the sole i-a-Si:H layer by internal quantum efficiency (IQE) and by assuming a 100% IQE. This is a widely adopted standard method for determining the EQE from a simulated thin film solar cell.2,3
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank R. H. Siddique (California Institute of Technology) and Q. Guo (Light Technology Institute, KIT) for their help during the development of the polymer blend lithography process. P. Brenner (Center for Functional Nanostructures, KIT) is acknowledged for his assistance with the FIB cut and subsequent SEM observations of the samples. S. Moll and H. Siekmann (IEK5-Photovoltaik, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH) are acknowledged for the deposition of the solar cells. The authors acknowledge support from the state of Baden-Württemberg through bwHPC. G. G. is thankful for support from the Helmholtz Postdoctoral Program and from the Karlsruhe School of Optics and Photonics (KSOP, http://wwww.ksop.kit.edu). This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft in the priority programme 1839.
References
M. Smeets, V. Smirnov, M. Meier, K. Bittkau, R. Carius, U. Rau and U. W. Paetzold, J. Photonics Energy, 2015, 5, 057004–057004 CrossRef .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, M. C. v. Lare, R. E. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4239–4245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. Li, E. Verhagen, R. J. Walters, R. E. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Opt. express, 2010, 18, A237–A245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Biswas and D. Zhou, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 667–670 CrossRef CAS .
B. Curtin, R. Biswas and V. Dalal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 231102 CrossRef .
C. Trompoukis, I. Massiot, V. Depauw, O. El Daif, K. Lee, A. Dmitriev, I. Gordon, R. Mertens and J. Poortmans, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A191–A201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Mendes, S. Morawiec, F. Simone, F. Priolo and I. Crupi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4796–4805 RSC .
H. Tan, R. Santbergen, A. H. Smets and M. Zeman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4070–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Santbergen, T. Temple, R. Liang, A. Smets, R. Van Swaaij and M. Zeman, J. Opt., 2012, 14, 024010 CrossRef .
S. Morawiec, M. J. Mendes, S. A. Filonovich, T. Mateus, S. Mirabella, H. Águas, I. Ferreira, F. Simone, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, 
            et al.
          , Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1059–A1070 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Morawiec, J. Holovskỳ, M. J. Mendes, M. Müller, K. Ganzerová, A. Vetushka, M. Ledinskỳ, F. Priolo, A. Fejfar and I. Crupi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, M. Moosmann, J. Jin, T. Heiler, S. Walheim and T. Schimmel, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, L. Liu, Z. Zhuang, X. Chen, M. Ni, Y. Li, Y. Cui, P. Zhan, C. Yuan and H. Ge, 
            et al.
          , Sci. Rep., 2015, 5 Search PubMed  , 15947.
C. Huang, A. Förste, S. Walheim and T. Schimmel, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Hu, X. Han, Q. Yang, Y. Xiong, Y. Bai, X. Guo, Y. Cui, C. Yuan and H. Ge, 
            et al.
          , Langmuir, 2016, 32, 3670–3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Siddique, Y. J. Donie, G. Gomard, S. Yalamanchili, T. Merdzhanova, U. Lemmer and H. Hölscher, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700232 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Jovanov, S. Shrestha, J. Hüpkes, M. Ermes, K. Bittkau and D. Knipp, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 082301 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, M. Meier, A. Hoffmann, W. Zhang, K. Bittkau, G. Jost, U. W. Paetzold, M. Ermes and T. Merdzhanova, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2015, 5, 33–39 CrossRef .
M. Smeets, V. Smirnov, K. Bittkau, M. Meier, R. Carius, U. Rau and U. W. Paetzold, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A1575–A1588 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Donev, S. Torquato and F. H. Stillinger, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 011105 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. Tan, R. Santbergen, G. Yang, A. H. Smets and M. Zeman, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Volume 2, 2012 IEEE 38th,  2012, pp. 1–6 .
U. W. Paetzold, E. Moulin, B. E. Pieters, R. Carius and U. Rau, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A1219–A1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Astakhov, V. Smirnov, R. Carius, B. Pieters, Y. Petrusenko, V. Borysenko and F. Finger, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 129, 17–31 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jovanov, X. Xu, S. Shrestha, M. Schulte, J. Hüpkes, M. Zeman and D. Knipp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Vynck, M. Burresi, F. Riboli and D. S. Wiersma,  2012, arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.4601.
D. Nečas and P. Klapetek, Open Phys., 2012, 10, 181–188 Search PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R.-W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Ferry, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10055–10064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oskooi, P. A. Favuzzi, Y. Tanaka, H. Shigeta, Y. Kawakami and S. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100 CrossRef CAS  , 181110.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00455BThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic view of the thin film solar cells integrating the light trapping disordered NP array in their back reflector. The fabricated stack, deposited on the polymer NP array, consists of a Ag back reflector, a rear transparent and conductive oxide (TCO) layer made of ZnO:Al, an n-i-p type a-Si:H active layer, and a front TCO layer (hydrogenated indium oxide, denoted “IOH”) capped by a thin ZnO:Al layer.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fabrication and topographical characterization of the disordered NP array. (a) Overview of the phase separation process, leaving PS NPs on the substrate after the selective development of the PMMA matrix and prior to the deposition of the solar cell stack. (b) A SEM top-view image of the disordered and uniformly distributed PS NPs. The pair correlation function (PCF) and diameter size distribution of this array are reported in (c) and (d), respectively. The solid red line in (d) represents the Gaussian fit. The height distribution within the NP array can be appreciated in the 5 μm × 5 μm AFM image in (e), and is analyzed in more details in (f). The vertical profile of a single NP is measured in (g) and emphasizes a smooth transition from the base to apex. Both SEM and AFM images are representative of the whole patterned surface (5 cm × 5 cm).	 

 	Fig. 3  Light scattering properties of the patterned back reflectors. (a) Photographs of the patterned reflectors taken under varying incidence angles, after the deposition of the Ag and ZnO:Al layers on the top of the NP array. (b) Corresponding haze spectra showing a high scattering coefficient above 600 nm. The arrows follow the increase of the angle of incidence. (c) Total reflectance of the scattering back reflectors.	 

 	Fig. 4  Improved light harvesting properties of thin film solar cells integrating the scattering NP array. SEM cross-sections of (a) the a-Si:H solar cell deposited on the Asahi substrates (“Asahi”) and of (b) a similar thin film stack processed atop the disordered NP array (“NP”). The scale bar represents 500 nm. (c) The absorptance spectrum of the solar cell based on the “NP” design, benchmarked against “Asahi” type devices and equivalent but planar solar cells (“planar”). The improved light trapping properties of the “NP” configuration translate into a substantial increase of its external quantum efficiency (EQE) above 600 nm, as shown in (d). All spectra were acquired under normal incidence.	 

Planar	10.2	873	51.9	4.6
Asahi	12.7	900	64.4	7.3
NP	13.6	901	62.3	7.6

 	Fig. 5  Numerical analysis of the parasitic absorption effects in the patterned solar cells. (a) a 3D model developed to accurately compute the optical properties of the a-Si:H solar cells integrating the disordered NP array with a mean diameter of 357 nm, SC of 30% and average height of 80 nm. These parameters correspond to the best fabricated structure shown in Fig. 2. (b) Distribution of the absorptance in the different layers of the PV stack shown in (a). The reported values correspond to the integrated absorptance for each layer. (c) Comparison of the parasitic absorption in the Ag reflector between solar cells based on the NP and on the Asahi designs (in the 500–800 nm range). (d) Normalized electromagnetic power loss density simulated in the NP- and Asahi-based solar cells at λ = 665 nm (cross-section views). All the simulations are performed under normal incident light.	 

 	Fig. 6  Guidelines for the design of efficient light harvesting disordered NPs. (a) Cross-sectional view of the simulated solar cells deposited on the NPs with mean heights (H) of 50 nm, 80 nm, and 130 nm. The EQE and overall absorptance spectra of the complete solar cell stack depicted in Fig. 5(a) are simulated as a function of the NP mean height H (b), and of their surface coverage SC (c). A normal incidence of the light was considered in all the simulations.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00455B

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
