Recent advances in nanostructured metal nitrides for water splitting  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA06529B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA06529B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19912-19933Recent advances in nanostructured metal nitrides for water splitting

        
          
            Ning 
            Han
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pengyun 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Lunhong 
            Ai
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Shaomin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *b
aChemical Synthesis and Pollution Control Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, China West Normal University, Nanchong 637002, P. R. China. E-mail: 0826zjjh@163.com; ah_aihong@163.com
bWA School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering (WASM-MECE), Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia 6102, Australia. E-mail: Shaomin.liu@curtin.edu.au
Received 
      7th July 2018
    , Accepted 17th September 2018First published on 17th September 2018AbstractThe gradually dwindling resources of fossil fuels and the urgency to reduce greenhouse gas emissions portray a globally concerning image of our contemporary energy infrastructure with over reliance on coal, gas and oil. The transformation of the current fossil-fuel-based energy system to a more sustainable, renewable and cleaner alternative is desperately required to mitigate climate change. As a carbon-free and clean energy carrier, hydrogen has long been considered as a promising energy option. However, hydrogen does not exist naturally due to its inherently reactive features and has to be cost-effectively produced from hydrogen-containing compounds. Solar or electrochemically driven water splitting is an appealing vision for future sustainable hydrogen production. The state of the art water splitting technology via electro-catalysis is highly dependent on the efficiency of electrocatalysts to promote the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) or hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), a possible limiting step for the overall reaction. Electro-catalysts are currently dominated by these noble metals. To minimize the production cost, it is vital to develop noble-metal free catalysts for water splitting. In this context, metal nitrides have captured the imagination of academic researchers. This review summarizes the recent research progress made in these nanostructured metal nitrides as efficient and cheap catalysts for electrochemical and photo(electro)chemical water splitting. The various synthetic strategies for the fabrication and functionalization of these nanostructured metal nitrides are first presented followed by the introduction of their unique physical, chemical, and electronic properties and their respective applications in facilitating the HER, OER and the overall water splitting reaction. Some engineering perspectives to further enhance the performances of these nanostructured catalysts for water splitting are also discussed. Finally, opportunities for future development are briefly proposed.Ning HanNing Han received his BS in 2013 and MS in 2016 in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Shandong University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Shuguang Zhang. He then came to Curtin University in Australia for his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Shaomin Liu in 2017. His current research interests focus on energy electrocatalysis, including oxygen reduction/evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions.Jing JiangJing Jiang received his BS from China West Normal University in 2004 and Ph.D. from Central China Normal University in 2012. He is currently a professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at China West Normal University. His research interest involves the development of novel inorganic functional materials for semiconductor photocatalysis and energy electrocatalysis.Lunhong AiLunhong Ai received her BS from China West Normal University in 2004 and Ph.D. from Chengdu University of Technology in 2014. Currently, she is a professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at China West Normal University. Her research interests focus on the design and fabrication of nanostructures for renewable energy and environmental remediation.Shaomin LiuShaomin Liu is an ARC Future Fellow and Professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2002, and then worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in Chemical Engineering at the California Institute of Technology for three years. From 2008, he has been working in Curtin University. His research interests include membrane science and technology for gas separation, environmental remediation, and green chemical synthesis. He has more than 350 publications with over 10000 citations and an H-index of 53 (Google Scholar).
1. Introduction
The continuously increasing energy demand due to population growth has caused rapid consumption of fossil fuels and severe environmental issues. The dwindling fossil fuel resources and the urgency to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to mitigate climate change have inexorably driven us to transform the current energy generation infrastructure towards a more sustainable, renewable and cleaner alternative. Hydrogen as a carbon-free and clean energy carrier is considered as a future ideal renewable energy to replace the conventional fossil fuel energy system due to its highest mass energy density and absence of carbon emission. The realization of such clean energy schemes is dependent on the availability of cost-effective hydrogen production technology. Currently, the industrial tonnage hydrogen production is mainly fulfilled by expensive and energy-intensive steam reforming of hydrocarbons, which are still derived from fossil fuels and inevitably causing a huge amount of emissions. Despite the challenging technical hurdles, the electro- or photo-chemical dissociation of water is a promising alternative to produce hydrogen. The overall water splitting reaction (2H2O → 2H2 + O2, ΔE = −1.23 V) consists of two separate reactions, namely the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER): 2H+ + 2e− → H2, E0 = 0.00 V vs. (RHE) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER: 2H2O → 4H+ + O2 + 4e−, E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE). However, for both reactions to proceed smoothly, efficient electro(or photo)catalysts are generally required.
Until now, for the electrochemical water splitting process or water electrolysis, the best catalysts for the HER and OER are still those noble metal-based materials including Ir, Ru, and Pt.1 However, the high price and limited availability of these precious metals have largely hindered their large scale applications. Therefore, a large amount of research has been focused on the development of efficient and low-cost electrocatalysts for water splitting. To date, various non-precious metal electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements have been evaluated in term of efficiency related to the HER, OER and overall water splitting. Most of these promising catalysts can be classified as noble-metal free oxides,2,3 phosphides,4–6 sulfides,7–9 carbides,10 alkoxides,11 nitrides,12,13 hydroxides,14 and their hybrid or composites.4,15–18 Earth-abundant electrocatalysts would greatly lower the cost,19,20 while still maintaining good activity and durability. Furthermore, recently developed metal nitrides as electrocatalysts for both the HER and OER simultaneously working in the same medium have received great attention as they are able to improve the overall efficiency and simplify the splitting process.
Another direction to achieve sustainable hydrogen production is the effective utilization of clean inexhaustible solar energy. Obviously, converting solar energy to hydrogen via photo(electro)chemical water splitting is one of the most promising approaches for sustainable energy supply.21 In general, the photo(electro)catalytic water splitting process mainly includes: (1) photoinduced generation of charge carriers in semiconductors with appropriate band energy under light irradiation; (2) the separation, migration and transport of photoinduced charge carriers to the surface of the semiconductors; (3) redox reactions initiated by photoinduced charge carriers on the surface of the semiconductors. These processes are strongly determined by the properties of applied semiconductors, such as the electronic structure, the band gap, the level of conduction and valence bands, microstructures, and surface properties. Since the pioneering work on UV light-induced TiO2-driven photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation was reported by Fujishima and Honda,22 a number of semiconductor-based photocatalysts have been developed, especially working under visible light irradiation to utilize a large portion of sunlight. These photocatalysts mainly consist of native and mixed metal oxides,23 sulfides,24 (oxy)nitrides,25 and metal-free compounds.26
Among non-noble metal catalysts, metal nitrides (MNs) have recently emerged as a new family of non-noble metal catalysts and attracted increasing attention from researchers due to their unique physical, chemical, and electronic properties. Some of them display excellent catalytic activities in a variety of reactions for energy related applications.27–29 Up to now, more than one hundred excellent publications of MNs for water splitting have been made. Several good review articles on this topic are also available but with emphasis on different areas. For example, Chen et al. reviewed recent developments in transition metal carbides and nitrides as HER electrocatalysts with less attention being paid to the application of water splitting.30 Other reviews discussed the potential of transition metal carbides and nitrides for electrocatalytic energy conversion and storage.29–32 However, there is no review article comprehensively covering metal nitrides as catalysts for electro- or photo-chemical water splitting. The vast amount of literature vividly demonstrates the necessity of this timely review of this important topic of metal nitrides for electrocatalytic water splitting to cover the fundamentals, latest progress and emerging opportunities. The diverse synthetic strategies for the fabrication and functionalization of various nanostructured MNs are provided. Special attention will be given to clarify the MN structure-associated applications in the electro-, photo-, or photoelectro-catalytic HER, OER, and overall water splitting. Some engineering perspectives to further enhance the efficiency of these catalysts are also discussed.
2. A brief introduction of metal nitrides
MNs are a family of interstitial compounds containing the parent metals with nitrogen atoms integrated into the interstitial sites. The parent metal structure could be modified by intercalation of the nitrogen atoms.33 The metal lattice expands and the distance between metal atoms increase after the formation of interstitial metal nitrides, broadening the metal d-band. The d-band contraction would cause a greater density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level in comparison with that of the parent metal.32 The redistributions of the DOS are helpful to improve the properties of noble metals. In addition, the metal nitrides also possess a wide variety of interesting properties such as high hardness, melting temperature, and electronic conductivity. Therefore, metal nitrides have wide applications in several fields such as semiconductors,34,35 superconductors,36 supercapacitors,37 lithium ion batteries,38 sensors,39 and catalysts.40,41 In particular, metal nitrides have promising applications in electro-, photo- or photoelectro-catalytic reactions due to their unique electronic structures, high electrical conductivity and good corrosion resistance,42 which will be discussed shortly.
3. Synthesis of nanostructured metal nitrides
The most general and scalable method for the synthesis of nanostructured metal nitrides is the heat-treatment of various metal precursors in the presence of different nitrogen sources including ammonia,43–45 nitrogen,46 hydrazine,47 urea,48 and dicyanamide.49
3.1 Synthesis of binary metal nitrides
For the synthesis of binary metal nitrides (i.e., Mo2N, TiN, and FexN), ammonia (NH3) has been frequently used as the nitrogen source with annealing or heat treatment between 400 and 1000 °C for the nitriding process. For example, Mo2N can be directly synthesized through heat treatment of molybdenum oxide under an NH3 flow of 100 mL min−1 at 700 °C for 2 h.50–52 Moreover, the specific nanostructures and morphologies are favorable for the HER or OER, which could be obtained via tailoring the preparation process. Batch production of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) sheets (Fig. 1a) from MoN bulk materials was achieved via liquid exfoliation.53 In another study, defect-rich molybdenum nitride (dr-MoN) nanosheets were prepared successfully via a NaCl template-directed synthesis route under an NH3/Ar atmosphere followed by incomplete ammoniation of MoO3 nanosheets.54Fig. 1b shows the synthesis process of dr-MoN catalysts. The effects of preparation conditions, such as nitriding temperature, original materials, and flow rate of NH3 on the molybdenum species in the resultant nitrides, were investigated by Nagai et al.,43–45 and eventually the synthesis of different species could be controlled, i.e., MoN,55 Mo2N,50 and metallic Mo.55–57 Similarly, Co2N, Co3N, Co4N and other cobalt nitrides can be obtained from β-Co(OH)2, α-Co(OH)2 and Co3O4 precursors, respectively, in an NH3 atmosphere.40,58–60 The XRD results (in the left) of Co2N, Co3N, and Co4N with a schematic of the electron delocalization (in the right) of the corresponding cobalt nitrides are shown in Fig. 1c.58 Kumta's group developed a two-step ammonolysis reaction to synthesize a series of binary metal nitrides at relatively low temperature under anhydrous NH3 gas,61 such as tantalum nitride (Ta3N5) and tungsten nitride (WN).62 The unit cells of Ta3N5 and WN prepared at 600 and 675 °C are shown in Fig. 1e and f.62 Single domain Ni3N nitride particles can be synthesized through simultaneous decomposition and nitridation in an ammonia atmosphere of [Ni(NH3)6](NO3)2 complex crystals.63
 Fig. 1  (a) HRTEM of the synthesized MoN;53 (b) the synthesis process of dr-MoN catalysts;54 (c) powder XRD patterns of Co2N, Co3N, and Co4N (in the left), and schematic of the electron delocalization of the corresponding cobalt nitrides (in the right);58 (d) the XRD pattern of Ni3N with the reference pattern of Ni3N, with the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image and the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (FFT) given as insets;27 (e) and (f) unit cells of Ta3N5 and WN (green balls denote Ta and W, and blue balls denote N);62 (g) the synthesis process of TiN NWs;64 (h) SEM and TEM images of CoN.46 (a–d and g) Reproduced from ref. 27, 53, 54, 58 and 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e, f and h) Reproduced from ref. 46 and 62 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
N2 is well known as another primary nitrogen source during the preparation of binary metal nitrides. For instance, ZrN can be prepared via heat treatment under pure N2 gas (3 L min−1 at 1.5 bar) at 600 or 800 °C for 2 h or 6 h, respectively.65 GaN nanoparticles have been synthesized by a solvothermal method combined with calcination under a N2 atmosphere at different temperatures (400, 600, 800 and 950 °C).66 γ-Mo2N is synthesized by the ‘urea glass’ route under a N2 gas flow.48 A novel chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method for in situ growth of TiN on a graphite bar substrate in a N2 atmosphere has been developed to directly synthesize single-crystalline TiN NWs,64 which is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1g. Similarly, Ni3N is in situ fabricated on nickel foam under nitrogen flow.27 Its XRD patterns, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image and corresponding fast Fourier transforms (FFT) confirm the formation of pure phase Ni3N (Fig. 1d). In addition, specific nitriding treatment of N2 plasma has been employed to prepare some distinctive binary metal nitrides.46,67 A novel porous tungsten nitride nanowire is successfully prepared via N2 plasma treatment, in which a microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition system (MPECVD) was employed to directly convert WOx nanowires into WN in a short duration (10 min).67 Cobalt nitride nanowires can be synthesized through N2 radio frequency plasma treatment.46 SEM and TEM images are shown in Fig. 1h. As can be seen, ammonia and nitrogen are the major nitrogen sources for binary metal nitride synthesis.
3.2 Synthesis of ternary metal nitrides
Ternary metal nitrides represent a rich class of fascinating compounds due to their compositional synergies bringing broader application prospect.68 Typical ternary metal nitrides such as Ni–Mo–N,69,70 Cu–Ni–N,71 Co–Mo–N,42,57 Fe2Ni2N,72 Co3FeNx,73 NiCo2N,74 and Ni3FeN75 have been verified to have particularly high activity as electrocatalysts. Ternary metal precursors were generally used for the synthesis of ternary metal nitrides. For example, Bhattacharyya et al. developed a continuous nitriding process to synthesize CoMoN2 nanoparticles by using CoMoO4 as precursor.76 The intermetallic nitride Co3Mo3N can be obtained by the heat treatment of CoMoO4 in an NH3 atmosphere at high temperature, which serves as the precursor for further nitridation under NH3 flow to produce the CoMoN2 nanoparticles.76 Adopting a similar method, Khalifah et al. developed a mixed close-packed cobalt molybdenum nitride (Fig. 2a).42 They further carried out neutron diffraction experiments and pair distribution function studies to investigate the structure and found that the product was stoichiometric Co0.6Mo1.4N2,42 a highly active non-noble metal electrocatalyst for the HER42 and ORR.57 Similarly, Chen et al. prepared electrocatalytic Ni–Mo nitride nanotubes by annealing NiMoO4 nanotubes in an NH3 atmosphere at relatively low temperature (550 °C).70 In addition to NH3 as a nitrogen source, Gomathi demonstrated that pure phases of Fe3Mo3N, Co3Mo3N and Ni2Mo3N can be obtained by heating the corresponding molybdate precursors (FeMoO4, CoMoO4 and NiMoO4) with urea in the 900–1000 °C range.77 Apart from these metal oxides as the precursors, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are also demonstrated to be an effective precursor to prepared ternary metal nitrides.75 Nanoparticle-stacked porous Co3FeNx (NSP-Co3FeNx)73 and Ni3FeN28 were successfully synthesized by Wang's group via a simple nitridation reaction (under NH3) with the corresponding double hydroxide precursors (Fig. 2b). This synthetic strategy could basically retain the lamellar morphology of LDHs and also inherit the great conductivity of metal nitrides. In another study Ni3FeN nanoparticles (Ni3FeN-NPs) with a particle size of ∼100 nm and a thickness of ∼9 nm were successfully synthesized by thermal ammonolysis of ultrathin NiFe-LDH nanosheets (Fig. 2c),75 which exhibited excellent catalytic performance and high stability in electrochemical overall water splitting. It is of note that the method based on hydroxides only needs a low annealing temperature (<500 °C) to realize the synthesis of ternary metal nitrides. For instance, bimetallic copper–nickel nitrides (CuxNi4−xN) and nickel–cobalt nitrides (NiCo2N) on nickel foams (NF) have been synthesized from Cu2O@Ni(OH)2/NF and Ni–Co hydroxides, respectively, under an NH3 atmosphere at a quite low temperature of 380 °C.71,74 The synthesis process of CuxNi4−xN/NF is shown in Fig. 2d.
 Fig. 2  (a) Rietveld refinements of neutron diffraction for CoMoN2 showing the observed data (black line), calculated pattern (red line) and difference curve (bottom line);42 (b) illustration of the preparation of NSP-Co3FeNx nanowires by annealing with NH3;73 (c) schematic illustration of the formation of Ni3FeN nanoparticles;75 (d) schematic illustration of the synthesis of CuxNi4−xN/NF.71 (a) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b and d) Reproduced from ref. 71 and 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
3.3 Synthesis of composite-type metal nitrides
Previous reports have revealed that some single composition nitrides do not have complete electrochemical stability under reaction conditions in either acidic or alkaline media.29 One effective strategy is to deposit metal nitrides on various supports to form composites and thus to improve the stability and activity. Chen et al. (Fig. 3a) designed and fabricated effective biomass-derived electrocatalysts from soybeans and ammonium molybdate, which were composed of a β-Mo2C phase, a γ-Mo2N phase and reduced graphene oxide.78 A synergic effect between each component endows the HER-active composites with long-term durability (over a period exceeding 500 hours). Using the solid reaction of graphene nanoplatelets with ammonium tungstate and aniline, they further constructed a composite of WC–WN–graphene, which exhibited low overpotential and highly stable HER under harsh acidic conditions.79 Fan et al. employed a homogeneous graphene quantum dot (GQD) coating on nanocoralline hNi3N to create GQD@hNi3N via a plasma-directed strategy (Fig. 3b), improving the performance of hNi3N.80 A three-dimensional (3D) nanoporous iron nitride film of FexN–graphene/Ni is fabricated for water oxidation.52 The process consists of three steps: direct synthesis of graphene on Ni foam (NF), followed by immersion of graphene/NF into Fe(NO3)3 dispersion, and final thermal nitridation.52 In addition, a more simple method via modifying the urea-glass route has been utilized to synthesise a TiN/CNT-graphene hybrid catalyst.81
 Fig. 3  (a) The synthesis from soybeans and ammonium molybdate of a solid catalyst suitable for electrochemical hydrogen production;78 (b) schematic diagram of GQD@hNi3N preparation;80 (c) schematic illustration of the process for anchoring the nitrides as decoration catalysts on carbon supports;82 (d) preparation process of Co(OH)F NWs, Co3O4 NWs, and Co4N NWs grown on carbon cloth;83 (e) a DFT minimized model showing the most energetically favorable configuration for a small hexagonal Ni3N cluster within the COF.87 (a and c) Reproduced from ref. 78 and 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b, d, and e) Reproduced from ref. 80, 83, and 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Tian's group developed an effective “1-methylimidazole (1-MD)-fixation” strategy to anchor small-sized nitrides on carbon supports.82 The process mainly consists of three steps (Fig. 3c): the anchoring of POMs on A-CNTs (acid treated CNTs) by 1-methylimidazole, the calcination of 1-MD–POMs/CNTs in air and nitriding in NH3 to form WN (Mo2N)/CNTs.82 Wu's group for the first time applied 2D Ni3N nanosheets as a new metallic graphene-like material for water oxidation through simultaneous decomposition and nitridation based on carbon cloths.41 Furthermore, this group also developed metallic Co4N porous nanowires arrayed on carbon cloth by a similar preparation process (Fig. 3d).83 The catalysts, tungsten nitride (W2N) and molybdenum nitride (Mo2N) growing on carbon black, are prepared by a temperature-programmed reaction (TPR) process.84,85 Similarly, MoN/C and Mo2N/C are fabricated with carbon black as the support via traditional nitrogen treatment under an NH3 atmosphere.86 In addition, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) are also extended to support Ni3N nanoparticles via a solid state synthesis to form COF_Ni3N composites. Fig. 3e shows the most energetically favorable configuration of COF_Ni3N.87
In addition to the supporting effect from carbon, optimizing the interface to form other types of composites is also an effective way to maximize the number of catalytically active sites. Guo's group developed a method to construct NiO/CoN porous nanowires (NWs) through in situ nitrogenization of NiCo2O4. A strongly interconnected nanointerface between NiO and CoN domains is determined by the HRTEM images (Fig. 4a) of NiO/CoN NWs,88 which promotes the electrocatalytic performance and stability. Sun's group designed an effective interface between Ni3N and Ni–Ci via the oxidative polarization of a Ni3N nanoarray on carbon cloth, and the HRTEM image of the synthesized Ni3N NA/CC is shown in Fig. 4b,89 Mn doped CoN nanowires are successfully grown on a carbon fiber cloth substrate (CFC) from a Mn–Co2(OH)2CO3/CFC nanowire array precursor via a topotactic nitridation conversion reaction. The HAADF-STEM image and elemental maps shown in Fig. 4c confirm the uniform distribution of each constituent element.90
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of NiO/CoN NWs and the corresponding elemental mapping of N, O, Co and Ni;88 (b) HRTEM image of Ni3N NA/CC;89 (c) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of Co, Mn and N;90 (d) microscopic and spectroscopic identification of Mo and Au in Mo6/20/80-Z8FA-1050, (I) STEM mapping for Mo, (II) STEM mapping for Au, (III) k2-weighted EXAFS function at the Mo K-edge (circle) and its fitting (solid line), (IV) XANES spectra at the Au L3-edge for gold foil (dashed line) and for Mo6/20/80-Z8FA-1050 (solid purple line);91 (e) schematic process for the synthesis of Ni3N@Fe3N/CF;93 (f) schematic illustration of the synthesis and fabrication of TiN@Ni3N nanowire arrays on Ti foil.92 (a and e) Reproduced from ref. 88 and 93 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier. (c, d and f) Reproduced from ref. 90–92 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The synergy between molybdenum nitride and gold was also exploited by introducing gold wire as a counter electrode (CE) by Jaouen's group, which was characterized via STEM mapping, extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectra (XANES) shown in Fig. 4d.91 Several VIII group transition metal (M = Fe, Co, and Ni) nitrides have been developed as core materials to prepare Ir/M4N core–shell particles.60 Zheng's group prepared novel myriophyllum-like hierarchical TiN@Ni3N nanowire arrays.92 The NiO nanosheets first grew on TiN nanowires, which were realized by a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method and an annealing process. After that, the prepared TiN@NiO NWs were annealed in ammonia at 450 °C for 1 h. The schematic of synthesis and fabrication of TiN@NiN NWs is shown in Fig. 4f.92 Qiu's group developed a novel method to construct Ni3N@Fe3N heterostructures anchored on carbon fiber (CF), and the schematic process for the synthesis of Ni3N@Fe3N/CF is displayed in Fig. 4e.93
4. Applications of metal nitrides for electrochemical water splitting
4.1 Application of metal nitrides toward the HER
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is the process of hydrogen gas production during the water splitting process.94 The HER includes two main processes, starting with the hydrogen absorption on the catalyst surface via a charge transfer or Volmer reaction (H+ + e− + * → H*) and ending with the electrochemical hydrogen evolution (2H+ + 2e− → H2). During the two processes, two absorbed hydrogen atoms combine and generate molecular hydrogen via a Tafel reaction (H* + H* → H2 + 2*) or a proton from the solution reacts with an electron and an absorbed hydrogen atom on the surface to form H2via a Heyrovsky reaction (H+ + e− + H* → H2 + *).95 To develop and design more efficient catalysts for the HER, both the hydrogen absorption process and the hydrogen generation process should be taken into consideration. Actually, a variety of electrocatalysts for the HER have been systematically investigated in order to effectively promote H2 production. Non-noble metal nitrides have newly emerged as one class of efficient HER electrocatalysts, including tungsten,67,96 molybdenum,48,54,70 copper,71,97 cobalt,98 nickel,27,99 iron,28,75 iridium,100 titanium,64,92 and tantalum-based95 binary and ternary nitrides.28,40,64,67,71,74,75,101,102
Transition-metal nitrides have been applied as good catalysts to replace Pt. For example, molybdenum nitrides can function as a catalyst for hydrocarbon hydrogenolysis owing to their Pt-like characteristics.103 In the past, nickel and nickel–molybdenum showed the ability to electrocatalyse the HER only in alkaline electrolytes. Researchers are always seeking acid-resistant and efficient catalysts for the HER. Until the first synthesis of NiMo nitride nanosheets on a carbon support (NiMoNx/C),69 its high electrocatalytic activity and small Tafel slope shown in the HER in acidic electrolyte reveal its potential application under acidic conditions (Fig. 5a). In this case, the intrinsic characteristics of both bimetallic atoms and special nanostructures should be responsible for high HER electrocatalytic activity in acidic media. On one hand, nickel, which binds H weakly, collaborated well with molybdenum, which binds H strongly, enabling the formation of H2. On the other hand, the unique exfoliated nanosheet structure allowed more active sites to be exposed. It should also be noted that an ionic rock salt phase (γ-Mo2N-type) and a Ni2Mo3N (Mo3Al2C-type) phase coexist in this system and both Ni and Mo atoms distribute on the surface, which confers more active sites.
 Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves of MoN, NiMoN, Pt/C catalysts, and graphite in 0.1 M HClO4 solution;69 (b) polarization curves of Co, δ-MoN, Co0.6Mo1.4N2 and Pt in H2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with (dashed line) and without (solid line) iR correction;42 (c) stability tests of the NiMoN electrode at current densities (the inset photograph shows the bubble generation);101 (d) polarization curves for BGC, Mo2N–MoC, Mo2N/Gr, Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr-3 and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 (I) and 1 M KOH (II);17 (e) polarization curves for P–WN/rGO, WN/rGO, P–rGO, Pt/C, and GO in 0.5 m H2SO4;12 (f) HER polarization curves of the W0.5Ani/GnP catalyst before and after 5000 and 10000 cycles of the accelerated deterioration test (−0.5 to +0.3 V vs. RHE) (I), and long-term durability tests of the W0.5Ani/GnP catalysts (II);79 (g) polarization curves of WSoy0.7, WSoy0.7GnP0.5, WSoy0.7GnP1.0, WSoy0.7GnP1.5, and WGnP1.0 samples, along with carbon paper without catalyst and commercial Pt/C.104 (a and c–f) Reproduced from ref. 12, 17, 69, 79 and 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Inspired by this, a more complicated Co–Mo nitride system has been designed, in which the valence and electronic states of Mo can be more readily tuned than in binary molybdenum nitrides due to the incorporation of Co. It has been verified that this nitride has a four-layer mixed closed packed structure with alternating layers of octahedral sites and trigonal prismatic sites, which are occupied by divalent Co and different valences of Mo. And H is found to bond strongly with N atoms on the surface. This compound achieves large currents at modest overpotentials (about 0.2 V) in acidic media and relatively high exchange current, indicating an excellent HER activity (Fig. 5b).42
Afterwards, to perform the nitridation reaction at relatively low temperatures, a Ni–Mo–N catalyst is synthesized by heat treatment of the Ni–Mo catalyst at 500 °C in a 60% Ar–40% NH3 atmosphere, which shows a quite low overpotential (53 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 43 mV in 1 M KOH) at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 and good stability for the HER in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes.105 Also, Chen et al. synthesized bimetallic Ni–Mo nitride nanotubes and this material achieved an overpotential of 89 mV for the HER in 1 M KOH solution.70 Furthermore, Fan's group developed an environmentally friendly method to synthesize porous nickel molybdenum nitride on carbon cloth (NiMoN) by nitriding electrodeposited NiMo alloy films with N2 plasma at a relatively low reaction temperature (450 °C) and shorter duration (15 min).101 The resultant NiMoN catalyst exhibits outstanding HER performance with a small overpotential of 109 mV to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2, along with an excellent durability at different current densities (Fig. 5c).101
In addition to the Mo2N-based bimetallic nitrides, the other heterostructures of molybdenum nitrides have also attracted great attention, as the appreciable charge transfer at the interface between them can facilitate the electrocatalytic HER. Chen et al. fabricated a Mo2N–Mo2C composite (named Mo1Soy) using soybeans as carbon and nitrogen sources.78 Mo1Soy presented remarkably high HER activity with increased durability.78 Besides, the Mo2N–Mo2C interface can also be constructed by temperature programmed carburization of the metal precursor in the presence of graphitic g-C3N4 and HMT106 or melamine-formaldehyde resin.107 The resultant catalyst only requires an overpotential of 96 mV to yield a current density of 10 mA cm−2, close to that of commercially available Pt/C catalysts (61 mV). Recently, Tian et al. reported a highly active Mo2N–Mo2C heterojunction on holey reduced graphene oxide (named Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr) by using H3PMo12O40 (PMo12) clusters as the Mo heterojunction source. The synthesized Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr presented superior HER activity with low onset potentials of 11 mV (0.5 M H2SO4) and 18 mV (1 M KOH), even superior to Pt/C in alkaline media at large current densities (Fig. 5d).17 Similarly, Ganguli et al. found that the electrocatalytic activity of Mo2N nanostructures can also be enhanced remarkably by conjugation with few-layer MoS2 sheets, due to the optimized Mo2N–MoS2 interface.108 The collaboration between Mo2N nanoparticles and gold on carbon electrodes brings in great HER activity in acidic medium due to the presence of synergic effects between Mo2N and Au. The synergy arises from the combination of Mo2N, which strongly binds hydrogen, with Au, which has a low affinity for hydrogen atoms, thus overcoming the non-optimum metal–hydrogen bonding energy intrinsic to Mo and Au.91 Furthermore, direct growth of Mo2N on conductive carbon materials such as CNTs,109 nitrogen-doped carbon nano-octahedrons,18 and N-doped carbon matrices110 can also realize an enhanced HER activity.
Due to the effectiveness of metal nitrides in electrocatalyzing the HER, nitride-based composites derived by combining different metal nitrides, metals and even different supports together have been widely investigated to further improve HER performance. For instance, pure tungsten nitride (WN) has a relatively low HER activity,30 but it could be substantially promoted via introducing WN on carbon supports or via rational design of a tungsten nitride–carbon composite.111 The excellent HER activity of such composites in acidic solution is attributed to the cooperation between nanosized WNx particles and the conductive graphene-like carbon networks with enriched nitrogen doping.111 Tian et al. found that P-modified WN/rGO can further enhance the HER performance of WN/rGO, which enables a very low onset overpotential (46 mV) and larger exchange current density (0.35 mA cm−2), since the work function of P–WN/rGO was close to that of Pt (Fig. 5e).12 Similar to the above Mo2N–Mo2C, the tungsten nitride–carbide interface is also favorable for electrocatalyzing the HER. For instance, Nakanishi et al. demonstrated that nitrogen-rich tungsten carbonitride (WCN) nanomaterials can act as stable and efficient HER electrocatalysts with a much higher activity than conventional WCN materials.112 Sasaki's group reported highly active graphene nanoplatelet-supported tungsten nitride–carbide nanocomposites prepared by an in situ solid-state approach, showing quite low overpotential and excellent stability, operating for at least 300 h under harsh acidic conditions (Fig. 5f).79 A similar HER catalyst was also prepared via heating a mixture of ammonium tungstate, soybean powder and graphene nanoplatelets (WSoyGnP) by this group (Fig. 5g).104 To further improve the HER activity, the self-supported nanostructured tungsten nitrides are designed by integrating other 3D conductive substrates.113 One example is a tungsten nitride nanorod array on carbon cloth (WN NA/CC) through nitridation of WO3 NA/CC with NH3. This active 3D cathode exhibited high catalytic activity and strong durability in acidic media.113 Another example is a porous tungsten nitride nanowire array on carbon cloth (WN NW/CC), which exhibits an enhanced HER electrocatalytic activity with an η10 of 134 and 130 mV in acidic and alkaline solutions, respectively and maintains excellent stability over 40 h in both media.67
Iron-group element-based nitrides like iron, cobalt, and nickel nitrides have caught attention for HER electrocatalysis as well. Among them, the most studied HER electrocatalysts are nickel-based nitrides. By contrast, bare cobalt and iron nitrides often show poor activity and thus are rarely studied. Apart from the above-mentioned HER-active NiMo nitrides, bare Ni nitrides still exhibit good performance towards the HER. The significance of nickel nitrides in catalyzing the HER is confirmed by introducing N into Ni foam.27,114 This remarkably improved HER performance is mainly attributed to the stronger absorption of hydrogen onto the metal nitrides than the pure metals. In addition, atomically thin metallic Ni3N nanosheets exhibited high HER activity in acidic, neutral, and alkaline media.102 Especially, they deliver an electrocatalytic current density of 100 mA cm2 at a low overpotential of 100 mV and remarkable durability (little activity loss for >5000 cycles) in acidic media. In addition, the superior HER performance of Ni3N/CMFs/Ni3N was achieved by Bo et al., benefitting from the excellent electrical conductivity and a high density of utilizable active sites.99 A further enhancement is achieved in the electrocatalytic system of the Pt-decorated Ni3N nanosheets, which gives a larger hydrogen evolution current density (200 mA cm−2) at a low overpotential (160 mV) (Fig. 6a).115
 Fig. 6  (a) HER activity of Ni3N/Pt, NiO/Pt, 20% Pt/C, Ni3N, and NiO in 1 M KOH;115 (b) LSV of Ni foam, Co4N, V–Co4N, and Pt/C;40 (c) the polarization curves of atomically thin MoN nanosheets compared with the bulk material and Pt, and the structural diagram of the hexagonal molybdenum nitride given as an inset;53 (d) differential free energy of H absorption (I); activation energy (Ea/eV) for the Tafel reaction in the HER on several transition-metal nitrides as a function of the hydrogen coverage (II); volcano plot of the HER for various catalysts (III).95 (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 40 and 115 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Due to the center of the d band of cobalt nitrides being relatively far away from the energy level of the HER, there are few reports on the HER behaviour of Co4N.116 However, this issue can be overcome via tailoring the positions of the d-band center through vanadium doping. For example, V-doped Co4N nanosheets display a much lower overpotential of 37 mV at 10 mA cm−2 than bare Co4N and even close to the benchmark Pt/C. In order to explore the HER mechanism of the V-doped Co4N nanosheets, synchrotron-based X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES), ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations are utilized and the results pointed out that the enhanced activity arose from the downshift of the d-band center on neutralizing the electron densities of cobalt by V doping (Fig. 6b).40 Another implemental way to optimize the HER electrocatalytic activity of such kinds of nitrides by controlled manipulation of the valence and electronic states of the metal elements through combination with each other. The synergic effect arising from the resultant bimetallic nitrides, including binary Ni–Fe,16,28,72,75,117–120 Ni–Co,17,74,121,122 and Co–Fe nitrides,73 remarkably promotes HER electrocatalysis and endows them with significantly enhanced activity compared with the individual nitrides. Hitherto, Ni3FeN materials were widely used as HER electrocatalysts. Specifically, Zhang et al. reported LDH-derived Ni3FeN nanoparticles exhibiting excellent catalytic performance and high stability in the electrochemical HER.75In situ growth of FeNi3N nanostructures on surface-redox-etching Ni foam also enabled this electrocatalytic system to possess high activity with a low overpotential of 75 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and good durability of 400 h for the HER.119 Furthermore, Yang et al. demonstrated that Ni3FeN/r-GO was more favorable for the HER since the surface electronic structure of Ni3FeN was tuned by transferring electrons from Ni3FeN clusters to the r-GO through the interaction of two metal species.16 Besides, the interface engineering of heterostructures by integrating them with other materials such as NiIr,100 TiN,92 Ni(OH)2,123 Ni–Bi and Fe2P,124,125 also provides an optional strategy to improve the HER activity.
Despite the advances of metal nitrides, the accurate mechanism of these nitride compounds towards the HER remains unclear. In order to clarify this issue, Xie's group designed atomically thin MoN nanosheets as a simplified model to investigate the HER mechanism due to their unique atom alignment (Fig. 6c).53 Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the atomically thin MoN nanosheets showed a metallic behavior, which effectively facilitated electron transport during the catalytic process. From the experimental analysis, they reasonably concluded that apical Mo atoms on the surface are the active sites for the HER rather than N atoms. Last year, a series of transition-metal (Sc, Ti, Y, Hf, Ta and Mo) nitrides were investigated theoretically via density functional theory (DFT) calculations (Fig. 6d).95 Some of them were capable of catalyzing the HER at low overpotentials and TaN was predicted to be the most promising one through comprehensive comparison, but this needed to be verified by experimental results for practical application.
4.2 Application of metal nitrides toward the OER
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is another half reaction of water splitting, playing a significant role in the electrochemical field. Kinetic analysis shows that the OER is a four electron–proton coupled anode reaction. In comparison with the HER, the OER requires a much higher energy (larger overpotential) to overcome the kinetic barrier.94 In the past, research studies were mainly focusing on the improvement of electrode kinetics and stability under different electrolyte environments. Some precious metal oxides like RuO2 and IrO2 are often used, but the high price and limited sources restricts their practical application. Thus, some efforts have been devoted to developing other catalysts without precious metals. Recently, lots of studies have revealed that transition metal nitrides may become a promising alternative catalyst.46,87,116,120
Co, Fe, Ni-based oxide electrocatalysts have long been actively pursued owing to their easy availability. However, their relatively low electrical conductivity restricts their applications in the OER. Metal nitrides intrinsically possess metallic characteristics, which can circumvent this issue and provide the theoretical possibility for the OER. For instance, Ni3N nanosheets have achieved good OER performance with low overpotential and small Tafel slopes in alkaline electrolytes.41,126 Compared with the bulk Ni3N and NiO nanosheets, Ni3N nanosheets perform best no matter in electrical conductivity or in catalytic activity tests, manifesting the excellent OER results (Fig. 7a) with the current density reaching 52.3 mA cm−2 at a relatively low overpotential of 350 mV. It is also interesting to note that their corresponding metal oxides are formed on the surface of these nitrides during the OER, evidenced by the XPS results of the post-OER catalysts (Fig. 7b).41 This phenomenon actually reveals the mechanism of nitrides taking part in the OER. The OER activity is attributed to the in situ formation of a NiOOH outer layer on the nitrides (Ni3N/NiOOH) as the actual surface active site. Shalom et al. developed Ni3N on nickel foam for the electrocatalytic OER and also observed a similar surface oxidation behavior of Ni3N during the OER catalysis process.27 It happens that there is a similar case for Co4N83 and FexN52 based catalysts towards the OER, underlining the important function of the formed oxide species during the OER. The detailed content will be discussed later. Subsequently, another OER-active Ni3N nanostructure on Ni foam has been obtained via a facile, simple, low-temperature and environmentally friendly synthesis method as mentioned in the previous section. The resultant Ni3N presents a remarkably porous structure with high surface area and homogeneous coral size distribution, and thus gives a better OER activity than the above mentioned other Ni3N morphologies due to its unique nanostructure (Fig. 7c).80 Furthermore, this structure was well preserved during the OER process, ensuring the superior long-term stability of OER performance.80 In 2015, Wu's group further found that metallic Co4N nanowires/carbon cloth still exhibited superior OER performance with an extremely small overpotential of 257 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope of 44 mV dec−1 in an alkaline medium (Fig. 7d).83 The OER performance of Co4N nanowires is then further enhanced by using a N2 radio frequency plasma synthesis route. The plasma treatment significantly enhances the OER activity and endows the nanowire with a much lower overpotential of 290 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2.46 The appearance of CoOx or CoOOH surrounding Co4N not only can protect nitrides during the OER process but also can provide many active sites. In terms of metallic Co4N with high electronic conduction, it can provide reliable electron transfer to the surface active sites, overcoming the limitation of the low conductivity of their metal oxides/hydroxide counterparts.83
 Fig. 7  (a) The normalized polarization curves of Ni3N nanosheets, bulk Ni3N and NiO nanosheets by the BET surface area of electrocatalysts (I), corresponding Tafel plots of Ni3N nanosheets, bulk Ni3N and NiO nanosheets (II);41 (b) XPS spectrums of the initial Ni3N nanosheets and those after 1000 cycles of catalytic reaction;41 (c) electrocatalytic properties of the hNi3N electrode for the oxygen evolution reaction, polarization curves and stability test;80 (d) IR-corrected polarization curves (I); Tafel plots of all catalysts in 1 M KOH solution of Co4N NW/CC compared with other relative electrocatalysts (II);83 (e) the polarization curves of FexN in comparison with iron oxide and the support;52 (f) IR-corrected polarization curves of a series of cobalt nitrides in 1.0 M KOH solution;58 (g) LSVs of bulk Ni3N, pristine COF, and the composites prepared in different reaction atmospheres.87 (a, b and e) Reproduced from ref. 41 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c, d and g) Reproduced from ref. 80, 83, and 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (f) Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A similar design philosophy described can be applied to prepare the Ir/metal nitrides core–shell nanoparticles for the OER, in which Ir serves as the reaction site in the surface of metal nitrides and oxides and also protects the internal metal nitrides especially in acidic environments. Through experimental and theoretical investigation on the OER performance of Ir/Ni4N, Ir/Co4N and Ir/Fe4N, these metal nitrides can effectively reduce the Ir mass loading by a factor of 2 compared to standard IrO2 electrocatalysts.127 Furthermore, Ir/Fe4N is found to be more active than IrO2 making this composition a promising candidate to perform the OER in acidic solutions. Furthermore, without the usage of the noble metal Ir, Ren et al. achieved nanoporous iron nitride thin films with excellent OER performance in an alkaline medium, featuring a very low overpotential of 238 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7e).52
To enhance the OER performance of these metal nitrides, a variety of strategies have been attempted. One strategy is to tune compositions by changing the ratios of the metal and nitrogen or adding other elements. The ratio of cobalt and nitride influences the electrical conductivity, which in turn affects the OER efficiency. Wu et al. compared the intrinsic conductivity of cobalt nitrides (Co2N, Co3N and Co4N) arising from electron delocalization modulation and the OER efficiency.58 Co4N with the decreased N content has higher intrinsic conductivity, unquestionably showing better OER efficiency and stability in KOH solution (Fig. 7f).58
Doping or alloying has long been a helpful strategy to improve materials' properties, which can combine the advantages of two and even more elements and employ the synergetic effect. Mn has been successfully doped into CoN nanowires with improved OER activity under both alkaline and neutral conditions, which can be explained by the enhanced active area, electrical conductivity and intrinsic activity.90 As a result, the Mn doped CoN nanowire has a desirable performance under both alkaline and neutral conditions with high stability during the 3000-cycle-test.90 Anion-doping is also effective to improve the OER activity of metal nitrides. The phosphorus and fluorine co-doped Ni1.5Co1.5N synthesized by using ionic liquids exhibits OER performance superior to that of the IrO2 catalyst, manifesting a low overpotential of 280 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and excellent durability in 1.0 M KOH solution.118 The incorporation of other metals in different molar ratios could further boost OER activity. This has been proved by ternary Ni–Fe nitrides, in particular Ni3FeN,28,75,117,119,128,129 compared to pure Ni3N. Similar observations are also reported in other ternary nitrides, such as Ni–Co,74,130 Cu–Co,97 Co–Fe73 metal nitrides. Very recently, Sun's group has devoted efforts into designing heterostructures of metal nitrides with in situ formed amorphous Ni borate (Bi-layer)124 and amorphous Ni carbonate (Ni–Ci layer).89 In such in situ formed Ni3N-based core–shell structures, conductive Ni3N not only provides the Ni source for in situ electrochemical derivation of Ni–Ci or Ni–Bi catalyst, but also effectively prompts the electron transport during the OER, thus enabling more efficient water oxidation electrocatalysis under near-neutral conditions.
In addition to the metal nitride composition variation, the support structure could also be optimized to boost the OER performance. Carbon cloth and Ni foam are widely used as porous and nanostructured catalyst supports, as aforementioned. Another promising support being used was covalent organic frameworks (COFs) because of their highly ordered porosity and crystallinity.87 Compared with others, the biggest advantage of COFs as supports is that it is easier to manipulate their intrinsic structure by atomic doping. With regard to the IISERP-COF3, it has OER activity itself. The nanocomposite formed by inherently metallic Ni3N nanoparticles on such a conductive N-rich COF is an excellent electrocatalyst with a low band gap for water oxidation. The experimental results indicate that higher amounts of small conducting nanoparticles of Ni3N could be obtained under ammonia-rich air and such a superior performance of the catalysts can be credited to the synergic effect from the conducting Ni3N and the π-conjugated COF support (Fig. 7g).87
4.3 Application of metal nitrides as electrocatalysts for overall water splitting
In recent years, developing metal nitrides as catalysts for both the HER and OER has attracted intensive attention due to their fast reaction rates and the simplification of the overall water splitting process. The basic requirement to design these catalysts is that they should have good catalytic activity and stability towards the HER and OER simultaneously in the same medium. Among various nitrides, some bimetallic nitrides are more likely to be applied well in the overall water splitting than monometallic nitrides because the incorporation of a second metal atom would bring in more variation in the atomic arrangement with more favorable electron structures.
Nickel–iron nitrides with good OER electrocatalytic performances have been proposed as promising and efficient catalysts for the overall water splitting. The intrinsic metallic characteristics and unique electron structure of this compound result in the strong absorption of H2O, promoting the water splitting. Nickel–iron nitrides with different compositions like Ni3FeN and Fe2Ni2N have been reported as electrocatalysts in full water splitting.16,28,72,75,119,120 In addition, nickel–titanium,92 nickel–cobalt,74,121 nickel–molybdenum,70 and cobalt–iron73 nitrides are also investigated as promising candidates to be used for overall water splitting.31
Since the morphologies and substrates of nitrides can significantly affect their HER and OER performances, these two aspects of bimetallic nitrides play a role in determining the full water splitting rate. For example, Ni3FeN nanoparticles prepared via thermal ammonolysis of ultrathin NiFe-LDH nanosheets exhibit both good HER and OER activities and durability.75Fig. 8a displays the LSV curves for the HER and OER of Ni3FeN nanoparticles and their counterparts. It is clear that the HER and OER performance of Ni3FeN nanoparticles surpassed that of others.75 In this case, the Ni3FeN composition obtained from a Ni2+/Fe3+ feeding molar ratio of 2/1 shows the best overall water splitting performance, superior to nickel–iron nitrides prepared from other Ni2+/Fe3+ molar ratios.75 Very recently, 3D Ni3FeN nanoparticles/r-GO aerogel electrocatalysts achieved a 10 mA cm−2 current density at 1.60 V of cell voltage with a durability of 100 h for overall water splitting (Fig. 8b).16 In spite of great progress, the complexity of the preparation technique and the poor contact between catalyst nanoparticles and the GC electrodes restrict further performance enhancement and long-term stability. In situ growth of Ni3FeN on Ni foam with a hierarchical nanostructure could help the aforementioned issues. During the synthesis process, the selection of ion precursor is important. The slow-growth process of FeCl2 is more beneficial for Ni3FeN growth with a favorable electrocatalytic behavior. And the Ni foam serves not only as the Ni source but also as the support of Ni3FeN catalysts. All these features contribute to its good electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 8c) and stability as well as feasibility for overall water splitting.131 Only 1.62 V of cell voltage was needed when achieving a current density of 10 mA cm2. Ni3FeN deposited on the carbon cloth has also been used as both the anode and cathode in the overall water electrolysis.117 Thanks to the 3D nanostructure of Ni3FeN on the carbon cloth (CC) which facilitates charge transfer and affords an intimate contact between active sites and electrolytes, the Ni3FeN/CC catalyst delivers good electrocatalytic activity and durability for overall water splitting (Fig. 8d).117 Furthermore, the full water splitting performance of Ni3FeN could be further enhanced by synthesizing stacked-Ni3FeN nanoparticles on Ni foam. Actually these stacked nanoparticle constituted nanosheets favor the enhancement of electrocatalytic performance. This is because this porous nanostructure could provide more active sites for electrocatalytic reactions.28 This porous nanostructured Ni3FeN dramatically reduces the overpotentials to 45 mV and 223 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in the same electrolyte for the HER and OER, exhibiting the lowest cell voltage of 1.495 V to reach 10 mA cm−2 when applied in the overall water splitting. The resultant LSV curves for overall water splitting are shown in Fig. 8e.28
 Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves for the (I) HER, and (II) OER of Ni3FeN nanoparticles and other contrast samples;75 (b) overall water-splitting performance of Ni3FeN/r-GO-20, Ni3Fe/r-GO-20, Ni3N/r-GO-20, Fe2N/r-GO-20, and Ni3FeN in 1.0 M KOH (I). Photograph of the two-electrode electrolyzer using Ni3FeN/r-GO-20 as both the anode and cathode (II);16 (c) polarization curve of water electrolysis for FeNi3N/NF‖FeNi3N/NF in 1 M KOH;131 (d) chronopotentiometry of Ni3FeN/CC in 1.0 M KOH;117 (e) LSV curves of overall water splitting for porous Ni3FeN nanosheets and other catalysts in a two-electrode system in alkaline media;28 (f) LSV curves (I) and the corresponding stability test (II) of NCN/CC and other contrast catalysts for full water splitting in acidic and alkaline media;98 (g) TEM image of an individual TiN@Ni3N nanowire;92 (h) the polarization curve of the symmetric water splitting device in 1 M KOH based on TiN@Ni3N nanowire electrodes.92 (a) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b and e) Reproduced from ref. 16 and 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c and f–h) Reproduced from ref. 92, 98 and 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier. 
Similar to the aforementioned nanoparticle stacked structured Ni3FeN, this is also suitable for cobalt–iron nitrides and cobalt–nickel nitrides towards efficient overall water splitting. The difference lies in the nano-morphology. To be more specific, the stacked cobalt–iron nitride and cobalt–nickel nitride nanoparticles exhibit the nanowire/grass morphology, instead of the nanosheet.73,98 Despite the different morphology, the porous structure and more exposed active sites ensure the outstanding electrocatalytic activity and stability toward the HER and OER. Co3FeNx nanowires and CoNi3N nanograsses on carbon cloth (NCN/CC) are successfully applied as both the anode and cathode of overall water splitting in an alkaline solution, showing only 1.56 V (ref. 98) and 1.539 V (ref. 73) at 10 mA cm−2 with good stability, respectively. Fig. 8f shows the electrochemical measurement results of the water splitting device using CoNi3N nanograsses on the carbon cloth as the anode and cathode.98 It is noteworthy that NH3 usage is purposely avoided during the formation route of CoNi3N nanograss on carbon cloth because polyaniline (PANI) on carbon cloth was employed as the nitridation source. Apart from serving as a nitridation source, PANI can also be doped into carbon cloth to boost carbon cloth conductivity and enable metal nitrides to form on the surface without binders, consequently enhancing the catalytic activity.98
The performances of Ni–Mo nitride nanotubes and myriophyllum-like hierarchical TiN@Ni3N nanowires are also impressive.70,92 In the Ni–Mo nitride based overall water splitting system, the effect of morphology and composition on the HER and OER activities of nitrides was evaluated via varying the annealing temperature from 350 to 750 °C.70 Through comprehensive comparison, Ni–Mo nitrides annealed at 550 °C are the most appropriate catalyst for full water splitting in a KOH electrolyzer.70 Different to these bimetallic nitrides, TiN and Ni3N in the myriophyllum-like hierarchical TiN@Ni3N structure play different roles, where 1D Ni3N nanowires are employed as stalks to support shorter Ni3N nanorods as leaves (Fig. 8g). As a result, such TiN@Ni3N exhibits superior HER and OER performance. Thanks to this carefully designed structure, this compound performs well in a full water splitting device with 1 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 8h).92
5. Application of metal nitrides in photo(electro)catalytic water splitting
The solar energy driven water splitting represents a clean and sustainable means of generating H2 and O2. In general, the photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic water splitting shares a much identical working mechanism. Both of these processes need a light-sensitive semiconductor material to absorb solar energy, which mainly includes three steps. Firstly, the solar energy is absorbed by the photocatalysts with appropriate band energy to excite electron–hole pairs in the bulk. Secondly, the photoexcited electrons and holes are transported to the catalyst surface without recombination. And finally, the absorbed species on the material surface is reduced or oxidized to form H2 and O2. The first two steps are strongly dependent on the properties of the applied photocatalysts, while the third step usually needs facilitation by an additional co-catalyst.19,21,132–134 The prerequisite for an efficient photocatalyst and photoelectrode used for the water splitting is high visible light absorption as well as appropriate energy levels. To be more specific, the conduction band bottom should be more negative than the reduction potential of water to generate H2, while the valence band top should be more positive than the oxidation potential of water to produce O2. Additionally, the photoinduced electrons and holes should be efficiently separated and quickly transferred in order to avoid the unfavorable bulk/surface charge recombination.25
Despite the analogical material requirements, the difference between the photocatalytic and the photoelectrochemical water splitting arises due to the fact that the latter occurs in photoelectrochemical cells, in which the photogenerated holes and electrons migrate to the anode and cathode to participate in water oxidation and reduction, respectively. In some cases, an applied external voltage is needed to assist in efficiently completing the entire solar-to-hydrogen conversion process.135 The advantage of photoelectrocatalytic water splitting is that H2 and O2 can be separately generated at different electrodes, which is convenient for collection and also reduces the risk of explosion. In contrast, the mixed O2 and H2 from the photocatalytic water splitting needs an extra step to separate them in most cases. Fig. 9 displays the schematic diagrams of photocatalytic water splitting and photoelectrocatalytic water splitting.
 Fig. 9  The schematic diagrams of (a) the photocatalytic water splitting,136 and (b) the photoelectrocatalytic water splitting.135 (a) Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5.1 Application of metal nitrides toward photocatalytic water splitting
Some metal oxides consisting of metal cations with d0 and d10 electronic configurations have so far been developed as photocatalysts for water splitting. However, such development in this field is restricted by the wide band gap (greater than 3.0 eV) due to the deep O 2p valence bands which can increase difficulties in efficient light utilization. Thus photocatalyst development for water splitting has been shifted from metal oxides to oxynitrides and nitrides in order to create a narrow band gap due to the higher potential of the N 2p orbital than the O 2p orbital from 2005.137 The first successful example of a non-oxide photocatalyst for overall water splitting under UV irradiation is a single phase β-Ge3N4 with dispersed RuO2 as the co-catalyst.138 Further research finds that the β-Ge3N4 phase shows activity for the stoichiometric decomposition of pure water under UV irradiation and the performance is affected by the crystallinity and the defect density in the material.139 Very recently, metal nitrides like Ni3N and Co3N also have been reported as robust and low-cost co-catalysts for photocatalytic water splitting even with comparable properties to Pt.140,141
Among all the metal nitrides for photocatalysts, GaN is one of the most widely studied. Although GaN itself is inactive, it could exhibit high activity with the assistance of other co-catalysts (Rh2−xCrxO3)142 or when doped with other metal ions.143 In order to achieve efficient water splitting under visible light irradiation, the solid solutions of ZnO and GaN were frequently adopted as the photocatalyst with Rh2−xCrxO3 co-catalysts in the past.144–149 With constant exploration of the nanostructured morphology, the application of GaN has been found to be more flexible even without the incorporation of ZnO. For instance, GaN nanowires achieve photocatalytic pure water with the incorporation of Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell structures as cocatalysts but without the aid of ZnO.150 This process has been proved to be highly stable. Furthermore, through theoretical analysis, GaN or AlN could collaborate well with MoS2 to form van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures due to their good lattice match.151 This heterostructure and the photocatalytic water splitting process are shown in Fig. 10a. Such a design represented a separated process of H2 and O2 production. H2 and O2 may evolve separately at the opposite monolayer, in which MoS2 and AlN or GaN serve as the electron acceptor and electron donor, respectively.151 This theoretical finding may open a new way to facilitate the design of photocatalysts for water splitting, attracting a lot of enthusiasm for future experimental investigation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of MoS2/AlN(GaN) vdW heterostructures as the photocatalysts for water splitting;151 (b) overall pure water splitting on Rh/Cr2O3 decorated InGaN/GaN nanowire arrays under full arc (>300 nm) 300 W xenon lamp irradiation (I), apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) and H2 evolution rate as a function of the wavelength of the incident light (II);154 (c) the influence of Mg content in this photocatalyst on the oxygen evolution rate (I); the oxygen evolution rate based on different photocatalysts (II), reaction conditions: 0.15 g catalyst; 0.2 g La2O3 (as a buffer agent to maintain the pH value of the reaction solution to be ca. 8.5); 1.5 g AgNO3; 150 mL H2O; 300 W xenon lamp (≥420 nm); 0.5 h reaction time. (d) Decay of transient absorption of the representative Ta3N5-based photocatalysts in a vacuum: (a) CoOx/MgO(in)–Ta3N5, (b) CoOx/MgO(ex)–Ta3N5, (c) CoOx–Ta3N5, and (d) Ta3N5.159 (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 151 and 154 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Another currently known metal-nitride photocatalyst is InGaN whose energy bandgap can cover nearly the entire solar spectrum via tuning the ratio between In and Ga.152 It has been demonstrated that a higher In content could promote the water splitting more efficiently since the bandgap of InGaN matches better with the solar spectrum.153 The multiband photocatalyst is often formed by combining InGaN with GaN. It has been reported that multiband InGaN/GaN nanowire heterostructures could achieve stable H2 production from pure water splitting under UV light and blue and green-light irradiation with the decoration of rhodium (Rh)/chromium-oxide (Cr2O3) core–shell nanoparticles.154Fig. 10b displays the result of H2 and O2 production amounts under full arc (>300 nm) 300 W xenon lamp irradiation as well as the variation of apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) and the H2 evolution rate with the wavelength of the incident light. Moreover, the performance of the InGaN/GaN nanowire for photocatalytic water splitting is enhanced via p-type Mg-dopant incorporation.155 In this case, 1.8% of the solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency can be obtained under concentrated sunlight.155 The incorporation of Mg not only ensures the good crystalline quality of the nanowires but also optimizes the surface band structure. The good efficiency and stability of the InGaN/GaN nanowire make it a potential candidate for use in large-scale solar-fuel conversion.
Besides, Ta3N5 has long been probed as a photocatalyst to split water due to its suitable band gap of 2.1 eV. As early as 2002, the bulk Ta3N5 was found to be able to split water under visible light irradiation in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor and acceptor.156 Since then, Ta3N5 has attracted researchers' interests as the photocatalyst. The Ta3N5 photocatalyst in a nanoparticle structure can significantly improve the photocatalytic activity due to its larger surface area and lower defect density compared to its bulk counterpart.157 Afterwards, it has been found that the Ta3N5 photocatalytic activity could be improved by the pretreatment of alkaline metal salts because such a modification on the surface of Ta2O5 allows the formed Ta3N5 to possess better crystallinity, smaller particles and a smoother surface, thereby significantly improving the water oxidation under visible light.158 CoOx is demonstrated to be an efficient water oxidation co-catalyst for Ta3N5 in photocatalytic water splitting. However, an undesirable intimate interface could form between Ta3N5 and CoOx owing to their respective hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties, which has an adverse effect on interfacial charge transfer. This issue has been circumvented by introducing a hydrophilic 2–5 nm MgO nanolayer.159 In this study, the enhanced water oxidation efficiency was credited to the enhancement of interfacial contact area and the reduced defect density, promoting the charge separation and achieving 11.3% AQE under 500–600 nm illumination. Fig. 10c shows some information about the relationship between MgO content and water splitting efficiency as well as the comparison before and after modification of the MgO monolayer. Fig. 10d clearly shows the enhanced photogenerated carrier lifetime after introducing a magnesia modifier. Besides, it is necessary to explain that the excessive amount of Mg is not beneficial to the water splitting efficiency because the formed thick MgO layer suppresses the transfer of photogenerated carriers. This emphasizes the importance of the interface between photocatalysts and co-catalysts and provides an alternative way to optimize the efficiency of photocatalytic water splitting.
5.2 Application of metal nitrides toward photoelectrochemical water splitting
Photoelectrochemical water splitting is developed on the basis of a photocatalytic process. These light-sensitive photocatalysts towards water splitting are often the appropriate choices of photoelectrode materials. Thus, all these metal-nitride photocatalysts mentioned above are often employed as photoelectrodes in a photochemical cell. GaN is suitable for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting not only because of its tunable bang gap by incorporating InN but also due to its good stability in aqueous solutions. The H2 generation from the Pt counter electrode was clearly observed for the first time when n-type GaN was adopted as a working electrode in 1.0 M KOH under an external bias in 2005.157 In the same year, the photochemical properties of InxGa1−xN (x = 0.02 and 0.09) were also investigated and it was found that the content of In could determine the PEC performance.160 In most cases, InGaN and GaN collaborate with each other to form composite or multiband photoelectrodes, similar to the InGaN/GaN multiband photocatalyst. InGaN/GaN/Si, and GaN/Si photoelectrodes161 and InN/InGaN162 quantum dot photoelectrodes have also been reported for efficient H2 generation. No matter single GaN or InGaN or their composite photoelectrodes, the nanostructure plays a critical role in controlling the solar water splitting performance and should be rationally designed. The InGaN/GaN core/shell nanowire photoanode on the Si substrate achieves up to 27% incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency and such a structure could ensure stable hydrogen production in HBr under UV and visible light irradiation. Fig. 11a shows a good match of the experimental and calculated H2 production results.163 The epitaxial InGaN layer growing successfully on 3D GaN rods offers high-quality and dislocation-free GaN–InGaN heterojunction systems with large active surface area and appropriate concentration, consequently improving PEC properties.164Fig. 11b shows the current density of the 3D GaN/InGaN rod arrays in comparison with the single GaN rod arrays with the structure schematic inside. In terms of tandem photoelectrodes, the biggest problem is the mismatch between various absorbing layers. Such a tricky issue has been circumvented via integrating p-InGaN/tunnel junction/n-GaN nanowire arrays onto a planar Si solar cell wafer.165 In such a structure, the photogenerated electrons can be injected into the GaN surface and reduce chemical loss. The H2 evolution result and the generated photocurrent are exhibited in Fig. 11c.165 Compared with the InGaN nanowires/planar Si substrate photoelectrode, the photocurrent could be increased by a factor of 5 via redesigning the structure (growing InGaN nanowires on Si wires) to form Si/InGaN core/shell hierarchical nanowire arrays. The result is shown in Fig. 11d.161 Such enhancement can be attributed to the increase in charge transport or separation due to the larger interfacial area and the increased light absorption.161 The InGaN/GaN multiple-quantum-well photoelectrode could be optimized by fabricating the highly ordered nanorods and growing them on hollow n-GaN nanowires.166,167 In addition to forming a multiband InGaN/GaN photoelectrode, a dual-photoelectrode device in conjunction with the parallel illumination scheme has been fabricated for solar-driven water splitting, in which GaN nanowires and InGaN nanowires serve as the photoanode and photocathode, respectively, are designed to absorb the UV and visible spectrum of sunlight, respectively.168Fig. 11e shows the open-circuit potential result of the photoanode and photocathode. This configuration exhibits a remarkable enhancement of power conversion efficiency in comparison with the individual photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 11  (a) Steady H2 evolution result based on the InGaN/GaN core/shell nanowire-structure photoanode;163 (b) current density of the 3D GaN–InGaN core–shell rod array (red) compared with that of the single GaN rod arrays (blue);164 (c) the measured and calculated H2 evolution as well as the photocurrent result based on a monolithically integrated InGaN/GaN/Si adaptive tunnel junction photocathode;165 (d) photocurrent density plots of hierarchical Si/InxGa1−xN nanowire arrays (red) and planar Si/InxGa1−xN (blue) under 100 mW cm−2 without an AM 1.5 filter show an increase in current for the hierarchical geometry;161 (e) open-circuit potential EOCP of the GaN nanowire photoanode and InGaN nanowire photocathode in the dual-photoelectrode device (I); the power conversion efficiency of the dual-photoelectrode device as a function of applied bias under AM 1.5G 1 sun illumination (II);168 (f) chronoamperograms of substrate generation for water oxidation on Co3O4–Ta3N5 nanotubes (black), Ta3N5 nanotubes (red), and Ta3N5 (blue) electrodes in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 and 1 mM KOH (pH 11) aqueous solution;171 (g) current–potential curves for the IrO2/Ta3N5 thin film and IrO2/Ta3N5 nanorods nitrided at 1000 °C. The curves were measured in a 0.5 M aqueous Na2SO4 solution (pH = 13) under chopped AM 1.5G simulated sunlight at 100 mW cm−2;172 (h) IPCE measurement result of the NiOx-coated Si–Ta3N5 photoanode.179 (a–f and h) Reproduced from ref. 161, 163–165, 168, 177, and 179 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Ta3N5 is another popular metal nitride for the photoelectrochemical water splitting owing to its good optical properties. However, the unsatisfactory PEC performance and the photodegradation of Ta3N5 impede its practical application and development. The poor photocatalytic performance is mainly caused by the insufficient crystallization and the poor electronic properties of Ta3N5, while the photodegradation is attributable to the self-oxidation of Ta3N5 which would inhibit the transport of photogenerated holes.158,169,170 To settle these problems, a variety of strategies have been tried from designing nanostructures, optimizing synthesis methods, and doping engineering to exploring efficient cocatalysts and composites as photocatalysts. Both well-aligned Ta3N5 nanotube arrays and vertically aligned Ta3N5 nanorod arrays are efficient candidates for solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting. And their photocurrent results are displayed in Fig. 11f and g.171,172 The crystallization of Ta3N5 could be optimized via a post treatment of NH3.158,173 Apart from the nanostructure and the crystallinity optimization, doping is also a practical way to change intrinsic properties (including tuning the band gap and conductivity) and then promoting water splitting. It has been found that doping alkaline metal elements (Na, K, Ru and Cs) into Ta3N5 could strongly boost the visible light water splitting performance due to the reduced bandgap and the increased electrode conductivity.174
In most cases, cocatalysts are needed to assist Ta3N5 in completing the water oxidation process. The most applied cocatalysts can be selected from these electrocatalysts with good OER performance, such as IrO2,173 Co3O4,171,175 Co–Pi,171 CoTiOx,176 and NiOx.177 The Ta3N5 photoanode shows better durability against photocorrosion when Co3O4 is employed as the cocatalyst than when IrO2 and Co(OH)x are employed as cocatalysts due to the parallel optimization of the photocatalysts and the electrocatalysts.175 In addition to the combination of these commonly used cocatalysts, the formation of composite photoanodes or tandem photoanodes is another effective strategy to improve the photoelectrochemical water splitting performance. Collaborating Ta3N5 with GaN and Si has been proposed to achieve stable and high photocurrent.178,179 The incorporation of GaN addresses the poor compatibility between Ta3N5 and the electrolytes,178 while the incorporation of n-type Si can enable the band alignment at the heterojunction to shift the photocurrent onset to more negative potentials.179 After that, Si has been proved to create some contributions to the observed oxidation photocurrent as Si can absorb the light at a longer wavelength.179 The IPCE measurement result (Fig. 11h) can help to explain this issue.
6. Conclusions and outlook
Given the urgency to find cleaner and more sustainable energy generation methods to replace the conventional fossil fuel consumption, there is a strong research enthusiasm to realize hydrogen energy. This inspires a lot of studies to explore various techniques to achieve efficient and economical hydrogen production and electro(photo)chemical water splitting is a typical example. In this review, we summarize the recent advancement in the application of metal nitrides as noble-metal free cheap electrocatalysts for water splitting. These metal nitrides possess exceeding physicochemical properties such as high electrical conductivity, good corrosion resistance, high chemical stability and unique electronic structure, thus resulting in remarkable performance improvement for water splitting. Compared to metal oxides/hydroxides, metal nitrides generally present a metal-like behavior and much better conductivities. The metal–nitrogen bond in the density of states (DOS) of the metal d-band endows the metal nitrides with electron-donating characteristics and enables suitable adsorption between the surface of nitrides and the protons, all of which could contribute to the high electrocatalytic HER activity associated with metal nitrides. During the OER process, in situ evolution of corresponding metal oxide/hydroxide layers on the surface of metal nitrides generally occurred. The good performance of outer oxide/hydroxide layers on water dissociation and inner metal nitrides for carrier transportation helps provide much more active sites for OER electrocatalysis. This phenomenon resembles metal phosphides as OER electrocatalysts. Though great progress has been made, there are still some intrinsic drawbacks limiting their practical applications. The realization of high performance metal nitride catalysts for practical application is still facing a number of challenges and future studies are recommended as the following areas.
Firstly, several universal and scalable strategies have been developed to prepare metal nitride catalysts; however it is still a great challenge to realize large-scale and reproducible metal nitride synthesis with controlled morphology and precise composition. In particular, cost-effective and environmentally friendly synthesis methods in environmentally benign manner are still required.
Secondly, high efficient electrocatalytic water splitting requires an aqueous medium in an alkaline or acid state. However, the metal nitrides are generally unstable in aqueous electrolyte. Thus, the applied metal nitride-based catalysts should possess high activity and stability under extreme pH conditions. Loading metal nitrides on various supports to form the desirable composites is believed to be an effective solution to solve the low stability problem.
Thirdly, despite the simplicity in theory, the real electrocatalytic water splitting process is very complex and still not clear. More theoretical investigation or in situ techniques (i.e., spectroscopic studies) on metal nitrides should be strengthened for deeply understanding the reaction mechanism. This would be helpful for further future improvement and optimization of the catalyst design.
Finally, photo/electro-chemical water splitting is a more promising technology to effectively utilize sunlight to produce hydrogen. However, the photoconversion efficiency of most metal nitride-based semiconductors is still very low and in need of improvement. This can be achieved via catalyst composition and structure design to adjust its electronic structure, band gap, band-edge potential, microstructures, sunlight absorption and surface catalysis. We trust that the appropriate combination of light-harvesting photocatalysts and electrocatalytic metal nitrides will further promote the efficiency for future sustainable water splitting.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this work provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51572227 and 21771147), Sichuan Youth Science and Technology Foundation (2013JQ0012), Major Cultivating Foundation of Education Department of Sichuan Province (17CZ0036), Meritocracy Research Funds of CWNU (17YC007 and 17YC017), and Innovative Research Team of CWNU (CXTD2017-1).
References
L. Morales and A. M. Fernández, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 12692–12706 Search PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Tian, W. Cui, P. Jiang, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 6828–6832 CrossRef .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 5531–5534 CrossRef .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan and F. Abild-Pedersen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tian, L. Huang, L. Ai and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20985–20992 RSC .
L. Ai, J. Su, M. Wang and J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9912–9920 CrossRef .
M. Wang, J. Jiang and L. Ai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6117–6125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, F. Meng, M. Cabán-Acevedo, L. Li, A. Forticaux, L. Xiu, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Niether, S. Faure, A. Bordet, J. Deseure, M. Chatenet, J. Carrey, B. Chaudret and A. Rouet, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, S. Chen, J. Ren, Y. A. Jia, C. Chen, S. Komarneni, D. Yang and X. Yao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 245–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, Y. Jiao, A. Wu, C. Tian, X. Zhang, L. Wang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704156 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, X. Xu, G. Yang, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3540–3547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700090 CrossRef .
C. Qiu, L. Ai and J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4492–4498 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, J. Shi and C. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1704179 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Wu, M. Xing, S. A. K. Leghari and S. Sajjad, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 715–726 RSC .
K. Iwashina, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 604–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 92, 33–63 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shalom, D. Ressnig, X. Yang, G. Clavel, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8171–8177 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. Xie, D. Liu, X. Huang, J. Huo and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18652–18657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, F. Shi, J. Zhan, J. Tu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500286 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
J. Xie and Y. Xie, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 3588–3598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, X. Chen, X. Zhang and G. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1946–1956 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Houston, G. E. Laramore and R. L. Park, Science, 1974, 185, 258–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zakutayev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6742–6754 RSC .
A. Fischer, J. O. Müller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2489–2496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, D. Antonio, X. Yu, J. Zhang, A. L. Cornelius, D. He and Y. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13733 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cui, G. Zhu, X. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Xie, C. Yang, T. Lin, H. Gu and F. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500126 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-W. Fu, Y. Wang, X.-L. Yue, S.-L. Zhao and Q.-Z. Qin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2236–2244 CrossRef CAS .
U. Guler, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 227–237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, P. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tong, H. Ding, X. Wu, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cao, G. M. Veith, J. C. Neuefeind, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19186–19192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nagai, Y. Goto, A. Miyata, M. Kiyoshi, K. Hada, K. Oshikawa and S. Omi, J. Catal., 1999, 182, 292–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagai, Y. Goto, O. Uchino and S. Omi, Catal. Today, 1998, 43, 249–259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagai, Y. Goto, O. Uchino and S. Omi, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 335–340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, G. Jia, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8670–8674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jacob, R. Verma and R. Mallya, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 4465–4472 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, L. R. L. Ting, V. Molinari, C. Giordano and B. S. Yeo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8361–8368 RSC .
M. Shalom, V. Molinari, D. Esposito, G. Clavel, D. Ressnig, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1272–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Lee, Y.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kwak, J.-S. Moon, A.-R. Park, E.-T. Hwang and K.-W. Park, Mater. Lett., 2014, 124, 231–234 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, X. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Chen, B. K. Tay, H. Huang, H. Zhang and W. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4566–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Z. Zhu, J. Sun, R. He, J. Bao, S. Chen and Z. Ren, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4615–4620 RSC .
J. Xiong, W. Cai, W. Shi, X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Yang, L. Feng and H. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24193–24198 RSC .
J. Song, G. Li, F. Xiong and X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20580–20585 RSC .
W. Zheng, T. P. Cotter, P. Kaghazchi, T. Jacob, B. Frank, K. Schlichte, W. Zhang, D. S. Su, F. Schüth and R. Schlögl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3458–3464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cao, J. C. Neuefeind, R. R. Adzic and P. G. Khalifah, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 2128–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Y. Tong, X. Li, S. Tao, Z. Fang, W. Chu, X. Wu and C. Wu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 236–242 RSC .
Y. Cong, H. S. Park, H. X. Dang, F.-R. F. Fan, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 579–586 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Tackett, W. Sheng, S. Kattel, S. Yao, B. Yan, K. A. Kuttiyiel, Q. Wu and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2615–2621 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A418–A422 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi and P. N. Kumta, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 3113–3120 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gajbhiye, R. Ningthoujam and J. Weissmüller, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2002, 189, 691–695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, X. Yue, Y. Jin, X. Huang and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3673–3677 RSC .
N. C. Reger, V. K. Balla, M. Das and A. K. Bhargava, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 334, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cruz-López, A. Manzo-Robledo, O. Vázquez-Cuchillo, R. Zanella, R. Gómez, J. Santoyo-Salazar and A. Campos-Badillo, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 30, 435–441 CrossRef .
B. Ren, D. Li, Q. Jin, H. Cui and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19072–19078 RSC .

          S. T. Oyama, The chemistry of transition metal carbides and nitrides, Springer,  1996, pp. 1–27 Search PubMed .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, Y. Sun, C. Zhu, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13648–13658 RSC .
Y. Ma, Z. He, Z. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Ding and C. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24850–24858 RSC .
M. Jiang, Y. Li, Z. Lu, X. Sun and X. Duan, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 630–634 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Liu, C. Xie, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12614–12617 RSC .
Y. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Pan, H. Ma and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4170–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Kang, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502585 CrossRef .
S. Bhattacharyya, S. Kurian, S. Shivaprasad and N. Gajbhiye, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1107–1116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomathi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 870–874 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Chen, S. Iyer, S. Iyer, K. Sasaki, C.-H. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1818–1826 RSC .
W. F. Chen, J. M. Schneider, K. Sasaki, C. H. Wang, J. Schneider, S. Iyer, S. Iyer, Y. Zhu, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2414–2418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ouyang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. J. Fan and R. S. Rawat, Small, 2017, 13, 1604265 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Youn, G. Bae, S. Han, J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Jang, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8007–8015 RSC .
M. Meng, H. Yan, Y. Jiao, A. Wu, X. Zhang, R. Wang and C. Tian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 29303–29307 RSC .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu, X. Lu, X. Peng, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 14923–14927 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, H. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Hu and B. Yi, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 707–712 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, H. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Zhang, M. Wang and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 572–577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, L. Jiang, Q. Jiang, S. Wang and G. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18159–18166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nandi, S. K. Singh, D. Mullangi, R. Illathvalappil, L. George, C. P. Vinod, S. Kurungot and R. Vaidhyanathan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601189 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Y. Li, F. Lv, Q. Fan, Y.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, F. Cheng, P. Xi and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2275–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xie, H. Wu, J. Mou, D. Lin, C. Xu, C. Wu and X. Sun, J. Catal., 2017, 356, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Li, D. Liu, G. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Lyu, W. Cai and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 13237–13240 RSC .
A. Morozan, V. Goellner, A. Zitolo, E. Fonda, B. Donnadieu, D. Jones and F. Jaouen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4047–4053 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5713–5718 RSC .
H. Huang, C. Yu, X. Han, S. Li, S. Cui, C. Zhao, H. Huang and J. Qiu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 14245–14251 CrossRef CAS .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Y. Abghoui and E. Skúlason, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24036–24045 CrossRef CAS .
E. Navarro-Flores, Z. Chong and S. Omanovic, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 226, 179–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, X. Chen, X. Zhong, S. Li, T. Liu, G. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Deng, D. Mei and J. G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704169 CrossRef .
C. Ray, S. C. Lee, B. Jin, A. Kundu, J. H. Park and S. C. Jun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 6146–6156 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, M. Li, C. Jiao, M. Hassan, X. Bo, M. Zhou and H.-L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9377–9390 RSC .
K. A. Kuttiyiel, K. Sasaki, W.-F. Chen, D. Su and R. R. Adzic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 591–594 RSC .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600221 CrossRef .
D. Gao, J. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Xiao, K. Tao, D. Xue and J. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17363–17369 RSC .
J.-G. Choi, J. R. Brenner, C. W. Colling, B. G. Demczyk, J. L. Dunning and L. T. Thompson, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 201–222 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, E. Hu, L. Zhang, K. Sasaki, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18572–18577 RSC .
T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Zheng and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, R. Rai, S. Gautam, A. De Sarkar, N. Tiwari, S. N. Jha, D. Bhattacharyya, A. K. Ganguli and V. Bagchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7764–7768 RSC .
X. Chen, J. Qi, P. Wang, C. Li, X. Chen and C. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ojha, S. Saha, S. Banerjee and A. K. Ganguli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19455–19461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Youn, S. Han, J. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, M. Tahir, X. Lang, G. Yuan, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20932–20937 RSC .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13638–13641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, J. Hu and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, Q. Li, D. Wang, X. Yang and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Chen, X. Yu, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601390 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Ha, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, H. Xu, Y. Li and R. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7134–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, R. Wang, M. Yu, Y. Zeng, F. Lu, X. Kuang and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 666–673 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, Q. Wang, G. Xu, Y. Ning, K. Huang, F. He, Z. j. Wu and J. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16862–16870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, C. Xiao, S. Xie, J. Liang, X. Chen and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6934–6941 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Tan, J. Xin, J. Duan, X. Su, P. Hao, J. Xie, J. Zhan, J. Zhang and J.-J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3699–3706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Peng, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, H. Zhang, X. Sun and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501661 CrossRef .
C. Ray, S. C. Lee, B. Jin, A. Kundu, J. H. Park and S. C. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4466–4476 RSC .
M. Gao, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Sun and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 833–836 RSC .
L. Xie, F. Qu, Z. Liu, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7806–7810 RSC .
X. Fan, F. Kong, A. Kong, A. Chen, Z. Zhou and Y. Shan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32840–32850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, C. Tang, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4793–4800 RSC .
B. M. Tackett, W. Sheng, S. Kattel, S. Yao, B. Yan, K. A. Kuttiyiel, Q. Wu and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2615–2621 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 382–389 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fu, Z. Cui, Y. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Tang and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, K. Feng and Z. Chen, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1908–1911 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Meng, X. Wang, J. Sunarso, X. Tan and S. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 36786–36793 RSC .
W. Bi, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, X. Li, T. Jin, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4253–4257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, C. J. Wang, W. F. Fu and Y. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4306–4323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, Y. Huang, W. Qiu, H. Yang, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 425–451 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, J. Shi, Z. Wang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 675–688 CrossRef .
Y. Moriya, T. Takata and K. Domen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 1957–1969 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arai, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama, K. Domen, H. Kobayashi, K. Sato and Y. Inoue, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 407–413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, N. Saito, Y. Yamada, K. Maeda, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi, K. Domen and Y. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4150–4151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4092–4097 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, D. Jiang, Z. Sun, R. M. Irfan, L. Zhang and P. Du, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1515–1522 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Lu and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13289–13295 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arai, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, K. Domen and K. Sato, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 796–797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, H. Hashiguchi, H. Masuda, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3447–3452 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, K. Toda, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20504–20510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda, K. Takanabe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21458–21466 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 303–308 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara and T. Setoyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 4190–4193 CrossRef .
D. Wang, A. Pierre, M. G. Kibria, K. Cui, X. Han, K. H. Bevan, H. Guo, S. Paradis, A.-R. Hakima and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2353–2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, B. Sa, J. Zhou, R. Ahuja and Z. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17594–17599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, K. Yu, W. Shan, J. Ager Iii, E. Haller, H. Lu, W. J. Schaff, W. Metzger and S. Kurtz, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6477–6482 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Lin and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 162107 CrossRef .
M. G. Kibria, H. P. Nguyen, K. Cui, S. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Guo, M. L. Trudeau, S. Paradis, A.-R. Hakima and Z. Mi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7886–7893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kibria, F. Chowdhury, S. Zhao, B. AlOtaibi, M. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 31, 736–737 CrossRef .
K. Fujii, T. Karasawa and K. Ohkawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L543 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. K. Ma, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda, Y. Moriya and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19993–19996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, S. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Qi, F. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujii, K. Kusakabe and K. Ohkawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 7433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, C. H. Wu, C. Hahn, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1678–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. D. S. Rodriguez, P. Aseev, V. J. Gómez, W. ul Hassan, M. Willander and R. Nötzel, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 291–297 CrossRef .
B. AlOtaibi, H. Nguyen, S. Zhao, M. Kibria, S. Fan and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4356–4361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Caccamo, J. Hartmann, C. Fàbrega, S. Estradé, G. Lilienkamp, J. D. Prades, M. W. Hoffmann, J. Ledig, A. Wagner and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2235–2240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, B. AlOtaibi, S. Y. Woo, Y. Wang, G. A. Botton and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2721–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Park, A. Mandal, S. Kang, U. Chatterjee, J. S. Kim, B.-G. Park, M.-D. Kim, K.-U. Jeong and C.-R. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tao, T. Zhi, B. Liu, M. Li, Z. Zhuang, J. Dai, Y. Li, F. Jiang, W. Luo and Z. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. AlOtaibi, S. Fan, S. Vanka, M. Kibria and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6821–6828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, J. E. Thorne, C. H. Wu, P. Ma, C. Du, Q. Dong, J. Guo and D. Wang, Chem, 2016, 1, 640–655 CAS .
J. M. Morbec, I. Narkeviciute, T. F. Jaramillo and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 155204 CrossRef .
Y. Cong, H. S. Park, S. Wang, H. X. Dang, F.-R. F. Fan, C. B. Mullins and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14541–14550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yokoyama, H. Hashiguchi, K. Maeda, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, R. Abe, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kado, C.-Y. Lee, K. Lee, J. Müller, M. Moll, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8685–8687 RSC .
M. Liao, J. Feng, W. Luo, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3066–3074 CrossRef CAS .
L. Seitz, B. Pinaud, D. Nordlund, Y. Gorlin, A. Gallo and T. Jaramillo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H841–H846 CrossRef CAS .
L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 363–379 RSC .
M. Zhong, T. Hisatomi, Y. Sasaki, S. Suzuki, K. Teshima, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama and T. Yamada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4739–4743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Narkeviciute, P. Chakthranont, A. J. Mackus, C. Hahn, B. A. Pinaud, S. F. Bent and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7565–7572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Ning Han	Ning Han received his BS in 2013 and MS in 2016 in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Shandong University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Shuguang Zhang. He then came to Curtin University in Australia for his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Shaomin Liu in 2017. His current research interests focus on energy electrocatalysis, including oxygen reduction/evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions.
Jing Jiang	Jing Jiang received his BS from China West Normal University in 2004 and Ph.D. from Central China Normal University in 2012. He is currently a professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at China West Normal University. His research interest involves the development of novel inorganic functional materials for semiconductor photocatalysis and energy electrocatalysis.
Lunhong Ai	Lunhong Ai received her BS from China West Normal University in 2004 and Ph.D. from Chengdu University of Technology in 2014. Currently, she is a professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at China West Normal University. Her research interests focus on the design and fabrication of nanostructures for renewable energy and environmental remediation.
Shaomin Liu	Shaomin Liu is an ARC Future Fellow and Professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the National University of Singapore in 2002, and then worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in Chemical Engineering at the California Institute of Technology for three years. From 2008, he has been working in Curtin University. His research interests include membrane science and technology for gas separation, environmental remediation, and green chemical synthesis. He has more than 350 publications with over 10000 citations and an H-index of 53 (Google Scholar).

 	Fig. 1  (a) HRTEM of the synthesized MoN;53 (b) the synthesis process of dr-MoN catalysts;54 (c) powder XRD patterns of Co2N, Co3N, and Co4N (in the left), and schematic of the electron delocalization of the corresponding cobalt nitrides (in the right);58 (d) the XRD pattern of Ni3N with the reference pattern of Ni3N, with the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image and the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (FFT) given as insets;27 (e) and (f) unit cells of Ta3N5 and WN (green balls denote Ta and W, and blue balls denote N);62 (g) the synthesis process of TiN NWs;64 (h) SEM and TEM images of CoN.46 (a–d and g) Reproduced from ref. 27, 53, 54, 58 and 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e, f and h) Reproduced from ref. 46 and 62 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Rietveld refinements of neutron diffraction for CoMoN2 showing the observed data (black line), calculated pattern (red line) and difference curve (bottom line);42 (b) illustration of the preparation of NSP-Co3FeNx nanowires by annealing with NH3;73 (c) schematic illustration of the formation of Ni3FeN nanoparticles;75 (d) schematic illustration of the synthesis of CuxNi4−xN/NF.71 (a) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b and d) Reproduced from ref. 71 and 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The synthesis from soybeans and ammonium molybdate of a solid catalyst suitable for electrochemical hydrogen production;78 (b) schematic diagram of GQD@hNi3N preparation;80 (c) schematic illustration of the process for anchoring the nitrides as decoration catalysts on carbon supports;82 (d) preparation process of Co(OH)F NWs, Co3O4 NWs, and Co4N NWs grown on carbon cloth;83 (e) a DFT minimized model showing the most energetically favorable configuration for a small hexagonal Ni3N cluster within the COF.87 (a and c) Reproduced from ref. 78 and 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b, d, and e) Reproduced from ref. 80, 83, and 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of NiO/CoN NWs and the corresponding elemental mapping of N, O, Co and Ni;88 (b) HRTEM image of Ni3N NA/CC;89 (c) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental mapping of Co, Mn and N;90 (d) microscopic and spectroscopic identification of Mo and Au in Mo6/20/80-Z8FA-1050, (I) STEM mapping for Mo, (II) STEM mapping for Au, (III) k2-weighted EXAFS function at the Mo K-edge (circle) and its fitting (solid line), (IV) XANES spectra at the Au L3-edge for gold foil (dashed line) and for Mo6/20/80-Z8FA-1050 (solid purple line);91 (e) schematic process for the synthesis of Ni3N@Fe3N/CF;93 (f) schematic illustration of the synthesis and fabrication of TiN@Ni3N nanowire arrays on Ti foil.92 (a and e) Reproduced from ref. 88 and 93 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Elsevier. (c, d and f) Reproduced from ref. 90–92 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves of MoN, NiMoN, Pt/C catalysts, and graphite in 0.1 M HClO4 solution;69 (b) polarization curves of Co, δ-MoN, Co0.6Mo1.4N2 and Pt in H2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 with (dashed line) and without (solid line) iR correction;42 (c) stability tests of the NiMoN electrode at current densities (the inset photograph shows the bubble generation);101 (d) polarization curves for BGC, Mo2N–MoC, Mo2N/Gr, Mo2N–Mo2C/HGr-3 and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 (I) and 1 M KOH (II);17 (e) polarization curves for P–WN/rGO, WN/rGO, P–rGO, Pt/C, and GO in 0.5 m H2SO4;12 (f) HER polarization curves of the W0.5Ani/GnP catalyst before and after 5000 and 10000 cycles of the accelerated deterioration test (−0.5 to +0.3 V vs. RHE) (I), and long-term durability tests of the W0.5Ani/GnP catalysts (II);79 (g) polarization curves of WSoy0.7, WSoy0.7GnP0.5, WSoy0.7GnP1.0, WSoy0.7GnP1.5, and WGnP1.0 samples, along with carbon paper without catalyst and commercial Pt/C.104 (a and c–f) Reproduced from ref. 12, 17, 69, 79 and 101 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) HER activity of Ni3N/Pt, NiO/Pt, 20% Pt/C, Ni3N, and NiO in 1 M KOH;115 (b) LSV of Ni foam, Co4N, V–Co4N, and Pt/C;40 (c) the polarization curves of atomically thin MoN nanosheets compared with the bulk material and Pt, and the structural diagram of the hexagonal molybdenum nitride given as an inset;53 (d) differential free energy of H absorption (I); activation energy (Ea/eV) for the Tafel reaction in the HER on several transition-metal nitrides as a function of the hydrogen coverage (II); volcano plot of the HER for various catalysts (III).95 (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 40 and 115 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The normalized polarization curves of Ni3N nanosheets, bulk Ni3N and NiO nanosheets by the BET surface area of electrocatalysts (I), corresponding Tafel plots of Ni3N nanosheets, bulk Ni3N and NiO nanosheets (II);41 (b) XPS spectrums of the initial Ni3N nanosheets and those after 1000 cycles of catalytic reaction;41 (c) electrocatalytic properties of the hNi3N electrode for the oxygen evolution reaction, polarization curves and stability test;80 (d) IR-corrected polarization curves (I); Tafel plots of all catalysts in 1 M KOH solution of Co4N NW/CC compared with other relative electrocatalysts (II);83 (e) the polarization curves of FexN in comparison with iron oxide and the support;52 (f) IR-corrected polarization curves of a series of cobalt nitrides in 1.0 M KOH solution;58 (g) LSVs of bulk Ni3N, pristine COF, and the composites prepared in different reaction atmospheres.87 (a, b and e) Reproduced from ref. 41 and 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c, d and g) Reproduced from ref. 80, 83, and 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (f) Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) LSV curves for the (I) HER, and (II) OER of Ni3FeN nanoparticles and other contrast samples;75 (b) overall water-splitting performance of Ni3FeN/r-GO-20, Ni3Fe/r-GO-20, Ni3N/r-GO-20, Fe2N/r-GO-20, and Ni3FeN in 1.0 M KOH (I). Photograph of the two-electrode electrolyzer using Ni3FeN/r-GO-20 as both the anode and cathode (II);16 (c) polarization curve of water electrolysis for FeNi3N/NF‖FeNi3N/NF in 1 M KOH;131 (d) chronopotentiometry of Ni3FeN/CC in 1.0 M KOH;117 (e) LSV curves of overall water splitting for porous Ni3FeN nanosheets and other catalysts in a two-electrode system in alkaline media;28 (f) LSV curves (I) and the corresponding stability test (II) of NCN/CC and other contrast catalysts for full water splitting in acidic and alkaline media;98 (g) TEM image of an individual TiN@Ni3N nanowire;92 (h) the polarization curve of the symmetric water splitting device in 1 M KOH based on TiN@Ni3N nanowire electrodes.92 (a) Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b and e) Reproduced from ref. 16 and 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c and f–h) Reproduced from ref. 92, 98 and 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  The schematic diagrams of (a) the photocatalytic water splitting,136 and (b) the photoelectrocatalytic water splitting.135 (a) Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of MoS2/AlN(GaN) vdW heterostructures as the photocatalysts for water splitting;151 (b) overall pure water splitting on Rh/Cr2O3 decorated InGaN/GaN nanowire arrays under full arc (>300 nm) 300 W xenon lamp irradiation (I), apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) and H2 evolution rate as a function of the wavelength of the incident light (II);154 (c) the influence of Mg content in this photocatalyst on the oxygen evolution rate (I); the oxygen evolution rate based on different photocatalysts (II), reaction conditions: 0.15 g catalyst; 0.2 g La2O3 (as a buffer agent to maintain the pH value of the reaction solution to be ca. 8.5); 1.5 g AgNO3; 150 mL H2O; 300 W xenon lamp (≥420 nm); 0.5 h reaction time. (d) Decay of transient absorption of the representative Ta3N5-based photocatalysts in a vacuum: (a) CoOx/MgO(in)–Ta3N5, (b) CoOx/MgO(ex)–Ta3N5, (c) CoOx–Ta3N5, and (d) Ta3N5.159 (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 151 and 154 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Steady H2 evolution result based on the InGaN/GaN core/shell nanowire-structure photoanode;163 (b) current density of the 3D GaN–InGaN core–shell rod array (red) compared with that of the single GaN rod arrays (blue);164 (c) the measured and calculated H2 evolution as well as the photocurrent result based on a monolithically integrated InGaN/GaN/Si adaptive tunnel junction photocathode;165 (d) photocurrent density plots of hierarchical Si/InxGa1−xN nanowire arrays (red) and planar Si/InxGa1−xN (blue) under 100 mW cm−2 without an AM 1.5 filter show an increase in current for the hierarchical geometry;161 (e) open-circuit potential EOCP of the GaN nanowire photoanode and InGaN nanowire photocathode in the dual-photoelectrode device (I); the power conversion efficiency of the dual-photoelectrode device as a function of applied bias under AM 1.5G 1 sun illumination (II);168 (f) chronoamperograms of substrate generation for water oxidation on Co3O4–Ta3N5 nanotubes (black), Ta3N5 nanotubes (red), and Ta3N5 (blue) electrodes in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 and 1 mM KOH (pH 11) aqueous solution;171 (g) current–potential curves for the IrO2/Ta3N5 thin film and IrO2/Ta3N5 nanorods nitrided at 1000 °C. The curves were measured in a 0.5 M aqueous Na2SO4 solution (pH = 13) under chopped AM 1.5G simulated sunlight at 100 mW cm−2;172 (h) IPCE measurement result of the NiOx-coated Si–Ta3N5 photoanode.179 (a–f and h) Reproduced from ref. 161, 163–165, 168, 177, and 179 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (g) Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
