Progress in silicon microwire solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA12792E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12792E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5395-5420Progress in silicon microwire solar cells

        
          
            Han-Don 
            Um
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kangmin 
            Lee
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Inchan 
            Hwang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jeonghwan 
            Park
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Deokjae 
            Choi
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Namwoo 
            Kim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyungwoo 
            Kim
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kwanyong 
            Seo
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kseo@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      21st November 2019
    , Accepted 6th February 2020First published on 7th February 2020AbstractSilicon microwires are very promising candidates for next-generation solar cells. Si microwires achieve strong broadband light absorption, acting as an antireflection coating layer. In addition to superior optical properties, Si microwires can effectively separate and collect photocarriers at the radial junction owing to a short diffusion length (equal to the microwire radius). This factor can relax the requirement for high-quality materials, enabling a reduction in the cost of producing solar cells. In this report, we review recent progress in vertically aligned Si microwire solar cells with reference to (1) optimized microwire structures to enhance light absorption, (2) uniform radial junctions for effective carrier separation, (3) minimization of surface recombination through surface treatments, and (4) fine metal electrodes for efficient carrier collection. In addition, we present studies on flexible crystalline Si solar cells that use mechanically flexible Si microwires. Furthermore, based on each fabrication process, we discuss the challenges related to the realization of high-efficiency Si microwire solar cells.Han-Don UmDr. Han-Don Um received his B.S. (2006) in chemical engineering and Ph.D. (2013) in bio-nanotechnology from Hanayng University. He was a post-doctoral researcher in energy engineering at the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 2013–2016. He studied nano-/micro-structured Si and dopant-free crystalline Si solar cells. He is currently a research associate in electrical engineering at Harvard University. His main research interests are nanostructure-based optoelectronics for applications such as photodetectors, image sensors, and chemical/bio sensors.Kangmin LeeKangmin Lee received a B.S. degree from the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2014. He is a Ph.D. candidate in the department of energy engineering at UNIST. His main research interests are transparent crystalline silicon photovoltaics, transparent electronics, and silicon nano/micro-structure-based devices.Inchan HwangInchan Hwang is a Ph.D. candidate at the Department of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). He received a bachelor's degree from the Department of Fine Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry at Chungnam National University in 2013. His research interests include flexible and stretchable photovoltaics based on crystalline silicon.Jeonghwan ParkJeonghwan Park received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Green Energy engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2015. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at UNIST. His research focuses on flexible transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs), transparent energy devices using crystalline silicon, and c-Si solar cell modularization.Deokjae ChoiDeokjae Choi received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Energy Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2015. He is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at UNIST. He is currently working on the development of dopant-free photodiodes such as solar cells, photosensors, etc. Also, he is interested in the study of optical interference in nano/micro-structures of semiconductors for various optical devices.Kwanyong SeoProf. Kwanyong Seo has been an associate professor in the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) since 2013. He received a B.S. degree in chemistry from the Korea National University of Education in 2002 and a Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from KAIST in 2008. From 2009 to 2013, he was a postdoctoral research fellow in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard University. His current research interests include nano- and micro-structures based energy devices, including functional energy devices, such as flexible and transparent solar cells and PV-battery hybrid systems.
1. Introduction
Significant research has been conducted on solar cells over the last couple of decades, resulting in steady improvement in the conversion efficiency of solar cells and a considerable reduction in the manufacturing cost. In recent years, solar power has become the third most used source of renewable energy after hydropower and wind power. As of 2018, 2.4% of the global energy demand is met by solar cells.1 In many countries, the production cost of solar power is close to grid parity, making it possible to compete with traditional power generation. The efficiency of crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells, which was only 14% in the 1970s, improved to 25% by 1999. In 1977, the production cost of c-Si solar cells was $76 per watt; currently, it is only $0.3 per watt.2 This progress is attributed not only to the development of solar cell technology but also to the support of government policies around the world. However, for the solar cell industry to continue to grow and compete successfully with traditional electricity generation, further improvements in efficiency and reductions in cost are needed.
Currently, c-Si-based solar cells account for 90% of the solar cell market, as c-Si has several advantages. These are (1) ample resource availability (Si is the second most abundant mineral in the crust of the Earth), (2) minority carriers with a relatively long diffusion length, (3) satisfactory mechanical and thermal stability, (4) suitable energy bandgap (1.12 eV), (5) non-toxicity, and (6) mature technologies. One disadvantage of c-Si is that light absorption at long wavelengths is inefficient because of its indirect bandgap behavior. Therefore, a thick c-Si substrate is required for high-efficiency solar cells. However, thick c-Si substrates increase solar cell prices, accounting for 50% of the total cost of the cells. Although metallurgical grade c-Si is inexpensive at $1.75–2.30 per kg,3 it is not highly efficient, owing to the short diffusion length caused by a large number of impurities. In contrast, solar-grade c-Si has a long diffusion length of over 200 μm, which is greater than the substrate thickness required for sufficient absorption of incident light. This enables the minority carriers to collect at the front and rear electrodes, resulting in significant improvements in efficiency. However, solar-grade c-Si is expensive at $20–30 per kg because of the additional thermal treatment required for purification.4
Considering the above and to limit the amount of c-Si needed in solar cell applications, intensive research has been conducted on Si nanowires (NWs) for next-generation c-Si solar cells, which are expected to have high efficiency even with low-cost c-Si.5–9 Vertically aligned Si NWs are black in color and do not reflect incident light, resulting in superior light absorption. The light injected into the Si NW arrays is scattered on the surface of the NWs.10,11 The scattered light is absorbed efficiently, even in NWs with a relatively short length compared with the thick c-Si substrate. In addition to excellent light absorption, Si NWs offer improved efficiency of solar cells because of their one-dimensional structures. When the radial junction is formed on the surface of the NW, the maximum distance the photo-generated carriers have to move to the junction is half the diameter of the NW.12 Compared with conventional c-Si solar cells, an extremely short carrier travel distance is allowed, and the carriers can therefore be collected effectively. However, the efficiency of Si NW solar cells reported to date is significantly lower than that of conventional c-Si solar cells. This is ascribed to the fully depleted p–n junction in Si NWs with a diameter of approximately 100 nm. Furthermore, severe surface recombination occurs because of the relatively large surface area, which reduces the efficiency of the solar cells despite their excellent light absorption ability.
Si microwires (MWs) have been investigated as an alternative structure for wire-based solar cells.13–17 Si MWs have the same one-dimensional (1D) structure as the Si NWs and can be applied easily to radial p–n junctions by using conventional doping methods. The Seo group recently reported 19% efficiency for a Si MW solar cell,14 which was attributed to the effective collection of photocarriers at the radial junction, as well as a light absorption of 99%.
In addition, Si MWs are mechanically flexible compared with bulk c-Si. Because of their 1D structure with a high aspect ratio, mechanical stress caused by bending the MWs can be released effectively through the empty space between the MWs, resulting in excellent flexibility. Si MW flexible solar cells have received considerable attention for applications such as wearable devices. Conventional flexible solar cells based on organic materials have low efficiency and stability, whereas Si MW flexible solar cells have shown high potential as next-generation flexible solar cells because of the material stability of c-Si and its high efficiency, which corresponds to that of commercial solar cells. In this review, we discuss key studies on developing high-efficiency Si MW solar cells, based on the following questions:
(1) How can high-quality Si MWs be fabricated?
(2) How do Si MWs absorb light and how efficient are they compared with conventional Si solar cells?
(3) How are the radial junctions in Si MWs produced and analyzed?
(4) How can surface recombination be minimized by surface treatments?
(5) How can photocarriers be collected efficiently without optical/electrical losses?
At the end of this paper, we present a review of studies on flexible solar cells using Si MWs.
2. Fabrication processes of Si MWs
Several fabrication methods have been developed for vertical Si MWs. In this section, we present an overview of the representative bottom–up and top–down techniques that have been employed to fabricate vertical Si MWs.
2.1 Vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth
The VLS growth method is the most popular bottom–up method to fabricate vertical Si MWs. The name (VLS growth) reflects the pathway for Si, which, coming from the vapor phase, diffuses through the liquid droplet and finally becomes solid Si. This technique was first discovered in 1964 by R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis.19 They reported growing Si whiskers on c-Si (111) wafers using Au as a catalyst (Fig. 1a). The general mechanism of VLS growth can be explained by considering the binary-phase diagram of the Au–Si eutectic system (Fig. 1b). The melting temperatures of Au–Si alloys are lower than those of pure Au or Si components, with the minimum melting temperature of the Au–Si alloy being 363 °C. This is called the eutectic point, with a eutectic composition of 19 at% Si and 81 at% Au.18 When continuously supplying Si using gaseous precursors (SiCl4, SiH4, Si2H6, and others), the Si vapor dissolves into Au, forming eutectic liquid droplets. When Si exceeds its solubility limit in Au, Si starts to precipitate. Consequently, a continuous supply of Si leads to the growth of Si wires. Although VLS growth was first reported using Au as the metal catalyst, several subsequent studies have been conducted to fabricate Si wires through VLS growth using cost-effective metal catalysts such as Al, Cu, and Ni.20,21
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the vapor–liquid–solid growth mechanism. (b) Schematic phase diagram of Au–Si systems.18 Copyright 1964, AIP. 
As the diameter of the Si wire is determined by the size of the catalyst,22,23 controlling the catalyst size enables the fabrication of MWs of various diameters (Fig. 2).24 The VLS method was mainly used by the Atwater group to grow vertical Si MWs.15,21,25,26 Generally, the surface migration of the metal catalyst during VLS growth affects the shape and length of the Si wire.27,28 The Atwater group has fabricated high-quality vertical Si MW arrays of the same diameter and length using an oxide buffer layer to prevent surface migration of the metal catalyst during VLS growth.21,29 The fabrication process is shown in detail in Fig. 3a. SiO2-coated Si substrates are patterned with hole arrays using photolithography and SiO2 etching processes (e.g., hydrofluoric acid [HF] etching); then a metal catalyst is deposited onto the photoresist (PR) pattern, after which the PR is lifted off. The SiO2 layer acts as a buffer layer to isolate the metal catalyst, preventing the migration of the catalyst under high-temperature conditions during VLS growth (Fig. 3b). The samples are annealed in a H2 atmosphere at 1000 °C for 20 min, followed by flowing a gaseous precursor (e.g., SiCl4) for VLS growth.21 Vertical Si MWs can be fabricated through this process (Fig. 3c). The lengths of the MWs can be controlled by the reaction time. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4a, the growth rate increases with increasing process temperature.22,30 However, the growth rate slows as the pitch between the MWs decreases (Fig. 4b), owing to the mass transport limitation of Si precursors.24 In 2007, vertical Si MWs of uniform height and diameter were fabricated successfully through VLS growth in an area of 1 cm2, whereas, currently, the wafer scale is 6 inches.17,21
 Fig. 2  SEM images of VLS-grown Si MWs with (a) 2.5 μm and (b) 5 μm diameter. (c) Diameter of the silicon wires as a function of the volume of the gold catalyst. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process of Si MWs via VLS growth. (b) Schematic of the patterned VLS growth process. (c) SEM image of Si MWs grown from SiCl4 with Cu as the VLS catalyst. The inset shows the catalyst balls on top of the wires after growth. Inset scale bar represents 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2007, AIP. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Temperature dependence of the growth rate of silicon wires formed by VLS growth. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2008, AIP. (b) Silicon wire growth rate by VLS growth versus the pitch size between Si MWs. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
The advantages of the VLS growth process are that high-purity c-Si can be obtained and the Si wafers can be reused easily because the wires can be transferred to other substrates without difficulty. However, this method has critical disadvantages in that the wire growth is limited by the crystal orientation of the Si substrate and a high-temperature process (>400 °C) is required. Moreover, because impurities from the metal catalyst remain after VLS growth, an additional treatment process is required to remove the catalyst residue incorporated into the wire.31
2.2 Dry etching
Vertical Si MWs can be fabricated by the top–down method and the bottom–up method. The top–down method is divided mainly into dry etching and wet etching, with dry etching currently being used the most. The most common dry etching method is deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) based on the Bosch process, which was developed by Laermer and Schilp at Bosch in 1994.32 This method comprises a cyclic process of passivation of sidewalls with a passivation gas and Si etching with an etching gas (SF6). Fluorocarbon gases, such as C2F6, CHF3, and C4F8, are commonly used as passivation gases, with C4F8 being the most common because of its fast deposition rate. Fig. 5a shows Si etching employing the Bosch process. Si etching is performed using SF6; after a certain period of etching, SF6 is pumped out and C4F8 is introduced into the chamber. The fluorocarbon polymer coats the entire substrate, including the sidewalls. After the passivation step, the etching step with SF6 is repeated. At this time, the Si bottom region is anisotropically etched by SF6, because of ion bombardment induced by plate power.33 This cycle is repeated until the final structure is fabricated. Through this repetitive process, a scallop is formed in the sidewall of the Si MW (Fig. 5b and c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematics of the Bosch process. (b) SEM image of the scallop on the sidewall as a result of the Bosch process. (c) High-magnification SEM image of the MW tip. 
To fabricate vertical Si MWs employing the Bosch process, an etching mask that acts as a protective layer is required for the selective etching of Si. PR, polystyrene (PS) microspheres, silicon oxide, or metals are conventionally used as etching masks (Fig. 6), with the PR-based etching mask being the most common.34 This is ascribed to it being possible to form an etching mask with the desired shape by employing a simple photolithography process. Recently, the formation of etching masks with PS microspheres instead of PR has also been reported.35 In this method, PS microspheres are monodispersed on a c-Si wafer employing the Langmuir–Blodgett method. Simple fabrication is an advantage of using PR or PS microspheres as etching masks. However, in general, PR and PS microspheres have a limited etching span and will therefore be depleted before the end of the etching process because of their fast etching rate.33,36 Consequently, harder materials, such as silicon oxide, silicon nitride, alumina, or metals, are preferred as etching masks for extended etching periods.37 As the etching rates of the harder etching masks are lower than those of Si, the desired Si structure can be etched while maintaining the original shape of the etching mask. Some hard materials such as alumina are considered ideal etching masks, as they have an extremely low etching rate compared with that of Si.38 An extended etching period enables the fabrication of longer Si MWs. For example, vertical MWs with lengths exceeding 80 μm have reportedly been fabricated employing DRIE and using alumina as the etching mask.36
 Fig. 6  Schematic of different lithography processes for Si MW etching. 
The sidewall shape of Si MWs can be controlled during the Bosch process by regulating the gas flow ratio between SF6 and C4F8. Fig. 7 shows three types of sidewall shapes, namely, re-entrant, vertical, and tapered profiles. When the flow rate of the etching gas (e.g., SF6) increases, the etching rate at the bottom of the MWs increases, resulting in a re-entrant profile in which the diameter of the bottom region is smaller than that of the upper region (Fig. 7a). However, when the ratio of C4F8 increases, a tapered shape is obtained because of the thicker passivation layer (Fig. 7b). An optimized gas ratio between SF6 and C4F8 is therefore required to fabricate Si MWs with a vertical shape. Lee et al. reported the fabrication of vertical Si MWs more than 30 μm long by employing optimized etching conditions. These are 250 sccm SF6 and 150 sccm C4F8 for 2 s and 1.5 s processing time, respectively (Fig. 7c and d).14,39
 Fig. 7  (a–c) Schematics of different shapes of Si MWs depending on the ratio of SF6 and C4F8 gas. (d) Cross-sectional SEM images of MWs of different lengths from 10 to 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In dry etching, Si can be etched independently regardless of the crystal orientation of the c-Si substrate. However, the method has high process costs, and the rough surface caused by plasma-induced surface damage and scallops could reduce the lifetime of minority carriers. Consequently, additional surface smoothing processes are required to remove the rough surface of the etched Si.40
2.3 Wet etching
In contrast to dry etching, wet etching does not require high-cost vacuum-based etching equipment, and it is possible to fabricate Si MWs without plasma-induced damage. A representative wet etching method to fabricate Si MWs is metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE), which is well known as an anisotropic wet-chemical method. The MACE method was first presented by Li and Bohn.41 They reported that a thin noble-metal layer on a c-Si substrate could act as a catalyst to etch Si in a mixed solution containing HF, H2O2, and organic solvents. The noble metals most commonly used in the MACE method are Ag, Au, Pt, and Pd. These metals are deposited on a c-Si substrate by sputtering, thermal evaporation, electron beam (e-beam) evaporation, electroless deposition, or spin-coating. Thereafter, Si etching is performed according to eqn (1) and (2) in an etching solution (mainly HF and H2O2 mixed solution). The mechanism is described in detail in a report by Huang et al.42 H2O2 + 2H+ → 2H2O +2h+(1) Si + 4h+ + 6HF → SiF2−6 + 6H+(2)
The MACE method has been used widely for Si NW fabrication by depositing metallic nanoparticles (e.g., Ag nanoparticles) with electroless deposition on a c-Si substrate and etching Si in a mixed solution of H2O2 and HF.43–45 The fabrication of Si MWs with the MACE method was first reported by Choi et al. in 2011.46 In this fabrication process, metal catalysts need to be formed on a selective area, and this is usually done by patterning with photolithography and metal deposition to form the catalysts on selective regions of the c-Si substrate. The Si MWs are then fabricated by employing MACE only where the catalyst metal is formed (Fig. 8). Choi et al. used the same process, as shown in Fig. 8, to fabricate Si MWs with MACE and found that longer lengths of Si MWs could be fabricated under longer etching times and under higher etching solution temperature conditions (Fig. 9a and b).46 However, owing to the undesired etching of Si sidewalls, Si MWs with perfect vertical sidewalls could not be fabricated (Fig. 9c). In 2015, Um et al. reported an optimized method to fabricate Si MWs by controlling the thickness and deposition rate of the metal catalyst (Au).47 They first investigated the relationship between Au thickness and the etch rate of Si, finding that for Au thicknesses less than 25 nm, NWs are fabricated because an island-type metal film is formed (Fig. 10a). In contrast, when the Au thickness exceeds 50 nm, etching is not performed because the etchant cannot access the Si surface (Fig. 10b). When the Au thickness is 30–40 nm, vertical Si MWs are fabricated successfully (Fig. 10c and d). These authors also investigated the correlation between the deposition rate and etch rate, finding that at low deposition rates, a dense Au film is formed (Fig. 10e). In contrast, as shown in Fig. 10f, a porous Au film is formed at a high deposition rate. In the porous film, fast etching is possible because the etching solution easily penetrates the metal catalyst. Accordingly, an etch rate of 116 nm min−1 was observed for a sample deposited with a 30 nm-thick Au film at a deposition rate of 1 Å s−1 (Fig. 10g), whereas a sample deposited at a deposition rate of 3 Å s−1 had an etch rate of 386 nm min−1 (Fig. 10h).
 Fig. 8  Fabrication process of Si MWs via MACE. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Length of Si wire over etching time. (b) Length of the Si wire versus the temperature of the etching solution. (c) SEM images of Si wires fabricated with MACE. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 10  SEM images of Si MWs fabricated with MACE with (a) 15 nm, (b) 50 nm, (c) 30 nm, and (d) 40 nm-thick Au film. Top-view SEM images of Au films with 30 nm thickness deposited at rates of (e) 1 Å s−1 and (f) 3 Å s−1. The inset of panel f shows the high magnification SEM image of the porous Au film. Cross-sectional SEM images of Si MWs fabricated with MACE with a 30 nm-thick Au film deposited at (g) 1 Å s−1 and (h) 3 Å s−1 deposition rate. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. 
Compared with dry etching, wet etching does not require expensive etching equipment, and numerous wafers can be etched simultaneously. In addition, high-quality Si MWs can be fabricated without plasma-induced surface damage or scallops. Furthermore, recent studies on using cost-effective metal catalysts such as Cu have raised expectations that more cost-effective etching could be possible in the near future.48 However, this method has the limitation of depending strongly on the crystal orientation and doping concentration of the c-Si wafer.49
2.4 Strategies for mass production of Si MWs
As described in sections 2.1–2.3, there are various methods, such as VLS, RIE, and MACE, by which Si MWs can be fabricated. As summarized in Table 1, each fabrication method has advantages and disadvantages. Among these fabrication methods, MACE, which is the most cost-effective etching method, is the most appropriate for mass production and commercialization of Si MWs. In addition, because wet etching is currently used in the fabrication of commercial Si solar cells, the process can be easily modified to manufacture Si MWs. However, further efforts to fabricate uniform Si MWs of the same height and diameter on large-scale Si wafers (e.g., 6 inch Si wafers) via MACE are necessary. In addition, research to discover an effective method for reusing metal catalysts,50 using polymer or carbon-based materials51 instead of expensive metal catalysts, and developing a novel MACE process independent of the crystalline orientation of Si wafers is needed.
Table 1 Summary of various fabrication methods




Fabrication method
Advantage
Disadvantage




VLS
• High-purity Si MWs can be obtained
• Wire growth is limited by the crystal orientation of the Si substrate


• The Si substrate can be reused
• A high-temperature process (>400 °C) is required


• Metal catalyst impurities remain after VLS growth






DRIE
• The etching of Si is independent of the crystal orientation of the Si substrate
• The process cost is high


• Si MWs with a uniform height and diameter are fabricated on large-sized wafers (e.g., 6 inch)
• Plasma-induced surface damage and scallops could reduce the lifetime of minority carriers






MACE
• Expensive etching equipment is not required
• The etching behavior of this method depends strongly on the crystal orientation of the c-Si wafer and the concentration of its dopant


• High-quality Si MWs can be fabricated without plasma-induced damage or scallops
• An expensive metal catalyst, such as Au or Ag, is required




3. Optical characteristics of vertical Si MWs
3.1 Light absorption properties according to the geometries of vertical Si MWs
Vertical Si MWs show an antireflection effect because of structural advantages that improve the light-absorption properties of c-Si. Light absorption depends strongly on the physical dimensions of vertical MWs, such as radius, length, and filling fraction. The filling fraction is the ratio of the area occupied by the top of the MW to the total area.52 In other words, the shape and arrangement of the wires are key to maximizing light absorption. Several phenomena occur when light is introduced into vertical Si MWs, as shown in Fig. 11a. First, light can be reflected from the top surface of the MWs and from the bottom substrate. These surface reflections have to be minimized to enhance light absorption. Second, light scattering between the vertical Si wires increases the probability that the light is absorbed by the c-Si because of the increased optical path. The third and fourth phenomena are the light absorbed by the c-Si and the light passing through the c-Si substrate. Based on these optical phenomena, vertical Si MWs can be designed to maximize light absorption.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic image of optical phenomena occurring in Si MWs. (b) Simulated ultimate efficiency of 20 μm-long Si wires as a function of wire radius and filling factor. (c) Ultimate efficiency of Si wires with diameters of 50 nm, 200 nm, and 3 μm as a function of Si wire length. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2012, IOP Publishing. (d) Absorption spectra of Si MWs with various MW lengths. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.1.1 Radius and filling fraction of vertical Si MWs. 
To optimize the physical dimensions of vertical Si MWs, simulations were run considering the physical dimensions of the vertical wire arrays. In this manner, the ultimate efficiency of the solar cell was achieved. Ultimate efficiency refers to a theoretical efficiency determined solely by the amount of light absorption of c-Si. We can evaluate which structure absorbs light effectively in terms of solar cells based on the following equation: (3)where λg is the wavelength corresponding to the bandgap energy, A(λ) is the absorbed power, and I(λ) is the solar irradiance spectrum, taken to be the AM 1.5G spectrum (eqn (3)).52 First, ultimate efficiencies are simulated according to the different radii and filling fractions of 20 μm-long wires (Fig. 11b). As shown in Fig. 11b, the light absorption of wires with a radius of ≤500 nm is generally higher than that of wires with a radius of ≥500 nm. However, for actual solar cells with small radius wires, the efficiency is much lower than that of conventional solar cells despite the strong light absorption capability of the wire structure. This is explained by the following: (1) vertical wires with a smaller radius have a larger surface area, which degrades solar cell efficiency because of surface recombination,53 and (2) when dopants diffuse into the surface of the vertical Si wire, it can be doped fully because the general junction depth (∼500 nm) of conventional thermal doping is greater than the radius of the wire.14,39,54 Consequently, photo-induced carriers cannot be separated effectively in the fully doped wire, which reduces the shunt resistance of the solar cells, thereby degrading their efficiency.8 In other words, when designing the radius of vertical wires, it is crucial to consider the junction structure for effective separation of the photo-induced carriers and the light absorption properties.
For vertical Si wires with a radius of ≥1 μm, the p–n junction can be formed radially using the conventional doping process, i.e., showing effective separation of photo-induced carriers.15,47 However, the larger the radius of the wire, the weaker the light absorption properties. This is ascribed to wires with a larger radius with wider spacing between the wire arrays for an identical filling fraction, resulting in less interaction of light. Given the light-absorption properties, as well as the effective separation of the photo-induced carriers, the optimal radius of vertical Si wires for solar cells is considered as approximately 1 μm.
In the design of the radius of vertical Si wires, the optimization of the filling fraction has to be considered as well. As shown in Fig. 11b, ultimate efficiency increases as the filling fraction of the vertical Si wires increases in the optimal radius range. Vertical wires with a higher filling fraction show more light-scattering effect in the narrower space between the wires, which increases the light absorption capability of c-Si. Despite the optimization of the filling fraction, the ultimate efficiency is still lower than that of wires with a radius of ≤500 nm. Therefore, additional strategies are required to improve the light absorption properties of vertical Si wires in the optimal radius (∼1 μm) range.


3.1.2 Length of vertical Si MWs. 
One way to improve the light absorption properties of vertical Si MWs is to increase the length of the wires. As shown in Fig. 11c, a longer wire shows higher ultimate efficiency regardless of the wire radius. This is because longer vertical Si MWs have a longer optical path, increasing the probability that light is absorbed into the c-Si because of light scattering between the wires.52 However, light absorption becomes saturated as the length of the wire increases. This is not only proven by the simulation results but is also observed experimentally in fabricated vertical Si MWs. Fig. 11d shows the absorption spectra of vertical Si MWs with different lengths. For MWs 10 μm long, a significant increase in light absorption is observed compared with that of the planar structure. However, when the length of the wire exceeds 30 μm, the light absorption becomes saturated. The main reason for this optical behavior is top surface reflection, which is not affected by the MW length.39

3.2 Strategies to enhance light absorption
As discussed in Section 3.1, the top surface of Si MWs causes significant reflection, and to reduce this, a dielectric layer is used as an anti-reflection coating. Fig. 12a and b show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and optical reflection spectra of vertical Si MWs coated with an SiO2 layer.55 When a 200 nm-thick SiO2 layer is deposited on vertical Si MWs, the reflection is less than that of MWs without the coating. The dielectric layer can reduce the reflection by reducing the difference in the refractive index between air and c-Si.56,57 The dielectric layer has low parasitic absorption, with over 95% transmittance. Furthermore, the dielectric layer can reduce not only the top surface reflection of the MW but also the overall reflection on the sidewall of the wire, which can increase light absorption. This strategy has the advantage of increasing the light absorption of c-Si by coating of an additional layer without optical loss. However, the method has a limitation in that reflectance is reduced only in a specific wavelength region, depending on the thickness of the deposited dielectric film. Therefore, other strategies are required to reduce reflection over the entire wavelength range.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of the conformally coated SiO2 layer on the surface of Si MWs. Scale bar indicates 300 nm. (b) Reflection spectra of Si MWs with and without the SiO2 layer. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c and d) SEM images of Si NWs on the top area of Si MWs. (e) Photographs of planar and pristine Si MWs, and Si MWs with Si NWs. (f) Reflection spectra of Si MWs with and without Si NWs. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To reduce reflection in a broad wavelength range without additional coating materials, Si nanostructures are integrated into the vertical Si MWs, as these nanostructures show extremely low reflection at all wavelengths. Si nanoneedles are formed between the vertical Si MWs to reduce the reflection on the bottom substrate.13 This can be done by increasing the ratio of the source gases SF6/C4F8 in the RIE process because of the passivation behavior of a higher SF6 ratio. Si nanoneedles demonstrate ∼97.6% light absorption over the entire wavelength range; however, these vertical Si MWs with Si nanoneedles cannot be considered for high-efficiency solar cells. By applying the Si nanoneedles onto the c-Si substrate, the surface area is increased considerably compared with vertical Si MWs without nanostructures. Consequently, severe degradation of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) would occur.
As an alternative, Si NWs can be formed selectively on the top area of the vertical Si MWs, as shown in Fig. 12c and d.39 As the NWs are present only in the region where reflection must be reduced in the MWs, light absorption can be maximized while minimizing the surface area. As shown in Fig. 12e, the NWs formed selectively on the top of the vertical Si MWs show a black color. Similarly, the reflection spectra shown in Fig. 12f indicate that the reflection (<2%) can be minimized over the entire wavelength region. As the junction is formed radially in the MW rather than the NW, the photocarriers can be separated effectively by the vertical Si MWs. In other words, the NW/MW hybrid structure not only maximizes light absorption but also effectively separates the photocarriers from the radial junction.
Compared with the aforementioned strategies, the most effective way to reduce the top surface reflection of vertical Si MWs is to modify the entire structure of the wires. When Si MWs with a tapered structure are fabricated, the top surface reflection can be reduced without additional layers or NWs. This is because the diameter of the wire increases gradually from top to bottom, which is along the path of the light when light is introduced into the vertically tapered Si MWs from the air, as shown in Fig. 13a and b.14,58 This leads to a gradual change in the refractive index between air and Si, which allows the tapered MWs to reduce the reflection effectively over the entire wavelength region. The tapered MWs show less than 2% reflection in the wavelength region 400–1000 nm and also exhibit lower dependence of light absorption on the incident angle. In particular, the tapered MWs show a high light-absorption property in the near-infrared region (1000–1100 nm) compared with the non-tapered MWs (Fig. 13c and d). Consequently, the tapered MWs have an optimized structure that can reduce surface reflection significantly over the entire wavelength region while reducing the surface area.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of tapered Si MWs fabricated with ICPRIE. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Diameter profile of tapered Si MWs from top to bottom of the MWs. Reflection spectra of (c) tapered and (d) non-tapered Si MWs with different lengths. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although tapered Si MWs possess excellent optical properties, the change in light-trapping efficiency with a change in the length of the wires may reduce the solar cell efficiency. As shown in Fig. 13c, the tapered Si MWs with a length of 5 μm reflect more at all wavelengths than the tapered MWs with a length of 30 μm, because of the reduction in light scattering among the wires. However, a longer wire has a larger surface area, which leads to an increase in surface recombination. The increased surface recombination can lower the efficiency of the PVs. Hence, the goal is to realize the absorption of the entire solar spectrum using short Si MWs. It is, thus, necessary to maximize the light scattering among the short Si MWs to increase the light absorption.
The use of dielectric nanoparticles is one way to enhance the light-scattering effect when using short Si MWs. To embed the nanoparticles among the Si MWs, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) combined with dielectric nanoparticles is inserted into the spaces between the Si MWs. When Al2O3 nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼900 nm are mixed with PDMS and inserted interstitially among the vertical Si MWs, the Al2O3 nanoparticles enhance light absorption by the vertical Si MWs, because the optical path is increased due to light scattering.16 As Al2O3 nanoparticles and PDMS have negligible absorption in the wavelength where c-Si absorbs, the reflection from the MWs can be reduced with a small optical loss. In addition, the vertical Si MWs with Al2O3 nanoparticles have extremely low angular sensitivity, as light scattering occurs randomly regardless of the incident angle of the light.
However, further research on the effects of the radius, filling fraction, and array geometries of the MWs (e.g., square, honeycomb, and hexagonal arrays) on the optical features of short, tapered Si MWs is required.
4. Progress in radial junction Si MW solar cells
Several studies have reported the development of highly efficient c-Si solar cells through the excellent light-absorption capability of Si MWs. The theoretical efficiency of the first presented Si MW solar cell was 17%,59 but the experimental efficiency was only 7.9%.15 Optimization of factors such as the MW structure, front metal electrode design, surface passivation, and others has been pursued intensively in an effort to improve the efficiency of Si MW solar cells. Recently, Hwang et al. achieved an efficiency of 18.9% by maximizing light absorption, enhancing carrier collection, and minimizing surface recombination.14 The efficiency of Si MW solar cells depends strongly on how efficiently the photocarriers are collected. The electrons and holes generated by light absorption diffuse to the p–n junction and are then separated by the built-in potential of the depletion region at the p–n junction. The separated electrons and holes are finally collected by the metal electrode, generating a current through the external circuit. A high-quality p–n junction is required to separate electrons and holes effectively.
Various methods have been proposed to form the p–n junction on the surface of Si MWs. In contrast to the planar p–n junction of conventional planar c-Si solar cells, the junction is formed three-dimensionally along the surface of Si MWs, forming a radial p–n junction with a base in the core and an emitter in the shell. Electrons and holes that are separated effectively by the radial p–n junction are collected at the front and back metal electrodes. Because of the high aspect ratio of Si MWs, a novel front electrode should be designed, unlike a bus electrode and the multiple-finger electrodes of conventional planar solar cells. Um et al. proposed grid-patterned metal electrodes with microscale lines for the front metal electrode of Si MW solar cells.60 By minimizing the optical and electrical losses, a microgrid electrode dramatically improves photovoltaic properties such as short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factor (FF). Because of the large surface area of MWs with a high aspect ratio, the Si MW solar cells suffer from severe surface recombination compared with planar solar cells. Various surface passivation layers have been investigated in an effort to minimize such surface recombination.
4.1 Radial p–n junction of Si MW solar cells
The key advantage of Si MWs is the radial junction formed along the MW surface. In contrast to the planar p–n junction, electrons or holes photogenerated in the MWs can be separated efficiently through radial junctions. In this section, we discuss processes for forming uniform radial junctions on 3D surfaces and analyzing the junction structure.

4.1.1 Radial junction structure. 
In conventional c-Si solar cells, the c-Si substrate should be thicker than the optical depth of incident light. If the substrate is too thin, light absorption at long wavelengths is insufficient, leading to a decrease in the photocurrent of the solar cell. For c-Si, a substrate with a thickness of more than 125 μm is required to absorb 90% of the light above the energy bandgap.5 The diffusion length of the minority carriers should be longer than the thickness of the substrate for effective collection of photocarriers. This is because the electrons or holes must travel through the substrate to the front or bottom electrode of the solar cell (Fig. 14a). With respect to the minority carrier lifetime (i.e., electrons) of 1 μs on a p-type c-Si solar cell using a Czochralski (Cz) solar grade wafer,61 the diffusion length of the electron is 53 μm, which is shorter than that of the c-Si substrate (>125 μm). Consequently, minority carriers are recombined before collecting at the metal electrodes, reducing the efficiency of the solar cell. One possible way to overcome this is by decoupling the directions of light absorption and carrier collection.
 Fig. 14  Schematics of light absorption and photocarrier separation in (a) conventional planar and (b) radial junction devices. α and Ln represent the absorption coefficient and the diffusion length of electron, respectively. 
Si MW solar cells can decouple light absorption and carrier separation in orthogonal spatial directions, as shown in Fig. 14b. As the Si MWs are aligned vertically to the substrate, the p–n junction forms along the surface of the MWs, producing a core (base)–shell (emitter) structure. The incident light propagates along the MW direction and is then absorbed by the MWs. However, carrier separation and collection occur in the radial rather than the axial direction. The required diffusion length is the radius of the MW, which is considerably shorter than that of conventional planar solar cells. The decoupling of light absorption and carrier separation facilitate achieving high efficiency. Because of the shorter travel distance of the minority carriers, low-purity c-Si with a short diffusion length can be used to reduce solar cell cost for high-efficiency solar cells.


4.1.2 Formation of the radial p–n junction in Si MWs with a high aspect ratio. 
Generally, the core is the absorber and the shell is the emitter for Si MW solar cells. As the junction area of MW solar cells is relatively larger than that of planar solar cells, the thickness of the emitter should be less and uniform to minimize the electrical loss caused by Auger recombination in a highly doped emitter layer. Various methods have been developed to form a uniform and thin emitter layer on the MW surface. The conventional method in the c-Si solar cell industry is a thermal diffusion process, in which phosphorus as an n-type source or boron as a p-type source is diffused into c-Si using phosphoryl chloride (POCl3) or boron tribromide (BBr3), respectively. The doping process comprises two steps: (1) pre-deposition of a dopant oxide layer onto c-Si, and (2) driving of the dopant into c-Si at a temperature above 850 °C. The carrier gas is introduced into the liquid doping source, and the vaporized doping source flows into the furnace with the carrier gas. In the chamber, the injected doping source reacts with O2 gas to form a thin oxide film of P2O5 or B2O3 on the surface of the c-Si substrate during the pre-deposition process. Because of the chemical vapor reaction of the dopant source, the oxide film can be formed conformally, even in structures with a high aspect ratio such as Si MWs. When the substrate is annealed at a temperature above 850 °C, phosphorus or boron is diffused from the oxide into c-Si, resulting in the formation of n-Si or p-Si, respectively. After the doping process, by-products such as phosphorus silicate glass (PSG) or boron silicate glass (BSG) that remain on the c-Si surface are removed with hydrofluoric acid. As the dopant oxide film is formed on both sides of the c-Si substrate during pre-deposition, the back of the substrate should be protected with a diffusion barrier such as silicon oxide or silicon nitride. Furthermore, an additional utility tool such as a scrubber is required to safely remove the toxic residue of the doping source gas.
The spin-on dopant (SOD) has been proposed as an easy doping method in the laboratory.62 A solution containing phosphorus or boron in spin-on glass (SOG), a silicon oxide-based sol–gel, is coated onto a substrate by spin-coating. After vaporizing the organic solvent by baking at a low temperature of approximately 200 °C for 10 min, the dopant is diffused into the substrate by annealing in a furnace at 850–1100 °C, as in the conventional doping process. The doping mechanism of the SOD is the same as that for the conventional doping process using POCl3 and BBr3, but the pre-deposition process can be conducted by spin-coating the SOD. This allows the selective diffusion of the dopant to one side of the substrate. In addition, the surface concentration and junction depth of the doped c-Si can be controlled easily by adjusting the dopant concentration of the SOD solution. However, spin-coating of the SOD solution on Si MWs fills the gaps between the MWs, damaging the Si MWs because of the difference in thermal expansion during the drive-in process. Furthermore, an organic residue from the SOD could remain on the c-Si surface and act as a defective impurity, leading to severe degradation in photovoltaic performance.
A proximity doping method has been proposed to eliminate the above problems in using the SOD.13 Instead of coating the SOD directly on a target substrate with the Si MW, a SOD-coated dummy wafer is stacked on the target substrate using spacers between the two substrates, as shown in Fig. 15. Employing the proximity doping method, the doping concentration and junction depth can be adjusted by controlling the dopant concentration, as well as the annealing temperature and time. Furthermore, a uniform pre-deposition layer can be formed on the MWs by using the dummy wafer as a dopant source in gas-based processes such as those using POCl3 and BBr3. Organic impurities remain on the surface of the dummy wafer, and PSG or BSG residue on the MWs can be removed completely with HF. In the proximity doping method, a solid disk consisting of the dopant source such as boron nitride can be used instead of a solution-based dopant source.
 Fig. 15  Schematics of proximity doping process using SOD. 
In these doping processes, the p–n junction is formed by diffusing dopants into c-Si. Because thermal energy is used to diffuse the dopant, the main process temperature is above 850 °C. The junction depth formed by thermal doping is generally several hundred nm or more, and it is not easy to form a radial junction in a small MW with a diameter of less than 1 μm. However, if a doped Si layer is deposited onto the surface of the MW by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), a relatively low-temperature process is possible, and the radial junction can be formed regardless of the diameter of the Si MW. In particular, the plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) process can be used to deposit the doped Si layer at a temperature lower than 300 °C by the reaction of the process gases (PH3, BH3, SiH4, etc.) with high-energy electrons generated by a radio-frequency (RF) field. As the doped Si deposited by PECVD is normally amorphous Si or nanocrystalline Si with extremely low crystallinity, a heterojunction is formed on the c-Si MWs fabricated by VLS growth or etching methods. The PECVD process enables deposition of the film at a low temperature because of plasma-enhanced chemical decomposition. However, the step coverage, which is the ratio of the film thickness on the bottom to that on the top surface, is low because of the orientation of the highly reactive gases generated by the plasma. Therefore, PECVD Si deposition is not suitable for Si MWs with a high aspect ratio (≥10). In contrast to PECVD, low-pressure CVD (LPCVD) can be used to deposit the doped poly c-Si film on the Si MW because of its relatively high step coverage, although the process temperature is relatively high (≥800 °C) for thermal decomposition of the reaction gas. However, it remains challenging to deposit the doped Si film conformally onto the Si MWs owing to the limited diffusion of the reacting gases when the spacing between the Si MWs is too narrow and too deep.


4.1.3 Characterization of the radial p–n junction. 
The basic method to analyze the distribution of dopants in c-Si is secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), a technique that measures the mass and charge of ions away from the surface by etching the c-Si surface with an ion beam. As the etching speed of Si is uniform for a given ion beam energy, the etching time can be converted into the depth of the etched Si. This allows quantitative analysis of the composition of the doped c-Si layer according to the Si depth. By measuring the dopant elements, i.e., phosphorus or boron, the concentration of the dopant can be analyzed according to depth. Because the accelerated ion beams of SIMS are injected directionally onto the surface, the ion beams cannot uniformly etch the surface of a 3D structure such as Si MWs (Fig. 16a and b).63 Generally, SIMS characterization is valid only for analyzing the dopant profiles of flat surfaces (Fig. 16c). Therefore, the same doping conditions applied to Si MWs are applied to a planar c-Si sample, and the surface concentration and junction depth are analyzed using the planar c-Si sample through SIMS characterization. However, this characterization assumes that the p–n junction in the planar c-Si sample is identical to that in the Si MWs. This method cannot analyze the actual doping profile in Si MWs.
 Fig. 16  (a and b) Schematics of SIMS characterization of planar and wire surfaces. (c) SIMS analysis of planar and wire solar cells, showing a higher dopant concentration in wire structures. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2012, Springer. 2D concentration plots of Si NWs with diameters of (d) 75 nm and (e) 55 nm. Colors pink, brown, and blue indicate the phosphorus, carbon, and boron atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Selectively etched MWs after the MW was cut in half by a FIB, revealing the junction. (g) Finite element method (FEM) simulations of a radial junction in a Si MW. All the scale bars represent 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Various methods have been employed for direct observation of the radial junction formed in MWs, namely, (1) atomic probe tomography (APT), (2) selective chemical etching, and (3) low-voltage SEM. In APT analysis, similar to SIMS, the components are divided into atomic units and analyzed according to their individual mass and charge. In contrast to SIMS, which sputters the sample with the ion beam, an electric field is applied to a sharp tip of the sample to pull atoms and ions apart from the sample. By reorganizing the positions of the atoms and ions, a 2D (or 3D) profile of the atoms and ions can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 16d and e.64 This method can detect extremely low concentrations; however, application of the strong electric field to a wire tip provides analysis of a single wire. Consequently, studies have been conducted on the impurity and dopant profiles in NWs, as it is not easy to analyze the dopant profile in Si MWs employing APT owing to a distributed field in the microscale tip of Si MWs.
Elbersen et al. used chemical selective etching rather than dopant profile analysis of SIMS and APT to observe the junction depth of radial junction in MWs.65 The etch rate of highly doped c-Si is faster than that of moderately doped c-Si in a mixture of hydrofluoric acid and nitric acid or a mixture of hydrofluoric acid and chromium trioxide. This difference in etch rates enables the selective etching of the shell layer of the doped c-Si, facilitating direct observation of the doped Si on the surface of the Si MW by SEM. To observe the cross-section of an MW, a single MW is cut vertically by a focused ion beam (FIB) and then the doped c-Si at the shell region of the Si MW is fast-etched by the chemical etching process compared with the core region of the Si MW. Fig. 16f shows the result of the chemical etching process of a vertically cut MW; the step difference, which is a result of selective etching, is clearly visible by SEM. The junction depth measured using SEM analysis is matched with the simulation (Fig. 16g). The width of the shell observed by SEM is consistent with the junction depth analyzed by SIMS for the planar sample. This indicates that the thermal diffusion process using a spin-on dopant, a solid-state dopant, and others could form a uniformly doped layer for both three-dimensional and planar structures.
In general, the SEM images show a difference in contrast depending on the material and the surface level. Based on the characterization of SEM morphology, the core–shell structures pre-etched by the selective chemical treatment could be observed by SEM analysis. As an alternative method, Jung et al. visualized the radial p–n junction profile of Si MWs by lowering the voltage of the SEM measurement without any selective etch treatment (Fig. 17).13 A structure with random NWs between periodic MWs was fabricated by the MACE method and the p–n junction was formed using an SOD. To observe a cross-section of the vertically cut MW, the space between the NWs and the MWs was filled with crystal wax and then polished mechanically. Reducing the acceleration voltage of the SEM generated the difference in contrast between highly doped c-Si and lightly doped c-Si, and the position of the junction could be visualized. This observation confirmed that the junction depth of the MW analyzed by SEM was similar to that of the planar substrate analyzed by SIMS.
 Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional low-voltage SEM image of both NW- and MWs (2 μm scale bar). (b) False colored image of (a), where the lighter (or darker) regions are colored red (or blue). Green indicates unconverted areas with conversion errors. (c) One-dimensional contrast intensity along the yellow line in (a), which matches the SIMS profile. (d) Schematic of the tapered NW, MWs, and both NWs and MWs. Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing. 
Although the aforementioned direct methods can approximately determine the junction depth, it is challenging to obtain a detailed dopant profile. The use of electrochemical capacitance–voltage (CV) measurements to characterize the dopant profiles of Si MW solar cells is a promising method to achieve this goal. In a solid-state device, conventional CV measurement characterizes the doping profile and electrically active defect densities by analyzing the dependence of the depletion width at the junction upon the applied voltage. Instead of solid-state metal contact, which occurs during the CV measurement process, electrochemical CV measurement occurs via electrolyte/semiconductor contact. This enables the formation of three-dimensional contact, which is necessary for CV measurement. The characterization of an MW doping profile via an electrochemical CV measurement has not been obtained. Because the electrochemical CV measurement method is one of the possible methods by which to measure direct and accurate dopant profiles of Si MW solar cells, it needs to be further investigated.

4.2 Surface treatments for Si MW solar cells
In comparison with that of conventional c-Si solar cells, the surface recombination problem of Si MW solar cells is more severe because of the relatively large surface area and the surface damage induced during the Si MW fabrication process. To produce high-efficiency Si MW solar cells, additional surface treatment is required to minimize surface recombination. In the following section, we discuss the c-Si surface damage generated by the Si MW fabrication process and various methods to remove such surface damage. In addition, we briefly introduce an overview of general passivation techniques to minimize surface recombination.

4.2.1 Plasma-induced surface damage by RIE. 
As mentioned in Section 2.2, the RIE method is the most popular Si dry etching method to fabricate Si MW structures. This method can easily form vertical Si MWs regardless of the crystal orientation of the c-Si wafer. However, it can cause significant surface damage to the c-Si substrate because of the induced RF plasma power during the fabrication process. Schaefer et al. proposed a three-layer model to explain the possible surface damage generated in the c-Si substrate by the RIE-induced plasma power.66 One of these layers is a surface residue layer, such as metallic and organic contaminants on several nanometer surfaces (∼5 nm). The model shows that underneath the Si surface, the crystal lattice is heavily damaged up to a depth of 10–20 nm. A deeper Si layer, up to a depth of 50–80 nm, contains impurities such as particles of etching gases, which can be observed up to a depth of approximately 1 μm. This implies that the RIE-induced plasma power causes Si surface damage to a depth of approximately 1 μm.

Fig. 18a and b show the variation in the VOC of the solar cell as a function of RF power and the change in the effective lifetime according to the removed c-Si thickness. As the RF power is increased from 0 to 500 W, surface damage on the c-Si surface caused by ion bombardment induced by direct current (DC) bias becomes more severe. Consequently, the VOC decreases from approximately 608 mV (0 W) to 590 mV (500 W). Similarly, as shown in Fig. 18b, the effective minority carrier lifetime of the etched Si decreases significantly because of the damaged surface compared with that of non-etched Si, implying that the Si surface is damaged. Removal of approximately 20 nm of the damaged Si surface restores the effective lifetime to 200 μs, which is the initial value for a bare c-Si wafer. Accordingly, to achieve high-efficiency Si MW solar cells, the surface damage caused by the fabrication of Si MWs must be removed.
 Fig. 18  (a) VOC as a function of RF power: VOC decreases with increasing RF power and DC bias. (b) Effective minority charge carrier lifetimes of Si after removing damaged Si. Removal of about 20 nm of damaged Si leads to recovery of the effective minority charge carrier lifetimes. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 1999, AIP. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns along the [110] zone axis of Si NWs etched in different etching solutions, showing the nanowire axial directions as 〈111〉 and 〈100〉 for (c) and (d), respectively. The dashed white line shows the interface between the Si and SiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 Formation of a porous c-Si layer by MACE. 
Because of its solution-based etching process, MACE, another representative Si etching method, does not cause plasma damage on the MW surface. However, it leads to surface changes with an increase in the c-Si specific surface area. This is ascribed to the formation of the porous structure according to the c-Si crystal direction and the concentration of the etching solution.67,68
This phenomenon, i.e., surface roughness formation in Si NWs according to the c-Si crystal orientation and the concentration ratio of the HF/H2O2 solution, was confirmed by Chern et al.67Fig. 18c and d show the axial direction and morphology of the etched Si NWs on a (100) c-Si wafer at two different HF/H2O2 concentrations. Although c-Si wafers with the same crystal orientation are used, the (111) and (100) NWs form at different HF/H2O2 concentrations. In particular, the (100) Si NW has an extremely rough interface between c-Si and the amorphous layer, presumably silicon oxide. In addition, as shown in Table 2, porous Si NWs can be formed according to various c-Si wafer crystal orientations and the concentration of the etching solution. Furthermore, according to Han et al., porous Si NWs can be formed by the MACE process.68
Table 2 Dependence of Si NW direction and morphology on MACE conditions.68 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society




Volume ratio of HF/H2O2 solution






≪ 1:1
1.5:1–2:1
2.5:1–3:1
3:1–3.25:1
3.25:1–3.5:1
3.5:1–4:1
≫4:1


(100) Si wafer
No pattern
Porous vertical 〈100〉
Vertical 〈100〉
Slanted 〈110〉
Slanted 〈111〉
Porous slanted 〈111〉
No pattern


(110) Si wafer
No pattern
Porous slanted 〈100〉
Slanted 〈100〉
Vertical 〈110〉
Slanted 〈111〉
Porous slanted 〈111〉
No pattern


(111) Si wafer
No pattern
Porous slanted 〈100〉
Slanted 〈100〉
Slanted 〈110〉
Vertical 〈111〉
Porous vertical 〈111〉
No pattern




Nanochannels between c-Si and metal catalysts are formed by MACE, and the etching solution penetrates the channel to react with the surface of the Si NWs. Based on this mechanism, a porous structure can be formed on the entire c-Si surface. Um et al. demonstrated vertical Si MWs fabricated through MACE by controlling the thickness of the metal catalyst and the metal deposition rate.47 The morphology and etch rate of the Si MWs are affected strongly by the porosity of the metal catalyst, because the more porous catalyst has a shorter diffusion path of the etching solution through the porous nanochannel. As mentioned in these studies, it is expected that the surface roughness of the Si MWs would increase according to the etching mechanism of MACE. The increased surface recombination site on the rough surface of Si MWs leads to performance degradation of the Si MW solar cells. Therefore, to achieve ultimate efficiency of Si MW solar cells, additional surface treatment is necessary to reduce the surface roughness.


4.2.3 Strategies to remove surface damage. 
To realize high-efficiency Si MW solar cells, surface damage, such as plasma damage, and the porous surface of the Si MW fabricated by RIE and MACE, respectively, must be removed. Thermal oxidation is a convenient and effective method to remove surface damage on a SiO2 layer on the Si surface, as Si is consumed by the formation of the SiO2 layer. However, the thermal oxidation process requires a high temperature of approximately 850–1100 °C to thermally diffuse oxygen into Si, which increases the process cost of solar cells. Furthermore, thermal oxidation generally has the limitation that the dopant profile of the c-Si wafer itself can change because of dopant redistribution at the interface between SiO2 and c-Si during thermal oxidation.69 The dopant redistribution process is divided into two mechanisms, where SiO2 releases and absorbs the dopant according to the solid solubilities of the dopants in SiO2. The solubility of the solids depends on the dopant element. Because of the redistributed dopant profile on the surface, it is difficult to control the junction depth of the p–n junction precisely. Consequently, solar cell performance can be degraded by varying the VOC and contact resistance between the c-Si and metal.70 Furthermore, undesired impurities such as metals and ions can be diffused into the bulk region under high-temperature conditions, which can also degrade the device performance.69 Therefore, another surface treatment method is required that does not degrade device performance.
Chemical wet etching, another surface treatment method to remove c-Si surface damage, is a solution-based etching process using a Si etchant. It does not require high temperatures and can therefore remove surface damage without the limitations of the thermal oxidation process. Zaidi et al. carried out device characterization when Si surface damage caused by RIE is removed with a potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution.71 The effect of removing the Si surface damage is confirmed by the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) responses of solar cells as a function of the KOH etching time. By increasing the etching time from 0 to 60, 180, and 270 s, the calculated JSC by IQE measurements improved from 27.1 to 30.0, 31.1, and 31.9 mA cm−2, respectively. A 110 nm-thick Si layer was etched for 270 s, showing 18% improvement in the calculated JSC compared with that of the pristine solar cell. This implies that the KOH etching process can reduce the surface recombination probability significantly and improve the photo-generated carrier collection probability by removing surface damage, as confirmed by the IQE measurements. However, because KOH etching exhibits an anisotropic etching property along with the Si crystal orientation, the etching process has an intrinsic limitation in uniformly removing the surface damage of vertical Si MWs that have various crystal orientations.
Instead of KOH etching, Seo et al. proposed a conformal c-Si wet etching method for vertical Si MW arrays using an isotropic Si etchant (RSE-100, Trasene), which consists of a mixture of HF/HNO3/CH3COOH (HNA).55Fig. 19a–c shows the morphological change in vertical Si MWs according to the wet etching duration. As shown in the SEM images, tapered-shape MW arrays are formed as the wet etching time increases. This clearly confirms that the entire surface of the Si MWs has been etched. Therefore, the isotropic Si etchant is considered a suitable candidate to conformally remove surface damage on vertical Si MWs with a high aspect ratio, regardless of the Si crystal orientation. Hwang et al. manufactured vertical Si MW solar cells with surface treatment using an isotropic Si slow etchant, achieving 19% efficiency, which is the highest level of efficiency achieved in Si MW solar cell research to date.14 Accordingly, Si surface treatment using the isotropic Si slow etchant is considered an optimized chemical wet etching process for vertical Si MW structures with a high aspect ratio.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM images of vertical Si MWs before Si wet-etching. 30 degree tilted view of Si MWs after (b) 1 s and (c) 10 s of etching. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (d) Extracted density of the interface state for three different passivation designs using the full interface method: (i) 4 nm Al2O3 cap (black star and dash line); (ii) 4 nm Al2O3 cap and surface pretreatment (red circle and dash line); (iii) 4 nm Al2O3 cap, surface pretreatment and etching 500 nm of previously formed thermal SiO2 (blue square and dash line). Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.2.4 Surface passivation layers. 
To obtain ultimate efficiency for Si MW solar cells, the minority carrier lifetime must be increased by minimizing electrical losses in the photo-generated carriers. It is essential to minimize surface recombination of photo-generated carriers by the surface passivation technique on the Si MW structures. Surface passivation can minimize surface defects by reducing the dangling bonds on the surface of c-Si. Furthermore, passivation materials form an electric field on the c-Si interface, because of the formation of fixed charges, to facilitate selective carrier collection.72 SiNx, SiO2, Al2O3, and amorphous silicon (a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H) are representative passivation materials in solar cell applications.
The Al2O3 passivation layer activates negative fixed charges at the interface with c-Si; therefore, it is used mainly for the p+ emitter of n-Si solar cells to facilitate hole collection at the front metal electrode. In addition, recombination of the electrons generated in the emitter region can be reduced by pushing electrons to the rear electrode. This is due to the Coulomb repulsive force induced by the electric field at the Al2O3/c-Si interface, which results in enhanced photovoltaic parameters such as VOC and JSC.72 Mikulik et al. reported that the surface damage of c-Si MWs induced by the RIE process generates many carrier trap sites on the surface, which could increase the possibility of surface recombination and degrade device performance.73 These authors quantitatively measured the interface trap density (Dit) that causes surface recombination. The surface passivation effect of the Al2O3 layer on p-Si MWs is confirmed by Dit measurement after forming a 4 nm-thick Al2O3 layer on p-Si MWs. The trap density of this 4 nm-thick Al2O3-coated p-Si MPs is 2 × 1011 cm−2 eV−1, which is significantly lower than that of pristine p-Si MWs. In addition, the trap density of 4 nm-thick Al2O3-coated p-Si MWs with additional thermal oxidation treatment prior to Al2O3 deposition is reduced further to 1.5 × 1011 cm−2 eV−1 (Fig. 19d). Accordingly, to achieve high-efficiency Si MW solar cells, this surface passivation technique is required with surface pretreatment (thermal oxidation or wet etching), as mentioned in Section 3.2.2.
In contrast, SiO2 and SiNx passivation layers activate positive fixed charges at the interface with c-Si. These passivation layers are used mainly for the n+-emitter of p-Si solar cells to facilitate the collection of electrons while preventing the recombination of holes. Consequently, it can enhance photovoltaic performance such as VOC and JSC.72 Oh et al. formed a SiO2 passivation layer on p-Si NW solar cells with the thermal oxidation process at a temperature of 850 °C for 30 min.8 The p-Si NW solar cells with a SiO2 passivation layer show an effective lifetime of approximately 200 μs and exhibit a maximum efficiency of 18.2% with JSC = 36.45 mA cm−2, VOC = 628 mV, and FF = 0.796. These results show that a superior passivation effect to Si MW solar cells can also be expected, as the passivation effect of the SiO2 layer is observed even at a larger surface area of Si NWs.
An a-Si layer can be deposited by PECVD at a relatively low temperature between 200 and 250 °C. It forms a high-quality interface layer on c-Si and can therefore be used to passivate both p- and n-Si in conjunction with annealing in a hydrogen environment. However, it has the limitations of parasitic absorption in visible light and low thermal stability.69 Kelzenberg et al. confirmed the passivation effect of the a-Si layer by applying it to a single Si MW solar cell. PECVD is employed to deposit a-Si:H or a-SiNx:H on the surface of a buffered HF (BHF)-treated single MW.25
To determine the passivation effect, scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) characterization is employed to calculate the effective axial minority carrier collection length (Leff) of each passivation layer, a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H. The non-coated single MW device shows an effective axial minority carrier collection length (Leff) of <0.5 μm. Single MW devices coated with a-Si:H and a-SiNx:H exhibit enhanced Leff values of 10 μm and 30 μm, respectively. Furthermore, as a-SiNx:H not only shows a passivation effect but also an antireflection property, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the a-SiNx:H-coated single MW device is considerably higher compared with that of the non-coated device (Fig. 20a–c). Furthermore, the fabricated a-SiNx:H-coated single MW device shows an improved efficiency of up to 9% (Fig. 20d).
 Fig. 20  SPCM characterization of minority-carrier recombination in Si MW radial junction solar cells. Schematic illustration (top) and SPCM images (bottom) for MWs with surfaces passivated with (a) buffered HF, (b) a-Si:H, and (c) a-SiNx:H. (d) Current density–voltage characteristics of the single-MW structures of each surface passivation type. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration of a-Si/c-Si Si MW solar cells. (f) Current density–voltage characteristics of the a-Si/c-Si Si MW solar cells from passivation strategies. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Maps of measured apparent lifetime for heterojunction film deposition at (g) 140 °C and (h) 180 °C on high quality planar wafers; insets show TEM images of the interface. The area of the map is ∼2 × 2 cm, and the scale bars of TEM insets are 5 nm. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Kim et al. investigated a-Si/c-Si heterojunction Si MW solar cells with an 80 nm-thick a-SiN:H passivation layer deposited by PECVD (Fig. 20e).74 Because the a-SiN:H layer both passivates the top surface and serves as an antireflection layer, it increases the VOC and JSC by 4% and 31%, respectively. Consequently, the heterojunction Si MW solar cells demonstrate an efficiency of 11.0% with VOC = 580 mV, JSC = 29.2 mA cm−2, and FF= 0.649 (Fig. 20f). Similarly, Gharghi et al. demonstrated heterojunction with an intrinsic thin layer (HIT) Si MW solar cells by depositing a 12–16 nm-thick a-Si layer (4–6 nm for the intrinsic layer, 8–10 nm for the doped layer) on c-Si by PECVD.75 The a-Si layer enables the formation of high-quality junctions with c-Si, acting as the surface passivation layer. Furthermore, a minority carrier lifetime of 100 μs can be achieved with the intrinsic a-Si passivation layer (Fig. 20g and h). Finally, the HIT Si MW solar cells exhibit an efficiency of 12.2% with VOC = 591 mV, JSC = 31.1 mA cm−2, and FF = 0.664.

4.3 Electrode designs for Si MW solar cells
The electrodes of the solar cells collect the photo-induced carriers and flow the electric current through the external circuit. It is essential to design an optically and electrically optimized electrode for the front side of solar cells, where the light enters. To optimize the electrical characteristics of the front electrode, the following factors must be minimized: (1) resistive loss owing to contact resistance between Si and the electrode,60 (2) the intrinsic electrical conductivity of the electrode, and (3) the shading loss caused by the front electrode.76 Application of the bus/finger bar electrode generally used in conventional solar cells is limited in MWs because the front electrode must be formed over three-dimensional MW structures with a high aspect ratio. Accordingly, the design of a novel front electrode suitable for MW solar cells is essential to collect carriers effectively.

4.3.1 Trade-off between optical and electrical gain. 
In designing the front electrode, both shading and resistive losses by the front electrode must be considered. The shading loss depends on the transparency of the front electrode, which is determined by the ratio of the area covered by metal on the top of the c-Si absorber. For metal-based electrodes, the only way to minimize shading loss is to reduce the front electrode area. As the area of the front electrode decreases, the light absorption area increases and the JSC of the solar cell therefore increases. However, when the total area of the front electrode decreases, the spacing between the electrodes increases, increasing the distance that the carriers move through the relatively highly resistive emitter layer.60 The reduced surface area of the front electrode causes an increase in the series resistance of the solar cell, leading to degradation of the FF.


4.3.2 Bus and finger electrodes. 
Generally, the design of the front electrode for conventional solar cells is a bus bar, with the fingers formed by using a screen-printing method. The form of the bus/finger electrodes is a metal grid with spacing of several millimeters and consists of metal fingers with a regular interval for carrier collection and a bus bar for contact with an external circuit. Kim et al. examined the influence of the diameter and period of Si MWs on the efficiency of Si MW solar cells with the bus/finger electrode as a front electrode.77 These Si MW solar cells show a FF of 76.29% using a screen-printed silver film as metal electrodes, which is lower than the FF of 80% that is typical for commercial solar cells with the same electrode design. Even though relatively high FF and VOC (0.608 V) can be achieved, the efficiency of the Si MW solar cells (16.92%) is not higher than that of commercial solar cells. This is ascribed mainly to relatively low JSC (36.47 mA cm−2) caused by the high reflectance of the Si MWs with a low aspect ratio of 2.8. Because of the short Si MWs, the screen-printing method can form the electrode onto the Si MWs. However, longer Si MWs, which can achieve a higher JSC, have a higher aspect ratio and will be damaged by the screen-printing method. In addition, only limited application is possible of a shallow emitter to improve VOC because of the resistive loss caused by carrier collection through the wide spacing between the fingers of the bus/finger electrode. Accordingly, electrodes in the form of a bus/finger bar are not suitable for high-efficiency Si MW solar cells.


4.3.3 Full contact electrode using metal oxides and wrap-around contacts. 
To improve efficiency, emitter thickness must be reduced to minimize Auger recombination of the c-Si solar cells, particularly Si MW solar cells that have a large surface area. As discussed in Section 4.3.1, because the electrical conductivity of the emitter decreases with a decrease in emitter thickness, the spacing between the finger electrodes should be narrower to prevent resistive loss caused by photocarrier collection through the less-conductive emitter layer. However, for bus/finger electrodes, shading loss occurs because the spacing should be narrow. To solve this issue, a metal oxide transparent electrode can be applied as the front electrode of Si MW solar cells. Metal-oxide-based transparent electrodes such as indium tin oxide (ITO) and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) show relatively high transmittance and electrical conductivity.
The metal oxide transparent electrode is deposited directly onto the Si MW to collect the photocarriers from the entire Si MW (Fig. 21a).15 As an empty space exists between Si MWs, it should be filled by the transparent polymer to support the metal oxide thin film. By applying a metal oxide transparent electrode, the photocarriers can be collected through the relatively highly conductive channel rather than the highly resistive emitter layer. However, applying metal oxides to the MWs has the following disadvantages: (1) parasitic absorption in the short wavelength region and (2) requirement for expensive rare metals (e.g., indium). Although increasing the thickness of the metal oxide layer reduces the contact resistance of the metal oxide layer, it eventually causes an increase in parasitic absorption by the metal oxide. Therefore, an intrinsic limitation is present in forming the front electrode with metal oxide only. Furthermore, power loss could occur during the collection of the large current flow of wafer-scale solar cells by the metal oxide transparent electrode because of its relatively low conductivity compared with that of the metal. This obviously necessitates using another metal electrode on top of the metal oxide transparent electrode.
 Fig. 21  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of Si MWs with a metal oxide layer on the top of MWs. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of wrap-around metal contact for Si MW solar cells. (c) SEM image of the wrap-around metal contact near the wire bottoms. (d) Plots of FF and ΔF (=pseudo FF − FF) as a function of metal thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
According to Shin et al., the metal electrode acts in collecting carriers, whereas a wrap-around metal contact applied to reduce parasitic absorption forms only at the bottom of the MW (Fig. 21b and c).78 As the wrap-around metal contact is connected to all the Si MWs, the photocurrent from the Si MWs can be collected effectively through a silver electrode with high conductivity. In addition, this electrode acts as a back reflector to increase the light absorption of Si MWs, as this electrode is located at the root of the Si MWs. However, as shown in Fig. 21d, the FF measured is lower than the pseudo-FF because the limited metal electrode thickness and reduced contact area lead to an increase in contact resistance. Consequently, a Si MW solar cell with a wrap-around metal contact electrode exhibits low FF of 65.4%.


4.3.4 Edge electrode. 
Edge electrodes have been investigated as stable and effective metal electrodes for Si MW solar cells. As a front electrode, the edge electrode is formed by the metal being selectively patterned on the edge of the solar cell, as shown in Fig. 22a and b. This facilitates negligible optical loss from shading loss because the metal is not present in the area of the MWs.47,55 As the edge electrode is formed only on the edge of solar cells, it is difficult to collect the carrier generated from positions distant from the electrode, which are close to the center of the solar cell. As discussed in Section 4.3.1, power loss occurs when the photocarriers are collected through the less conductive layer, which is the doped c-Si layer (i.e., emitter) for edge electrode solar cells. To prevent power loss, the conductivity of the emitter can be increased by diffusing more dopants into the emitter to form a highly doped c-Si layer. With this approach, a relatively high FF value can be obtained. However, the highly doped c-Si causes considerable Auger recombination, resulting in severe degradation of the VOC and JSC. Consequently, Si MW solar cells with edge electrodes have a high FF of 71% but a relatively low efficiency of 13%.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic and (b) optical image of Si MW solar cells with an edge electrode. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic and (d) SEM image of Si MW solar cells with a microgrid electrode. (e) Optical transmission (black line with squares) and sheet resistance (blue squares) of the microgrid as a function of grid spacing. The inset shows the optical image of the microgrid on a glass substrate. (f) Current density–voltage curves of Si MWs solar cells with the microgrid electrode measured using a solar simulator (red) and a Suns–VOC (blue line). The inset shows the SEM image of a plated Ni film of the microgrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.3.5 Microgrid electrode. 
Um et al. developed a new grid-based front electrode with microscale spacing between the grid lines to fabricate a front metal electrode suitable for Si MW solar cells.60 The microgrid electrode is designed to reduce electrical loss of carrier collection in the emitter and to minimize shading loss. The microgrid electrode is fabricated by photolithography followed by thermal evaporation of the Al film, resulting in a continuous and uniform square pattern (Fig. 22c and d). Um et al. fabricated metal microgrids on glass substrates with line widths of 2 μm and different grid spacings of 50, 100, 200, and 400 μm to confirm the optical and electrical properties of the metal microgrid electrodes. The average transmittance and sheet resistance were shown to increase with increasing spacing of the microgrid lines (reduced surface area covered by the Al film). With a microgrid spacing of 400 μm, a front electrode with a high transmittance of 97% or more and a relatively low sheet resistance of 25 Ω sq−1 could be developed (Fig. 22e).
With the microgrid electrode, there is no parasitic absorption, as additional materials such as a transparent metal oxide are not required owing to the outstanding electrical properties of the electrode. In addition, carriers are collected effectively because of a reduction in the diffusion distance of the carrier by the minimized spacing of metal electrodes. The excellent transmittance and electrical conductivity of microgrid electrodes significantly improve the FF and VOC values and result in a 72% improvement in efficiency (6.5% to 11.3%) compared with that of the edge electrode for planar solar cells. The Si MW solar cells using a metal microgrid electrode as the front electrode have an FF of 81.2% (Fig. 22f).

4.4 Strategies for high-efficiency Si MW solar cells
An effective p–n junction is key for maximizing the efficiency of an Si MW solar cell. Various methods have been developed to minimize Auger recombination loss by fabricating a shallow p–n junction with a lightly doped emitter. However, it is difficult to fabricate a shallow junction using the conventional doping methods discussed in Section 4.1.2 due to the high processing temperature. Significant research on the use of carrier selective contacts (CSCs) has recently been conducted.79,80 In contrast to conventional doping methods, in which the doping agent is added directly to Si, in this method, a CSC, such as MoOx, V2Ox, WOx, etc., forms an inversion layer under the CSC/Si interface. Owing to the large work function gap between the CSC and Si, the minority carriers accumulate at the interface, resulting in the formation of an inversion layer. This separates the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which act as emitters. Although the use of conventional CSCs has yielded highly efficient silicon solar cells,80 conventional deposition methods, such as thermal evaporation and sputtering, in which the deposition is directional and the step coverage is low, do not yield cost-effective Si MW solar cells. To achieve this result, the conformal layer of the solution-processed CSCs should be deposited onto the three-dimensional surface of the MWs by the spray or spin-coating method.
The surface treatment methods for achieving Si MW solar cells with high VOC are described in Section 4.2. To date, however, the highest VOC achieved by a Si MW solar cell is 608 mV,14 which is still low compared to the previously reported VOC of 744 mV.81 achieved by a c-Si solar cell. Therefore, further research is necessary to produce a Si MW solar cell whose VOC is maximized. For this purpose, a high-quality surface passivation layer is required. Thus, the fabrication of the HIT technology, which is commercially available, to obtain high-quality surface passivation should be explored.
Using the HIT technology, the maximum VOC achieved by a c-Si solar cell is 744 mV,81 which corresponds to an efficiency of 26.8%. Although an HIT Si MW solar cell has been developed, it reveals relatively low VOC of 591 mV due to a poor-quality surface passivation layer.82 This is because the HIT technology is designed to deposit a-Si:H on a planar Si (111) wafer to suppress epitaxial growth.83,84 However, since the sidewall of a Si MW possesses crystals with different orientations, it is difficult to obtain high-quality surface passivation on all of the Si MW surface facets due to undesired epitaxial growth during a-Si:H deposition.85 Recently, efforts to suppress the epitaxial growth on Si wafers with various crystal orientations by incorporating an oxygen atom into a-Si:H (a-SiOx:H) has been proposed.86,87 If an HIT Si MW solar cell with high-quality surface passivation is developed, it is expected to achieve a VOC value that approaches the theoretical limit of 752 mV.81
In addition, designing front electrodes suitable for use in MW solar cells is essential for fabricating highly efficient Si MW solar cells. Unfortunately, the electrodes that achieve a high FF and efficiency that are described in Section 4.3 may not be suitable for commercialization due to their complicated and expensive formation process. In the conventional commercial process of constructing Si solar cells, the top electrode is formed by the screen-printing method. The screen-printing method has the advantage of being simple and reproducible. However, the minimum resolution of the screen mask is 40–120 μm.88,89 Thus, it is challenging to form electrodes in Si MW arrays with spacings of several micrometers. Furthermore, increasing the metal electrode surface area would block the sunlight from entering the solar cell and would reduce its efficiency. Therefore, further efforts to form electrodes that are both suitable for use in Si MW solar cells and appropriate for industrial processing are necessary. Among the existing technologies, inkjet, gravure, and 3D printing methods should be considered, because these methods produce fine microscale patterns that can be formed via a commercialized scaling process.90,91
5. Flexible Si MW solar cells
Generally, conventional solar cells are installed on a flat surface because they are fabricated on rigid substrates. In contrast, flexible solar cells can be applied to curved or pliable surfaces. Flexible solar cells have attracted considerable attention because they can be integrated with electric vehicles, wearable technology, and portable electronics as a continuous power source.14,92 Thus far, numerous studies have been conducted on developing flexible solar cells based on organic,93 dye-sensitive,94 and perovskite solar cells.95 However, challenges such as low efficiency, high manufacturing cost, and low stability have made commercialization of flexible solar cells difficult. Although c-Si solar cells have been commercialized successfully at a low fabrication cost with a lifespan of more than 20 years and high efficiency (26.7%), it is more difficult to commercialize flexible solar cells owing to the rigid mechanical characteristic of bulk c-Si.54,96 Recent reports have indicated that the rigidity of c-Si could be overcome in Si-MW-based flexible solar cells. Si MWs with excellent light trapping properties facilitate high-efficiency flexible solar cells, as the bent MWs are able to release mechanical stress by moving to the empty space between the wires. In this section, recently developed MW-based flexible c-Si solar cells are discussed.
5.1 Thin c-Si with Si MWs for flexible solar cells
In general, c-Si has a fundamental limitation for flexible solar cells because of its rigid mechanical properties. However, recent studies have proposed thin c-Si solar cells (less than 50 μm thick) with outstanding flexibility for flexible solar cells.97–100 Unfortunately, thin c-Si with an indirect bandgap has severe loss of light absorption because of the low light absorption coefficient in the near-infrared region. Similarly, planar thin c-Si substrates have high surface reflection (over 40% in the entire wavelength region) caused by refractive index mismatching between air and c-Si. Therefore, a novel strategy is required to improve the light absorption properties of thin c-Si for highly efficient and flexible solar cells.
Generally, random pyramidal structures are formed on the surface of c-Si solar cells to increase light absorption. However, these thin c-Si substrates with random pyramidal structures possess crack initiation sites, where an external force is concentrated (Fig. 23a). Because of mechanical defects, the thin c-Si substrates with pyramidal structures represent lower flexibility compared with that of the planar structure, as shown in Fig. 23b. Therefore, a unique surface structure should be designed that can maximize light absorption while maintaining the flexibility of thin c-Si to realize highly efficient and flexible c-Si solar cells.
 Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of the random pyramidal structures with crack initiation sites; (b) bending radius results of random pyramidal structured and planar thin c-Si substrates with different thicknesses from 50 to 80 μm. (c) Calculated stress distribution of a thin c-Si film with Si MWs using finite element method simulation. (d) Bending radius results of the planar thin c-Si film with various thicknesses from 50 to 80 μm and thin c-Si film (50 μm thickness) with various lengths of MWs from 0 to 30 μm. (e) Absorption spectra of the thin c-Si film with increasing length of MWs from 0 to 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2019, Hwang et al. presented a strategy to realize highly efficient and flexible solar cells using thin c-Si solar cells with MWs.14 Thin c-Si with regularly positioned MWs can distribute mechanical stress effectively, which is confirmed by mechanical simulation, as shown in Fig. 23c. Because the mechanical stress exists mainly in the substrate without affecting the MWs, the flexibility of thin c-Si substrates is maintained regardless of the length of the MWs (Fig. 23d). The analysis of the optical properties of thin c-Si substrates with MWs is shown in Fig. 23e. A thin c-Si substrate with no surface structures (i.e., planar substrate) shows a high surface reflection of over 40% over the entire wavelength range (300–1000 nm) and poor light absorption for wavelengths over 900 nm. Increasing the length of the MWs increases the light absorption over the entire wavelength region. For example, a thin c-Si substrate with 30 μm-long MWs shows improved integrated photon flux absorption of 87.5% compared with that of a thin c-Si substrate without surface textures (59.7%). In addition, with tapered MW structures on a thin c-Si substrate, surface reflection is reduced significantly to less than 2% over the entire wavelength region. The flexible, thin c-Si solar cells with tapered MWs show a high current density of ∼40 mA cm−2 (Fig. 24a). The reasons for the flexible thin c-Si solar cells achieving high JSCs are (1) high light absorption of the tapered MWs and (2) their improved quantum efficiency in the long-wavelength region, over 900 nm, through the formation of localized back contact. Notably, the flexible, thin c-Si solar cells with tapered MWs achieve almost 100% internal quantum efficiency (IQE) in the short wavelength region (300 nm), as shown in Fig. 24b. This result is attributed mainly to the effectively separated and collected minority carriers in the radial junction of the tapered MWs. The flexible thin c-Si solar cells with tapered MWs achieve a maximum efficiency of 18.9% and show stable photovoltaic properties even with a repetitive bending test conducted 1000 times (Fig. 24c). In addition, a flexible solar module integrated with the MW-based flexible c-Si solar cells was installed on the flexible strap of a battery-free electronic watch, with the watch functioning successfully (Fig. 24d and e). This successful demonstration of solar-powered flexible electronics raises expectations that MW-based flexible thin c-Si solar cells can be applied to flexible electronics as a continuous power source.
 Fig. 24  (a) Current density–voltage curves and (b) internal quantum efficiency of tapered MWs based thin c-Si solar cells. (c) Photovoltaic properties of tapered MW based flexible c-Si solar cell after repeated bending test. (d) Current–voltage and power–voltage curves of the flexible module. (e) Photographs of a battery free electronic watch powered by the flexible module using the tapered MW based flexible c-Si solar cells. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.2 Polymer-embedded Si MW for flexible solar cells
In 2009, Plass et al. proposed a unique structure of PDMS-embedded Si MWs to maximize the flexibility of c-Si.101 To fabricate the PDMS-embedded Si MWs, vertically aligned Si MWs are grown on the Si substrate with the VLS process (Fig. 25a). To form free-standing wire arrays, PDMS varnish is cast onto the MW arrays and then cured. The free-standing PDMS-embedded Si MWs are detached mechanically from the Si substrate (Fig. 25b). The PDMS-embedded Si MWs exhibit extreme flexibility because the stretchable PDMS can release mechanical stress effectively (Fig. 25c).
 Fig. 25  (a) SEM image of vertically aligned Si MWs fabricated by the VLS growth method. (b) Schematic images of the fabrication process of PDMS embedded Si MWs. (c) Optical and SEM images of PDMS embedded Si microwires. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2009, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Kelzenberg et al. (2011) predicted the theoretical efficiency of polymer-embedded Si MW solar cells.25 The simulated structure of the polymer-embedded Si MW solar cells has vertically aligned Si MWs (75 μm length and 1.6 μm diameter) without the thick c-Si substrate in an area of 7 × 7 μm2. Al2O3 light scattering particles are dispersed in PDMS (400 spheres per unit cell), as shown in Fig. 26a. In addition, an 80 nm a-SiNx:H surface passivation layer is formed on the Si MW. The simulated current density of the polymer-embedded Si MW solar cell is 32.4 mA cm−2. The loss of JSC is caused mainly by surface reflection and parasitic absorption of the ITO top electrode. Although the calculated efficiency of polymer-embedded Si MW solar cells is reportedly 17.4%, it could be improved further by reducing the absorption loss caused by the electrode (Fig. 26b).
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic and (b) simulated current–voltage curve of polymer-embedded Si MWs solar cell without the Si substrate (49 μm2 area). Copyright 2011, RSC. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.3 Strategies for Si MW based stretchable solar cells
To maximize the flexibility of a MW solar cell, the bottom substrate should be removed from the device, because the flexibility of the device is determined only by the thickness of the bottom substrate. The aforementioned polymer-embedded Si MW solar cell is an excellent example of an MW solar cell without the bottom substrate. However, the efficiency of polymer-embedded Si MW solar cells is limited due to the parasitic absorption and relatively high resistance of the ITO electrodes. Furthermore, the ITO electrodes physically degrade when the bending radius is under 5 mm due to the presence of crack sites.93,102 Therefore, transparent electrodes that possess high flexibility, transmittance, and electrical conductivity are necessary for realizing flexible Si MW solar cells. Recently, flexible metal nanowire-based transparent electrodes have been developed.93,102 These flexible transparent metal nanowire-based electrodes should be able to satisfy the requirements of the polymer-embedded Si MW solar cells due to their high transmittance (95%), low sheet resistance (less than 20 Ω sq−1), and excellent flexibility (1.5 mm bending radius).103 These metal nanowire-based transparent electrodes even exhibit stretchability when formed on pre-strained PDMS substrates.104,105 Therefore, the development of a stretchable polymer-embedded Si MW solar cell using a novel transparent electrode should be possible.
6. Summary and outlook
Si MWs have been studied extensively for use in next-generation c-Si solar cells. Si MWs show excellent light absorption due to their one-dimensional structure and high aspect ratio, as well as the effective carrier separation achieved by their radial junction. To fabricate vertical Si MWs, bottom–up and top–down methods have been used. As one of the bottom–up methods, the VLS method has been employed to grow Si MWs using a metal catalyst. In the VLS method, Si is grown selectively and only at the catalyst position by supplying Si source gas at the eutectic temperature of the metal catalyst and Si. However, due to limitations such as metal contamination and random growth direction, top–down methods are more common. Wet and dry etching methods have been developed to selectively etch the c-Si substrate to produce one-dimensional structures. MACE has been proposed to minimize the isotropic etching behavior of the general wet process, which etches Si selectively using a metal catalyst. In addition, wafer-scale Si MWs can be fabricated using the RIE process, which is a general process for semiconductors. Among various fabrication methods, the advantages and disadvantages of which are shown in Table 1, MACE, the most cost-effective etching method, is the best candidate for mass production and commercialization. MACE could easily be incorporated into the current wet process of fabricating commercial Si solar cells. For commercial mass production of Si MWs via MACE, further studies on the use of more cost-effective catalysts, such as reusable metal catalysts or carbon-based catalysts, are needed.
In fabricating Si MWs for maximum applicability, the following features should be considered: (1) light absorption; (2) photocarrier generation and separation; and (3) the nature of the electrodes. Vertical Si MWs scatter incident light more efficiently than the pyramidal structures of conventional solar cells, resulting in efficient light absorption by vertical Si MWs (even with a small volume of c-Si). As some of the incident light is reflected from the top flat surface of the Si MWs, which have a diameter of several microns, tapered Si MWs have been proposed to reduce the reflection from the top surface of the MW. By gradually increasing the diameter of the MW from top to bottom, the MW tip, which has a diameter in the nanoscale range, can be fabricated. This tapered structure gradually reduces the difference in the refractive index between the bulk c-Si and air, thus minimizing the light reflection. Consequently, Si MWs can absorb wavelengths from 400 to 900 nm efficiently. Recent trends in c-Si solar cell applications include the use of an ultrathin c-Si film as a substrate to reduce the production cost. When attaching the Si MWs to the ultrathin c-Si substrate, the goal should be to minimize the length of the Si MWs while enhancing light absorption. Embedding dielectric nanoparticles into the spaces between short Si MWs is a promising way to compensate for the reduction in light scattering due to their short stature. The radius, filling fraction, array geometries of the MWs, and other features that affect the optical properties of the cell should be further studied to maximize light absorption by short Si MWs.
In Si MWs, radial p–n junctions are required to separate the electron hole pairs generated by light absorption. To produce the p–n junctions in Si MWs during thermal diffusion, liquid sources, such as POCl3 and BBr3, are sometimes used as dopants. Spin-on and solid-state dopants are also available as non-liquid sources. Heterojunctions produced by depositing the doped-Si layer on the MW surface have also been studied. Even Si MW solar cells possessing shallow p–n junctions and a lightly doped emitter suffer from Auger recombination in the doped emitter layer. However, simply coating the Si MWs with CSCs can prevent Auger recombination loss. The inversion layer between the CSC and Si allows the photocarriers to be separated, despite the absence of the p–n junction. In addition to increasing the device performance, the use of CSCs can reduce the process cost, because the simple deposition of the CSCs requires a much lower temperature than conventional doping methods. However, a method for depositing solution-processed CSCs conformally onto the three-dimensional surface of the Si MWs via spay or spin-coating needs to be developed.
A radial junction decreases the path length of the photocarriers generated in the Si MWs (compared with the conventional planar junction). However, Si MW solar cells suffer from severe surface recombination, because their surface areas are larger than those of planar solar cells. To suppress surface recombination, the surface damage caused during MW fabrication should be removed with various surface treatments, and the Si MW surface can be coated with various passivation layers of SiO2, SiNx, Al2O3, or a-Si. However, the highest VOC achieved by a Si MW solar cell reported to date is 608 mV, which is still low compared with the highest VOC achieved by a c-Si solar cell (744 mV). Even though Si MWs are passivated by a-Si layers that are used in the fabrication of highly efficient HIT solar cells, the Si MWs only achieve a maximum VOC of 591 mV. Typically, an intrinsic a-Si deposition of HIT solar cells onto the (111) plane of pyramidal Si is performed. In contrast with cells possessing pyramidal structures, Si MWs have various crystal planes, such as (100), (110), and (111), on which nanocrystalline Si dots can be grown, thereby cancelling the passivation effect of the intrinsic a-Si layer. However, an oxygen-doped a-Si layer (a-SiO:H) can be placed between the doped a-Si layer and the Si MWs, minimizing the epi-growth on the facets of the crystals along the interface. If HIT Si MW solar cells with high-quality surface passivation are developed, their VOC is expected to approach the theoretical limit of 752 mV.
The separated photocarriers are ideally collected via the electrode in the solar cells. Conventional bus/finger metal electrodes have a large coverage area, leading to optical loss due to shadowing. Moreover, because of the large spacing between the finger electrodes, electrical loss occurs. Accordingly, covering the top of the MW with an ITO layer is an effective way to counter this phenomenon. However, the power conversion efficiencies of MW solar cells are limited by both the high contact resistance between the ITO and c-Si and the parasitic absorption of the ITO layer. A microgrid electrode that could minimize not only the shadowing loss but also the resistive loss caused by the metal electrode has been proposed. Microgrid electrodes can significantly improve the power conversion efficiency of a Si MW solar cell. The high transparency and conductivity of microgrid electrodes yield a JSC of approximately 40 mA cm−2 and an FF of more than 80%. However, these electrodes, although exhibiting high FF values and efficiencies, may not be suitable for commercialization due to their complicated and expensive formation process. In a conventional commercial Si solar cell manufacturing process, the top electrode is formed by a screen-printing method. However, it is challenging to form a screen-printed array of Si MW electrodes with a resolution of several micrometers, which is much finer than the minimum resolution of the screen mask (40–120 μm). Therefore, further effort must be put into forming electrodes that are both suitable for use in Si MW solar cells and commercially feasible. Among existing technologies, inkjet, gravure, and 3D printing methods, through which fine microscale patterns can be obtained via commercialized scaling processes, should be considered for this purpose.
We also discussed how to obtain flexible c-Si solar cells using Si MWs. The thin c-Si substrate, with a thickness of ≤50 μm, shows better flexibility than the rigid bulk c-Si does. However, thin c-Si layers suffer from severe loss of light absorption in the near-infrared region. To overcome the poor light absorption of thin c-Si layers while maintaining their mechanical flexibility, Si MWs were successfully introduced into the high-efficiency flexible c-Si solar cell matrix. Owing to the superior flexibility of Si MWs, the thin c-Si substrates consistently exhibited flexibility, regardless of the MW length. By using tapered 20 μm-long Si MWs attached to a thin (50 μm-thick) c-Si substrate, the surface reflection was suppressed by up to 2% over the entire spectrum, resulting in a JSC of ∼40 mA cm−2 and an efficiency of 18.9%. For high flexibility and less Si consumption, polymer-embedded Si MWs solar cells were introduced. The Si MWs were embedded into the transparent polymer PDMS, which transferred them away from the master substrate. By applying a passivation layer and light scatterers, the calculated efficiency of PDMS-embedded Si MWs solar cells is 17.4% without the c-Si bottom substrate. With further development and optimization, the efficiency of c-Si MWs solar cells without the bottom substrate can be improved. In addition, research is needed to develop a transparent electrode to replace the ITO electrode due to the rigidity, parasitic absorption, and relatively high resistance of ITO. Transparent electrodes that are highly flexible and possesses high transmittance and electrical conductivity are needed to obtain flexible Si MW solar cells. Recently, flexible metal nanowire-based transparent electrodes that possess high transmittance, low sheet resistance, and excellent flexibility were developed. They have been shown to be flexible when formed on the pre-strained PDMS substrates. Based on these developments, it is expected that achieving a stretchable polymer-embedded Si MW solar cell is possible.
However, such a high-efficiency MW solar cell cannot yet be realized commercially. Toward this goal, several challenges and insights have been addressed in this review. These include (1) the development of robust and cost-effective MACE for the mass production of Si MWs; (2) the modification of short Si MW arrays to achieve maximum light absorption; (3) the introduction of CSCs into the Si MW solar cell to obtain highly-efficient p–n junctions; (4) the introduction of an alternative passivation layer to reduce surface and interface recombination; and (5) the development of a reliable and commercially viable metallization process for the front electrode. It is believed that with further research, an efficiency of over 20% can be realized even if low quality metallurgical-grade Si materials with a low minority carrier lifetime are used.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the New Renewable Energy Core Technology Development Project of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) granted financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (No. 20183010013900). It was also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (NRF-2019R1A2C2086602, NRF-2019M1A2A2065614, and NRF-2017M1A2A2087812).
Notes and references

          REN21, Renewables 2019 global status report,  2019 Search PubMed .
P. Yu, J. Wu, S. Liu, J. Xiong, C. Jagadish and Z. M. Wang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 704–737 CrossRef CAS .
Silicon USGS Mineral Commodities Survey, 2008.

          M. G. Mauk, J. A. Rand, R. Jonczyk, R. B. Hall and A. M. Barnett, in 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion,  2003, pp. 939–942 Search PubMed .

          G. Li and H. S. Kwok, in Advances in Silicon Solar Cells, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2018, pp. 269–298 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H. Yu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4888–4900 RSC .
M. D. Ko, T. Rim, K. Kim, M. Meyyappan and C. K. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11646 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Oh, H. C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima, J. Rand, L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser and B. A. Korevaar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 233117, 8–11 Search PubMed .
O. L. Muskens, J. G. Rivas, R. E. Algra, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2638–2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302 CrossRef .
J. Y. Jung, Z. Guo, S. W. Jee, H. D. Um, K. T. Park, M. S. Hyun, J. M. Yang and J. H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 445303 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hwang, H. D. Um, B. S. Kim, M. Wober and K. Seo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 641–647 RSC .
M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, J. M. Spurgeon, E. L. Warren, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1037–1041 RSC .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Tamboli, C. T. Chen, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 294–297 Search PubMed .
H. Okamoto and T. B. Massalski, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 1983, 4, 190–198 CrossRef .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, V. Schmidt, S. Senz and U. Gösele, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 186–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, M. D. Kelzenberg, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 103110 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, J. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2214–2216 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Nebol'sin and A. A. Shchetinin, Inorg. Mater., 2003, 39, 899–903 CrossRef .
C. E. Kendrick and J. M. Redwing, J. Cryst. Growth, 2011, 337, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, R. M. Briggs, J. Y. Baek, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 866–871 RSC .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hannon, S. Kodambaka, F. M. Ross and R. M. Tromp, Nature, 2006, 440, 69–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elbersen, W. Vijselaar, R. M. Tiggelaar, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6781–6796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Warren, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 747–759 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmid, M. T. Björk, J. Knoch, H. Riel, W. Riess, P. Rice and T. Topuria, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 024304 CrossRef .
V. Schmidt, J. V. Wittemann and U. Gösele, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 361–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Laermer and A. Schilp, US Pat., 5501893A,  1996, vol. 6 .
B. Wu, A. Kumar and S. Pamarthy, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 051101 CrossRef .
J. Op de Beeck, W. De Malsche, D. S. Tezcan, P. De Moor and G. Desmet, J. Chromatogr. A, 2012, 1239, 35–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, M. Liao, Z. Wang, Z. Li, P. Gao, J. Ye and W. Shen, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Henry, S. Walavalkar, A. Homyk and A. Scherer, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 255305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Yoon, Y. A. Yuwen, C. E. Kendrick, G. D. Barber, N. J. Podraza, J. M. Redwing, T. E. Mallouk, C. R. Wronski and T. S. Mayer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213503 CrossRef .
A. Solanki and H. Um, Semicond. Semimetals, 2018, 98, 71–149 CAS .
K. Lee, I. Hwang, N. Kim, D. Choi, H. D. Um, S. Kim and K. Seo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14473–14479 RSC .
T. G. Chen, P. Yu, S. W. Chen, F. Y. Chang, B. Y. Huang, Y. C. Cheng, J. C. Hsiao, C. K. Li and Y. R. Wu, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 452–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and P. W. Bonn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2572–2574 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. De Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, K. Q. Peng, L. Liu, Z. Qiao, X. Huang, X. L. Wu, X. M. Meng and S. T. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–5 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, K. Q. Peng, Y. Hu, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1410–1413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Srivastava, D. Kumar, S. W. Schmitt, K. N. Sood, S. H. Christiansen and P. K. Singh, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 175601 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Choi, S. Baek, H. S. Jang, S. B. Kim, B. Y. Oh and J. H. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S25–S29 CrossRef .
H. D. Um, N. Kim, K. Lee, I. Hwang, J. Hoon Seo, Y. J. Yu, P. Duane, M. Wober and K. Seo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, G. Yuan, Q. Wang, W. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Wang and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, A. Lu, R. Zhang and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3026–3035 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, B. Ki, K. Choi, S. Lee and J. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13574–13580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, D. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and S.-H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24242–24246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alaeian, A. C. Atre and J. A. Dionne, J. Opt., 2012, 14, 024006 CrossRef .
K. Q. Peng and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Battaglia, A. Cuevas and S. De Wolf, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1552–1576 RSC .
K. Seo, Y. J. Yu, P. Duane, W. Zhu, H. Park, M. Wober and K. B. Crozier, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5539–5545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hwang, D. Choi, S. Lee, J. H. Seo, K. H. Kim, I. Yoon and K. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21276–21282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Choi, H. Yoon, K. H. Kim, H. D. Um and K. Seo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2192–2199 RSC .
S. Yalamanchili, H. S. Emmer, K. T. Fountaine, C. T. Chen, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1854–1861 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, S. W. Boettcher, R. M. Briggs, J. Y. Baek, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 866–871 RSC .
H.-D. Um, I. Hwang, N. Kim, Y. J. Yu, M. Wober, K.-H. Kim and K. Seo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500347 CrossRef .
A. Richter, S. W. Glunz, F. Werner, J. Schmidt and A. Cuevas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165202 CrossRef .
W. Zagozdzon-Wosik, P. B. Grabiec and G. Lux, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 337–344 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guo, J. Wei, Q. Shu, Y. Jia, S. Song, Y. Xu, H. Wang, P. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 107, 911–917 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, O. Hazut, B. C. Huang, Y. P. Chiu, C. S. Chang, R. Yerushalmi, L. J. Lauhon and D. N. Seidman, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4490–4500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elbersen, R. M. Tiggelaar, A. Milbrat, G. Mul, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401745 CrossRef .
S. Schaefer and R. Lüdemann, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1999, 17, 749–754 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chern, K. Hsu, I. S. Chun, B. P. D. Azeredo, N. Ahmed, K. H. Kim, J. M. Zuo, N. Fang, P. Ferreira and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1582–1588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, Z. Huang and W. Lee, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 271–304 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, P. R. Coxon, M. Peters, B. Hoex, J. M. Cole and D. J. Fray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3223–3263 RSC .

          R. C. Jaeger, Introduction to microelectronic fabrication, 2nd edn,  1988, vol. 28 Search PubMed .
S. H. Zaidi, D. S. Ruby and J. M. Gee, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2001, 48, 1200–1206 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dingemans and W. M. M. Kessels, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 040802 CrossRef .
D. Mikulik, A. C. Meng, R. Berrazouane, J. Stückelberger, P. Romero-Gomez, K. Tang, F. J. Haug, A. Fontcuberta i Morral and P. C. McIntyre, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. R. Kim, C. H. Lee, P. M. Rao, I. S. Cho and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2704–2708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gharghi, E. Fathi, B. Kante, S. Sivoththaman and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Saga, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 96–102 CrossRef .
H. S. Kim, D. B. Patel, H. Kim, M. Patel, K. R. Chauhan, W. Park and J. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 7–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Shin, J. Y. Jung, K. T. Park, H. D. Um, S. W. Jee, Y. H. Nam and J. H. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1756–1760 RSC .
H. D. Um, N. Kim, K. Lee, I. Hwang, J. H. Seo and K. Seo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 981–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bullock, M. Hettick, J. Geissbühler, A. J. Ong, T. Allen, C. M. Sutter-Fella, T. Chen, H. Ota, E. W. Schaler, S. De Wolf, C. Ballif, A. Cuevas and A. Javey, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15031 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17032 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gharghi, E. Fathi, B. Kante, S. Sivoththaman and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. K. Das, M. Z. Burrows, M. Lu, S. Bowden and R. W. Birkmire, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063504 CrossRef .
G. Viera, M. Mikikian, E. Bertran, P. R. I. Cabarrocas and L. Boufendi, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4684–4694 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Ro, R. Chen, R. Liu, N. Li, T. Williamson, J. Yoo, S. Sim, R. P. Prasankumar and S. A. Dayeh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802154 CrossRef .
T. Krajangsang, S. Inthisang, J. Sritharathikhun, A. Hongsingthong, A. Limmanee, S. Kittisontirak, P. Chinnavornrungsee, R. Phatthanakun and K. Sriprapha, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 628, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, M. Tang, J. Wong, Z. Zhang, T. Dippell, M. Doerr, O. Hohn, M. Huber, P. Wohlfart, A. G. Aberle and T. Mueller, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2014, 752967 Search PubMed .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, M. C. Hersam, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Erath, A. Filipović, M. Retzlaff, A. K. Goetz, F. Clement, D. Biro and R. Preu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Sele, T. von Werne, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, S. Lim, H. Zhang, C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Francis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4533–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Um, K.-H. Choi, I. Hwang, S.-H. Kim, K. Seo and S.-Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 931–940 RSC .
J. H. Seo, H.-D. Um, A. Shukla, I. Hwang, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang, C. S. Kim, M. Song and K. Seo, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 122–129 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoo, J. Y. Kim, J. A. Lee, J. S. Kim, D. K. Lee, K. Kim, J. Y. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim, W. M. Kim, J. H. Kim and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3760–3771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, R. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 RSC .
P. J. Ribeyron, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–2 Search PubMed .
S. Zhou, Z. Yang, P. Gao, X. Li, X. Yang, D. Wang, J. He, Z. Ying and J. Ye, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 194 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Branham, W. C. Hsu, S. Yerci, J. Loomis, S. V. Boriskina, B. R. Hoard, S. E. Han and G. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2182–2188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, B. D. Weil, Y. Li, K. X. Wang, E. Garnett, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4393–4398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. E. Plass, M. A. Filler, J. M. Spurgeon, B. M. Kayes, S. Maldonado, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 325–328 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Ko, H. J. Kim, S. J. Lee, J. H. Lee and H. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46634–46642 RSC .
J. H. Seo, I. Hwang, H.-D. Um, S. Lee, K. Lee, J. Park, H. Shin, T.-H. Kwon, S. J. Kang and K. Seo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701479 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, S. Wang, S. Wang, G. Liu, T. Cao and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902922 CrossRef .
H. S. Liu, B. C. Pan and G. S. Liou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2633–2639 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Han-Don Um	Dr. Han-Don Um received his B.S. (2006) in chemical engineering and Ph.D. (2013) in bio-nanotechnology from Hanayng University. He was a post-doctoral researcher in energy engineering at the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), 2013–2016. He studied nano-/micro-structured Si and dopant-free crystalline Si solar cells. He is currently a research associate in electrical engineering at Harvard University. His main research interests are nanostructure-based optoelectronics for applications such as photodetectors, image sensors, and chemical/bio sensors.
Kangmin Lee	Kangmin Lee received a B.S. degree from the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2014. He is a Ph.D. candidate in the department of energy engineering at UNIST. His main research interests are transparent crystalline silicon photovoltaics, transparent electronics, and silicon nano/micro-structure-based devices.
Inchan Hwang	Inchan Hwang is a Ph.D. candidate at the Department of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). He received a bachelor's degree from the Department of Fine Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry at Chungnam National University in 2013. His research interests include flexible and stretchable photovoltaics based on crystalline silicon.
Jeonghwan Park	Jeonghwan Park received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Green Energy engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2015. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at UNIST. His research focuses on flexible transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs), transparent energy devices using crystalline silicon, and c-Si solar cell modularization.
Deokjae Choi	Deokjae Choi received his bachelor's degree from the Department of Energy Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2015. He is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Energy Engineering at UNIST. He is currently working on the development of dopant-free photodiodes such as solar cells, photosensors, etc. Also, he is interested in the study of optical interference in nano/micro-structures of semiconductors for various optical devices.
Kwanyong Seo	Prof. Kwanyong Seo has been an associate professor in the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) since 2013. He received a B.S. degree in chemistry from the Korea National University of Education in 2002 and a Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from KAIST in 2008. From 2009 to 2013, he was a postdoctoral research fellow in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard University. His current research interests include nano- and micro-structures based energy devices, including functional energy devices, such as flexible and transparent solar cells and PV-battery hybrid systems.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the vapor–liquid–solid growth mechanism. (b) Schematic phase diagram of Au–Si systems.18 Copyright 1964, AIP.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of VLS-grown Si MWs with (a) 2.5 μm and (b) 5 μm diameter. (c) Diameter of the silicon wires as a function of the volume of the gold catalyst. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fabrication process of Si MWs via VLS growth. (b) Schematic of the patterned VLS growth process. (c) SEM image of Si MWs grown from SiCl4 with Cu as the VLS catalyst. The inset shows the catalyst balls on top of the wires after growth. Inset scale bar represents 10 μm. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2007, AIP.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Temperature dependence of the growth rate of silicon wires formed by VLS growth. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2008, AIP. (b) Silicon wire growth rate by VLS growth versus the pitch size between Si MWs. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematics of the Bosch process. (b) SEM image of the scallop on the sidewall as a result of the Bosch process. (c) High-magnification SEM image of the MW tip.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of different lithography processes for Si MW etching.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) Schematics of different shapes of Si MWs depending on the ratio of SF6 and C4F8 gas. (d) Cross-sectional SEM images of MWs of different lengths from 10 to 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
H2O2 + 2H+ → 2H2O +2h+	(1)
Si + 4h+ + 6HF → SiF2−6 + 6H+	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Fabrication process of Si MWs via MACE.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Length of Si wire over etching time. (b) Length of the Si wire versus the temperature of the etching solution. (c) SEM images of Si wires fabricated with MACE. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of Si MWs fabricated with MACE with (a) 15 nm, (b) 50 nm, (c) 30 nm, and (d) 40 nm-thick Au film. Top-view SEM images of Au films with 30 nm thickness deposited at rates of (e) 1 Å s−1 and (f) 3 Å s−1. The inset of panel f shows the high magnification SEM image of the porous Au film. Cross-sectional SEM images of Si MWs fabricated with MACE with a 30 nm-thick Au film deposited at (g) 1 Å s−1 and (h) 3 Å s−1 deposition rate. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group.	 

VLS	• High-purity Si MWs can be obtained	• Wire growth is limited by the crystal orientation of the Si substrate
• The Si substrate can be reused	• A high-temperature process (>400 °C) is required
• Metal catalyst impurities remain after VLS growth


DRIE	• The etching of Si is independent of the crystal orientation of the Si substrate	• The process cost is high
• Si MWs with a uniform height and diameter are fabricated on large-sized wafers (e.g., 6 inch)	• Plasma-induced surface damage and scallops could reduce the lifetime of minority carriers


MACE	• Expensive etching equipment is not required	• The etching behavior of this method depends strongly on the crystal orientation of the c-Si wafer and the concentration of its dopant
• High-quality Si MWs can be fabricated without plasma-induced damage or scallops	• An expensive metal catalyst, such as Au or Ag, is required

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic image of optical phenomena occurring in Si MWs. (b) Simulated ultimate efficiency of 20 μm-long Si wires as a function of wire radius and filling factor. (c) Ultimate efficiency of Si wires with diameters of 50 nm, 200 nm, and 3 μm as a function of Si wire length. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2012, IOP Publishing. (d) Absorption spectra of Si MWs with various MW lengths. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of the conformally coated SiO2 layer on the surface of Si MWs. Scale bar indicates 300 nm. (b) Reflection spectra of Si MWs with and without the SiO2 layer. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c and d) SEM images of Si NWs on the top area of Si MWs. (e) Photographs of planar and pristine Si MWs, and Si MWs with Si NWs. (f) Reflection spectra of Si MWs with and without Si NWs. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM images of tapered Si MWs fabricated with ICPRIE. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Diameter profile of tapered Si MWs from top to bottom of the MWs. Reflection spectra of (c) tapered and (d) non-tapered Si MWs with different lengths. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematics of light absorption and photocarrier separation in (a) conventional planar and (b) radial junction devices. α and Ln represent the absorption coefficient and the diffusion length of electron, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematics of proximity doping process using SOD.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) Schematics of SIMS characterization of planar and wire surfaces. (c) SIMS analysis of planar and wire solar cells, showing a higher dopant concentration in wire structures. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2012, Springer. 2D concentration plots of Si NWs with diameters of (d) 75 nm and (e) 55 nm. Colors pink, brown, and blue indicate the phosphorus, carbon, and boron atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (f) Selectively etched MWs after the MW was cut in half by a FIB, revealing the junction. (g) Finite element method (FEM) simulations of a radial junction in a Si MW. All the scale bars represent 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cross-sectional low-voltage SEM image of both NW- and MWs (2 μm scale bar). (b) False colored image of (a), where the lighter (or darker) regions are colored red (or blue). Green indicates unconverted areas with conversion errors. (c) One-dimensional contrast intensity along the yellow line in (a), which matches the SIMS profile. (d) Schematic of the tapered NW, MWs, and both NWs and MWs. Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2010, IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) VOC as a function of RF power: VOC decreases with increasing RF power and DC bias. (b) Effective minority charge carrier lifetimes of Si after removing damaged Si. Removal of about 20 nm of damaged Si leads to recovery of the effective minority charge carrier lifetimes. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 1999, AIP. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns along the [110] zone axis of Si NWs etched in different etching solutions, showing the nanowire axial directions as 〈111〉 and 〈100〉 for (c) and (d), respectively. The dashed white line shows the interface between the Si and SiO2 layers. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 


	≪ 1:1	1.5:1–2:1	2.5:1–3:1	3:1–3.25:1	3.25:1–3.5:1	3.5:1–4:1	≫4:1
(100) Si wafer	No pattern	Porous vertical 〈100〉	Vertical 〈100〉	Slanted 〈110〉	Slanted 〈111〉	Porous slanted 〈111〉	No pattern
(110) Si wafer	No pattern	Porous slanted 〈100〉	Slanted 〈100〉	Vertical 〈110〉	Slanted 〈111〉	Porous slanted 〈111〉	No pattern
(111) Si wafer	No pattern	Porous slanted 〈100〉	Slanted 〈100〉	Slanted 〈110〉	Vertical 〈111〉	Porous vertical 〈111〉	No pattern

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM images of vertical Si MWs before Si wet-etching. 30 degree tilted view of Si MWs after (b) 1 s and (c) 10 s of etching. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (d) Extracted density of the interface state for three different passivation designs using the full interface method: (i) 4 nm Al2O3 cap (black star and dash line); (ii) 4 nm Al2O3 cap and surface pretreatment (red circle and dash line); (iii) 4 nm Al2O3 cap, surface pretreatment and etching 500 nm of previously formed thermal SiO2 (blue square and dash line). Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  SPCM characterization of minority-carrier recombination in Si MW radial junction solar cells. Schematic illustration (top) and SPCM images (bottom) for MWs with surfaces passivated with (a) buffered HF, (b) a-Si:H, and (c) a-SiNx:H. (d) Current density–voltage characteristics of the single-MW structures of each surface passivation type. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic illustration of a-Si/c-Si Si MW solar cells. (f) Current density–voltage characteristics of the a-Si/c-Si Si MW solar cells from passivation strategies. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Maps of measured apparent lifetime for heterojunction film deposition at (g) 140 °C and (h) 180 °C on high quality planar wafers; insets show TEM images of the interface. The area of the map is ∼2 × 2 cm, and the scale bars of TEM insets are 5 nm. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of Si MWs with a metal oxide layer on the top of MWs. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of wrap-around metal contact for Si MW solar cells. (c) SEM image of the wrap-around metal contact near the wire bottoms. (d) Plots of FF and ΔF (=pseudo FF − FF) as a function of metal thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic and (b) optical image of Si MW solar cells with an edge electrode. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic and (d) SEM image of Si MW solar cells with a microgrid electrode. (e) Optical transmission (black line with squares) and sheet resistance (blue squares) of the microgrid as a function of grid spacing. The inset shows the optical image of the microgrid on a glass substrate. (f) Current density–voltage curves of Si MWs solar cells with the microgrid electrode measured using a solar simulator (red) and a Suns–VOC (blue line). The inset shows the SEM image of a plated Ni film of the microgrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) SEM image of the random pyramidal structures with crack initiation sites; (b) bending radius results of random pyramidal structured and planar thin c-Si substrates with different thicknesses from 50 to 80 μm. (c) Calculated stress distribution of a thin c-Si film with Si MWs using finite element method simulation. (d) Bending radius results of the planar thin c-Si film with various thicknesses from 50 to 80 μm and thin c-Si film (50 μm thickness) with various lengths of MWs from 0 to 30 μm. (e) Absorption spectra of the thin c-Si film with increasing length of MWs from 0 to 30 μm. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Current density–voltage curves and (b) internal quantum efficiency of tapered MWs based thin c-Si solar cells. (c) Photovoltaic properties of tapered MW based flexible c-Si solar cell after repeated bending test. (d) Current–voltage and power–voltage curves of the flexible module. (e) Photographs of a battery free electronic watch powered by the flexible module using the tapered MW based flexible c-Si solar cells. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) SEM image of vertically aligned Si MWs fabricated by the VLS growth method. (b) Schematic images of the fabrication process of PDMS embedded Si MWs. (c) Optical and SEM images of PDMS embedded Si microwires. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2009, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic and (b) simulated current–voltage curve of polymer-embedded Si MWs solar cell without the Si substrate (49 μm2 area). Copyright 2011, RSC. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
