Performance degradation and mitigation of high temperature polybenzimidazole-based polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CS00072A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CS00072A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 4046-4070Performance degradation and mitigation of high temperature polybenzimidazole-based polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells

        
          
            Nedjeljko 
            Seselj
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Aili
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sanser 
            Celenk
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lars N. 
            Cleemann
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hans Aage 
            Hjuler
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jens Oluf 
            Jensen
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kobra 
            Azizi
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Qingfeng 
            Li
          
          
        
      *b
aBlue World Technologies, Egeskovvej 6C, 3490 Kvistgård, Denmark. E-mail: kaz@blue.world; qfli@dtu.dk
bDepartment of Energy Storage and Conversion, Technical University of Denmark, Fysikvej, Building 310, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Received 
      1st February 2023
    First published on 30th May 2023AbstractTo meet challenges associated with climate changes due to the continuous increase in global energy demand, implementation of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies, especially the polymer electrolyte membrane type, are recognized as potential solutions. The high temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell based on acid doped polybenzimidazoles has attracted enormous R&D attention due to the simplified construction and operation of the power system. In order to improve the reliability and lifetime of the technology, studies on material degradation and mitigation are essential. The present work is a comprehensive review of the current knowledge on degradation mechanisms of the fuel cell components including the acid loss, polymer oxidation and catalyst instability due to the metal dissolution and carbon support corrosion. The durability results are updated according to the categories of steady state and dynamic operations. Durability protocols, diagnostic techniques and mitigation strategies are also discussed.
Nedjeljko Seselj
Nedjeljko Seselj has a background in materials science, electrochemistry, and nanomaterial synthesis. His research has focused on technologies within the energy conversion field e.g., super- and pseudocapacitors, PEM fuel cells and water electrolysis. He was awarded a PhD degree in chemistry, for a study on graphene-supported, Pt-based nanocatalyst syntheses, applied in low-temperature PEM fuel cells. Nedjeljko Seselj currently works as senior scientist at Blue World Technologies, where his research encompasses: low/high-temperature PEM fuel cells, acid/alkaline water electrolysis, catalyst development, electrode structure studies and cell testing. He is also a project manager for several energy conversion technology-based external projects, collaborating with international universities and industries.
David Aili
David Aili, senior researcher, has an educational background in chemistry, and obtained his PhD from DTU Chemistry in 2011. Following a period in the polymer industry in Sweden, he joined DTU Energy in 2012. His field of research spans from fundamental chemistry and polymer science to catalysis and electrochemical conversion in the context of electrolysis, power-to-X, CO2 capture/utilization, fuel cells and flow batteries.
Sanser Celenk
Sanser Celenk obtained his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from Gazi University, Turkey in 2016. He is currently a PhD student at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). He works on high temperature PEM fuel cells.
Lars N. Cleemann
Lars Nilausen Cleemann is Team Lead material development at Blue World Technologies. His main focus area is development of materials for HT-PEM systems, to enhance durability and performance. He received his PhD in electrochemistry from the Technical University of Denmark, in 2009 and has been working within the field of HT-PEM fuel cells, since then, first within academia and for the last year at Blue World Technologies.
Hans Aage Hjuler
Hans Aage Hjuler, graduated from Chemistry Department, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 1980. PhD degree (rechargeable batteries) was awarded from DTU in 1983. He worked for DTU until 1991. From 1991 he worked in industry, mainly for NKT and Novo Nordisk in Denmark. In 1994 he was co-founder of Danish Power Systems (DPS). From 2010 he has been the CEO of the company. DPS merged with Blue World Technologies in 2021 and Hans Aage Hjuler was appointed Chief Scientific Officer. He has published more than 200 papers, conference contributions and patents.
Jens Oluf Jensen
Jens Oluf Jensen has materials science, electrocatalysis and electrochemistry as main research fields. The approach is experimental, addressing technologies within energy conversion with a focus on hydrogen energy, high temperature PEM fuel cells and alkaline water electrolysis. He was awarded his PhD degree for a study on metal hydrides. The research on fuel cells and electrolyzers includes ion conducting membranes (acidic and alkaline), catalysts (noble metal based and noble metal free), electrode structures and cell testing with an emphasis on durability. He is the founder of the conference series International Conference on Electrolysis. At DTU Energy, he teaches hydrogen energy and fuel cells as well as thermodynamics. He is the coordinator of the development of low temperature electrolyzers at the department and of the Master study line Energy Conversion and Storage and editorial board member of several scientific journals including Electrocatalysis.
Kobra Azizi
Kobra Azizi got a PhD degree in Chemistry (2015) from Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, working in catalysis, and completed her formation with a postdoctoral stay at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in Lyngby (2017–2019). Since 2020 she has been working as a senior scientist at Danish Power Systems/Blue World Technologies, Kvistgaard, Denmark. The company is devoted to the development and manufacture of methanol fuel cell components and systems for the automotive and heavy-duty transportation sectors and stationary applications around the world. In addition to various aspects of organic/inorganic synthetic and supramolecular chemistry, Azizi current research interests include the development of new membranes for high temperature fuel cells. She has published more than 50 scientific papers in international journals in organic synthesis, homogenous and heterogeneous catalysis, batteries, high temperature fuel cells and solar cells.
Qingfeng Li
Qingfeng Li is a full professor at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). His research areas include proton conducting electrolytes, electrocatalysts and the related technologies. He received his Ph.D. in Electrochemistry from Northeastern University, China, in 1990 and was awarded Doctor Degree of Technices at DTU in 2006. He started the research on high-temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFC) at DTU and has participated/coordinated more than 20 EU and Nordic research projects within the fuel cell area including the 4 M Centre devoted to fundamental research for HT-PEMFCs, funded by Innovation Fund Denmark.
1. Introduction
Energy consumption and climate change due to uses of fossil fuels are of global concern and have stimulated worldwide research on clean, efficient, and sustainable energy technologies. Hydrogen and fuel cells (FC) have been recognized as a possible solution and have reached maturity in provision of practical power for stationary and portable applications. Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) are the predominant type for automobile applications, which are commercially available from several automobile companies.1 This technology is based on perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) type membranes e.g., Nafion® and often referred to as the low temperature PEMFC (LT-PEMFC). The membrane material has high conductivity, excellent chemical stability, mechanical strength and flexibility, and has demonstrated long-term durability, however, it functions only in a highly hydrated state. The technology, therefore, is limited to operation at temperatures up to around 80 °C under ambient pressure in order to maintain a high-water content in the membrane. Challenges due to the low operating temperatures include system complexities for water and thermal management as well as establishment of a hydrogen infrastructure and poor fuel or oxidant impurity tolerance.2
The water management is associated with the fact that the FC operates at temperatures close to the water boiling point and hence involves a two-phase system, i.e., water vaporizes at low humidities and condenses at high humidities. The thermal management is an issue as the cooling duty is defined as the ratio of generated heat of a stack to the temperature difference between the stack and the atmosphere (Q/ΔT), which implies that an intensive cooling technique is needed when a FC operates at temperatures of 60–80 °C. At this temperature any contamination of e.g., CO, NOx or sulfur containing species in either reformate fuel or the atmospheric air is poisoning the catalysts. These issues as well as the kinetics for electrode reactions are expected to improve at higher temperatures.
High temperature (HT)-PEMFCs based on phosphoric acid (PA) doped polymer membranes of polybenzimidazole (PBI) have attracted increasing attention. PBI is a class of heat-resistant heterocyclic thermoplastics3 while PA is the dopant that combines high intrinsic proton conductivity with thermal stability and low volatility.4 Poly(2,5-benzimidazole) (AB-PBI), as shown in the PA doped form in Fig. 1, is the most structurally simple polymer in this family of polymers. However, poly-(2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole) (m-PBI) and poly(2,2′-(p-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole) (p-PBI) have been more widely used due to their higher solubility in organic solvents and better processing characteristics. Two approaches are usually used to prepare acid doped PBI membranes, one by casting membranes from an organic polymer solution followed by post doping in an aqueous acid solution, the other by direct casting from a polymer solution in polyphosphoric acid (PPA) via a sol–gel process. Catalysts are, like for LT-PEMFC, based on carbon supported platinum and its alloy nanoparticles, bonded with polymeric binders5 and coated on a porous substrate, called a gas diffusion layer (GDL). Between the catalyst and gas diffusion layers is a microporous layer to make the GDL resistant to liquid penetration.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structure of AB-PBI (top), m-PBI (center) and p-PBI (bottom) in an environment of PA and water. 
The HT-PEMFC operating at 150–200 °C is able to tolerate about 3% CO in the fuel stream, compared to the tolerance level of about 10–100 ppm CO for LT-PEMFCs (80 °C).6,7 This is arguably the most relevant and beneficial feature of this technology. The robustness in fuel selection enables the system to be used for electricity generation from hydrogen-rich reformate gases containing CO, residual methanol and other impurities.8 One of the shortcomings for HT-PEMFCs is the slow kinetics of oxygen reduction in the presence of phosphoric acid, which strongly adsorbs on the platinum catalyst surface, an issue well known from phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFCs). As a result, HT-PEMFCs always exhibit a low power density. Operating with methanol reformate with typical compositions of 69.2% H2, 22.3% CO2, 1.4% CO and 6.9% H2O under ambient pressure, the state-of-art (SoA) performance of commercial Dapozol® or Celtec MEAs is about 0.67–0.70 V at 0.2 A cm−2 and a peak power density of 0.45–0.50 W cm−2 at around 1.0 A cm−2, at a relatively high platinum loading of 0.7–1.0 mg cm−2 on each electrode.9
Since the first report in 1995,10 FCs and related technologies of this type have been developed with operating features including little need for humidification, high CO tolerance and therefore simpler integration with fuel processing units. Additionally, the high temperature can potentially allow for a better utilization of the waste heat.
The durability is recognized as the most critical issue to be addressed before widespread commercialization of the technology can become a reality. During operation all FC components experience a degradation in performance, which can be either reversible or irreversible, leading to a gradual decrease in power output or eventually a failure of the entire system.
Chemically, FC components are exposed to a very aggressive environment with strong oxidizing and reducing conditions with reactive species such as acids and radicals under practical electrochemical potentials and temperatures. In terms of materials, the durability issues include dissolution and sintering of catalyst nanoparticles, corrosion of catalyst supports, oxidation of polymers, loss of the doping acid and degradation of other components and materials. The durability of these materials is significantly influenced by the applied operating parameters, e.g., temperature, pressure, level of fuel impurities, cell voltage/current, and the thermal, load and startup–shutdown cycling of operation. The nature of different degradation modes as well as experimental techniques for monitoring degradation11 and the influence of operational parameters and protocols12 have recently been discussed for PEMFC technologies in general. For HT-PEMFCs, the presence of PA and elevated operating temperature significantly increase the degradation.
The research and development activities in this area have previously been reviewed13 and recently updated14 by some of the present authors. In 2016, a book exclusively devoted to HT-PEMFC was published by Springer.15 Specific review articles are available in the literature focusing on fundamental issues,16 polymer variants3,17 including AB-PBI18 and other types of membranes19–21 particularly the composites,22,23 membrane electrode assembly (MEA)24 and characterization techniques.25 The perspectives of integration of HT-PEMFC with methanol reformers have also been reviewed26,27 with emphasis on higher operating temperatures28 as well as other applications e.g., hydrogen purification.29,30 Degradation and durability of the technology have been previously addressed.15,31,32 The present work is devoted to a comprehensive overview of durability and mitigation for HT-PEMFCs based on PA doped PBI membranes. Emphasis is placed on updating new insights in understanding the mechanisms of material degradation as well as recent progress in improving the performance and lifetime of the technology.
2. Components degradation mechanisms
Major factors that are reducing the durability of PBI cells include the loss of doping PA, polymer oxidation and membrane thinning, and platinum nanoparticle growth and hence active surface area decrease. Operational parameters like level of fuel impurities, temperature, and load modes, particularly startup and shutdown, deteriorate the FC components and result in performance degradation. Compared to LT-PEMFCs, the presence of PA and the higher operating temperature aggravates all these material issues. In this section, the mechanisms and their interactions related to degradation of HT-PEMFC are treated in more detail.
2.1 Acid loss
The membrane conductivity in HT-PEMFC is achieved via the acid doping, the loss of which is a major cell performance degradation mechanism. Compared to LT-PEMFC technologies, PBI cells exhibit a relatively large ohmic resistance, depending on the specific conductivity and the thickness of the membrane electrolyte. In this section the acid loss mechanisms and its significance are discussed in terms of acid doping, conductivity, migration, evaporation and operational parameters such as temperatures, current density and gas stoichiometries.

2.1.1 Ohmic resistance in PBI cells. 
For LT-PEMFCs, the PFSA membranes, often in the polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) reinforced composite form, are in thickness of below 25 μm with resultant area specific resistance about 20–40 mΩ cm2.33 For PA doped PBI membranes, the proton conductivity depends on the acid doping level (ADL), which was about 5–6 H3PO4 per PRU in the early years when low molecular weight PBI was used.34 With high molecular weight polymers, the ADL can be further increased to the current trend of 11–12 H3PO4 per PRU.3,14 It provides a proton conductivity of about 0.1 S cm−1 at temperatures around 160 °C. Although the high ADL increases the conductivity it also results in decreased mechanical robustness of the membranes.35 Strategies for improving mechanical stability at high acid contents will be discussed in more detail in Section 2.2.5. Even though the conductivity of PA doped PBI is comparable to that of PFSA membranes, the typical membrane thicknesses of 40–100 μm result in relatively large ohmic resistances around 100 mΩ cm2, which is higher than that for LT-PEMFCs.


2.1.2 Acid doping. 
As an amphoteric polymer, pure PBI in the form of dense films absorbs up to around 20 wt% of water, which is driven by the development of hydrogen bonds between the water molecules and the benzimidazole moieties.36 The water uptake corresponds to about 3 water molecules per PRU. As evidenced by 1H NMR spectroscopic studies,37 the benzimidazole units are fully protonated when exposed to PA to form a polymeric salt with dihydrogen phosphate as the counter anions (Fig. 1). The proton exchange rate between benzimidazole and PA is 9 orders of magnitude slower than between the PA species present in excess.38 Doping far beyond the equimolar composition of 2 H3PO4 per PRU is, therefore, needed to reach technologically relevant ion conductivity. The ADL can be controlled by varying the H3PO4 concentration of the doping solution, as summarized for m-PBI in Fig. 2a. The typical ADL of around 11 H3PO4 molecules per PRU is achieved after equilibrating the membrane in 15 M (85 wt%) H3PO4 at room temperature. The ADL has traditionally been determined gravimetrically, eventually in combination with acid–base titration, but a new Raman spectroscopic method allows for monitoring the status and progress of the doping process in a non-destructive manner.39
 Fig. 2  (a) Sorption isotherm for m-PBI in 85% H3PO4 at 25–30 °C,40–44 and (b) ion conductivity at 160 °C for m-PBI as function of ADL under non-humidified conditions.35,40,45–53 The different markers refer to data sets from different sources, and the reader is referred to the original references for full experimental details. 


2.1.3 Water vapor pressure and acid condensation. 
PA has a high intrinsic thermal stability, but concentrated PA undergoes dehydration at elevated temperatures, by condensation to dimers, trimers and polymers. Water is liberated in this process, and it can be reversed if the water partial pressure is high enough. As water is generated during FC operation and present in the fuel stream if the cell is fed with methanol reformate, the acid hydration and dehydration behaviour is of concern because the acid–water composition may result in dramatic changes of the membrane conductivity, phase equilibria as well as the electrolyte acidity and electrode kinetics. In literature, water vapor pressure data over the acid are often presented in form of temperature–composition diagrams for the binary H2O–P2O5 system.54 The saturated water vapor pressure data at 150 and 170 °C are collected and converted into the relative humidity at each temperature, and plotted as a function of that in Fig. 3. Also presented in the figure are a set of data from Melchior et al.,55 who have recently measured the equilibrium water vapor pressure at 182 °C over PA and mixtures of the acid with benzimidazole (bIm) in molar ratios of 3 and 9.38 For pure PA at 182 °C, the equilibrium relative humidity is about 1.4%, corresponding to a water vapor pressure of 150 mbar. The presence of a basic component e.g., bIm is found to enhance the condensation of PA. At a H3PO4/bIm molar ratio of 9, a slightly higher water vapor pressure is needed to prevent the acid from dehydration. When the H3PO4/bIm molar ratio is 3, the equilibrium water vapor pressure is about 10 times higher than that for pure H3PO4.
 Fig. 3  Hydration isotherms of PA and PA-benzimidazole (bIm) mixtures. Data at 150 and 170 °C are from Korte et al.56 while data at 182 °C are from Melchior et al.37 
At 160 °C, the typical operating temperature of HT-PEMFCs, PA in PBI membranes with an acid doping level of 11–12 is estimated to condense to form pyrophosphoric acid, H4P2O7, and higher oligophosphoric acids with the general formula Hn+2PnO3n+1 at a water vapor pressure below about 120 mbar, as indicated by the vertical dashed line in Fig. 3. This number corresponds to an relative humidity of ca. 2%, very close to the practical humidity of the FC cathode chamber operating at an air stoichiometry of 2.0 at this temperature. For FCs operating with reformate fuel, which often contains a significant fraction of residual water from the reformer, PA condensation is effectively suppressed. However, condensation could occur when the cell is operated with dry hydrogen at low stoichiometry, and particularly under OCV conditions when water is not generated at the cathode. The PA condensation is, however, a reversible process though the kinetics is slow and the polyphosphoric acid (PPA) hydrolyzes to ortho-PA provided that the water activity is sufficiently high.57


2.1.4 Acid vapor pressure and evaporation. 
The vapor over a PA solution is primarily consisting of water. The acid content in the vapor phase at FC operating temperatures i.e., 150–160 °C has been estimated to be about 0.7 μbar at 160 °C and 3.7 μbar at 190 °C.14,31 Considering the FC operation with a significant airflow over a period of a few years the acid loss due to PA evaporation is not negligible. At a current density of 0.2 A cm−2 and stoichiometries of λH2/air = 1.2/2.0, these saturated acid vapor pressure values can be translated into an acid loss rate of 3.6 and 19 μg m−2 s−1 as 160 and 190 °C, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Estimated acid loss from the acid saturated air flow (solid line for 0.2 A cm−2 at λAir = 2)31 and measured acid loss from PAFC and HT-PEMFCs. Blue circles were cited from Oono et al.,58 red circles from Søndergård et al.59 and green triangle from Büchi et al.60 
Experimentally the acid loss has been measured by collection of the trace acid carried by the anodic and cathodic exhaust gasses. Acid loss data from PBI cells are rich in literature and vary to a great extent also under much varied conditions, as compiled in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of acid loss measurements




Membrane
Conditions
Time (h)
Acid loss (μg m−2 s−1)
Year
Ref.




AB-PBI (ADL 3.5)
160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, 1000 h, λAir = 2, λH2 = 2
180
(A & C) 0.21
2008

61




p-PBI and 2OH-PBI (PPA process, ADL 26)
80–190 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2.0, λH2 = 1.2
160 °C
1700–2 500
0.02
2008

62



190 °C
800
0.2–0.3


PBI (ADL 6.6)
Three-cell stack, 125 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 3, λH2 = 2
185
3.4
2011

63



1.1


Advent TPS® (not PBI-based)
150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2
360
4.6–5.9
2013

64



Pyridine containing PBI copolymer (PPA process)
180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2.0, λH2 = 1.2
2500
0.6
2014

65



0.04



m-PBI (ADL 9.3–9.6)
160–180 °C, 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, λAir = 4.0–25.5, λH2 = 2.0–22.6
15000
2–59
2018

59




m-PBI membranes (ADL 9.5)
Varied GDLs, 180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2, λH2 = 1.5
5500
2.7–4.1
2018

66




m-PBI (layered, ADL 10–37)
180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2, λH2 = 1.5
10440
2.1–2.6
2020

67





It should be remarked that accurate measurement of acid loss by collecting acid traces levels of a few μg m−2 s−1 or μg cm−2 h−1 is a challenging task, as even tiny amounts of trapped acid in components such as GDLs, bipolar plates (BPPs), flow fields, and tubing can significantly affect the measurement results. This can be observed through the presence of apparently erroneous results in the table. Under steady state operation at a typical load of 0.2 A cm−2 with low stoichiometry hydrogen and air flows at 150–160 °C, the acid loss seems consistent in a range of a few μg m−2 s−1. In fitting the performance degradation at 150, 170 and 190 °C, Oono et al.58 cited a set of data for acid losses in PAFCs, which, as also shown in Fig. 4, is significantly higher than those from PBI cells. A clear temperature dependence trend is seen with the increase of the acid vapor pressure,62 indicating a fact that the dominating mechanism of the acid loss is via the evaporation mechanism, which implies the significant impact of the operating temperature and gas stoichiometries i.e., the total gas flow as the carrier of the PA vapor, and supported by the increased acid loss at higher temperatures and with higher gas-flow rate.59
Another mode of PA loss for cells operated with a direct feed of organic fuels, such as methanol or dimethyl ether, is the chemical formation of organic phosphate derivatives within the membrane.68,69 These alkyl phosphates are less conducting and more volatile than the pure PA, and may be responsible for the relatively fast performance degradation of direct methanol and direct dimethyl ether HT-PEMFCs.70 However, the relatively low methanol slip from the reformer for HT-PEMFCs has been found to have a very limited effect on the performance durability.71


2.1.5 Acid mobility in fuel cells. 
The PA within the membrane is mobile and when an MEA is assembled, the PA redistributes from the membrane into the catalyst layers, leading to establishment of the triple phase boundary at the interfaces.72 It is common that a PBI cell needs a break-in period, when the cell performance slowly improves to reach a steady state within a few hundred hours.73,74 During break-in, PA is driven from the membrane into the electrode structure by capillary forces and the process therefore depends on the microporous structures of the catalyst layer.75 A study by Kwon et al.76 showed that after the break-in period about 15% of the acid in the membrane was transferred into the catalyst layers.
During operation of a FC, the acid electrochemically migrates from the cathode to the anode and is balanced by the back diffusion in the opposite direction. In pure (100%) H3PO4 the proton conductivity is primarily mediated by the intermolecular proton transfer, also called structural diffusion or Grotthuss mechanism, while only a small portion of the charge conduction involves the vehicular mechanism with H2PO4− anions as the charge carrier, i.e., the parasitic movement of acid molecules from cathode to anode. At high current densities, e.g., 800 mA cm−2, H3PO4 droplets were observed at the anode GDL.77 The severe PA redistribution indicates that the electrochemically driven migration is considerably faster than the back-diffusion under these conditions.
By in situ measurements of the acid transport utilizing layered membranes with embedded platinum microelectrodes, the PA diffusion and migration through the acid doped PBI membranes was investigated.78 Under typical FC operation conditions, the anion transference number was estimated to be up to 4%, which is similar to that in concentrated PA electrolyte. The PA diffusion coefficient in PA doped m-PBI membranes was found to be in the order of 10−11 m2 s−1.79,80 This value is about one order of magnitude lower than in aqueous PA solutions,81 suggesting the effect of the dense polymer phase, in which a high acid concentration gradient will be developed upon passage of a current. With PA doped PFSA membranes, which was considered for HT-PEMFC applications before the PA doped PBI system was discovered,82 the consequences of concentration polarization are more severe than in PBI membranes due to a combination of a higher fraction of vehicular proton conduction and slow back-diffusion of PA in the PFSA matrix.83
As discussed by Jakobsen et al.,31 the mobility of PA within the membrane is likely a trigger for further PA loss. Yu et al.62 first reported the increased acid loss at higher current densities, which was confirmed by Wannek et al.72 The phenomenon was also monitored using in operando imaging techniques.84,85 At current densities higher than 0.2 A cm−2, the PA may even penetrate through the catalyst layer and gas diffusion layer at the anode side.85 The consequence of the PA loss is a decrease in the membrane conductivity and hence an increase in the FC resistance. Fig. 5 shows changes of the cell area specific resistance during durability tests at different temperatures, gas stoichiometries and current densities. It is seen that an evident increase in the area specific resistance is observed at about 4500 h of operation at 160 °C, 0.6 A cm−2 and hydrogen/air stoichiometries of 2.0/1.6. When the gas stoichiometries were increased to λH2/Air = 6.0/6.0, an increase in the resistance occurred at about 1500 h. When the temperature was increased to 180 °C and the current density to 0.8 A cm−2 at gas stoichiometries of 3.0/4.0, a much faster increase is observed. As shown in Fig. 2b, the conductivity drops dramatically when the ADL falls below 5–6 H3PO4 per PRU, which could probably explain the sudden increases in area specific resistance in Fig. 5. It should be noted that the increase in the resistance does not need to be all the way across the membrane - a large local increase on one side will have the same effect.
 Fig. 5  Change of the membrane resistance as a function of operating hours under operation at different temperatures and gas stoichiometries. Replotted with data from Søndergaard et al.59 


2.1.6 Acid inventory and lifetime. 
Two types of PA doped PBI membranes are commercially available. One type is prepared by solution casting from an organic solvent, typically polar aprotic solvents such as N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc), followed by doping in an aqueous H3PO4 solution. Membranes of this type usually have an ADL around 11–12 H3PO4 per PRU, as discussed in Section 2.1.2.14 The other type of membranes is prepared by direct casting of the crude polyphosphoric acid (PPA) polycondensation solution followed by hydrolysis of the PPA to PA, which induces a sol–gel transition to give mechanically robust films, as first reported by Xiao et al.48 and referred to as the PPA process. The PPA membranes may have acid doping levels as high as 20–30 H3PO4 per PRU, and allow for the preparation of p-PBI membranes which cannot be obtained by casting from organic solvents due to the low solubility. Assuming a thickness of the PA doped membranes being 60–80 μm, an overall PA inventory is estimated to be of about 20 mg H3PO4 cm−2 for the DMAc type membranes and 35–40 mg H3PO4 cm−2 for the PPA membranes.
From the dependence of the membrane conductivity on the ADL, as shown in Fig. 2b, it is seen that a significant decrease in the proton conductivity occurs when the ADL is lower than, say, 5–6 H3PO4 per PRU. Taking this critical ADL as the threshold of the PA loss, the PA loss related lifetime can be assessed under mild operating conditions, i.e., 200 mA cm−2 at 150–160 °C and stoichiometry of λH2 = 1.2 and λAir = 2.0. Based on PPA membranes, Eberhardt et al.86 estimated the acid loss for an MEA with an initial acid content of 36 mg H3PO4 cm−2 when operated at 160–180 °C at 200–800 mA cm−2 with a stoichiometry of λH2/Air = 1.2/2.0. The conclusion was that HT-PEMFCs operating at 160 °C at up to 600 mA cm−2 may have a sufficient PA inventory for a desired lifetime of 50000 h. At 190 °C and at higher gas flow rates, it was experimentally verified that 90% of the initial PA inventory had been lost after 2830 h of operation.
As discussed in Section 2.1.1, the area specific resistance of HT-PEMFCs is relatively high due to the large membrane thickness of SoA cells. A recent study focusing on reducing membrane thicknesses to 10–20 μm with ADLs of 11–12 H3PO4 per PRU shows that it is indeed possible to construct cells using thinner membranes with acceptable hydrogen crossover rates, as indicated by OCVs of above 0.95 V and clearly reduced area specific resistance.87 However, due to the lower total acid inventory of the thin membranes a large fraction of the PA within the membrane was transferred into the electrode structures during the break-in procedure, which may affect the durability. A rational way to compensate for that would be to use thin membranes with an initially higher ADL or to use electrodes that have been pre-imbibed with PA.
It should also be remembered that contacting with water in the liquid phase results in wash-out of the excess doping PA. Any condensation of water should therefore be strictly avoided during FC operation, start-up or shutdown. Recent efforts are made to enhance the PA retention in the membrane using quaternary ammonium (QA) functionalized polymers.88,89 This leads to formation of QA–H2PO4− ion pairs, which have been suggested to reduce the PA mobility. By exposing the polymer membranes to an inert atmosphere of varying relative humidities, the ion paired membranes were found to improve the acid retention compared with the PA-PBI analogue. Similar studies are also reported by Jang et al.90 showing that the basicity of N-substituted azoles, in addition to the steric hindrance,91 affects the ionic bonding nature of azole–PA pairs and hence the PA retention. The improved PA retention characteristics has also been observed for crosslinked PBI structures equipped with QA functionalities.92 Strategies to mitigate the performance degradation due to the acid loss are discussed in a recent perspective,93 and a few specific examples include use of intrinsically microporous polymers94 or the incorporation of inorganic solid acids,95 surface functionalized inorganic particles,96 or clays97 that contribute to immobilization of the excess PA. Other approaches make use of membranes containing graphene layers98 or densified crosslinked layers99 to contain the PA without compromising the through-plane proton conductivity.

2.2 Polymer membrane degradation
Under FC operational conditions, the polymer membrane experiences stressors that may ultimately result in mechanical failures and thermo-oxidative degradation. The mechanical stressing, resulting from the MEA assembling, thermal and wet swelling/shrinking during start/stop or load cycling, may cause the membrane tearing, cracking or creeping. The oxidative degradation, by hydrolysis, oxygen or radical attack, can lead to membrane thinning, pinhole and hotspot formation, which, in turn, increase the hydrogen crossover, lower OCV and ultimately collapse of the membrane and short circuiting of the cell.100 PA loss is also part of the membrane degradation, instigating the steady decrease in the membrane conductivity, as already discussed above.

2.2.1 Mechanical failure. 
Due to the strong hydrogen bonding between benzimidazole rings, undoped PBI membranes are mechanically rigid. Dry PBI membranes exhibit an elongation at break of only 3–5% and an intermediate tensile strength at break of about 150 MPa at 150 °C. Under an atmospheric humidity, the elongation increases to about 70–80% at expense of reduced tensile strength to ca. 70–80 MPa, owing to the plasticizing effect.101 PA doping causes further softening of the membrane. It is worth noting that the behavior of post-doped and directly cast PBI membranes is distinct, as previously discussed.12 At an acid doping level of 11–12 H3PO4 per PRU, the doped membranes with an average molecular weight of 33 kDa displayed a tensile strength of <1.0 MPa and an elastic modulus of only a few MPa at the FC operating temperatures.102 Mechanical failures are hence of critical concern for the durability of PBI membranes. During FC operation, the humidity and therefore the membrane swelling and shrinking vary with the changes of the FC load. At an air stoichiometry of e.g., λAir = 2.0, the water partial pressure in the cathode stream can reach nearly 200 mbar. After a change of the current density from zero to 140 mA cm−2, a membrane swelling of 20% has been observed.103 From a technological point of view, the most relevant mechanical parameter is likely the creep resistance,65,104,105 as limited creep resistance may further trigger additional PA loss as well as the eventual membrane thinning, as to be discussed below. The HT-PEMFC durability data in the literature show a clear correlation between degradation rates and the use of creep resistant53 or mechanically robust crosslinked membrane chemistries.106–108


2.2.2 Thermal and oxidative degradation. 
The thermal and oxidative stability of PBI is well-described in the literature, mainly because heat resistant fabrics is the largest application area for polybenzimidazole fibers, as reviewed by Chung.109 The initial backbone rupture appears to start from the weak link between the nitrogen-containing heterocyclic and adjacent benzenoid rings.110 The onset of thermal decomposition of the polymer is reported to be around 500 °C from the thermogravimetric analysis, however severe degradation has been observed after prolonged heating at above 350 °C under air.108 To initiate thermal curing of the membrane above this temperature, an oxygen free atmosphere is therefore needed to avoid oxidative degradation.108 Under FC conditions where the membrane is exposed to hydrogen, oxygen as well as platinum nanoparticles at up to 200 °C, the thermal stability has been found to be adequate under simulated conditions.110
During cell operation, oxidative degradation of the membrane seems to play a key role in the FC degradation, compared to the thermal degradation. The type of oxidation is assumed to be due to oxygen radicals. Hydroxyl (˙OH) and hydroperoxyl (˙OOH) radicals are generated from hydrogen peroxide formed from side-reactions at the FC electrodes. To assess the radical-oxidative stability of polymers, accelerated aging tests are often carried out in the Fenton reagent composed of 3% H2O2 and 4 ppm Fe2+ at 68 °C. The mass loss during the test is used as a qualitative measure of the radical oxidative stability of different polymer chemistries. Several data sets from Fenton tests of PBI have been compiled by Aili et al.,14 grouped according to the initial molecular weight of the m-PBI and structures modified by crosslinking, blending or copolymer approaches. In terms of the polymer mass loss after a certain period of the Fenton test, a clear trend is observed that the mass loss decreases with increase in the linear molecular weight of m-PBI. A recent work with p-PBI with molecular weights ranging from 39 to 119 kDa showed the same trend.111 It should be stated that direct evidence for the radical oxidation mechanism has not been reported in literature and therefore any translation of the Fenton test results to the polymer degradation and FC lifetime should be with great care.
It should also be noted that the above discussed Fenton test is typically conducted in the absence of PA. The presence of PA affects the polymer stability in different ways because it changes the protonation state, the polymer chain separation as well as the radical stability and reactivity. Hydroxyl radicals preferentially react with electron rich aromatic sites,112 but the fully protonated PBI in the PA doped state is electron deficient around the benzimidazolium C2 position, with two positive charges per PRU. The overall effect of PA is a significantly reduced degradation rate of the polymer under the Fenton test conditions, as shown by Liao et al.113 This should be taken into account when the Fenton test results are interpreted as a measure of the oxidative stability of the polymer. A recent work114 interestingly reported that an electric field accelerates the breakdown of benzimidazole rings of PBI under Fenton test. It should also be noted that the full protonation along the polymer increases the electropositivity of the polybenzimidazolium C2 position,115 which could lead to increased sensitivity to the hydrolytic chain scission at high water activities. This seems supported by the rapid membrane degradation observed when operated in water electrolysis mode under steam.116 At lower water activities, model system studies on a series of protic benzimidazolium salts show no signs of hydrolysis or other degradation modes at 160 °C over 20 days in 85% H3PO4.117


2.2.3 Membrane thinning. 
Significant polymer oxidation as well as PA depletion is evidenced by membrane thinning after prolonged FC operation. The membrane thinning will result in increased crossover of hydrogen and air, and therefore a lowered OCV of FCs. Several studies based on cross-sectional SEM imaging of tested MEAs seem to support that membrane thinning and collapse are responsible for the faster performance degradation in the later period of the FC lifetime. One example is given in Fig. 6 from Oono et al.118 for cells based on a linear PBI membrane that had been operated at 150 °C and 0.2 A cm−2 for 17800 h. A cell based on a crosslinked AB-PBI membrane was operated in parallel. For the cell based on the linear PBI, a significant reduction of the thickness was observed after 13000 h of operation and the end of life (EoL) thickness of the membrane was about half of the initial value. For the crosslinked AB-PBI membranes, a much smaller decrease in the thickness occurred after 17500 h, indicating the suppression of the polymer degradation by chemical crosslinking. Direct evidence e.g. in situ studies in association with the long-term lifetime test is, however, unavailable while ex situ studies are made using Fenton agents as stressor, which, as discussed above, are not convincingly relevant.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional MEA images with m-PBI membranes (a) before test and (b) after 17800 h operation at 0.2 A cm−2 and 150 °C. (c) Membrane thinning during the durability test for m-PBI and cross-linked ABPBI. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission Copyright © 2013, Elsevier. 


2.2.4 Mitigation by modified polymers. 
Many PBI derivatives of widely different backbone structures have been designed and synthesized, and the structural scope has grown tremendously during the past two decades.3 Crosslinking is one of the effective ways to increase membrane durability, and covalent crosslinking by N-coupling using bifunctional alkyl/aryl halides,119–121 Michael acceptors,122 or epoxides123 is the most studied approach. Alternative routes of crosslinking have also been proposed e.g., via reactions between sulfonated polymers with electron-rich aromatic rings of the polymer backbone in a Friedel–Crafts sulfonylation.124 PBI based polymer blends and ionically crosslinked interpenetrating networks have also been widely explored to tune the membrane properties101,125–127 as well as for the development of PBI copolymers.128,129 It should also be remarked that in parallel to the PBI development, alternative polymer chemistries based on PA doped pyridine containing poly(arylene ether sulfone)s have been developed to a technologically mature stage, as reviewed by Kallitsis et al.130
Thermal curing is a simple technique to obtain crosslinked PBI by heating at temperatures up to 350 °C under an inert atmosphere,108 and the benefit on durability at the FC level has been observed repeatedly.106,107,124,131 As discussed in Section 2.2.2, this may be connected to the improved mechanical robustness and dimensional stability of the membrane, which contribute to reducing PA loss and preventing the sudden membrane failure that has been observed towards the EoL for cells based on non-crosslinked membranes. As also discussed in Section 2.1.6, recent findings support that QA functionalized membranes have the potential to reduce the acid loss,88,89 and the development of PBI-derived anion exchange membranes for doping with PA could therefore be an attractive development path to follow for the design and synthesis of new high-performing PBI chemistries.
Long-term durability tests under continuous operation at a constant current density have achieved lifetimes of 13000–18000 hours, as shown in Section 3.2.4. It should be remarked that these results are achieved by using modified PBI membranes.

2.3 Catalyst degradation

2.3.1 Pt and its alloy catalysts for HT-PEMFCs. 
Platinum and its alloys are the state-of-the-art (SoA) catalysts for both LT-PEMFCs132 and HT-PEMFCs. The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is sluggish in concentrated PA, even at the high operating temperature of HT-PEMFC. This is the dominant factor limiting the FC performance as compared to LT-PEMFC. The reported ORR exchange current density is about 2.2 × 10−9 A cm−2, which is two orders of magnitude lower than the value of 2.8 × 10−7 A cm−2 for the ORR in LT-PEMFCs with PFSA membranes.133 The low ORR activity of the Pt catalysts in the presence of PA is associated to the strong adsorption of the acid molecules via the formation of Pt–O bonds with acid anions (H2PO4−) in the intermediate potential range.134 Beside the slow ORR kinetics in PA, the oxygen solubility is low and oxygen transport slow, which limits the performance further.135,136
A tremendous amount of work has been conducted in last decades in development of Pt alloys, primarily for LT-PEMFCs.137,138 Better catalytic performance has been achieved by introduction of surface strain, defect site for adsorption and coordination, and crystal facet for Pt-based catalysts, as recently reviewed.139 Concerns are the stability of the alloying metal components as well as the carbon supports, as revealed for PtxNi140 and PtxCo catalysts.141 This is probably the reason why only a few pieces of work have been published using Pt alloy catalysts for HT-PEMFCs142,143 though weakening of the adsorption strength of PA by Pt alloying with transition metals has been reported.144


2.3.2 Platinum particle growth mechanisms. 
The loss of the electrochemical surface area of Pt catalysts attributes to significant degradation of FC performance. Several mechanisms have been proposed to cause the Pt particle growth and hence the loss of active Pt surface area, as illustrated in Fig. 7. One is the catalyst coarsening due to the migration of particles i.e., agglomeration or sintering of the metal particles. This mechanism involves movement of Pt adatoms between neighboring particles on the carbon support surface from small particles to large ones, known as the Ostwald ripening.145
 Fig. 7  Three mechanisms for Pt particle growth in fuel cells. (a) Pt particle coalescence; (b) Pt dissolution from smaller particles and redeposition on larger particles; (c) diffusion of dissolved Pt into the conducting electrolyte where it may be reduced by hydrogen crossing over from the anode. 
The electrochemical dissolution of Pt can be a direct dissolution of the metal:Pt ⇄ Pt2+ + 2e− E (V) = 1.19 V + 0.029 Vlog[Pt2+]At high potentials, an oxide layer is formed on the metal surface. The formation and dissolution of this depends on the electrolyte pH and electrode potential:146Pt + H2O ⇄ PtO + 2H+ + 2e− E (V) = 0.98 V − 0.59 V·pHPtO + H2O ⇄ PtO2 + 2H+ + 2e− E (V) = 1.05 V − 0.59 V·pH
The formed oxides are unnstable in acidic electrolytes and can dissolve either chemically or electrochemically with the equilibria as follows:PtO + 2H+ ⇄ Pt2+ + H2O log[Pt2+] = −7.06 − 2pHPtO2 + 4H+ + 2e− ⇄ Pt2+ + H2OE(V) = 0.834 V − 0.118 V·pH − 0.029 Vlog[Pt2+]The solubility of Pt changes with a number of factors such as the electrode potential, type and pH of electrolytes, and temperature. It depends also on the morphology of platinum e.g., nanoparticles or wires.
The Pt ions are mobile in the electrolyte phase. When encountering electrons transported through the carbon support, they can be redeposited on larger particles. This mechanism is also called electrochemical Ostwald ripening. As Pt ions are mobile in the ionomer phase they may also encounter hydrogen permeated from the anode and reduced inside the ion conducting membrane,147 resulting in the formation of the so called Pt band.148–150 The Pt-band formation can, in turn, result in further membrane and MEA deterioration, as revealed for LT-PEMFCs.151
Early year research on the stability of carbon supported Pt nanoparticles in concentrated PA showed little potential dependence of the platinum surface area loss in the potential range below 0.70 V. At cathode potentials above 0.70 V, however, a strong dependence is observed between the platinum surface area loss and the electrode potential, suggesting an increased influence from the dissolution and redeposition mechanism.152 This phenomenon has been recently revisited by Prokop et al.153–155 showing the enhancement of the particle coarsening at elevated temperatures. At potentials above 0.70 V, a combined process of agglomeration/sintering and Ostwald ripening prevails.
In concentrated PA electrolytes at up to 200 °C the dissolution rate and solubility of platinum have been studied. The logarithmic dependence of the Pt solubility (10−7–10−4 M) on the electrode potential (0.8–1.0 V vs. RHE), i.e., the Nernstian behavior of the Pt solubility was reported in 96% H3PO4 at 176 and 196 °C.156 The Pt dissolution rate is estimated to increase by 9 orders of magnitude when the potential is swept from 0.6 to 1.0 V.157 For PBI cells, the PA content in the membrane is limited. Using the PA inventory numbers discussed in Section 2.1.6, it is estimated that the dissolution of the platinum catalyst under OCV can be up to 2–5% of the total catalysts with the loading of 0.5–1.0 mgPt cm−2 in a cathode.14 This number may have significant impacts on the catalyst degradation particularly under the potential cycling mode.


2.3.3 Carbon corrosion. 
Carbon, the catalyst support, is susceptible to corrosion and the main processes have the following standard potentials:158C + 2H2O ⇄ CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− E0 = 0.207 V vs. RHEC + H2O ⇄ CO + 2H+ + 2e− E0 = 0.518 V vs. RHEThermodynamically, carbon can be oxidized at potentials above 0.207 V vs. RHE, leading to release of CO2. Corrosion of carbon causes detachment of Pt particles, which triggers further agglomeration of Pt particles. A side effect of carbon corrosion is the formation of surface oxides, causing a decrease in hydrophobicity of the catalyst layer and possibly PA flooding. Fortunately, the corrosion rate of carbon at potentials lower than 0.7 V is reasonably slow, but it is significantly enhanced in the presence of platinum159 and at elevated temperatures like in HT-PEMFC.58,160 On the other hand, any operation modes involving exposure of electrodes to high cell voltages near the OCV will lead to significant carbon corrosion.
A critical issue is the start–stop of a FC, during which the transition of the H2/air to an air/air mode generates a reverse current resulting in electrode potentials higher than the OCV161,162 and instigate rapid carbon corrosion and catalyst degradation.163 Similar phenomena have been observed during the fuel starvation of a FC. In both cases, extraordinary degradation of the electrode performance, in terms of activation loss due to the Pt particle growth and mass transport losses due to the catalyst layer thinning or even collapse would occur. A significant amount of research on start–stop cycling has been performed and will be discussed in details in Section 3.3.


2.3.4 Catalyst degradation and mitigation. 
A gradual decrease of the cell voltage is always observed during a constant current durability test, which is, at least partly, associated with the decrease of the active surface area of catalysts.100 Migration of PA from the membrane and depletion of acid from the catalyst layer occur after prolonged operation of a FC. As an example, Oono et al. reported that the average size of Pt particles grew from 4.6 nm to 7.9 nm after 17800 h of FC operation at 0.2 A cm−2 and 150 °C, which was accompanied by a voltage decay rate of 4 μV h−1.58 The authors also reported that the thickness of the catalyst layers was reduced from 30 μm to 20 μm, suggesting that a large amount of carbon support was oxidized.
It should be noted that the elevated temperatures accelerate the carbon corrosion while the much reduced water activity in HT-PEMFCs, on the other hand, may give a counter impact. In addition the typical operating voltage of HT-PEMFCs for long-term tests is generally lower than that for LT-PEMFCs. As a result the overall carbon corrosion might not be more prominent for HT-PEMFCs.
Practically the carbon corrosion can be limited by using graphitized carbon, which possesses fewer structural defects and has enhanced support stability and consequently catalyst durability.164 However, this is gained at the expense of the specific surface area of the carbon support.165 Another carbon material with high chemical stability and perspectives for high porosity is carbon nanotubes. Non-functionalized nanotubes are most stable, but difficult to attach Pt nanoparticles to. A way to overcome the latter challenge is to wrap the carbon nanotubes by PBI.166 This was reported to improve the utilization efficiency and durability of catalysts. The polymer acts as an efficient dispersant and produces a stable complex serving as a glue for immobilizing Pt nanoparticles onto the surface of multi-walled carbon nanotubes167 as well as carbon blacks.168,169 An eight times higher mass activity170 and a four-time higher durability171 have been reported. An interesting study by Kondratenko et al.172, on the other hand, showed that the presence of the catalyst binder, PBI or other benzimidazole containing polymers, influences the dissolution rate of Pt in PA at 160 °C.
Alternative catalyst supports have been explored including tungsten carbides/oxides,173 SiC174,175 or SiC–TiC176,177 composites, all showing improved catalyst stability as compared with a traditional carbon-supported counterpart.

2.4 Gas diffusion layer
The GDL is a porous and conductive medium between the flow field or bipolar plate and the catalyst layer, which plays several roles in construction of MEAs. It is typically composed of two layers, a macroporous substrate made of a carbon fibre matrix as the substrate and a microporous layer (MPL) made of PTFE bonded carbon blacks serving as a smooth support to the catalyst layer. The high porosity allows for diffusion of reactants (hydrogen and oxygen/air) from the flow field channels to the active sites on the electrocatalyst, where the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) take place.178 Removal of the product water vapor in HT-PEMFCs179 is through the GDL, for which the hydrophobic characteristics of the GDL is essential. Mass transport as well as the PA retention within the MEA are also issues related to the hydrophobicity.
The degradation of GDL has received limited attention in comparison to that of membranes and catalyst layers. The GDL degradation, in general, undergoes two key changes180,181 of (i) the wetting behaviour as a result of carbon surface changes and loss of hydrophobicity and (ii) the GDL's structure caused by mechanical stress and carbon corrosion. Fabrication of MEAs by hot pressing is known to weaken the GDL and MPL structures. Due to the breaking and displacement of carbon fibers at high pressures, strong compression causes GDL to deform and reduce thickness and porosity.180
Under ordinary operation, the GDL structure degrades by erosion of reactant and water flows, causing losses of carbon as well as PTFE.182 Start-stop and idling of FCs, as to be discussed in the next section, may lead to GDL degradation via carbon corrosion, freezing/thaw or radical attack. Both carbon corrosion and PTFE deterioration cause the surface wettability change (i.e., the loss of hydrophobicity), which, in turn, has an impact on the mass transport process through the GDL.180,183
These GDL degradation mechanisms are evidently exacerbated in HT-PEMFCs. As summarized by Schmidt,184 the carbon corrosion and PTFE deterioration of GDL will, in addition to the known structural damage and hydrophobicity loss, result in the PA imbalance and increased mass transport overpotentials.
It has been recognized that the GDL degradation is accelerated by dynamic load cycling.185 In a load cycling test, Büsselmann et al.186 used the μ-CT scanning to identify the degradation of the PTFE binder and decrease in the tortuosity of the GDL. It seems that the reduction in tortuosity of cathodic GDL in MEAs caused by load cycling conditions primarily affects the binder of GDL and leads to short-cuts in materials. In addition to the activation polarization loss, the carbon corrosion in the GDL, as well as catalyst layer, affects the gas phase mass transport and hence polarization, as observed by Li et al.187
3. Durability – demonstration and mitigation
3.1 Performance and degradation
Degradation mechanisms of HT-PEMFC components, as discussed in the last section, include (1) pinhole formation in the membrane, (2) acid losses by evaporation, (3) membrane thinning due to the polymer oxidation, (4) catalyst layer thinning caused by the carbon corrosion, (5) catalyst particle growth due to physical and electrochemical Ostwald-ripening, (6) catalyst detachment, etc. These mechanisms, except for the acid loss, happen in LT-PEMFCs as well, however the elevated temperature and presence of PA magnify these degradation mechanisms. This is further amplified under dynamic operations such as thermal, load or start–stop cycling, where high voltages are involved.162,188
All these mechanisms are complex functions of the operation conditions, making the identification of a specific mechanism quite challenging. Gaining insight into MEA lifetime limitations is the key for a successful development of mitigation strategies, and reaching the desired lifetimes for both vehicular and stationary applications.
The electrolyte degradation in terms of acid loss and polymer oxidation, on one hand, is significant only under extended time scale unless under intensified stressors such as high temperatures, high current densities or/and extreme gas stoichiometries. Catalyst degradation in form of nanoparticle agglomeration, metal dissolution and carbon support corrosion, on the other hand, is responsible for the initial and steady performance degradation through the durability test period,58,149,189,190 resulting in loss in the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) of the catalysts.191,192 This has been considerably investigated under steady state operation59 as well as under dynamic load.193 It is the experience that a low degradation rate is possible over long-term operation under steady state at moderate current densities,62,106 however, the cells suffer from a more severe degradation under varying operating modes27 such as potentials at or close to OCV, high temperatures, cell potential cycling, start-up and shut-down events.58,149,190,194 In this section the durability test results are categorized into static and dynamic operation, which is followed by a discussion of an additional stressor, fuel starvation.
3.2 Durability under static operation
A large number of durability tests have been performed under static operation i.e., in a continuous mode with a constant load. Table 2 summarizes the key results of the long-term durability of HT-PEMFCs under static operation. Most studies were conducted in a moderate range of operating conditions i.e., a current density of 0.2 A cm−2, temperature of 150–160 °C, dry hydrogen and air with low stoichiometries λH2/Air = 1.2–1.5/2.0. Under these conditions the acid loss and catalyst degradation are minimized. Several groups have performed long-term durability studies in a time frame of up to twenty thousand hours i.e., over a period of 2 years.
Table 2 Summary of degradation tests of PBI cells under steady state operation




Test conditions
Lifetime (h)
Degradation (μV h−1)
Year
Ref.




180–200 °C, m-PBI
>2000
5
2004

195



150 °C, m-PBI
>5000


160 °C, p-PBI (PPA process)
≈18000
5–6
2005

48



160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, Celtec® P1000 MEA
>3000
43
2006

196



150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, AB-PBI
1000
25
2008

61



160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, reformate/air
Single cell
1105
41–149
2010

193



24-cell 500 W stack
658
200–520


160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, m-PBI
508
39


160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, m-PBI
370


150, 170, 190 °C
6400
11
2010

58



1220
60


160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2, PBI copolymers
>2400
2.4–6.4
2012

197



160 °C
0.2 A cm−2, thermally cured membranes
>2000
5–6
2012

108



600 mA cm−2
43


150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, H2 (λH2 = 3.7)/air (λO2 = 3.7)
2000/12000/15 000/17860
<4
2012

100



150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, cross-linked AB-PBI, 33% H2 + 1% CO
17500
<2
2013

118



160–180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, 12 cell (320 cm2) stack
3400
24 (first 2000 h)
2013

198



0.2 A cm−2
160 °C
>6000
4.9–6.3
2013

199



>8000
6–8


180 °C


19


160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, with spiral flow field
1000
14
2013

200



160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2, m-PBI 78 kDa, ADL 10.8
>1500
1.5
2014

35



180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, Py-PBI
2300
5.2
2014

65



160 °C, 0.24 A cm−2, H2/air (Pt from 2–3 nm to 6–8 nm (cathode) and 4–5 nm (anode) and membrane thinning
17000 h
9
2015

201



160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2 Dapozol®G55
Synthetic reformate (78% H2+ 22% CO2)/air
>1000
263
2016

202



H2/O2
270


H2/air
257


160 °C, Dapozol® G55, 0.2 A cm−2, H2/Air
>9000
1.7–3.0
2016

203



200 °C, 0.2 A cm−2
PA-PBI
2450
129
2016

96



PBI composite
2700
27


160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2
Cross-linked PBI
<1300
<9 200
1.4
0.5
2017

106




m-PBI
4.6
2.6


180°C, 0.2 A cm−2, m-PBI
>5500
12
2018

66



160°C and 0.2, 0.6 A cm−2, m-PBI
>4200
13
2018

59



160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, m/p-PBI (7:1) copolymer; λH2/Air = 1.2/2.0
17500
0.67
2019

53



160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, Dapozol®
>2000
12.6
2021

204



170 °C, 0.8 A cm−2, 1.5 barabs, Dapozol®
>12000
9.3


200 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, P1100W
250
102
2022

205



160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, P1100W
1588
15.9




A series of significant studies were conducted at 150 °C and 0.2 A cm−2 by Oono et al. Based on PBI membranes, five identical cells were assembled for testing in periods of 150 h (as reference), 2000 h, 12000 h, 15000 h and 17800 h.100 Until 14000 h a gradual decline of the cell performance of a rate about 3.6 μV h−1, as estimated from the graph, was observed, followed by a more rapid decrease. The performance decay of 10% of its peak value was attributed to the steady loss of the catalyst active surface area due to the nanoparticle agglomeration, while the rapid performance decrease was suggested to correlate with the acid loss and polymer thinning. Another study was based on cross-linked AB-PBI membranes for a period of 17500 h, showing an average degradation rate of 1.9 μV h−1, compared to 3.8 μV h−1 for PBI membranes.118
Such low degradation rates of a few μV h−1 were verified by several other groups. For example, Rastedt et al.206 performed extended long term tests at different facilities under similar test conditions. An average degradation rate of 1.7 μV h−1 has been achieved for the first 3000 h of operation and of 3 μV h−1 for an operation duration of more than 9000 h.189
The work by Søndergaard et al.106 used a thermally cross-linked polybenzimidazole membrane and compared it with the reference membrane based on linear PBI (i.e. no crosslinking).98 The test was conducted at 160 °C and 0.2 A cm−2 for periods of up to 13000 h. The steady state operation was disturbed as little as possible with in-line diagnostics only via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The cell showed an average degradation rate of 0.5 μV h−1 within the first 9200 h and of 1.4 μV h−1 for the full test period of 13000 h. The cell based on the reference membrane showed degradation rates of 2.6 μV h−1 and 4.6 μV h−1 within the respective time span. Another interesting study was done by Pingitore et al.53 based on PPA cast meta/para-PBI copolymer membranes. They reported a voltage decay of 0.69 μV h−1 over a time frame of up to 17500 h.
It should be noted that the low degradation rates over long test durations have been achieved with either crosslinked membranes or alternative PBI polymer chemistries, showing the importance of the polymer stability for prolonged operation of HT-PEMFCs. The following discussion is for durability tests under different stressing conditions.

3.2.1 Temperature effect. 
Operating temperature is a stressor of the HT-PEMFC degradation. Oono et al. investigated the degradation in a temperature range from 150 to 190 °C.58 Compared to the average degradation rate of 3.6 μV h−1 at 150 °C, operation at 170 °C and 190 °C showed 10% of the peak performance loss in a duration of 4400 and 1220 h, respectively, corresponding to an average degradation rate of ca. 11 and 60 μV h−1.
Yu et al.62 studied the temperature effect from 80 to 190 °C, showing the minimum performance degradation rate of 4.9 μV h−1 at 160 °C.51 Operation of PBI cells at temperatures lower than 100 °C is rarely reported in literature. The authors conducted a cell test at 80 °C after break-in and showed a degradation rate of 45 μV h−1 for p-PBI and 14 μV h−1 for a hydroxylated PBI derivative (2OH-PBI) membrane. This is higher than the value obtained at 150–160 °C, apparently due to the presence of liquid water. As to be discussed below, the thermal cycling tests between 80 and 160 °C at 0.15 A cm−2 by Lee et al.89 showed a 3 fold increase (from 0.14 to 0.45 Ω cm2) in the FC area specific ohmic resistance measured as the high frequency resistance (HFR) after 23 cycles.81
A 6000 h study by Galbiati et al.189 reported higher degradation rate (19 μV h−1) at 180 °C, compared to that (6–8 μV h−1) observed at 160 °C.190 At 200 °C the performance loss rate of as high as 102 μV h−1205 and 127 μV h−196 has been reported.
Søndergaard et al.59 reported that the acid loss rate was increased by 2.0–2.5 times when the temperature was elevated from 160 to 180 °C.52 A number of other studies have used temperature as a durability stressor for membrane studies.66,67
The increased performance degradation at elevated temperatures can be attributed the carbon corrosion and platinum particle agglomeration, while the major cause is the acid loss via the evaporation mechanism. Aili et al.207 prepared PBI composites containing nano SiO2, which led to an in situ formation of a conductive PA/phosphosilicate phase and hence stabilized PA and the cell performance at temperatures above 200 °C.192


3.2.2 Current density. 
The current density in a range of higher than the typical value of 0.2 A cm−2 has been shown to increase the performance degradation. In a study with thermally cured membranes at 160 °C over a period of 2000 hours Aili et al.108 showed a degradation rate of 43 μV h−1 at 600 mA cm−2, compared to 5–6 μV h−1 at 200 mA cm−2.100
Søndergaard et al.59 carried out a study of the PBI cell durability in a current range from 200 to 800 mA cm−2, showing increased degradation at higher current densities. The authors reported a close correlation of the degradation with the acid loss. This is understandable since a high current density is accompanied by an increased total gas flow of both hydrogen and air, which are carriers of the evaporated acid out of the cell. Another possible reason is the electrochemical migration of PA through the cell towards the anode is accelerated, driven by parasitic movement of the PA based ions due to the small fraction of the vehicular mechanism (explained in 2.1.5).59,80


3.2.3 Reformate fuel and gas stoichiometries. 
Most of the durability studies were carried out using hydrogen as fuel. As remarked in introduction, there is not yet an infrastructure to produce, distribute and store green H2 obtained via renewable energy. H2 from methanol reforming is a practical source to HT-PEMFCs. The reformate gas, although rich in H2, contains CO2, CO, H2O as well as other trace components. The CO tolerance is primarily dependent on the volume or molar CO/H2 ratio due to their competitive adsorption on the Pt catalyst sites, however other components have additional dilution effects that should be taken into account.
In a number of studies, the effect of fuelling by reformate was investigated. The concentrations of all impurities, unconverted methanol–water vapor mixture, CO and CO2 were varied along with current density according to a multilevel factorial design of experiments. All impurities were found to degrade the performance, with CO being the most and CO2 the least though an interdependence among their effects exists, while methanol showed a poisoning effect on the cell at all the tested feed ratios. Zhou et al.208 studied the combined effect of the CO2 and the water vapor in H2-rich fuels containing CO. Pinar et al.209 used fuel gas mixtures similar to a natural gas reformate containing 54% H2, 31% H2O, 14% CO2, and 1% CO. Araya et al.210 studied effects of reformate gas impurities on the HT-PEMFC performance based on BASF Celtec® P2100 MEAs.
Early year studies e.g., by Wannek et al.61 reported a performance degradation rate of 20 to 25 μV h−1 under operation with simulated diesel reformate (40% H2 and 1% CO). Schmidt et al.196 conducted a durability study for Celtec® P1000 MEAs operating with a synthetic fuel mixture containing 5 ppm H2S, 2% CO, 21% H2O, 17% CO2.196 At 180 °C and 0.2 A cm−2 they showed a performance degradation rate of 20 μV h−1 over a period of 3500 h.
Mocotéguy et al.193 studied the durability of a single cell as well as a 24 cell stack (500 W) using a fuel mixture of 70% H2 and 30% CO2 with or without addition of 1% CO. The reported high degradation rates seem less conclusive since the tests were interfered by the oxidant and fuel utilization. The study by Pinar et al.,202 however, showed quite a similar degradation rate at 0.3 A cm−2 and 160 °C, i.e., 63 μV h−1 for synthetic reformate (78% H2 and 22% CO2) and 57 μV h−1 for pure H2, though both numbers are high compared to other studies.202
The higher degradation rates for HT-PEMFCs under operation with reformate fuels can be related to the higher total gas flow and higher water activity through the cell anode, leading to faster PA loss. Søndergaard et al.59 have shown a strong dependence of the PA loss on the gas stoichiometries. A similar effect is assumed for the high current density operation.
A comprehensive study by Hjuler et al.204 used a synthetic reformate fuel containing 69.3% H2, 22.3% CO2, 6.9% H2O and 1.4% CO at 160 °C. Low stoichiometries (λH2/Air = 1.3/2.5) were carefully controlled.204 At a current density of 0.4 A cm−2 the recorded cell voltage decay over a test period of 10000 h is shown in Fig. 8. The FC performance at beginning of life (BOL) reached the peak of life (POL) of 0.645 V, after the break-in of 262 h. Over the first 4800 h, an average decay rate of only 4.8 μV h−1 was observed over the first 4800 h. It increased slightly to 6.4 μV h−1 for the period from 4800 to 9000 h and then further to 9.3 μV h−1 for the period from 9000 to 10000 h.
 Fig. 8  Cell voltage versus time during a steady state long-term test. The active surface area of the electrodes was 21 cm2. The fuel was synthetic reformate containing 69.3% H2, 22.3% CO2, 6. 9% H2O and 1.4% CO. The stoichiometries were λH2/Air = 1.3/2.5. The cell was operated at 0.4 A cm−2 and 160 °C. Replotted from ref. 204 with permission Copyright © 2021, Electrochemical Society. 


3.2.4 Conclusive remarks of static durability results. 
Many durability tests have been conducted on PBI cells under continuous operation with a constant load at typical temperatures of 150–160 °C and current densities around 0.2 A cm−2. In this temperature range the water formed at the cathode is vapor while the PA vapor pressure and hence the PA loss is sufficiently low. A constant and relatively low voltage is maintained, which implies the minimized catalyst degradation in terms of carbon corrosion and agglomeration. Low degradation rates of <2 μV h−1 have been repeatedly reported by several groups based on both commercial and lab-prepared MEAs. FC durabilities towards 20000 h are clearly illustrated in Fig. 9, where the relative performance is expressed as percentage of the peak power or cell voltage. The longest test of HT-PEMFCs, always with the lowest degradation rate, was reported by Pingitore et al.,49 which was ended at 17500 hours by an accidental stop.
 Fig. 9  Selected durability test results expressed as performance (cell voltage at 0.2 A cm−2) relative to the peak point. Replotted with data from ref. 14. 
A general trend is that, after a peak performance is reached within a few hundred hours a steady initial performance degradation develops, attributable to the catalyst agglomeration as well as the PA loss. The steady membrane degradation, in terms of the conductivity due to the PA loss and membrane thinning, reaches a critical point after a certain period of typically 10000 h, after which a faster performance decay occurs. It seems that the polymer chemistry and acid inventory play a critical role in determination of the end of life. By defining a lifetime as 10% loss of the peak cell voltage, a degradation rate of <2 μV h−1 can be translated to 35000 h, close to the targeted 4000 h for stationary applications. Temperature, current density and gas stoichiometry are all significant stressors of the cell lifetime, the variations and effects of which will be further discussed in the following section. However, as already discussed, it is the experience that the decay rate increases after an extended period of time and thus, any further extrapolation of the lifetime from durability measurements is not justified.

3.3 Dynamic operation
FCs are much more stressed when operating in dynamic modes i.e., with thermal, load or start–stop cycling. The dynamic cycling exposes the cathode to high potentials, leading to severe corrosion of carbon supports and growth of the catalysts. The thermal expansion and contraction of membranes and electrodes create stress at the interface and deteriorate the MEA integrity. In addition, the varying amount of water may change the concentration and volume of the PA in both membranes and electrodes. Moreover during start–stop processes, liquid water might be present at low temperatures, which is believed to enhance the acid leakage.

3.3.1 Protocols and diagnosis. 
The European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking (FCH 2 JU) has suggested a target lifetime of more than 15 years (>130000 h) of operation for stationary micro combined heat and power (μ-CHP) systems, while targets for the transportation sector targets vary between 6000 h (with a nominal power loss less than 10%) for passenger cars and 15000 h for buses. For both stationary and automotive applications, a stable and reliable cell performance is required under dynamic operating conditions.
It is generally impractical and costly to operate a FC under normal conditions for several thousand hours. Accelerated stress test (AST) methods have therefore been developed to facilitate rapid evaluation of key materials and degradation processes. The goal of the AST is to determine the durability and performance of FC components in order to ensure that the generated data can be compared. For HT-PEMFCs, the AST protocols can be categorized into (1) start–stop; (2) open circuit voltage (OCV); (3) high or low level load cycling and (4) thermal cycling.
The start–stop protocols consist of single cycles entailing a cell cold start, baseline operation and subsequent shutdown. The degradation of the cell voltage per single cycle is usually taken as a measure of the cell durability.
Load cycling is divided into low load (0–0.2 A cm−2) and high load (0.2–1.0 A cm−2) levels, focusing on catalyst/electrode and membrane electrolyte evaluation, respectively. The low load operation often involves exposure of the cell to OCV, which is inevitable during the idling of a FC. A well-sealed cell ensures an effective entrapment of reformate during start-up and cool-down, resulting in continuously high OCV values where carbon corrosion and platinum nanoparticle aggregation occur.
Thermal cycling is another stressor for the performance degradation. The high temperature imposes substantial stress on the materials particularly the carbon corrosion, metal dissolution and acid evaporation, while temperatures lower than 100 °C causes extra PA leaching due to the washout by liquid water.

In situ material characterization techniques are of significance here due to the ability to probe various phenomena in real time. In addition to the most often used i–V curves, the EIS is a powerful technique in capturing the effects of operational events on the cell performance, for example where the resistance is accumulating and which cell component is the most impacted.211 Other techniques focus on post-mortem studies, like SEM for membrane and CT thinning, XRD and TEM for Pt NP growth, μ-CT for microstructure, XPS for component interactions, titration for PA doping level determination, etc.25
Literature work on the dynamic durability of HT-PEMFCs is chronologically complied in Table 3 and the following discussion is made by following the protocol categories.
Table 3 Summary of dynamic lifetime tests of PBI cells




Test conditions
Lifetime
Degradation
Year
Ref.




150 °C, H2/air, daily start/stop (7/17 h)
860 cycles, 3.5 years
300 μV per cycle
2004

195



160 °C, daily on/off (12 h/12 h)
240 cycles, 6 000 h
11 μV h−1, 200 μV per cycle
2008

189



160 °C
2 min at OCV
500 cycles
34 μV per cycle
2008

62



30 min at 0.2 A cm−2
28 μV per cycle


30 min at 0.6 A cm−2
41 μV per cycle


160 °C, load cycling 0.2–0.4 A cm−2 and start/stop, Celtec®P1000
24 cell stack
658 h
100 μV h−1
2010

193



Single cell
1105 h
40 μV h−1


180 °C, simulated start–stop cycling, 0.2 A cm−2
157 cycles, 4 000 h
19 μV h−1, 480 μV per cycle
2011

212



Thermal cycling 30 °C/30 min–180 °C/30 min
PBI membrane
150 h
14 μV h−1
2014

213



PBI-PTFE composite membrane
2 μV h−1


165 °C, start/stop cycles, 0.25 A cm−2, 5-cell stack, Celtec P1100W (163 cm2)
1562 cycles, 4 160 h
26 μV per cycle
2015

214



Load cycling 0.0–0.5 A cm−2 for 16 s
100000 cycles, 444 h
34 μV h−1
2015

201



Triangular sweep cycling 0.0–0.5 A cm−2 for 16 s, 2 s OCV
100000 cycles, 500 h
44 μV h−1
2017

215



Constant load 0.22 A cm−2
30 μV h−1


160 °C, low current cycling 16min at 0.3A cm−2, 4min OCV
70 h
363 μV h
2016

216



216 min at 1.0 A cm−2 + 4min at 0.6 A cm−2 + 10min at OCV every 6 h
330 μV h−1


160 °C, 60 daily start/stop cycles, 0.3A cm−2


12.6 μV h−1, 600 μV per cycle
2016

206



160 °C, load cycling 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, Dapozol® MEAs


16–195 μV h−1
2017

217



160 °C, start/stop cycling, λH2/Air = 1.25/2.5, synthetic reformate (74.8%H2, 25%CO2, 0.2%CO), Celtec®-P1100W
1562 cycles, 4 042 h
26 μV per cycle
2018

218



Single cell start/stop, λH2/Air = 1.5/2.0, 160 °C
18 cycles, 1 900 h
60 μV h−1
2019

219



Potential cycling 0.5–0.9 V, 3 min at 0.5 A cm−2 (multiple serpentine)
4821 cycles, 482 h
40 μV per cycle
2019

219



140–160–180 °C thermal cycling at 0.2 A cm−2, 1 h interval
100 h
200 μV h−1
2019

220



High load cycling 0.2–0.6 A cm−2
103 μV h−1


Low load cycling 0.0–0.2 A cm−2
135 μV h−1


Load cycling 0.6 (4 min)–1.0 A cm−2 (16 min)
1100 cycles, 500 h
32 μV h−1
2019

186



Daily start/stop (12 h/12 h), 0.3 A cm−2
20 cycles, 500 h
33 μV h−1


Temperature & load cycling
165 °C, 0.31 A cm−2
240 cycles, >4 000 h
480 μV per cycle
2021

204



175 °C, 0.55 A cm−2
580 μV per cycle


160 °C, triangular sweep cycling
OCV – 0.5 A cm−2, 16 s
100000 cycles, 440 h
30 μV h−1
2021

221



OCV – 0.5 A cm−2, 12 s + 2 s OCV
125000 cycles, 550 h
30 μV h−1


Start/stop cycling in 1.2 h, 0.22 A cm−2
300 cycles
81 μV h−1


1000 cycles
55 μV h−1


Start/stop cycling 12 h, 0.2 A cm−2
600 h
29.7 μV h−1
2021

187



High load cycling 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, 20 min
84 μV h−1


Low load cycling, 0.04–0.2A cm−2, 20 min
115 μV h−1






3.3.2 Start-stop cycling. 
Start–stop cycling instigates additional degradation compared to the static operation mode. Reiser et al.161 identified an accelerated degradation mechanism by the so-called reverse-current. During a start or stop event, the H2/air front sweeps through the anode compartment and instigates a local reverse internal current and hence an electrode potential as high as 1.4–1.5 V, as schematically shown in Fig. 10. This high potential accelerates the carbon corrosion in the catalyst layer, which, in turn, triggers the Pt particle growth and the reduction of the active surface area of the catalysts. Another consequence is the loss of the electrode hydrophobicity and hence the increase in the mass transport resistance. It also accelerates the catalyst layer thinning and eventually leads to collapse of the cathode integrity.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the anode and cathode potential changes during the cell start, stop, idle as well as fuel starvation. 
Another significant degradation mechanism during the start–stop is the electrolyte redistribution due to the volume change of the liquid electrolyte caused by thermal expansion and water formation. Low relative humidities and high temperatures lead to highly concentrated PA while at low temperatures and rising relative humidities the PA concentration decreases due to the hygroscopic nature of the electrolytes. As noted by Schmidt et al.189 the effect of the acid redistribution may be compensated by the polymer phase in PBI cells, compared to the inorganic (SiC) matrix in PAFCs.
An early start–stop test was made by daily operation for 7 h with hydrogen and air at 150 °C and idling for 17 h with simple shutdown of fuel and air and the cell left to cool. Within a timeframe of more than 3 years and after about 900 cycles, an average voltage decay rate of 0.3 mV per cycle was observed.195
The performance degradation of HT-PEMFCs under a constant load of 0.2 A cm−2 with and without start/stop cycles is exemplified in Fig. 11. Within a timeframe of 6000 h with 240 daily start cycles, a degradation rate is 0.2 mV per cycle or 11 μV h−1 on a time basis was observed, which should be compared to 5 μV h−1 for the continuous operation.189 The cells under continuous and start/stop cycling operation exhibited similar ohmic resistance and oxygen reduction overpotential losses while the start/stop cycling led to significantly increased cathodic mass transport loss, attributable to the corrosion of the cathode catalyst support.
 Fig. 11  Cell voltage at 0.2 A cm−2 as a function of time of a constant load without (red circles) and with start/stop cycles (blue squares). λH2/air = 1.2/2, T = 160 °C, p = 1 bara. Reprinted from ref. 189 with permission Copyright © 2008, Elsevier. 
Hartnig et al.212 simulated the start–stop cycling (150 cycles) by passing an alternating hydrogen/air flow through the fuel electrode and measured the air electrode carbon corrosion product CO2.156 They correlated the carbon corrosion with the cathode performance degradation for catalysts with varied support materials and verified the major consequence of the start–stop cycling i.e., the mass transport loss. In a real start–stop test at 180 °C, the cell operated at 0.2 A cm−2 for 16 h and then stopped (at room temperature with no purging gas) for 8 h. After 4000 h with 157 daily start–stops, a voltage degradation rate of 19 μV h−1 or 480 μV per cycle was observed. Compared to the beginning of life (BoL) performance the total degradation loss was estimated to be 31 mV due to the ORR overpotential increase and 23 mV due to the mass transport overpotential increase.
In a daily start–stop cycling test, with operation at 0.2 A cm−2 and 160 °C and idling at 25 °C overnight, Rastedt et al.222 purged the cell with N2/N2 during the excursion at the cell temperature below 120 °C. They observed an overall voltage loss rate of 12.6 μV h−1 or 600 μV per cycle within a test duration of 115 days.
It seems that the overall performance loss caused by each start–stop cycle is generally more than 200 μV per cycle if no mitigation measures are taken, though some authors e.g., Chinese et al.221 have reported a relatively smaller degradation rate. Oyarce et al. studied different start–stop strategies including H2 consumption (fuel shut off with load on), air purge of anode, O2 consumption (air shut off with load on) and H2 purge of cathode.223 System strategies, e.g., flow rate adjustments,224,225 cell potential control,161 nitrogen purging,161,226etc. have also been investigated. Compared to the no purge operation all these strategies showed considerably low degradation rates. While the H2 consumption and air purge on the anode showed limited protection, the O2 consumption and H2 purge on the cathode showed one order of magnitude lower degradation rates.
Kannan et al.214 tested a 5-cell stack by purging the anode with an inert gas e.g., N2, and oxygen consumption on the cathode. The 5-cell stack was equipped with Celtec® P1100W MEAs, having an active electrode area of 163.5 cm2. The total operation time was 4160 h, including more than 1500 start–stop cycles of 15 min/10 min on/off time. A degradation rate of 26 μV per cycle at 0.25 A cm−2 was reported. Each cycle involved 29 minutes of operation at 0.25 A cm−2. Taking the steady state degradation rate into account, the performance loss related to the start–stop events was estimated to be 20 μV per cycle.


3.3.3 Load cycling and OCV effect. 
Load cycling i.e., periodical change of the load level is a commonly used strategy to stimulate a time-accelerated degradation of FCs, particularly the catalysts. The cycling exposes a cell to the severe corrosion of carbon supports and the sintering of noble metal catalysts. Platinum catalyst dissolution, more precisely, the formation and dissolution of the metal surface oxide, is intensified during the load cycling. The metal oxide solubility in the electrolyte is of Nernstian nature i.e., dependent on the cathode potential. The first study on HT-PEMFCs by Yu et al.62 showed that a current cycling led to a more than five times higher degradation rate after only 500h compared to the constant load operation for 2500h. Low and high load cycling operations have since been used as an effective stressor.
The OCV hold is the most destructive stressor of the operating conditions. An exposure of a FC to OCV was reported to exhibit a voltage degradation of over 400 μV h−1, showing significant increases in both the activation and mass transport resistance as well as a reduction of the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the cathode.190,221 Compared to the fresh cathode, an increase of the Pt nanoparticle size by more than 4 times was reported after 245 h of exposure to OCV.190 Li et al. showed similar observations, as presented in Fig. 12.187 The high degradation rate was further verified by Pinar et al.202
 Fig. 12  TEM micrographs and particle size distributions of cathode catalysts after 600 h operation at 160 °C with H2 and air: (A) initial; (B) Cell 1 after start/stop cycle test at 0.2 A cm−2; (C) Cell 2 after high-load cycle (20 min) test between 0.2 and 0.8 A cm−2; (D) Cell 3 after low-load cycle (20 min) test between 0.04–0.2 A cm−2. Reprinted from ref. 187 with permission Copyright © 2021, Elsevier. 
Studies on the low load cycling, typically between 0 and 0.2–0.5 A cm−2 involve dwelling of a FC at OCV.201,206 Instead of OCV (0 A cm−2) some authors cycled the cell with a small current density e.g., 0.04 A cm−2187 or 0.05 A cm−2.220 As long as the OCV or a high voltage near OCV is implicated, higher degradation rates of 100–400 μV h−1 have been reported. Among changes of the activation, ohmic and mass transport polarization losses, the activation polarization is the predominant factor, leading to the overall FC performance degradation.
Similarly, potential cycling studies between 0.7 or 0.6 and 1.0 V correspond to the low load cycling and have reached the same conclusions.149,165 It is noted that for the low load or high potential cycling at near OCV, there is little water formation inside the FC. For prolonged tests, the effect of atmospheric humidity on the PA dehydration should be taken into account.
Schonvogel et al.216 seem the first performing AST under high load cycling. They conducted a load cycling between 0.6 A cm−2 (4 min) and 1.0 A cm−2 (16 min) while for every 6 h the cell was idled at OCV for 10 min. A high degradation rate of 330 μV h−1 was reported, which is comparable to the low load cycling between 0 and 0.3 A cm−2. This is understandable because an idling of cell at OCV is involved.
A high load cycling study between 0.6 and 1.0 A cm−2 without involving the OCV exposure was reported by Büsselmann et al.186 In this case the degradation rate was as low as 32 μV h−1 over a 500 h testing period. Similar degradation rates of 30–40 μV h−1 can also be found in literature as long as the load cycling does not entail an excursion to the OCV potential.62,193
Comparative studies were carried out using a triangular sweep cycling with a relatively fast sweeping rate i.e., 16 s per cycle between 0.01 A cm−2 and 0.5 A cm−2 or between OCV condition and 0.5 A cm−2 with a dwelling at OCV for 2 s.215,221,227 Over an entire test period of 400 h, a degradation rate of 34 μV h−1 was reported for the test without dwelling at OCV. For the cycling test with dwelling at OCV for 2 s, the reported degradation rate was, however, only slightly higher (44–45 μV h−1).
Another interesting study was performed by Thomas et al., who investigated the effect of relaxation time, which is the duration of the low current operation in a load cycling test between 0.2 and 0.8 A cm−2.217 The duration of the high load operation was selected based on the relaxation time in order to achieve the same average current density of 0.55 A cm−2 for the test cells. The authors found that the cell with a relaxation time of 2 min performed the best and showed low degradation rate of 36 μV h−1, which was 63% of that observed under constant load operation. The lower degradation with higher relaxation time was assumed to be due to reduced PA loss from the cell.
It should be noted that, in addition to the catalyst degradation, mechanical stressing of the membrane due to the load cycling has also been detected with e.g., the micro-computed tomography (μ-CT) images and MEA thickness sensing.216 The acid loss varies under operation with high current densities, apparently related to the higher water production, heat generation and gas flows.59 The timeframe of load cycling tests is generally limited to several hundred hours, during which little effect on the membrane degradation was observed. In other words little changes in the proton conductivity or the hydrogen crossover was reported due to the acid loss or polymer degradation during the load cycling tests.


3.3.4 Thermal cycling. 
Cycling at different temperatures is the harshest operational mode for the PBI cell durability testing. First of all the thermal cycling imposes mechanical stresses on the membrane, electrode and their interfaces. The cell voltage varies due to the variation of the catalytic activity and proton conductivity, resulting in catalyst degradation as discussed for the load cycling above. Operation of the cell at temperatures lower or higher than the usual operating temperature, typically 150–160 °C, may also lead to enhanced PA loss. The high PA vapor pressure and hence larger PA loss at higher temperatures have been discussed in Section 2.1.
The PA loss in the low temperature region has also been a concern when water is present in the liquid state. Lee et al.89 suggested that the interaction between PA and water is stronger than the interaction of the PA and the polymer, which makes PA molecules segregate from the membrane in the presence of water.89,228 In a triangular thermal cycling test between 80 and 160 °C with a ramp of 10 °C min−1 under a constant current density of 0.15 A cm−2, the cell voltage was found to decrease from 0.78 V to about 0 V after 70 cycles, which was accompanied by ca. 85% PA loss from the membrane. In comparison to this, a membrane with much stronger acid–base interactions, showing an acid loss of only 40% after 500 thermal cycles.
An early thermal cycling study between 160 °C (2 h at 0.6 V) and 40 °C (2 h at 0.6 V) showed a degradation rate of 6% power loss for every 1000 h, approximately about 200 μV per cycle.13 Park et al.213 conducted a thermal cycling test between 180 °C (30 min at OCV) and 30 °C (30 min at OCV) and I–V curves were recorded every 48 cycles. An OCV decrease of 13 mV per cycle was observed for PBI membranes after 50 cycles while 2 mV per cycle for a PTFE-reinforced membranes after 150 cycles.
Another study by Liu et al.220 was performed by thermal cycling from 140 to 160 and then 180 °C at 0.2 A cm−2 with an interval of 1 h at each temperature step. The PA loss and therefore the membrane degradation were recognized to be the major mechanism, as revealed by the remarkably high PA loss rate of 94.2 ng H3PO4 h−1 and increased hydrogen crossover.
A start–stop test by Hjuler et al.204 also involved the temperature cycling from 50 °C (at 0.01 A cm−2), 165 °C (at 0.31 A cm−2) and 175 °C (at 0.55 A cm−2) and back to 50 °C. Each cycle took ca. 13.3 h and in total, 240 cycles corresponded to a period of more than 4000 h. An overall degradation rate of 0.48 mV per cycle at 0.31 A cm−2 was observed.
Mitigation of the catalyst degradation during thermal cycling between 30 and 160 °C was attempted by Qi et al.,190 who introduced a 1 Ω resistor between the anode and cathode just before the last current load (20 mA cm−2) was disconnected. Upon the current release, nitrogen was purged to displace air through the cathode compartment, with a 6.5 h continuous flow during the temperature cycle. This mitigation strategy resulted in the same cell voltage (0.77 V) at 20 mA cm−2 as before the temperature cycling. After 244.5 h of OCV tests, the cathode Pt particle size increased by 5.3 times, while the anode Pt particle size showed minor change. Extended operation at OCV should be avoided to prolong the life of the high temperature cells.


3.3.5 Other issues of dynamic durability. 
Most of the durability studies under dynamic operation were conducted using dry H2 and air with a practical stoichiometry of 2.0/4.0. High gas stoichiometries e.g., 22.6/25.2 have been investigated,59 which cause extra PA loss due to the evaporation mechanism. As a result, the durability of these cells declined by more than 50% with current densities of 0.2–0.6 A cm−2 at both 160 and 180 °C.
Operation at high current densities entails high gas flow rates and the development of PA concentration gradients across the MEA when the rate of migration exceeds the rate of back diffusion.80 This increases the PA loss from the MEA and acts as another cell durability agitating factor.


3.3.6 Conclusive remarks of dynamic durability studies. 
Load cycling under a constant temperature is an effective stressor and often categorized into low load (0–0.2/0.5 A cm−2) and high load (0.2–1.0 A cm−2) levels. High decay rates of the performance are observed for low load cycle tests, primarily due to the catalyst aggregation and the carbon support corrosion caused by the high electrode potentials. As long as OCV or near OCV potentials are entailed in the load cycling tests, the performance degradation rate can be ranging from 100 to 300 μV h−1. The main mechanism for the performance degradation under high load cycling, on the other hand, is the PA loss, which eventually results in the membrane degradation e.g., the decreased proton conductivity. The membrane degradation, as characterized by the hydrogen crossover and/or OCV observation, is, however, not always detectable during the short timeframe of the load cycling test.
The OCV exposure is one of the most destructive stressors, which may lead to a cell voltage degradation of over 400 μV h−1, originating from significant increases in the activation loss due to the ECSA reduction and mass transport loss due to the carbon corrosion and catalyst layer thinning or collapse.
Start-stop and thermal cycling induce accelerated degradation because of the mechanical stressing of membranes, electrodes and their interfaces. During the start–stop the hydrogen/air front over the anode chamber may cause a reverse current and therefore an excursion of the electrode potential to 1.4–1.5 V. As a result, carbon corrosion and catalyst agglomeration are the major mechanisms of the degradation. It is well documented that a start–stop cycle, without taking any mitigation cautions, may cause a performance degradation of more than 200 μV per cycle. The high temperature tour of the thermal cycling will deteriorate the catalyst degradation. The low temperature region, lower than 100 °C in particular, raises a new issue of the PA leaching due to the liquid water formation.

3.4 Fuel starvation and mitigation
Fuel starvation may occur in many occasions during the operation of a FC. For example, the fuel flow may drop below the critical level,229 when the fuel supply cannot respond quickly enough to a fast load transition.230 Fuel starvation of individual cells in the stack can also be caused by uneven gas flows, which consequently reduces the overall stack potential. Other possible causes to a fuel starvation include start–stop events and malfunction of the H2 supply system and methanol reformer.
Zhou et al.231 operated a HT-PEMFC at 150 °C and a constant current density of 0.4 A cm−2 by cycling the hydrogen stoichiometry between 3.0 and 0.8 every 2 minutes.213 During the starvation (λH2= 0.8) the cell voltage decreased dramatically and eventually reversed. When the H2 stoichiometry was turned back to 3.0 the FC performance was declining and lowered from 0.5 to 0.4 V after 19 cycles, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  (a) The voltage profile of the HT-PEMFC under hydrogen stoichiometry cycling between 3.0 and 0.8 every 2 minutes. The cell was operated at 0.4 A cm−2, 150 °C and λAir = 3.0. (b) Cell voltage degradation as a function of the cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission Copyright © 2015, Elsevier. 
The polarity reversal means the electrochemical generation of hydrogen at the cathode and oxygen at the anode as the process of water electrolysis. The consequences of the fuel starvation are corrosion of catalyst supports and other carbon components such as the gas diffusion and backing layers, as well as the electrocatalyst agglomeration.232 The cumulative outcome is of course the shortening of the cell lifetime.230
A simple method to reduce the possibility of fuel starvation is by using more fuel than needed for the specified power. This entails that the flow rates of both hydrogen and air are controlled at fixed at stoichiometrically excessive ratios to the current produced by the cell.233 Fuel starvation has been identified as a detrimental occurrence in PEMFC operation in general. A variety of mitigation strategies have been tried in PEMFC systems, to avoid hydrogen and oxygen starvation.229
4. Conclusions and perspectives
With great advancement in the last decades, the HT-PEMFC technology approaches its maturity to applications. Long-term durability is one of the most significant barriers to the market penetration and hence the subject of this review. Major issues of the material and component degradation include the loss of doping acid, oxidation and thinning of polymer membranes and platinum nanoparticle growth and resultant active surface area decrease.
The PA loss is primarily via the evaporation mechanism but supplemented by the electrochemical migration mechanism upon the passage of the current. This implies the significant impact of the operating temperature, gas stoichiometries and current densities. Under a steady state operation at a moderate current density, the acid loss rate is about a few μg m−2 s−1, based on which the PA inventory of the MEAs seem sufficient to support the desired lifetime, but any harsh e.g. dynamic operation makes the PA inventory a critical parameter. In addition any thickness reduction of advanced membranes will lead to a decrease in the acid inventory of MEAs and, therefore, face durability issues. Monitoring PA content and replenishment of the acid in either CLs, GDL/MPL or BPP would eventually alleviate the acid loss issue and likely enable the targeted lifetime of 50000 hours.
Polymer oxidation and the resultant membrane thinning are less of an issue for short-term applications. For long-term durability, polymer chemistry seems to play a central role in strengthening the membrane, improving the acid retention and oxidative resistance of the membrane. Several studies have demonstrated that the use of mechanically robust membranes allows for longer lifetimes – in fact most of observed long-term durabilities over 10000 hours are achieved with modified or crosslinked polymer membranes.
Catalyst degradation is well understood by the steady loss of the active surface area via the physical as well as electrochemical Ostwald ripening of platinum nanoparticles, and via the carbon support corrosion. Both carbon corrosion and metal dissolution are strong functions of the electrode potential as well as temperature. Carbon, non-carbon supports, and platinum alloys (e.g. PtxNi and PtxCo) have been investigated and used for HT-PEMFCs, however, the long-term durabilities need to be further evaluated for those materials.
The technology has been well demonstrated under steady state operation. At a constant load typically at 0.2–0.4 A cm−2 at 150–160 °C, a voltage degradation rate of a few μV h−1 was previously reported and has in last years been repeatedly confirmed, indicating the potential in meeting the lifetime requirements of many devices. Challenges remain for operation at higher temperatures, current densities or reactant stoichiometries. Durability under dynamic operation such as start–stop, load and thermal cycling is the most critical. Idling of the cell at OCV or operating at near OCV (low load) dramatically enhances the catalyst degradation. High load operation, on the other hand, stimulates the acid loss and membrane electrolyte degradation. Start–stop cycling, accompanied by the reversal current and cathode potential sparking, imposes extra catalyst degradation. In addition to the mechanical stressing of the membranes, electrodes and their interfaces, thermal cycling of cells exaggerates the acid loss via evaporation at high temperatures and the washout effect at low temperatures. Isolation of these mechanisms and their impacts under OCV, startup/stop as well as thermal and load cycling are desirable in the future studies. Moreover durability data and mitigation strategies on a stack or system level have been so far rarely reported. The objective behind this work is to inspire and motivate future durability work on HT-PEMFC, as the technology matures and transitions to commercial applications.
Abbreviation

AB-PBIPoly(2,5-benzimidazole)
ADLAcid doping level
ASTAccelerated stress test
BImBenzimidazole
BOLBeginning of life
BPPBipolar plate
CLCatalyst layer
DMAc
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
ECSAElectrochemical surface area
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EOLEnd of life
GDLGas diffusion layer
HFRHigh frequency resistance
HT-PEMFCHigh temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
LT-PEMLow temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
LT-PEMFCLow temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
MEAsMembrane electrode assemblies
MPLMicroporous layer
MWDMolecular weight distribution
OCVOpen circuit voltage
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PAPhosphoric acid
PAFCPhosphoric acid fuel cell
PBIPolybenzimidazoles

m-PBIPoly(2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole)

p-PBIPoly(2,2′-(p-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole
PEMProton exchange membrane
PEMFCProton exchange membrane fuel cell
PFSAPerfluorosulfonic acid
POLPeak of life
PPAPolyphosphoric acid
PRUPolymer repeat unit
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
QAQuaternary ammonium
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
SEMScanning electron microscope
SoAState-of-the-art

Conflicts of interest
Blue World Technologies is a producer of HT-PEMFC systems. There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Innovation Fund Denmark (MAKE-FC-LAST, 2079-00005B) and Energy Technology Development and Demonstration (EUDP) Program (COBRA-Drive, 64018-0118).
References
B. G. Pollet, S. S. Kocha and I. Staffell, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 16, 90–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. F. Ruiz Diaz, K. S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. C. Adroher, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 178–203 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, J. Yang, K. Jankova, D. Henkensmeier and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater., 2020, 8, 12854–12886 RSC .
L. Vilčiauskas, M. E. Tuckerman, G. Bester, S. J. Paddison and K. D. Kreuer, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 461–466 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tang, K. Geng, D. Aili, Q. Ju, J. Pan, G. Chao, X. Yin, X. Guo, Q. Li and N. Li, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 7577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, R. He, J.-A. Gao, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1599–A1605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. Aili, S. Fu, Q. Li and S. P. Jiang, Research, 2020, 2020, 9089405 CAS .
M. Boaventura, I. Alves, P. Ribeirinha and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19771–19780 CrossRef CAS .
N. Seselj, S. M. Alfaro, E. Bompolaki, L. N. Cleemann, T. Torres and K. Azizi, Adv. Mater., 2023 DOI:10.1002/adma.202302207 .
J. S. Wainright, J.-T. Wang, D. Weng, R. F. Savinell and M. Litt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L121–L123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao and X. Li, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 199, 112022 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Nguyen, J. Han, X. L. Nguyen, S. Yu, Y. M. Goo and D. D. Le, Energies, 2021, 14, 4048 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, R. F. Savinell and N. J. Bjerrum, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 449–477 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, D. Henkensmeier, S. Martin, B. Singh, Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, L. N. Cleemann and Q. Li, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 793–845 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Li, D. Aili, H. A. Hjuler and J. O. Jensen, High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells: Approaches, Status, and Perspectives, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. S. Araya, F. Zhou, V. Liso, S. L. Sahlin, J. R. Vang, S. Thomas, X. Gao, C. Jeppesen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 21310–21344 CrossRef CAS .
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6436–6444 RSC .
R. Rath, P. Kumar, L. Unnikrishnan, S. Mohanty and S. K. Nayak, Polym. Rev., 2020, 60, 267–317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, O. Zholobko, X.-F. Wu, T. Aulich, J. Thakare and J. Hurley, Energies, 2020, 14, 135 CrossRef .
V. Vijayakumar, K. Kim and S. Y. Nam, Appl. Chem. Eng., 2019, 30, 643–651 CAS .
K. Hooshyari, B. Amini Horri, H. Abdoli, M. Fallah Vostakola, P. Kakavand and P. Salarizadeh, Energies, 2021, 14, 5440 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. C. Simonsen, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Membranes, 2019, 9, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Escorihuela, J. Olvera-Mancilla, L. Alexandrova, L. F. del Castillo and V. Compañ, Polymers, 2020, 12, 1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Haque, A. B. Sulong, K. S. Loh, E. H. Majlan, T. Husaini and R. E. Rosli, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9156–9179 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zeis, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 68–83 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, S. Lu and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700184 CrossRef .
R. E. Rosli, A. B. Sulong, W. R. W. Daud, M. A. Zulkifley, T. Husaini, M. I. Rosli, E. H. Majlan and M. A. Haque, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9293–9314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. Aili, S. Lu, Q. Li and S. P. Jiang, Research, 2020, 2020, 1–15 CAS .
J. H. Kim, K. Kim and S. Y. Nam, Appl. Chem. Eng., 2020, 31, 453–466 Search PubMed .
J. H. Bitter and A. Asadi Tashvigh, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2022, 61, 6125–6134 CrossRef CAS .

          M. T. D. Jakobsen, J. O. Jensen, L. N. Cleemann and Q. Li, High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells: Approaches, Status, and Perspectives, Springer International Publishing,  2016, pp. 487–509 Search PubMed .
Z. Guo, M. Perez-Page, J. Chen, Z. Ji and S. M. Holmes, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 393–429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kusoglu and A. Z. Weber, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 987–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, R. He, R. W. Berg, H. A. Hjuler and N. J. Bjerrum, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 168, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yang, L. N. Cleemann, T. Steenberg, C. Terkelsen, Q. F. Li, J. O. Jensen, H. A. Hjuler, N. J. Bjerrum and R. H. He, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Brooks, R. A. Duckett, J. Rose, I. M. Ward and J. Clements, Polymer, 1993, 34, 4038–4042 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang and L. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 12234–12241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Melchior, G. Majer and K. D. Kreuer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 19, 601–612 RSC .
F. Arslan, T. Böhm, J. Kerres and S. Thiele, J. Memb. Sci., 2021, 625, 119145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, J. J. Linares and G. Manjavacas, J. Memb. Sci., 2006, 280, 351–362 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, Q. Che and B. Sun, Fibers Polym., 2008, 9, 679–684 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Kumbharkar, Md. N. Islam, R. A. Potrekar and U. K. Kharul, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1403–1413 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadeghi, H. Moadel, S. Khatti and B. Ghalei, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2010, 49, 1128–1135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Glipa, B. Bonnet, B. Mula, D. J. Jones and J. Rozière, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 3045–3049 RSC .
M. Kawahara, J. Morita, M. Rikukawa, K. Sanui and N. Ogata, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1395–1398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qingfeng, H. A. Hjuler and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 773–779 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Ma, J. S. Wainright, M. H. Litt and R. F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, H. Zhang, E. Scanlon, L. S. Ramanathan, E. W. Choe, D. Rogers, T. Apple and B. C. Benicewicz, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5328–5333 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. P. Jayakody, S. H. Chung, L. Durantino, H. Zhang, L. Xiao, B. C. Benicewicz and S. G. Greenbaum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, G. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Wang, M. Li, J. Zhu, H. Li, Y. Zhang, C. M. Lew and H. Na, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2187–2193 RSC .
K. A. Perry, K. L. More, E. Andrew Payzant, R. A. Meisner, B. G. Sumpter and B. C. Benicewicz, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Giffin, S. Galbiati, M. Walter, K. Aniol, C. Ellwein, J. Kerres and R. Zeis, J. Memb. Sci., 2017, 535, 122–131 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Pingitore, F. Huang, G. Qian and B. C. Benicewicz, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1720–1726 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Korte, F. Conti, J. Wackerl and W. Lehnert, High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2016, pp. 169–194 Search PubMed .
J. P. Melchior, K. D. Kreuer and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 19, 587–600 RSC .
A. Majerus, F. Conti, C. Korte, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 1155–1165 CrossRef .
L. Vilčiauskas, M. E. Tuckerman, J. P. Melchior, G. Bester and K. D. Kreuer, Solid State Ion, 2013, 252, 34–39 CrossRef .
Y. Oono, T. Fukuda, A. Sounai and M. Hori, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1007–1014 CrossRef CAS .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F3053–F3062 CrossRef .

          F. N. Büchi, T. J. Schmidt and M. Inaba, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Durability,  2009, pp. 1–507 Search PubMed .
C. Wannek, B. Kohnen, H. F. Oetjen, H. Lippert and J. Mergel, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, L. Xiao and B. C. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Pinar, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, D. Úbeda and J. Lobato, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4306–4313 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Oh, Y. Cho, W. H. Lee and H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater., 2013, 1, 2578–2581 RSC .
M. A. Molleo, X. Chen, H. J. Ploehn, K. J. Fishel and B. C. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 16–25 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kannan, Q. Li, L. N. Cleemann and J. O. Jensen, Fuel Cells, 2018, 18, 103–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kannan, D. Aili, L. N. Cleemann, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1008–1017 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, A. Vassiliev, J. O. Jensen, T. J. Schmidt and Q. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vassiliev, A. K. Reumert, J. O. Jensen and D. Aili, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, J. J. Linares and R. López-Vizcaíno, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 3335–3345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thomas, J. R. Vang, S. S. Araya and S. K. Kær, Appl. Energy, 2017, 192, 422–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wannek, I. Konradi, J. Mergel and W. Lehnert, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9479–9485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chevalier, M. Fazeli, F. Mack, S. Galbiati, I. Manke, A. Bazylak and R. Zeis, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 212, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tingelöf and J. K. Ihonen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6452–6456 CrossRef .
M. Boaventura and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11649–11660 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kwon, T. Y. Kim, D. Y. Yoo, S. G. Hong and J. O. Park, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eberhardt, M. Toulec, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, F. N. Büchi and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F310–F316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Becker, L. N. Cleemann, D. Aili, J. O. Jensen and Q. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 82, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
H. Becker, U. Reimer, D. Aili, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen, W. Lehnert and Q. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F863–F869 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, H. Becker, U. Reimer, J. W. Andreasen, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, X. Wang, W. Lehnert and Q. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 134507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lang, T. J. Kazdal, F. Kühl and M. J. Hampe, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2014, 68, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
R. Savinell, E. Yeager, D. Tryk, U. Landau, J. Wainright, D. Weng, K. Lux, M. Litt and C. Rogers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L46–L48 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, R. F. Savinell, J. O. Jensen, L. N. Cleemann, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1471–1475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tobias, M. Wiebke, C. Tötzke, C. Wannek, H. Markötter, F. Wieder, J. Banhart, W. Lehnert and I. Manke, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 290–298 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eberhardt, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, F. N. Büchi and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F842–F847 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eberhardt, T. Lochner, F. N. Büchi and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F1367–F1372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, K. Azizi, W. Zhang, D. Aili, S. Primdahl, L. N. Cleemann, H. A. Hjuler and Q. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 28615–28625 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, J. S. Spendelow, Y. K. Choe, C. Fujimoto and Y. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
A. S. Lee, Y. K. Choe, I. Matanovic and Y. S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater., 2019, 7, 9867–9876 RSC .
J. Jang, D. H. Kim, B. Kang, J. S. J. H. Lee, C. Pak and J. S. J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 531–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang, D. H. Kim, C. M. Min, C. Pak and J. S. Lee, J. Memb. Sci., 2020, 605, 118096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, X. Shen, R. Sun, S. Wang, J. Xiang, L. Zhang, P. Cheng, X. Du, Z. Yin and N. Tang, J. Memb. Sci., 2022, 660, 120795 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, J. Gao, Y. Wang, N. Li and K. Geng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2022, 28, e202202064 CAS .
H. Tang, K. Geng, L. Wu, J. Liu, Z. Chen, W. You, F. Yan, M. D. Guiver and N. Li, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Hu, H. Li and L. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 024505 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, J. Zhang, M. T. Dalsgaard Jakobsen, H. Zhu, T. Yang, J. Liu, M. Forsyth, C. Pan, J. O. Jensen, L. N. Cleemann, S. P. Jiang and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater., 2016, 4, 4019–4024 RSC .
Z. Guo, J. Chen, J. J. Byun, M. Perez–Page, Z. Ji, Z. Zhao and S. M. Holmes, J. Memb. Sci., 2022, 641, 119868 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, J. Chen, M. Pérez-Page, Z. Guo, Z. Zhao, R. Cai, M. T. P. Rigby, S. J. Haigh and S. M. Holmes, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 68, 143–153 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, W. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Wang, S. Lu and Y. Xiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2210036 Search PubMed .
Y. Oono, A. Sounai and M. Hori, J. Power Sources, 2012, 210, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, V. Bandur, M. S. Nilsson, F. Schönberger, A. Chromik, M. Hein, T. Häring, J. Kerres and N. J. Bjerrum, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 188–199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Q. Li, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, N. J. Bjerrum and R. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 622–630 CrossRef CAS .
W. Maier, T. Arlt, C. Wannek, I. Manke, H. Riesemeier, P. Krüger, J. Scholta, W. Lehnert, J. Banhart and D. Stolten, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 10, 1436–1438 CrossRef .
X. Chen, G. Qian, M. A. Molleo, B. C. Benicewicz and H. J. Ploehn, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2015, 53, 1527–1538 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Molleo, X. Chen, H. J. Ploehn and B. C. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2015, 15, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, D. Aili, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 570–578 CrossRef .
N. Nambi Krishnan, A. Konovalova, D. Aili, Q. Li, H. S. Park, J. H. Jang, H. J. Kim and D. Henkensmeier, J. Memb. Sci., 2019, 588, 117218 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, L. N. Cleemann, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, E. Christensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5444–5453 RSC .
T.-S. Chung, Polym. Rev., 1997, 37, 277–301 CrossRef .
S. R. Samms, S. Wasmus and R. F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Berber and N. Nakashima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46269–46277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Dockheer, L. Gubler, A. Wokaun and W. H. Koppenol, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12429–12434 RSC .
J. H. Liao, Q. F. Li, H. C. Rudbeck, J. O. Jensen, A. Chromik, N. J. Bjerrum, J. Kerres and W. Xing, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 745–755 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chang, H. Yan, J. Tian, H. Pan and H. Pu, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2017, 138, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
D. Serhiichuk, T. Patniboon, Y. Xia, M. R. Kraglund, J. O. Jensen, H. A. Hansen and D. Aili, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2023, 5, 803–814 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, M. K. Hansen, C. Pan, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6985–6993 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, D. Aili, K. Geng, J. Gao, Q. Li and N. Li, J. Power Sources, 2021, 515, 230642 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oono, A. Sounai and M. Hori, J. Power Sources, 2013, 241, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, C. Pan, J. O. Jensen, P. Noyé and N. J. Bjerrum, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 350–352 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Aili, Q. Li, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen, N. J. Bjerrum and R. He, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 275–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kirkebaek, D. Aili, B. Yue, A. Vassiliev, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen and Q. Li, Fuel Cells, 2018, 18, 688–697 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Polym. Int., 2011, 60, 1201–1207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Xu, P. Liu, L. Gao, Q. Che and R. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 160, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Krishnan, D. Joseph, N. M. H. Duong, A. Konovalova, J. H. Jang, H. J. Kim, S. W. Nam and D. Henkensmeier, J. Memb. Sci., 2017, 544, 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
V. Deimede, G. A. Voyiatzis, J. K. Kallitsis, L. Qingfeng and N. J. Bjerrum, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 7609–7617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, F. Schönberger, A. Chromik, T. Häring, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, P. Noyé and N. J. Bjerrum, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 175–187 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Li, H. C. Rudbeck, A. Chromik, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, T. Steenberg, M. Calverley, N. J. Bjerrum and J. Kerres, J. Memb. Sci., 2010, 347, 260–270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maity and T. Jana, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6851–6864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schönberger, G. Qian and B. C. Benicewicz, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 1831–1843 CrossRef .
J. K. Kallitsis, M. Geormezi and S. G. Neophytides, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 1226–1233 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ossiander, M. Perchthaler, C. Heinzl and C. Scheu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, S. Zaman, X. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Fang and B. Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 311–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Parthasarathy, S. Srinivasan, A. J. Appleby and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2530–2537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaserer, K. M. Caldwell, D. E. Ramaker and C. Roth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6210–6217 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Zecevic, J. S. Wainright, M. H. Litt, S. Lj. Gojkovic and R. F. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2973–2982 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. S. Wainright and R. F. Savinell, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 4833–4838 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Wu, S. Shan, S. Q. Zang and C. J. Zhong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2913–2924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. L. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806296 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Kong, D. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. Yang, S. Du, W. Li, L. Tao and S. Wang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1610–1634 CrossRef CAS .
V. Beermann, M. E. Holtz, E. Padgett, J. F. De Araujo, D. A. Muller and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2476–2485 RSC .
E. Padgett, V. Yarlagadda, M. E. Holtz, M. Ko, B. D. A. Levin, R. S. Kukreja, J. M. Ziegelbauer, R. N. Andrews, J. Ilavsky, A. Kongkanand and D. A. Muller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F198–F207 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Lee, S. J. Yoo, D. Ahn, S. K. Kim, S. J. Hwang, Y. E. Sung, H. J. Kim, E. Cho, D. Henkensmeier, T. H. Lim and J. H. Jang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8802–8810 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Lim, U. J. Lee, S. H. Ahn, E. A. Cho, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jang, H. Son and S. K. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Park, D. H. Lim, S. J. Yoo, H. J. Kim, D. Henkensmeier, J. Y. Kim, H. C. Ham and J. H. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ruiz-Zepeda, M. Gatalo, A. Pavlišič, G. Dražić, P. Jovanovič, M. Bele, M. Gaberšček and N. Hodnik, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4919–4927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cherevko, N. Kulyk and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 275–298 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schneider, C. Sadeler, A.-C. Scherzer, N. Zamel and D. Gerteisen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F322–F333 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rau, A. Niedergesäβ, C. Cremers, S. Alfaro, T. Steenberg and H. A. Hjuler, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, L. Zhong, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, Electrocatalysis, 2018, 9, 302–313 CrossRef .
S. Liu, M. Rasinski, Y. Lin, K. Wippermann, A. Everwand and W. Lehnert, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitsushima, Y. Koizumi, S. Uzuka and K. I. Ota, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Honji, T. Mori, K. Tamura and Y. Hishinuma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prokop, R. Kodym, T. Bystron, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 352–366 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prokop, R. Kodym, T. Bystron, M. Drakselova, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 333, 135509 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prokop, T. Bystron, P. Belsky, O. Tucek, R. Kodym, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 363, 137165 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bindra, S. J. Clouser and E. Yeager, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 1631–1632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aragane, H. Urushibata and T. Murahashi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26, 147–152 CrossRef CAS .
F. Maillard, W. O. Silva, L. Castanheira, L. Dubau and F. H. B. Lima, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2019, 20, 3106–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, Carbon N Y, 2005, 43, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Oh, J. H. Lee and H. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10844–10849 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Reiser, L. Bregoli, T. W. Patterson, J. S. Yi, J. D. Yang, M. L. Perry and T. D. Jarvi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A273 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, R. N. Carter, P. T. Yu and H. A. Gasteiger, ECS Trans., 2007, 11, 963–973 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Z. Qi, M. Ramani and J. F. Elter, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1306–1312 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Mathias, R. Makharia, H. A. Gasteiger, J. J. Conley, T. J. Fuller, C. J. Gittleman, S. S. Kocha, D. P. Miller, C. K. Mittelsteadt, T. Xie, S. G. Van and P. T. Yu, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2005, 14, 24–35 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Cleemann, F. Buazar, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, T. Steenberg, S. Dai and N. J. Bjerrum, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 822–831 CAS .
M. Okamoto, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, Small, 2009, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujigaya, M. Okamoto and N. Nakashima, Carbon N Y, 2009, 47, 3227–3232 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Berber, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 567–571 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jayawickrama, Z. Han, S. Kido, N. Nakashima and T. Fujigaya, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 312, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Hafez, M. R. Berber, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. R. Berber, I. H. Hafez, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, J. Mater. Chem. A Mater., 2014, 2, 19053–19059 RSC .
M. S. Kondratenko, M. O. Gallyamov, O. A. Tyutyunnik, I. V. Kubrakova, A. V. Chertovich, E. K. Malinkina and G. A. Tsirlina, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F587–F595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Perchthaler, T. Ossiander, V. Juhart, J. Mitzel, C. Heinzl, C. Scheu and V. Hacker, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, H. Zamora, J. Plaza and M. A. Rodrigo, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 848–854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, H. Zamora, J. Plaza, P. Cañizares and M. A. Rodrigo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 516–524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zamora, J. Plaza, P. Velhac, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo and J. Lobato, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 207, 244–254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Millán, H. Zamora, M. A. Rodrigo and J. Lobato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5927–5936 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Mehta and J. S. Cooper, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 32–53 CrossRef CAS .

          A. El-kharouf and B. G. Pollet, Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cell Degradation,  2012, pp. 215–247 Search PubMed .
W. Schmittinger and A. Vahidi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Zhou, F. Tang, B. Li, P. Ming and C. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 515, 230655 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, G. Zhang, L.-J. Guo and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 326–332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, H. Wang and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2021, 513, 230560 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt, ECS Trans., 2006, 1, 19–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Z. Yuan, J. J. Martin, H. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Wu and W. Merida, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 104–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Büsselmann, M. Rastedt, V. Tullius, K. Yezerska, A. Dyck and P. Wagner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 4, 19384–19394 CrossRef .
J. Li, L. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Sun and G. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 24353–24365 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Yu, W. Gu, R. Makharia, F. T. Wagner and H. A. Gasteiger, ECS Trans., 2006, 3, 797–809 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt and J. Baurmeister, J. Power Sources, 2008, 176, 428–434 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi and S. Buelte, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1126–1132 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Ferreira, G. J. laO’, Y. Shao-Horn, D. Morgan, R. Makharia, S. Kocha and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2256 CrossRef .

          N. Seselj, PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark,  2017 .
P. Mocotéguy, B. Ludwig, J. Scholta, Y. Nedellec, D. J. Jones and J. Rozière, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 299–311 CrossRef .
J. Kim, M. Kim, B.-G. Lee and Y.-J. Sohn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 7769–7776 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, R. He, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Fuel Cells, 2004, 4, 147–159 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Schmidt and J. Baurmeister, ECS Trans., 2006, 3, 861–869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Q. Li, L. N. Cleemann, C. Xu, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, N. J. Bjerrum and R. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11185–11195 RSC .
H. Janßen, J. Supra, L. Lüke, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4705–4713 CrossRef .
S. Galbiati, A. Baricci, A. Casalegno and R. Marchesi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 6469–6480 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, M. Kvesić, K. Wippermann, U. Reimer and W. Lehnert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F892–F897 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kerr, H. R. García, M. Rastedt, P. Wagner, S. M. Alfaro, M. T. Romero, C. Terkelsen, T. Steenberg and H. A. Hjuler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 16860–16866 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Pinar, N. Pilinski and P. Wagner, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 217–227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rastedt, F. J. Pinar, P. Wagner, H. R. García, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, M. Paidar and K. Bouzek, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 301–315 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hjuler, K. Azizi, N. Seselj, S. Martinez Alfaro, H. R. Garcia, D. Gromadskyi, L. Hromadska, S. Primdahl, J. O. Jensen, Q. Li, S. Celenk and L. Cleemann, ECS Trans., 2021, 104, 403–413 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Leader, Y. Yue, M. R. Walluk and T. A. Trabold, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 18820–18830 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rastedt, F. J. Pinar, N. Pilinski, A. Dyck and P. Wagner, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 455–469 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, D. Aili, J. Bradley, H. Kuang, C. Pan, R. De Marco, Q. Li and S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F1615–F1625 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, S. J. Andreasen, S. K. Kær and J. O. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 14932–14941 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Pinar, M. Rastedt, N. Pilinski, P. Wagner and A. Dyck, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 13860–13875 CrossRef CAS .

          S. S. Araya, S. J. Andreasen and S. Knudsen Kaer, Preprint submitted to International Journal of Hydrogen Energy.
B. K. Kakati, A. R. J. Kucernak and K. F. Fahy, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 888–897 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hartnig and T. J. Schmidt, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5564–5572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, L. Wang, S. G. Advani and A. K. Prasad, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kannan, A. Kabza and J. Scholta, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
R. Taccani, T. Chinese and M. Boaro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1875–1883 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schonvogel, M. Rastedt, P. Wagner, M. Wark and A. Dyck, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thomas, C. Jeppesen, T. Steenberg, S. S. Araya, J. R. Vang and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 27230–27240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kannan, J. Kaczerowski, A. Kabza and J. Scholta, Fuel Cells, 2018, 18, 287–298 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Li, F. Qi, F. Jing, H. Sun and G. Sun, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 12313–12319 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. Rasinski, Y. Rahim, S. Zhang, K. Wippermann, U. Reimer and W. Lehnert, J. Power Sources, 2019, 439, 227090 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chinese, F. Ustolin, B. Marmiroli, H. Amenitsch and R. Taccani, Energies, 2021, 14, 6737 CrossRef CAS .
F. Javier Pinar, M. Rastedt, N. Pilinski and P. Wagner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19463–19474 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oyarce, E. Zakrisson, M. Ivity, C. Lagergren, A. B. Ofstad, A. Bodén and G. Lindbergh, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
N. Linse, G. G. Scherer, A. Wokaun and L. Gubler, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Perry, T. Patterson and C. Reiser, ECS Trans., 2006, 3, 783–795 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Meyers and R. M. Darling, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1432 CrossRef CAS .
F. Valle, N. Zuliani, B. Marmiroli, H. Amenitsch and R. Taccani, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 938–944 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lim, A. S. Lee, V. Atanasov, J. Kerres, E. J. Park, S. Adhikari, S. Maurya, L. D. Manriquez, J. Jung, C. Fujimoto, I. Matanovic, J. Jankovic, Z. Hu, H. Jia and Y. S. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 248–259 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. W. Daud, R. E. Rosli, E. H. Majlan, S. A. A. Hamid, R. Mohamed and T. Husaini, Renew Energy, 2017, 113, 620–638 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Danzer, S. J. Wittmann and E. P. Hofer, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, S. J. Andreasen, S. K. Kær and D. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2833–2839 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yousfi-Steiner, P. Moçotéguy, D. Candusso and D. Hissel, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 130–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dalvi and M. Guay, Control Eng. Pract., 2009, 17, 924–938 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Nedjeljko Seselj
	Nedjeljko Seselj has a background in materials science, electrochemistry, and nanomaterial synthesis. His research has focused on technologies within the energy conversion field e.g., super- and pseudocapacitors, PEM fuel cells and water electrolysis. He was awarded a PhD degree in chemistry, for a study on graphene-supported, Pt-based nanocatalyst syntheses, applied in low-temperature PEM fuel cells. Nedjeljko Seselj currently works as senior scientist at Blue World Technologies, where his research encompasses: low/high-temperature PEM fuel cells, acid/alkaline water electrolysis, catalyst development, electrode structure studies and cell testing. He is also a project manager for several energy conversion technology-based external projects, collaborating with international universities and industries.

David Aili
	David Aili, senior researcher, has an educational background in chemistry, and obtained his PhD from DTU Chemistry in 2011. Following a period in the polymer industry in Sweden, he joined DTU Energy in 2012. His field of research spans from fundamental chemistry and polymer science to catalysis and electrochemical conversion in the context of electrolysis, power-to-X, CO2 capture/utilization, fuel cells and flow batteries.

Sanser Celenk
	Sanser Celenk obtained his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from Gazi University, Turkey in 2016. He is currently a PhD student at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). He works on high temperature PEM fuel cells.

Lars N. Cleemann
	Lars Nilausen Cleemann is Team Lead material development at Blue World Technologies. His main focus area is development of materials for HT-PEM systems, to enhance durability and performance. He received his PhD in electrochemistry from the Technical University of Denmark, in 2009 and has been working within the field of HT-PEM fuel cells, since then, first within academia and for the last year at Blue World Technologies.

Hans Aage Hjuler
	Hans Aage Hjuler, graduated from Chemistry Department, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 1980. PhD degree (rechargeable batteries) was awarded from DTU in 1983. He worked for DTU until 1991. From 1991 he worked in industry, mainly for NKT and Novo Nordisk in Denmark. In 1994 he was co-founder of Danish Power Systems (DPS). From 2010 he has been the CEO of the company. DPS merged with Blue World Technologies in 2021 and Hans Aage Hjuler was appointed Chief Scientific Officer. He has published more than 200 papers, conference contributions and patents.

Jens Oluf Jensen
	Jens Oluf Jensen has materials science, electrocatalysis and electrochemistry as main research fields. The approach is experimental, addressing technologies within energy conversion with a focus on hydrogen energy, high temperature PEM fuel cells and alkaline water electrolysis. He was awarded his PhD degree for a study on metal hydrides. The research on fuel cells and electrolyzers includes ion conducting membranes (acidic and alkaline), catalysts (noble metal based and noble metal free), electrode structures and cell testing with an emphasis on durability. He is the founder of the conference series International Conference on Electrolysis. At DTU Energy, he teaches hydrogen energy and fuel cells as well as thermodynamics. He is the coordinator of the development of low temperature electrolyzers at the department and of the Master study line Energy Conversion and Storage and editorial board member of several scientific journals including Electrocatalysis.

Kobra Azizi
	Kobra Azizi got a PhD degree in Chemistry (2015) from Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, working in catalysis, and completed her formation with a postdoctoral stay at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in Lyngby (2017–2019). Since 2020 she has been working as a senior scientist at Danish Power Systems/Blue World Technologies, Kvistgaard, Denmark. The company is devoted to the development and manufacture of methanol fuel cell components and systems for the automotive and heavy-duty transportation sectors and stationary applications around the world. In addition to various aspects of organic/inorganic synthetic and supramolecular chemistry, Azizi current research interests include the development of new membranes for high temperature fuel cells. She has published more than 50 scientific papers in international journals in organic synthesis, homogenous and heterogeneous catalysis, batteries, high temperature fuel cells and solar cells.

Qingfeng Li
	Qingfeng Li is a full professor at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). His research areas include proton conducting electrolytes, electrocatalysts and the related technologies. He received his Ph.D. in Electrochemistry from Northeastern University, China, in 1990 and was awarded Doctor Degree of Technices at DTU in 2006. He started the research on high-temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFC) at DTU and has participated/coordinated more than 20 EU and Nordic research projects within the fuel cell area including the 4 M Centre devoted to fundamental research for HT-PEMFCs, funded by Innovation Fund Denmark.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structure of AB-PBI (top), m-PBI (center) and p-PBI (bottom) in an environment of PA and water.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Sorption isotherm for m-PBI in 85% H3PO4 at 25–30 °C,40–44 and (b) ion conductivity at 160 °C for m-PBI as function of ADL under non-humidified conditions.35,40,45–53 The different markers refer to data sets from different sources, and the reader is referred to the original references for full experimental details.	 

 	Fig. 3  Hydration isotherms of PA and PA-benzimidazole (bIm) mixtures. Data at 150 and 170 °C are from Korte et al.56 while data at 182 °C are from Melchior et al.37	 

 	Fig. 4  Estimated acid loss from the acid saturated air flow (solid line for 0.2 A cm−2 at λAir = 2)31 and measured acid loss from PAFC and HT-PEMFCs. Blue circles were cited from Oono et al.,58 red circles from Søndergård et al.59 and green triangle from Büchi et al.60	 

AB-PBI (ADL 3.5)	160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, 1000 h, λAir = 2, λH2 = 2	180	(A & C) 0.21	2008	
61


p-PBI and 2OH-PBI (PPA process, ADL 26)	80–190 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2.0, λH2 = 1.2	160 °C	1700–2 500	0.02	2008	
62

190 °C	800	0.2–0.3
PBI (ADL 6.6)	Three-cell stack, 125 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 3, λH2 = 2	185	3.4	2011	
63

1.1
Advent TPS® (not PBI-based)	150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2	360	4.6–5.9	2013	
64

Pyridine containing PBI copolymer (PPA process)	180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2.0, λH2 = 1.2	2500	0.6	2014	
65

0.04

m-PBI (ADL 9.3–9.6)	160–180 °C, 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, λAir = 4.0–25.5, λH2 = 2.0–22.6	15000	2–59	2018	
59


m-PBI membranes (ADL 9.5)	Varied GDLs, 180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2, λH2 = 1.5	5500	2.7–4.1	2018	
66


m-PBI (layered, ADL 10–37)	180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, λAir = 2, λH2 = 1.5	10440	2.1–2.6	2020	
67


 	Fig. 5  Change of the membrane resistance as a function of operating hours under operation at different temperatures and gas stoichiometries. Replotted with data from Søndergaard et al.59	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cross-sectional MEA images with m-PBI membranes (a) before test and (b) after 17800 h operation at 0.2 A cm−2 and 150 °C. (c) Membrane thinning during the durability test for m-PBI and cross-linked ABPBI. Reprinted from ref. 118 with permission Copyright © 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Three mechanisms for Pt particle growth in fuel cells. (a) Pt particle coalescence; (b) Pt dissolution from smaller particles and redeposition on larger particles; (c) diffusion of dissolved Pt into the conducting electrolyte where it may be reduced by hydrogen crossing over from the anode.	 
Pt ⇄ Pt2+ + 2e− E (V) = 1.19 V + 0.029 Vlog[Pt2+]
Pt + H2O ⇄ PtO + 2H+ + 2e− E (V) = 0.98 V − 0.59 V·pH
PtO + H2O ⇄ PtO2 + 2H+ + 2e− E (V) = 1.05 V − 0.59 V·pH
PtO + 2H+ ⇄ Pt2+ + H2O log[Pt2+] = −7.06 − 2pH
PtO2 + 4H+ + 2e− ⇄ Pt2+ + H2O
E(V) = 0.834 V − 0.118 V·pH − 0.029 Vlog[Pt2+]
C + 2H2O ⇄ CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− E0 = 0.207 V vs. RHE
C + H2O ⇄ CO + 2H+ + 2e− E0 = 0.518 V vs. RHE

180–200 °C, m-PBI	>2000	5	2004	
195

150 °C, m-PBI	>5000
160 °C, p-PBI (PPA process)	≈18000	5–6	2005	
48

160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, Celtec® P1000 MEA	>3000	43	2006	
196

150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, AB-PBI	1000	25	2008	
61

160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, reformate/air	Single cell	1105	41–149	2010	
193

24-cell 500 W stack	658	200–520
160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, m-PBI	508	39
160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, m-PBI	370
150, 170, 190 °C	6400	11	2010	
58

1220	60
160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2, PBI copolymers	>2400	2.4–6.4	2012	
197

160 °C	0.2 A cm−2, thermally cured membranes	>2000	5–6	2012	
108

600 mA cm−2	43
150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, H2 (λH2 = 3.7)/air (λO2 = 3.7)	2000/12000/15 000/17860	<4	2012	
100

150 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, cross-linked AB-PBI, 33% H2 + 1% CO	17500	<2	2013	
118

160–180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, 12 cell (320 cm2) stack	3400	24 (first 2000 h)	2013	
198

0.2 A cm−2	160 °C	>6000	4.9–6.3	2013	
199

>8000	6–8
180 °C	
	19
160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, with spiral flow field	1000	14	2013	
200

160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2, m-PBI 78 kDa, ADL 10.8	>1500	1.5	2014	
35

180 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, Py-PBI	2300	5.2	2014	
65

160 °C, 0.24 A cm−2, H2/air (Pt from 2–3 nm to 6–8 nm (cathode) and 4–5 nm (anode) and membrane thinning	17000 h	9	2015	
201

160 °C, 0.3 A cm−2 Dapozol®G55	Synthetic reformate (78% H2+ 22% CO2)/air	>1000	263	2016	
202

H2/O2	270
H2/air	257
160 °C, Dapozol® G55, 0.2 A cm−2, H2/Air	>9000	1.7–3.0	2016	
203

200 °C, 0.2 A cm−2	PA-PBI	2450	129	2016	
96

PBI composite	2700	27
160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2	Cross-linked PBI	<1300	<9 200	1.4	0.5	2017	
106


m-PBI	4.6	2.6
180°C, 0.2 A cm−2, m-PBI	>5500	12	2018	
66

160°C and 0.2, 0.6 A cm−2, m-PBI	>4200	13	2018	
59

160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, m/p-PBI (7:1) copolymer; λH2/Air = 1.2/2.0	17500	0.67	2019	
53

160 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, Dapozol®	>2000	12.6	2021	
204

170 °C, 0.8 A cm−2, 1.5 barabs, Dapozol®	>12000	9.3
200 °C, 0.4 A cm−2, P1100W	250	102	2022	
205

160 °C, 0.2 A cm−2, P1100W	1588	15.9

 	Fig. 8  Cell voltage versus time during a steady state long-term test. The active surface area of the electrodes was 21 cm2. The fuel was synthetic reformate containing 69.3% H2, 22.3% CO2, 6. 9% H2O and 1.4% CO. The stoichiometries were λH2/Air = 1.3/2.5. The cell was operated at 0.4 A cm−2 and 160 °C. Replotted from ref. 204 with permission Copyright © 2021, Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Selected durability test results expressed as performance (cell voltage at 0.2 A cm−2) relative to the peak point. Replotted with data from ref. 14.	 

150 °C, H2/air, daily start/stop (7/17 h)	860 cycles, 3.5 years	300 μV per cycle	2004	
195

160 °C, daily on/off (12 h/12 h)	240 cycles, 6 000 h	11 μV h−1, 200 μV per cycle	2008	
189

160 °C	2 min at OCV	500 cycles	34 μV per cycle	2008	
62

30 min at 0.2 A cm−2	28 μV per cycle
30 min at 0.6 A cm−2	41 μV per cycle
160 °C, load cycling 0.2–0.4 A cm−2 and start/stop, Celtec®P1000	24 cell stack	658 h	100 μV h−1	2010	
193

Single cell	1105 h	40 μV h−1
180 °C, simulated start–stop cycling, 0.2 A cm−2	157 cycles, 4 000 h	19 μV h−1, 480 μV per cycle	2011	
212

Thermal cycling 30 °C/30 min–180 °C/30 min	PBI membrane	150 h	14 μV h−1	2014	
213

PBI-PTFE composite membrane	2 μV h−1
165 °C, start/stop cycles, 0.25 A cm−2, 5-cell stack, Celtec P1100W (163 cm2)	1562 cycles, 4 160 h	26 μV per cycle	2015	
214

Load cycling 0.0–0.5 A cm−2 for 16 s	100000 cycles, 444 h	34 μV h−1	2015	
201

Triangular sweep cycling 0.0–0.5 A cm−2 for 16 s, 2 s OCV	100000 cycles, 500 h	44 μV h−1	2017	
215

Constant load 0.22 A cm−2	30 μV h−1
160 °C, low current cycling 16min at 0.3A cm−2, 4min OCV	70 h	363 μV h	2016	
216

216 min at 1.0 A cm−2 + 4min at 0.6 A cm−2 + 10min at OCV every 6 h	330 μV h−1
160 °C, 60 daily start/stop cycles, 0.3A cm−2	
	12.6 μV h−1, 600 μV per cycle	2016	
206

160 °C, load cycling 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, Dapozol® MEAs	
	16–195 μV h−1	2017	
217

160 °C, start/stop cycling, λH2/Air = 1.25/2.5, synthetic reformate (74.8%H2, 25%CO2, 0.2%CO), Celtec®-P1100W	1562 cycles, 4 042 h	26 μV per cycle	2018	
218

Single cell start/stop, λH2/Air = 1.5/2.0, 160 °C	18 cycles, 1 900 h	60 μV h−1	2019	
219

Potential cycling 0.5–0.9 V, 3 min at 0.5 A cm−2 (multiple serpentine)	4821 cycles, 482 h	40 μV per cycle	2019	
219

140–160–180 °C thermal cycling at 0.2 A cm−2, 1 h interval	100 h	200 μV h−1	2019	
220

High load cycling 0.2–0.6 A cm−2	103 μV h−1
Low load cycling 0.0–0.2 A cm−2	135 μV h−1
Load cycling 0.6 (4 min)–1.0 A cm−2 (16 min)	1100 cycles, 500 h	32 μV h−1	2019	
186

Daily start/stop (12 h/12 h), 0.3 A cm−2	20 cycles, 500 h	33 μV h−1
Temperature & load cycling	165 °C, 0.31 A cm−2	240 cycles, >4 000 h	480 μV per cycle	2021	
204

175 °C, 0.55 A cm−2	580 μV per cycle
160 °C, triangular sweep cycling	OCV – 0.5 A cm−2, 16 s	100000 cycles, 440 h	30 μV h−1	2021	
221

OCV – 0.5 A cm−2, 12 s + 2 s OCV	125000 cycles, 550 h	30 μV h−1
Start/stop cycling in 1.2 h, 0.22 A cm−2	300 cycles	81 μV h−1
1000 cycles	55 μV h−1
Start/stop cycling 12 h, 0.2 A cm−2	600 h	29.7 μV h−1	2021	
187

High load cycling 0.2–0.8 A cm−2, 20 min	84 μV h−1
Low load cycling, 0.04–0.2A cm−2, 20 min	115 μV h−1

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of the anode and cathode potential changes during the cell start, stop, idle as well as fuel starvation.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cell voltage at 0.2 A cm−2 as a function of time of a constant load without (red circles) and with start/stop cycles (blue squares). λH2/air = 1.2/2, T = 160 °C, p = 1 bara. Reprinted from ref. 189 with permission Copyright © 2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM micrographs and particle size distributions of cathode catalysts after 600 h operation at 160 °C with H2 and air: (A) initial; (B) Cell 1 after start/stop cycle test at 0.2 A cm−2; (C) Cell 2 after high-load cycle (20 min) test between 0.2 and 0.8 A cm−2; (D) Cell 3 after low-load cycle (20 min) test between 0.04–0.2 A cm−2. Reprinted from ref. 187 with permission Copyright © 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The voltage profile of the HT-PEMFC under hydrogen stoichiometry cycling between 3.0 and 0.8 every 2 minutes. The cell was operated at 0.4 A cm−2, 150 °C and λAir = 3.0. (b) Cell voltage degradation as a function of the cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission Copyright © 2015, Elsevier.	 
AB-PBI	Poly(2,5-benzimidazole)
ADL	Acid doping level
AST	Accelerated stress test
BIm	Benzimidazole
BOL	Beginning of life
BPP	Bipolar plate
CL	Catalyst layer
DMAc	
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
ECSA	Electrochemical surface area
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EOL	End of life
GDL	Gas diffusion layer
HFR	High frequency resistance
HT-PEMFC	High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
LT-PEM	Low temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
LT-PEMFC	Low temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
MEAs	Membrane electrode assemblies
MPL	Microporous layer
MWD	Molecular weight distribution
OCV	Open circuit voltage
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PA	Phosphoric acid
PAFC	Phosphoric acid fuel cell
PBI	Polybenzimidazoles

m-PBI	Poly(2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole)

p-PBI	Poly(2,2′-(p-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
PEMFC	Proton exchange membrane fuel cell
PFSA	Perfluorosulfonic acid
POL	Peak of life
PPA	Polyphosphoric acid
PRU	Polymer repeat unit
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
QA	Quaternary ammonium
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SoA	State-of-the-art

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
