Alignment of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polymer chains in photovoltaic cells by ultraviolet irradiation  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM34556K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM34556K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22409-22417Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAlignment of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polymer chains in photovoltaic cells by ultraviolet irradiation

        
          
            Fu-Ching 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jay 
            Chang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fu-Chiao 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Horng-Long 
            Cheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Steve Lien-Chung 
            Hsu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jen-Sue 
            Chen
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Wei-Yang 
            Chou
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Physics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan
bDepartment of Photonics, Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. E-mail: weiyang@mail.ncku.edu.tw;  Fax: +886 6 2095040;   Tel: +886 6 2757575 ext. 63912
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan
Received 
      12th July 2012
    , Accepted 30th August 2012First published on 17th September 2012AbstractThe conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is a promising candidate for developing flexible electronics. The conductivity of this polymer can be increased via simple ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. This process can lead to enhanced performance and stability of organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells. We used micro-Raman spectroscopy, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), and quantum chemical calculations to map the energy band diagram and the electronic properties of PEDOT:PSS films irradiated with UV at various times. These procedures can explain how the observed changes in the macroscopic electronic properties of OPV cells arose from local changes in the carrier transport at the organic/organic and metal/organic interfaces. Micro-Raman spectroscopy indicates the effect of UV irradiation on PEDOT chains, which suggests a conformation change of PEDOT chains in the thin film. When UV irradiates the PEDOT:PSS film, the quinoid structure becomes the dominant conformation structure in the treated film. This change originates from the interaction between the dipole moment within the conjugate PEDOT chains and the electric field of the UV. Combining experimental results and theoretical calculations, we propose a gradient energy band for UV-treated PEDOT:PSS film that can reduce the barrier of the organic/organic heterojunction and can induce an interface dipole field at the organic/metal interface that simultaneously results in easy carrier extraction from PEDOT:PSS to metal and the enhancement of carrier transport from the active material to PEDOT:PSS.
1. Introduction
The demands made by highly conductive, transparent, and flexible electrodes on electronic components are constantly increasing. A number of efforts to develop highly conductive, solution-processable, and inherently conducting polymer materials based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), which are suitable for use as transparent electrode materials, have been reported.1–4 PEDOT:PSS is one of the most widely used materials in organic devices, including small-molecule organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs), and organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells.5–8 PEDOT:PSS is also one of the most studied conducting polymers in both the academic and industrial fields because of its advantages such as high ionization potential, high conductivity, high stability in the oxidized state, and its ability to incorporate water-soluble polyelectrolytes. PEDOT:PSS usually acts as an interface layer between the indium tin oxide (ITO) anode and the active organic semiconductor layer to improve carrier transport and modify the morphology of ITO. The properties and formulations of PEDOT:PSS are also highlighted in several relevant transparent circuitry applications such as inorganic electroluminescent devices, flexible touch screens, and liquid crystal displays.9–12 To increase the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film, the coating properties (annealing times) are controlled and adjusted by carefully formulating the coating ingredients. This technique has been widely discussed in many reports.13–17 Several researchers also point out that changing the ratio of the conducting PEDOT to the insulating PSS or adding a secondary dopant can effectively enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films.18–20
A recurring problem in OPV cells is the loss of photogenerated carriers on the interface between the active layer and the electrodes. With regard to hole transportation, the energy difference between the work function of the anode and the highest occupied molecular orbit (HOMO) of the acceptor leads to a transport barrier, which reduces the external photocurrent of OPV cells. To solve this problem, a buffer layer of PEDOT:PSS is commonly inserted between the anode and the acceptor layer.21,22 Nevertheless, several holes cannot be effectively transported to the anode because of the barrier height of the PEDOT:PSS/acceptor and PEDOT:PSS/ITO interfaces. Controlling the film coating of PEDOT:PSS and adding a secondary dopant in the PEDOT:PSS aqueous dispersion can enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS.23–26 The secondary dopant can change the conformation of PEDOT chains which may modify the HOMO of PEDOT:PSS to close to the HOMO of the organic semiconductor or the work function of the ITO electrode, resulting in the improvement of carrier injection/extraction in optoelectronic devices. However, the HOMO of the PEDOT:PSS layer cannot simultaneously match both those of the ITO and the organic semiconductor, which results in the loss of some of the carriers at the PEDOT:PSS/acceptor and the PEDOT:PSS/ITO interfaces. Therefore, increasing the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS film and decreasing the barrier height at the PEDOT:PSS/ITO and PEDOT:PSS/acceptor interfaces by adjusting the interface energy step are still important areas of active research.
In this study, we used a simple and effective process of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation on thin PEDOT:PSS films to increase the conjugation length of PEDOT polymer chains to cause notable changes in bulk film conductivity and ionization potential for different UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS conditions. The ionization potential of PEDOT:PSS film can be modified by UV irradiation to form a gradient band that can simultaneously match the HOMO of the active layer and induce an electric dipole field at the interface between PEDOT:PSS and O2 plasma-treated ITO anode for the OPV device. The former can be attributed to carrier injection from the active layer to PEDOT:PSS, whereas the latter can enhance hole-extraction from the PEDOT:PSS layer to the anode. However, these induced changes and related physical mechanisms in UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film for photovoltaics have never been clearly reported. We first demonstrated that the ionization potential of PEDOT:PSS variations is UV-exposure-time dependent. Subsequently, the conjugation length of PEDOT chains was examined by Raman spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations to correlate the ionization potential, electrical dipole moment, and sheet resistance of PEDOT:PSS films. Finally, a series of bilayer and polymer-based OPV cells with different UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS films were fabricated to confirm the effect of UV irradiation on the PEDOT:PSS surface for vertical charge transport by changing the PEDOT:PSS flat HOMO band to the gradient band diagram. Significant improvements were observed in the OPV cells, such as in the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The stability of OPV devices can also be improved by incorporating UV irradiation into the fabrication process. The process of UV-irradiation of PEDOT:PSS film is expected to be applicable to other types of photoelectronic devices as well.
2. Experimental procedures
2.1 Materials
An aqueous dispersion of the conductive polymer blend PEDOT and PSS (PEDOT:PSS, CLEVIOS™ P VP AI 4083) with a weight ratio of 1:6 was used as the hole-transporting layer and bathocuproine (BCP) was used as the electron-transporting layer of photovoltaic devices. Active materials include donor organic semiconductor, pentacene (99.9%), and acceptor organic semiconductor, N,N′-ditridecylperylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C5H11) (98%), for the heterojunction. All materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
2.2 Device fabrication
The photovoltaic cells were fabricated with an anode consisting of PEDOT:PSS with or without UV irradiation on ITO-coated glass substrates. The ITO substrates were subsequently cleaned by sonication in acetone and 2-propanol and were then rinsed with deionized water to prevent organic contamination on the ITO surface. The sheet resistance of the ITO anode was 15 Ω □−1. Oxygen plasma with a power of 50 W was used to treat the ITO surface for 3 min to increase further the surface energy of the ITO anode for a uniformly coated PEDOT:PSS. A 60 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer was deposited on the ITO anode by spin coating in a 1.7 wt% water solution. The spin-coated PEDOT:PSS substrates were dried on a hot plate at 150 °C for 30 min to remove the solvent completely. The substrates were then transferred to a nitrogen-filled glove box. The PEDOT:PSS films were irradiated with UV light (emission centered at 365 nm and power density of 460 μW cm−2) in the dark glove box for 20, 40, 60, or 80 min. A bilayer heterojunction of pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11 was deposited on the surface of PEDOT:PSS at a deposition rate of approximately 0.3 Å s−1 and functioned as the active layer of the photovoltaic cell. An electron transport layer consisting of BCP and silver/aluminum (Ag/Al) cathode was deposited by thermal evaporation through a shadow mask to complete the structure of the device. The area of the active device was 6 mm2. The base pressure during thermal evaporation was 2 × 10−6 Torr. The complete structure of the photovoltaic cell was ITO(170 nm)/PEDOT:PSS(60 nm)/pentacene(45 nm)/PTCDI-C5H11(45 nm)/BCP(8 nm)/Ag(10 nm)/Al(70 nm). All samples were prepared and measured on the same day.
2.3 PEDOT:PSS film structure analyses and device measurements
Raman spectroscopy, originally known as atomic vibration spectroscopy for chemical and physical applications, was carried out on the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS films using a Jobin Yvon LabRam HR spectrometer with a 632.8 nm He–Ne laser, which served as the excitation light source. The laser power was kept below 0.5 mW under a spatial resolution of around 1 μm beam spot, which was achieved using a 100× objective microscope lens, to prevent thermal damage to the PEDOT:PSS films. At least three spectra were obtained for each sample, and each Raman spectrum was obtained from an average of 20 measurements. Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM, PSIA XE-100E), also known as surface potential microscopy, was used to analyze the surface ionization potential of PEDOT:PSS films irradiated with UV at different times. KPFM is a scanning probe method where the contact potential difference (CPD) between the probe tip and the material surface is measured using a modified version of the AC scanning microscope. A comparison of the CPD images of PEDOT:PSS and Au was performed to obtain the absolute surface potential of PEDOT:PSS. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the photovoltaic cells were measured in the dark glove box using a 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G solar illumination from an Oriel solar simulator. The illumination intensity of the Oriel solar simulator was calibrated using a standard silicon photodiode detector (XP102C). A source meter (Keithley 2400) was used to record the output photocurrent and the voltage of the photovoltaic cell.
2.4 Quantum chemical calculations
The optimized neutral geometries of PEDOT with various repeating units were determined using the density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level with periodic boundary conditions.27 These optimized geometries of PEDOT at the neutral state were adopted to calculate the values of the Raman shift, dipole moment, and ionization potential using the DFT at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. All calculations were carried out using the Gaussian suite of programs.28
3. Results and discussion
To investigate the vertical charge transport in OPV devices, we studied the energy-level diagram (only considering the flat band junction) of photovoltaic cells with the structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11/BCP/Ag/Al, wherein ITO and PEDOT:PSS are anodes and Ag and Al are cathodes (Fig. 1). Photovoltaic parameters such as FF and PCE, including their mean deviations, are summarized in Table 1. The current density–voltage curves are shown in Fig. 2a. The Voc of the OPV cells is determined by the energy difference between the HOMO band of the donor material and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) band of the acceptor material (denoted by Voc1), and the barrier height at the active layer/anode (Vb1) and at the cathode interfaces (Vb2). The following equation is proposed for Voc in the OPV cell:29 Voc = S0 × Voc1 − S1 × Vb1 − S2 × Vb2 + C(1)where C is a constant that describes the interface potential of the ideal ohmic contact, and the parameters S0, S1, and S2 are based on the index of the interface behavior.30Voc is crucially dependent on the barrier heights (Vb1 and Vb2) between the active layers, including acceptor and donor, as well as electrodes. Accordingly, Voc increases with decreasing Vb1 and Vb2. To decrease the barrier height Vb1 between the PEDOT:PSS and pentacene layers, a UV beam centered at 365 nm irradiated the PEDOT:PSS surface to increase the surface ionization potential. The surface potential measured using KPFM is reported versus UV irradiation time at a PEDOT:PSS film with thickness of 60 nm, as estimated from the scanning electron microscopy results. Fig. 2b displays an exponential evolution for the surface potential with an initial value of 4.94 eV, which increased to 5.18 eV when the UV irradiation time exceeded 60 min. This UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS surface can be attributed to carrier injection from pentacene to the PEDOT:PSS because the PEDOT:PSS surface potential matches the HOMO level (5.21 eV)31 of the pentacene film. Accordingly, the Vb1 between pentacene and PEDOT:PSS was reduced to increase Voc, as shown in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 1  Proposed energy-level diagram of photovoltaic cells with structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11/BCP/Ag/Al in which ITO and PEDOT:PSS are anodes and Ag and Al are cathodes. 
Table 1 The photovoltaic parameters of organic solar cells with PEDOT:PSS irradiated with UV light for different times. All data were obtained by averaging over ten individual cells. Measured roughnesses of PEDOT:PSS films were performed after various UV irradiation times




UV irradiation time (min)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
PEDOT:PSS Rrms (Å)




0
52.0 ± 0.3
0.53 ± 0.02
13.8


20
54.2 ± 0.4
0.63 ± 0.05
12.9


40
58.1 ± 0.7
0.73 ± 0.04
12.2


60
57.5 ± 0.3
0.77 ± 0.02
11.8


80
56.4 ± 0.6
0.74 ± 0.03
11.5




 Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of small molecule photovoltaic cells using ITO and PEDOT:PSS as an electrode irradiated for various UV times. The photovoltaic cell has the following structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11/BCP/Ag/Al. (b) Surface potentials of the PEDOT:PSS films irradiated for various UV times and Voc of the these PEDOT:PSS film-based photovoltaic devices. 
To determine how PEDOT:PSS film was modified by UV irradiation, several techniques, including atomic force microscopy (AFM, Park XE-100), four-point probe, KPFM, and micro-Raman spectroscopy, were used to characterize the film cast onto an O2 plasma-cleaned ITO substrate. The morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS films with and without UV irradiation were characterized by tapping-mode AFM. Fig. 3 compares the topography of 4 μm × 4 μm sections of PEDOT:PSS films irradiated under various UV conditions. Notable pores were observed in the native PEDOT:PSS film (Fig. 3a). When the PEDOT:PSS surface was exposed to UV radiation, the porosity and surface roughness decreased with increasing UV irradiation time, as shown in Fig. 3b–d. PEDOT grains were observed on the film surface, as well as enlarged features during the UV irradiation of the film. For polymer systems, the UV radiation absorbed by the polymer chains in the film caused vibrations in the polymer chains. This finding indicates that the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS films were qualitatively similar to the annealed case, which leads to the enlargement of the PEDOT grains and the reduction in pores. Therefore, the surface roughness of PEDOT:PSS films decreases with increasing UV irradiation time, as displayed in Table 1.
 Fig. 3  AFM images of PEDOT:PSS surfaces irradiated by UV lights under (a) 0, (b) 20, (c) 40, (d) 60 min. All images are 4 μm × 4 μm in size. 
We next considered the effect of UV irradiation on polymer chain alignment in PEDOT:PSS films. Micro-Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the conjugation length of PEDOT chains on a series of PEDOT:PSS films that were irradiated with UV light for 0 min to 80 min. Fig. 4 plots the molecular vibrational spectra of the untreated and the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS films. Noticeable differences were observed for the strongest atomic vibration band between 1410 and 1515 cm−1, which was assigned to the stretching vibration of CαCβ on the five-membered thiophene ring and to the out-of-plane bending of the ethylenedioxy ring of PEDOT chains.32,33 The schematic conformation of the stretching vibration (CαCβ labeled as pink vectors) on the five-membered thiophene ring of the PEDOT chain is shown in Fig. 5a. In the figure, the vectors indicate the displacement of the atoms in the Cartesian coordinate system. As the UV exposure time of the PEDOT:PSS film increased, the CαCβ stretching band red shifted and the peak intensity at high-vibration frequencies (1450 cm−1 to 1500 cm−1) decreased. These findings indicate that the resonant structure of the PEDOT chain changes domination from a benzoid structure to a quinoid structure. Both the benzoid structure and the quinoid structure exist simultaneously in the untreated PEDOT:PSS film. The benzoid structure favors a coiled conformation, whereas the quinoid structure favors a linear or expanded coil conformation. In the coil conformation, the Cα–Cβ bond between the two thiophene rings in the PEDOT chain is similar to a σ bond, which has a low density of conjugated π-electrons. Thus, the conjugated π-electrons are not completely delocalized in the benzoid structure. By contrast, in the linear or coil-expanded conformation,23 the thiophene rings in the PEDOT chains can be oriented in nearly the same plane, which results in the delocalization of conjugated π-electrons throughout the entire chain. Hence, the dominant conformation transformation of PEDOT films from the benzoid structure to the quinoid structure results in increased conjugation length of the PEDOT chain.
 Fig. 4  Raman spectra of PEDOT:PSS films irradiated for various UV irradiation times. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Vibrational symmetry modes (labeled as pink vectors) and out-of-plane bending modes (labeled as blue vectors) of a PEDOT polymer chain in the neutral state, determined from the B3LYP/6-31G(d) calculations. The vectors indicate the displacement of the atoms in the Cartesian coordinate system. (b) Calculated vibration frequency of CαCβ symmetric stretching of the five-membered thiophene ring (□) and C–H out-of-plane bending of the ethylenedioxy ring (△) on the PEDOT chain as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. 
The correspondence between the conjugation length of PEDOT and the stretching vibration frequency of the CαCβ bond, as evaluated by the theoretical calculations, is shown in Fig. 5b. The vibration frequencies of the CαCβ bond in the PEDOT chains decreased with increasing the conjugation length and their values were confined between 1450 cm−1 and 1500 cm−1, whereas the long conjugation length cases were stable at 1454 cm−1. This result indicates that the effective conjugation length of the PEDOT chain was elongated by the UV irradiation of the PEDOT:PSS film. Thus, the quinoid structure became dominant in the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film. Although both the coil and the linear or expanded-coil conformations exist in untreated PEDOT:PSS film, the coil conformation turned into the linear or expanded-coil conformation after UV irradiation. However, the vibration frequency of out-of-plane bending of the ethylenedioxy ring located at 1521 cm−1, which had the corresponding experimental value of approximately 1500 cm−1 in Fig. 4, was almost independent of the conjugation length of the PEDOT chain, as shown in Fig. 5b. The ethylenedioxy ring was not located within the conjugated structure; therefore, no obvious shift was observed with increased conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. The increase in conjugation length was understood from the interaction between the electric field of UV light and the dipole moment of PEDOT chains, resulting in the formation of the expanded-coil conformation, as shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  The UV irradiation on PEDOT chain leads to the conformation change from a benzoid structure to a quinoid structure. 
To verify the relationship between conjugation length and the dipole moment of the PEDOT chain, polarized Raman analyses were carried out on the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film to determine how the dipole moment of PEDOT chains was affected by the directional UV electric field. Fig. 6 displays the polarized Raman spectra of the PEDOT:PSS film irradiated for 80 min with polarized UV light (in the x-direction). The light source of the polarized Raman measurements was a polarized He–Ne laser at 632.8 nm. In this experiment, the polarized Raman scatterings were obtained under laser polarization in the x-direction (parallel) and in the y-direction (perpendicular), which are labeled xx and xy in Fig. 6, respectively. For comparison, the Raman spectrum of the untreated PEDOT:PSS film is also included in Fig. 6. Upon irradiation with polarized UV, an obvious difference was observed for the two cases compared with the untreated case. In these two measuring modes, the xx spectrum exhibited a larger red shift in the main peak than the xy spectrum. We observed the increase in intensity in the low-vibration frequency region and the decreased intensity in the high-vibration frequency region by subtracting the xy spectrum from the xx spectrum (lower channel). This finding indicates that the PEDOT:PSS chain along the UV polarization has a longer conjugation length. The microscopic changes in the PEDOT chains are accounted for by torque in the UV electric field (E) that occurs in the electric dipole (Pi) within two units of the PEDOT chain upon exposure to polarized UV. The torque always oriented the Pi to line up with E during UV exposure. Accordingly, the interaction between Pi and the E forces the PEDOT chain to extend along the directional electric field of UV. Thus, the total dipole moment of the PEDOT chain is (2)where n = N/2 and N is the number of units in the conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. To understand the alignment mechanism of the dipole moment on the PEDOT chains, we used DFT to calculate the components of the dipole moment in three dimensions as a function of the conjugation length of the PEDOT chain, as shown in Fig. 7. The x component of the total dipole moment increased with increasing conjugation length of the PEDOT chain, whereas the y and z components of the dipole moment on the PEDOT molecule canceled each other out, so no net torque occurred in these two directions. This phenomenon indicates that UV irradiation increases the average conjugation length of the PEDOT chain along the electric field. Therefore, the quinoid structure is the dominant conformation in the PEDOT:PSS film after UV irradiation. Thus, the symmetrical CαCβ stretching vibration in longer PEDOT chain results in greater red shifts in the Raman spectrum. This finding suggests that the π–π stacking between conjugate polymer chains leads to the high conductivity and carrier mobility of quinoid structure-dominated PEDOT:PSS films.
 Fig. 6  (Upper channel) Polarized Raman spectra of the PEDOT:PSS film irradiated with polarized UV light for 80 min in the x-direction (the first symbol in the legend) excited by a polarized He–Ne laser at 632.8 nm. The polarized Raman scatterings were obtained parallel (in the x-direction, the second symbol in the legend) and perpendicular (in the y-direction, the second symbol in the legend) to the polarization of the laser. For comparison, a Raman spectrum of a native PEDOT:PSS film labeled as 0 min is included. The spectrum in the lower channel is obtained by subtracting the xy spectrum from the xx spectrum. 
 Fig. 7  DFT indicates dipole moments on the PEDOT chain as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. The coordinate is the same as the definition in Fig. 5a. 
Although the large conjugation length of the UV-irradiated PEDOT chain has been explained in our study, the mechanism that enhances carrier transport remains unclear. We investigated the electric dipole field-driven carrier transport in the conjugated PEDOT chain. Quantitative information regarding the electric dipole field was calculated at a distance d = 10 nm from the electric dipole. When the distance from the dipole is greater than its size, the approach form of the resulting electric field is (3)where εr is the dielectric constant of PEDOT:PSS, which was 3.1 according to capacitor measurement. In Fig. 7, as the electric dipole moment increased from 0.01 Debye to 0.10 Debye, the intensity of the electric field increased from about 10 V cm−1 to 100 V cm−1, which indicates that the longer conjugate PEDOT chain is a more effective transport carrier because of its larger dipole field. To prove that the PEDOT chain can be aligned along the UV field, the resistance was measured parallel and perpendicular to the UV polarization, as shown in the inset of Fig. 8. The resistance of the PEDOT:PSS film parallel to the UV polarization was lower than the resistance perpendicular to the UV polarization. Therefore, the UV irradiation of PEDOT:PSS films extends the PEDOT chain, thereby transforming the conformation structure of the film from the benzoid resonant structure to the quinoid resonant structure, wherein the conjugate π-electrons are completely delocalized over the whole PEDOT chain. This change accounts for the high carrier mobility and conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film. The anisotropic conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film imparts a strong field dependence on conductivity in the direction of UV polarization. The sheet resistances of PEDOT:PSS films under varying UV irradiation times were measured and the corresponding total dipole moments were calculated as a function of the conjugation length of the PEDOT chain to prove the high conductivity of the PEDOT chain with the larger dipole moment (Fig. 9). The sheet resistance decreased with increasing UV irradiation time, which indicates that UV irradiation of PEDOT:PSS films effectively increases the chain conjugation length by enhancing the dipole moment in the polymer chain. Accordingly, the conductivity of the PEDOT chain strongly depends on its dipole moment. Consequently, UV irradiation enhances the Jsc and FF of photovoltaic cells, as shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1, respectively.
 Fig. 8  The resistances of PEDOT:PSS film were obtained parallel and perpendicular to the UV polarization. The sketch inset shows the measurement method of film resistance. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Measured sheet resistances of a PEDOT:PSS film irradiated with various UV exposure times. (b) Calculated total dipole moments as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. 
Differences in barrier height and the direction of the interface dipole moment affect carrier extraction from the interface between the PEDOT:PSS film and ITO. The charge transfer at the interface is controlled by the difference between the work function (ΦM) of ITO and the ionization potential of PEDOT:PSS, which are both measured with respect to a common vacuum level. As shown in Fig. 1, the ΦM (5.21 eV) of the O2 plasma-treated ITO is below the ionization potential of the untreated PEDOT:PSS (dashed line), i.e., the ΦM is greater than the energy difference between the vacuum level and the ionization potential. Negative charges are then transferred from the PEDOT:PSS to the ITO, which induce interface dipole. The interface dipole contributes to carrier extraction from the PEDOT:PSS layer. Fig. 10 shows the calculated ionization potential of PEDOT as a function of the conjugation length of the chain. All ionization potentials were considered with respect to the ΦM. The varying conjugation length of the PEDOT chain (from 2 to 16 repeat units) resulted in a decrease in the calculated ionization potential from 6.43 eV to 4.17 eV, as indicated by the downward arrow. This finding suggests that the PEDOT chains of PEDOT:PSS films with small ionization potential relative to the vacuum level have long conjugation lengths. However, the surfaces of UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS films have large ionization potentials (based on KPFM), which indicates that UV irradiation degrades the PEDOT chains near the film surface, thereby decreasing the conjugation length. Accordingly, the distribution of conjugation length within the PEDOT:PSS film gradually increases. We propose a gradient band diagram for the UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film, as shown by the inclined solid line in Fig. 1. In general, the dipole moment at the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface is small, which reduces the external photocurrent and the open circuit voltage of photovoltaic cells. To address these issues, we used the simple and effective process of UV irradiation on the PEDOT:PSS film to obtain a gradient ionization potential that simultaneously reduces organic/organic barrier formation and enhances charge extraction at the metal/organic interface. These modifications reduce the initial energy difference between the PEDOT:PSS and pentacene and produces a large dipole moment at the ITO/PEDOT:PSS interface, which allows the collection of more carriers at the anode, thereby enhancing the Jsc, Voc, and FF of OPV devices.
 Fig. 10  DFT indicates ionization potential of the PEDOT as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. The sketch inset shows that the conjugation length of the PEDOT chains increases gradually from the surface of a PEDOT:PSS film. 
We extended these ideas and showed that the performance of polymer-based photovoltaic cells can also be enhanced by UV irradiation. Polymer-based OPV devices are fabricated with anodes that consist of PEDOT:PSS (with or without UV irradiation) spin cast on O2-plasma-treated ITO substrates. The influence of UV irradiation on the J–V curve of polymer-based OPV cells that consist of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) blends with indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA) is shown in Fig. 11. The non-irradiated OPV cells had a Voc of 0.846, Jsc of 7.61 mA cm−2, and an FF of 62%, whereas the irradiated OPV cells had a Voc of 0.855, Jsc of 8.14 mA cm−2, and an FF of 66%. The calculated PCE of the OPV device increased from 4.03% to 4.62% after UV exposure on the PEDOT:PSS films for 80 min. In polymer-based OPVs, the increase of Voc is hardly obtained because the S value in eqn (1) for polymer heterojunctions is small; approximately 0.1.29Fig. 11 clearly shows that the Jsc and Voc values increase with increasing UV irradiation time. This result indicates that the sheet resistance of the PEDOT:PSS films decreased. In addition, the PEDOT:PSS surface potential of this polymer-based OPV device has a considerably stronger effect on Vb1 than that in small-molecule OPV devices even though the S is small in polymer-based devices. Hence, UV irradiation of PEDOT:PSS films can be applied to bilayer heterojunction OPV cells and to polymer-based devices. In principle, transporting carriers are easily trapped at the metal/organic interface to degrade the organic material near the interface. Considering the calculated ionization potential decreased with increasing conjugation length of the PEDOT chain, the larger dipole field formed at the metal/organic interface facilitated the extraction of carriers from the PEDOT:PSS layer into ITO to overcome the instability of OPV devices. Fig. 12 illustrates the time-dependent changes in the Jsc of polymer-based OPV cells with UV irradiated and non-irradiated PEDOT:PSS layers. The decay of UV-irradiated OPV cells is less than non-irradiated device during 7200 s of continuous operation. We observed a strong correlation between the current decay and the interface dipole field. The larger dipole field induced by UV irradiation decreases the time-dependent decay of the current density of OPV cells, i.e., it enhances their stability. Interestingly, a slight increase in current occurs during the initial measurement (before 200 s) of the OPV cell with 80 min UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS layer, as shown in the inset of Fig. 12. The connection between interface dipole field and stability becomes more evident when we examine the alignment of the PEDOT chain under UV irradiation.
 Fig. 11  The influence of UV irradiation effect on the current density–voltage characteristics of OPV cells consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) blends employing an indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA). 
 Fig. 12  The time-dependent short-circuit current density of OPV cells with untreated (0 min) and UV-irradiated (80 min) PEDOT:PSS layers. 
4. Conclusions
We employed micro-Raman spectroscopy, AFM, KPFM, four-point probe, and quantum chemical calculation to determine the mechanism of the alignment of polymer chains and the band diagram of PEDOT:PSS films upon UV irradiation. The average conjugation length of UV-irradiated PEDOT chains increases with increasing UV irradiation time. However, the conjugation length near the surface decreases because of the accompanying degradation. We proposed a gradient HOMO band diagram for UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film based on the relationship between the ionization potential and conjugation length. The effects of UV on PEDOT:PSS thin films are as follows: (i) morphological changes caused by the thermal effect; (ii) decreased barrier energy at the organic/organic heterojunction, which enhances carrier injection; (iii) increased dipole moment at the metal/organic interface, which facilitates carrier extraction to the anode; (iv) dominant conformation change from the benzoid structure to the quinoid structure because of the interaction between the electric dipole of the PEDOT chain and the UV field; and (v) enhanced conductivity, which is associated with dipole field changes caused by longer conjugation lengths. This high-conductivity UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film has a high carrier transport capacity and is ideal for use as electrodes in both small-molecule OPV cells and polymer-based devices. The stability of OPV devices can also be improved by incorporating UV irradiation into the fabrication process. UV-irradiated PEDOT:PSS film can also be applied in other organic semiconductors and devices.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Contract no. NSC 99-2112-M-006-014-MY3, and NSC 99-2627-E-006-001.
Notes and references
A. J. Kronemeijer, E. H. Huisman, I. Katsouras, P. A. van Hal, T. C. T. Geuns, P. W. M. Blom, S. J. van der Molen and D. M. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 156604 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hong, S. Y. Yang, C. Yang, S. H. Kim, D. Choi and C. E. Park, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, J. K. Kim and O. O. Park, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1641–1644 CrossRef .
S. H. Eom, S. Senthilarasu, P. Uthirakumar, S. C. Yoon, J. Lim, C. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. Lee and S. H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Koh, J. M. Choi, S. Lee and S. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tekin, P. J. Smith and U. S. Schubert, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 703–713 RSC .
J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Grüner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472–2477 CrossRef CAS .
P. Matyba, H. Yamaguchi, M. Chhowalla, N. D. Robinson and L. Edman, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 574–580 CrossRef .
J. Kawahara, P. A. Ersman, I. Engquist and M. Berggren, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gruner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3533–3539 RSC .
X. W. Sun, J. Z. Huang, J. X. Wang and Z. Xu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1219–1223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Döbbelin, R. Marcilla, M. Salsamendi, C. P. Gonzalo, P. M. Carrasco, J. A. Pomposo and D. Mecerreyes, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2147–2149 CrossRef .
E. Vitoratos, S. Sakkopoulos, E. Dalas, N. Paliatsas, D. Karageorgopoulos, F. Petraki, S. Kennou and S. A. Choulis, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, M. M. de Kok, E. Vinken, K. Maturova and R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink and R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 085208 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson and D. D. C. Bradley, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Timpanaro, M. Kemerink, F. J. Touwslager, M. M. de Kok and S. Schrader, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 394, 339–343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, C. Sachse, M. L. Machala, C. May, L. M. Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1076–1081 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C. W. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
G. Greczynski, T. Kugler, M. Keil, W. Osikowicz, M. Fahlman and W. R. Salaneck, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2001, 121, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, Q. Xu, C. W. Chu, Y. Yang, G. Li and J. Shinar, Polymer, 2004, 45, 8443–8450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, C. W. Chu, F. C. Chen, Q. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, H. Kenrick, M. Chiesa and R. H. Friend, Polymer, 2005, 46, 2573–2578 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wagenpfahl, D. Rauh, M. Binder, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 115306 CrossRef .
T. Tanai, D. P. Tew and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 51–57 CrossRef .

          M. J. Frisch
          
            et al.
          , Gaussian 03, Revision E.01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
          Gaussian 09, Revision A.02, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cavino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moliton and J. M. Nunzi, Polym. Int., 2006, 55, 583–600 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Singh, T. Meghdadi, S. Gunes, N. Marjanovic, G. Horowitz, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2315–2320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lapkowski and A. Proň, Synth. Met., 2000, 110, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garreau, J. L. Duvail and G. Louarn, Synth. Met., 2002, 125, 325–329 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Voc = S0 × Voc1 − S1 × Vb1 − S2 × Vb2 + C	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Proposed energy-level diagram of photovoltaic cells with structure ITO/PEDOT:PSS/pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11/BCP/Ag/Al in which ITO and PEDOT:PSS are anodes and Ag and Al are cathodes.	 

0	52.0 ± 0.3	0.53 ± 0.02	13.8
20	54.2 ± 0.4	0.63 ± 0.05	12.9
40	58.1 ± 0.7	0.73 ± 0.04	12.2
60	57.5 ± 0.3	0.77 ± 0.02	11.8
80	56.4 ± 0.6	0.74 ± 0.03	11.5

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current density–voltage characteristics of small molecule photovoltaic cells using ITO and PEDOT:PSS as an electrode irradiated for various UV times. The photovoltaic cell has the following structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/pentacene/PTCDI-C5H11/BCP/Ag/Al. (b) Surface potentials of the PEDOT:PSS films irradiated for various UV times and Voc of the these PEDOT:PSS film-based photovoltaic devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  AFM images of PEDOT:PSS surfaces irradiated by UV lights under (a) 0, (b) 20, (c) 40, (d) 60 min. All images are 4 μm × 4 μm in size.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman spectra of PEDOT:PSS films irradiated for various UV irradiation times.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Vibrational symmetry modes (labeled as pink vectors) and out-of-plane bending modes (labeled as blue vectors) of a PEDOT polymer chain in the neutral state, determined from the B3LYP/6-31G(d) calculations. The vectors indicate the displacement of the atoms in the Cartesian coordinate system. (b) Calculated vibration frequency of CαCβ symmetric stretching of the five-membered thiophene ring (□) and C–H out-of-plane bending of the ethylenedioxy ring (△) on the PEDOT chain as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain.	 

 	Scheme 1  The UV irradiation on PEDOT chain leads to the conformation change from a benzoid structure to a quinoid structure.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (Upper channel) Polarized Raman spectra of the PEDOT:PSS film irradiated with polarized UV light for 80 min in the x-direction (the first symbol in the legend) excited by a polarized He–Ne laser at 632.8 nm. The polarized Raman scatterings were obtained parallel (in the x-direction, the second symbol in the legend) and perpendicular (in the y-direction, the second symbol in the legend) to the polarization of the laser. For comparison, a Raman spectrum of a native PEDOT:PSS film labeled as 0 min is included. The spectrum in the lower channel is obtained by subtracting the xy spectrum from the xx spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 7  DFT indicates dipole moments on the PEDOT chain as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. The coordinate is the same as the definition in Fig. 5a.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 8  The resistances of PEDOT:PSS film were obtained parallel and perpendicular to the UV polarization. The sketch inset shows the measurement method of film resistance.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Measured sheet resistances of a PEDOT:PSS film irradiated with various UV exposure times. (b) Calculated total dipole moments as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain.	 

 	Fig. 10  DFT indicates ionization potential of the PEDOT as a function of conjugation length of the PEDOT chain. The sketch inset shows that the conjugation length of the PEDOT chains increases gradually from the surface of a PEDOT:PSS film.	 

 	Fig. 11  The influence of UV irradiation effect on the current density–voltage characteristics of OPV cells consisting of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) blends employing an indene-C60 bis-adduct (ICBA).	 

 	Fig. 12  The time-dependent short-circuit current density of OPV cells with untreated (0 min) and UV-irradiated (80 min) PEDOT:PSS layers.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
