Construction of one-dimensional nanostructures on graphene for efficient energy conversion and storage   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00531G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00531G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559-2579Construction of one-dimensional nanostructures on graphene for efficient energy conversion and storage†

        
          
            Jia Le 
            Xie†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Chun Xian 
            Guo†
abc and 

        
          
            Chang Ming 
            Li
          
          
        
      *abc
aInstitute for Clean Energy & Advanced Materials, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P.R. China. E-mail: ecmli@swu.edu.cn
bChongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials & Technologies of Clean Electrical Power Sources, Chongqing 400715, P.R. China
cFaculty of Materials and Energy, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P.R. China
Received 
      15th February 2014
    , Accepted 16th May 2014First published on 16th May 2014AbstractOne-dimensional (1D) nanostructures can efficiently scatter incident light, resulting in improved absorption or complete absorption for solar energy conversion and storage. However, 1D nanostructures often lack good conductivity for fast charge transfer and/or transport. A thin-layer coating of graphene gives superior conductivity for improving the charge transport ability while its highly transparency does not deteriorate the light absorption. Thus, construction of 1D nanostructured materials on graphene as an electrode to synergistically boost high-efficiency energy conversion and storage have attracted great attention in recent years. In this feature review, starting with general concepts of 1D nanostructures on a substrate, various advanced methods for the design, fabrication and characterization of different 1D nanostructures comprising inorganic, organic and hybrid materials built on graphene are systematically surveyed. In particular, the significant progress in fabrication strategies, superior nanostructures and unique architectures is discussed, while the excellent electrical, optical, mechanical, and electrochemical properties of the nanostructured composites as well as their important applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, light-emitting diodes and nanogenerators are also presented. The enhancement mechanisms for the efficient energy conversion and storage are highlighted to elicit scientific insights. The challenges and prospects are also deliberated to spark our future researches. This review provides critical and updated knowledge for researchers to further explore new 1D-structured materials on graphene and their important applications in energy conversion and storage.Jia Le XieJiale Xie is a PhD student in the Institute of Clean Energy & Advanced Materials, Southwest University, China. He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Southwest University in 2009. His research focuses on the synthesis and functionalization of metal oxide nanostructures, in particular one-dimensional arrays and their applications in solar cells and solar water splitting, etc.Chun Xian GuoDr Chunxian Guo received his Bachelor and PhD (Supervisor of Prof. Chang Ming Li) degrees from Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) in 2007 and 2011 respectively. In 2012, he joined Institute of Clean Energy and Advanced Materials of Southwest University as a Professor. He works on functional composite materials composed of metal oxide, conducting polymer and nanostructured carbon and their applications in supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and biosensors. He has obtained several awards including the Best Poster Award of the 1st International Conference on Clean Energy (Dalian, China, 2011), Chinese Government Award for Outstanding Self-finance Students Abroad (2010) and Singapore Government-Linked Company Full Scholarship (2003).Chang Ming LiDr Chang Ming Li is currently the Professor and Dean of Faculty for Materials and Energy in Southwest University and Director for Chongqing Key Lab for Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, China. He worked with Motorola as a distinguished technical member, Science Advisory Board Associate and senior scientific manager. Later he became Professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and Director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Motorola Master Innovator Award in 1999, Nanyang Innovation and Research Award in 2008, China National Talent 1000 Award (2011), China Overseas Innovation Talent Award (2012) and Australia National University Craig Visiting Professor (2012). His main research interests are nanomaterials, green energies and biosensors/lab-on-a chip. He has published over 400 peer-reviewed journal papers, 8 book chapters and holds 124 patents with ∼10000 citations. He is a Fellow of American Institute of Medicine and Biological Engineering and an RSC Fellow, serving as an Editorial Board Member of RSC Advances and a member of the Advisory Board for Nanoscale, RSC.

Broader context
Environmentally friendly and economic renewable energy conversion and storage systems have been fueled up to face energy and environmental challenges. The lack of excellent electrode materials is a critical limit for the improvement of device performance. Among the various nanostructured materials, one-dimensional nanostructures constructed on graphene composite (1D@G) have unique physico-chemical properties to develop highly efficient energy conversion and storage systems. In this review we systematically discuss the fundamentals of 1D@G in terms of their structure and property followed by further survey of the progress of growth approaches for 1D nanostructures and multifarious 1D nanomaterials composited with graphene as well as their important applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, light-emitting diodes and nanogenerators.

1. Introduction
Solar cells, sodium/lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, light-emitting diodes and nanogenerators that are both environmentally friendly and renewable energy conversion and storage systems hold great promise for alternative sustainable energies.1–6 However, the performance of these energy systems needs to be further significantly improved to satisfy increasing demands placed upon them. Electrode materials as electrocatalysts in these energy systems are critical to the performance improvement, in which the composition and structure are two important factors. In particular, a proper structure can greatly improve the electrode kinetic process by providing high electroactivity, fast charge interfacial transfer and enhanced mass transport. Graphene, a magnificent two-dimensional (2D) carbonic nanomaterial with superior structural and chemical/physical properties has attracted increasing attention over recent years.7–13 Its one-atom thickness and large 2D plane lead to an extremely high specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), excellent transparency (∼97.7%), high flexibility and fast interface charge transfer. The zero band-gap characteristic of graphene allows both electron- and hole-transport through an ambipolar electric field effect to achieve a carrier concentration of up to 1013 cm−2 and a mobility exceeding 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.14,15 In particular, graphene-based materials have demonstrated controllable surface and interface properties as well as tailored work functions via functionalization during synthesis and/or post-treatment. Moreover, based on its 2D parent structure, various nanostructured graphene materials have been fabricated, such as graphene quantum dots,16 graphene ribbons,17 graphene flowers18 and three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical graphene materials.19 In addition, approaches for low-cost and large-scale synthesis,20 patterning21,22 and transferring23 have recently been developed for graphene. In recent years, graphene has been extensively used in various energy systems such as Li-ion batteries,24 fuel cells,25–27 water splitting,28 solar cells,29–31 supercapacitors32,33 and hydrogen storage34,35 for efficient energy conversion and storage. In particular, since the popularly used ITO and FTO transparent conducting films have some limitations, such as the limited indium supply, chemical instability in the presence of acids or bases, high sheet resistance on flexible substrates and poor transparency in ultraviolet and blue regions, the highly conductive and transparent graphene film can be a better alternative as a photoelectrode for solar energy conversion. It has been reported that even a 4-layer graphene film is more transparent at near-infrared wavelengths than ITO for practical device applications.36 More details for the advantages of 1D structures on graphene will be discussed in a later section.
As a low-dimensional system, a one-dimensional (1D) nanostructure possesses many unique characteristics. It can shorten the path of carrier transportation, enhance the carrier collection ability and function as an electron expressway in the axial direction.37–39 In a 1D nanostructure, the electronic wave-functions are constrained by quantum effects in the nanoscale directions, resulting in significant changes in electronic properties in comparison with irregular or other-dimensional structures. With respect to optical properties, a 1D nanostructure can trap photons more efficiently and may undergo surface plasmon resonances.40 By reducing the number of defects per unit length, a 1D nanostructure can render strong mechanical properties that are essential for its nanoscale manipulation and further macro applications.41 Other unique characteristics of 1D nanostructures include high specific surface area, electronegative absorption and photoinduced oxidation properties in chemical-related aspects.42 Considering its chemical composition, a 1D nanostructured material can be made of inorganic materials such as metal (i.e. Ag and Au),43–46 metal oxides (i.e. ZnO, TiO2, MnO2 and Co3O4),47–57 carbonic/organic materials (i.e. carbon nanotubes and polyaniline),58–63 and hybrids (i.e. polythiophene/ZnO nanowires and reduced graphene-wrapped TiO2 nanorods).64,65 However 1D nanostructures often lack good conductivity for fast charge transfer, in particular at an interface. A thin-layer-coating of graphene is able to improve the interfacial charge transfer ability while its high transparency does not deteriorate the absorption of light. Construction of 1D nanostructured materials with unique characteristics and diverse chemical components on graphene can result in intriguing material characteristics from synergistic effects including high electrical conductivity, optical transparency, high specific surface area, low cost and good mechanical flexibility/strength, thus holding great promise as an electrode material for the next generation of energy conversion and storage devices with high energy/power density, transparency, touchability, foldability, portability and flexibility.
In this review, we summarize the recent development of 1D nanostructured materials constructed on graphene as electrodes with unique physico-chemical properties to synergistically promote highly efficient energy conversion and storage. The general concepts of constructing 1D nanostructures on a substrate are introduced, followed by a systematic survey of methods for the design, fabrication and characterization of various 1D nanostructures on graphene, in particular, highlighting the significant progress in fabrication strategies. Then, we discuss the electrical, optical, mechanical, and electrochemical properties associated with the synergistic effect of nanostructures and chemical compositions. As a demonstration of the beauty of the 1D structure, we present examples of the applications of 1D nanostructure/graphene in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, light-emitting diodes and nanogenerators, and further discuss the enhancement mechanisms for efficient energy conversion and storage. In the final part, we discuss the challenges and prospects in this research area.
2. Fundamentals of 1D nanostructures on graphene in energy conversion and storage
2.1. Fundamental properties of 1D nanostructures
1D nanostructured materials have a large surface area and quantum confinement effect, while possessing unique electrical, photovoltaic, optical and mechanical properties (Fig. 1). In a low-dimensional 1D material, the electronic wave-functions are constrained by quantum effects in the nanoscale directions, resulting in the quantum confinement effect. If a 1D nanostructure has the same crystal structure as its bulk counterpart, the electronic state is a subset of the electronic states of the bulk phase. Confinement effects for electrons may appear in the transverse direction whilst allowing electrons free movement in one dimension along the structure. As a typical example, single-walled carbon nanotubes have diameters of 1–2 nm, and the confinement effects come from the adjustment of electronic wave-functions to fit to the circumference of the nanotube. The wave vector components in the nanoscale directions only take discrete values, thus becoming quantized (Fig. 2c). Assuming the electronic confinement in the x- and y-directions and free electron motion in the z-direction (Fig. 2a), the Schrödinger equation can be written as follows: [px2 + py2 + pz2/2m + V(x,y)]Ψ(x,y,z) = Ψ(x,y,z)E.(1)The density of states can be calculated along the z-direction: (2)where Lz is the length of the 1D nanostructure, ℏ is the Planck's constant over 2π, me is the electron mass, E is the total electron energy and Ei is considered as a critical energy in the density of states. In different dimensional systems, electrons behave quite differently (Fig. 2b). In 1D nanostructures, the density of states is proportional to E−1/2, different from its relation to E and E1/2 in 2D and 3D nanostructures, respectively. The electronic properties of 1D nanostructures are largely affected by density of states, and hence are significantly different from the bulk and other dimensions.
 Fig. 1  Unique properties of one-dimensional nanostructures. 
 Fig. 2  Quantum confinement effect: (a) schematic of 1D nanostructure; (b) density of states of 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D systems; (c) energy level diagram of a 1D system. 
1D nanostructures also have unique photovoltaic properties. In general, the generation and separation of excitons induced by the photon absorption and the built-in electric potential gradient greatly affect the performance of a photovoltaic device. For a 1D nanostructure with a diameter below its critical value (the Bohr radius), the quantum confinement effect plays an important role in determining the energy levels. 1D nanostructures can trap the photons more efficiently with the proper geometric configuration for the generation of excitons and considerably facilitate the collection of free carriers for exciton separation due to their physical dimensions similar to the carrier diffusion length. Moreover, in comparison to zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, 1D nanomaterials could serve as an electron expressway in the axial direction for electron collection due to a shorter collection time. As an example, single-crystalline TiO2 nanowires have an electron mobility of ∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than that of polycrystalline nanoparticles.66 Besides, the recombination time of 1D nanostructures is much longer than that of their 0D counterparts.67 This might be attributed to different distributed recombination centres on their surface and the existence of a radial electric field in 1D nanostructures that prevents carrier recombination.
1D nanostructures can have interesting optical properties. They can efficiently scatter incident light, resulting in improved absorption or complete absorption. It has been shown that ZnO nanorod arrays can be an effective anti-reflection coating due to their periodic structure in a broadband range of 400–1200 nm.68 In particular for 1D nanotubes, an even higher light absorbance from the trapped light can be scattered and absorbed several times higher.67 1D metallic nanostructures have nearly free conduction electrons to undergo collective excitation called surface plasmon resonances (SPRs), which play a major role in the optics of these systems. 1D nanowires made from metals such as Au and Ag show two SPR modes, corresponding to transverse and longitudinal excitations, respectively.69 Light emitted from the 1D nanowire is highly polarized along the longitudinal axes.
The mechanical properties of 1D nanostructures are essential for manipulation in the nanoscale and further applications in the macroscale. It has mechanical properties that are different from its micro- or other-dimensional counterparts. Most single crystalline 1D nanostructures are significantly stronger than their high-dimensional counterparts. This is attributed to a reduced number of defects per unit length. It has been found from scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) studies that the bond strength of Au nanowires is approximately twice as strong as that of a bulk bond.70 Moreover, due to the unique structural flexibility, a 1D material is compatible with the flexible substrates, giving them potential in the development of various flexible electronics and photonics.
There are also other unique properties for 1D nanostructures, such as high specific surface, electronegative absorption and photo-induced oxidation properties. 1D nanostructures can be used as a sensor with small dimensions and high sensitivities for array-based screening and in vivo diagnostics. As the dimension of a 1D nanostructure is reduced to a range of phonons, it could offer free paths and reduced thermal conductivity due to scattering by boundaries. The melting point of a 1D nanomaterial is greatly lower than that of a bulk material,71 which is advantageous for annealing at modest temperatures, manipulating nanowires easily, cooling quickly, generating power efficiently, and detecting environmental changes sensitively.
2.2. Structure and properties of 1D nanostructures/graphene nanocomposites
The superior structural and physical properties are schematically shown in Fig. 1. Graphene can be synthesized on a large-scale and at low cost. More detail and fundamental properties of graphene and graphene-derived materials have been reviewed over the past years.72–79 Graphene-based nanocomposite materials with polymer, metal and/or metal oxide can provide unique electronic, mechanical and electrochemical properties contributed from their individual components.80–84 In particular, the construction of 1D nanostructures on graphene (1D@G) brings specific functions and properties from the synergistic effect of graphene and the 1D nanostructure as follows: (1) graphene as a 2D platform to uniformly anchor or disperse 1D nanostructures with well-defined sizes, shapes and crystallinity. Densely and vertically aligned ZnO nanorod arrays with good crystallinity can be seedlessly and directly electrodeposited on oxidized bi-layer graphene, but normally they are not able to grow without a seed layer. This work indicates that the oxidized defects on the graphene surface can efficiently assist the nucleation and epitaxial growth of ZnO.85 On the other hand, 1D nanostructures could passivate the graphene defects and reduce the sheet resistance.86 (2) 1D nanostructures suppress graphene re-stacking. For example, MnO2 nanowires on graphene could efficiently prevent the aggregation of graphene for improvement of the electrochemical capacitance.87 (3) Graphene acts as a 2D conductive template to assemble 1D nanostructures for a 3D conductive network.60,87 (4) Graphene suppresses the volume change and agglomeration of 1D nanostructures. Silicon-based Li-ion batteries with structural and interfacial stability are very attractive. Wang et al. synthesized graphene-wrapped silicon nanowires for a high-performance Li-ion battery, in which graphene layer can absorb well the volume change of the Si nanowires whilst preventing the direct exposure of the Si nanowires to the electrolyte.88 (5) Oxygen-containing groups on graphene can ensure good bonding, strong interfacial interactions and sound electrical contact between graphene and 1D nanostructures. It has been reported that polyaniline nanowires directly grown on graphene oxide sheets have a higher capacitance than those of sandwiched rGO/polyaniline nanofibers, indicating that the former has better electrical contact and stronger interfacial interactions for a more electroactive surface than the latter.60,89 Several structural models of this composition type are shown in Fig. 3 as well as in Table 1. (e) 1D nanostructures growing on 3D-structured graphene or other nanostructured graphene.56,90–92 1D@G materials have been compared with 0D@G materials including TiO2 nanoparticles,93 CdS or CdSe quantum dots,94,95 Au or Pt nanoparticles,96,97 and CoO or Co3O4 nanoparticles98,99 for various applications. The experimental results from Fan et al. indicate that the photocatalytic activities of the former are higher than the latter due to the more uniform distribution of nanowires on the graphene sheets, stronger interfacial interactions, better electron–hole separation and transportation, and much less carrier scattering between 0D nanoparticles. In particular, the superior synergistic effects of 1D@G nanocomposites made from inorganic materials such as metal (i.e., Ag and Au), metal oxides (i.e., ZnO, TiO2, MnO2 and Co3O4) and carbonic/organic materials (i.e., carbon nanotube and polyaniline) for important applications in energy conversion and storage applications are summarized in Table 1, which clearly shows that most of such materials are synthesized and the 1D structures directly grown on the graphene surface by hydrothermal methods.
 Fig. 3  Structure models of 1D@G composite materials: (a) 1D nanostructures growing directly on graphene; (b) graphene wrapping 1D nanostructures; (c) 1D nanostructure containing graphene sheets or G@1D@G composite materials; (d) sandwich-like G@1D@G composite. 
Table 1 Summary of the applications and related synergistic effects of the representative 1D@G nanostructures




Model
1D@G
Approach
Application
Synergistic effect
Ref.




a
MnO2, Mn3O4, ZnO, TiO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, SnO2, Cu2O, Co3O4, V2O5, VO2, WO3, CdS, CuGeO3, Au, Ag, CNT, PANI, InGaN/GaN, SiO2/Fe3O4
Hydrothermal, electrodeposition, CVD, PECVD, self-assembly, microwave irradiation and polymerization
Supercapacitor, solar cells, photocatalysis, LEDs, Li-ion batteries, nanogenerators and sensors
Superior electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, high transparency, porous structure, 3D conduction network, preventing restacking of graphene, low ionic diffusion resistance and charge transfer resistance

46, 50, 60, 80, 85, 87 and 122–169



b
TiO2, CNT, Ag, Ge, Si
UV reduction, CVD, arc-discharge
Solar cells, photocatalysis, Li-ion batteries, transparent electrodes, memory devices
High transparency, good dispersibility, accommodating the volume change of electrode materials, superior electron transfer ability, low charge recombination

43, 65, 88 and 170–177



c
CNT, PVA, PBASE/PVAc
Electrospinning and carbonization
Photonics, such as light emitters and fiber lasers
Improved mechanical and thermal properties, enhanced wideband absorption, non-linear optical behavior

178–180



d
PANI, CNT, Sn
Vacuum filtration, CVD, self-assembly
Supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries
Mechanical stability, high flexibility, high specific surface area, good conductivity, low faradaic resistance, high capacitance, high cycling stability

89 and 181–185



e
Co3O4, CNT, ZnO
Hydrothermal, CVD
Supercapacitors, sensors
Large specific surface area, excellent cycling stability, 3D conduction network, lower diffusion resistance and charge-transfer resistance

56, 186 and 187





3. Approaches to construct 1D nanostructures
The growth of 1D nanostructures is a process including nucleation and growth from a vapour, liquid or solid phase, and a variety of physical and chemical approaches through template assistance, electrospinning, electrochemical deposition, etching and polymerization is summarized in Fig. 4. In the use of these methods, the most important issue is how to delicately and simultaneously control the dimensions, morphology (or shape) and monodispersity (or uniformity) of the 1D nanostructures. Some reviews have surveyed the synthesis of 1D nanostructures.41,100–110 The epitaxial growth of various semiconductor nanowires on graphene substrates has been discussed.111 Here we mainly focus on the methods that are compatible with graphene to build 1D nanostructure/graphene nanocomposites including some updated works regarding semiconductor nanowires on graphene.
 Fig. 4  Mainly used physical and chemical methods for the preparation of 1D nanostructures: (a) vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) and the related growth methods; (b) template (soft or hard)-assisted method; (c) electrospinning method; (d) hydrothermal/solvothermal method with capping molecules; (e) electrochemical deposition or electrochemical polymerization method; (f) chemical/electrochemical etching method. 
3.1. 1D nanostructures from vapour phase
The vapour phase method is probably the most extensively explored one for the construction of 1D nanostructures such as whiskers, nanorods and nanowires. In principle, it could be used to process any solid material for 1D nanostructures by controlling the supersaturation at a certain level. Strong evidence indicates that the degree of supersaturation determines the prevailing growth morphology. Thus the supersaturation control is a prime consideration for the growth of 1D nanostructures. In a typical process, the vapour species are first generated by evaporation, chemical reduction, and/or other gaseous reactions, followed by transporting and condensing onto the surface of a substrate at a lower temperature. Therefore the major advantage of a vapour-phase method is its simplicity and accessibility. However, it requires expensive equipment and the reaction parameters should be controlled accurately to obtain reproducible materials.
Among all the vapour-based methods, the vapour–liquid–solid approach seems to be the most successful one for the production of nanowires with single crystalline structures in relatively large quantities. Typically a process starts with the dissolution of gaseous reactants into nanosized liquid droplets of a catalyst metal, followed sequentially by nucleation and growth of single crystalline rods and wires. The 1D growth is mainly induced and dictated by the liquid droplets, of which the sizes remain essentially unchanged during the entire process of nanowire growth, and each droplet serves as a soft template to strictly limit the lateral growth of an individual wire. The methods of chemical vapour deposition (CVD),112 physical vapour deposition (PVD)113 and derived metal organic chemical deposition (MOCVD)114 belong to this category. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs),115 SiC nanowires,116 CdS nanotubes,117 ZnO nanorods,112,113,118 ZnO nanotips,119 TiO2 nanowires120 and Bi2O3 nanorods121 have been synthesized using these techniques.
3.2. 1D nanostructures from liquid phase
Hydrothermal and solvothermal techniques have been widely applied in the liquid phase for any solid materials for material synthesis, which utilize water (or organic solvent) under pressure and a temperature above its critical point to increase the solubility of a solid while speeding up the reactions between solids. Typically, a precursor and possibly a reagent capable of regulating and/or templating the crystal growth are added to a solvent at an appropriate ratio. The mixture is often placed in an autoclave at elevated temperatures and pressures. When changing the reaction conditions, such as increasing the reaction temperature, the reaction is pushed and in some district the concentration of the monomer (i.e., atoms, ions or molecules) appears higher than its saturation, resulting in monomer aggregation to small clusters through fast and homogenous nucleation. Then the clusters serve as seeds for further growth to form larger nanostructures. After nucleation and growth, Ostwald ripening188,189 is the main process that produces the final nanostructures. Due to the surface energy difference between small and larger particles the larger particles grow beside the small ones and the small particles dissolve into the solution. To obtain the desired nanostructures with perfect crystallinities, homogenous composition and uniform morphology, the growth parameters including the growth rate, surface energy, capping molecules and temperature should be well controlled. By using this approach most materials can be made soluble in a proper solvent by heating and pressurizing the system close to its critical point. Through adding the capping molecule52 to change the free energies of the various crystallographic surfaces and controlling the growth parameters, various complex and fascinating nanostructures can be fabricated, such as MnO2 nanowires,190 Ni nanobelts,191 Cd(OH)2 nanowires,192 ZnO nanorods,193 WO3 nanowires,194 CeO2 nanorods,195 V2O5 nanowires,144 Mg(OH)2 nanotubes or nanorods,196 and CdS nanorods.197 Most hydrothermal reactions are simple, controllable, environmentally friendly and inexpensive. The disadvantage mainly comes from their low yield and poor purity.
Self-assembly is a popular method to grow 1D nanostructures in the liquid phase. Electrostatic interaction, intermolecular interaction, and van der Waals interaction between the nanostructures and substrate are usually essential for the assembly process. Self-assembly can also involve the application of an external magnetic-, electric- or flow-field to induce or nucleate self-assembly. Monodispersed colloids have formed wire-like structures through self-assembly or externally manipulated assembly.198,199 Although the capability and feasibility of nanoscale self-assembly have been demonstrated to a certain extent, its success is still some distance from the accomplished self-assembly of 0D nanostructures (or molecules) in the liquid phase. The great challenge in the self-assembly of 1D nanostructures is to develop a practical route for well-controlled or tailored 1D nanostructures. More extensive studies are still in high demand.
3.3. 1D nanostructures fabricated by template assistance
This method is a straightforward route for the construction of 1D nanostructures. Normally, it can be categorized into ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ template approaches. During the fabrication the material of interest is grown into or around the template and is further shaped into a nanostructure with a morphology complementary to the template (Fig. 4b). Then the physical template is post-treated by chemical etching or calcination to harvest the required nanostructures. In a chemical process the template is usually consumed as the reaction proceeds for the possible direct production of a well-defined nanostructure. A large number of templates have been prepared and successfully demonstrated including step edges of a solid substrate surface,200 channels within a porous material,201 biological macromolecules such as DNA strains or rod-shaped viruses202 and synthesized nanostructured templates. Template-assisted synthesis is a simple, high-throughput and cost-effective process. Nevertheless, the synthesized nanostructures are often polycrystalline and the quantity of the structures produced in each synthetic run is relatively limited.
3.4. Electrospinning 1D nanostructures
Electrospinning is broadly employed to electrostatically and continuously fabricate fibres of polymers, composites, semiconductors and ceramics with diameters ranging from 2 nm to several microns (Fig. 4c).203–206 The fabrication process offers unique and flexible capabilities for the continuous production of nanofibers or patterns and fabrics with controllable composition and pore structure. Typically, a high voltage (>5 kV) is applied to the solution to produce a repulsive force within the charged solution that is larger than its surface tension and a jet erupts from the tip of the spinneret (as a template). The jet soon enters a bending instability stage with further stretching of the solution jet under the electrostatic forces as the solvent evaporates. Then a grounded receiver is used to collect the resulting fibres. The diameter can be controlled by changing the parameters including the solution viscosity, conductivity, applied voltage, spinneret tip-to-collector distance and humidity. Various fibre assemblies can also be produced through controlling the flight of the electrospinning jet through manipulation of the electric field or by using a dynamic collection device. It is advantageous by virtue of its simple set-up, flexibility and consistency of the process, and its repeatability for controlling the composition, properties and functionality of the nanofibers. Spun nanofibers offer an extremely high surface area, tunable porosity, and malleability to conform to a wide variety of sizes and shapes.
3.5. Electrochemical deposition
Electrochemical or chemical methods, which are often simple, mass-productive, controllable, economic and environmentally friendly, have been intensively employed to prepare metal oxides, polymers and single-crystal semiconductors. Electrochemical deposition is a process by which a thin and adherent desired coating of a metal, oxide or salt can be formed on the surface of a conductive substrate through simple electrolysis of a solution containing the desired metal ion or its chemical complex (Fig. 4e). Through controlling the electrochemical conditions including the current density, electrodeposition potential or electrolyte composition various nanostructured ZnO materials207–209 such as nanorods, nanotubes, nanoneedles and even a well-defined urchin-like nanostructure have been synthesized. 1D nanostructured polymers including nanofibers, nanorods and nanowires of polyaniline and polypyrrole have been templatelessly fabricated.210,211 Moreover, complicated or hybrid 1D nanostructures such as metal oxide/polymer coaxial nanowires have also been fabricated by electrochemical co-deposition.212 Electrochemical (or chemical) etching is also a method for the effective fabrication of 1D nanostructures such as Si nanowire arrays by etching a silicon wafer with HF (Fig. 4f).213
4. Various 1D nanostructured materials constructed on graphene
4.1. 1D inorganic nanostructured materials on graphene

4.1.1. 1D metal oxide materials. 
1D metal oxide nanostructures can provide a variety of important applications such as transparent electronics, piezoelectric nanogenerators, catalysts, sensors, and photovoltaic devices due to their unique shapes, compositions and chemical/physical properties. 1D metal oxide nanostructured materials including ZnO, TiO2, MnO2 and Co3O4 have been constructed on graphene to significantly improve the performances of energy conversion and storage devices.
ZnO, an n-type semiconductor with a direct band-gap of 3.37 eV has good stability, biocompatibility, high transparency and piezoelectricity, and has been constructed on graphene for graphene/ZnO nanocomposites. 1D ZnO nanostructures (Fig. 5a and 5b) can be grown directly on the mechanically exfoliated few-layer-graphene sheets using the catalyst-free metal–organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) and hydrothermal approaches.134,135 1D vertical ZnO nanoneedles or nanorods grown on a graphene surface by the hydrothermal approach have been demonstrated. Dense ZnO nanoneedles can grow along the boundaries of graphene and sometimes with nanowalls formed by MOCVD. Different ZnO nanostructures are produced from different growth mechanisms in hydrothermal growth and MOCVD. In MOCVD growth, gas molecules undergo nucleation easily at the edge of the graphene layers, which is the most active nucleation site for ZnO nanostructures. On the other hand, ZnO forms primarily in solution with hydrothermal reactions and therefore the surface status of the graphene substrate may not have much of an effect on the nucleation. Electrochemical deposition (ECD) is also an efficient approach to for the growth of 1D ZnO nanostructures on graphene, such as ZnO nanorods arrays grown on both oxidized and un-oxidized graphene from Zn(NO3)2 solution (Fig. 5c and 5d).85 The ZnO nanorods grown on non-oxidized graphene have a low density with a random orientation whereas highly dense ZnO nanorod arrays grown on oxidized graphene possess perfect vertical alignment, possibly due to the different nucleation processes to induce different growth behaviours. The electrodeposition of ZnO nanorods undergoes initial self-nucleation and subsequent rod growth, in which the zinc ions of the reactants are coordinated with the oxygen atoms on the oxidized graphene surface to result in heteroepitaxial growth of ZnO seeds for the initial nucleation process. On a non-oxidized graphene surface, ZnO seeds are primarily formed in the reaction solution and then randomly deposited on the electrode surface because the graphene surface is chemically inert. It can be concluded that surface functional groups play a critical role in the growth of 1D nanostructured metal oxides on graphene sheets, which can greatly affect the bonding and interfacial properties and the nanostructure uniformity.
 Fig. 5  1D ZnO nanostructures on graphene or graphene oxide surfaces. MOCVD (a) and hydrothermal (b) methods for preparing ZnO nanorods on graphene. ECD method prepared ZnO nanorods on graphene (c) and (d) graphene oxide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, 134 and 135. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2011, IOP Publishing; 2009, AIP Publishing.) 
TiO2 is known for its chemical stability, non-toxicity, large band-gap, high transparency and high photocatalytic activity, and has been grown on graphene for various energy conversion and storage systems including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),214 photocatalytic devices215,216 and lithium-ion batteries.143,217 TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 6a) have assembled on graphene oxide sheets at the water/toluene interface via a self-assembly approach.137 When combined with graphene the photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 nanorods is significantly improved, which is confirmed by the degradation of methylene blue (MB) under UV-light irradiation. This is attributed to the effective charge anti-recombination, fast charge transfer and the effective absorption of MB on the graphene surface. A nanocable composed of 1D TiO2 nanofibers wrapped with uniform UV-light-reduced graphene oxide (rGO) (Fig. 6b) has been fabricated,65 in which the conformably wrapped rGO on the TiO2 surface is a result of non-covalent interactions such as van der Waals and electrostatic forces. Integrating the rGO/TiO2 nanocables into the functional TiO2 photoanode greatly enhances the photo-induced electron transfer while depressing the charge combination.
 Fig. 6  1D TiO2, MnO2 and Co3O4 nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) TiO2 nanorod self-assembly on graphene oxide at a two-phase interface; (b) UV-light-reduced graphene oxide sheet wrapped TiO2 nanorods and the higher magnification TEM image (E); (c) MnO2 nanowires grown on graphene by solution-phase assembly; and (d) Co3O4 nanowires grown on 3D graphene by CVD and the higher magnification SEM image (F). [Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, 65, 87 and 137. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society (ACS); 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2010, ACS; 2010, WILEY-VCH.] 
1D nanostructured MnO2 and Co3O4 on graphene have been reported recently to produce high-performance supercapacitors. A MnO2 nanowire/graphene composite (Fig. 6c) has been prepared via a solution-based assembly approach,87 in which the nanowires with different lengths are uniformly and densely distributed on the graphene surface whilst preventing the stacking of graphene. The use of graphene significantly improves the conductivity of MnO2. Co3O4 has demonstrated great potential in supercapacitors, heterogeneous catalysts and Li-ion batteries218–224 because of its intriguing electronic, optical and electrocatalytic properties. A Co3O4 nanowire composite (Fig. 6d) has been synthesized by the in situ hydrothermal growth of single crystalline Co3O4 nanowires on 3D graphene scaffolds.56 Due to the excellent mechanical properties of 3D graphene, the nanocomposite can be fabricated as a free-standing monolithic electrode. The 3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composite-based supercapacitors exhibit greatly improved performance due to the synergistic effect of the 3D graphene and 1D Co3O4 nanowires. The 3D graphene foam provides three-dimensionally multiplexed and highly conductive pathways for rapid charge transfer and low ion diffusion resistance while the Co3O4 1D nanowires contribute exceptional electrochemical properties to the system.


4.1.2. 1D metal materials. 
1D nanostructured metals display unique physical and chemical properties generated from their quantum size effect, thus holding great promise for diverse applications such as in transparent conductors, nanoelectronics, photonics, sensors, catalysis and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. 1D nanostructured metals such as gold and silver have been fabricated on graphene nanosheets. Ultrathin gold nanowires (Au NWs) are synthesized by reduction of the 1-amino-9-octadecene–AuCl complex in organic solvents.225 Using a similar approach, an ultrathin layer of Au NWs and tadpole-shaped Au NWs have also been synthesized on GO sheets (Fig. 7c).122 The resulting Au NWs have a diameter of ca. 1.6 nm with hcp-crystal domains. The tadpole-shaped nanowires exhibit mixed hcp and fcc structures that are related to the variation of nanowire thickness. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 7d the growth of Au NWs on GO is started with the formation of ∼2 nm Au seeds by self-assembling discontinuous chain-like structures on GO. The chain-like structure comes from the reduction of Au+ in the chain-like structure of the [(1-amino-9-octadecene)AuCl] complex (step (a)). Then the short rod-like structures grow from the small Au seeds followed by arranging themselves into the discontinuous chains. Continuous ageing and reduction of the chain-like structure lead to the formation of ultrathin Au NWs on the GO surface (step (b)).
 Fig. 7  1D metal nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) Ag nanowires grown on N-doped graphene by one-step hydrothermal method; (b) hybrid structures with CVD single layer graphene film and a network of silver nanowires; (c) tadpole-shaped Au NWs with one enlarged ‘head’ grown on GO; (d) the formation process of Au NW from reduction of the [(1-amino-9-octadecene)AuCl] complex on GO; (e) rGO/Cu nanowires hybrid film prepared by spray and spin coating. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, 46, 122 and 226. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH; 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2012, WILEY-VCH; 2013, American Chemical Society.) 
1D silver nanostructures are fabricated on graphene for their unique utilization in electronics and catalysis. N-doped graphene supported silver nanowire (NG-SNW) composites (Fig. 7a) have been prepared via a facile one-step hydrothermal synthesis in an ethanol–water system in the presence of ammonium hydroxide solution and are further used as a catalyst towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).46 The SNWs loaded into the highly active NG sheets not only act as spacers to open porous channels for gas diffusion and OH− anion transport, but also to function as an efficient catalyst towards the ORR. Recently, a new type of transparent electrode has been made of silver nanowires that are covered with graphene (Fig. 7b).43 The transparent electrode has an Rs value as low as 22 Ω □−1 (stabilized to 13 Ω □−1 after 4 months) and has a high transparency of 88% at λ = 550 nm. The electrode also exhibits impressive mechanical stability under high pressure and harsh mechanical bending, providing a possible replacement for ITO but with much better conductivity. Besides the 1D noble metal nanostructures, 1D Cu nanowires have been grown on graphene for a transparent electrode (Fig. 7e).226 This hybrid film shows improved electric conductivity due to the two-dimensional pathways for charge transfer between the non-percolated metal NWs. In addition, rGO functions as an anti-oxidation layer, a conductive and transparent film that fills in open spaces between NWs, and a coating to protect the Cu NWs against harsh environments.


4.1.3. Other inorganic materials. 
Except for the 1D metal oxide and metal materials, a number of other 1D inorganic nanostructured materials from group IV (Si, Sn and Ge),185,227 groups III–V (GaP, GaAs, and InP)228 and groups II–VI (ZnS, CdS, CdSe, CdTe, ZnSe)229–231 have been investigated, of which some have been fabricated on graphene. 1D p-GaAs-AlGaAs/MQW/n-GaAs/AlGaAs pillar arrays have been integrated with graphene to fabricate a light-emitting diode.148 This type of LED demonstrates good mechanical, optical and electrical characteristics.

4.2. Carbonic and organic 1D nanostructures

4.2.1. Carbon nanotube. 
As a 1D carbonaceous material, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have different forms that include single-walled, double-walled and multi-walled structures with metallic or semiconducting properties. In recent years, CNTs have been combined with graphene for various applications. Using the vacuum filtration method, a sandwich-like CNT/graphene hierarchical structure has been synthesized (Fig. 8b).184 The electronic wiring of GO surfaces by CNTs enables reasonably high electronic conductivities (≈14 S cm−1) for lithium-ion battery electrodes. Although the vacuum filtration method cannot precisely fabricate nanoscale and uniform nanofilms in a layer-by-layer structure, it has a prominent advantage of simplicity since it is a single-step, aqueous-based process that can be operated at room temperature.
 Fig. 8  1D CNTs constructed on graphene: (a) patterned CNT arrays on rGO by catalytic PE-CVD; (b) sandwich-like CNTs/GO composite by self-assembly; (c) few-layer G/CNT hybrid synthesized by radio frequency hydrogen plasma sputtering deposition; (d) CNT growth on graphene substrate; (e) schematic diagram of the patterned unzipping of an SWCNT for producing an SWCNT/GNR intramolecular junction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, 127, 170, 183 and 232. Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH; 2013, American Chemical Society; 2012, Elsevier; 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2013, Nature Publishing Group.) 
CNTs can be grown directly on the graphene surface. Lee and co-workers have grown 1D CNT arrays on graphene (Fig. 8a),126 in which graphene oxide is spin-coated onto a silicon wafer with an aqueous dispersed GO solution. Then the nanopatterned Fe catalyst nanoparticles are deposited on the graphene oxide film to self-assemble block-copolymer nanoporous templates, followed by plasma-enhanced CVD (PE-CVD) under a flow of C2H2/H2/NH3 to grow N-doped CNTs. The CNT diameter can be precisely tuned by adjusting the particle size of the Fe catalyst. During the PE-CVD step, the underlying graphene oxide film is thermally reduced simultaneously, resulting in a thin graphene film with good electrical conductivity as well as mechanical flexibility and optical transparency. A controlled CNT out-of-plane growth on a graphene substrate has been reported (Fig. 8d),127 in which a 3-nm Ni film is deposited on graphene by an electron beam followed by Ni nanoparticle formation with a post-thermal treatment. Then CNTs grow by the catalysis of the Ni catalyst nanoparticles via a vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) process in a mixture gas of C2H4, H2 and Ar. Direct growth of CNTs on graphene can result in a low contact resistance for fast electron transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface. A similar technique, CVD, has been also reported for growing CNTs on graphene.130 Recently Lee et al. used a microwave irradiation method to synthesize a bio-inspired three-dimensional hierarchical structure of graphene–nanotube–iron (G–CNT–Fe) as an anode material for a lithium-ion battery.128 The nanostructure comprises vertically aligned carbon nanotubes grown directly on graphene sheets along with shorter branches of carbon nanotubes stemming out from both the graphene sheets and the vertically aligned carbon nanotubes. This bio-inspired hierarchical structure provides a three-dimensional conductive network for efficient charge-transfer and prevents the agglomeration and restacking of the graphene sheets, enabling Li-ions to easily access the electrode material.
A 1D CNTs-on-graphene composite can be fabricated by an non-catalysed growth of a few layers of graphene on CNTs using radio frequency hydrogen plasma sputtering deposition (Fig. 8c).170 The method is catalyst-free and carbonaceous gas-free, which is different from traditional methods that synthesize graphene by chemical vapour deposition. The hybrids display excellent field emission properties with low Eon and Eth, large field enhancement factors and good stability. From another aspect, CNTs can be treated as rolled graphene ribbons (GNRs). Recently, Wei et al. fabricated an intramolecular junction of GNRs and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) by controllable unzipping SWCNTs (Fig. 8e).232 In the fabrication, SWCNTs are first grown on a SiO2/Si substrate followed by patterning poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) on one side of the SWCNTs by electron beam lithography (EBL) while exposing another side for zinc sputtering. After removal of zinc and PMMA with HCl and acetone, respectively, the GNRs are finally obtained at the exposed side to produce an SWCNT/GNR intramolecular junction at the interface. The junction shows a strong gate-dependent rectifying behaviour, providing applications in prototype directionally-dependent field-effect transistors, logic gates and high-performance photodetectors.


4.2.2. Polymer. 
A poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) polymer nanofiber-based structure has been successfully grown on graphene by electrospinning to produce a free-standing composite membrane (Fig. 9b)178 with improved mechanical and thermal properties as well as tunable optical properties. It is found that a small loading (0.07 wt%) of graphene enhances the total optical absorption of PVAc by 10 times.
 Fig. 9  1D polymer nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) sandwich-like graphene/polyaniline nanofibers (PANI-NFs) film; (b) electrospun graphene modified by 1-pyrenebutanoic acid, succinimidyl ester (G-PBASE)/poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) nanofiber; (c) nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowires on graphene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, 89 and 178. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society; 2010 WILEY-VCH.) 
Conducting polymers (CPs) are known to possess good conductivity, electroactivity and unusual doping/dedoping chemistry, and these features have been widely used in energy conversion and storage devices. 1D polyaniline nanofibers (PANI-NFs) are fabricated to be covered by graphene for layered films (Fig. 9a) by vacuum filtration of a mixed dispersion containing both components.89 The method provides a large-scale and low-cost production process. The composite film containing 44 wt% graphene shows greatly improved mechanical properties and conductivity as well as enhanced supercapacitor capacitance and cycling stability. Xu et al. synthesized PANI 1D nanowire arrays on graphene sheets with a hierarchical structure by chemical oxidation polymerization (Fig. 9c).60 A possible formation mechanism has been proposed. Two possible nucleation sites in both bulky solution and solid substrates compete with each other during the chemical oxidation polymerization of aniline. When a low concentration of aniline is employed most active nucleation sites are generated on the GO nanosheet surface to minimize the interfacial energy barrier since aniline cannot reach a supersaturation state for homogeneous nucleation in the bulky solution. Thus PANI nanowires would further grow along the initial nuclei on the graphene surface to produce aligned PANI nanowires on GO nanosheets. The specific capacitance of the PANI-NFs/graphene nanocomposite-based supercapacitor can reach as high as 555 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.2 A g−1, which is much higher than 298 F g−1 of the randomly connected PANI nanowire-based devices.

5. Applications in energy conversion and storage
5.1. Lithium ion batteries
A lithium-ion battery (LIB) consists of a negative electrode, a positive electrode and a lithium-ion conducting electrolyte, which greatly relies on the reversible Li-ion intercalation process for a rechargeable power source. The currently developed electrode materials usually have poor electrical conductivity and lack cycling stability owing to nanostructure damage that occurs during the charging–discharging cycles. Graphene has a high conductivity, good mechanical strength and large surface area. Thus many 1D nanostructured materials such as SnO2, Co3O4, MnO2, TiO2, Cu2O, carbon nanotubes and carbon fibres have been synthesized with graphene for high-performance Li-ion batteries.
The anode for Li-ion batteries made from the bio-inspired hierarchical graphene–nanotube–iron oxide (G–CNT–Fe) nanostructures (Fig. 10) as discussed above shows a high performance (Fig. 10a), which delivers an initial capacity of 3240 mAh g−1 and a reversible capacity of 1024 mAh g−1 after 40 cycles. This is much higher than that of Fe2O3 nanorods grown directly on graphene by the hydrothermal method,233 which is attributed to its hierarchical structures with a large amount of open pores and high surface area. The capacity appears to be stabilized from the second cycle, and the Coulombic efficiency is more than 99%. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) shows the cathodic and anodic peaks around 0.8 and 1.75 V, respectively. The hierarchical G–CNT–Fe nanostructure has a much larger specific capacity than the baseline counterpart because of its much lower charge-transfer resistance (Rct) (5 Ω) compared with that (15 Ω) of the baseline counterpart (Fig. 10g).
 Fig. 10  1D CNT on graphene hierarchical nanostructure (G–CNT–Fe) for Li-ion battery anode materials: (a) schematic diagram for charge and discharge in the G–CNT–Fe 3D anode material; (b) initial growth of carbon nanotubes on the graphene sheet; (c) fully grown G–CNT–Fe 3D nanostructure through the first step of microwave radiation; (d) growth of smaller branched carbon nanotubes on the first stem carbon nanotubes grown in the second step of microwave radiation; (e) specific capacity and Coulombic efficiency of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials; (f) CV responses of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials; (g) impedance responses of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.) 
The poor electrical conductivity and large volume expansion of the electrode materials are often the main blockages to achieving a high capacity and long cycle life for LIBs. MnO2 is a promising electrode material for LIBs due to its high theoretical capacity, it being environmentally benign and its natural abundance. However, the achieved practical performance is poor, resulting from its low electrical conductivity and large volume expansion during operation. Our group has grown 1D rod-like MnO2 on graphene for a hierarchical nanostructured composite comprising 1D rod-like MnO2, 2D graphene nanosheets and 3D porous structure.24 To direct the growth of uniformly distributed 1D rod-like MnO2, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is polymerized in situ on the graphene supporting matrix. The hierarchically nanostructured MnO2/PEDOT/graphene delivers a discharge capacity of up to 948 mAh g−1 after 15 cycles at a current density of 50 mA g−1, while the baseline samples of MnO2, graphene and MnO2/graphene achieve only 71, 308 and 421 mAh g−1, respectively, after 15 cycles. This clearly demonstrates that graphene can improve the cycle reversible capacity and cycling stability. Besides, the nanostructured graphene as a supporting matrix can enhance the electrical conductivity of MnO2 and enlarge the specific surface area while preventing MnO2 aggregation. This self-assembly approach to create 1D@G hierarchically nanostructured composites can be universally used for various energy conversion/storage system applications.
5.2. Electrochemical supercapacitors
The supercapacitor is an electrochemical energy storage device that can provide a higher power density (up to 10 kW kg−1), shorter charge/discharge time and longer cycling life as compared to battery devices. Supercapacitors can be typically classified into two types: electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) by energy storage via electrostatically accumulated charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and pseudocapacitors based on rapid redox reactions at electrodes for huge pseudocapacitance. Commonly used electrode materials are metal oxides such as RuO2, NiO and MnO2 and conducting polymers such as PANI and polypyrrole. However the relatively low conductivity of metal oxides and conducting polymers significantly limits their performance. To overcome this barrier, graphene is introduced for the composite-growth of 1D structured electrode materials for superior supercapacitors.
1D polyaniline nanofibers (PANI-NFs) are layered and sandwiched by chemically converted graphene (CCG) by vacuum filtration and are further used as an electrode material for supercapacitors.89 The composite film has high flexibility and excellent mechanical stability. The conductivity (5.5 × 102 S m−1) of the composite film containing 44% CCG is ∼10 times higher than that of the plain PANI-NF film. Two pairs of redox waves attributed to the redox reaction of PANI can be clearly seen from the CV curves of the composite film and PANI-NF electrodes (Fig. 11a). The composite film electrode demonstrates the synergistic effect of graphene and PANI for higher specific capacitance as shown from the rectangular CV curve. At a current density of 0.3 A g−1, supercapacitors fabricated from G-PNF30 composite films have a specific capacitance of 210 F g−1, which is much larger than that of PANI-NF and graphene alone-based devices. In particular, supercapacitors with a composite film have a lower internal resistance than that of the devices with PANI-NF, giving the higher power density. Moreover, the electrochemical cycling stability and rate performances are also greatly improved. This is mainly attributed to 1D PANI-NFs that suppress the re-stacking of graphene and facilitate charge transport as well as ion transport in the electrode materials. The most important contribution to the long cycle life comes from the 1D nanostructures on graphene, in which the 1D electroactive material has one end anchored on the graphene whilst leaving the other end free to absorb the volume expansion/reduction during charge/recharge cycles for retaining an intact electrode structure that is free from damage.
 Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms (a: scan rate = 5 mV s−1) and galvanostatic charge/discharge curves (b: charging/discharging current density = 0.3 A g−1) of the supercapacitors based on G-PNF30, as-formed PANI-NF, and CCG films. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.) 
An all-solid-state flexible micro-supercapacitor has recently been developed using 1D conducting polymer/graphene nanostructures.141 The microelectrodes are prepared by the in situ electrodeposition of PANI nanorods on the surface of rGO patterns that are fabricated by micromolding in capillaries. The morphology of the PANI nanorods is controlled by the concentration of aniline and the growth time. The micro-supercapacitor provides a specific capacitance as high as 970 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 2.5 A g−1 and good stability as reflected by the retained 90% of its initial capacitance after 1700 consecutive cycles. Besides the symmetric supercapacitors, a high-voltage asymmetric supercapacitor has been fabricated using graphene and a MnO2 nanowire grown on graphene (MG) as the negative and positive electrodes, respectively.87 MG is prepared through the assembly of graphene sheets and MnO2 nanowires in a solution. The asymmetric supercapacitors with an aqueous electrolyte can be cycled reversibly over a high-voltage window of 0–2.0 V with an energy density of up to 30.4 Wh kg−1, which is much higher than those of symmetric supercapacitors and also many other asymmetric supercapacitors. They also present a high power density of 5 kW kg−1 at 7.0 Wh kg−1 and an acceptable cycling performance of ∼79% retention after 1000 cycles.
5.3. Solar cells
Solar cells are a promising renewable energy source to harvest electricity from sunlight, in which under illumination the sunlight with a photon energy larger than the band-gap of the semiconductors generates excitons (electron–hole pairs) followed by separation of the electron–hole pairs by a local built-in electric field, while the unwanted recombination of electrons and holes happens at the interface. 1D nanostructured electrodes can significantly improve the light absorption, charge separation, charge transport and anti-charge recombination. It has been proved that 1D ZnO nanorods arrays serve as an anti-reflection coating to enhance the absorption of light.68 1D ZnO nanowire-based dye-sensitized solar cells have achieved an efficiency of 1.5% under AM 1.5 irradiation.234 Nevertheless, 1D nanostructures have a much lower surface area in comparison with conventional nanoparticles to limit their power conversion efficiency. The prominent merits of graphene such as its relatively large surface area, high mobility, good chemical and mechanical stability as well as superior transparency have boosted efficient charge separation,84,235 suppressed the charge recombination84 and recycled ‘waste heat’.236 Thus graphene could be used together with 1D nanostructures to complimentarily enhance the solar cell performance.
A graphene-wrapped 1D TiO2 nanofiber and nanocable-like 1D nanostructure have been developed as photoanodes in solar cells (Fig. 12),65 showing a 1.5-fold enhancement in photocurrent in comparison with the conventional ones with photoanodes made of P25 nanoparticles. This is ascribed to the significantly reduced charge transfer resistance from 88.2 to 28.8 Ω in the presence of the nanocables (Fig. 12b). 1D monocrystalline ZnO nanorods with a high donor concentration have been electrochemically deposited on rGO and are further used to fabricate inorganic–organic hybrid solar cells with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).150 The 1D ZnO nanorod/graphene structure improves the charge separation/anti-charge recombination and has a suitable band-gap/work function structure, thus resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) much higher than the reported ones.
 Fig. 12  1D TiO2 wrapped with graphene in photoelectrochemical solar cells: (a) the photocurrent response of the nanocable-like photoanodes with (5 wt%) and without rGO/TiO2 under UV-irradiation in 10 mM NaNO3 electrolyte; (b) the electrochemical impedance spectra of the corresponding photoanodes in (a). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
In dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) the highly expensive platinum (Pt) counter electrode is one of the critical factors that limits their practical applications. Therefore many studies have focused on lowing the amount of Pt or using a non-platinum anode.29,237–239 Graphene and graphene derivatives are potential alternatives, which possess high chemical activity and stability, a high surface area and good conductivity. In a study, DSSCs with graphene-nanoribbon-bridged CNTs (GNR/CNTs) as the counter electrode showed an improved efficiency of 8.23% compared with 7.6% for the Pt counter electrode. GNR/CNTs have good electrical conductivity (10 S cm−1), which is twice that of a plain CNT and three times that of pure GNR. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements show that GNR/CNTs have a lower peak-to-peak separation and a higher peak current, indicating a higher catalytic activity and a larger active surface area. In the hybrids, graphene as a bridge can transport electrons rapidly to the conductive electrode. However, CNTs can efficiently prevent the restacking of graphene ribbons to increase the efficient surface area. Moreover, the GNR/CNTs hybrid film is highly transparent and flexible. In addition, the easy solution process is low-cost for large-scale fabrication.
With graphene on Si nanowire arrays (Si NWs) a Schottky junction solar cell with an electron block layer can be fabricated to achieve a high efficiency. In the fabrication, graphene sheets with a large surface area synthesized by CVD were transferred onto the Si NWs. Si NWs can greatly improve the light absorption by their light trapping effect. However, the efficient junction area is ∼40% of the whole Si substrate surface area. Thus, Si nanoholes are used to increase the efficient junction area (∼70%) to reach an efficiency of 10.30%. It is worthy of note that graphene must be HNO3-doped to improve its p-type conductivity. After HNO3 doping the work function of the multilayer graphene film can be increased by ∼0.13 eV to efficiently increase the short circuit current density and photovoltage. The devices also have excellent stability in air and remain stable after one week's storage in air. In comparison with Si-alone solar cells the graphene/Si NWs Schottky junction one also has the potential to simplify the manufacturing process and to lower the cost. Normally, electron–hole separation happens in the depletion layer. The depletion width of the graphene/Si junction is ∼500–700 nm,240 which is small and needs to be increased to improve the incident photon for high current efficiency. Further, enhanced uniformity of the graphene sheet is also necessary for better hole transport, easy exciton separation and suppression of charge carrier recombination.
5.4. Light-emitting diodes
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are incandescent light sources that lower energy consumption while possessing a longer lifetime, stronger physical robustness, smaller size and faster switching, and they have been greatly investigated and developed to meet the growing demands of displays, sensors, illuminations and information storage. When an LED is forward-biased (switched on), electrons are able to recombine with holes within the device to release energy in the form of photons. The colour of the light is determined by the energy gap of the semiconductors. ZnO has substantial advantages for ultraviolet LEDs because of its large exciton binding energy (∼60 meV), tunable band-gap and available large and high-quality single-crystal wafer.152,241,242 Recently its 1D nanostructures have been successfully integrated with graphene for high-performance LEDs.
Lee et al. have grown vertical ZnO nanorods on large-area graphene for GaN/InGaN LEDs.148 In comparison with those without the use of a graphene conducting electrode, both the current injection and light emission of the devices with the use of graphene increase almost 2–3 times and there is a ∼66% increase in light emission. Another merit of the device is its good stability, which is attributed to the chemical stability of graphene. Graphene also has good thermal conductivity to effectively release the heat in the LEDs, resulting in improved performance as demonstrated by the ZnO/graphene LED.
Except for fabrication on thick and rigid substrates, LEDs with good flexibility have been fabricated by the CVD growth of 1D vertically-aligned N-doped CNTs on graphene.125 Because of the robust mechanical and good electrical contacts between the CNTs and graphene the hybrid film demonstrates excellent field emission properties, even under highly deformed states. In particular, the similar work function between graphene and CNTs promotes the formation of good electrical contact at their interface, enabling efficient and high electrical current injection to the CNT tips through the junctions. However, the device is not transparent and limits the field of applications.
Pei et al. have accomplished a fabrication process for a possible large-scale production of fully stretchable white polymer LEDs (Fig. 13).172 They prepared a transparent conductive electrode (TCE) based on a graphene oxide-modified Ag nanowires percolation network with an all-solution process at room temperature. The GO-soldered AgNW network has a low sheet resistance of 14 ohm □−1 with 88% transmittance at 550 nm. GO sheets can efficiently wrap around and solder the AgNW junctions, thus dramatically reducing the inter-nanowire contact resistance. Its storage stability and stretchability are also improved by using graphene. When bending to 4 mm radius its sheet resistance increases by only 2–3% after 12000 bending cycles. The LEDs can survive after 100 stretching cycles between 0 and 40% strain and can be stretched up to 130% linear strain at room temperature. In this type of TCE electrode, GO containing oxygen-containing groups can form strong bonds with the AgNWs. Moreover, it has an extremely high strength, a high flexibility and a high transparency. Although the AgNWs are of higher conductivity, the stretchability of these AgNW networks is limited because the nanowire junctions could detach and the nanowires slide against each other to cause a high contact resistance. Large-strain deformation can cause a lot of interesting changes in the materials, including interfacial bonding, charge injection barriers, molecular orientation, and morphological changes in neat materials and blends. These changes can affect the stretchability and electroluminescent properties of the LEDs. Therefore, future work is needed in adjusting the parameters to optimize the performance of these stretchable LEDs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic drawing of a fully stretchable LED using a GO-AgNW/PUA composite electrode as both anode and cathode. (b) Optical photographs of a semi-transparent unlit stretchable LED (top) and a stretchable LED operated at 13 V emitting white light from two sides and illuminating two white papers with printed ULCA logo in black (bottom). (c) Current density–luminance–driving voltage characteristics and (d) current efficiency–brightness characteristics of the LED device. (e) Optical photographs of an LED (original lighting area: 3 mm × 4 mm) being driven at 14 V and stretched to specified strains. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.) 
5.5. Nanogenerators
A nanogenerator can convert one type of energy into another type of energy at the nanoscale. For example, mechanical energy can be converted to electricity by the piezoelectric effect of some materials. Nanogenerators can also utilize thermal energy by incorporating thermoelectric materials such as nanostructured Bi2Te3 to harvest electricity.243 Recently, the graphene/1D nanostructure nanocomposite has made highly efficient nanogenerators. Delicate design and fabrication of suitable nanostructured components are essential for highly efficient nanogenerators.
Kumar et al. have employed a graphene platform to fabricate different nanostructures of ZnO for a nanogenerator.147 Due to its ideal monolayer and flatness with π-electrons, graphene can serve as a substrate to tailor the ZnO morphology for an efficient electrode in nanogenerators. A piezoelectric nanogenerator fabricated from a vertically aligned hybrid nanowire–nanowall ZnO/graphene structure generates a new type of device that produces electricity through specific electron dynamics in the nanowire–nanowall hybrid.
A rollable transparent nanogenerator has been fabricated with 1D ZnO nanorods (∼2 μm) grown on a CVD-produced graphene electrode in a solution at a low temperature to avoid damage to the graphene (Fig. 14).146 The graphene electrode shows a high carrier mobility at room temperature and a Schottky contact to the ZnO nanorods for good charge-scavenging performance. The ZnO/graphene electrode has outstanding mechanical and electronic properties, mainly contributed from graphene. The fabricated nanogenerator is rollable and electrically/structurally stable under external mechanical loads. The structure and work principle for the nanogenerator are schematically shown in Fig. 14a. The work function of the graphene electrode is ∼4.53 eV and the electron affinity of ZnO is 4.35 eV, resulting in a weak Schottky contact at their interface. When a force is applied on the top electrode of the nanogenerator in a vertical direction the top surface produces a negative potential (V−) whilst generating a positive potential (V+) on the bottom surface. The force-induced piezoelectric potential drives the flow of electrons from the top electrode to the bottom electrode, consequently producing a measurable current pulse during pushing (Fig. 14b). The magnitude of V+ is reduced as the electrons move from the top electrode to penetrate into the ZnO area and to contact the graphene electrode by passing through the weak Schottky barrier. The weak positive potential is not sufficient to drive back the electrons for accumulating near the bottom electrode toward the top electrode. Therefore no current pulses are measured when releasing the force, thus resulting in a DC-type power generator.
 Fig. 14  1D ZnO constructed on graphene for nanogenerator: (a) schematic illustration of a nanogenerator and electrons flow from the top electrode to the bottom side through the external circuit by the negative piezoelectric potential generated at the top of the ZnO nanowire array under direct compression in the vertical direction; (b) current density generated by the graphene-based rollable transparent nanogenerator and switching-polarity tests. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH.) 
The fully rollable transparent nanogenerator achieves a high on/off ratio of the output current, which is attributed to the high carrier mobility of graphene (1760 cm2 V−1 s−1). However, the piezoelectric voltage constant and output voltage still need further improvement for practical applications. Additionally, the hydrothermal synthesis method poses some drawbacks. It is difficult to grow single-crystal nanorods longer than 50 μm. Thus, the short length of the nanorods significantly restricts the output voltage of the nanogenerator.
6. Conclusions and prospective
We present an overview of functional materials composed of 1D nanostructured materials constructed on graphene as electrodes for highly efficient energy conversion and storage, which not only provides an updated progress on the design and fabrication of various 1D nanostructures on graphene, but also demonstrates their important applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, LEDs and nanogenerators. The discussion on the physics of 1D nanostructures, the nanostructure-associated optical, mechanical and electrochemical properties and the arguments on the enhancement mechanisms for energy systems offers fundamental insights into the understanding and design of such specific material systems for further improvements.
As the size is reduced down to a critical value, the quantum size effect of the 1D nanostructured materials determines their properties. The effects of nanoscale sizes including diameter, aspect ratio and shell thickness on the intrinsic physical and chemical properties of 1D nanostructures could be an important topic to be investigated more in detail in the future. The synergistic effect of the 1D nanostructure and graphene is still not completely clear in different applications. In particular, the relationship of the efficiency of energy absorption, conversion and storage against the sizes, ratios and chemical properties is critical to the rational design of such a material system for anticipated chemical and physical properties leading to high-performance energy devices, but this still requires systematic exploration.
The interface between 1D materials and graphene plays a critical role in determining the physico-chemical properties of 1D nanostructured material/graphene composites that have a significant impact on the performance of the energy conversion/storage devices. It is important to investigate the interface structures of the 1D material and graphene. A synthesis approach to control accurately the interface structure that favors device performance improvement could further advance the technology. Hierarchically nanostructured material-composed 1D materials grown on graphene could be possibly designed and fabricated to significantly improve the active specific surface area in energy conversion and/or energy storage devices for further performance improvement. The layered 1D materials/graphene structure is one such hierarchical structure. Using self-assembly, spin-coating and vacuum deposition, multilayers of 1D materials on graphene can be delicately tailored to a highly conductive, hierarchically porous and interconnected network structure. We expect that these hierarchical nanostructured materials could significantly improve the performance of the energy conversion/storage devices.
It is known that different methods can be used to produce graphene for different unique properties including structure defects, surface properties and intrinsic physical/chemical properties. For example, a solution-based oxidation/reduction approach can produce graphene and graphene oxide in large quantities and good aqueous dispersion. However, these graphene materials always suffer from defects, resulting in significant differences of the residual functional groups, the conductivity, and the mechanical strength, consequently causing variation of the electrochemical responses. On the other hand, chemical vapor deposition and micromechanical exfoliation can mass-produce graphene but the yield is low whilst requiring graphene transfer techniques for their applications.
Functionalization of the interface by doping or chemical/physical modification can be a facile approach to greatly tune the structure for fast charge transfer and/or retarded charge recombination. Most importantly, it could produce profound promotion of the catalytic activity toward specific reactions for energy conversion. A convenient way is to modify graphene, which can generate novel physico-chemical properties such as widened band-gap, controlled electronic properties, good dispersibility, high surface energy, high chemical/thermal stability, high selectivity and good biocompatibility. Inspired by recent works on graphene, we can also develop functional composites comprising 1D nanostructures and functionalized graphene materials and/or some graphene-like 2D materials to expand their applications. The graphene-like 2D materials include hexagonal boron nitride nanosheets, layered transition metal dichalcogenides and layered group-IV and group-III metal chalcogenides that can be used as a substrate to grow 1D materials on graphene-like 2D materials for applications in energy conversion/storage devices in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Institute for Clean Energy & Advanced Materials (Southwest University, Chongqing, China), Chongqing Key Laboratory for Advanced Materials and Technologies of Clean Energies, Chongqing Science and Technology Commission under cstc2012gjhz90002, and Chongqing development and reform commission and National Natural Scientific Fund (no. 21375108).
Notes and references
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palomares, P. Serras, I. Villaluenga, K. B. Hueso, J. Carretero-Gonzalez and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5884–5901 CAS .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
W.-W. Li, H.-q. Yu and Z. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 911–924 CAS .
G. M. Farinola and R. Ragni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3467–3482 RSC .
Q. Zhong, J. Zhong, B. Hu, Q. Hu, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1779–1784 CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Han, B. Özyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Science, 2006, 313, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L.-s. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. W. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Kim, M. Ge, Z. Li and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2810–2816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ye, L. Gan, L. Dai, Y. Dai, X. Guo, H. Meng, B. Yu, Z. Shi, K. Shang and G. Qin, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1477–1481 RSC .
A. Reina, H. Son, L. Jiao, B. Fan, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. Liu and J. Kong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17741–17744 CAS .
C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736–741 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, L. Y. Zhang, J. Miao, J. Zhang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Guo, L. Zhang and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6334–6336 RSC .
Z. Cui, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6687–6692 CAS .
C. X. Guo, Y. Dong, H. B. Yang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, C. X. Guo, Q. Zhang, Y. Lei, J. Xie, S. Ee, G. Guai, Q. Song and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2047–2052 CAS .
H. Bin Yang, Y. Qian Dong, X. Wang, S. Yun Khoo, B. Liu and C. Ming Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 214–218 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. P. Wang, X. Du, F. Wang, Y. Y. Gao, T. Qi and C. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5196–5203 RSC .
Y. Luo, D. Kong, Y. Jia, J. Luo, Y. Lu, D. Zhang, K. Qiu, C. M. Li and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5851–5859 RSC .
Z. Cui, C. X. Guo, W. Yuan and C. M. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12823–12828 RSC .
C. X. Guo, Y. Wang and C. M. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2012, 1, 14–18 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. X. Guo, X. Wang, C. Guan, H. Yang, K. Wang and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 195–200 CAS .
P. K. Mohseni, A. Behnam, J. D. Wood, X. Zhao, K. J. Yu, N. C. Wang, A. Rockett, J. A. Rogers, J. W. Lyding, E. Pop and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3755–3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Dong, X. Chen, L. Gu, X. H. Zhou, L. F. Li, Z. H. Liu, P.
X. Han, H. X. Xu, J. H. Yao, H. B. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, C. Q. Shang, G. L. Cui and L. Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3502–3508 CAS .
J. Qu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2003–2009 CAS .
A. Ramadoss, G.-S. Kim and S. J. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 10222–10229 RSC .
N. Han, F. Wang and J. C. Ho, Nanomater. Energy, 2012, 1, 4–17 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolmakov and M. Moskovits, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151–180 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, S. R. Das, C. Jeong, M. R. Khan, D. B. Janes and M. A. Alam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5150–5158 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chu, Y. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Tan, W. Deng, M. Ma, X. Su, Q. Xie and S. Yao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3600–3604 CAS .
C. H. Chung, T. B. Song, B. Bob, R. Zhu, H. S. Duan and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5499–5504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, J. Yao, L. Qiu, Y. Wu, L. Li, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, D. Li and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11552–11555 RSC .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 789–795 CAS .
Y.-B. He, G.-R. Li, Z.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Su and Y.-X. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1288–1292 CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, Y.-F. Xu, C.-Y. Su and D. Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 CAS .
Y. Shengyuan, A. S. Nair, R. Jose and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2010–2014 Search PubMed .
Q. Huang, G. Zhou, L. Fang, L. Hu and Z.-S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2145–2151 CAS .
M. Lv, D. Zheng, M. Ye, J. Xiao, W. Guo, Y. Lai, L. Sun, C. Lin and J. Zuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1615–1622 CAS .
M.-J. Deng, J.-K. Chang, C.-C. Wang, K.-W. Chen, C.-M. Lin, M.-T. Tang, J.-M. Chen and K.-T. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3942–3946 CAS .
Y. Qin, J. Lu, P. Du, Z. Chen, Y. Ren, T. Wu, J. T. Miller, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, Z. Zhang and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 519–531 CAS .
Y. Cao, Z. Wei, J. He, J. Zang, Q. Zhang, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9765–9768 CAS .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X.-h. Xia, J.-p. Tu, Q.-q. Xiong, Y.-X. Yu, X.-l. Wang and C.-d. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15056–15061 RSC .

          V. E. Muradyan, B. P. Tarasov and N. S. Kuyunko, in Carbon Nanomaterials in Clean Energy Hydrogen Systems, ed. B. Baranowski, S. Zaginaichenko, D. Schur, V. Skorokhod and A. Veziroglu, Springer, Netherlands,  2009, vol. 37, pp. 317–320 Search PubMed .
C. Ding, H. Liu, Y. Zhu, M. Wan and L. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8517–8522 CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S.-Z. Zu, B.-H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Virji, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 314–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, J. Zhang, G. Zhang and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7097–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, Y. Liang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8279–8281 RSC .
A. L. Briseno, T. W. Holcombe, A. I. Boukai, E. C. Garnett, S. W. Shelton, J. J. M. Frechet and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 334–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, Y. Jing, J. Zeng, Q. Qi, C. Wang, D. Goldfeld, C. Xu, Y. Zheng and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18174–18179 RSC .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Lee, D. S. Ruby, D. W. Peters, B. B. McKenzie and J. W. P. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rubio-Bollinger, S. R. Bahn, N. Agraït, K. W. Jacobsen and S. Vieira, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 026101 CrossRef .
P. Buffat and J. P. Borel, Phys. Rev. A, 1976, 13, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, J. Zhu, Q. He, X. Cao, C. Tan, H. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201300574 .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 291–312 RSC .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146–4157 RSC .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Chen, L. B. Chen, Y. Q. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20968–20976 RSC .
L. Cui, X. Lu, D. Chao, H. Liu, Y. Li and C. Wang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 459–461 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lan, H. Hu, W. Jiang, K. Liu, X. Zeng, Y. Wu and Z. Gu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2264–2267 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, W. Hu, J. Song, G. H. Guai and C. M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5245–5250 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, J.-H. Lee, J.-C. Lee, B.-S. Kim, S. W. Hwang and D. Whang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6036–6039 RSC .
P. K. Mohseni, A. Behnam, J. D. Wood, C. D. English, J. W. Lyding, E. Pop and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437–1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, Y. Zhu, Q. Yan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2216–2221 CAS .
U. M. Patil, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, H. G. Park, Y. Jung, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim and S. C. Jun, Mater. Lett., 2014, 119, 135–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. Patil, S. C. Lee, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 334–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, C. L. Korzeniewski, S. Wang and Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3944–3950 CAS .
A. Cao, Z. Liu, S. Chu, M. Wu, Z. Ye, Z. Cai, Y. Chang, S. Wang, Q. Gong and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, F. Xu, J. Wu, K. Qasim, Y. Zhou, W. Lei, L.-T. Sun and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 441–443 RSC .
Q. Xi, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9885–9892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, D. Wen, Y. Zhai, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3959–3968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, B. Chen, Y. Qin, S. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1074–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Ruda, J. C. Polanyi, J. S. Y. Yang, Z. Wu, U. Philipose, T. Xu, S. Yang, K. L. Kavanagh, J. Q. Liu, L. Yang, Y. Wang, K. Robbie, J. Yang, K. Kaminska, D. G. Cooke, F. A. Hegmann, A. J. Budz and H. K. Haugen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2006, 1, 99–119 CrossRef .
J. F. Ye and L. M. Qi, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2008, 24, 529–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, N. Koshizaki and W. P. Cai, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 357–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Jiang, Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu and X. T. Huang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 45–58 RSC .
A. J. Mieszawska, R. Jalilian, G. U. Sumanasekera and F. P. Zamborini, Small, 2007, 3, 722–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Sosnowchik, L. W. Lin and O. Englander, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 051101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Yang, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2012, 4, 401–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Su, Y. C. Wu and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7832–7856 RSC .
L. Li, N. Koshizaki and G. H. Li, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2008, 24, 550–562 CAS .
M. Miyauchi and H. Tokudome, Top. Appl. Phys., 2010, 117, 45–57 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 CAS .
A. Mazid Munshi and H. Weman, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 713–726 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu and S. C. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 9546–9551 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Wang, X. Z. Zhang, S. Q. Zhao, G. Y. Zhou, Y. L. Zhou and J. J. Qi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 024108 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, C.-Y. Chi, K. T. Fountaine, M. Yao, H. A. Atwater, P. D. Dapkus, N. S. Lewis and C. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1879–1890 CAS .
C. Mattevi, C. T. Wirth, S. Hofmann, R. Blume, M. Cantoro, C. Ducati, C. Cepek, A. Knop-Gericke, S. Milne, C. Castellarin-Cudia, S. Dolafi, A. Goldoni, R. Schloegl and J. Robertson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12207–12213 CAS .
Q.-G. Fu, H.-J. Li, X.-H. Shi, K.-Z. Li, J. Wei and Z.-B. Hu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 100, 108–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 168–187 RSC .
H. Kim, N. Kim, J.-H. Shim, N.-H. Cho and C. Lee, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2005, 16, 13–15 CrossRef CAS .
O. Taratula, E. Galoppini, R. Mendelsohn, P. I. Reyes, Z. Zhang, Z. Duan, J. Zhong and Y. Lu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2107–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Wu, H. C. Shih and W.-T. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 105 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, J. W. Lee and S. H. Shim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Li, S. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Boey, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 979–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Kim, H.-K. Na, Y. W. Lee, H. Jang, S. W. Han and D.-H. Min, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3185–3187 RSC .
S. Liu, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8251–8261 CAS .
D. H. Lee, J. A. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Small, 2011, 7, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Lee, J. E. Kim, T. H. Han, J. W. Hwang, S. Jeon, S.-Y. Choi, S. H. Hong, W. J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1247–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kumar, Y.-S. Kim, X. Li, J. Ding, F. T. Fisher and E.-H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3874–3879 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, V. Sridhar, J.-H. Jung, K. Karthikeyan, Y.-S. Lee, R. Mukherjee, N. Koratkar and I.-K. Oh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4242–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, G.-Q. Ning, L.-J. Zhi, J.-C. Liu, D.-X. Cao, G.-L. Wang and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2787–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Kim, K. Kumar, F. T. Fisher and E. H. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 015301 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, A. S. Hall, J.-D. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1158–1164 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, J. Zai, K. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Shen, Y. Su and X. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-W. Jeon, W. M. Choi, H.-J. Shin, S.-M. Yoon, J.-Y. Choi, L.-W. Jang and I.-H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17688–17692 RSC .
Y. J. Kim, Hadiyawarman, A. Yoon, M. Kim, G. C. Yi and C. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, J. H. Lee and G. C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 213101 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ren, C. Zhu, S. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Chen, P. Gao, P. Yang and Q. Ouyang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12296–12303 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Zhang and D. D. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, R. Zou, G. Song, L. Yu, Z. Chen and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17360–17365 RSC .
B. Ma, X. Zhou, H. Bao, X. Li and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 36–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, K. Zhang, H. S. On Chan and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 80–85 RSC .
M. Xue, F. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, R. Ma, N. Du, J. Ren, T. Wong, Y. Li and S. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19061–19066 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Fang, Y. Xia, X. Tao, Y. Gan, J. Du, W. Zhu and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2495–2500 CAS .
H. M. Liu and W. S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000–4008 CAS .
X. An, J. C. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, X. Yu and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8525–8531 RSC .
D. Choi, M.-Y. Choi, W. M. Choi, H.-J. Shin, H.-K. Park, J.-S. Seo, J. Park, S.-M. Yoon, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee, S.-W. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2187–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar, K. Y. Lee, H.-K. Park, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4197–4204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, J. Yi, W. W. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, T. Jung, Y. Kim and W. I. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 061107 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Yi, X. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1165–1173 CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, Y. B. Pyun, J. Yi, J. W. Choung and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19134–19138 CAS .
R. Zou, G. He, K. Xu, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8445–8452 CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Ran, Y. Li, L. Niu, P. Gong, B. Liu and S. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 66, 407–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Yan, S. Xin, W. Li, J. Qu, Y.-G. Guo and W.-G. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11404–11409 CAS .
M. Fu, Q. Jiao and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5577–5586 CAS .
S. D. Perera, A. D. Liyanage, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus Jr, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 130–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Perera, M. Rudolph, R. G. Mariano, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus Jr, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 966–975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, S. Quan, Y. Liu, Z. Guo and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 107, 307–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dai, L. Lu, C. Liang, J. Dai, Q. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Zhu and Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 111–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, W. Lu, S. J. Limmer, P. G. Kotula, A. Thuli, M. Hungate, G. Ruan, Z. Jin and J. M. Tour, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7931–7933 RSC .
J. Tian, H. Li, Z. Xing, L. Wang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2227–2230 CAS .
L. Wang and D.-L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5010–5015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon, T. Kang, J. M. Lee, S.-i. Kim, K. Seo, J. Kim, W. I. Park and B. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 956–960 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, G. Tian, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4366–4374 CAS .
X. Chang, S. Sun, L. Dong, X. Hu and Y. Yin, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 40–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, Y. Xu, Y. Lei and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3536–3539 RSC .
R. Lv, X. Wang, W. Lv, Y. Xu, Y. Ge, H. He, G. Li, X. Wu, X. Li and Q. Li, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2014 DOI:10.1002/jctb.4347 .
W. Wang, I. Ruiz, S. Guo, Z. Favors, H. H. Bay, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2014, 3, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahmad, N. Rusli, M. Mahmood, K. Yasui and A. Hashim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 83 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-h. Deng, R.-t. Zheng, Y.-m. Yang, Y. Zhao and G.-a. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4732–4737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Jyothirmayee Aravind, V. Eswaraiah and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15179–15182 RSC .
J. Liang, L. Li, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590–1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Ju, Y. Yang, Y. Tang, J. Lin, Z. Shi, R. P. S. Han and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8897–8902 CAS .
S. Wang, K. K. Manga, M. Zhao, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Small, 2011, 7, 2372–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, Y. Sun, J. Yao, D. Ling, Y. Wang, H. Long, X. Wang, B. Lin, T. H. Zeng and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1060–1067 CAS .
Z. Zheng, Y. Cheng, X. Yan, R. Wang and P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 149–154 CAS .
P. Nayak, P. N. Santhosh and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5172–5179 CAS .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang, J.-x. Yang, S. Wang, D. Y. Tang, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 782–791 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Chernov, P. V. Fedotov, A. V. Talyzin, I. Suarez Lopez, I. V. Anoshkin, A. G. Nasibulin, E. I. Kauppinen and E. D. Obraztsova, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6346–6353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Park, B. G. Choi, W. H. Hong and S.-Y. Jang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 406, 24–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, P. Chen and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4323–4329 RSC .
Z.-D. Huang, B. Zhang, S.-W. Oh, Q.-B. Zheng, X.-Y. Lin, N. Yousefi and J.-K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3591–3599 RSC .
Z. Tong, Y. Yang, J. Wang, J. Zhao, B.-L. Su and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4642–4651 CAS .
H. R. Byon, B. M. Gallant, S. W. Lee and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1037–1045 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, Z. Tan, T. Kuykendall, E. J. An, Y. Fu, V. Battaglia and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3611–3616 CAS .
X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044–17048 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364–4369 RSC .
F. Jiang and A. J. Muscat, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12931–12940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iggland and M. Mazzotti, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 1489–1500 CAS .
H. Jiang, T. Zhao, J. Ma, C. Yan and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1264–1266 RSC .
Z. Liu, S. Li, Y. Yang, S. Peng, Z. Hu and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1946–1948 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, L. Zhuo, J. Ge, J. Niu and Z. Shi, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 2568–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, X. Feng, J. D. Sloppy, L. Guo and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 203–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, R. Yu, J. Chen and X. Xing, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1474–1477 CAS .
W. Fan, S. Sun, X. Song, W. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Tan and G. Cao, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 2329–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9352–9358 CAS .
Y. D. Yin, Y. Lu and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 771–772 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Yin, Y. Lu, B. Gates and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8718–8729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Zach, K. H. Ng and R. M. Penner, Science, 2000, 290, 2120–2123 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
A. L. Litvin, S. Valiyaveettil, D. L. Kaplan and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 124–127 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Secasanu, C. K. Giardina and Y. D. Wang, Biotechnol. Prog., 2009, 25, 1169–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 89–106 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cavaliere, S. Subianto, I. Savych, D. J. Jones and J. Roziere, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4761–4785 CAS .
B. Q. Cao, Y. Li, G. T. Duan and W. P. Cai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1091–1095 CAS .
J. H. Qiu, M. Guo, Y. J. Feng and X. D. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5776–5782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Elias, J. Michler, L. Philippe, M. Y. Lin, C. Couteau, G. Lerondel and C. Levy-Clement, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 728–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Zang, C. M. Li, S. J. Bao, X. Q. Cui, Q. L. Bao and C. Q. Sun, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7053–7057 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Huang and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 851–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Yu, F. Meiser, T. Cassagneau and F. Caruso, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, Y. J. Yan, S. P. Gao and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1164–1167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Irie, K. Sunada and K. Hashimoto, Electrochemistry, 2004, 72, 807–812 CAS .
T. J. Wong, F. J. Lim, M. M. Gao, G. H. Lee and G. W. Ho, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1086–1093 CAS .
Y. Luo, J. Luo, W. Zhou, X. Qi, H. Zhang, D. Y. W. Yu, C. M. Li, H. J. Fan and T. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 273–281 CAS .
W. Y. Li, L. N. Xu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 851–857 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Meher and G. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15646–15654 CAS .
X.-h. Xia, J.-p. Tu, X.-l. Wang, C.-d. Gu and X.-b. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 671–679 RSC .
L. Cui, J. Li and X.-G. Zhang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 1871–1876 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Gao, J. Cao, W. Wang and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 732–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yuan, X. H. Xia, J. B. Wu, X. H. Huang, Y. B. Pei, J. L. Yang and S. Y. Guo, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1123–1126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Ryu, T.-H. Yoon, S. H. Song, S. Jeon, Y.-J. Park and I.-D. Kim, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4190–4197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Halder and N. Ravishankar, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1854–1858 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Kholmanov, S. H. Domingues, H. Chou, X. Wang, C. Tan, J.-Y. Kim, H. Li, R. Piner, A. J. G. Zarbin and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, L. Qiang, Y. Fang and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1098–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lee, J. W. Choung, J. Yi, D. H. Lee, M. Samal, D. K. Yi, C.-H. Lee, G.-C. Yi, U. Paik, J. A. Rogers and W. I. Park, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2783–2788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Fan, Z. Li, E. Shi, X. Li, H. Li, C. Ji, Y. Jia, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu and A. Cao, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 891–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, L. Wu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 585–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chu, X. Li and P. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11283–11287 RSC .
D. C. Wei, L. F. Xie, K. K. Lee, Z. B. Hu, S. H. Tan, W. Chen, C. H. Sow, K. Q. Chen, Y. Q. Liu and A. T. S. Wee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1374 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Cai, Z. Jiao, M. Wu, X. Ling, B. Lu and Y. Jiang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2005, 4, 455–459 CAS .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, G. H. Guai, C. Gong, W. H. Hu, J. X. Zhu, H. B. Yang, Q. Y. Yan and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6294–6298 CAS .
J.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Chan and S.-W. Chou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1440–1442 RSC .
J. W. Guo, B. Zhang, Y. Hou, S. Yang, X. H. Yang and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1982–1986 CAS .
G. Wang, W. Xing and S. Zhuo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 269–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bao, M. A. Zimmler, F. Capasso, X. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1719–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, T. Onuma, M. Ohtani, T. Makino, M. Sumiya, K. Ohtani, S. F. Chichibu, S. Fuke, Y. Segawa, H. Ohno, H. Koinuma and M. Kawasaki, Nat. Commun., 2005, 4, 42–46 CAS .
X. B. Zhao, X. H. Ji, Y. H. Zhang, T. J. Zhu, J. P. Tu and X. B. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 062111–062113 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Equal contributors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Jia Le Xie	Jiale Xie is a PhD student in the Institute of Clean Energy & Advanced Materials, Southwest University, China. He received his Bachelor's degree in Physics from Southwest University in 2009. His research focuses on the synthesis and functionalization of metal oxide nanostructures, in particular one-dimensional arrays and their applications in solar cells and solar water splitting, etc.
Chun Xian Guo	Dr Chunxian Guo received his Bachelor and PhD (Supervisor of Prof. Chang Ming Li) degrees from Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) in 2007 and 2011 respectively. In 2012, he joined Institute of Clean Energy and Advanced Materials of Southwest University as a Professor. He works on functional composite materials composed of metal oxide, conducting polymer and nanostructured carbon and their applications in supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries and biosensors. He has obtained several awards including the Best Poster Award of the 1st International Conference on Clean Energy (Dalian, China, 2011), Chinese Government Award for Outstanding Self-finance Students Abroad (2010) and Singapore Government-Linked Company Full Scholarship (2003).
Chang Ming Li	Dr Chang Ming Li is currently the Professor and Dean of Faculty for Materials and Energy in Southwest University and Director for Chongqing Key Lab for Clean Energy and Advanced Materials, China. He worked with Motorola as a distinguished technical member, Science Advisory Board Associate and senior scientific manager. Later he became Professor, Head of Bioengineering Division and Director of Centre for Advanced Bionanosystems in Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received a number of prestigious awards such as Motorola Master Innovator Award in 1999, Nanyang Innovation and Research Award in 2008, China National Talent 1000 Award (2011), China Overseas Innovation Talent Award (2012) and Australia National University Craig Visiting Professor (2012). His main research interests are nanomaterials, green energies and biosensors/lab-on-a chip. He has published over 400 peer-reviewed journal papers, 8 book chapters and holds 124 patents with ∼10000 citations. He is a Fellow of American Institute of Medicine and Biological Engineering and an RSC Fellow, serving as an Editorial Board Member of RSC Advances and a member of the Advisory Board for Nanoscale, RSC.

Broader context
Environmentally friendly and economic renewable energy conversion and storage systems have been fueled up to face energy and environmental challenges. The lack of excellent electrode materials is a critical limit for the improvement of device performance. Among the various nanostructured materials, one-dimensional nanostructures constructed on graphene composite (1D@G) have unique physico-chemical properties to develop highly efficient energy conversion and storage systems. In this review we systematically discuss the fundamentals of 1D@G in terms of their structure and property followed by further survey of the progress of growth approaches for 1D nanostructures and multifarious 1D nanomaterials composited with graphene as well as their important applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, light-emitting diodes and nanogenerators.

[px2 + py2 + pz2/2m + V(x,y)]Ψ(x,y,z) = Ψ(x,y,z)E.	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Unique properties of one-dimensional nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Quantum confinement effect: (a) schematic of 1D nanostructure; (b) density of states of 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D systems; (c) energy level diagram of a 1D system.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure models of 1D@G composite materials: (a) 1D nanostructures growing directly on graphene; (b) graphene wrapping 1D nanostructures; (c) 1D nanostructure containing graphene sheets or G@1D@G composite materials; (d) sandwich-like G@1D@G composite.	 

a	MnO2, Mn3O4, ZnO, TiO2, Fe2O3, Fe3O4, SnO2, Cu2O, Co3O4, V2O5, VO2, WO3, CdS, CuGeO3, Au, Ag, CNT, PANI, InGaN/GaN, SiO2/Fe3O4	Hydrothermal, electrodeposition, CVD, PECVD, self-assembly, microwave irradiation and polymerization	Supercapacitor, solar cells, photocatalysis, LEDs, Li-ion batteries, nanogenerators and sensors	Superior electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, high transparency, porous structure, 3D conduction network, preventing restacking of graphene, low ionic diffusion resistance and charge transfer resistance	
46, 50, 60, 80, 85, 87 and 122–169

b	TiO2, CNT, Ag, Ge, Si	UV reduction, CVD, arc-discharge	Solar cells, photocatalysis, Li-ion batteries, transparent electrodes, memory devices	High transparency, good dispersibility, accommodating the volume change of electrode materials, superior electron transfer ability, low charge recombination	
43, 65, 88 and 170–177

c	CNT, PVA, PBASE/PVAc	Electrospinning and carbonization	Photonics, such as light emitters and fiber lasers	Improved mechanical and thermal properties, enhanced wideband absorption, non-linear optical behavior	
178–180

d	PANI, CNT, Sn	Vacuum filtration, CVD, self-assembly	Supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries	Mechanical stability, high flexibility, high specific surface area, good conductivity, low faradaic resistance, high capacitance, high cycling stability	
89 and 181–185

e	Co3O4, CNT, ZnO	Hydrothermal, CVD	Supercapacitors, sensors	Large specific surface area, excellent cycling stability, 3D conduction network, lower diffusion resistance and charge-transfer resistance	
56, 186 and 187


 	Fig. 4  Mainly used physical and chemical methods for the preparation of 1D nanostructures: (a) vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) and the related growth methods; (b) template (soft or hard)-assisted method; (c) electrospinning method; (d) hydrothermal/solvothermal method with capping molecules; (e) electrochemical deposition or electrochemical polymerization method; (f) chemical/electrochemical etching method.	 

 	Fig. 5  1D ZnO nanostructures on graphene or graphene oxide surfaces. MOCVD (a) and hydrothermal (b) methods for preparing ZnO nanorods on graphene. ECD method prepared ZnO nanorods on graphene (c) and (d) graphene oxide. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, 134 and 135. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2011, IOP Publishing; 2009, AIP Publishing.)	 

 	Fig. 6  1D TiO2, MnO2 and Co3O4 nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) TiO2 nanorod self-assembly on graphene oxide at a two-phase interface; (b) UV-light-reduced graphene oxide sheet wrapped TiO2 nanorods and the higher magnification TEM image (E); (c) MnO2 nanowires grown on graphene by solution-phase assembly; and (d) Co3O4 nanowires grown on 3D graphene by CVD and the higher magnification SEM image (F). [Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, 65, 87 and 137. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society (ACS); 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2010, ACS; 2010, WILEY-VCH.]	 

 	Fig. 7  1D metal nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) Ag nanowires grown on N-doped graphene by one-step hydrothermal method; (b) hybrid structures with CVD single layer graphene film and a network of silver nanowires; (c) tadpole-shaped Au NWs with one enlarged ‘head’ grown on GO; (d) the formation process of Au NW from reduction of the [(1-amino-9-octadecene)AuCl] complex on GO; (e) rGO/Cu nanowires hybrid film prepared by spray and spin coating. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43, 46, 122 and 226. Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH; 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2012, WILEY-VCH; 2013, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  1D CNTs constructed on graphene: (a) patterned CNT arrays on rGO by catalytic PE-CVD; (b) sandwich-like CNTs/GO composite by self-assembly; (c) few-layer G/CNT hybrid synthesized by radio frequency hydrogen plasma sputtering deposition; (d) CNT growth on graphene substrate; (e) schematic diagram of the patterned unzipping of an SWCNT for producing an SWCNT/GNR intramolecular junction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 126, 127, 170, 183 and 232. Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH; 2013, American Chemical Society; 2012, Elsevier; 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; 2013, Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 9  1D polymer nanostructures constructed on graphene: (a) sandwich-like graphene/polyaniline nanofibers (PANI-NFs) film; (b) electrospun graphene modified by 1-pyrenebutanoic acid, succinimidyl ester (G-PBASE)/poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) nanofiber; (c) nucleation and growth mechanism of PANI nanowires on graphene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, 89 and 178. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society; 2010 WILEY-VCH.)	 

 	Fig. 10  1D CNT on graphene hierarchical nanostructure (G–CNT–Fe) for Li-ion battery anode materials: (a) schematic diagram for charge and discharge in the G–CNT–Fe 3D anode material; (b) initial growth of carbon nanotubes on the graphene sheet; (c) fully grown G–CNT–Fe 3D nanostructure through the first step of microwave radiation; (d) growth of smaller branched carbon nanotubes on the first stem carbon nanotubes grown in the second step of microwave radiation; (e) specific capacity and Coulombic efficiency of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials; (f) CV responses of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials; (g) impedance responses of 3D G–CNT–Fe and hierarchical 3D G–CNT–Fe nanomaterials. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms (a: scan rate = 5 mV s−1) and galvanostatic charge/discharge curves (b: charging/discharging current density = 0.3 A g−1) of the supercapacitors based on G-PNF30, as-formed PANI-NF, and CCG films. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  1D TiO2 wrapped with graphene in photoelectrochemical solar cells: (a) the photocurrent response of the nanocable-like photoanodes with (5 wt%) and without rGO/TiO2 under UV-irradiation in 10 mM NaNO3 electrolyte; (b) the electrochemical impedance spectra of the corresponding photoanodes in (a). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic drawing of a fully stretchable LED using a GO-AgNW/PUA composite electrode as both anode and cathode. (b) Optical photographs of a semi-transparent unlit stretchable LED (top) and a stretchable LED operated at 13 V emitting white light from two sides and illuminating two white papers with printed ULCA logo in black (bottom). (c) Current density–luminance–driving voltage characteristics and (d) current efficiency–brightness characteristics of the LED device. (e) Optical photographs of an LED (original lighting area: 3 mm × 4 mm) being driven at 14 V and stretched to specified strains. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 14  1D ZnO constructed on graphene for nanogenerator: (a) schematic illustration of a nanogenerator and electrons flow from the top electrode to the bottom side through the external circuit by the negative piezoelectric potential generated at the top of the ZnO nanowire array under direct compression in the vertical direction; (b) current density generated by the graphene-based rollable transparent nanogenerator and switching-polarity tests. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2010, WILEY-VCH.)	 
Footnote
† Equal contributors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
