Water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CC04293H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CC04293H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9418-9431Water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures

        
          
            Haoqi 
            Ren
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Cui
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shaodong 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *
      Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory for Electrical Materials and Infiltration Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi’an University of Technology, Xi’an 710048, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. E-mail: sdsun@xaut.edu.cn
Received 
      4th June 2019
    , Accepted 9th July 2019First published on 9th July 2019AbstractWater is one of the most commonplace solvents employed in wet chemical synthesis; however, it can sometimes play important roles such as an effective inducer or morphology-directing agent when introduced into a special reaction system, resulting in the formation of inorganic micro-/nanostructures with well-defined configurations. A better understanding of the key roles of water in the chemical synthesis will unlock a door to the design of many more novel single-component and hybrid nanocomposite architectures. Therefore, it is imperative to comprehensively review the topic of water-guided synthesis of well-defined micro-/nanostructures. Unfortunately, the significance of water has been underestimated and an in-depth study about the exact action of water in morphology-control is still lacking. In this review, we focus on the recent advances made in the development of the shape-controlled synthesis of inorganic micro-/nanostructures achieved by only adjusting the amount of water through some typical examples, including noble metals, metal oxides, perovskites, metal sulfides and oxysalts. In particular, the theory principles, synthesis strategies and growth mechanisms of the water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures have been mainly highlighted. Finally, several current issues and challenges of this topic that need to be addressed in future investigations are briefly presented.
Haoqi Ren
Haoqi Ren received his bachelor's degree from Fudan University in 2017. Now he is a research assistant in Prof. Shaodong Sun's group at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the controllable synthesis of metal oxide-based nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.
Jie Cui
Jie Cui received his bachelor's degree and master's degree from Shaanxi Normal University in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xi’an University of Technology in 2017. He is currently a Research Fellow in the State Key Laboratory Base of Eco-hydraulic Engineering in Arid Area at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the modelling and synthesis of photocatalysts.
Shaodong Sun
Shaodong Sun received his bachelor's degree and master's degree from Xi’an University of Technology in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2011, and then joined the School of Science at Xi’an Jiaotong University (2011–2014). From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Research Fellow in the Department of Chemistry at National University of Singapore (NUS). He is now a full professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the designated synthesis of novel nanomaterials for catalytic applications.
1. Introduction
In the past decades, micro-/nanomaterials have received tremendous attention for widespread applications in photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, gas sensors, drug delivery and therapy.1–7 Diverse micro-/nanostructures possess a great deal of fascinating properties including size effects, quantum effects and surface effects, which lead to intriguing performances in various applications.2,8–10 Generally, the anisotropy of a crystal is quite valuable because selectivity and activity differentials occur on different crystalline directions and facets.4,11–13 For instance, noble metal nanocrystals, including Au, Ag, Pt and Pd, usually exhibit good morphology-dependent catalytic performances in typical electrocatalytic reactions such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and fuel oxidation reaction.14–17 Moreover, facet-dependent enhanced performances have also been investigated in polyhedral metal oxides such as Cu2O, TiO2, ZnO, SnO2 and so on.9–11,13,18–21 Hence, it is highly desirable to develop rational strategies to prepare surface-structure-engineered micro-/nanostructures, especially those with high-energy surfaces.
Among the most used classical and effective synthetic strategies, wet chemical methods, including colloidal synthesis, hydro-/solvothermal method, chemical precipitation and sol–gel method, have been widely applied to engineer the shape of micro-/nanocrystals.22–25 Well-designed micro-/nanomaterials with desired morphologies can be facilely prepared by controlling the nucleation and growth process in a solution phase. As is known, the usage of surfactants or capping agents can be used to manipulate the growth of a crystal by minimizing the monomer attachment on specific surfaces and preventing the agglomeration of nuclei.26–28 Besides, it should be noted that the composition of solvent also has a profound influence on the control of the final morphology. As one of the most common solvents, water sometimes serves as a simple inducer or morphology-directing agent when introduced into a special reaction system.29–32 For instance, Zheng's group synthesized ultrathin Pd nanosheets by mixing a Pd carbonyl complex with water in the absence of any surfactants or capping agents.32 Similarly, morphology-controlled growth of CuO nanostructures could also be achieved by only adjusting the amount of water.29 The irregular netlike CuO composed of many nanoneedles was synthesized without water but transformed into an urchin-like morphology and nanoleaves upon increasing the amount of water. Additionally, a controllable crystallization of lead halide perovskite can be achieved by controlling the amount of water which can induce the formation of differently shaped perovskites, such as spherical nanocrystals, rectangular nanoplatelets and nanowires.33
Based on the above examples, water-guided synthesis shows several advantages as a special soft chemical method. For instance, the reaction can be induced at room temperature by water or a product with a well-defined morphology can be obtained by simply controlling the amount of water without any organic surfactant. However, precise control of the final morphology is still hard to achieve merely by manipulating the amount of water. Besides, the inorganic materials synthesized by this water-guided strategy generally have exposed low-index facets, which strongly restrained the investigation on facet-dependent applications. Indeed, understanding the key roles of water in the chemical synthesis will help develop water-guided synthesis, offering a new insight into the design of many more novel architectures. Therefore, it is necessary to comprehensively review the investigation on water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures. Unfortunately, the importance of water has been underestimated and an in-depth study about the exact action of water in morphology control of different species is still lacking.
In this review, we are devoted to summarizing the important advances made in the development of shape-controlled synthesis of inorganic micro-/nanostructures achieved by only adjusting the amount of water (see Fig. 1). First, we provide the theory principles on water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures. Next, we systematically summarize the synthesis strategies and their growth mechanisms through some typical examples in various species, including noble metals, metal oxides, perovskites, metal sulfides and oxysalts. Finally, the current challenges and outlooks of this topic that need to be highlighted in future research are briefly given.
 Fig. 1  A brief description of the water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures. 
2. Growth theory
The reaction medium, an essential component in a typical wet chemical synthesis system, undoubtedly has a profound influence on reaction equilibria and reaction kinetics. Thus, it will be feasible to prepare thermodynamically unfavorable shapes with high surface energies by altering the basic characteristics of the reaction medium.34 As the most used reaction medium, water can act as not only a solvent solely but also a component in a mixed solvent. In fact, the properties of mixed solvents, such as polarity, viscosity, surface tension and thermal conduction, will change in turn when the amount of water varies, leading to different kinetics.35–41 Moreover, water can sometimes participate in nucleation as well as growth processes as a capping agent and consequently lead to a preferential growth.42,43 Additionally, water can induce a series of reactions when it acts as a reactant and catalyse the formation or decomposition of intermediates.32,44,45 However, unlike traditional organic solvents used in colloidal synthesis such as octadecylamine or octylamine, the influence of water on crystal growth has rarely been systemically summarized. Herein, we will discuss the different roles of water in the shape-controlled synthesis of inorganic micro-/nanostructures theoretically based on three aspects, namely, as a solvent, capping agent and reactant (see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  (a) Water serves as a solvent in the reaction medium. The crystal seeds will aggregate in a different way when the amount of water varies. (b) Water acts as a capping agent on the surface of seeds, resulting in different growth behaviours. (c) Water functions as an inducer or catalyst in the reaction, possibly accompanying the formation of precipitates or gases. 
First, water can serve as a solvent in most common reactions, and influence the reaction process by its strong polarity. Polarity is a quite important property that almost influences or determines the overall solvation capability for solutes (including solubility, boiling point, vapor pressure, etc.). As a result, it can be responsible for the overall intermolecular interactions between solute ions or molecules and solvent molecules.46 Hence, polarity is an extremely important factor for controlling a series of chemical and physical processes, such as recrystallization, extraction, chromatographic separation, and phase-transfer catalysis. The value of polarity can be reflected by the dielectric constant to some degree.35,38 In particular, water exhibits extremely high polarity among most common solvents. Therefore, the total polarity of a mixed solvent will become larger as the amount of water increases, which will influence the size and shape of the synthesized product.36,47 It has been suggested that the growth rate of metal oxides such as WO3 or CeO2 would be much slower in high dielectric constant solvents, especially in pure water, leading to the formation of larger particles with better crystallization.47,48 Interestingly, a linear relationship can be obtained between the reciprocal of particle size and the reciprocal of dielectric constant.48 Moreover, the polarity of mixed solvents is also a key factor that determines the final morphology of products, which will affect the homogenization of the reactants in the reaction medium, the amount of individual nuclei formed and the amalgamation and direction preference of growing nuclei (as shown in Fig. 2a). In terms of ZnO, the reactants dispersed more homogeneously in pure water than in n-heptane, where the growth of crystal nucleus was subject to lower confinement in a boiling droplet of solvent, resulting in the formation of a flower-like morphology in water but a snow-flake-like morphology in n-heptane.35
Second, water can be used as a capping agent, which alters the growth tendency of certain facets owing to the existence of hydrogen bonding and hydroxyl groups in the reaction medium. Hydrogen bonding is a unique intermolecular interaction between a hydrogen atom and an atom with high electronegativity like oxygen, fluorine or sulfur. Based on previous reports, the amount of hydrogen bonding would determine the final morphology of products in a variety of chemical syntheses, which is attributed to the capping effect.43,49–52 For instance, hollow TiO2 spheres could be well prepared through a hydrothermal synthesis in a trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) mixed aqueous solution. The as-synthesized products were composed of irregular small nanogranules when either TFA or DMF was replaced by pure water, which indicated that self-organization would only occur when there was enough hydrogen bonds in the medium afforded by the reaction solution.52 Besides, hydrogen bonding can determine the amount of free −OH groups that also control the nucleation process as well as the stabilization of crystals. A difference in the stabilization of aragonite CaCO3 was observed in a mixed alcohol–water system.51 The alcohol could bond to the surface of calcite through the −OH groups and provide a hydrophobic layer of CH3 groups on the outside, forming an alcohol termination layer which avoids contact with water molecules. In fact, there will be a competitive adsorption on certain facets between water and alcohols owing to the difference in adsorption energy, as shown in Fig. 2b.53,54 The adsorption energy would vary corresponding to the chemical structure of alcohols and the facets of crystals.42,44 Therefore, the adsorption behaviour will be kinetically changed by altering the ratio of water in mixed solvents, leading to a preferential growth.
Third, water can serve as a reactant during a hydrolysis process, in which the water molecule directly participates in the chemical reaction (see Fig. 2c). Hydrolysis reactions have been widely applied in the synthesis of noble metals, metal oxides and organic molecules through hydro-/solvothermal strategies, refluxing or direct precipitation methods.32,45,55,56 The hydrogen ion and hydroxyl ion can be generated from water due to ionization, inducing the hydrolysis reaction according to acid–base theory. Protonation can be easily achieved with the assistance of water, which is an effective way to induce the assembly of micelles. For instance, amine-terminated micelles assembled from dodecylamine could be readily protonated by trace moisture to form strong alkaline micro-cavities which was beneficial for the growth of ZnO nanostructures at room temperature.57 In addition, water can react with substances to form intermediate species or break down the precursors, which is usually found in the synthesis of metal oxides. For example, Cu(OH)2 could be formed by the reaction between water and basic copper salts (such as Cu2(NO3)(OH)3, Cu7Cl4(OH)10H2O and Cux(OH)2x−2(SO4)) at high temperature, which would readily transform into CuO or Cu2O through a heating process or the assistance of a reducing agent.29,45,58 Moreover, the existence of water can sometimes induce a recrystallization process and lead to a structure conversion into the stable state.59 Therefore, both the thermal equilibrium and dynamic process are influenced by the amount of water when the water serves as one reactant in the system.
Based on the above discussions, one needs to thoroughly consider how water will function in the synthesis when designing a rational reaction system for the construction of a unique micro-/nanostructure. First, it should evaluate the change in properties of solvents brought by water. When using a mixed solvent system, water usually serves as either a good or a bad solvent for the precursors. In this case, the solubility of precursors can be controlled by the amount of water, influencing the reaction rate according to the rate equation. It is worth mentioning that the change in basic properties brought by addition of water should be considered in almost all the mixed solvent systems. Also, water sometimes adsorbs on the surface of nuclei or crystals, inhibiting the growth on certain surfaces. Whether the adsorption of water will occur or not can be decided by the adsorption energy as shown in the following formula: Eads = Eaft − Ebef(1)
As shown in the equation, Eads represents the adsorption energy, while Eaft and Ebef represent the system energy after and before, respectively. All the energy can be calculated by first principles, and adsorption will occur when Eads is below zero. Moreover, the value of Eads will help confirm the competition between water and other solvents, which will be meaningful for designing shape-controlled synthesis. Additionally, water can exhibit nucleophilicity and promote the reaction process by emerging as an active intermediate due to the lone pair electrons of oxygen in water. Typically, hydrolysis will happen in the presence of weak electrolyte ions (pKa or pKb > 0) in the system. Moreover, the rate of hydrolysis is closely related to the species of precursors and amount of water. As a result, controlling either the addition of water or the kind of precursor will cause different reaction pathways, finally resulting in different morphologies or compositions.
In brief, water in a wet chemical reaction can function in three ways: as a solvent, capping agent and reactant. Notably, water can play more than one role under real reaction circumstances. Consequently, it is worthwhile to establish a mature water-guided synthesis theory for the construction of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures.
3. Typical water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures
3.1. Noble metals
Noble metal nanocrystals have been extensively investigated due to their fascinating properties and widespread use in photonics, medicine, energy conversion and catalysis.12,16 The performances of metal nanocrystals are closely related to a series of intrinsic parameters in terms of shape, size, phase and composition. Morphological noble metal nanocrystals are generally synthesized by colloidal synthesis, which often requires organic solvents and surfactants that are hard to remove from the surface of a crystal and reduce the catalytic activity.53,60–62 In recent years, a new perspective has demonstrated that water can act as a simple inducer in the surfactant-free synthesis of noble metal crystals, which is in favour of preparing surface-clean products. In this subsection, we will present the achievements made in the water-induced synthesis of noble metals with well-defined morphologies and try our best to advance the understanding of the role of water in the synthesis process.
Taking Pd nanosheets as a typical example, they were successfully prepared through a CO-assisted route in solvents such as DMF or benzyl alcohol which employed palladium acetylacetonate as precursors.63 In such a traditional synthetic procedure, hexagonal Pd nanosheets were synthesized through a pyrolysis process of the precursors at a high temperature. However, freestanding Pd nanosheets can be simply prepared at room temperature by merely introducing water into the above reaction system.32,64–66 As shown in Fig. 3a, ultrathin Pd nanosheets with exposed (111) facets were conveniently prepared by adding water into the Pd carbonyl complex ([Pd2(μ-CO)2Cl4]2−) without any organic capping agents.32 Surprisingly, only a trace amount of water is needed to trigger the reaction and efficiently catalyze the transformation from the Pd carbonyl complex to Pd nanosheets within several minutes. A possible mechanism might be given as follows: [Pd2(μ-CO)2Cl4]2− + H2O → 2Pd + CO2 + CO + 2H+ + 4Cl−(2)
 Fig. 3  (a) The shape-controlled synthesis of surface-clean ultrathin Pd nanosheets by simply mixing a dinuclear PdI carbonyl chloride complex with H2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2013. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed growth mechanism of Au spherical architectures at the interface of immiscible toluene and water and SEM images of products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright RSC 2015. 
It could be inferred from 13C isotope studies that the addition of water would induce the decomposition of [Pd2(μ-CO)2Cl4]2−, in which the bridging CO would not only serve as a reductant for Pd(I) but also help stabilize the Pd(111) facets. Notably, the surface-clean Pd nanosheets presented a much better electrocatalytic performance than polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP)-capped Pd because PVP showed a deleterious effect. This work sheds light on a totally new perspective that the noble metal crystals could be formed with the aid of water by a simple stirring method and the as-obtained Pd nanosheets would also be able to assemble in water via selecting appropriate metal ions as a structure director rather than an organic surfactant, which was quite beneficial for their further applications.64,65 For instance, the two dimensional Pd nanosheets could be facilely assembled into one dimensional nanowires with the assistance of cations. Length control could be achieved by adjusting the concentrations and charge density of cations. Zeng et al. reported that trivalent Al3+ cations were able to assemble the Pd nanosheets together into reasonably long nanowires and the divalent Mg2+ cations were in favour of assembling Pd into short nanorods, while monovalent Na+ cations could not induce the assembly.61 Additionally, the morphology of non-layer Pd nanosheets could be controlled by the amount of Fe3+ due to an etching mechanism when synthesized in water.65
Besides directly inducing the reactions, water can form interfaces or emulsive layers when mixed with organic solvents. Consequently, the as-formed interlayer will be a good environment for self-assembly of materials. For example, a novel synthetic strategy towards a three-dimensional Au spherical nanostructure was achieved at the interface between toluene and water, as shown in Fig. 3b.67 Water was used to establish interfaces with water-insoluble organic solvents because of the immiscibility. Moreover, the concentration and pH value could be adjusted by the amount of water, which had a great influence on the final morphology of Au in turn.
Based on the above examples, it is clearly found that water should be considered as an important inducer in morphology control. However, investigations have been mainly limited to only some noble metals such as Pd and Au, while a mature synthetic route for most of the noble metals still needs to be explored in-depth.
3.2. Metal oxides
Metal oxides are one of the most important categories of chemical compounds and they consist of a myriad of compositions and structures, which result in unique properties and various applications. Wet chemical synthesis of metal oxide micro-/nanocrystals has been extensively reported through various routes, especially a solvo-/hydrothermal or chemical precipitation method. When applying those methods, many types of metal oxides, including ZnO, CuO, TiO2etc., can exhibit morphology evolution by only adjusting the amount of water in the reaction system to different extents (see Table 1). In this subsection, we will summarize the influence of water on the morphology-controlled synthesis of metal oxides and emphasize the synthesis strategies and their growth mechanisms in the formation of diverse morphologies by some typical examples.
Table 1 Typical examples of water-guided synthesis of metal oxides




Precursor
Solvent
Product
Morphology without water
Morphology with water
Applications
Ref.




CuCl2
Water/ethanol
CuO
Nanoneedles
Nanoleaves
Glucose sensors

29



Cu(NO3)2
Water/ethanol
CuO
Nanoflowers composed of nanoparticles
Nanoleaves
Glucose sensors

45



CuSO4
Water/ethanol
CuO
Porous nanoribbons
Nanoflowers
Glucose sensors

58



Cu(NO3)2
Water/ethanol
CuO
Nanorods
Nanobelts
Glucose sensors

71



Cu(NO3)2
Water/EG
Cu2O
Needle-like morphology
Nanorods/cubes
None

72



Cu(NO3)2·3H2O
Water/DMF
Cu2O
Hollow cubes
Microcubes
Chemical template

73



Cu(NO3)2·3H2O
Water/DMF
Cu2O
Nanospheres
Nanoparticles and larger nanospheres
Gas sensors

74



Zn(CH3COO)2
Water/ethanol
ZnO
Cone-like structures
Bottle cork-like nanocrystals
Photocatalysis

42



Zn(CH3COO)2
Water/alcohol
ZnO
Fat plate crystals
Microrod clusters
None

75



Zn(CH3COO)2
Water/EG
ZnO
Spherical ZnO nanocrystals
Teardrop-shaped ZnO nanocrystals
None

76



Zn(CH3COO)2
Water/EG
ZnO
Smaller spheres covered with nanotiles
Larger spheres
Photodegradation

78



Zn(CH3COO)2
Water/ethanol
ZnO
Hollow spheres
Microdisks and microrods
Catalysis

79



FeCl3·6H2O
Water/EG
Fe3O4 or Fe2O3
Solid spheres
Mesoporous spheres
None

83



FeCl3
Water/EG
Fe3O4
Microrods
Microspheres
None

85



Fe(C5H5)2
Water/IPA
Fe3O4
Star-like morphology
Octahedron
None

86



TiCl3
Water/EG
TiO2
Spherical particles
Urchin-like spheres
Lithium batteries

30



Amorphous TiO2 particles
Water
TiO2
Amorphous particles
Mesoporous crystalline nanospheres
Phosphoprotein (β-casein) enrichment

88



Anodized TiO2
Water
TiO2
Amorphous tubes
Mesoporous crystalline nanotubes
Hydrogen evolution reaction

89



Na2WO4
Water/ethanol
WO3
Hierarchical microflowers
Microspheres composed of nanorods
Photodegradation

47





Copper oxides, including CuO and Cu2O, can be easily prepared by a decomposition or reduction method in an aqueous system, in which water acts as a capping agent and reactant for determining the morphologies. As for CuO nanoparticles,29,45,58,68–70 they can be directly synthesized by adding NaOH into a solution of a copper salt above 70 °C, and the morphology control is accomplished by adjusting the amount of water (see Fig. 4).29 As shown in Fig. 4a, net-like CuO composed of nanoneedles was prepared by mixing copper chloride and NaOH in a pure ethanol system. When adding a small amount of water, it evolved into an urchin-like shape. After adding more water, CuO seemed to be assembled in larger nanoleaf-like structures (see Fig. 4e) and finally transformed into monodisperse CuO nanoleaves when synthesized in pure water (see Fig. 4i). A possible mechanism can be proposed using the following equations: 7Cu2+ + 10OH− + 4Cl− + H2O → Cu7Cl4(OH)10H2O(3) 2Cu7Cl4(OH)10H2O + OH− → 7Cu2Cl(OH)3 + Cl− + H2O(4) Cu2Cl(OH)3 + H2O → 2Cu(OH)2 + HCl(5) Cu(OH)2 → CuO + H2O(6)
 Fig. 4  TEM images of different CuO nanostructures obtained in different amounts of water under otherwise similar conditions: (a) in the absence of water; Vwater = (b) 0.5, (c) 1.0, (d) 3.0, (e) 6.0, (f) 10, (g) 15, and (h) 30 mL; (i) in the absence of ethanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright ACS 2013. 
Based on the above reaction equations, it could be found that water was an important reactant for inducing the formation of CuO.29 Besides, due to the selective adsorption of solvent molecules, the (111) facets were strongly protected by polar-charged hydroxyl groups in a large amount of ethanol, while they were insufficiently capped in a large amount of water.58 Notably, a similar result could also be obtained even though the species of the precursor were altered. Hence, the phenomenon manifests the predominant function of water in the shape evolution.45,58,69 Significantly, ultrathin CuO nanorods have been prepared by directly adding water into a Cu(NO3)2/NaOH/ethanol system at high temperature.71 The synthesis strategy is similar to that in the above-mentioned example of Pd nanosheets.29 Such ultrathin CuO nanorods acting as a promising electrode material present high sensitivity, low detection limit, fast amperometric responses and good selectivity. The investigation is meaningful in the tailored synthesis of surfactant-free CuO nanostructures by a water-guided strategy, which might act as an important platform to evaluate the effect of organic capping on the electro-catalysis of metal oxide nanostructures.
With regard to Cu2O, the presence of water will also lead to a significant alteration in crystal morphology.72–74 Zeng's group reported a typical solvothermal synthesis of Cu2O nanocubes by Ostwald ripening in a DMF solvent.73 In this synthetic process, a trace amount of water could control the size and crystallites of Cu2O nanocubes, as shown in Fig. 5. A drastic size-evolution (from 150 to 6000 nm) and morphology evolution (from hollow nanocubes to large solid microcubes) of the Cu2O cubes could be clearly observed when there was only a small increase in the water amount. In this reaction, water not only induced the generation of charged species but also served the capping agent because of its polarity, hence the small molecules could interact with the Cu2O (100) surfaces via direct charge compensation or through formation of different hydrogen bonds and the mechanism of the assembly of Cu2O is shown in Fig. 5a and b, respectively. Herein, the above results demonstrate that water can be used in the synthesis of copper oxides with diverse morphologies.
 Fig. 5  (a) Hollow Cu2O cubes synthesized at low water concentration and the schematic description for the central void formation. (b) Large Cu2O cubes synthesized at low water concentration and the schematic description for the growth process. CuO crystallites attached to the formed Cu2O cubes (in gray) are represented with darker rectangular blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright RSC 2018. 
ZnO crystals often present various morphologies such as cones, belts, wires, and spheres, due to the different growth rate of different facets, which is generally controlled by the addition of a surfactant.37,44,57,75–80 In order to avoid the use of a surfactant, researchers have used mixed solvents in the synthesis of ZnO and obtained distinct morphologies by manipulating the composition of the solvents. Sun et al. demonstrated a typical synthesis of ZnO with different morphologies in a water/ethanol/anhydrous zinc acetate (Zn(CH3COO)2) system and systematically revealed the function of water in the chemical precipitation process.42 The formation process of the as-prepared ZnO in this synthesis system can be summarized as follows: firstly, anhydrous Zn(CH3COO)2 was hydrolysed in a water/ethanol system to generate a Zn(OH)2 precipitate at an evaluated temperature based on eqn (7). Subsequently, ZnO species were formed by the decomposition of the Zn(OH)2 intermediates (see eqn (8)). Zn(CH3COO)2 + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2↓ + CH3COOH(7) Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O(8)
According to the above reaction equations, it was observed that water was an important reactant for the synthesis of ZnO species. And the volume ratio (R) of water and ethanol was very significant for the morphology-controllable synthesis of ZnO crystals, in which the volume of ethanol was constant (30 mL), while the volume of water was variable from 0.5 mL to 30 mL. As shown in Fig. 6, the shape-evolution of ZnO from cone-like mesocrystals to bottle cork-like nanocrystals was achieved by only controlling the amount of water under otherwise identical synthetic conditions.42 In particular, it was found that typical cone-like ZnO mesocrystals enclosed by the (101) and (000) surfaces were facilely generated in the presence of trace amount of water in an ethanol environment (see Fig. 6a). Interestingly, the side facets (101) were gradually minimized along with addition of water, and in turn, the size of the (0001) facets relatively increased, though the whole size of the products gradually decreased (see Fig. 6b–i).
 Fig. 6  TEM images of the ZnO products obtained with different volume ratios (R) between water and ethanol (the volume of ethanol is constantly 30 mL). (a) R = 1/30; (b) R = 1/15; (c) R = 1/10; (d) R = 1/6; (e) R = 1/3; (f) R = 1/2; (g) R = 2/3; (h) R = 5/6; (i) R = 1/1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright RSC 2018. 
It can be attributed to the differential adsorption energies on certain facets calculated by density functional theory. The exact growth mechanism is described as follows: the polar ethanol molecules preferentially adsorbed onto the positive (101) and (000) facets of ZnO will stabilize the (101) and (000) facets, thus the growth rates along the 〈101〉 and 〈0001〉 directions were limited at small R values, while the water molecules could readily be adsorbed onto the (0001) and (100) facets and would stabilize the (0001) and (100) facets at higher R values. In brief, ethanol molecules are beneficial to protecting the (101) and (000) facets, while water molecules are useful in confining the (0001) and (100) facets. Consequently, cone-like ZnO mesocrystals were synthesized at lower R values, while pancake-like and bolt-like architectures with (0001) and (100) facets were gradually synthesized at higher R values.
Similarly, the role of water was also demonstrated in a double solvothermal (water/ethanol) route.79 From Fig. 7a to d, it can be seen that ZnO could form spheres, pot-plant-like morphologies, polyhedron microdisks and microrods based on the amount of water used in the reaction. One important reason for the shape evolution was the polarity of the mixed solvents, which had a strong influence on the nucleation of ZnO nanocrystals, orientation of crystals and amalgamation of crystals.35,81,82 Since ZnO is a kind of polar crystal, the polar solvent species are more likely to attach to the polar facets, resulting in the appearance of polar surfaces.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of the ZnO samples prepared with different amounts of water: (a) 0 mL; (b) 2.0 mL; (c) 5.0 mL, and (d) 8.0 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright Nature Publishing Group 2014. 
Besides, solubility is also a vital factor that decides the morphology, as a result of the increased nucleation and growth rate by the water solvent. With regard to other solvent systems, such as EG, a distinct morphology change can also be observed by altering the amount of water.37,76,78 Greer et al. proposed that the Zn precursor would be involved in a polymerization during hydrolysis, where water served as an important reactant and inducer.78 The polymerization process can be presented in equations as follows: 2Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O + H2O → (CH3COO)2–Zn(2H2O)–O–Zn(2H2O)–(CH3COO)2 + 2H+(9) n/2[Zn(2H2O)–O–Zn(2H2O)–(CH3COO)2] + n/2H2O → [–O–Zn(2H2O)–]n + nH2O(10)
The Zn precursor could form a dimer and a polymer and then dehydrate with a rearrangement into crystalline ZnO.78 When the concentration of water became high, the water molecule diffused very easily into the core and enhanced Ostwald ripening in the inner space, resulting in the formation of nanocones. As a result, there is no doubt that water can be employed as a morphology-tailoring additive for the synthesis of ZnO with different morphologies crystals.
Water is also able to play a key role in synthesizing magnetite oxides, such as Fe3O4 and NiO, based on a solvo-/hydrothermal method and alkali precipitation route. For instance, mesoporous Fe3O4 nanospheres could be prepared in a water/EG mixed solvent system, while it could be solid Fe3O4 spheres in pure EG,83 but large α-Fe2O3 particles in pure water. Notably, the mesoporous structure could only be observed in a mixed solvent system. The results revealed that the poly-alcohol worked as both a solvent and reducing agent, while the water acted as a good inducer and morphology regulator because of the strong coordination between Fe3+ and H2O. As a result, the kinetics of the nucleation was altered correspondingly and more small nuclei formed at the initial stage and water helped control aggregation by the surface hydroxyls acting as a binder, leading to the formation of a mesoporous structure.84,85 Moreover, low polarity or non-polarity solvents were applied as well when preparing iron oxide nanoparticles in precursor systems such as Fe(CO)5, Fe(acac)3, and Fe(oleate)3 complexes and so on. Micro-sized single crystalline Fe3O4 particles were successfully prepared through a facile solvothermal method with ferrocene as a single iron precursor and an isopropanol (IPA)–water mixture as the solvent.86 As shown in Fig. 8, the addition of water induced an octahedral crystal growth, while the product in pure IPA exhibited a star-shaped morphology. It could be well explained by the surface free energy minimization principle. In pure IPA, the growth rate of (100) was believed to be much faster than that of (111) of the formed primary seeds, resulting in the formation of star-shaped hexapod Fe3O4 crystals. After introducing water into the IPA system, the variation in polarity and coordination of the changed solvent affected the supersaturation of seeds and the selective growth of crystal facets. It induced the growth and aggregation of nanoparticles under kinetically controlled conditions, causing the formation of round-arm Fe3O4 hexapods and concave octahedra.86,87 Besides Fe3O4, the morphologies of NiO grown on graphene nanosheets could be tailored by introducing water into the mixed solvents of CO2–expanded ethanol.55 The trace amount of water added during the synthesis facilitated the transformation from an amorphous precursor into a crystalline precursor after the hydrolysation and polymerization reactions, and thus NiO would form distinct morphologies (including nanospheres and microflowers) after assembly of the unstable crystalline intermediate with high energy surface.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of Fe3O4 prepared at 350 °C for 6 h in IPA without an additive; (b) in IPA/water at 8:1; (c) IPA/water at 5:1; (d) pure water. (e) Schematic illustration for the formation of microsized Fe3O4 crystals with different morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright ACS 2010. 
Similarly, anatase TiO2, as one of the most stable polymorphs, can be synthesized with diverse morphologies by varying the amount of water.21,88 Yin's group successfully converted amorphous sol–gel derived TiO2 into mesoporous anatase nanocrystals with a high specific surface area and controllable porosity as well as crystallinity through a facile water-assisted crystallization process.88 The amount of water significantly influenced hydrolysis and condensation kinetics, which could be reflected by the size of the TiO2 spheres. Furthermore, the larger ones seemed to be more spherical but the smaller ones would be relatively irregular. Besides the above nanospheres, amorphous TiO2 nanotubes could also be transformed into a crystalline anatase structure with the assistance of water, which was realized by soaking the as-anodized TiO2 nanotubes in water at room temperature.59 The spontaneous phase transformation into anatase was ascribed to a water-driven dissolution–precipitation process of TiO62− octahedra, which is shown in Fig. 9. It could be inferred from the transformation process that the relatively large space inside the TiO2 helped water molecules to access the inner surface of the tubes to drive nucleation and growth of the anatase phase, and in contrast, the diffusion and transport of water was limited in the narrow interspace of the adjacent TiO2, causing a giant difference in the growth rate. Therefore, different morphologies could be obtained by controlling the reaction time. With regard to rutile TiO2, another important phase in the polymorph families of TiO2, it can also be prepared through a water-assisted method.30 TiO2 presented a sphere-like morphology in a low water/EG ratio, while it could form an urchin-like morphology with more water involved in the reaction. It was noted that a precise control of the water content was required to avoid undesired outcomes, for instance, irregular particles prepared in the pure EG or water system. A possible formation mechanism was also proposed as follows: Ti3+ + H2O → TiOH2+ + H+(11) TiOH2+ + O2 → Ti(IV) oxo species + O2 → TiO2(12)
 Fig. 9  The SEM images of the morphological evolution as a function of water-soaking time from top and side view and scheme illustrating the morphology transformation of the as-anodized TiO2 nanotubes upon water soaking. Scale bars: 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright ACS 2011. 
As shown in the above equations, water induced the hydrolysis of Ti precursors, and the homogeneous solvent composed of EG and water acted as an ideal environment for the intermediate Ti(IV) oxo species, rendering the dispersion of nucleation centers. Consequently, this indicates that the ratio of water to EG is quite crucial to fabricate the desired microstructures, and a minor disturbance to the balanced state will lead to the formation of irregular particles. As for the synthesis of brookite TiO2, the hydrothermal method is the most common way, where water mainly serves as a solvent and reaction inititor.89–92 Fan et al. proposed that water would induce the formation of Ti–OH through hydrolysis and Ti–(OH)2–Ti through an olation process.89 During the reactions, the high ratio of water would lead to dominant brookite and anatase TiO2, while a low ratio of water would cause the formation of the rutile phase. Unfortunately, pure brookite TiO2 synthesized through a water-guided synthesis has rarely been reported.
Based on the above-mentioned discussions, a morphology-controlled synthesis of several metal oxides can be readily achieved by water-guided reactions even without any surfactants. However, the green design of more novel single-component and hybrid nanocomposites is still a challenge, thus much more attention should be paid to enriching the family of micro-/nanostructures on the basis of water-guided synthesis.
3.3. Perovskites
Perovskites, one of the most studied ternary compounds that can be recognized as ABX3, have attracted great attention because of their potential applications in solar cells, catalysis and sensors.11,33,93,94 MTiO3 (M = Sr, Ba and Ca) are recognized as the most classical perovskite-type alkaline earth titanates, which can be simply obtained through a liquid phase reaction and water plays an important role undoubtedly.94,95 BaTiO3 would form a star shape in a pure water system, while a cubic phase would form upon employing a water/ethanol system.95 Interestingly, a higher amount of water would further result in a larger size as well as better crystallization, which was influenced by the different nucleation rate determined by the solubility of the precursors in the solutions. Notably, the aggregation process was likely affected by water, but a proper explanation remained to be proved by further investigations.
Lead halide perovskites form another important class of perovskites, which can be categorized into totally inorganic perovskite and organic–inorganic hybrids. It has been reported that both kinds of halide perovskites can be synthesized with a water-controllable crystallization.33,93 For instance, Gong et al. used water as a solvent additive during the synthesis of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx.93 It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the individual grain size was enlarged with a larger amount of water, whereas more and larger voids were formed between the grains. Moreover, perovskite thin films with 2% water (Fig. 10c) exhibited enhanced properties such as larger surface coverage, better crystallization and stability, leading to significant improvement in the power conversion efficiency and cell stability under ambient conditions. The enhancement could be attributed to the lower boiling point and higher vapor pressure of water compared with DMF, which probably accelerated the crystallization and led to the formation of larger crystals. It should be noted that the as-prepared perovskite can resist corrosion from water molecules in air to some extent after an annealing process, which seems to be an effective way to prolong the lifetime of solar cells.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films based on (a) DMF, (b) DMF + 1% H2O, (c) DMF + 2% H2O, (d) DMF + 3% H2O, (e) DMF + 5% H2O, (f) DMF + 7% H2O, and (g) DMF + 10% H2O solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2015. 
As for CsPbBr3, it was also reported that several different shapes can be obtained with the adjustment of water.33 Spherical CsPbBr3 with a uniform size of around 2.1 nm could be synthesized in a pure toluene solution (Fig. 11a), while larger square-shaped nanoplatelets were generated in the samples with the addition of 30 and 60 μL of water (see Fig. 11b and c). The formation mechanism is shown in Fig. 11d. It was assumed that some precursors would transform into intermediates at the toluene/water interface, while other 2.1 nm precursors served as seeds which grew larger during the crystallization process. Water not only induced the decomposition of precursors but also created different crystallization environments with toluene, causing the formation of spherical nanocrystals or square-shaped nanocrystals. Therefore, the above achievements reveal that water does play a critical role in the preparation of perovskites and pave a way for further investigations on the mechanisms upon addition of minor amounts of polar solvents.
 Fig. 11  TEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoparticles synthesized with 0 μL water (a); 30 μL water (b); and 60 μL water (c) and (d) a possible growth process of CsPbBr3 nanoparticles with or without the presence of traces of water in the reaction mixture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2018. 
3.4. Metal sulfides
Metal sulphides generally can be prepared through a chemical precipitation or hydrothermal method because of their poor solubility in water; thus a water-induced strategy can be used to control the morphology of metal sulfides.96,97 For instance, CdS was successfully prepared by a reflux method in water/alcohol solution.98 In the experiments, the ratio of water in the mixture solution would influence the size, phase and structure of the product. When the mixture contained more water, the as-prepared CdS particles would grow larger as well. Besides, water can also serve as an inducer in the synthesis of CuS core/shell structures.99 It was proposed that the CuS nanoparticles outside and inside the water capsules exhibited quite different reaction behaviours; finally a core–shell structure would be obtained after a heating process by removing water. The scheme is given in Fig. 12. Initially, the precursor would melt at low temperature, in which the remaining small amount of water might disperse and form small capsules in the molten-aqueous mixture. At the early heating stage, small individual CuS nanoparticles were formed by thermolysis of Cu(R2dtc)2. Some CuS nanoparticles might disperse in the water capsules and aggregate into small spheres. At the same time, small CuS nanoparticles outside the water-capsules might aggregate together into nanodisks with the aid of the organic ligands and adsorb on the interface of the water capsules. When the temperature was higher than 100 °C, water would evaporate from the system, leading to the formation of the homogeneous CuS core/shell products. Apparently, the presence of a suitable small amount of water is quite crucial for the formation of the CuS core/shell structures. Additionally, MoS2 with diverse morphologies can be obtained by controlling the amount of water during the hydrothermal process.100,101 Wang et al. found that MoS2 tended to grow into flake flowers in water or water/PEG while into a more bulk structure in ethanol/water or EG/water.101 This could be attributed to the influence of solvent properties on crystallization. Water was believed to be the best crystalline medium among these solvents due to its good solubility and low viscosity. Meanwhile, water would not interfere with the formation of stable Mo–S bonding in the plane direction. Any extra alcohol added into water will disturb the crystallization process. Hence, both the shape and crystallization of MoS2 can be easily manipulated by the addition of water.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of CuS microspheres. (b) SEM images of the fragments of the homogeneous core–shell CuS microspheres. (c) Tentative formation mechanism of the homogeneous core–shell CuS microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright ACS 2008. 
3.5. Metal salts
Oxysalts, including carbonates, nitrates, phosphates, vanadates etc., have also been synthesized through a water-assisted method.31,51,102–105 For example, monodispersed CaCO3 nanoparticles could be synthesized by a facile precipitation method and the crystallization of CaCO3 could be kinetically controlled, resulting in the formation of three polymorphs in a mixed water–ethanol solvent.51,102 By adjusting the ratio between water and alcohol, the dominant phase of aragonite and calcite could be achieved.51 A reasonable explanation was proposed that the adsorption of alcohol on special surfaces of CaCO3 would block the transport of Ca2+ or CO32−, hindering the recrystallization process, thus the kinetics of crystal growth was altered for tailoring the morphology. Similar to CaCO3, water-dispersible willow-leaf-like carbonate apatite could also be synthesized without any surfactant in a water/ethanol/NH3/Ca2+ system, where water was an inducer to promote the hydrolysis of NH3 to produce OH−.106 Notably, it would form irregular nanoplates rather than nanorods with increasing amounts of water, caused by the inhomogeneous nucleation in the low supersaturation solution.
The morphology of InBO3 would be controlled by adjusting the amount of water in the synthesis system.104 After adding a small amount of water, the as-obtained InBO3 tended to assemble into microspheres, whereas a half-open flower-like morphology could be synthesized by increasing the amount of water, as shown in Fig. 13. Moreover, the crystallinity would be enhanced by the addition of more water, and the small crystalline seeds would adopt different aggregation behaviours depending on the amount of water in the system. When there was a small amount of water, it would generate amorphous particles immediately and further aggregate into microspheres. In contrast, monodisperse bud structures were synthesized at the primary stage and a dissolution process for the undissolved sharp vertices would occur as the reaction proceeded, finally leading to the formation of a flower-like morphology.
 Fig. 13  SEM images of InBO3 synthesized by using different amounts of water (a) 0.25 mL; (b) 1 mL; (c) 1.25 mL and (d) 1.75 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright Elsevier 2017. 
As mentioned above, several inorganic materials with well-defined morphologies have been synthesized by only adjusting the amount of water in wet chemical synthesis, which indicates that water is an efficient control agent for constructing novel micro-nanostructures. However, previous literature merely includes a small part of inorganic species, thus there is a giant space left for uncovering the relationship between water and other species. Therefore, it is necessary to employ more efforts to understand the function of water in special chemical reactions and establish a systematic theory for the shape-control of micro-nanostructures based on the water-guided strategy.
4. Conclusions and outlook
Although water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures has been investigated in the past years, it has not attracted much attention and become widely utilized. In this review, we have comprehensively summarized the design processes, synthesis strategies, growth mechanisms and morphological diversities of water-guided synthesis strategies in the existing literature, which involves some different types of inorganic species, such as noble metals (including Pd and Au), metal oxides (including CuO, Cu2O, ZnO, Fe3O4, NiO and TiO2), perovskites (including CsPbBr3, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, BaTiO3), metal sulfides (including CdS, CuS and MoS2) and oxysalts (including CaCO3, carbonate apatite and InBO3). The significant achievements in water-guided synthesis of inorganic species would offer a great chance for the rational design and synthesis of high-performance micro-/nanostructures. However, it is a remarkable fact that there is still a long way to go before the formation mechanisms can be fully uncovered and generalized. In order to achieve this goal, several new tasks need to be specially studied in the future.
So far, the as-reported inorganic materials synthesized by this water-guided strategy generally have exposed low-index facets, which strongly restrained the investigation on the facet-dependent applications. Therefore, great efforts should be further employed to explore the synthesis of novel architectures with exposed controllable-index crystallographic facets, especially high-activity high-index facets. Thus, the choice of suitable water-solvent systems for constructing targeted architectures based on theoretical calculation assisted surface energy variations is imperative. Moreover, the size-/or phase-controlled synthesis of nanomaterials is also an urgent task by this water-guided strategy. Notably, self-assembly organization of nanosized building blocks might be designed and synthesized by the water-guided synthesis method based on the poly-functionality of water (including reaction media, capping agent and reactant or catalyst) in the wet-chemical synthesis process. Significantly, apart from the current reported micro-/nanomaterials, it is urgently necessary to give more attention to precise-control aspects and the formation mechanisms of other inorganic species and organic materials. In addition, the water-guided synthesis strategy, especially in a solvothermal system, should be considered for element-doping and construction of hybridized architectures for optimizing the performances of micro-/nanomaterials.
To summarize, water is a simple inducer for the synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures, which is beneficial to developing a low cost, facile and environment friendly route to construct microstructure-oriented functional materials. This review is of great significance to the morphology-controlled synthesis of various inorganic species, and offers a good opportunity to understand the formation mechanism of the preferential growth of different materials. Importantly, it is believed that the water-induced synthetic strategy mentioned here could provide a promising way to design more and more single-component and hybrid nanocomposite architectures with controllable morphologies. Hence, we finally want to take this opportunity to make an appeal that more attention should be paid to the development of water-guided synthesis of well-defined micro-/nanostructures.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC No. 51834009 and 51801151), the Hundred Talent Program of Shaanxi Province, the Key Laboratory Project of Shaanxi Education Department (No. 18JS070, 18JK0560 and 17JS081), the Shaanxi Province Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (2018JC-027), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2018M633643XB), the Key Research and Development Project of Shaanxi Province (No. 2017ZDXM-GY-033 and 2017ZDXM-GY-028), and the Key Laboratory Project of Science and Technology Agency (No. 13JS075). In particular, the authors would like to dedicate this article to the 70th anniversary of Xi’an University of Technology.
Notes and references
S. D. Sun, P. J. Li, S. H. Liang and Z. M. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11357–11404 RSC .
Y. M. Yang, Q. Zhao, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 192–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yadegari and X. L. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1532–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Gilroy, X. Yang, S. F. Xie, M. Zhao, D. Qin and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706312 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Q. Ren, S. D. Sun, J. Cui and X. F. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 6326–6369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Liu, W. Yang, L. Han and M. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7346–7349 RSC .
H. Xue, Y. Fang, L. Zeng, X. He, F. Luo, R. Liu, J. Liu, Q. Chen, M. Wei and Q. Qian, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 533, 627–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Sun and Z. M. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7403–7415 RSC .
S. D. Sun, X. J. Zhang, Q. Yang, S. H. Liang, X. Z. Zhang and Z. M. Yang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 96, 111–173 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Rej and C. Y. Chiu, Small, 2015, 11, 2716–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Huang, L. Yuan and S. H. Feng, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 965–981 RSC .
H. L. Wang, S. Zhou, K. D. Gilroy, Z. S. Cai and Y. N. Xia, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 121–144 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 106–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang and S. Thoka, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
P. Swetha and S. P. Feng, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 94, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Quan, Y. X. Wang and J. Y. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 191–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hong, Y. N. Kim, Y. M. Kwon and S. W. Han, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2224–2239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kuang, X. Wang, Z. Y. Jiang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 308–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, H. G. Yang, J. Pan, Y. Q. Yang, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9559–9612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Tan, S. C. Hsu, W. H. Ke, L. J. Chen and M. H. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2155–2160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Pan, L. C. Yin, J. T. S. Irvine, F. Li, J. Tan, P. Wormald and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3233–3238 CrossRef CAS .
B. Viswanath, P. Kundu, A. HaIder and N. Ravishankar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16866–16883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Lai, W. X. Niu, R. Luque and G. B. Xu, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 240–267 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Lofgreen and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 911–933 RSC .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449–493 CrossRef CAS .
C. de and M. Donega, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1512–1546 RSC .
S. M. Yang, S. H. Kim, J. M. Lim and G. R. Yi, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2177–2190 RSC .
S. D. Sun, X. Z. Zhang, Y. X. Sun, S. C. Yang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4429–4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, Y. N. Liang, Y. M. Li, Q. Y. Yan and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9998–10003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Wang, H. C. Chen, H. J. Li, G. Mailhot and W. B. Dong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 478, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. X. Chen, H. Y. Yang, X. L. Wang, J. H. Liang, P. X. Liu, M. Chen and N. F. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8368–8372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, X. Bai, H. Wu, X. T. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, W. T. Zheng, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3337–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sugimoto, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1983, 93, 461–473 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. D. Sun, J. L. Yin, H. L. Su, C. S. Liao and C. H. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4172–4177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arii and A. Kishi, Thermochim. Acta, 2003, 400, 175–185 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, S. Meierott and J. M. Köhler, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165, 958–965 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Iyengar, M. Joy, A. P. Mohamed, S. Samanta, C. K. Ghosh and S. Ghosh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60845–60855 RSC .
Y. Song, Y. Shen, H. Y. Liu, Y. H. Lin, M. Li and C. W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16491–16498 RSC .
C. J. Li, Q. D. Zeng, C. Wang, L. J. Wan, S. L. Xu, C. A. Wang and C. L. Bai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 747–750 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Pour, M. R. Housaindokht and H. Monhemi, Colloid J., 2014, 76, 782–787 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Liang, X. F. Gou, J. Cui, Y. G. Luo, H. T. Qu, T. Zhang, Z. M. Yang, Q. Yang and S. D. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2257–2267 RSC .
Y. Q. Zhu, L. Liu and J. Z. Du, Macromolecules, 2012, 46, 194–203 CrossRef .
S. D. Sun, X. Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2411–2418 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Sun, X. Z. Zhang, Y. X. Sun, S. C. Yang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10904–10913 RSC .
G. A. Baker, A. A. Rachford, F. N. Castellano and S. N. Baker, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1025–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Wang, G. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Xu, X. M. Wei, X. Q. Shen and Y. Q. Sun, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8089–8100 RSC .
H. I. Chen and H. Y. Chang, Colloids Surf., A, 2004, 242, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pérez-Hernández, D. Fort, C. Pérez and J. D. Martín, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 1054–1061 CrossRef .
H. J. Martin, C. R. Pfeiffer, E. Stephen Davies, A. L. Davis, W. Lewis and N. R. Champness, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 8769–8776 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sand, J. D. Rodriguezblanco, E. Makovicky, L. G. Benning and S. L. S. Stipp, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 842–853 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Q. Qin, X. C. Duan, J. Q. Yang, W. Guo and W. J. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9095–9100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Standop, A. Redinger, M. Morgenstern, T. Michely and C. Busse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 16412 CrossRef .
P. X. Liu, R. X. Qin, G. Fu and N. F. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2122–2131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Zhuo, Y. Q. Wu, W. Zhou, L. Y. Wang, Y. C. Yu, X. B. Zhang and F. Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7065–7071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, X. Y. Wang, T. Wagner, J. Thiel, Y. Yao, Y. C. Lin, E. Metwalli, R. Liu, H. J. Butt, P. Muller-Buschbaum, J. Q. Meng, L. Chen, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Y. J. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5789–5793 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhang, H. P. Wang, H. Jiang and X. M. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3530–3535 RSC .
S. D. Sun, Y. X. Sun, A. R. Chen, X. Z. Zhang and Z. M. Yang, Analyst, 2015, 140, 5205–5215 RSC .
D. A. Wang, L. F. Liu, F. X. Zhang, K. Tao, E. Pippel and K. Domen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3649–3655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Fan, K. Qi, H. Chen, W. T. Zheng and X. Q. Cui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 490, 190–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Li, R. He, L. J. Wu, L. Y. Zhang and J. Zeng, Environ. Pollut., 2015, 204, 145–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. A. Li, J. J. Lenhart and H. W. Walker, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16690–16698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Huang, S. H. Tang, X. L. Mu, Y. Dai, G. X. Chen, Z. Y. Zhou, F. X. Ruan, Z. L. Yang and N. F. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Hu, K. Q. Lin, X. L. Wang, S. J. Liu, J. Yi, Y. Tian, B. H. Wu, G. X. Chen, H. Y. Yang, Y. Dai, H. Li and N. F. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12856–12859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Liu, X. Li, W. Bi and M. S. Jin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7505–7510 RSC .
H. Wang, X. He, Y. X. Zhao, J. L. Li, T. Huang and H. F. Liu, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4304–4311 RSC .
K. S. Yao, X. Y. Li, Y. L. Zhao, W. W. Lu, J. J. Wang and J. L. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10154–10163 RSC .
S. D. Sun, X. Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Q. Wang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 867–877 RSC .
S. D. Sun, Y. X. Sun, X. Z. Zhang, H. J. Zhang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5275–5282 RSC .
C. C. Kong, L. L. Tang, X. Z. Zhang, S. D. Sun, S. C. Yang, X. P. Song and Z. M. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7306–7312 RSC .
X. F. Gou, S. D. Sun, Q. Yang, P. J. Li, S. H. Liang, X. J. Zhang and Z. M. Yang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6364–6369 RSC .
J. W. Zhu, Y. P. Wang, X. Wang, X. J. Yang and L. D. Lu, Powder Technol., 2008, 181, 249–254 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Teo, Y. Chang and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7369–7377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, J. F. Liu, Q. Peng, X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 867–871 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wang, E. J. Kim, S. H. Hahn, C. H. Park and K. K. Koo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Zhu, H. B. Liu, X. H. Liu, X. Wang, X. J. Yang and L. d. Lu, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., 2009, 24, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Liang, O. Deschaume, S. V. Patwardhan and C. C. Perry, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 80–89 RSC .
H. F. Greer, W. Z. Zhou, G. Zhang and H. Ménard, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601238 CrossRef .
J. Z. Yin, G. Feng, C. Z. Wei and Q. Y. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3736 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Chang, K. L. Chang, C. Y. Chi, J. Zhang and J. S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5397–5403 RSC .
S. K. N. Ayudhya, P. Tonto, O. Mekasuwandumrong, V. Pavarajarn and P. Praserthdam, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 2446–2450 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cheng and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Commun., 2004, 986–987 RSC .
Y. J. Zhang, C. Y. Li, L. D. Liu, K. J. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Q. Ben and J. Wu, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2018, 1–6 Search PubMed .
T. He, D. R. Chen and X. L. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Zhang, C. H. Lu, Y. R. Ni, Z. Z. Xu and W. B. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4755–4764 RSC .
X. Z. Wang, Z. B. Zhao, J. Y. Qu, Z. Y. Wang and J. S. Qiu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 2863–2869 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhao, H. J. Zhang, Y. Xing, S. Y. Song, S. Y. Yu, W. D. Shi, X. M. Guo, H. H. Yang, Y. Q. Le and F. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, J. B. Joo, Z. Lu, M. Dahl, Y. Gan and Y. Yin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9113–9117 RSC .
S. Z. Hu, F. Y. Li and Z. P. Fan, Asian J. Chem., 2012, 24, 1135–1140 CAS .
A. Behjou, H. Aghaie, K. Zare and M. Aghaie, Asian J. Chem., 2013, 25, 880–882 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Chen, C. Yang, Q. Wei and M. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 226–231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Guo, Z. Liu, Q. Wei and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1196–1200 RSC .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. B. Shi, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimijima, K. Kanie, M. Nakaya and A. Muramatsu, Mater. Trans., 2014, 55, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Krzmanc, I. Bracko, B. Budic and D. Suvorov, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 96, 3401–3409 CrossRef .
L. Jing, G. Lian, F. Niu, J. Yang, Q. Wang, D. Cui, C.-P. Wong and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 546–555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Han, X. Li, L. Zeng and M. Wei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 548, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Thakur and S. S. Joshi, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2012, 7, 547–558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Chen, L. Chen and L. M. Wu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2736–2740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Liu, L. Ren, X. Qi, L. W. Yang, G. L. Hao, J. Li, X. L. Wei and J. X. Zhong, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 571, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
X. Leng, Y. Wang and F. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900010 CrossRef .
S. F. Chen, H. Cölfen, M. Antonietti and S. H. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9564–9566 RSC .
J. Ludwig, D. Haering, M. M. Doeff and T. Nilges, Solid State Sci., 2017, 65, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ding, P. Liang and Z. H. Liu, Solid State Sci., 2017, 67, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mohandes and M. Salavatiniasari, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2013, 20, 354–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Jiang, Y. Lu, R. J. Sun, J. Song, L. Ren and S. H. Yu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3822–3828 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Haoqi Ren
	Haoqi Ren received his bachelor's degree from Fudan University in 2017. Now he is a research assistant in Prof. Shaodong Sun's group at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the controllable synthesis of metal oxide-based nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.

Jie Cui
	Jie Cui received his bachelor's degree and master's degree from Shaanxi Normal University in 2005 and 2008, respectively, and his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xi’an University of Technology in 2017. He is currently a Research Fellow in the State Key Laboratory Base of Eco-hydraulic Engineering in Arid Area at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the modelling and synthesis of photocatalysts.

Shaodong Sun
	Shaodong Sun received his bachelor's degree and master's degree from Xi’an University of Technology in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and his PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2011, and then joined the School of Science at Xi’an Jiaotong University (2011–2014). From 2015 to 2016, he worked as a Research Fellow in the Department of Chemistry at National University of Singapore (NUS). He is now a full professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Xi’an University of Technology. His research interest focuses on the designated synthesis of novel nanomaterials for catalytic applications.

 	Fig. 1  A brief description of the water-guided synthesis of well-defined inorganic micro-/nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Water serves as a solvent in the reaction medium. The crystal seeds will aggregate in a different way when the amount of water varies. (b) Water acts as a capping agent on the surface of seeds, resulting in different growth behaviours. (c) Water functions as an inducer or catalyst in the reaction, possibly accompanying the formation of precipitates or gases.	 
Eads = Eaft − Ebef	(1)
[Pd2(μ-CO)2Cl4]2− + H2O → 2Pd + CO2 + CO + 2H+ + 4Cl−	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The shape-controlled synthesis of surface-clean ultrathin Pd nanosheets by simply mixing a dinuclear PdI carbonyl chloride complex with H2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2013. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed growth mechanism of Au spherical architectures at the interface of immiscible toluene and water and SEM images of products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright RSC 2015.	 

CuCl2	Water/ethanol	CuO	Nanoneedles	Nanoleaves	Glucose sensors	
29

Cu(NO3)2	Water/ethanol	CuO	Nanoflowers composed of nanoparticles	Nanoleaves	Glucose sensors	
45

CuSO4	Water/ethanol	CuO	Porous nanoribbons	Nanoflowers	Glucose sensors	
58

Cu(NO3)2	Water/ethanol	CuO	Nanorods	Nanobelts	Glucose sensors	
71

Cu(NO3)2	Water/EG	Cu2O	Needle-like morphology	Nanorods/cubes	None	
72

Cu(NO3)2·3H2O	Water/DMF	Cu2O	Hollow cubes	Microcubes	Chemical template	
73

Cu(NO3)2·3H2O	Water/DMF	Cu2O	Nanospheres	Nanoparticles and larger nanospheres	Gas sensors	
74

Zn(CH3COO)2	Water/ethanol	ZnO	Cone-like structures	Bottle cork-like nanocrystals	Photocatalysis	
42

Zn(CH3COO)2	Water/alcohol	ZnO	Fat plate crystals	Microrod clusters	None	
75

Zn(CH3COO)2	Water/EG	ZnO	Spherical ZnO nanocrystals	Teardrop-shaped ZnO nanocrystals	None	
76

Zn(CH3COO)2	Water/EG	ZnO	Smaller spheres covered with nanotiles	Larger spheres	Photodegradation	
78

Zn(CH3COO)2	Water/ethanol	ZnO	Hollow spheres	Microdisks and microrods	Catalysis	
79

FeCl3·6H2O	Water/EG	Fe3O4 or Fe2O3	Solid spheres	Mesoporous spheres	None	
83

FeCl3	Water/EG	Fe3O4	Microrods	Microspheres	None	
85

Fe(C5H5)2	Water/IPA	Fe3O4	Star-like morphology	Octahedron	None	
86

TiCl3	Water/EG	TiO2	Spherical particles	Urchin-like spheres	Lithium batteries	
30

Amorphous TiO2 particles	Water	TiO2	Amorphous particles	Mesoporous crystalline nanospheres	Phosphoprotein (β-casein) enrichment	
88

Anodized TiO2	Water	TiO2	Amorphous tubes	Mesoporous crystalline nanotubes	Hydrogen evolution reaction	
89

Na2WO4	Water/ethanol	WO3	Hierarchical microflowers	Microspheres composed of nanorods	Photodegradation	
47

7Cu2+ + 10OH− + 4Cl− + H2O → Cu7Cl4(OH)10H2O	(3)
2Cu7Cl4(OH)10H2O + OH− → 7Cu2Cl(OH)3 + Cl− + H2O	(4)
Cu2Cl(OH)3 + H2O → 2Cu(OH)2 + HCl	(5)
Cu(OH)2 → CuO + H2O	(6)

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of different CuO nanostructures obtained in different amounts of water under otherwise similar conditions: (a) in the absence of water; Vwater = (b) 0.5, (c) 1.0, (d) 3.0, (e) 6.0, (f) 10, (g) 15, and (h) 30 mL; (i) in the absence of ethanol. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright ACS 2013.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Hollow Cu2O cubes synthesized at low water concentration and the schematic description for the central void formation. (b) Large Cu2O cubes synthesized at low water concentration and the schematic description for the growth process. CuO crystallites attached to the formed Cu2O cubes (in gray) are represented with darker rectangular blocks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright RSC 2018.	 
Zn(CH3COO)2 + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2↓ + CH3COOH	(7)
Zn(OH)2 → ZnO + H2O	(8)

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of the ZnO products obtained with different volume ratios (R) between water and ethanol (the volume of ethanol is constantly 30 mL). (a) R = 1/30; (b) R = 1/15; (c) R = 1/10; (d) R = 1/6; (e) R = 1/3; (f) R = 1/2; (g) R = 2/3; (h) R = 5/6; (i) R = 1/1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright RSC 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of the ZnO samples prepared with different amounts of water: (a) 0 mL; (b) 2.0 mL; (c) 5.0 mL, and (d) 8.0 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright Nature Publishing Group 2014.	 
2Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O + H2O → (CH3COO)2–Zn(2H2O)–O–Zn(2H2O)–(CH3COO)2 + 2H+	(9)
n/2[Zn(2H2O)–O–Zn(2H2O)–(CH3COO)2] + n/2H2O → [–O–Zn(2H2O)–]n + nH2O	(10)

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of Fe3O4 prepared at 350 °C for 6 h in IPA without an additive; (b) in IPA/water at 8:1; (c) IPA/water at 5:1; (d) pure water. (e) Schematic illustration for the formation of microsized Fe3O4 crystals with different morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright ACS 2010.	 
Ti3+ + H2O → TiOH2+ + H+	(11)
TiOH2+ + O2 → Ti(IV) oxo species + O2 → TiO2	(12)

 	Fig. 9  The SEM images of the morphological evolution as a function of water-soaking time from top and side view and scheme illustrating the morphology transformation of the as-anodized TiO2 nanotubes upon water soaking. Scale bars: 500 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx films based on (a) DMF, (b) DMF + 1% H2O, (c) DMF + 2% H2O, (d) DMF + 3% H2O, (e) DMF + 5% H2O, (f) DMF + 7% H2O, and (g) DMF + 10% H2O solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2015.	 

 	Fig. 11  TEM image of CsPbBr3 nanoparticles synthesized with 0 μL water (a); 30 μL water (b); and 60 μL water (c) and (d) a possible growth process of CsPbBr3 nanoparticles with or without the presence of traces of water in the reaction mixture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright Wiley-VCH 2018.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of CuS microspheres. (b) SEM images of the fragments of the homogeneous core–shell CuS microspheres. (c) Tentative formation mechanism of the homogeneous core–shell CuS microspheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright ACS 2008.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of InBO3 synthesized by using different amounts of water (a) 0.25 mL; (b) 1 mL; (c) 1.25 mL and (d) 1.75 mL. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright Elsevier 2017.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
