Ultrafast rechargeable Zn micro-batteries endowing a wearable solar charging system with high overall efficiency   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03623D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03623D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1602-1611Ultrafast rechargeable Zn micro-batteries endowing a wearable solar charging system with high overall efficiency†

        
          
            Zhengnan 
            Tian‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhongti 
            Sun‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanyan 
            Shao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuanlong 
            Shao
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Richard B. 
            Kaner
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Jingyu 
            Sun
          
        
      *abc
aCollege of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations (SIEMIS), Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, P. R. China. E-mail: sunjy86@suda.edu.cn; ylshao@suda.edu.cn
bSUDA-BGI Collaborative Innovation Center, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, P. R. China
cBeijing Graphene Institute (BGI), Beijing 100095, P. R. China
dDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, and California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), USA. E-mail: kaner@chem.ucla.edu
Received 
      14th November 2020
    , Accepted 2nd February 2021First published on 2nd February 2021AbstractWearable solar charging systems are now developing rapidly. However, their insufficient overall efficiency and poor charging rate remain daunting challenges. Herein, we report the rational design of a wearable solar charging unit based on a miniature GaAs solar cell and an ultrafast rechargeable Zn micro-battery. This integrated system demonstrates a high overall efficiency of 23.11%. Upon solar charging for 5 s, the system delivers a continuous supply of power for 110 s at 0.5 mA cm−2, showing favorable fast charging performance characteristics. With the aid of in-depth characterization combined with theoretical simulations, the electrochemical energy storage mechanism of the zinc ion battery is elucidated as the synergy of hydroxyl anion intercalation with surface pseudocapacitive reaction. This work provides an innovative strategy to construct wearable solar charging units with high efficiency and advanced charging capabilities.

Broader context
Solar is a promising renewable energy source used to generate electricity. However, due to the fluctuating and intermittent nature of its energy output, solar is still challenging to satisfy energy demand. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop multi-field coupling systems by synergizing solar cells and energy storage modules to tackle this issue. Accordingly, a tough mission remains in multi-field integration due to the mismatch between the highly fluctuating output current of solar cells and the low current tolerance of typical energy storage devices. Aiming to address these concerns, we propose an innovative wearable solar charging system based on a rechargeable Zn-ion micro-battery. The high-rate Zn-ion battery as the energy storage module enables a high current tolerance and fast charge/discharge performance, matching favorably with GaAs solar cells. In line with this, the solar charging unit shows a high overall efficiency of 23.11%, which exceeds most reported works in this realm. In addition, we have employed laser engraving as a facile and economical method to manufacture the miniaturized Zn-ion battery electrodes. This work offers new insights into the design of high-efficiency solar charging systems and other self-rechargeable hybrid devices.

Introduction
The boom in flexible electronics and artificial intelligence has stimulated the growth of multifunctional power sources.1–3 Among them, solar charging self-powered systems have attracted increasing interest in both scientific and technological realms.4 In general, each of these integrated units consists of a photovoltaic (PV) component and an energy storage (ES) component. Under sunlight, solar energy is converted to electricity by the PV component, which is concurrently stored in the complementary ES component to enable powering the output whenever needed. For instance, Xu et al. reported an effective solar charging system using a lithium-ion battery (LIB) and a perovskite solar cell that achieved an overall energy conversion and storage efficiency (ηoverall) of 7.8%.5 Nevertheless, state-of-the-art integrations still suffer from key limitations pertaining to low ηoverall under uneven sunlight intensities, which is mainly caused by the poor rate performance of the ES module (i.e., the LIB), while experiencing radically varied input currents. In light of this, supercapacitors have emerged as one of the most favourable ES candidates benefiting from their excellent rate performance and long lifespan. A recent research endeavour from us demonstrated a solar charging unit based on printed Mg ion quasi-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors, exhibiting a ηoverall value of 11.95%.6 Notwithstanding these advances, the practicability and wearability of solar charging self-powered systems are still plagued by the insufficient energy density of the supercapacitor modules.
To this end, incorporating an alkaline zinc ion battery (ZIB) with good rate capability and favorable energy density is a feasible avenue to enable advanced ES for solar charging units. In contrast to organic electrolytes, an aqueous KOH electrolyte possesses a significantly higher ionic conductivity, which in turn provides superior rate performance for ZIBs compared to that of LIBs. Likewise, sufficient faradaic reactions at the cathode side and fairly high theoretical capacity of the Zn anode (820 mA h g−1) could impart higher energy density as compared with supercapacitors.7 However, to the best of our knowledge, the demonstration of an aqueous ZIB-enabled, solar-charging unit affording high ηoverall performance and high safety is still lacking. Furthermore, the reaction mechanism of a rechargeable alkaline ZIB remains too ambiguous to explain the high-rate and high-energy features so far.
As already mentioned, flexibility and wearability of self-powered systems is of paramount importance toward applications. Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of such integrated devices in wearable/portable forms due to their sustainability and practicability in real world scenarios including personalized healthcare, individual field operations and implantable medical therapies.8,9 Nevertheless, the tough mission still lies ahead in seeking viable fabrication routes to flexible devices, especially for integrated systems. The prevailing methods encompass printing and electroplating techniques that normally require the deposition of additional metallic current collectors (e.g., Au thin layers or applying Ag paste). During the continuous operation of flexible devices under geometry deformation, the devices suffer from inevitable cracks or delamination of the active electrode materials, which can result in serious electrochemical performance degradation and even device failure. In view of this, laser engraving on intrinsically flexible and conductive media affords facile and contact-free pathways to realize the fine patterning and manufacturing needed for miniaturized device arrays.10,11
Herein we realize a flexible solar charging unit with a high overall efficiency of 23.11% as a stable and safe power supply for wearable electronic devices. Such a self-powered system utilizes the synergy between a micro-ZIB arrayed ES component and a miniature GaAs solar cell-based PV component, which can be directly sewn onto clothes and fabrics. The laser cutting method enables the fabrication of flexible micro-ZIB arrays that can generate favourable rate performances. As a consequence, the thus-integrated photo-rechargeable system affords a reliable power supply lasting 110 s at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 upon a short solar charging (5 s), a robust regulation capability for light intensity (from 293 to 2750 W m−2) and a long-term cyclic durability (solar-charge/electrochemical-discharge for 100 cycles), readily providing great promise for practical applications in wearable scenarios. Furthermore, the superb high-rate performance of an assembled ZIB with a nickel–cobalt hydroxide cathode is mechanically probed using ex situ X-ray diffraction (XRD)/X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)/electron spin-resonance spectroscopy (ESR) measurements, in harmonization with density functional theory (DFT) simulations.
Results and discussion
Illustration of the solar charging system

Fig. 1a depicts the laser engraving fabrication of patterned ZIB electrodes. The laser enables the fine-carving of foiled zinc anode and freestanding layer double hydroxide (LDH) cathode into a myriad of planar geometries, for instance, interdigited fingers, stripes and concentric circles. As can be clearly seen in the actual photograph in Fig. 1b, the laser-cut alphabet patterns demonstrate high machinability and precision. Fig. 1c shows the assembly of a micro-ZIB with the laser-engraved electrodes. As such, plastic films serve as the flexible capping layers and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) acts as the gel electrolyte. The thus-assembled micro-ZIB arrays display favourable flexibility. In turn, a wearable solar charging unit is constructed by integrating a micro-ZIB and a GaAs solar cell. The related concept is illustrated in Fig. 1d. Note that the power pack can be readily sewn onto clothes. When outdoor activities are performed during the day, sunlight is absorbed and converted into electricity via the solar cell, which is instantly stored in the ZIB module. In this sense, our solar charging system is able to support self-powered electric watches or sensor networks.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the solar-charging integrated unit. (a) Illustration of the laser patterning process (left panel) and a real photo of the different shapes of micro-electrodes (right panel). (b) Photograph of a laser engraved pattern. (c) Fabrication procedure for the micro-ZIB. (d) Concept demonstration of the wearable solar charging self-powered system. 
Electrochemical performance of ZIB
Our ZIB encompasses a freestanding LDH cathode and a Zn anode. In detail, the Ni–Co LDH cathode material is grown in situ on carbon cloth (CC) via a hydrothermal process.12 A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image shows the two-dimensional, vertically-erected nanosheet structure of LDH uniformly formed on carbon fibre (ESI,† Fig. S1). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), XRD, Raman spectroscopy and XPS characterizations additionally validate the successful synthesis of Ni–Co LDH on CC (ESI† Fig. S2–S4). Specifically, the formation of oxygen deficient sites can be clearly observed from the O 1s XPS spectrum (ESI,† Fig. S4a).13 ESR spectra were collected to identify the oxygen vacancy locations on the LDH@CC electrode. As shown in ESI,† Fig. S5, a unique ESR signal at g = 1.999 can be observed for both LDH@CC and pure LDH samples, in stark contrast to bare CC, thus providing evidence that the oxygen vacancies are located within the LDH material. The sophisticated nanoflake structure not only enlarges the contact area between the cathode and electrolyte, but also affords enriched electron transport pathways due to the tight interface with the carbon cloth. Fig. 2a displays the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves at two different scan rates of 1 mV s−1 and 2 mV s−1 (the electrolyte: 2.0 M KOH + 0.01 M Zn(Ac)2). Note that the addition of Zn(Ac)2 within the electrolyte is beneficial for forming [Zn(OH)4]2− anions, which improves the reversibility of the Zn anode. The CV profiles show conspicuous redox signals located at 1.72 V/1.65 V, denoting reversible faradaic reactions. The sharp peaks represent fast reaction kinetics; likewise, the small peak distance is indicative of low electrochemical polarization. The galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) curves echo favourable capacity values of nearly 280 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 (ESI,† Fig. S6). Notably, by increasing the current density from 1 A g−1 to 20 A g−1, no obvious polarization is detected according to the voltage drop, shedding light on the outstanding rate performance.
 Fig. 2  Electrochemical performance of the assembled ZIB. (a) CV curves of the assembled ZIB at two different scan rates (red: 2 mV s−1; blue: 1 mV s−1). (b) Rate performance under different current densities from 1 to 20 A g−1. (c) Cycle performance at 1 A g−1. (d) Long term cycle performance at 20 A g−1. (e) SEM image of LDH material after 1000 cycles. (f) Ragone plot of the performances between the ZIB in this work and other recently reported zinc-based batteries. 

Fig. 2b presents the rate capability of the LDH@CC//Zn battery. Strikingly, there is no attenuation in the delivered capacity upon augmenting the current density. The capacity reaches 278 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1, while still maintaining 274 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 20 A g−1. It is worth noting that the bare carbon cloth also is investigated as a comparison under the same condition. As shown in Fig. 2b, the bare carbon cloth (dark green curve) displays the extremely low specific capacity (<10 mA h g−1). As such, the capacity retention harvests as much as 98.56% of the energy, outperforming state-of-the-art ZIBs as presented in recent reports.14–16Fig. 2c discloses the cycling performance of our ZIB at 1 A g−1. The capacity retention rate is 94.74% after 100 cycles, indicating favorable cycling stability at a low current density. It is noted that the slight capacity increase in the initial cycles might stem from the electrolyte infiltration and material activation process. As shown in Fig. 2d, the long-term cycling performance was also examined at 20 A g−1, where it delivered a high-capacity retention of 91% after undergoing 1000 cycles. To probe the structural durability of the LDH@CC cathode, post-mortem SEM (Fig. 2e) and TEM (ESI,† Fig. S7) observations were carried out. It is evident that the nanosheet array is retained without structural collapse and/or pulverization, implying high stability during the electrochemical process. In addition, XPS analyses suggest stable elemental configurations after long-term cycling (ESI,† Fig. S8). Finally, on a basis of the mass loading of the cathode material (1.02 mg cm−2), the energy density and power density of the thus-derived ZIB can be calculated. As illustrated in the Ragone plot in Fig. 2f, the maximum energy density of the LDH@CC//Zn battery reaches 445 W h kg−1 at a power density of 1600.7 W kg−1, which surpasses most of the alkali- and neutralized-electrolyte based ZIB systems (with a detailed summary provided in ESI,† Table S1).14–21 More encouragingly, with respect to the maximum power density, a high value of 30885.7 W kg−1 is harvested while the corresponding energy density value (432.4 W h kg−1) displays only marginal degradation. The overwhelming positive electrochemical performances of our ZIB are most likely to be accompanied by a unique energy storage mechanism of the LDH@CC cathode.
Exploration of the electrochemical mechanism
To ascertain the reason for the favorable energy density and outstanding rate performance, the reaction mechanism was probed through electrochemical analyses in combination with ex situ XRD/XPS/ESR characterizations. First of all, CV curves at different scan rates were collected in a two-electrode system where Zn was employed as the counter electrode (ESI,† Fig. S9). The CV curves display a stable curve shape even at a high scan rate of 50 mV s−1, indicative of a typical capacitive type reaction that is in good agreement with the results from the three-electrode configuration (ESI,† Fig. S10).22Fig. 3a shows the information of the corresponding b-value (anodic: 0.8; cathodic: 0.7), suggesting that there is a synergism via a solid-phase faradaic reaction and a surface pseudocapacitive redox reaction.23 The relatively low slope of the straight line at the low frequency range in the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) provides evidence that the reaction kinetics of the LDH based Zn ion battery includes both battery-type and capacitive behaviours (ESI,† Fig. S11a and Table S2).24 Furthermore, aiming at analysing the dominated kinetic process, the capacity contribution is calculated according the CV curves at different scan rates in ESI,† Fig. S11b. Clearly, the capacitive contribution dominates at scan rates from 0.5 mV s−1 to 10 mV s−1. Especially, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, the capacitive capacity significantly reaches to 91.47% where the diffusion-limited capacity is only 8.53%. Therefore, according to the discussion above, there is a synergism including the diffusion-limited ion intercalation and capacitive surface reaction. However, the capacitive behaviour, such as ion adsorption and surface pseudocapacitance, still dominates the entire reaction process.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical reaction mechanism. (a) b-Value determination from the CV curves at different scan rates. (b) Ex situ XRD pattern at different steps in the current density vs. voltage plot. (c) CV curves of LDH@CC in different electrolytes tested in a three-electrode configuration (green line: 2.0 M KOH + 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2; red line: 2.0 M KOH + 0.01 M Zn(Ac)2; violet line: 2.0 M KOH; black line: 2.0 M ZnSO4). (d) GCD curve of the second cycle. (e) Ex situ XPS spectra of Ni 2p and Co 2p according to (d). (f) The calculated site concentration of Ni and Co. 

Ex situ XRD was performed to analyse the specific reaction type at the LDH cathode side. Note that all the measurement results were collected from the second cycle to avoid the irreversible side reactions that occur during the initial cycle. As shown in Fig. 3b, an obvious peak shifting can be witnessed during the electrochemical cycling. Upon charging (from point 1 to 4), the diffraction peak of the (003) plane gradually shifts to a lower angle, indicating expansion of the lattice spacing. In response, during the period of discharging (from point 4 to 6), the diffraction peak recovers from the shift, representing the contraction of the (003) lattice plane. This clear peak shifting indicates the existence of ion intercalation behaviour. We speculate that the insertion/extraction of hydroxyl ions is the most likely scenario to initiate an anion-participated reaction. To validate such a proposal, detailed exclusion on the participation of the other three types of ions, including the potassium ion, zinc ion and acetate ion in the electrolyte, was accordingly carried out. As for the potassium ion, ex situ K 2p XPS spectra illustrate no signal of potassium during the entire charging/discharging process (ESI,† Fig. S12), implying that potassium ions do not participate in the intercalation reaction. Apart from the potassium ion, our analysis deals further with the zinc ions and acetate ions due to the fact that Zn(Ac)2 was dosed into the electrolyte to restrain the dissolution of Zn. In turn, CV curves with different electrolytes (2.0 M KOH + 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2, 2.0 M KOH + 0.01 M Zn(Ac)2, 2.0 M KOH and 2.0 M ZnSO4) were obtained in a three-electrode configuration (employing a graphite counter electrode instead of a zinc electrode). As depicted in Fig. 3c, there is no significant change observed for the three sets of CV profiles, i.e., in the dominant redox peak positions, voltage windows and peak current densities. This observation precludes the participation of zinc ions and acetate ions in the reaction. In addition, the black line denotes the CV curve in a 2.0 M ZnSO4 electrolyte. There appears to be no reaction activity of the LDH material as shown in pure Zn2+-based aqueous electrolytes. The slight electrochemical polarization (the peak current and peak gap) can be attributed to the impeded ion diffusion of hydroxyl ions with the addition of Zn(Ac)2 (ESI,† Fig. S13). Thus, we conclude that the hydroxyl ion plays a dominant role in the ion intercalation charge storage process.
It is also intriguing to note from the ex situ XRD patterns that the intensity and the width at the half-height of the (003) diffraction peak experiences a gradual changing upon charging/discharging. Such a variation in peak intensity can be interpreted as a reversible change of the LDH crystallinity,25 affording additional evidence that hydroxyl is the primary active ion involved in the insertion/extraction process. Such a change is further corroborated by the high-resolution ex situ XRD results of LDH, which was pasted onto stainless steel foil as the cathode during testing (ESI,† Fig. S14). During charge, the oxygen vacancy (VO) sites on the LDH are occupied by the intercalated hydroxyl ions, leading to a dramatic improvement of the crystallinity. Upon undergoing the discharge process, the hydroxyl ions are deintercalated from their accommodated positions, resulting in the decrease in crystallinity. O 1s XPS spectra and ESR profiles at the fully charged/discharged states further validate that the VO concentration decreases upon charge while increasing upon discharge (ESI,† Fig. S15 and S16). Moreover, the morphology of the LDH@CC was probed by ex situ SEM (ESI,† Fig. S17). There are no obvious charge/discharge products observed on the electrode surface, thus eliminating oxygen as being involved in the product formation/decomposition mechanism during the discharge/charge processes.
To monitor the valence state change of cations in the LDH during the electrochemical process, ex situ XPS measurement was carried out. Fig. 3d illustrates three different states (point 1: the initial state, point 2: after full discharge, point 3: after full charge), with the corresponding Ni 2p (left panel) and Co 2p (right panel) XPS profiles displayed in Fig. 3e. It is evident that both the Ni and Co sites are oxidized upon charging (Ni2+ to Ni3+; Co2+ to Co3+) and reduced upon discharging (Ni3+ to Ni2+; Co3+ to Co2+). The relative reaction equations are shown in Supplementary Note S1 (ESI†). The reversible oxidation and reduction of cations in the LDH material is consistent with the charge conservation law, since the insertion/extraction of hydroxyl ions brings about additional negative/positive charges during the charging/discharging process.26,27 On the basis of the XPS data, the concentration of cations can be accordingly quantified (Fig. 3f). At the end of the charging procedure, 54% of the Ni2+ ions are oxidized to Ni3+, while 32% of the Co2+ ions are oxidized. As for the discharge process, 15% of the Ni3+ ions are reduced to Ni2+, while 40% of the Co3+ ions are reduced.
Theoretical insights into hydroxyl intercalation
To reveal the intercalated capability of OH−, Zn2+ and K+ in the layered LDH with the presence of VO defects, a theoretical simulation based on density functional theory (DFT) was adopted to study their adsorption on the VO-LDH surfaces. In an initial stage, the optimal LDH and VO-LDH configurations were confirmed (Fig. 4a and ESI,† Fig. S18 and S19). Afterwards, the capture of OH−, Zn2+ and K+ species on the VO-LDH surfaces were respectively simulated (Fig. 4b–d). The binding energies are derived to be −1.62, 0.51 and 0.07 eV for the adsorption of OH−, Zn2+ and K+ species, respectively. This simulation result delivers a clear message that VO enables an easy capture of OH− possessing the lowest adsorption energy as compared to those of the K+ and Zn2+ species. Note that the crystal structure is likely to be more complete with the occupation of VO defects by hydroxyl ions (Fig. 4b), which is consistent with our foregoing XRD analysis. Bader charge analysis further indicates that more electrons (∼62 e−) can be gained by OH− from Ni atoms adjacent to VO defects, whereas few electrons (c ∼ 0.18 e−) are obtained in the case of Zn2+. Nevertheless, in terms of K+ species, 0.36 e− were lost from K+ to VO-LDH due to the low electronegativity of K. Obviously, sufficient charge transfer between OH− and Ni atoms has occurred, signifying the strong capability for OH− capture. These results match well with the charge density analysis (ESI,† Fig. S20). In further contexts, partial density-of-state (PDOS) calculations were conducted to investigate the bond information between Ni 3d and the valence shell orbitals (O 2p, Zn 4s, K 4s) of the adsorption species. As shown in Fig. 4e–h, since OH− species are captured into the VO defects, there are higher and smoother orbital overlap among binding states between Ni 3d and O 2p owing to energy level matching. As a result, a stronger binding energy of OH− on the VO-LDH surface is obtained in comparison with the Zn2+ and K+ species.
 Fig. 4  Theoretical calculation and analysis. DFT calculations on the adsorption and bonding of OH−, Zn2+, and K+ species. Optimal defect (a) and adsorption configurations of OH− (b), Zn2+ (c) and K+ (d) species on a NiCo-LDH monolayer with VO from the top (up) and side (down) views. Cyan solid circles indicate the defect and adsorption sites. Steel-blue, blue, red, white, green, and violet marks the Ni, Co, O, H, Zn, and K atoms, respectively. Partial density-of-states (PDOS) calculations about three Ni atoms adjacent to defect sites (e) and OH (f), Zn (g), and K (h) adsorption species on the above system. (i) A dynamic reaction diagram of ion intercalation. 
On the basis of the experimental data and theoretical simulations, the dynamic intercalation process of hydroxyl ions in the layers of LDH can be conjectured (Fig. 4i). Owing to the existence of interlayer anions (e.g., nitrate ions) and water molecules, LDH materials harness a large lattice spacing of 8.88 Å (left panel). Upon charging, hydroxyl ions are intercalated into the layer spacing, leading to the expansion of the lattice spacing (middle panel). A certain amount of the intercalated hydroxyl ions will migrate to reach the VO defects, with electron transfer occurring at the adjacent cation sites (Ni/Co). Although this process occurs between the lattice layers, the kinetics are not extremely controlled by solid phase diffusion to a certain extent due to the broader layer spacing. In addition to intercalation, some hydroxyl ions also participate in the surface redox reactions, which is strongly related to the pseudocapacitive behaviour shown in the foregoing kinetics analysis. During discharging, the hydroxyl ions dissociate from the accommodated sites, invoking the reduction of cations in the LDH material to return to their initial state. Thus, both the hydroxyl ion intercalation and redox pseudocapacitive reactions contribute to the high capacity and high rate features of such LDH based ZIBs.
Micro-ZIB performance
To construct wearable solar charging systems, the design of flexible and miniature energy storage devices is appealing. In the present work, laser cutting is employed to fabricate micro-ZIBs with LDH@CC serving as the cathode and Zn plate as the anode. Fig. 5a illustrates the design concept of the devices, where the magnified digital image shows a real photo of the micro-ZIB with the application of the PVA–KOH gel electrolyte. As such, an approximately 1 mm gap distance and neat edges of the interdigitated electrodes can be obtained, indicating good accuracy for the laser cutting device fabrication. It is worth noting that the laser cutting technology shows excellent workability for miniature devices affording various electrode structures and substrate generality (ESI,† Fig. S21 and S22). As shown in ESI,† Fig. S23, the CV profile of a micro-ZIB at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 displays similar redox peaks; a broad voltage window of 0.8–1.9 V can be achieved, analogous to the electrochemical behaviour of a coin cell type ZIB.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the assembled micro-ZIB. (a) Fabrication illustration and a real photo of the micro-ZIB. (b) GCD curves of the micro-ZIB under different charge/discharge current densities from 0.5 to 1 mA cm−2. (c) Nyquist plot of the micro-ZIB with PVA as a gel electrolyte. (d) Ragone plot of an as-fabricated micro-ZIB compared with other reported micro-batteries and micro-supercapacitors. (e) GCD curves obtained at 1 mA cm−2 of a single device and a series connection of two/three micro-ZIBs. (f) GCD curves obtained at 1 mA cm−2 under different bending angles. (g) Flexibility test for 1000 bending cycles. (h) Long cycle performance test at 2 mA cm−2. 

Fig. 5b presents the GCD curves of an as-constructed micro-ZIB at various charge/discharge current densities (from 0.5 to 1.0 mA cm−2). The maximum areal capacity attains 108.5 μA h cm−2 (calculated based on the entire device area). Fig. 5c discloses the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data. Notably, the internal resistance is measured to be as low as <4 Ω, which can be ascribed to the favorable conductivity of the freestanding LDH@CC cathode and zinc metal anode without any additional current collectors. Fig. 5d depicts a Ragone plot of the assembled micro-ZIB, which enables a high areal energy density (135.6 μW h cm−2)/power density (1.4 mW cm−2). This is markedly superior to those of recently reported flexible systems encompassing Zn-ion capacitors and supercapacitors (ESI,† Table S3).6,28–35 To evaluate the device integrability of the micro-ZIB, GCD measurements were carried out under tandem connections. As shown in Fig. 5e, the voltage output can reach 1.9 V and 3.8 V with an individual cell and a series connection of two cells, respectively. Encouragingly, three tandem cells can deliver a voltage of nearly 6 V. Furthermore, the mechanical robustness of micro-ZIBs has been probed to shed light on the construction of wearable systems. Fig. 5f displays GCD curves of a micro-ZIB device at different bending angles from 0° to 150°. The shapes of the curves are essentially identical, indicative of high stability under various deformation conditions without obvious capacity decay. Ohmic resistance at both ends of the ZIB cell was further assessed during 1000 bending cycles (Fig. 5g). The resistance between the two furthest points of the finger-like electrodes maintained 2 Ω for the Zn anode and 5 Ω for the LDH@CC cathode (ESI,† Fig. S24), suggesting excellent flexibility for the micro devices (Inset: digital photos of the micro-ZIB device under flat and bending conditions). Fig. 5h presents the cycling performance of a flexible micro-ZIB. At a current density of 2 mA cm−2, a high capacity retention rate of 95.45% was obtained after 200 cycles.
Photoelectrochemical performance of solar charging unit
A wearable solar charging system was created by pairing a micro-ZIB ES with a miniature GaAs solar cell. The PV property of the solar cell was evaluated beforehand by J–V testing. It is evident that the GaAs solar cell reaches an open circuit voltage of 2.48 V (ESI,† Fig. S25). Such a high voltage could provide a perfect match and ultimately benefit the direct charging of the micro-ZIB (1.90 V). Fig. 6a presents the output current value of the solar cell under corresponding light density from 293 to 2750 W m−2. Under dim light conditions, the output current reaches nearly 1 mA, indicating mediocre indoor light performance. Nevertheless, the output current harvests ∼14 mA at a peak light density of 2750 W m−2, thus providing a favorable PV performance under intense light conditions. It is known that light intensity is a key factor dictating the overall energy conversion and storage efficiency (ηoverall) of an integrated unit. To seek optimal light intensity, the photo-charging/dark-discharging curves were collected under varied input light intensities while maintaining identical discharging current density in the dark (Fig. 6b). Upon boosting the light intensity, the photo-charging time sharply decreased from 300 s to 5 s, thereby realizing an ultra-fast charging process. In particular, in response to photo-charging for 5 s, the integrated unit was able to continuously discharge for 110 s at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Accordingly, Fig. 6c plots the calculated ηoverall values, which present an obviously ascending-descending tendency as the light intensity increases. The peak ηoverall occurs at a light intensity of 951 W m−2. The normally distributed ηoverall value can be ascribed to the dominating effect of the photoelectric conversion efficiency under dim light conditions vs. the energy storage efficiency at intensified light conditions. Along with light intensity, the discharging current density is another essential parameter to determine the ηoverall. In this sense, the photo-charging/dark-discharging profiles are attained at a fixed input light intensity of 951 W m−2, while under different discharging current densities (Fig. 6d). It is striking to observe that the output specific capacity of the solar charging system exhibits excellent stability, maintaining ∼20 μA h cm−2 at a current density from 0.5 to 10 mA cm−2. Such a superb rate performance can be attributed to the high-rate micro-ZIB ES component. Based on this profile, the ηoverall response can be derived (Fig. 6e). As such, the maximum ηoverall of 23.11% is achieved at a discharge current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Note that the ηoverall values are quite stable (at ∼20%), showing only a weak correlation with the dark-discharge current density. Such superior device performance can be mainly attributed to the outstanding rate capability and cycling stability of the ZIB during the course of discharging.
 Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical performance of the wearable solar charging unit. (a) The output photo currents under different input light intensities. (b) The photo-charging and dark-discharge curves with different light intensities from 293 to 2750 W m−2 and the same discharge current densities of 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Calculated ηoverall at different discharge current densities corresponding to (b). (d) The photo-charging and dark-discharge curves with the same light intensity of 951 W m−2 and different discharge current densities from 0.5 to 10 mA cm−2. (e) Calculated ηoverall at different input light intensities corresponding to (d). (f) Comparison of ηoverall with recently reported solar-charging integrated energy systems. (g) Long photo-charging and dark-discharge cycling stability. (h) Demonstration of wearable and portable scenarios using our solar-charging integrated units. 

Fig. 6f summarizes ηoverall obtained between this work and other recently reported solar charging devices. Apparently, the high ηoverall herein is superior to those from the state-of-the-art systems, including a GaAs solar cell integrated asymmetric supercapacitor (GaAs-ASC: 17.57%),6 a GaAs solar cell combined with a flow battery (GaAs-FB: 14.1%),36 an organometallic perovskite solar cell charged supercapacitor (PSC-SSC: 10%),37 and a perovskite solar cell photo-charged lithium ion battery (PSC-LIB: 9.36%)38 (detailed summary provided in ESI,† Table S4).5,39–41 Equally important, the lifespan of our solar charging system has also been evaluated. In light of this, the photo-charging/dark-discharging curves are shown in Fig. 6g at a discharging current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and a light intensity of 951 W m−2. After 100 cycles, the shape of the curves remains unchanged, reflecting the favorable solar charging durability. Note that the discharging capacity after solar charging is slightly incremental, especially during the last 20 cycles (nearly 50 μA h cm−2). This phenomenon can be ascribed to the photoelectric performance attenuation of the GaAs solar cell, engendering a decreased photoelectric current and increased solar charging time.
As a proof-of-concept demonstration, Fig. 6h presents a digital photo of an assembled wearable solar charging unit in a practical application scenario. In this respect, such a photo-rechargeable system is directly integrated onto cloth via a readily attainable sewing process. Such functional smart cloth exhibits favorable compatibility with the human body. Upon full charging under sunlight, the self-powered unit is able to continuously power an electronic watch.
Conclusions
In summary, a wearable solar charging unit has been designed via combining an ultrafast rechargeable ZIB and a highly efficient GaAs solar cell. The thus-integrated self-powered system demonstrates a high overall energy efficiency of 23.11% and a fast solar-charging performance (solar charging time as short as 5 s). Encouragingly, the charge storage mechanism of the LDH cathode based ZIB has been systematically probed utilizing ex situ instrumental characterizations and DFT simulations, in relation to the capacitance dominated behaviour with fast OH− intercalation at the oxygen vacancy defect sites. This mechanistic study sheds light on how to develop a high-energy wearable energy storage unit at a reasonable cost. Moreover, our device integration presented here offers a practical solution to construct next generation wearable solar charging units with high performance and excellent safety.
Experimental
Preparation of Ni–Co LDH@CC cathode and Zn anode
40 mM 2-methylimidazole, 10 mM Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and 10 mM Co(NO3)2·6H2O were mixed in 40 mL methanol under magnetic stirring. Next, the mixture was transferred into a hydrothermal reaction autoclave. The sealed autoclave was positioned in an oven at 120 °C for 14 h. Upon cooling down to room temperature, pale-yellow Ni–Co LDH powder was obtained. For the synthesis of freestanding Ni–Co LDH@CC, a piece of carbon cloth was placed into the autoclave prior to starting the hydrothermal reaction. The final product was collected after washing and drying. The mass loading of the Ni–Co LDH on the carbon cloth was controlled from 0.1 mg cm−2 to 1.0 mg cm−2 (ESI,† Fig. S26), with the calculated mass ratio between LDH and CC is 1:12.73. The Zn anode was prepared based on commercial Zn plates. Prior to use, the oxide layer on the surface of the plate was removed with a fine-bristled toothbrush.
Preparation of PVA–KOH gel electrolyte
Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA: 1 g) was dissolved in 50 mL deionized water under continuous stirring at 85 °C until the PVA powder completely dissolved. Then 1 g of KOH was added into this solution with intensive stirring for 20 min. After cooling down, a PVA–KOH gel formed.
Assembly of micro-ZIB devices
Laser engraving was employed to cut and shape the interdigital electrodes. As for the CC substrate, the laser engraving parameters were set as follows: cutting speed: 5 mM s−1; power: 70%; frequency: 42 kHz; Q pulse width: 100 ns. As for the anode, the parameters were set as follows: cutting speed: 10 mM s−1; power: 40%; frequency: 42 kHz; Q pulse width: 100 ns. Note that the active LDH material was grown on the laser-engraved CC support to form the cathode. Afterwards, the finger-like cathode and anode were fixed on the PI substrate by the AB glue. Then, PVA–KOH gel electrolyte was uniformly applied on the in-plane micro-electrodes. Finally, the whole device was sealed by PET thermoplastic film where the copper conductive tape was used as the current lead (see ESI,† Fig. S27).
Integration of wearable solar charging systems
To integrate the solar charging self-powered system, a commercial miniature GaAs solar cell was used as the PV module. An as-fabricated micro-ZIB was employed as the ES module. The individual modules were integrated together on the fabric by applying a sewing procedure.
The overall energy conversion and storage efficiency can be calculated according to the following equation: (1)where E, P, S and t represent the discharge energy after solar-charging (W h), the light intensity (W m−2), the effective area of the solar cell (m2) and the duration of solar-charging (h), respectively. Here η1 represents the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the solar cell while η2 gives the energy storage efficiency of the energy storage device.
The calculation of discharge energy E is provided by the following equations: (2) C = I × t(3)where V1 and V2 are the highest and lowest discharge voltages, respectively, while C represents the capacity which is equal to the product of the discharge current (I) and discharge time (t).
Computational details
A spin-unrestricted density functional theory (DFT) method was performed by Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).42 The electronic exchange–correlation energy was described by a generalized gradient approximation (GGA) parameterized by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof43 with projector augmented wave (PAW)44 pseudopotentials. DFT-D3 correction with the Grimme's schema45 simulated weak interactions between the adsorption of OH, Zn, and K species and the NiCo-LDH with a VO defect (VO-LDH) surface and a 4 × 4 supercell. To accurately depict localized d electrons of elemental Ni and Co in the LDH, the Hubbard-U correction with Co and Ni by 3.5 eV and 5.5 eV, respectively, was employed following previous work.46 The energy cutoff with the plane wave basis set was 400 eV. The K-point mesh size was 3 × 3 × 1 and 5 × 5 × 1 in the first Brillouin zone integration for the geometrical optimizations and static calculations, respectively. The total energy and force per atom convergence criteria were set to 10−5 eV and 0.02 eV Å−1, respectively. Bader charge and difference charge density calculations were adopted to analyse the charge transfer after VO-LDH capturing of the OH, Zn, and K species. Furthermore, bonding analysis was utilized by partial density-of-state calculations between adsorption species and the three adjacent Ni atoms. Three possible oxygen vacancy (VO) defect configurations were optimized, denoted as VO-NiCo, VO-Ni and VO-Co (ESI,† Fig. S19), respectively. VO-Ni possessed the lowest energy when compared to VO-NiCo and VO-Co. The binding energy of OH, Zn, and K species on the NiCo-LDH with a VO defect was calculated using the formula: Eb = Etotal − Esurf − Especies, where Etotal and Esurf are the total energy of VO-NiCo-LDH with and without the abovementioned species, respectively. Especies is the energy of the anion OH−, bulk Zn, and bulk K species. A more negative value of binding energy indicates a stronger interaction. For instance, the adsorption of the anion OH−, according to the reaction pathway in alkaline media, can be written as: * + OH− → *OH + e−. Eb = E*OH − E* − EOH + Ee− = E*OH − E* − (EH2O − 1/2EH2).
Characterization
Sample morphologies were characterized using a Hitachi SU8010 scanning electron microscope. STEM and HRTEM images were obtained on a Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN TEM using an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. XPS spectra (including ex situ XPS analysis) were collected using an ESCALAB 250Xi Spectrophotometer using a monochromatic Al-Kα X-ray source. XRD measurements (including ex situ XRD) were performed on a Bruker D8 Advance Diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å).
The calculation of the concentration ratio of Ni2+/Ni3+ and Co2+/Co3+ in Fig. 3f was carried out according to the equation: (4)where C is the concentration, a and b are the starting and ending points of the binding energy in the Ni2+ peak (eV), respectively, I is the peak intensity, E is the electron binding energy (eV), and S is the total area of Ni 2p spectrum. Likewise, the concentration ratio of Co2+/Co3+ can also be derived.
Electrochemical measurements
The three-electrode tests (CV, LSV, GCD) were performed on a CHI760E workstation where the Ag/AgCl was employed as reference electrode and a graphite rod was employed as the counter electrode. The two-electrode tests in Fig. 2 were performed by the 2032 type coin cell, where the glass fibre was used as separator. The rate performance, GCD curves and long cycle tests were performed on a LAND CT2001A battery testing system (the relevant capacity, energy density and power density were calculated automatically). The relevant electrochemical characterizations in Fig. 5 and 6 were performed on a CHI760E workstation.

Ex situ XRD was performed based on a 2032 type coin cell, where the zinc was employed as the anode and the Ni–Co LDH@CC was employed as the cathode. The six different points were selected from cyclic voltammetry curves at varied voltage steps (0.8 V, 1.3 V, 1.65 V, 1.9 V, 1.4 V and 0.8 V) at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1. To avoid side reactions during the first cycle, the sampling was chosen from the second cycle. After the Ni–Co LDH@CC cathode was disassembled from the coin cell, the electrode was first rinsed in a vial filled with distilled water by gently shaking it three times. Afterwards, the electrode was placed in a vacuum oven until completely dry prior to taking it for XRD characterization. As for the ex situ XPS characterization, three different states were chosen from the GCD curve (initial: 1.9 V; full discharge: 0.8 V and full charge: 1.9 V). The sampling process was identical to that of the ex situ XRD characterization.
The calculated process to obtain the b value is shown below. The capacitive effect was characterized by CV testing at various sweep rates according to: (5)where i represents the measured peak current, ν represents the scan rates and a and b are adjustable parameters. To facilitate the calculation, the logarithm of both sides of the equation was taken to obtain: logi = loga + blogν(6)
By conducting the linear fitting of logi and logν, the slope of the curve is b value. Further, the current response at a fixed potential can be expressed as the combination of two separate reaction mechanisms, including the surface capacitive behaviour and the solid diffusion behaviour (battery behaviour, i.e., ion intercalation): i (V) = k1ν + k2ν1/2(7)where the k1 and k2 are adjustable constants, V is the voltage and ν is the scan rate. The expression k1ν represents the current contribution from the capacitive behaviour, while k2ν1/2 represents the current contribution from the diffusion behaviour. To facilitate the calculation, we divide both sides of the equation by ν1/2: (8)
By further conducting a linear fit at each specific voltage, the slope of the linear fit reflects the k1 value. A plot can be drawn with the voltage as the abscissa and k1ν as the ordinate. The integral area of voltage (V) vs. current (k1ν) is S1. The integral area of a normal CV curve at this specific scan rate is S2. The capacitive contribution = S1/S2 × 100%.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51702225), the National Key R&D Program of China (2019YFA0708201), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK2020043448) and the China Post-doctoral Foundation (7131705619). The authors also acknowledge support from the Suzhou Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies, Suzhou, China and the Dr Myung Ki Hong Chair in Materials Innovation at UCLA (R. B. K.).
References
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D.-H. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis and A. Javey, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Boruah, A. Mathieson, B. Wen, S. Feldmann, W. M. Dose and M. D. Volder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2414–2421 RSC .
K. Kwon, S. Y. Heo, I. Yoo, A. Banks, M. Chan, J. Y. Lee, J. B. Park, J. Kim and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay2462 CrossRef .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian, X. Tong, G. Sheng, Y. Shao, L. Yu, V. Tung, J. Sun, R. B. Kaner and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4913 CrossRef .
Y. Li, J. Fu, C. Zhong, T. Wu, Z. Chen, W. Hu, K. Amine and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802605 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, F. Huang, S. Zhao, X. Lv, Y. Zhou, S. Xiang, S. Xu, Y. Li, G. Chen, C. Tao, Y. Nie, J. Chen and X. Fan, Matter, 2020, 2, 1–10 CrossRef .
Z. Chai, N. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Zhao, H. J. Fan, X. Fan and W. Mai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9201–9207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, S. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Du, T. Ni, Q. Wang, L. Ruan, W. Zeng and Z. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901957 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, H. Yang, G. Zhang, J. Gao, X. Jin, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3367–3374 RSC .
T. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Yan, M. Lu, L. Wang, J. Bell and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15510–15524 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Ma, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, P. Pan, L. Gu, D. Xu, J. Bao and Z. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900062 CrossRef .
L. Wang, K. W. Huang, J. Chen and J. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax4279 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Z. Lai, Y. Han, H. Zhang, S. Xie and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802396 CrossRef .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1656 CrossRef .
M. Yan, P. He, Y. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Wei, K. Zhao, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Shuang, Y. Shao, K. T. Mueller, L. Mai, J. Liu and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703725 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Guan, C. Zhou, Z. Fan, Q. Ke, G. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8732–8739 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Feng, H. Wang, Y. Liang, Z. Fan, J. Liu and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2025 RSC .
C. Xu, J. Liao, C. Yang, R. Wang, D. Wu, P. Zou, Z. Lin, B. Li, F. Kang and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 900–908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, Y. Tong, P. Zhang and X. Lu, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 56–62 CrossRef .
T. Brousse, D. Bélanger and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5185–A5189 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 111, 14925–14931 CrossRef .
Y. Xie and F. Zhu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 1675–1685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. O. Baker, M. E. Himmel, P. A. Parilla and D. K. Johnson, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2010, 3, 10 CrossRef .
Z. Li, B. P. Vinayan, P. Jankowski, C. Njel, A. Roy, T. Vegge, J. Maibach, J. M. G. Lastra, M. Fichtner and Z. Z. Karger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11483–11490 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Wang, N. Jiang, L. An, J. Song, Y. Zuo, F. Ning, H. Shang and D. Xia, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104727 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Wang, F. Wang, S. Yang, F. Zhu, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806005 CrossRef .
M. Qiu, P. Sun, G. Cui, Y. Tong and W. Mai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8246–8255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Xie, Y. Q. Ji, J. H. Kang, J. L. Sheng, D. S. Mao, X. Z. Fu, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 194–205 RSC .
W. Yang, L. He, X. Tian, M. Yan, H. Yuan, X. Liao, J. Meng, Z. Hao and L. Mai, Small, 2017, 13, 1700639 CrossRef .
J. Gao, C. Shao, S. Shao, F. Wan, C. Gao, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801809 CrossRef .
C. J. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S. H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. O. Coileain, N. McEvoy, H. C. Nerl, B. Anasori, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1795 CrossRef .
R. Guo, J. Chen, B. Yang, L. Liu, L. Su, B. Shen and X. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702394 CrossRef .
H. Wu, W. Zhang, S. Kandambeth, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900482 CrossRef .
W. Li, H. C. Fu, Y. Zhao, J. H. He and S. Jin, Chem, 2018, 4, 2644–2657 CAS .
X. Xu, S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, Y. B. Cheng and M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1782–1787 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurung, K. Chen, R. Khan, S. S. Abdulkarim, G. Varnekar, R. Pathak, R. Naderi and Q. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602105 CrossRef .
C. Li, S. Cong, Z. Tian, Y. Song, L. Yu, C. Lu, Y. Shao, J. Li, G. Zou, M. H. Rümmeli, S. Dou, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, G. Zhu, C. Wang, P. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Ma, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 239–245 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Lechêne, M. Cowell, A. Pierre, J. W. Evans, P. K. Wright and A. C. Arias, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 631–640 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef .
S. Li, Y. Zhang, N. Liu, C. Yu, S. J. Lee, S. Zhou, R. Fu, J. Yang, W. Guo, H. Huang, J. S. Lee, C. Wang, T. R. Kim, D. Nordlund, P. Pianetta, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Liu and J. Qiu, Joule, 2020, 4, 673–687 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03623d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar is a promising renewable energy source used to generate electricity. However, due to the fluctuating and intermittent nature of its energy output, solar is still challenging to satisfy energy demand. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop multi-field coupling systems by synergizing solar cells and energy storage modules to tackle this issue. Accordingly, a tough mission remains in multi-field integration due to the mismatch between the highly fluctuating output current of solar cells and the low current tolerance of typical energy storage devices. Aiming to address these concerns, we propose an innovative wearable solar charging system based on a rechargeable Zn-ion micro-battery. The high-rate Zn-ion battery as the energy storage module enables a high current tolerance and fast charge/discharge performance, matching favorably with GaAs solar cells. In line with this, the solar charging unit shows a high overall efficiency of 23.11%, which exceeds most reported works in this realm. In addition, we have employed laser engraving as a facile and economical method to manufacture the miniaturized Zn-ion battery electrodes. This work offers new insights into the design of high-efficiency solar charging systems and other self-rechargeable hybrid devices.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the solar-charging integrated unit. (a) Illustration of the laser patterning process (left panel) and a real photo of the different shapes of micro-electrodes (right panel). (b) Photograph of a laser engraved pattern. (c) Fabrication procedure for the micro-ZIB. (d) Concept demonstration of the wearable solar charging self-powered system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrochemical performance of the assembled ZIB. (a) CV curves of the assembled ZIB at two different scan rates (red: 2 mV s−1; blue: 1 mV s−1). (b) Rate performance under different current densities from 1 to 20 A g−1. (c) Cycle performance at 1 A g−1. (d) Long term cycle performance at 20 A g−1. (e) SEM image of LDH material after 1000 cycles. (f) Ragone plot of the performances between the ZIB in this work and other recently reported zinc-based batteries.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical reaction mechanism. (a) b-Value determination from the CV curves at different scan rates. (b) Ex situ XRD pattern at different steps in the current density vs. voltage plot. (c) CV curves of LDH@CC in different electrolytes tested in a three-electrode configuration (green line: 2.0 M KOH + 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2; red line: 2.0 M KOH + 0.01 M Zn(Ac)2; violet line: 2.0 M KOH; black line: 2.0 M ZnSO4). (d) GCD curve of the second cycle. (e) Ex situ XPS spectra of Ni 2p and Co 2p according to (d). (f) The calculated site concentration of Ni and Co.	 

 	Fig. 4  Theoretical calculation and analysis. DFT calculations on the adsorption and bonding of OH−, Zn2+, and K+ species. Optimal defect (a) and adsorption configurations of OH− (b), Zn2+ (c) and K+ (d) species on a NiCo-LDH monolayer with VO from the top (up) and side (down) views. Cyan solid circles indicate the defect and adsorption sites. Steel-blue, blue, red, white, green, and violet marks the Ni, Co, O, H, Zn, and K atoms, respectively. Partial density-of-states (PDOS) calculations about three Ni atoms adjacent to defect sites (e) and OH (f), Zn (g), and K (h) adsorption species on the above system. (i) A dynamic reaction diagram of ion intercalation.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the assembled micro-ZIB. (a) Fabrication illustration and a real photo of the micro-ZIB. (b) GCD curves of the micro-ZIB under different charge/discharge current densities from 0.5 to 1 mA cm−2. (c) Nyquist plot of the micro-ZIB with PVA as a gel electrolyte. (d) Ragone plot of an as-fabricated micro-ZIB compared with other reported micro-batteries and micro-supercapacitors. (e) GCD curves obtained at 1 mA cm−2 of a single device and a series connection of two/three micro-ZIBs. (f) GCD curves obtained at 1 mA cm−2 under different bending angles. (g) Flexibility test for 1000 bending cycles. (h) Long cycle performance test at 2 mA cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoelectrochemical performance of the wearable solar charging unit. (a) The output photo currents under different input light intensities. (b) The photo-charging and dark-discharge curves with different light intensities from 293 to 2750 W m−2 and the same discharge current densities of 0.5 mA cm−2. (c) Calculated ηoverall at different discharge current densities corresponding to (b). (d) The photo-charging and dark-discharge curves with the same light intensity of 951 W m−2 and different discharge current densities from 0.5 to 10 mA cm−2. (e) Calculated ηoverall at different input light intensities corresponding to (d). (f) Comparison of ηoverall with recently reported solar-charging integrated energy systems. (g) Long photo-charging and dark-discharge cycling stability. (h) Demonstration of wearable and portable scenarios using our solar-charging integrated units.	 
	(1)
	(2)
C = I × t	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
logi = loga + blogν	(6)
i (V) = k1ν + k2ν1/2	(7)
	(8)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ee03623d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
