Role of the spacer cation in the growth and crystal orientation of two-dimensional perovskites  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01469A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01469A
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1255-1279Role of the spacer cation in the growth and crystal orientation of two-dimensional perovskites

        
          
            Nishi 
            Parikh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Mahdi 
            Tavakoli
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Manoj 
            Pandey
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abul 
            Kalam
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Prochowicz
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Pankaj 
            Yadav
          
        
      *e
aDepartment of Science, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar-382007, Gujarat, India
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, P. O. Box 9004, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia
dInstitute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: dprochowicz@ichf.edu.pl
eDepartment of Solar Energy, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar-382007, Gujarat, India. E-mail: Pankajphd11@gmail.com; pankaj.yadav@sse.pdpu.ac.in
Received 
      30th September 2020
    , Accepted 7th January 2021First published on 13th January 2021AbstractTwo-dimensional metal halide perovskites are being immensely investigated because of the structural diversity and stability offered by this vast family of materials. Many efforts have been devoted to the use of these materials in diverse applications by tuning the optical band gap. The key parameter that needs to be controlled for efficient charge transport in two-dimensional perovskites is the crystal orientation. In this review, we first discuss the mechanisms of crystal formation and crystal growth to obtain the preferred vertical orientation. Next, the impact of organic spacer cations on controlling the growth and crystal orientation of 2D thin films will be discussed based on some of the strategies that allow optimizing these features such as compositional engineering, processing engineering, additive engineering, and the effect of solvent and temperature. At the end, the current challenges and future perspectives are proposed.
1. Introduction
The field of photovoltaics has witnessed tremendous development of metal halide perovskites (MHPs) thanks to their cost-effective solution processability and unique properties.1–3 The performance of MHP-based devices has been at par with or even better than that of the state-of-art technologies in some of the applications such as solar cells,4–6 photodetectors,7,8 light emitting diodes (LEDs),9,10 and lasers.11,12 The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has reached the certified value of 25.5% (ref. 13) and as a result, they are the front runner materials in the field of thin-film solar cells.
The unique properties of MHPs were first reported by Weber et al. in 1978 (ref. 14 and 15) but the breakthrough came when Miyasaka et al. reported a PCE of 3.9% using three-dimensional (3D) MHPs along with a liquid electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) in 2009.16 Since then, extensive research has resulted in the fast commercialisation of MHPs. Over the course of time, the main areas of study were the long-term operational stability by using different strategies like optimization of the device architecture, interface engineering, compositional engineering, etc.4,17,18 However, the drawbacks that hinder the commercialisation are intrinsic instability and performance degradation, which originate from the presence of grain boundaries and ion migration.19–21 Apart from this, the prototypical 3D perovskite i.e., methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3), undergoes an exothermic disproportionation reaction to MAI and PbI2 in the presence of water.22 The reason can be attributed to the ability of polar water molecules to intercalate into the perovskite lattice and form strong hydrogen bonds with the iodides.23 Moreover, the rate of degradation increases under illumination under humid conditions plausibly because of the halide to metal charge transfer, which leads to the weakening of MA–X hydrogen bonding interaction.24,25
One promising approach to overcome this issue is to insert a bulky hydrophobic organic cation into the perovskite lattice, which could prevent moisture intrusion.26 This kind of organic cation gives rise to the development of a 2D perovskite structure exhibiting quantum confinement.27,28 A typical formula to represent 2D MHPs is  where A′ is bulky R–NH3+ (phenylethyl ammonium cation, n-butylammonium cation etc.); A is CH3NH3+, HC(NH2)2+, Cs+, or Rb+; M is Sn2+ or Pb2+; and X is Cl−, Br−, or I− These cations do not fit into A-sites according to the tolerance factor criteria and lead to the formation of a 2D layered structure (Scheme 1).29 Unlike 3D MHPs, where there is a restriction of the tolerance factor for the choice of the organic moiety, 2D perovskites can be made of different organic cations. This feature leads to the structural diversity of 2D MHPs and paves new ways for chemical engineering and their diverse applications.30,31
 Scheme 1  (a) Crystal structures of 2D and 3D MHPs (upper panel) and schematic of charge carrier transport in 2D MHPs (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Chemical structures of representative organic cations. 
The first example of the 2D PSCs based on the (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] perovskite was reported by Karunadasa et al. with a PCE of 4.73% in 2014.32 The progress in efficiency is followed by the introduction of the hot-casting technique, which yielded 12.52% PCE as reported by Mohite et al.33 Since then, the PCE of 2D PSCs has reached ∼18% using compositional control in (GA) (MA)3Pb3I10, although it is still less than the PCE of 3D PSCs.34 To date, many efforts have been devoted for the development of structure–property relationships, charge carrier dynamics, compositional engineering, orientation control and diverse application of the 2D PSCs.35–37
The advantages of 2D MHPs over the 3D congeners are attributed to the multiple-quantum-well electronic structure imparted by the bulky hydrophobic organic cation.28 Because of this structure, the band gap (Eg) of this material is tuneable. The 2D MHPs possess a large band gap and it is found that the band gap possesses a linear relationship with the quantum well thickness (n). In other words, the band gap decreases with increase in quantum well thickness. This compositional tuning of the band gap has made possible the use of 2D materials in targeted applications.38 The 2D MHPs in the configuration of a 3D/2D bilayer have proven to be a promising approach to achieve greater stability without compromising the efficiency much in PSCs.39,40 The other property of 2D MHPs, which differs from the 3D MHPs, is the strong interaction between electrons and holes.41 To simplify it, the exciton binding energy (Eb) for 2D MHPs is very high as compared to that of the 3D MHPs because of the difference in the dielectric constants of the organic (low) and inorganic layer (high). As a result, the charge transport in 2D MHPs is affected as excitons play a crucial role in controlling the charge transport.42 The study by Rebecca L. Milot et al. revealed that in the typical 2D perovskite, the direction of charge transport is only along the inorganic layers (unlike in the 3D perovskite) as verified by time-resolved tetrahertz spectroscopy.43 Therefore, it becomes necessary to control the charge transport to achieve high efficiency for PSCs. The crystallographic orientation either horizontal or vertical is desired as it has a strong implication on the device performance.44 To overcome this issue, research has been focused on improving the crystal orientation and growth of the 2D MHPs by employing different strategies such as the development of new growth methods, use of additives, and compositional engineering, which was recently extensively reviewed.44–50However, intensive research to establish a relationship between the large organic cation and its effect on the growth and crystal orientation is not yet established.
In this review, we summarise and discuss the role of the spacer cation in the growth and crystal orientation of the 2D perovskite thin films. To begin with, we discuss the proposed mechanisms to achieve a vertical orientation in two dimensional MHPs. In the following section, the effect of some representative bulky organic spacer cations on controlling the morphology and crystal orientation of thin films will be discussed based on the different strategies used to date in the literature such as compositional engineering, processing engineering, additive engineering, interface engineering and effect of the solvent.
2. Mechanism for vertical crystal orientation of 2D MHPs
The mechanism of 2D MHP thin-film formation differs from that of their 3D counterparts as large organic cations with different chemical and physical properties are incorporated. Owing to their anisotropic shape, these bulky cations have a natural tendency to form a preferential orientation.44 However, the crystallization process of 2D MHPs is too complex and it is still under intensive study. Sargent's group has extensively studied the effect of crystal orientation on the 2D MHPs’ dimensionality by considering the methylammonium cation (MA) as well as butylammonium (BA) and phenethylammonium cations (PEA) as large organic spacers.51 They formulated 2D MHPs with different average layer thicknesses (n = 1, 3, 5, 10, 40, and bulk) to discuss the generality of their findings. It was demonstrated that the ordering in orientation and probability of forming an n-homogeneous film decrease with increasing n-values.52 The study of quantum well (QW) distribution revealed that the spin cast 2D MHP film possesses a predominantly higher concentration of low n-wells at the top of the film. However, a complete contrast is observed in the distribution of QWs using the hot-casting technique, which provides large n-wells near the surface and low n-wells at the bottom of the film. This becomes more pronounced with increasing film thickness. Moreover, the BA-based spin cast 2D MHPs have fewer n-wells as compared to PEA-based 2D MHPs owing to the small size of the BA cation, which is readily redistributed within the solvent. At the same time, due to depletion of the organic ligand, the average QW thickness increases for large n-wells in BA-based 2D MHPs. Moreover, the BA-based perovskite films show less pronounced preferred orientation than the PEA based films when n = 5–8 and n ≥ 10 (Fig. 1). In the case of n = 1 and n = 2–3, the films align parallel to the substrate for both perovskite films. The proposed mechanism of formation of 2D MHPs depicts that after the film is spin cast, a large number of randomly oriented solvent–precursor complexes are formed among the dissolved cations, which facilitates the formation of perovskite QWs.53 These intermediate solvent complexes gradually weaken on annealing and convert directly into 2D MHPs, which is evident by the similar rates of collapse of the solvent complex peaks and the emergence of the perovskite peak in GIWAXS patterns. Finally, at the end of the annealing process, all the solvent complexes convert into the 2D MHPs. Therefore, it can be concluded that the type of solvent also plays a key role in tailoring the rate of formation of 2D MHPs and orientation of the solvent precursor complex, which further affects the crystallinity and QW distribution as the solubility of different organic cations differ in various solvents.
 Fig. 1  Generalized concept of the QW morphology in both the 2D PEA-based and the BA-based spin-casted films (the brown, blue and white balls represent carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen atoms, respectively in the chemical structure of cations). Reprinted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 
In another work, the role of intermediate solvate formation has been found to impact the phase polydispersity in (BA)2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 thin films.54 During the preparation of the supersaturated perovskite solutions consisting of PbI2 and MAI as well as PbI2 and BAI in DMF, precipitates were observed after several days. The crystal structures of the formed (MA)[PbI3]·DMF and (BA)[PbI3]·DMF precipitates consist of 1D chains of “edge sharing” octahedra separated by DMF molecules and the respective ammonium cations. However, the supersaturated solution consisting of MAI, BAI and PbI2 showed a mixture of (MA)[PbI3]·DMF and (BA)[PbI3]·DMF rather than the mixed cation solvate structure. The mechanism suggests two independent pathways for the growth of a direct Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase and solvates during solidification (Fig. 2a). Initially, the formation of colloidal sol–gel is observed and then the high energy feature (low n-member) appears after deposition and converges into the low energy feature (high n-member) after annealing. The solvate formation is highly directed towards an MA-rich composition and the MA solvates form at a much lower supersaturation threshold than BA solvates. In addition, the (MA)[PbI3]·DMF yields small band gap phases with n ≥ 2 after annealing. More broadly, it can be said that the (MA)[PbI3]·DMF solvates locally sequester MA from the precursor solution and these results depicts that the MA-rich solvate formation is the primary cause of phase heterogeneity in 2D MHPs.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of (a) two parallel growth processes of (MA)[PbI3]·DMF solvate needles and RP phases during the drop casting from DMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the two possible scenarios for preferred orientation, which depicts two different nucleus orientations at the liquid–air interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing group. (c) Schematic illustration of the subsequent crystal growth mechanism. (d) Degree of vertical orientation with different solvent removal rates, solvent choices and organic spacers (1,3); GIWAXS pattern of most vertically oriented 2D perovskite films based on iso-BA (2) and n-BA (4) cations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of 2D MHP crystal growth in pure DMF (1) and mixed DMF/DMSO (5:5) (2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
The mechanism behind the vertical orientation of the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite film was proposed by Chen et al.55 The precursor solution was prepared by dissolving the reagents in stoichiometric quantities in dimethylacetamide (DMA) as it suppresses the formation of intercalated intermediate structures, leading to smooth morphology. The results demonstrated that the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 crystals nucleate and grow from the liquid/air interface rather than from the substrate/liquid interface. It was explained that the vertical orientation of the 2D perovskite nuclei is favoured as the BA cations are not prone to form a monolayer at the liquid–air interface and prefer to remain in solution (Fig. 2b). The degree of preferential orientation in the 2D perovskite thin film could be controlled by tuning the thermal annealing timing. The prolonged annealing step creates partially randomly orientated crystals, which deteriorates the device performance. In another work, a generalized crystallization mechanism for the preferential growth of 2D MHPs was proposed by considering three different solvents, gamma butyrolactone (γ-BL), DMA, 2-methoxy ethanol (2ME) and iso-BA and n-BA, as bulky cations spacers.56 It was consistently shown that the slow solvent evaporation rate is beneficial for the preferential vertical orientation as it forms a low supersaturation environment approaching the metastable zone, which promotes growth and suppresses nucleation. In the case of high supersaturation, according to classical theory of crystallization, nucleation is favoured against growth at the substrate–liquid interface. As a result, this should lead to more randomly oriented crystals underneath the vertically thin crust (Fig. 2c). The conditions with a faster solvent drying rate resulted in a lower degree of vertical orientation for all combinations with different organic spacers and solvents (Fig. 2d). Similarly, it was shown that the initial growth of the intermediate complex and the subsequent growth of the perovskite layer are affected by coordination strength of the solvents with perovskite precursors. This effect was nicely exemplified by adjusting the composition of the mixed solvent DMF/DMSO (from 10:0 to 0:10).57 This study demonstrates that DMF has weak coordination ability with Pb2+ in solution and the perovskite film formation becomes fast by reaction between PbI2, MAI and PEAI. Before annealing and after anti-solvent drip, there is simultaneous coexistence of the perovskite structure and intermediate complex of (MAI)x·(PEAI)y·PbI2·(DMF)z as evidenced by the time-dependent UV-vis measurements. The fast formation of perovskite crystals during the annealing process leads to different crystal growth directions. Contrary to this, if DMSO is added in an optimized amount with DMF (5:5), the formation of the intermediate complex (MAI)a·(PEAI)b·PbI2·(DMF)c·(DMSO)d only occurs before annealing as DMSO binds strongly with the Pb2+ and requires longer time to release the film and form perovskite structure (Fig. 2e). The low nucleation density also leads to the formation of larger grains. When excess DMSO is used, Pb2+ shows difficulty in reacting with the organic cations, leading to poor film quality. Consistent with this study, in another report, DMA is used as a solvent to prepare a highly oriented 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 film.58 The low polarity and suitable boiling point of DMA enable a greater degree of preferred orientation. Moreover, the favorable coordination of DMA with Pb2+ and a high evaporation rate during the crystallization process resulted in the formation of dense and smooth films with low trap density and long charge carrier lifetime.
Therefore, it can be summarized that the slow rate of solvent evaporation and structural flexibility of the organic spacer cation play an important role in achieving high-quality and highly oriented 2D MHP films. It is also observed that slow spin speed and pre-crystallization annealing favors larger grain size and preferred orientation.
3. Organic bulky cations for the formation of 2D MHPs
Similarly to the 3D perovskite structure, the crystal structure of 2D MHPs consists of the inorganic and organic layer.59–62 The connectivity modes of the inorganic lead halide octahedron differentiate them in three main types: corner sharing, edge sharing and face sharing (Fig. 3a–c). However, exclusive edge sharing and face sharing perovskites are too rare as area filling in 2D perovskites is difficult. Hence, the most common type of 2D perovskites is found with the corner sharing octahedra. Interestingly, this type can be further classified depending on the direction of slicing of the crystallographic planes in the bulk 3D structure: the <100>, <110> and <111> oriented structures (Fig. 3d). The <100> oriented structures can be further categorized following the nomenclature for oxide perovskites into Ruddlesden–Popper (RP)63 and Dion–Jacobson (DJ) phases64–66 generally represented by formulae  and A′An−1MnX3n+1 respectively where A′ is a bulky organic cation, A is CH3NH3+, HC(NH2)2+, Cs+, or Rb+; M is Sn2+ or Pb2+; and X is Cl−, Br−, or I−. The basic difference between these two phases is that the DJ structure possesses a single divalent (+2) spacer cation unlike the RP structure that has two monovalent spacer cations in the interlayer space. From the crystallographic stand point, the RP perovskites show a (1/2,1/2) shift along the ab-plane, whereas the DJ perovskites show no shift or (1/2,0) shift (Fig. 3e). Another structural diversity of 2D MHPs is granted by the different layer thicknesses (n). The organic layer in 2D MHPs consists of arbitrarily large organic cations, which lowers the dimensionality of the system. These cations play either the structural and functional roles. The monoammonium cation generally forms bilayers through van der Waals interactions, whereas the diammonium cations are bounded with the adjacent inorganic layers. Many characteristics of a cation such as its hydrogen bonding capacity, structural configuration (aliphatic or aromatic), net positive charge and reactive functional sites present in the structure define its role in tuning the optoelectronic properties of the 2D MHPs. In the next subsections, we will discuss some of the representative bulky cations (Scheme 1) and their role in the growth and crystal orientation of 2D MHPs.
 Fig. 3  Connectivity modes in 2D MHPs: (a) edge sharing; (b) corner sharing and (c) face sharing. (d) Schematic of the different cuts along (100), (110) and (111) planes (purple part) leading to different oriented families in 2D MHPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Comparison of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase and Dion–Jacobson phase in MHPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
3.1. Phenylethylammonium cation (PEA)
The PEA cation possesses a large ionic radius, which is incompatible to form a pure 3D MHP structure and rather crystallizes with forming a layered 2D PEA2PbI4 structure. Further mixing of PbI2, MAI and PEAI in the corresponding stoichiometric quantities leads to the formation of a series of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 with different layer values (n).67 As a first successful attempt, Smith et al. reported on the use of PEA as the organic spacer cation to form a perovskite formulation of (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10], which acts as an absorber in a solar cell yielding in a PCE of 4.73%.32 This 2D layered perovskite was synthesized by taking a stoichiometric ratio of 2:2:3 for PEAI, MAI and PbI2, respectively. The resulting solar cell showed a greater stability than the conventional 3D MAPbI3 owing to the hydrogen bonding between the ammonium head group of the organic cation and halogen anion of the inorganic sheet as well as the organic aromatic group self-assembly via π–π interactions (Fig. 4). Unfortunately, this 2D perovskite composition exhibits appreciably low mobility, low carrier lifetime and large band gap, which affects the absorption in the near infrared region of the solar spectrum. To overcome these issues, different approaches are employed to fabricate highly oriented films, which ultimately improve the charge carriers transport, efficiency and stability of the device (vide infra).
 Fig. 4  Crystal structures of the 3D MAPbI3 and the 2D perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10. Inset: a PEA cation in the organic layers. Atom colours: Pb = turquoise; I = purple; N = blue; C = gray. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 

3.1.1 Compositional and processing engineering. 
The compositional engineering by varying the percentage of PEA in perovskite solution has appeared as a promising strategy to obtain the highly ordered 2D perovskite films. For example, Milot et al. have studied the optoelectronic properties of 2D layered (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites as a function of % PEA cation.43 It was concluded that as % PEA increases, the thin films become more preferentially oriented, whereas pure 2D PEA2PbI4 crystallites are aligned parallel to the substrate along the (001) direction. In another work, the vacuum poling treatment was introduced to enforce crystal nucleation during crystallization and uniformly disperse different 2D n-value nanoplates between the bottom and top surfaces of quasi 2D [(PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1] films (Fig. 5a).68 For comparison, the perovskite film without this treatment exhibited nanoplates that are vertically arranged from smaller to larger n values between the bottom and top surfaces of the film.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram to show the preparation of quasi 2D perovskite films with and without vacuum poling treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Publishing group. (b) XRD patterns of the (BA,PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films and (c) XRD patterns of NEA, ALA, PGA, BA0.9NEA0.1, BA0.9ALA0.1, BA0.9PGA0.1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
A novel strategy of forming PEA in situ by direct reaction of PENH2 with HI, NH4I and MAI was demonstrated by Jian Qing and co-workers.70 The results obtained were superior to the conventional approach in the case of reaction with MAI. The FWHM of the (110) peak for the MAI based precursor shows the smallest value of 0.09° which shows better crystallinity and preferred orientation. The possible explanation for this is the formation of by-product CH3NH2 gas which was reported to induce defect healing in perovskite films.71 One important observation is that PENH2 itself cannot be used as the precursor in place of PEAI because MAI is supposed to form the perovskite frameworks with PbI2, leading to phases with smaller n values.
Contrary to this, a study on the interplay of the unsaturated alkyl amine and alkyl amine taking PEA+ and BA+ as the example respectively shows that increase in the amount of PEA decreases the crystallinity of the film and alters the growth direction as evident by the reduction in the (222) diffraction peak (Fig. 5b).69 A generalized concept was demonstrated by taking 1-naphthalene ethylamine (NEA), allylammonium (ALA), and propargylamine (PGA) along with the PEA cation. It was shown that the low concentration (∼10%) of these cations preserves the pristine structure. However, when it replaces BA to more extent, the film growth and crystallinity deteriorates owing to the rigidity of these spacers which affects the crystallization kinetics (Fig. 5c).


3.1.2 Additive engineering. 
The (PEA)2MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4) was synthesized and a PCE of 13.41% was achieved for planar solar cells with the aid of NH4Cl and DMSO additives.72 Both treatments are found to strongly impact the film morphology and charge transport in perovskites. Importantly, the generation of 3D phases is observed within either NH4Cl or DMSO treated perovskites, leading to improved charge separation. The effect of these additives on the crystal orientation was studied using GIWAXS profiles (Fig. 6a–d). The pristine PEA films exhibit Debye–Scherrer rings with a homogeneous intensity distribution which shows randomized orientation. The ordering is slightly enhanced upon adding NH4Cl, while the addition of DMSO resulted in sharp and discrete Bragg spots, which shows a highly aligned perovskite film. In contrast, the negative effect on crystal orientation is observed by the addition of both additives, simultaneously. Consequently, it can be said that NH4Cl increases the crystallization of 3D phase perovskites and reduces the defect states whilst DMSO weakens the crystallization of the 3D phase but enhances the crystal orientation. The synergistic effect leads to the optimization of the 2D/3D interface and facilitates inter-phase charge transfer. Apart from this NH4SCN has been found to improve the crystallinity and orientation.73 The stoichiometric addition of NH4SCN [(PEAI:MAI:PbI2:NH4SCN) = 2:4:5:2 (n = 5)] boosted the efficiency from 0.5% to 10.16%. The XRD and GIWAXS measurements revealed remarkable vertical orientation by enhancement in the (101) lattice peak and a (101) diffraction ring along out-of-plane direction, respectively. Thus, the overall benefits induced by this addition are intensified crystallinity, preferable vertical orientation growth, balanced carrier mobility and moisture stability compared to the randomly oriented counterpart. This performance was further enhanced to 14.1% when both NH4Cl and NH4SCN additives were employed simultaneously in an equimolar amount keeping the other conditions the same (Fig. 6e).74 The reason lies in the passivation by Cl− ions at the perovskite/HTL interface in the p–i–n structure. The Cl− enrichment does not induce a bandgap gradient but passivates the electron traps and thus maintains charge balance. In other report, methylammonium acetate (MAAc) was employed in (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 to improve the crystallinity and morphology of the perovskite film. As a result, the device performance was increased from 1.5% to 5.3% for precursor solutions of PEAI, MAI, PbI2, and MAAc at a molar ratio of 1:1:1.5:1.5, respectively. However, the effect of MAAc on the crystal orientation is not well explored.75 Apart from this, by the use of methylammonium chloride (MACl), vertical orientation was realised without the use of an anti-solvent in the one-step spin coating method for (PEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16.76 It is believed that because of the strong interaction between PbI2 and MACl, there exists an intermediate pure perovskite phase, which upon annealing acts like a seed and aligns vertically to the substrate.
 Fig. 6  GIWAXS images of (a) PEA, (b) PEA + NH4Cl, (c) PEA + DMSO and (d) PEA + NH4Cl + DMSO based 2D MHPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD patterns of 2D MHP films fabricated with different additives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 Interface engineering and surface passivation by the PEA cation. 
To increase the stability of the 3D MHPs, many reports have presented the use of a 2D capping layer on the surface of the 3D perovskite.77–79 Bai et al. developed a solution process-based in situ growth route to form a 2D capping layer together with a 3D perovskite, essentially a 3D–2D graded interface.80 They used time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) depth profiles to investigate the distribution of ions inside the film (Fig. 7a). A fragment of PEA+ was detected along with Pb2+ and CH3NH3+, showing that PEAI was introduced into the CH3NH3PbI3 layer during the solvent dripping process. Remarkably, the intensity of the PEA+ fragment decreased steeply at the near-surface of the film and then settled at a steady level much lower than MA+, indicating the successful deposition of an ultrathin layer of PEA+ on the perovskite surface. Furthermore, the effect of dimensional engineering resulted in an ultrahigh VOC of 1.17 V and an FF of 0.78 with an overall PCE of 19.89%. This can be attributed to the largest recombination time for the perovskite/PCBM interface (Fig. 7b). In one report, PEAI was incorporated in mixed-cation and mixed-halide perovskites, namely, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15.81 This modification showed advantages such as enhanced crystallinity, passivation of grain boundaries, and slowing down of moisture induced degradation. It promotes the preferred crystal orientation along the (110) direction. The CPD maps demonstrate that the grain size decreases with PEAI incorporation (Fig. 7c). Also, the electronic properties of the grain boundaries changed with the incorporation of PEAI. This is due to the formation of a quasi-2D phase at the grain boundaries. To passivate the grain boundaries of 3D FAPbI3, a small amount of PEAI (1.67%) was utilised.82 This 2D perovskite improved the crystallinity by rendering the generation of the cubic perovskite phase and suppressing the formation of δ FAPbI3. This effect can be attributed to the enhancement of the preferred orientation along (001) by the 2D perovskite due to which the surface energy of the facet is changed during crystallization. The novel technique different from the conventional methods of mixing the precursors was developed based on the dynamic spin coating of PEAI in IPA to enable surface growth on 3D Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39.83 This technique controlled the growth of the perovskite and a clear interface was observed between the 3D perovskite and the hole transport layer, which enabled efficient transfer of holes and reduced charge recombination.
 Fig. 7  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles of 3D–2D graded perovskite films deposited on NiO/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. (b) IMVS derived carrier recombination lifetimes for the different devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) Spatial CPD maps (1.5 × 1.5 μm2) of perovskites samples with PEAI incorporated at 0, 1.5, 3.0, 4.5 mol% and 10 mol% measured under dark and under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4 Lead free tin based perovskites. 
The mechanism and structural evolution of tin based perovskite was realised considering 3D FASnI3, 2D PEA2SnI4 and quasi 2D perovskites (n < 24, n ≥ 24).84 The important conclusions drawn from the study are that the crystallization starts from the solution/air interface and that too from a disordered precursor. In the case of pure 3D and n > 24, the rate of crystallization in the bulk and at the interface is comparable, whereas in the case of pure 2D and n ≤ 24, the bulk crystallization is suppressed probably because of the presence of PEA+ ions that induce change in the growth process. Liao et al. fabricated low dimensional tin halide perovskite thin films utilizing PEA as an organic separating interlayer.85 A highly oriented perovskite film perpendicular to the substrate was realized with 20% PEA. Also, these films were smooth and dense, which can protect the perovskite from oxygen infiltration and thus mitigate perovskite oxidation as compared to the 3D case. The origin of this enhanced air stability can be understood by the negative value of the decomposition enthalpy. Additionally, the encapsulating organic PEA ligands and compact perovskite film also protect Sn2+ from contact with oxygen, further augmenting the oxidation resistance of 2D (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1. The other strategy makes use of a very low amount of the 2D perovskite (0.08 M) in the 3D FASnI3 (0.92 M) perovskite, generating PEA2FA24Sn25I76 to induce crystallinity, orientation and robustness.86 The 2D material was found to locate near the substrate, aligned perpendicularly, and highly ordered, and the interaction between the benzene rings facilitated self-assembly. The grains of 3D FASnI3 were fused together with this 2D material, resulting in blurring of grain boundaries. Moreover, there was no significant effect on the structure on annealing at 65 °C and therefore, low temperature processing, which is necessary for tin based perovskites, is possible. This resulted in a PCE as high as ∼9% which is 50% superior to that of the reference cell. Contrary to this, in another report, PEACl was utilised as an additive in FASnI3 perovskite.87 The results demonstrate that as the annealing temperature increases, the intensity of h00 peaks decreases and the perfect high member 2D structure is formed with the (111) plane aligned perpendicular to the substrate. It was suggested that as the temperature increases, low and high member 2D structures change and at 100 °C, the large PEA cations accumulate at the grain boundaries. Mixed cations BA and PEA were incorporated in the 2D (BA0.5PEA0.5)2FA3Sn4I13 systems to inhibit the intermediate phase resulting in smooth, dense films with almost all the crystals growing perpendicular to the substrate to achieve a PCE of 8.82%.88

3.2. Butylammonium cation (BA)

3.2.1 Compositional engineering. 
Cao et al. synthesized high quality films of (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 with n = 1–4 from a stoichiometric reaction between PbI2, MAI and n-butylammine (BA).89 The observed film growth was different for all the members of this family. In the case of an n = 1 compound, it exclusively revealed the (00l) reflections. As soon as the value of n increases, a competition arises between the BA ions, which try to continue the growth within the planar layer, and the MA ions expand the perovskite growth outside the layer. The compound with n = 2 showed (020) reflections, whereas the compounds with n = 3 and 4 exclusively showed (111) and (202) reflections, clearly indicating the vertical growth of the perovskite compound (Fig. 8a). The n = 1 and 2 members of this family showed excellent photoluminescence properties, which paves the way for using these materials in light emitting diodes. However, the n = 3 member showed excellent vertical growth in the film formation, which is important for effective charge transport and a solar cell with a PCE of 4.03% was fabricated. The mixed-cation lead mixed-halide BA/FA/Cs perovskite system was synthesized, with the general formula BAx(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3.90 The optimization of BA content revealed that “layered” plate-like crystallites form between the 3D perovskite grains. It was reported that BA spacers induce a decrease in defects and, as a result, device hysteresis. Besides, the optimized amount of BA (x = 0.09) yielded significantly oriented crystals along the (100) direction. The PCEs of the device fabricated with x = 0.05 and x = 0.09 were 17.2% and 19.5%, respectively. Furthermore, the fifth member of the (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite family was synthesized in high yields and purity (Fig. 8b).91 This member unlike the lower members showed preferred platelet growth and exhibited a strong vertical growth. Moreover, it showed a partial degradation to MAPbI3. H2O and also the formation of BA2MA2Pb3I10 (n = 3) (Scheme 2).
 Fig. 8  (a) XRD patterns of thin films vs. bulk materials of (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7, (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10, and (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) View of the unit cell, which includes two individual perovskite layers offset by half perovskite cavity length (∼3.15 Å) normal to the b axis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Publishing group. (c) TRPL kinetics of the perovskite layer on a glass substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
 Scheme 2  Partial degradation of BA2MA4Pb5I16 in humid air. 
Apart from this, the band gap exhibited by the n = 5 member is 1.83 eV with suppressed low energy and superior optoelectronic properties. The solar cells fabricated from this member exhibited a VOC of 0.987 V with an FF of 72.12% which yielded an overall PCE of 8.32%. These higher n-members of the perovskite approach the boundaries between the quantum regime of thin perovskites and the classical bulk materials. This phenomenon has a strong impact on the perovskite devices since by increasing the perovskite thickness, higher photocurrent is achieved, whereas reduction of the excitonic effects can lead to improved charge collection in devices. The successful synthesis and crystal structure of n = 6,7 (and plausibly n = 9) with an optical band gap of 1.78 eV and 1.74 eV, respectively, of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 family were demonstrated.92 These higher members are difficult to synthesize because of the positive formation energy (ΔH) and thermodynamic instability, proved by calorimetric measurements. There is a sharp destabilization in the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) with increasing n, which limits the possibility of product formation and diminishes the phase purity. On the other hand, three A-cations were introduced to BA+ to form a BA+–Cs+–MA+–FA+ 2D perovskite with the formula (BA2(Cs0.02MA0.64FA0.34)4Pb5I16).93 Its possibility was investigated by comparing it with a mono-cation 2D perovskite. The PCE results shows an 81% increase as compared to the mono-cation based device. This is owing to the increased absorption, more efficient charge transfer, smooth and compact surface morphology, and larger grain size with fewer grain boundaries, which lead to longer carrier lifetime (Fig. 8c).


3.2.2 Processing engineering. 
Tsai and co-workers reported a photovoltaic efficiency of 12.52% with no hysteresis for a planar heterojunction solar cell fabricated using the hot casting method.33 The obtained high efficiency is attributed to the increase in JSC and FF. This technique enhanced charge transport and mobility (μ = 0.011 cm2 V−1 S−1) due to the perfect vertical orientation of the {(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1}2− slabs. The excellent crystallinity and thin film uniformity realized by the hot casting technique lead to continuous charge transport channels that enable the highly mobile photogenerated carriers to travel through the two dimensional {(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1}2− slabs across the device electrode without being blocked by the insulating spacer layers (Fig. 9a). Although this method has been the standard approach for fabricating 2D MHPs, it requires careful control of substrate temperature, which can induce irreproducibility from batch to batch. Zuo et al. reported two new spin-coating free processes, namely the drop cast method and slot-die coating method, for producing the 2D (BA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskite.94 As shown in Fig. 9b, the XRD pattern revealed two peaks located at 2θ values of 14.04° and 28.28°. The appearance of these peaks suggests vertical orientation of the 2D perovskite crystals. Wu et al. proposed a slow post annealing (SPA) method to obtain the vertical orientation in (BA)2MA3Pb4I13 with favourable alignment of multi-perovskite phases in order of n-values reducing the generation of potential barriers.95
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (111) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing group. (b) XRD pattern of a drop-cast 2D-perovskite film annealed at 50 °C showing near-perfect vertical orientation of 2D-perovskite crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.3 Additive engineering. 
To reduce the band gap in the MA-based perovskite family, a (BA)2(FA)2Pb3I10 2D perovskite was synthesized a band gap of 1.51 eV, which is very low as compared to that of the (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (1.89 eV).96 Furthermore, a one-step thiophene assisted deposition method was employed to improve the crystal growth orientation. The effect of thiophene on crystal orientation was studied by XRD and GIWAXS measurements. The XRD pattern showed three dominant crystallographic planes (111), (202) and (313) and their intensity increases linearly by the addition of thiophene, which proves improved crystallinity. The GIWAXS profile showed the (111) diffraction ring in the out of plane direction, intensified by 5:1 ratio compared to the in-plane direction. NH4SCN as an additive in the fabrication of 2D layered (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3, 4) based perovskites was utilised in order to obtain vertical orientation on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrate.97 These pseudohalide thiocyanate ions (SCN−) have a similar ionic radius to I− and the lone pairs of S and N atoms in SCN− ions offer strong interactions with Pb2+. Therefore, the crystallization of the 2D layered perovskite composed of I− and Pb2+ ions can be modified by NH4SCN. After optimization of the NH4SCN amount (BAI:MAI:PbI2:NH4SCN = 2:2:3:1 in molar ratio), the as-prepared planar-structured PSCs (n = 3) exhibited an averaged PCE of 6.82%, indicating the improved charge transport. This extraction resulted from the oriented growth of the 2D layered perovskite film. By increasing the n value from 3 to 4, the corresponding devices presented a higher PCE of 8.79% with a JSC of 14.71 mAcm−2. It is believed that the dramatic improvement of JSC can be mainly attributed to the NH4SCN induced vertical orientation of the (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10-based perovskite film. Additionally, the thermally annealed perovskite film is compact with the least pinholes through the film. Moreover, the role of methylammonium chloride (MACl) as an additive was explored in 2D BA2MA4Pb5I16 which revealed that as the amount of MACl increases, the fraction of the 2D perovskite aligned perpendicular to the substrate increases and the average crystal size also increases, as shown in Fig. 10a.98 The doping with MACl leads to more consumption of spacer cations and facilitates the formation of a small n 2D perovskite, which as a result increases the thickness of the large n 2D perovskite (Fig. 10b). On the other hand, PbCl2 was found to increase the built-in potential, the value being 0.94 V in the case without the additive and 1.00 V with the additive, an important parameter for charge transport in 2D MHPs (Fig. 10c).99 Additionally, it improved the crystallization, humidity and thermal stability. Apart from this, researchers have also used water100 and thiosemicarbazide (TSC) along with DMSO101 as additives to achieve preferential orientation and desired morphology in recent reports.
 Fig. 10  (a) Plots of the [101] crystal orientation ratio and average crystal size of the large-n 2D perovskite phase in layered perovskite films against the MACl doping ratio. (b) Schematic diagram of the structural variation of layered perovskite films upon MACl doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) The C−2–V measured under dark conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4 Effect of solvent. 
Atomically thin 2D square sheets of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 were prepared using the direct growth method (Fig. 11a).102 In fact, using a ternary co-solvent, DMF/chlorobenzene/acetonitrile, helps overcome the limitations of the conventional exfoliation and chemical vapour deposition method. The role of acetonitrile was to act as an intermediate solvent as DMF is “too good” a solvent and CB is “too bad” a solvent for hybrid perovskites. Hence, acetonitrile balances the dissolution and crystallization of 2D hybrid perovskites. The vapour pressure is high and so it leaves the solution quickly on heating and the CB/DMF ratio increases and induces crystal formation. Further mechanism of the growth needs to be explored. In another report, a facile and large scale synthesis of 2D (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1–4) (Fig. 11b) perovskite was reported using the HI/H3PO2 solvent system.103 The use of a stoichiometric amount of BA produces the compounds in the pure form. However, the reaction yield is ∼50% as compared to the total Pb content. The reason can be attributed to the high solubility of MAPbI3 in HI/H3PO2. Using this solvent system, if BA is used stoichiometrically, then the end product is contaminated with the n = 1 member, which acts as kinetic barrier. The driving force to synthesize a single n-member product is the careful control of the stoichiometry based on the “limiting reagent” principle. For the higher n-member (n = 5), the role of the solvent was comparatively considered for improving the film morphology and crystallinity.104 The film crystallinity, crystal growth orientation, and film morphology were studied for the pure DMF, mixtures of DMF/DMSO and pure DMSO (Fig. 11c). It was shown that a little addition of DMSO induces the change in the layer orientation with respect to DMF films, as proved by the intensity of the (202) Bragg peak, yielding a higher degree of vertical layer growth on the substrate (Fig. 11d and e). Although little DMSO addition produces favourable microstructures, several peaks in the low angles are observed as the DMSO concentration is further increased, possibly due to the formation of lower n-members, especially for n = 2 and n = 3. It was assumed that it is because the integrity of the bulk material is not retained when it is dissolved in the precursor solvent. However, it is likely present as individual ions. As DMSO is more polar than DMF, it can form stronger hydrogen bonds and the ions do not have sufficient energy to self-assemble into an n = 5 perovskite but instead reorganize into the more thermodynamically favourable n = 2 and n = 3 phases. Similarly, for the n = 4 member also, these results were obtained in another report where the hot casting method is supported by this binary solvent engineering.105 The two step mechanism was proposed wherein it was shown that in the first step, heterogeneous nucleation initiates on the surface (Fig. 11f). In the second step, in the case of DMF, because of rapid volatilisation, homogeneous crystallization starts which develops random orientation among the crystals, whereas in the case of DMF/DMSO, the crystallisation is slowed down as the lone pair of oxygen atom in SO of DMSO interacts with the Pb2+ of PbI2. Thus, orientation is controlled. On the other hand, Cao and co-workers reported an Sn-based 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite with the formula (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1SnnI3n+1 (n = 3,4).106 The resulting perovskite films were incorporated into solar cells and a PCE of 2.5% for the Sn4I13 member was obtained. The synthesis was carried out by carefully optimizing the ratio between BAI:MAI:SnCl2 in the proportion of 2:(n − 1):n to avoid precipitation of Sn2I7. The results revealed that the solvent used to dissolve the bulk perovskite plays a significant role in film growth and orientation. The growth of Sn3I10 films is parallel to the substrate when dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is used. However, if DMF is used then it grows perpendicular to the substrate keeping all the other conditions the same. As shown in Fig. 11g, DMSO exhibits mostly (0k0) [k = even integer] peaks, which shows parallel orientation and DMF exhibits (111) and (202) peaks attributed to perpendicular orientation. It was also demonstrated that high purity, single-phase films can be only grown by using precursor solutions of “pre-synthesized” single phase bulk perovskite material. Also, to mitigate the problem of morphology and to slower the precipitation of Sn2+, a soft Lewis base, triethylphosphine (TEP), was used, which also acted as a coordinating ligand for Sn2+ species in addition to SnF2. This promoted the growth of isolated perovskite islands, which resulted in a non-uniform film. Additionally, it prevented the incidental conversion to Sn4+ due to the soft acid nature of Sn2+.
 Fig. 11  (a) Optical image of the 2D square sheets. Scale bar, 10 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2015 Science Publishing group. (b) SEM images of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite crystals. Scale bar 200 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) AFM images of the hot-cast BA2MA4Pb5I16 films from precursor solutions using DMF, DMSO, and mixture of DMF and DMSO, (d) XRD pattern of the hot-cast BA2MA4Pb5I16 films from precursor solutions using DMF, DMSO, and a mixture of DMF and DMSO, and (e) full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the (111) reflection as a function of precursor solvent used for thin film fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (f) Illustration of the crystallization process without DMSO addition (case 1) and with DMSO addition (case 2) to the DMF solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) XRD measurement of the (BA)2(MA)2Sn3I10 thin film growth using different solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.5 Effect of processing temperature and small cation doping. 
A study on the ion migration and ion conductivity of the polycrystalline films of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4) was investigated.107 The rate of ion migration was quantitatively characterized by the activation energy of ions, which was extracted from the temperature-dependent electrical conductivity, measured in the dark and under 0.25 Sun illumination. The results demonstrated that when the temperature is increased to 330 K, no transition from electronic to ionic conductivity occurs for these films both in dark and under illumination (Fig. 12a). A constant slope was observed with an activation energy of 41 ± 7 meV, and this confirms the suppression of ion migration up to 330 K in 2D perovskite films, possibly due to the presence of organic spacer layers. However, it is unclear whether the geometry of grain boundaries affects the results or not. Apart from this, cesium doping is reported in the 2D BA2MA3Pb4I13 perovskites, which improved the photovoltaic performance of 2D devices up to a PCE of 13.7%.108 Cs+ doping aids improvement in trap density, charge carrier mobility and charge transfer kinetics. The excellent film quality and optoelectronic properties enhance the PCE from 12.3% to 13.7% (Fig. 12b). Furthermore, it enhances material stability and also the ideal crystal orientation was retained.
 Fig. 12  (a) Temperature-dependent conductivity measurement of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 polycrystalline films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) High magnification plan-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the Csx-2D perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.6 Effect of chain length: a case of n-butylammonium and iso-butylammonium as the spacer cation. 
The structural analogue of the n-butylammonium (n-BA) cation is the iso-butylammonium (iso-BA) cation with shorter chain length (Fig. 13a). Iso-BA showed enhanced absorption and better crystallinity and preferred out-of-plane orientation of crystallites presumably because of the short-branched chain spacers which caused decrease in the spacing of the inorganic octahedra.109 As evident from the XRD spectra in Fig. 13b, the peaks at 14.10° and 28.37° representing the (111) and (202) crystallographic planes are higher and sharp for both room temperature (RT) cast and hot cast (HC) films of (iso-BA)2MA2Pb4I13, indicating preferential crystal growth in the out-of-plane direction. Intriguingly, this difference in crystal orientation leads to the better charge transport. The out-of-plane carrier mobility (μo) for (iso-BA)2MA2Pb4I13 was found to be (1.35 cm2 V−1 s−1), which is much higher than that of (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (<0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1) measured by time-resolved terahertz (THz) spectroscopy (TRTS) (Fig. 13c).109 These properties also resembled in the photovoltaic performance of the planar solar cell fabricated using RT-(iso-BA)2MA2Pb4I13 which showed a PCE of 8.82%, three times higher than that found in the linear n-BA based device. Furthermore, the same group also studied the charge transfer in these two cations, which revealed that iso-BA showed two times faster charge transfer.110 In a nutshell, the better performance of iso-BA-based solar cells is due to the efficient charge transfer that prevents the charge accumulation ascribable to the unbalanced charge transfer of carriers owing to the different band alignments of conduction and valance bands.
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of n-butylammonium and iso-butylammonium cations. (b) XRD patterns of room-temperature and hot-cast fabricated (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskites. (c) TRTS for RT (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films excited at 400 nm under an excitation density of 3.4 × 1013 ph per cm2 per pulse. Reprinted from with permission ref. 109 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Among all reports, Tsai et al. gave in depth insight into the design principles of electronic charge transport in vertically stacked 2D RP perovskites using (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 as an example.111 They concluded that the major limiting factor for the vertically oriented 2D perovskite is field-limited carrier collection. In this type of perovskite, multiple potential barriers are generated and to surmount these barriers, a strong electric field is necessary. All these reports pointed out that a complex formation mechanism is required to be clarified and understood in order to improve the properties of 2D MHPs. Zhang and co-workers provided a detailed investigation of the crystallization mechanism and key bottlenecks of the efficiency limiting factors of the RP perovskite.112 They stated that highly crystalline RP perovskites with high phase purity, preferentially perpendicular crystal orientation and large grain size can be grown only by fast and direct transition from a disordered precursor solvate to the perovskite phase without the formation of any intermediate phases.

3.3. Guanidinium cation

3.3.1 Compositional engineering. 
The organic molecule CH6N3+, commonly known as guanidinium (GA), possesses nearly zero dipole moment and substantially large size (278 pm), which is able to be sited inside the perovskite crystals as the A-cation. Many efforts have been devoted to studying the impact of doping the GA cation in the 3D MHPs.113,114 All these reports revealed enhanced charge carrier lifetime, suppressed nonradiative recombination and ultimately superior device performance if alloyed in an optimised amount. As per the report by Kubicki et al., the enhanced charge carrier lifetime was attributed to the rapid reorientation of the guandinium cation in the picosecond timescale.115 Additionally, they showed that in the case of 3D FAPbI3, doping with only GA is not sufficient to suppress the non-perovskite δ phase. Furthermore, a GA incorporation of up to 40% was reported for triple cation Cs0.1(FA0.83MA0.17)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 to form a GAx(CsFAMA)1−x perovskite.116 Owing to the reduced absorption in the visible region, the colour of the films changed from black to brown on increasing the % of GA (Fig. 14a). The device with 10% GA showed the best performance with increased open circuit voltage (VOC). Moreover, the films also showed reduced defect states due to the passivating effect and greater hydrogen bonding capacity with the under-co-ordinated iodide ions with the GA cation. Similarly, GAI (2%) was used to control the hysteresis and ion migration in the FA0.83Cs0.17PbI3 perovskite.117 On the other hand, Lian et al. utilized GAI with 2D BA2MA4Pb5I16 and observed a uniform distribution of GA cations in the precursor solution, which results in superior device performance and better film quality.118 The reason was attributed to the solvation effect of GA with DMF. The symmetric distribution of solvophilic ammonium groups renders even distribution in the precursor (Fig. 14b). In another report, utilising the synergistic effect of solvent engineering and interface engineering, both the VOC and JSC were increased in the (BA,GA)2MA4Pb5I16 perovskite.119 The addition of 3% formamide (which has a higher boiling point and polarity than DMF) to the DMF increased the intensity of the (111) and (202) peaks in XRD which depicts improved vertical orientation (Fig. 14c). The interface engineering at the HTL/perovskite layer improved the band alignment.
 Fig. 14  (a) Photographs of GAx(CsFAMA)1−x perovskite films containing different fractions of GA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the influence of GA+ on the formation of the 2D perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) XRD patterns of the (BA,GA)2MA4Pb5I16 perovskite films without and with formamide addition on different substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 Solvent engineering. 
A new family of 2D halide perovskites by employing the guanidinium spacer was created with the formula (C(NH2)3) (CH3NH3)nPbnI3n+1 that contained alternating cations in the interlayer space (ACI) (Fig. 15a).120 They possess a narrower bandgap as compared to RP perovskites, which are 2.27 eV for n = 1, 1.99 eV for n = 2 and 1.73 eV for n = 3 members. For preparing thin films, normally, the solvent engineering method is used, utilizing chlorobenzene as the anti-solvent. As DMF/DMSO yielded very rough, dull-coloured films with pinholes, chlorobenzene promotes faster perovskite crystallization by enabling control over the crystallization rate. They optimized the delay time before the process and anti-solvent dropping (Fig. 15b). The planar solar cells fabricated with the higher member GAMA3Pb3I10 yielded a maximum PCE of 7.26% with an impressive FF of 80%. However, the photocurrent is low as compared to the n = 3 analogue of BA likely due to the non-optimal vertical orientation. Later, a comparison was drawn between the anti-solvent method and hot cast method for the GAMA3Pb3I10.121 The morphology and texture study revealed elongated grains with micrometre length. However, the 2D crystallites show highly random orientation, which is a typical characteristic of ACI perovskites and points out at a different crystallization mechanism. Therefore, on studying the crystallization mechanism, it demonstrated the formation of intermediate solvate and perovskite phases due to the intricate interactions between the solvent, lead halide, and organic components. Faster solvent extraction leads to stronger interaction between lead iodide and organic cations, and therefore preferential assembly of the crystalline perovskite phase, including the GA2PbI4 phase in the hot-casted film unlike the anti-solvent processed film which showed a dominated ACI phase. This shows the importance of temporally controlling the intermediate phases (Fig. 15c).
 Fig. 15  (a) View of the unit cells of the (GA) (MA)nPbnI3n+1 (n = 3) perovskites along the crystallographic a-axis highlighting the ordered crystal packing of the GA and MA cations between the perovskite layers. (b) AFM images of solution-processed thin films of GAMA3Pb3I10 as a function of delay time for antisolvent chlorobenzene (CB) dripping. The scale bar is 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic model illustrating the self-assembly of the ACI perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


3.3.3 Additive engineering. 
Zhang et al. proposed a two-step post-treatment process for the ACI type GAMA4Pb4I13 perovskite wherein guanidinium thiocyanate (GASCN) and methylammonium chloride (MACl) were used as additives.122 The GASCN treatment mainly rendered large crystal grains by interaction of Pb2+ and SCN− and ultimately sticks the grains together, leading to the dense and compact films. Further MACl treatment reduced the trap states via passivation. These two treatments resulted in an improved PCE of 15.27%. Later, Luo et al. reported the highest efficiency of 18.48% for the 2D MHPs by the synergistic effect of compositional engineering and additive engineering for the GAMA3Pb3I10.34 The optimised amount of MACl resulted in films with fewer traps, higher crystallinity and fewer grain boundaries. As a result, the fabricated device exhibited better thermal and environmental stability.

3.4. Fluorinated spacer cations
It is widely known that exchanging hydrogen atoms with fluorine atoms increases the hydrophobicity immensely and thus applying fluorinated spacer cations in the lead halide perovskite is a natural choice to further increase the moisture resistivity and polarity at a same time.123 The increase in the dipole moment of the cation could lead to increased charge separation and carrier lifetime and also the enhanced polarization of the crystal lattice, resulting in well-separated “ferroelectric highways” for both the charge carriers.124

3.4.1 Aromatic fluorinated cations. 
The impact of selective monofluorination of PEA at different positions of the aromatic moiety was demonstrated by Hu and co-workers.125 They found a PCE of >10% in the case of 3-fluorophenethyl ammonium (mF1PEA) (10.17%) and 4-fluorophenethyl ammonium (pF1PEA) (10.55%), whereas in the case of 2-fluorophenethyl ammonium (oF1PEA), it was less than 1%. The difference in the photovoltaic performance can be attributed to the different phase distributions in all the 2D OIHPs. As shown in Fig. 16a, phases having lower n values dominate on the glass side of the substrate, while phases with larger n or 3D appear more on the air side. However, for oF1PEA 2D OIHP, only a strong and dominating emission peak from the 3D perovskite phase was observed and this random phase distribution may result in charge trapping at the small band gap phases. Furthermore, the structures can be differentiated by the presence of split equatorial iodine positions and the formation energy calculations (Fig. 16b) also support the difference in device performance. Another group reported modification of PEA with fluorine to obtain 4-fluoro phenethylammonium (F-PEA).126 They showed that enhanced out-of-plane conductivity ∼ 7× larger than that of PEA2PbI4 was due to the preferred molecular stacking in both organic (reduced ring-to-ring distance) and inorganic phases (aligned PbI6 sheets) (Fig. 16c). The n = 5 member of this family (F-PEA)2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 displayed better charge transport, lower trap density and, as a result, improved device performance. Moreover, these F-PEA cations show a lower band gap and improved thermal stability compared to PEA as reported by other reports as well.127,128 Hence, the other strategy reported is to fabricate a 2D/3D heterostructure by the doping of the F-PEA cation into the 3D (MAPbI3)0.75(FASnI3)0.25.129 The as-fabricated solar cell exhibited a significantly higher PCE of 17.51% than the one without doping because of efficient charge transport. On the other hand, ultrahydrophobic pentafluorophenylethyl ammonium iodide F5PEAI was applied over the surface of the 3D perovskite which reacts with the nonperovskite δ-FAPbI3 to form 2D (FEAI)2PbI4.130 However, there was no observed significant difference between the 3D and 3D/2D orientation. In another study, it was shown that the incorporation of the mixed cation F5PEA + PEA significantly affects the charge transport.131 The (F5PEA0.75PEA0.25)2PbI4 perovskite showed increased charge transport by a factor of five and three across and within the layers of 2D perovskite respectively compared to the monocation PEA2PbI4. The reason can be attributed to the alloying of F5PEA and PEA by a strong non-covalent interaction. Apart from the lead and tin based layered 2D perovskites, the copper(II) based perovskite with a fluorinated spacer cation p-fluorophenethylamine was also synthesized with the formula (p-F-C6H5C2H4NH3)2CuBr4 for the application in heterojunction solar cells.132 The XRD pattern revealed that the film was highly crystalline, and the planes of the perovskite sheet were oriented parallel to the substrate surface. However, the efficiency of the fabricated device was 0.51% with an open circuit voltage of 0.87 V.
 Fig. 16  (a) Normalized photoluminescence spectra from the glass (back) side (upper spectra) and from the front (air) side (lower spectra) (b) relative formation energy difference between different 2D OIHPs (n = 1). DFT calculation of formation energy for PEA2PbI4, oF1PEA2PbI4, mF1PEA2PbI4, and pF1PEA2PbI4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing group. (c) TRMC comparison of out-of-plane and in-plane transport for n = 1 2D perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) Transient photocurrent decay of the 0.06F3EAI based and reference device, respectively. (e) Schematic representation of the effect of F3EAI on bounded excitons in layered 2D perovskite [(BA)1−x(F3EA)x]2(MA)3Pb4I13 materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 


3.4.2 Aliphatic fluorinated cations. 
In case of fluorinated alkylammonium cations, more studies are devoted to the understanding of the impact on the structure and not more on the growth and crystal orientation.133,134 Tan et al. reported the mixture of the fluorine-containing organic molecule 2,2,2-trifluoroethylamine iodide (F3EAI) and butylammonium iodide and made the general formula [(BA)1−x(F3EA)x]2(MA)3Pb4I13 (x from 0.00 to 0.10).135 This reduced the dielectric confinement effect of the 2D perovskite. In fact, the various contents of F3EAI did not affect the crystal orientation and the (111) planes are parallel to the substrate surface indicating better charge transport. Owing to the higher electronegativity of the fluorine atom and the increased dipole moment, the free carrier transportation was improved and the charge recombination was suppressed while retaining the crystallinity and film quality (Fig. 16d and e).

3.5. Diammonium cations

3.5.1 Aromatic diammonium cations. 
Studies by Li et al. show the fabrication of the 2D DJ phase perovskite by mixing formamidinium (FA) as a central cation and 1,4-phenylenedimethanammonium (PDMA) as a bifunctional spacer group.136 This molecular design was assumed to provide a rigid 2D backbone through π–π interactions within the hydrophobic spacer layer that would contribute to a higher crystallinity of the resulting perovskite material. In addition, the ammonium groups bind with the inorganic slabs via hydrogen bonding and the methylene linkers, providing a higher level of adaptability and enabling a more robust structural framework. The PL emission energy red-shifted by 0.1 eV from that of the RP analogues with the value of the band gap being 1.59 eV for the n = 3 member (Fig. 17a). This can be attributed to the presence of the so-called “edge states”. The n = 1 and n = 2 members showed preferentially parallel orientation whilst n > 2 showed preferentially perpendicular orientation with respect to the substrate. The effect of spacer cations 3-(aminomethyl) piperidinium (3-AMP) and 4-(aminomethyl)piperidinium (4-AMP) was discussed.64 A drastic structural difference in terms of hydrogen bonding was observed for both cations. The in-plane distortion was amplified in the case of 4-AMP as it forms H-bonds with the bridging I−, whereas the 3-AMP forms H-bond with the terminal I−. As a result, the strong antibonding interaction pushes up the valence band maximum (VBM), resulting in a reduced band gap. Thus, the systematically narrower band gap is observed for 3-AMP versus 4-AMP, which can be attributed to the more linear Pb–I–Pb angles (Fig. 17b). Additionally, the 3-AMP series showed constantly lower PL emission energy (Fig. 17c) and longer lifetime, which supports the observed photovoltaic performance and PCE of 6.74% for (3-AMP) (MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 4). In another report, a 2D DJ 3-AMP based perovskite was presented utilizing mixed A-cations of MA and FA in the perovskite cage, which have narrower bandgaps than those with MA only in the cage, which may be attributed to the larger Pb–I–Pb angles in the structure.137 As a result, JSC and PCE were increased. The preferred perpendicular orientation and better crystalline quality were obtained combining the solvent engineering method with the mixed DMF/DMSO solvent and HI additive. Furthermore, the optimal amount of 25% FA makes (3-AMP) (MA0.75FA0.25)3Pb4I13 have lower recombination, leading to a higher FF and VOC for the device. Using 1,4-benzenedimethanamonium iodide as a barrier molecule, another PSC was developed.138 It was revealed that at a higher n value (n = 10), the full width at half maximum of the PL peaks decreases, indicating more organized layers unlike lower n values. The PCE of 15.6% was obtained for this 2D DJ perovskite solar cell which they attributed to the self-oriented layers. However, clear understanding of the crystal growth and orientation needs to be developed.
 Fig. 17  (a) Images of perovskite films and the corresponding UV-vis absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of BFAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite compositions (n = 1–4) deposited on FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2 substrates (B = PDMA). Reprinted with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Summary of (b) absorption and (c) PL in energy for n = 1 to 5 of 3-AMP and 4-AMP series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


3.5.2 Role of alkyl chain length in alkyldiammonium cations. 
A series of this type of 2D MHP was successfully synthesized by Li et al., having the formula (NH3CmH2mNH3)-(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (m = 4–9/n = 1–4).139 They solved and refined the crystal structure of even and odd straight carbon chain diammonium cations by taking representative examples of m = 8 and m = 9. Considering the crystal orientation for the n = 3 member, when the carbon chain length (m) was 4, 6 and 7, it is almost random; however, m = 9 shows both parallel and perpendicular orientation and m = 8 shows nearly perfect perpendicular orientation. Moreover, 1,4-butanediammonium lead iodide (BdAPbI4), 1,6-hexanediammoinum lead iodide (HdAPbI4) and 1,8-ocatnedimammonium lead iodide (OdAPbI4) with band gaps of 2.37 eV, 2.44 eV and 2.55 eV, respectively, were reported.140 The BdA cation is connected to the inorganic component along the (001) direction, whereas the HdA and OdA cations follow the (200) direction. In addition, the Pb–I–Pb bond angle in the corner sharing [PbI6] octahedra is found to be 150°, 148° and 147°, which shows a decreasing order. Contrary to this, a detailed investigation of the role of alkyl chain length in these cations was demonstrated by Yao et al.141 The report revealed that 1,3-propanediammonium, 1,4-butanediammonium and 1,6-hexane diammonium cations failed to show complete 2D character, while the 1,8-octanediammonium cation formed a 2D structure. Apart from this, secondary and tertiary amines were incorporated into the iodoplumbate system which can partly inherit the structural features and forms hydrogen bonding along with steric effects at the organic–inorganic interface. The examples include deprotonated {[H2DMPDA][PbI4]}n (N,N-dimethyl-1,3-propanediamine), {[H2DEPDA]4[Pb5I18]}n (N,N-diethyl-1,3-propanediamine) and {[H2TMEDA][Pb3I8]}n (N,N,N′,N'-tetramethylethylenediamine), N-phenyl-ethanimidamidine cation.142,143 Although the crystal structures are studied, the impact of these cations on growth is not known.144 In another report, a printable solar cell based on the 2D/3D interface was made with great stability (>400 days).39 The 2D/3D composite was engineered by mixing the (AVAI:PbI2) and (CH3NH3I:PbI2) precursors at different molar ratios (0–3–5–10–20–50%). The perovskite film with 3% AVAI is constituted by a thin layer (possibly a monolayer) of the 2D perovskite; an oriented interface, where the 3D phase has a marked preferential growth direction; and a pure 3D perovskite arranged in the tetragonal phase on top. The as-fabricated printable solar cell shows a PCE of 11.9%. Ethylene diamine was used as a bication to stabilize the α-phase of the CsPbI3 perovskite (Fig. 18a), which shows phase transformation to δ-CsPbI3 in 12 h.145 A small stoichiometric amount of EDAPbI4 was introduced into the precursor solution of CsPbI3. The result demonstrates that it helped reduce pinholes in the deposited films of the CsPbI3 perovskite (Fig. 18b) and passivated the surface. As the content of EDAPbI4 increases, the intensity of the XRD peak decreases and the peak width broadens, suggesting decreased crystallite size (Fig. 18c). Furthermore, it does not indicate the formation of a mixture of 2D EDAPbI4 and 3D CsPbI3 perovskite. EDAPbI4 not only stabilizes CsPbI3 but also reduces the deterioration of charge-carrier transport across the perovskite film, caused by the “insulating” long alkyl spacing layers. The solar cells fabricated from this taking the amount of EDAPbI4 of x = 0.025 showed a champion PCE of 11.86%. The enhanced phase stability of the CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 can be ascribed to the reduced crystallite size and the EDAPbI4 component's unique (110) layered structure. Another member in the DJ phase perovskite family was reported by taking 1,3-propanediamine (PDA) as the spacer cation.65 The orientation of the (PDA)MA3Pb4I13 with respect to the substrate was revealed by grazing incidence XRD measurements at different hot-casting temperatures. As shown in Fig. 18d, sharp Bragg spots appear and the intensity is enhanced along the qz direction at 190 °C. However, at room temperature, continuous diffraction rings are present, which indicates random orientations (Fig. 18e). The stability test of the thin film of the perovskite under a relative humidity (RH) of 40% to 70% showed no signs of decomposition over 90 days and the colour changes after 170 days, visually indicating the degradation process of the perovskite (Fig. 18f).
 Fig. 18  (a) XRD patterns of CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 (x = 0 to 0.05) perovskites. (b) SEM images of perovskite films obtained from the CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 additive precursor (x = 0, 0.0125, 0.025, and 0.05). (c) XRD pattern and images of the CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 film heated at 100 °C in a dry box for 1 week. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145 Copyright 2017 Science Publishing group. 2D GI-XRD patterns of (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 thin films (d) at 190 °C and (e) at room temperature. (f) XRD patterns for the stability test; (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 films in ambient air; inset: digital photographs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Publishing group. 

3.6. Other types of cations or 2D MHPs
A generalized protocol for the synthesis of 2D CsPbX3 perovskite nanosheets was developed by preparing the Cs-oleate precursor in oleic acid as a solvent rather than conventionally used octadecene as a solvent.146 The CsPbBr3 nanosheets adopted an orthorhombic structure and CsPbCl3 and CsPbI3 were in tetragonal and cubic phases, respectively. These results suggested that the state of the Cs–oleate precursor not only affects the lateral growth of nanosheets but also has the profound influence on the crystal structure. The thickness and band gap of the nanosheets can be effectively tuned by simply adjusting the reaction temperature. The increase in temperature resulted in thinner sheets. The as-synthesized 2D nanosheets possessed large lateral dimensions, which is useful for the fabrication of photodetectors (Fig. 19a). In another report, the performance of the 3D perovskite was enhanced by the 2D/3D stacking structure after carrying out butylamine (BA) and BAI treatment, followed by two different chemical reactions (Scheme 3) that resulted in different compositions.147 The XRD spectra revealed that BA forms a very thin layer over the surface of the 3D perovskite and if the treatment time is longer, it can completely convert into the (BA)2PbI4 perovskite whereas for BAI treatment, different phases are formed from n = 1 to 4 (Fig. 19b). The device performance was improved for the treated perovskites and equals 19.56% and 18.85% for BA and BAI treated devices, respectively.
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM images of 2- and 4-monolayer-thick CsPbBr3 nanosheets synthesized at 150 and 60 °C, respectively. Inset: side view of stacking CsPbBr3 nanosheets synthesized at 60 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD of BA-treated MAPbI3 films, BAI-treated MAPbI3 films, and the bottom 3D MAPbI3 films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) FTIR spectra of the 2D (VBA)2PbI4 films with various UV exposure times. Features related to the disappearance of vinyl CC modes and appearance of N–H stretching modes are highlighted with arrows. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
 Scheme 3  Chemical equations representing the reaction of BA and BAI with 3D MAPbI3. 
Proppe et al. showed the use of the 4-vinylbenzyl ammonium (VBA) ligand to form well-ordered n = 1 and n = 2 perovskite quantum wells on top of 3D perovskite active layers, creating a 2D/3D heterostructure.148 The VBA molecule upon exposure to UV light at 254 nm is activated and the vinyl groups covalently cross-link (Fig. 19c). This cross-linking in the 2D perovskite greatly increased the performance and dark ambient lifetime of the devices. Besides, the 3D CH3NH3PbI3 film was modified with the alkylammonium chloride, namely octylammonium, decylammonium and dodecylammonium.149 The contact angle analysis showed that increase in the chain length of the surfactant decreases the wettability of the film; however, these data did not match with the stability results observed in a humid environment. These surfactants are supposed to bind with the 3D perovskite layer via hydrogen bond formation through ammonium groups. The result demonstrates a decreased band gap and increased charge carrier lifetime. In another work, a quasi 2D material with n = 9 and a general formula of A2(FA)8Pb9I28 is reported, in which they utilized four different ammonium salts, namely C6H5CH2NH3I (BEI), (CH3)2NH2I (DII), IH3N(CH2)3NH3I (PRI2), and IH3N(CH2)4NH3I (BUI2).150 They exhibited high moisture stability, whereas the crystal orientation was formed quite randomly according to the presence of Debye Scherrer rings in the GIWAXS images. Moreover, Lai et al. synthesized a 2-thiophenemethylammonium (ThMA+) spacer cation based 2D perovskite with a formula of (ThMA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3) by using the MACl-assisted casting technique.151 In fact, the optimised amount of MACl (MACl/MAI = 0.5) induces superior vertical orientation. However, a detailed study on the role of MACl in improving the crystal orientation is missing in this work. Cho et al. also fabricated 2D/3D PSCs which yielded excellent stability and efficiency for more than 10000 h with zero loss in performance measured under standard conditions in the presence of oxygen and moisture.152 They incorporated a novel fluorous cation (CF3)3CO(CH2)3NH3+ (A43) to form a layer on top of the 3D MA0.9FA0.1PbI3 and Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39 perovskite. This layer of 2D perovskite not only improves the interface with the hole transport layer (HTL) but its vertical orientation also enhances the optoelectronic properties of the 3D perovskite and stability against moisture.
Many efforts are devoted to controlling the morphology and crystal orientation by incorporating different spacer cations like ethyl ammonium (EA),153 PEA and thiophenethylammonium (TEA),154 tetra n-butyl ammonium155etc. In one report, the role of alkyl chain length of the organic cation was investigated taking BAI, octylammonium iodide (OAI) and dodecylammonium (DAI).156 The result suggested that as the chain length increases, the inorganic octahedra start aligning parallel to the substrate. Also, in the case of BA, large grain boundaries were observed and on going to the DA side, it becomes blurry. Additionally, the chain length has impact on the prevention of oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, the key issue in tin based perovskites. The trend observed for this oxidation was BA < OA < DA.
3.7. Lead free germanium (Ge) based 2D MHPs and double perovskites
As discussed in the above sections, to eliminate the toxic lead element, tin based 2D perovskites are researched the most as an alternative. The other element that has a similar electronic configuration to lead and tin is germanium, being an element of group IV(a). However, to the best of our knowledge, very few examples are present to date for 2D Ge based MHPs.157–159 Cheng et al. reported 2D (PEA)2GeI4 with a bandgap of 2.12 eV and greater stability than 3D CH3NH3GeI3.158 The authors later also reported 2D mixed Ge–Sn MHPs with an observation that increasing the Sn content decreases the bandgap.159 However, the study with a stand point of crystal orientation and growth studies in the case of Ge based 2D MHPs are still lacking. Apart from this, there are many reports present for 2D double perovskites. For instance, Wu et al. optimised and presented a series of 24 different kinds of 2D layered RP types n = 1–3 Csn+1Mn/2+Mn/23+X3n+1 (M+: In+, Cu+, Ag+, or Au+; M3+: Bi3+ or Sb3+).160 Xu et al. explored and synthesized vertically structured crystals of (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and investigated their properties for X-ray detection.161 Indeed these hybrid layered double perovskites can expand the compositional and electronic diversity of the 2D MHPs and many efforts are devoted to investigate the crystal structure and properties of these candidates.162,163 However, the studies on crystal orientation and its impact on the properties are not yet been fully discovered.
4. Conclusions and outlook
Two dimensional halide perovskites have emerged as a promising strategy to increase environmental stability by incorporating a hydrophobic organic spacer cation. However, this spacer cation prevents charge transport. Hence, active research is going on to understand the different in-plane and out-of-plane charge transport properties of this material for its use in optoelectronic devices. However, to date, there is no specific strategy for the selection of the spacer cation and to study its effect on the crystal structure and optoelectronic properties. Therefore, it becomes important to understand the role of this spacer cation in the growth and orientation of the film.
In this review, we have summarized some strategies like compositional engineering, processing engineering, effect of solvent, additives and small cation doping for some of the widely used spacer cations such as PEA, BA, GA, and fluorinated spacers and some dications. The maximum efficiency for the 2D MHP solar cell has reached ∼18% using orientational and additive engineering. Despite these various techniques used so far, the understanding and optimal selection of a suitable technique and/or additive are still lacking and are completely trial and error based. The most commonly used additives are NH4SCN, NH4Cl and MACl to induce vertical orientation. However, in many reports described above, their basic role in obtaining vertical orientation is explained, but their fundamental role and/or effect on the spacer utilized is still lacking.
Furthermore, there exist different directions for explaining the mechanism behind achieving the preferred orientation but the clear driving force for vertical orientation at the liquid–air interface is not known. When it comes to the spacer cation and its role in the crystal orientation, the general observation is that in aliphatic ammonium cations, as the chain length increases, parallel orientation dominates. However, the in detail understanding of the effect of the organic spacer cation on the crystal structure and properties is very unclear.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop a guideline for selecting a spacer cation based on the investigation of the effects of functional groups and/or any substituent group present on the structure, molecular bond lengths, the aromaticity/chain length so that a rational selection of a spacer can be made possible. This can develop the field of 2D perovskites by enabling the clear and unambiguous understanding of the crystal structure and charge transport properties of these materials and their efficient use in diverse applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A. K. extends his appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Khalid University for funding this work through research groups program under grant number RGP1/181/41. P. Y. acknowledges the ORSP of Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University for financial support and financial support from DST SERB (CRG/2018/000714) and DST Nano Mission (DST/NM/NT/2018/174).
References
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. Alsaggaf, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett, 2019, 4, 1258–1259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, T. Zhang, P. Schulz, Z. Li, G. Li, D. H. Kim, N. Guo, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Yuan, H. Wu, G. Zhao, Z. Yang, J. Tang, Z. Xu and S. Liu, Matter, 2019, 1, 465–480 CrossRef .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Y. Miao, Z. Hu, W. Xu, C. Kuang, K. Pan, P. Liu, J. Lai, B. Sun, J. Wang, S. Bai and F. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2818 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html
        .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., C: J. Biosci., 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .
A. Mancini, P. Quadrelli, C. Milanese, M. Patrini, G. Guizzetti and L. Malavasi, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8893–8895 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Shen, D. Wang, W. Wei and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12806 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen, C. Yang, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, J. Pan, J. Chen, A. A. Zhumekenov, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, D. Baran, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963–1976 CrossRef CAS .
U. G. Jong, C. J. Yu, G. C. Ri, A. P. McMahon, N. M. Harrison, P. R. F. Barnes and A. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1067–1074 RSC .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. Van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu, H. Xiang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2018, 35, 036104 CrossRef .
R. Gottesman, E. Haltzi, L. Gouda, S. Tirosh, Y. Bouhadana, A. Zaban, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2662–2669 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, M. I. Saidaminov, J. A. Christians, O. M. Bakr and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 330–338 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. B. Cheng, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15016 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, J. Takahashi and T. Goto, Solid State Commun., 1989, 69, 933–936 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, J. Chem. Soc. Dalt. Trans., 2001, 1–12 RSC .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, M. Hao and L. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700186 CrossRef .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612–16615 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
T. Luo, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, T. Niu, J. Wen, J. Lu, S. Jin, S. Liu and K. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903848 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, C. Gong, H. Gao, W. Wen, Y. Gong, X. Jiang, B. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Fu, L. Jiang and X. Zhang, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shibuya, M. Koshimizu, H. Murakami, Y. Muroya, Y. Katsumura and K. Asai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2004, 43, L1333 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Sun, P. Wang, W. Hu, S. Wang, C. Ji, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12150–12154 CrossRef CAS .
V. D'Innocenzo, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730–17733 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, X. Wu, T. Zhu, X. Zhu and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9992–9998 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, W. Du, X. Liu, L. Zhao, S. T. Ha and Q. Xiong, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700163 CrossRef .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Chen and J. J. Choi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2020, 38, 010801 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Tong, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1154–1186 RSC .
K. Hong, Q. Van Le, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2189–2209 RSC .
A. R. b. M. Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702073 CrossRef .
C. Ortiz-Cervantes, P. Carmona-Monroy and D. Solis-Ibarra, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1560–1575 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Smith, E. J. Crace, A. Jaffe and H. I. Karunadasa, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2018, 48, 111–136 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Leng, K. Wu, J. Zhang and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1432–1435 CrossRef CAS .
R. Munir, A. D. Sheikh, M. Abdelsamie, H. Hu, L. Yu, K. Zhao, T. Kim, O. El Tall, R. Li, D. M. Smilgies and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604113 CrossRef .
C. J. Dahlman, R. A. Decrescent, N. R. Venkatesan, R. M. Kennard, G. Wu, M. A. Everest, J. A. Schuller and M. L. Chabinyc, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5832–5844 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Chen, M. Shiu, J. H. Ma, M. R. Alpert, D. Zhang, B. J. Foley, D. M. Smilgies, S. H. Lee and J. J. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1336 CrossRef .
A. Z. Chen, M. Shiu, X. Deng, M. Mahmoud, D. Zhang, B. J. Foley, S. H. Lee, G. Giri and J. J. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1336–1343 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, F. Zhang, C. Xiao, X. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, Y. Zheng, Y. Xia, L. Chao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806831 CrossRef CAS .
D. Thrithamarassery Gangadharan and D. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2860–2889 RSC .
P. Gao, A. R. Bin Mohd Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5028 CrossRef .
J. Yan, W. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, J. Tang, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703487 CrossRef .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1958, 11, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mao, W. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Jacobson, J. W. Johnson and J. T. Lewandowski, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 3727–3729 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Zou, J. K. Keum, R. Tao, H. Xu, H. Yu, S. Haacke and B. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 3061–3071 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhou, B. Huang, M. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Lun, X. Wang, J. Hong, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1901566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qing, C. Kuang, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. K. Liu, S. Bai, M. Li, T. C. Sum, Z. Hu, W. Zhang and F. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904243 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, D. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9705–9709 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Chen, P. Chábera, K. Zheng and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2015–2021 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, W. Fu, M. Qin, W. Yang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702498 CrossRef .
W. Fu, J. Wang, L. Zuo, K. Gao, F. Liu, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett, 2018, 3, 2086–2093 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, S. Hu, Y. Zhang, H. Li and C. Sheng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, P. Siffalovic, B. Li, S. Yang, L. Zhang, P. Nadazdy, G. Cao and J. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124959 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
M. H. Li, H. H. Yeh, Y. H. Chiang, U. S. Jeng, C. J. Su, H. W. Shiu, Y. J. Hsu, N. Kosugi, T. Ohigashi, Y. A. Chen, P. S. Shen, P. Chen and T. F. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801401 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett, 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, T. H. Han, C. Choi, S. Y. Chang, S. J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo, J. Park, J. Jang, S. Paek, G. Garcia-Belmonte and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
J. Dong, S. Shao, S. Kahmann, A. J. Rommens, D. Hermida-Merino, G. H. ten Brink, M. A. Loi and G. Portale, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001294 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, J. Liu, G. Portale, H. H. Fang, G. R. Blake, G. H. ten Brink, L. J. A. Koster and M. A. Loi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702019 CrossRef .
M. Li, M. Li, M. Li, W. W. Zuo, W. W. Zuo, Y. G. Yang, M. H. Aldamasy, M. H. Aldamasy, Q. Wang, S. H. T. Cruz, S. L. Feng, M. Saliba, M. Saliba, Z. K. Wang, A. Abate and A. Abate, ACS Energy Lett, 2020, 5, 1923–1929 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, Y. Xia, Y. Zheng, W. Hui, H. Gu, W. Yuan, H. Yu, L. Chao, T. Niu, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Energy Lett, 2019, 4, 1513–1520 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. Herz and H. Snaith, in Proceedings of the 2nd Asia-Pacific Hybrid and Organic Photovoltaics, Fundació Scito, Valencia,  2018 Search PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. M. M. Soe, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, D. H. Cao, F. Liu, B. Traoré, C. Katan, J. Even, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem, 2017, 2, 427–440 CAS .
C. M. Myae Soe, G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, F. Melkonyan, D. H. Cao, B. Traoré, L. Pedesseau, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Even, T. J. Marks, A. Navrotsky, A. D. Mohite, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, F. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Xiao, B. W. Larson, S. P. Dunfield, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11737–11741 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo, A. D. Scully, D. Vak, W. Tan, X. Jiao, C. R. McNeill, D. Angmo, L. Ding and M. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803258 CrossRef .
G. Wu, X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Leng, P. Wang, M. Chen, D. Zhang, K. Zhao, S. Liu, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903889 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, W. Fu, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Yang, W. Qiu, G. Wu, F. Liu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 121–128 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, S. Yang, W. Fu, Z. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Liu, J. Yan, W. Yang and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700611 CrossRef .
F. Zheng, C. Zuo, M. Niu, C. Zhou, S. J. Bradley, C. R. Hall, W. Xu, X. Wen, X. Hao, X. Hao, M. Gao, T. A. Smith and K. P. Ghiggino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25980–25990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Duan, L. Xu and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11190–11196 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Zheng, D. Liu, Z. Liang, W. Yang, H. Chen, L. Ji, S. Yuan, Y. Gu and S. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 108 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, D. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Li, T. Zhang, H. Chen, L. Ji, Z. Chen and S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124266 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L. W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. M. Soe, W. Nie, C. C. Stoumpos, H. Tsai, J. C. Blancon, F. Liu, J. Even, T. J. Marks, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1700979 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Li, X. Zhu, J. Yu and K. Fan, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3487–3495 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T. Bin Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett, 2017, 2, 982–990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett, 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D. M. Smilgies, R. Li, Z. Yang, T. Niu, X. Wang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
K. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Chen, P. Chábera, R. Schaller, M. J. Al-Marri, S. E. Canton, Z. Liang and T. Pullerits, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6244–6250 RSC .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Even, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. A. Alam, A. D. Mohite and W. Nie, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2130 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, R. Munir, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. Li, T. Niu, D.-M. Smilgies, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. D. Mohite, K. Zhao, A. Amassian and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707166 CrossRef .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef .
R. J. Stoddard, A. Rajagopal, R. L. Palmer, I. L. Braly, A. K. Y. Jen and H. W. Hillhouse, ACS Energy Lett, 2018, 3, 1261–1268 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, M. Saski, P. Yadav, D. Bi, N. Pellet, J. Lewiński, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3345–3351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Li, J. Zhang, T. Liu, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4315–4318 RSC .
N. D. Pham, C. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, S. Zhang, G. Will, A. Bou, J. Bisquert, P. E. Shaw, A. Du, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806479 CrossRef .
X. Lian, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, M. Qin, T. R. Andersen, J. Ling, G. Wu, X. Lu, D. Yang and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19423–19429 RSC .
X. Lian, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Tian, M. Qin, J. Li, T. R. Andersen, G. Wu, X. Lu and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18980–18986 RSC .
C. M. M. Soe, C. C. Stoumpos, M. Kepenekian, B. Traoré, H. Tsai, W. Nie, B. Wang, C. Katan, R. Seshadri, A. D. Mohite, J. Even, T. J. Marks and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16297–16309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, P. Wang, M. C. Tang, D. Barrit, W. Ke, J. Liu, T. Luo, Y. Liu, T. Niu, D. M. Smilgies, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Jin, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Amassian, S. F. Liu and K. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2684–2694 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Lian, M. Qin, J. Li, T. R. Andersen, X. Lu, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900375 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Dalvi and P. J. Rossky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 13603–13607 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. Van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, I. W. H. Oswald, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, N. Zhou, O. F. Williams, Z. Guo, L. Yan, H. Hu, Z. Chen, X. Xiao, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, J. Huang, A. M. Moran, H. Ade, J. R. Neilson and W. You, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1276 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J. S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fu, H. Liu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900221 CrossRef .
H. Pan, X. Zhao, X. Gong, Y. Shen and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1813–1819 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Pan, J. Hu, S. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Chen, X. Liu, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, ACS Energy Lett, 2020, 5, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milić, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Ye, J. Tong, J. Hu, C. Xiao, H. Lu, S. P. Dunfield, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. Hao, K. Wang, Q. Zhao, Z. Chen, H. Hu, W. You, J. J. Berry, F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000082 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Cui, K. J. Jiang, J. H. Huang, Q. Q. Zhang, M. J. Su, L. M. Yang, Y. L. Song and X. Q. Zhou, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lermer, S. T. Birkhold, I. L. Moudrakovski, P. Mayer, L. M. Schoop, L. Schmidt-Mende and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6560–6566 CrossRef CAS .
I. García-Benito, C. Quarti, V. I. E. Queloz, Y. J. Hofstetter, D. Becker-Koch, P. Caprioglio, D. Neher, S. Orlandi, M. Cavazzini, G. Pozzi, J. Even, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Vaynzof and G. Grancini, Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 946 CrossRef .
S. Tan, N. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Li, G. Liu, P. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Lu, W. Sun, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803024 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, J. V. Milić, A. Ummadisingu, J. Y. Seo, J. H. Im, H. S. Kim, Y. Liu, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
B. El Cohen, Y. Li, Q. Meng and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2588–2597 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Hoffman, W. Ke, M. Chen, H. Tsai, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12226–12238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safdari, P. H. Svensson, M. T. Hoang, I. Oh, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15638–15646 RSC .
Z. Yao, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, X. Li, J. Han, M. Tai, Y. Zhou, J. Li, F. Hao and H. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 6704–6712 RSC .
T. Yu, L. Zhang, J. Shen, Y. Fu and Y. Fu, Dalt. Trans., 2014, 43, 13115–13121 RSC .
K. Xiong, W. Liu, S. J. Teat, L. An, H. Wang, T. J. Emge and J. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 230, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef .
L. Lv, Y. Xu, H. Fang, W. Luo, F. Xu, L. Liu, B. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Yang, W. Hu and A. Dong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13589–13596 RSC .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Proppe, M. Wei, B. Chen, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14180–14189 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. de Holanda, R. Szostak, P. E. Marchezi, L. G. T. A. Duarte, J. C. Germino, T. D. Z. Atvars and A. F. Nogueira, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1970084 CrossRef .
H. Zheng, G. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan and S. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800051 CrossRef .
H. Lai, B. Kan, T. Liu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie, T. Zhou, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11639–11646 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Cho, Y. Zhang, S. Orlandi, M. Cavazzini, I. Zimmermann, A. Lesch, N. Tabet, G. Pozzi, G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5467–5474 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, D. Liu, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Li, H. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. David Chen, W. Yang, L. Chen and S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 125133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Wang, B. Zhao, S. Qu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, L. Sui, K. Yuan, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and Z. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1120–1127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Hu, Y. Chen, Y. Li, M. Wei and M. Wei, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8624–8628 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Hu, M. Long, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, M. Qin, X. Lu and M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett, 2020, 5, 1422–1429 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 791–800 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, T. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Liu, L. Jiang, X. Mao, R. F. Lu, W. Q. Deng and K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4402–4406 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, T. Wu, J. Liu, W. Q. Deng and K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2518–2522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. J. Shi, M. Zhang, Y. L. Cen, W. H. Guo and Y. H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11575–11586 RSC .
Z. Xu, X. Liu, Y. Li, X. Liu, T. Yang, C. Ji, S. Han, Y. Xu, J. Luo and Z. Sun, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15757–15761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, L. Zhang, L. Wu, J. Yan, Y. Lin, K. Wang, W. L. Mao and B. Zou, Angew. Chemie, 2019, 131, 15393–15397 CrossRef .
B. A. Connor, L. Leppert, M. D. Smith, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5235–5240 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (a) Crystal structures of 2D and 3D MHPs (upper panel) and schematic of charge carrier transport in 2D MHPs (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) Chemical structures of representative organic cations.	 

 	Fig. 1  Generalized concept of the QW morphology in both the 2D PEA-based and the BA-based spin-casted films (the brown, blue and white balls represent carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen atoms, respectively in the chemical structure of cations). Reprinted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of (a) two parallel growth processes of (MA)[PbI3]·DMF solvate needles and RP phases during the drop casting from DMF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the two possible scenarios for preferred orientation, which depicts two different nucleus orientations at the liquid–air interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing group. (c) Schematic illustration of the subsequent crystal growth mechanism. (d) Degree of vertical orientation with different solvent removal rates, solvent choices and organic spacers (1,3); GIWAXS pattern of most vertically oriented 2D perovskite films based on iso-BA (2) and n-BA (4) cations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of 2D MHP crystal growth in pure DMF (1) and mixed DMF/DMSO (5:5) (2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Connectivity modes in 2D MHPs: (a) edge sharing; (b) corner sharing and (c) face sharing. (d) Schematic of the different cuts along (100), (110) and (111) planes (purple part) leading to different oriented families in 2D MHPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Comparison of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase and Dion–Jacobson phase in MHPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystal structures of the 3D MAPbI3 and the 2D perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10. Inset: a PEA cation in the organic layers. Atom colours: Pb = turquoise; I = purple; N = blue; C = gray. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram to show the preparation of quasi 2D perovskite films with and without vacuum poling treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68 Copyright 2019 Elsevier Publishing group. (b) XRD patterns of the (BA,PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films and (c) XRD patterns of NEA, ALA, PGA, BA0.9NEA0.1, BA0.9ALA0.1, BA0.9PGA0.1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  GIWAXS images of (a) PEA, (b) PEA + NH4Cl, (c) PEA + DMSO and (d) PEA + NH4Cl + DMSO based 2D MHPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) XRD patterns of 2D MHP films fabricated with different additives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles of 3D–2D graded perovskite films deposited on NiO/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. (b) IMVS derived carrier recombination lifetimes for the different devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) Spatial CPD maps (1.5 × 1.5 μm2) of perovskites samples with PEAI incorporated at 0, 1.5, 3.0, 4.5 mol% and 10 mol% measured under dark and under illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) XRD patterns of thin films vs. bulk materials of (BA)2(MA)Pb2I7, (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10, and (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) View of the unit cell, which includes two individual perovskite layers offset by half perovskite cavity length (∼3.15 Å) normal to the b axis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Publishing group. (c) TRPL kinetics of the perovskite layer on a glass substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 2  Partial degradation of BA2MA4Pb5I16 in humid air.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (111) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing group. (b) XRD pattern of a drop-cast 2D-perovskite film annealed at 50 °C showing near-perfect vertical orientation of 2D-perovskite crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Plots of the [101] crystal orientation ratio and average crystal size of the large-n 2D perovskite phase in layered perovskite films against the MACl doping ratio. (b) Schematic diagram of the structural variation of layered perovskite films upon MACl doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) The C−2–V measured under dark conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Optical image of the 2D square sheets. Scale bar, 10 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102 Copyright 2015 Science Publishing group. (b) SEM images of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite crystals. Scale bar 200 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) AFM images of the hot-cast BA2MA4Pb5I16 films from precursor solutions using DMF, DMSO, and mixture of DMF and DMSO, (d) XRD pattern of the hot-cast BA2MA4Pb5I16 films from precursor solutions using DMF, DMSO, and a mixture of DMF and DMSO, and (e) full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the (111) reflection as a function of precursor solvent used for thin film fabrication. Reprinted with permission from ref. 104 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (f) Illustration of the crystallization process without DMSO addition (case 1) and with DMSO addition (case 2) to the DMF solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (g) XRD measurement of the (BA)2(MA)2Sn3I10 thin film growth using different solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Temperature-dependent conductivity measurement of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 polycrystalline films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) High magnification plan-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the Csx-2D perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108 Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of n-butylammonium and iso-butylammonium cations. (b) XRD patterns of room-temperature and hot-cast fabricated (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskites. (c) TRTS for RT (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 films excited at 400 nm under an excitation density of 3.4 × 1013 ph per cm2 per pulse. Reprinted from with permission ref. 109 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photographs of GAx(CsFAMA)1−x perovskite films containing different fractions of GA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the influence of GA+ on the formation of the 2D perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) XRD patterns of the (BA,GA)2MA4Pb5I16 perovskite films without and with formamide addition on different substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) View of the unit cells of the (GA) (MA)nPbnI3n+1 (n = 3) perovskites along the crystallographic a-axis highlighting the ordered crystal packing of the GA and MA cations between the perovskite layers. (b) AFM images of solution-processed thin films of GAMA3Pb3I10 as a function of delay time for antisolvent chlorobenzene (CB) dripping. The scale bar is 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic model illustrating the self-assembly of the ACI perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Normalized photoluminescence spectra from the glass (back) side (upper spectra) and from the front (air) side (lower spectra) (b) relative formation energy difference between different 2D OIHPs (n = 1). DFT calculation of formation energy for PEA2PbI4, oF1PEA2PbI4, mF1PEA2PbI4, and pF1PEA2PbI4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing group. (c) TRMC comparison of out-of-plane and in-plane transport for n = 1 2D perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) Transient photocurrent decay of the 0.06F3EAI based and reference device, respectively. (e) Schematic representation of the effect of F3EAI on bounded excitons in layered 2D perovskite [(BA)1−x(F3EA)x]2(MA)3Pb4I13 materials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Images of perovskite films and the corresponding UV-vis absorption and steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of BFAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite compositions (n = 1–4) deposited on FTO/cp-TiO2/mp-TiO2 substrates (B = PDMA). Reprinted with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Summary of (b) absorption and (c) PL in energy for n = 1 to 5 of 3-AMP and 4-AMP series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) XRD patterns of CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 (x = 0 to 0.05) perovskites. (b) SEM images of perovskite films obtained from the CsPbI3·xEDAPbI4 additive precursor (x = 0, 0.0125, 0.025, and 0.05). (c) XRD pattern and images of the CsPbI3·0.025EDAPbI4 film heated at 100 °C in a dry box for 1 week. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145 Copyright 2017 Science Publishing group. 2D GI-XRD patterns of (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 thin films (d) at 190 °C and (e) at room temperature. (f) XRD patterns for the stability test; (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 films in ambient air; inset: digital photographs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2018 Elsevier Publishing group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM images of 2- and 4-monolayer-thick CsPbBr3 nanosheets synthesized at 150 and 60 °C, respectively. Inset: side view of stacking CsPbBr3 nanosheets synthesized at 60 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD of BA-treated MAPbI3 films, BAI-treated MAPbI3 films, and the bottom 3D MAPbI3 films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) FTIR spectra of the 2D (VBA)2PbI4 films with various UV exposure times. Features related to the disappearance of vinyl CC modes and appearance of N–H stretching modes are highlighted with arrows. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical equations representing the reaction of BA and BAI with 3D MAPbI3.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
