Facile infiltration of semiconducting polymer into mesoporous electrodes for hybrid solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01135A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01135A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3051-3058Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFacile infiltration of semiconducting polymer into mesoporous electrodes for hybrid solar cells†

        
          
            Agnese 
            Abrusci
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            I-Kang 
            Ding
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mohammed 
            Al-Hashimi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tamar 
            Segal-Peretz
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Michael D. 
            McGehee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Heeney
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gitti L. 
            Frey
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Henry J. 
            Snaith
          
        
      *a
aClarendon Laboratory, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK. E-mail: h.snaith1@physics.ox.ac.uk
bMaterials Science and Engineering, 476 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA94305, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry and Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
dDepartment of Materials Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, 32000, Haifa, Israel
Received 
      6th February 2011
    , Accepted 9th May 2011First published on 20th June 2011AbstractHybrid composites of semiconducting polymers and metal oxides are promising combinations for solar cells. However, forming a well-controlled nanostructure with bicontinuous interpenetrating networks throughout the photoactive film is difficult to achieve. Pre-structured “mesoporous” metal oxide electrodes can act as a well-defined template for latter polymer infiltration. However, the long range infiltration of polymer chains into contorted porous channels has appeared to elude the scientific community, limiting the advancement of this technology. Here we present a structural and electronic characterisation of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) infiltrated into mesoporous dye-sensitized TiO2. Through a combination of techniques we achieve uniform pore filling of P3HT up to depths of over 4 μm, but the volumetric fraction of the pores filled with polymer is less than 24%. Despite this low pore-filling, exceptionally efficient charge collection is demonstrated, illustrating that pore filling is not the critical issue for mesoporous hybrid solar cells.

Broader context
Semiconducting polymers hold great promise for solar cell technology since the basic material and manufacturing costs are extremely low. There are diverse approaches, but one of the most promising concepts is a “hybrid” approach, where transparent n-type metal oxides are combined with p-type semiconducting polymers. Charges are only generated when light is absorbed in the polymer in close proximity to the metal oxide heterojunction. The correct meso-length scale is set by first creating the mesostructured oxide and subsequently in filling the pores with the polymer. However, the two main issues thought to be responsible for suboptimal operation of these solar cells are an inability to effectively infiltrate semiconducting polymers into porous networks and ineffective charge transport within the polymer phase due to non-crystalline, un-orientated polymer chains. Here we demonstrate that polymers effectively penetrate porous films with pore sizes of 20 nm and film thickness up to 7 μm. We also show that hole-transport with this infiltrated polymer phase is very effective, resulting in well operating dye-sensitized solar cells. This indicates that switching focus to improving the charge generation at the polymer–metal oxide interface will yield major improvements for hybrid solar cells.

1. Introduction

Polymer–oxide solar cells, composed of mesoporous metal oxide electrodes infiltrated with light absorbing semiconducting polymers,1 have the potential to deliver high power conversion efficiencies while being compatible with low cost large area chemical processing.2 However, until recently solar-to-electrical power conversion efficiencies have remained below 1%. For efficient solar cell operation, a significant fraction of sunlight needs to be absorbed in the photoactive layer, excitons formed in the polymer need to be split at the polymer–oxide heterojunction, and the photo-generated charges need to be collected at the electrodes. The latter requires effective percolation for both charge carriers, electrons and holes, in the oxide and polymer phases respectively.
The two main issues thought to be responsible for the relatively poor operation of polymer–oxide solar cells are an inability to effectively infiltrate semiconducting polymers into random porous networks3 and ineffective charge transport within the polymer phase due to non-crystalline, un-orientated polymer chains.4
Recently, there have been two similar studies reported, where solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells have been fabricated employing poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) as the hole-transport material with solar power conversion efficiencies around 2.5%.5,6 Without dye-sensitization efficiencies remain below 1%. In these studies, the mesoporous oxide electrodes were fabricated from sintered TiO2 nanocrystals with film thicknesses around 1 μm. The fact that efficient solar cells can be made, where a semiconducting polymer is infiltrated into relatively thick mesoporous electrodes, raises the following question: does the path to improvement require better pore infiltration and charge transport?
Here we present a structural and electronic characterisation of P3HT–TiO2 solar cells sensitised by an organic dye D131.7 The dye is employed to ensure effective charge generation, enabling the independent probing of other electronic properties of the hole-transporter. We study the P3HT pore infiltration into the mesostructured oxide by XPS depth profiling and cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy, and find that uniform pore filling of P3HT can be achieved to depths of over 4 μm. Though the pore filling is uniform, it is not complete and we estimate that the pore filling fraction is in a range between 6 and 24% depending upon the precise processing conditions. Despite the low pore filling fraction, the polymer appears to form a “wetting film” over the entire internal surface of the dye-sensitized mesoporous electrode, and this wetting layer of on average only a few nm thick is sufficiently capable of regenerating the dye and transporting the holes out of the device. Charge collection efficiencies of up to 98% are estimated from transient electronic measurements. Notably, the photocurrent is almost exclusively generated from light absorbed in the dye, indicating that significant future improvements are likely to be achieved by improving the electron transfer from the photoexcited polymer into the TiO2.
2. Experimental
Solar cell assembly

          Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass sheets (15 Ω □−1 Pilkington) were etched with zinc powder and HCl (2 M) to obtain the required electrode pattern. The sheets were then washed with soap (2% Hellmanex in water), de-ionized water, acetone, methanol and finally treated under oxygen plasma for 10 minutes to remove the last traces of organic residues. The FTO sheets were subsequently coated with a compact layer of TiO2 (100 nm) by aerosol spray pyrolysis deposition at 450 °C, using air as the carrier gas.
The standard Dyesol TiO2 paste 18NR-T (∼20 nm in diameter, 60% porosity) was previously diluted down 1:2 and 1:3.5 in anhydrous ethanol and stirred and ultrasonicated. The paste was then doctor-bladed by hand using 2 or 1 layers of scotch tape and a pipette on the TiO2 compact layer coated FTO sheets to get a TiO2 average thickness from 1 to 6 μm. The sheets were then slowly heated to 550 °C (ramped over 1½ hours) and baked at this temperature for 30 minutes in air. After cooling, slides were cut down to size and soaked in an aqueous bath of 15 mM TiCl4 at 70 °C for 1 h. After rinsing with water, ethanol and drying in air, they were subsequently baked once more at 550 °C for 45 min in air. The resulting pore sizes after all processing were approximately 20 nm and the porosity approximately 60% as determined by nitrogen desorption. After final sintering the samples were cooled down to 70 °C and finally introduced in a dye solution for 1 hour.
A yellow indolene dye was used (D131) at 0.3 mM in a 1:1 volume ratio of tert-butanol and acetonitrile. This dye was chosen since at present we find that it gives the best and most reproducible results in terms of overall efficiency with P3HT.
It is not an obvious choice, but since its absorption maximum does not coincide with the absorption maximum of P3HT, the filtering effect from the light absorbed in the P3HT is less severe than with other more broadly absorbing dyes. P3HT was synthesised by according to the published route.8
Briefly, to a 0.2 M THF solution of 2,5-dibromo-3-hexylthiophene at 0 °C was added 0.98 equivalents of a 0.98 M solution of n-butylmagnesium chloride in THF. The mixture was allowed to warm to RT and then stirred for 1 h. The mixture was warmed to 50 °C, and Ni(dppp)Cl2 (1 mol%) was added directly as a powder, and the resulting mixture was refluxed for 4 h. The reaction was cooled and precipitated into a well stirred solution of methanol (160 mL)/25% HCl (40 mL). After stirring for 1 h, the resulting suspension was filtered directly into a Soxhlet funnel. This was extracted (Soxhlet) with methanol (12 h), acetone (12 h) and hexane (until no further colour was removed ca. 16 h). The polymer was dried, dissolved in hot chlorobenzene, filtered and precipitated into acetone (twice). Number-average (Mn) and weight-average (Mw) were 27500 g mol−1 and 35000 g mol−1 respectively, as determined by Agilent Technologies 1200 series GPC running in chlorobenzene at 80 °C, using two PL mixed B columns in series, and calibrated against narrow polydispersity polystyrene standards. Regioregularity was determined to be greater than 97% by NMR integration of the methylene protons. P3HT was dissolved at 3 wt% in chlorobenzene and heated at 70 °C for 1 hour. An additive solution of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide salt (Li-TFSI) with 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP) in acetonitrile was prepared to coat the dye-sensitized films prior to P3HT spin-coating. The dyed films were rinsed briefly in acetonitrile and dried in air for 1 minute. Then a small quantity of additive solution (25 μL) was dispensed onto each substrate and left to wet the films for 20 s before spin-coating at 1000 rpm for 60 s in air. Then P3HT was subsequently spun on each TiO2 substrate. The films were then placed in a thermal evaporator where 150 nm thick silver electrodes were deposited through a shadow mask under high vacuum (10−6 mbar). The active areas of the devices were defined by metal optical masks with a round aperture of 2.5 mm giving an area of 0.0491 cm2. We note that the masks used were single aperture and all light was excluded from entering the sides of devices by measuring them in a black box sample holder.
Transient photocurrent and photovoltage decay technique
Recombination and collection lifetime as well as charge collection efficiency were performed by a similar method to O'Regan et al.9 and as described elsewhere.10,11
Cross-section SEM
The cross-section SEM images were acquired with a FEI XL30 Sirion SEM operated at an accelerating voltage of 5 V.

XPS depth profiling

XPS spectra were acquired with a PHI 5000 Versaprobe system using a microfocused (100 μm, 25 W) Al Kα X-ray beam with a photoelectron takeoff angle of 45°. A dual-beam charge neutralizer (10 V Ar+ and 30 V electron beam) was used to compensate the charge-up effect. Ar+ ion source was operated at 1 μA and 5 kV, with rastering on an area of 1 mm × 1 mm. In order to calculate the sputter rate, the film thicknesses were measured with a cross-section SEM image. The sputter rate was around 25 nm min−1 for all P3HT-infiltrated mesoporous TiO2 films.
The carbon signal comes from both the dye and P3HT. To subtract the contribution of the dye, a TiO2 film with only the dye and no polymer was first measured in XPS to quantify the carbon concentration. This concentration is subtracted from the other samples that contain both the dye and polymer.1

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)

High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) measurements and energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) measurements were performed using a FEI Titan 80–300 keV S/TEM operating at 200 keV ith filterset to sulfur L2,3 edge (165 eV) or to titanium L2,3 edge (460 eV). Samples for EFTEM examination were thinned using a Focused Ion Beam integrated in the Strata 400 STEM DualBeam system of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM).
3. Results and discussion
A full description of the experimental details is given in the ESI†. Dye-sensitized polymer–oxide solar cells operate most effectively when ionic salts (typically Li-TFSI) and a base (typically 4-tert-butyl pyridine, tBP) are added to the system. We found most reproducibility by spin-coating an acetonitrile solution of the additives (Li-TFSI and tBP) on the dye-sensitized film, before spin-coating the P3HT solution. The addition of Li-TFSI dramatically enhances the charge generation efficiency from the photoexcited dye, and a detailed study of its electronic influence is presented elsewhere.12 For this work regioregular P3HT was dissolved in chlorobenzene at 30 mg mL−1, deposited upon the mesoporous electrodes and spin-coated at 1000 rpm. In order to characterize the influence of the dye, the additives and the film thickness upon the mesopore infiltration with P3HT, we have performed XPS depth profiling.13XPS is sensitive to the surface composition of the film with depth resolution on the order of 5 nm. Since we cannot be sure that the Ar-ion milling uniformly etches the TiO2 and the polymer at the same rate, this technique can only be used to give a qualitative picture of the relative composition as a function of depth within the mesoporous films.
Table 1 The carbon content as calculated from the XPS depth profiling measurements is shown for different TiO2 thicknesses with D131 only, and D131/P3HT combination with and without Li-TFSI + tBP pre-treatment




 

Electrode composition

                  TiO2 1 μm

                  TiO2 2.5 μm

                  TiO2 4 μm





                  Carbon content at the bottom of the film (%)
D131
4.2 ± 0.6
4.9 ± 0.6
NA


 


D131/P3HT
9.6 ± 0.6
7.5 ± 0.5
NA


 


D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT
7.5 ± 0.4
7.5 ± 0.5
6.4 ± 0.5




In Fig. 1(a) we show a cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a 1 μm thick dye-sensitized polymer–oxide solar cell. The layers from left to right are the silver electrode (bright), over-standing or capping layer of P3HT (dark), mesoporous TiO2 infiltrated with P3HT, and fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) transparent conducting electrode. We have used the carbon signal from the XPS in order to probe the presence of the P3HT. Unfortunately, the sulfur signal, unique to P3HT, was too weak to use reliably. The carbon signal arises from both the dye and the P3HT. Hence the average carbon signal from a dye sensitized film without polymer was used as a reference so that the carbon signal contribution from the dye can be subtracted.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a D131/P3HT device on a 1 μm thick mesoporous TiO2 film on FTO. (b) XPS depth profiling image of the same device with the indication of the elements content of a FTO/TiO2/D131/P3HT device. 
In Fig. 1(b) we show the XPS depth profiling for a 1 μm TiO2 thick D131/P3HT device, showing the signals for the carbon, oxygen, titanium and tin. As can be seen there is a significant reduction in the carbon signal when going from the capping layer into the mesoporous film. However, this signal remains significant and approximately constant throughout the entire depth down to the FTO electrode. The coincidence of the drop in the carbon signal, with the drop in the titanium and raise in the tin, indicates that the observed carbon signal is not due to the “knock-in” effect from the Ar-ion beam.
To unambiguously corroborate P3HT infiltration into the mesoporous film we have sectioned the devices into thin (∼50 nm) lamella with a focussed ion beam (FIB) and viewed them with high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). Using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), measured at sub-eV resolution, sulfur and titanium were spatially resolved in a series of energy filtered TEM (EFTEM) micrographs. The combination of HRTEM and EFTEM measurements in a single location enables us to determine the distribution of these elements across the film. In Fig. 2 we show the bright field TEM image, the sulfur L2,3 edge transition (165 eV) EFTEM image, the titanium L2,3 edge (460 eV) EFTEM image, and combined EFTEM images where the sulfur (P3HT) is in blue and the titanium (TiO2) is in red. Images are shown for dye-sensitized TiO2 infiltrated with P3HT (Fig. 2(a)–(d)), and dye-sensitized TiO2 coated with Li-TFSI and infiltrated with P3HT (Fig. 2(e)–(h)).
 Fig. 2  (a–d) High resolution cross-sectional TEM images of dye-sensitized TiO2 infiltrated with P3HT (left panel) and (e–h) dye-sensitized TiO2 coated with Li-TFSI + tBP and infiltrated with P3HT (right panel), under bright-field conditions (a and e), and corresponding energy-filtered TEM images of the same sample region using the sulfur L2/3 edge transition (165 eV) (b and f), or the titanium L2/3 edge (460 eV) (c and g). Bright intensity in (b and f) and (c and g) indicates the locations of sulfur-rich or titanium-rich regions in the cross-section, respectively. For clarity, an overlay of (b) and (c), and of (f) and (g), are presented in (d) and (h) respectively, where titanium-rich regions are red and sulfur-rich regions are blue. Voids are bright in the bright filed images (a and e) and dark in the overlay images (d and h). 
The bright-field TEM image in Fig. 2(a) shows the highly scattering TiO2 nanoparticles in grey, while the bright regions are the weakly scattering organic materials.
The energy-filtered TEM image of the same area, Fig. 2(b), shows intensity contrast between light regions containing sulfur and dark regions that do not contain sulfur. Similarly, the titanium energy-filtered TEM image in Fig. 2(c) maps the distribution of TiO2 nanoparticles within the same region of the film, showing the mesoporous character of the TiO2 film, as expected. Because P3HT is the only sulfur-baring component in the dye-sensitized P3HT-infiltrated TiO2 film, the spatial distribution of sulfur across the film reflects the location of the P3HT polymer in the film.
The sulfur distribution relative to the titanium distribution is analyzed by overlaying Fig. 2(b) and (c), as presented in Fig. 2(d). This analysis clearly indicates that the sulfur, and hence the P3HT polymer, is located in domains homogenously distributed through the entire mesoporous TiO2 layer. This observation confirms the XPS results showing that the P3HT indeed infiltrates through the entire mesoporous TiO2 and is, moreover, evenly distributed in the film.

HRTEM analysis was conducted also for the dye-sensitized TiO2 coated with Li-TFSI and infiltrated with P3HT as shown in Fig. 2(e)–(h). It can be seen from Fig. 2(f) and (h) that the number of sulfur domains and their density in this film are higher compared to those in the film prepared with no Li-salts, Fig. 2(b) and (d); in addition, the P3HT capping layer thickness is also increased. Although the Li-salts also includes sulfur atoms, the abundant sulfur signal in Fig. 2(f) could not be attributed to the Li-salts alone and has significant contributions from the infiltrated P3HT.
Importantly, the high sulfur abundance in the film treated with Li-TFSI compared to that that was not treated with the Li-salt, indicates that P3HT infiltration into the mesoporous TiO2 film is assisted by the presence of Li-salt in the pores, resulting in a higher degree of pore filling.
To quantitatively estimate the pore filling fraction, we have employed UV-Vis absorption measurements, in combination with capping layer thickness measurements to estimate the pore filling fraction (PFF) in these films.
In brief, the total equivalent thickness of P3HT in the film (dtot_P3HT) is estimated by measuring the UV-Vis transmission spectra and comparing this to a solid-film of known thickness.
The capping or overstanding layer thickness (dOS) is estimated from cross-section SEM images, and subtracted from the total P3HT thickness to give the equivalent thickness of P3HT within the porous titania film (dpores_P3HT). The pore filling fraction (PFF) is then calculated by dividing the product of the TiO2 film thickness (dTiO2) times the TiO2 porosity (pTiO2 ≈ 0.6) by the equivalent thickness of P3HT within the pores (dpores_P3HT). This is represented by the simple equation given below: (1)
In Table 2 we show the estimated pore filling fraction for the devices with a range of thicknesses, with and without the additives (Li-TFSI and tBP). The pore filling fraction is in qualitative agreement with the XPS depth profiling for the devices without the additives, in as much as there is little drop in the pore filling fraction with increasing thickness. With the presence of the additives there is a drop in pore filling with thickness.
Table 2 
          P3HT overlayer for the different film compositions measured by cross-section SEM. Equivalent thickness of P3HT into the mesoporous TiO2 dyed film (dpores) is estimated viaUV-Vis measurements at 630 nm, where the dye absorption (dos) is negligible. Pore filling fraction is calculated as explained in eqn (1)





                  TiO2 thickness

Electrode composition

                  P3HT overlayer/nm

                  P3HT
                  dpores_P3HT/nm

                  Pore filling fraction(%)




1 μm
D131/P3HT
177
64
8.1


D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT
155
187
23.8


2.5 μm
D131/P3HT
102
236
9.5


D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT
130
293
11.6


4 μm
D131/P3HT
40
212
6.7


D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT
75
273
7.6




However, the starting pore filling fraction for the thin films (∼1 μm) is much higher with than without the additives, and remains higher throughout the thickness range studied. Notably, the pore filling fraction is only between 6 and 24% for all the D131/P3HT films and it consistently increases with pre-treatment of the film with Li-TFSI.
Interestingly, both the UV-Vis pore filling estimations and the TEM images suggest that the pore filling fraction is enhanced by the addition of the Li-TFSI solution prior to P3HT coating (Table 2). Beyond this, the Li-TFSI has had a profound effect on the total amount of P3HT left after spin-coating, where for instance the total equivalent P3HT thickness is around 423 nm when coated on a 2.5 μm thick mesoporous film with dye and Li-TFSI, as compared to 338 nm without Li-TFSI and 263 nm when coated under identical conditions on a flat substrate. Our current understanding of the pore filling process cannot explain this additional increase with the presence of the Li-TFSI.
Considering the pore filling process, as spin-coating proceeds, the solvent evaporates and the polymer concentrates into the porous film, until it crashes out of solution or gels to become kinetically immobile, at a concentration of what will become the pore filling fraction. The remaining material which has already formed a skin or not yet concentrated into the pores becomes the overstanding layer.13 As the solvent continues to evaporate, voids appear within the porous film. The only means by which it is possible to get significantly more material into or onto the porous film with the addition of Li-TFSI is if either the viscosity of the P3HT solution is increased resulting in a thicker wet film in the initial stages of spin-coating, or by some unconsidered attraction causing the polymer to concentrate into the pores directly after solution deposition. In fact when the P3HT solution is deposited upon the film we let the solution rest for 20 seconds prior to spin-coating. This is to enable the solution to entirely wet the internal surface of the porous film. We varied this resting time from 5 to 80 seconds on dye-sensitized films incorporating Li-TFSI, but only saw marginal variations in the total equivalent thickness of P3HT.
This suggests that whichever process is occurring, polymer concentrating into the pores, or changes in viscosity, it is happening relatively quickly. In order to assess the influence of Li-TFSI upon the viscosity of the P3HT solution we added a small quantity of Li-TFSI in acetonitrile to a P3HT solution. Instantly upon addition, the P3HT solution darkened and gelled indicating that an increase in viscosity is causing the increased quantity of P3HT during the casting process (see ESI†).
A possible explanation to the gelling is that the P3HT is becoming doped. When P3HT is p-doped, the oxidized polymer chains become more planar and rigid, resulting in a characteristic red shift in the ground state absorption and reduced solubility or gelling in a solution.14 In Fig. 3(a) we show the UV-Vis absorption spectra for dye-sensitized TiO2 coated with P3HT with and without pre-coating with Li-TFSI. For the film without Li-TFSI, there is the expected ground-state absorption from P3HT and the sensitizer D131, but no absorption in the infrared region. For the film with the addition of Li-TFSI there are also strong absorptions in the IR with peaks centred around 900 and 2000 nm characteristic of the absorption of oxidized P3HT.15 There is negligible absorption in this region from the dye-sensitized films with the addition of Li-TFSI when no P3HT is added.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectra of D131, P3HT, D131/P3HT on a 2.5 μm TiO2 film with and without additives (Li-TFSI + tBP) with the inset of chemical structure of P3HT and D131. (b) Conductivity measurements for bare TiO2 and Al2O3, coated with P3HT where no additives, Li-TFSI or Li-TFSI and tBP, are added. The conductivity of solid state electrolytes,17 PEDOT:PSS,18 ionic liquids19 and spiro-OMeTAD20 with the additives, is also shown for comparison. 
Knowing the molar extinction coefficient ε for the hole on P3HT, estimated by Shuttle et al. to be 4 × 104 M−1 cm−1 at 980 nm,16 we can estimate the hole density using the following relationship: (2)where d is the film thickness, NA is Avogadro's number, and OD is the optical density of the film at 980 nm. If we take d to be the total film thickness, we estimate a hole density (p) of 7.5 × 1015 cm−3, which represents the average hole density within the device. If we instead consider the P3HT equivalent thickness (dtot_P3HT), we estimate hole density within the P3HT to be 3.5 × 1016 cm−3.
To independently confirm p-doping of the P3HT we have measured the conductivity of the mesoporous films coated with P3HT with the various additional additives. These data are shown in Fig. 3(b), where we can see that the conductivity of P3HT within the mesoporous oxide is increased by up to 3 orders of magnitude. We note that almost identical behaviour is observed for P3HT cast in mesoporous Al2O3, an insulator, illustrating that the increased conductivity is indeed due to enhanced conductivity in the P3HT phase.
As of yet we have not attempted to explain the mechanism behind the p-doping of P3HT: it is unexpected since Li-TFSI should not be redox active. One possibility is that impurities in the Li-TFSI which are strong acids, such as bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amine, are oxidizing the P3HT. To test this we have compared 99% pure Li-TFSI (the usual material we use) with 99.95% pure Li-TFSI, and we observed very similar changes to the absorption spectra, suggesting that impurities are not the main cause of the p-doping. Another possibility is that the doping is a result of P3HT reacting with atmospheric oxygen and/or water, and this reaction is catalysed by the presence of the salt. To test this we fabricated and sealed films in a nitrogen filled glove box, and compared to identical films fabricated in air over a period of time. For the films made and measured in air, the absorption spectra indicate an initial doping, but this doping gets significantly stronger over a period of a week stored in the dark. For the samples fabricated and sealed nitrogen (∼1 ppm oxygen) there is negligible signature of oxidized P3HT initially, however, there is a small absorption in the IR after 7 days stored in the glove box. These spectra are shown in the ESI†, and the strength of the signal for the samples fabricated in nitrogen is markedly lower (approximately 5 fold lower) than those fabricated in air.
Additionally to absorption measurements, we have also made photoluminescence (PL) measurements of mesoporous TiO2 films infiltrated with P3HT, with and without the addition of Li-TFSI and sealed in nitrogen or fabricated and measured in air. It could be expected that the presence of the radical cation on the doped P3HT will quench the luminescence. The presence of air alone results in a significant quenching of the PL, with respect to the sealed films, and the addition of Li-TFSI for the samples prepared in air results in a further 2 orders of magnitude reduction in PL intensity. Notably, for the films which are prepared in nitrogen with the addition of Li-TFSI, the PL intensity is slightly lower than the neat P3HT prepared in air, consistent with the marginal level of doping. The absorption and photoluminescence measurements are consistent with atmospheric oxygen and/or water in the air being the predominant cause for the p-doping, though Li-TFSI is required to help catalyse the reaction. The small levels of doping observed for the samples prepared in the glove box could be due to residual water or oxygen present in the solvents.
Aside from the subtleties of the influence of the ions, we have clearly demonstrated that thick porous films can be “uniformly” filled with semiconducting polymer, but that the filling fraction is relatively low, for instance for the 4 μm thick films the filling fraction both with and without Li-TFSI is around 7%. The critical questions are whether this small amount of P3HT forms a sufficiently interconnected network of polymer chains to enable effective hole-transport out of the device, and whether the P3HT uniformly wets the dye-coated pore walls to enable effective dye regeneration (hole-transfer from the photoexcited dye). In fact it is an open question whether regeneration of the dye could be facilitated by holes hopping between the dye molecules themselves to reach the P3HT. If hole hopping in the dye was a significant effect complete wetting would not be necessary, since a polymer chain far away from a photoexcited dye could still accept the hole once it had diffused to an adjacent dye molecule.
The only way to be certain of the effectiveness of the polymer infiltration is to characterise complete solar cells, and in Fig. 4(a) we show the current–voltage curves for complete devices with the addition of Li-TFSI and tBP with thicknesses of 1, 2.5 and 4 μm, measured under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight of 100 mW cm−2. Incredibly, all film thicknesses perform similarly, despite the filling fraction dropping from over 24 to 7% over this range, and the best performing device is the 2.5 μm thick film with a pore filling fraction of only 11%. Our best “hero cell” to date for this thickness has given a power conversion efficiency of 3.2% under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 simulated sunlight.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics for complete devices with the addition of Li-TFSI and tBP for 1, 2.5 and 4 μm TiO2 thickness measured under AM 1.5. (b) Transport rates (ktrans), left y-axis, and charge collection efficiency, right y-axis, for D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT devices with TiO2 thickness ranging from 1 to 6.8 μm are shown under background white light generated from an LED array with an equivalent intensity to 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5, calculated as inverse lifetime of the exponential decay of the photocurrent signal is also shown. 
We note that the high extinction coefficient dye employed (D131) absorbs over 90% of the light over the photoactive range within the first micron of the film. If charge transport was hindered by low pore filling fractions, we would expect a dramatic drop in efficiency with increasing film thickness as recombination losses increase. Since this does not happen, the comparable photocurrents suggest that the P3HT at the bottom of the pores in the 4 μm thick films is just as capable of both regenerating the dye and transporting the holes out of the device as in the 1 micron thick film.
Considering the low pore filling fractions, charge collection through 4 μm thick films is quite remarkable. For simplicity, if we assume the pores to be cylindrical and uniformly wet with P3HT, the thickness d of the shell of P3HT would be related to the pore filling fraction PFF by: (3)where δd is the thickness of the shell and r the radius of the cylinder. Assuming a diameter of 20 nm of the TiO2 pores and a P3HT pore filling fraction of 15%, then the shell thickness would only be 1 nm.
To quantify the charge transport and charge collection efficiency in this hybrid composite, we have employed small perturbation transient photocurrent decay measurements. For these measurements, we optically biased the cells with white light generated from an LED array, to create conditions similar to those under sunlight at short-circuit. We simultaneously exposed the solar cells to a short pulse (100 μs) of green light, generated from green LEDs, in order to photoexcite the dye and measured the transient decay of the small perturbation in the photocurrent and photovoltage. As well as measuring the charge collection rate, we can estimate the charge recombination lifetime (τe), by holding a constant current through the cell and measuring the voltage perturbation to the light pulse. With knowledge of both the charge collection rate (kcoll) and the charge recombination rate (krec = 1/τe) we can estimate the charge collection efficiency (ηcoll) at short-circuit as ηcoll = kcoll/(kcoll + krec). In Fig. 4(b) we show the transport rate (left y-axis) and the charge collection efficiency (right y-axis) measured under conditions equivalent to full sun illumination at 100 mW cm−2 for devices ranging from 1 to 7 μm in thickness. The key observation here is that both the charge collection efficiency and the transport rate are relatively independent of film thickness over a range of 1 to 6.8 μm, and the charge collection efficiency is over 90% over this entire range. We have not presented the charge recombination lifetime data since it is not central to the discussion, but the charge lifetimes also remain relatively invariant for the range of film thicknesses studied.
We have demonstrated that thick mesoporous films can be uniformly filled with P3HT, and even though the pore filling fraction is very low, this P3HT is capable of efficiently carrying the charge out of the solar cell. The remaining question is whether the photocurrent originates from the dye, the P3HT or both. In Fig. 5 we show the spectral response for the 2.5 μm thick device, along with the UV-Vis absorption spectra for a 1 μm thick TiO2 film coated with dye (+Li-TFSI), infiltrated with P3HT and both coated with dye (+Li-TFSI) and P3HT.
 Fig. 5  Spectral response for the 2.5 μm thick device with the UV-Vis absorption spectra for a 1 μm thick TiO2 film coated with dye (+Li-TFSI), infiltrated with P3HT and both coated with dye (+Li-TFSI) and P3HT. The peak incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is 53% at 425 nm. 
The peak incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is 53% at 425 nm, but it drops to approximately zero by 600 nm where the P3HT still absorbs strongly. It is apparent from the spectral response that all the photocurrent is generated from the light absorbed in the dye, and in fact the P3HT within the pores is likely to be acting as a filter competing light absorption by the dye. Integrating the IPCE over the AM 1.5 solar spectrum from 300 to 750 nm gives an estimated short-circuit photocurrent 3.8 mA cm−2. This is in a similar range, though slightly lower than the 4.7 mA cm−2 measured under simulated sunlight. These solar cells usually improve under light soaking, and the vastly different light intensities for the spectral response (∼1 mW cm−2 monochromatic) and simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) is likely to be the source of the difference.
Integrating the absorption spectra for the D131 + P3HT system over the same spectral range gives an estimate for the maximum possible photocurrent that could be generated from the light absorbed in a 1 μm thick film to be 17.5 mA cm−2. Complete absorption of sunlight over the photoactive region is a long way from complete photocurrent generation, however, if the P3HT can be “activated” to achieve this, or other more suitable polymers employed with the remaining parameters staying constant (Voc 0.87 V and FF 0.68), this would lead to a 10.4% efficiency solar cell. The reason why the P3HT generates negligible photocurrent could be for a number of reasons. In this precise configuration, the strong doping of the P3HT does result in significant quenching of the photoluminescence, as shown in the ESI†, indicating that charge generation will have to compete with a much more rapid decay channel than in the neat film. In order to get highly efficient polymer based DSCs it is therefore a likely requirement to obtain effective operation without the ions, or employ polymers which are not so easily oxidized as P3HT. However, beyond this it is clear that enabling efficient electron transfer from the photoexcited semiconducting polymer to the metal oxide is the area requiring attention, and not pore filling and charge transport within the polymer phase which have historically received much more effort.
4. Conclusion
In summary we have presented a detailed investigation into the infiltration of poly(3-hexylthiophene) into mesoporous TiO2. We conclusively demonstrate that P3HT can uniformly infiltrate the pores to depths of over 4 μm. The volumetric pore filling fraction is estimated to be in the region of 6–24% resulting in a “shell” of P3HT wetting the internal surface of the porous electrodes, with a shell thickness in the region of 1 nm. Despite the low pore filling fraction and the apparent “thinness” of the polymer shell, hole migration in this layer is suitably fast and in the complete solar cells, charge collection can occur over 7 μm in thickness with over 90% efficiency. The solar cells work remarkably well up to thicknesses of 7 μm, with the best devices exhibiting a power conversion efficiency of over 3% under simulated sunlight. Notably, almost all the charge generated in the solar cells is generated from light absorbed in the dye sensitizer bound to the TiO2 surface, and not from light absorbed in the P3HT despite the close proximity of the P3HT to the TiO2 surface. This suggests that a step-change in the performance of this concept is possible, once the interface is correctly engineered and the materials suitably matched to enable ionisation of the photoinduced excitations from the polymer phase.
Acknowledgements
This project was funded by the EPSRC nanotechnology grand energy challenge EP/F056702/1. We thank Dr J. Kirkpatrick for inspiring discussions concerning charge transport and collection.
References
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380–3382 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Bartholomew and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 677–682 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley, B. S. Srinivasan, J. M. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927–1932 CrossRef .
R. Zhu, C.-Y. Jiang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 994–1000 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, K. Manseki, Y. Yu, N. Masaki, K. Suzuki, Y. Song and S. Yanagida, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2481–2485 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Howie, F. Claeyssens, H. Miura and L. M. Peter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Loewe, P. C. Ewbank, J. Liu, L. Zhai and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4324–4333 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan and F. Lenzmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4342–4350 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Hüttner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787–1796 CAS .
H. J. Snaith, R. Robin Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424003 CrossRef .
A. Abrusci, R. S. S. Kumar, M. Al-Hashimi, M. Heeney, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201100048 .
I. K. Ding, N. Tétreault, J. Brillet, B. E. Hardin, E. H. Smith, S. J. Rosenthal, F. Sauvage, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2431–2436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, D. H. Kim, J. A. Lim, J. H. Cho, Y. Jang, W. H. Lee, J. H. Park and K. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1705–1710 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, M. Shkunov, R. H. Friend and J. L. Brédas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 113201 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 558–562 Search PubMed .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, M. M. de Kok, E. Vinken, K. Maturova and R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Singh, K.-I. Kim, J.-W. Lee and H.-W. Rhee, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, R88–R90 CrossRef CAS .
D. Poplavskyy and J. Nelson, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01135aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Semiconducting polymers hold great promise for solar cell technology since the basic material and manufacturing costs are extremely low. There are diverse approaches, but one of the most promising concepts is a “hybrid” approach, where transparent n-type metal oxides are combined with p-type semiconducting polymers. Charges are only generated when light is absorbed in the polymer in close proximity to the metal oxide heterojunction. The correct meso-length scale is set by first creating the mesostructured oxide and subsequently in filling the pores with the polymer. However, the two main issues thought to be responsible for suboptimal operation of these solar cells are an inability to effectively infiltrate semiconducting polymers into porous networks and ineffective charge transport within the polymer phase due to non-crystalline, un-orientated polymer chains. Here we demonstrate that polymers effectively penetrate porous films with pore sizes of 20 nm and film thickness up to 7 μm. We also show that hole-transport with this infiltrated polymer phase is very effective, resulting in well operating dye-sensitized solar cells. This indicates that switching focus to improving the charge generation at the polymer–metal oxide interface will yield major improvements for hybrid solar cells.



                  Carbon content at the bottom of the film (%)	D131	4.2 ± 0.6	4.9 ± 0.6	NA
 
D131/P3HT	9.6 ± 0.6	7.5 ± 0.5	NA
 
D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT	7.5 ± 0.4	7.5 ± 0.5	6.4 ± 0.5

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a D131/P3HT device on a 1 μm thick mesoporous TiO2 film on FTO. (b) XPS depth profiling image of the same device with the indication of the elements content of a FTO/TiO2/D131/P3HT device.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–d) High resolution cross-sectional TEM images of dye-sensitized TiO2 infiltrated with P3HT (left panel) and (e–h) dye-sensitized TiO2 coated with Li-TFSI + tBP and infiltrated with P3HT (right panel), under bright-field conditions (a and e), and corresponding energy-filtered TEM images of the same sample region using the sulfur L2/3 edge transition (165 eV) (b and f), or the titanium L2/3 edge (460 eV) (c and g). Bright intensity in (b and f) and (c and g) indicates the locations of sulfur-rich or titanium-rich regions in the cross-section, respectively. For clarity, an overlay of (b) and (c), and of (f) and (g), are presented in (d) and (h) respectively, where titanium-rich regions are red and sulfur-rich regions are blue. Voids are bright in the bright filed images (a and e) and dark in the overlay images (d and h).	 
	(1)

1 μm	D131/P3HT	177	64	8.1
D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT	155	187	23.8
2.5 μm	D131/P3HT	102	236	9.5
D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT	130	293	11.6
4 μm	D131/P3HT	40	212	6.7
D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT	75	273	7.6

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectra of D131, P3HT, D131/P3HT on a 2.5 μm TiO2 film with and without additives (Li-TFSI + tBP) with the inset of chemical structure of P3HT and D131. (b) Conductivity measurements for bare TiO2 and Al2O3, coated with P3HT where no additives, Li-TFSI or Li-TFSI and tBP, are added. The conductivity of solid state electrolytes,17 PEDOT:PSS,18 ionic liquids19 and spiro-OMeTAD20 with the additives, is also shown for comparison.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics for complete devices with the addition of Li-TFSI and tBP for 1, 2.5 and 4 μm TiO2 thickness measured under AM 1.5. (b) Transport rates (ktrans), left y-axis, and charge collection efficiency, right y-axis, for D131/(Li-TFSI + tBP)/P3HT devices with TiO2 thickness ranging from 1 to 6.8 μm are shown under background white light generated from an LED array with an equivalent intensity to 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5, calculated as inverse lifetime of the exponential decay of the photocurrent signal is also shown.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Spectral response for the 2.5 μm thick device with the UV-Vis absorption spectra for a 1 μm thick TiO2 film coated with dye (+Li-TFSI), infiltrated with P3HT and both coated with dye (+Li-TFSI) and P3HT. The peak incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is 53% at 425 nm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01135a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
