Counter electrode materials combined with redox couples in dye- and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03682H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03682H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19638-19656Counter electrode materials combined with redox couples in dye- and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Mingxing 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Lin
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yudi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Tingli 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *d
aCollege of Chemistry and Material Science, Hebei Normal University, No. 20 Rd East of 2nd Ring South, Yuhua District, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Province, P. R. China. E-mail: mingxing@mail.ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-311-80787438;   Tel: +86-311-80787438
bShanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jialuo Road 2019, Shanghai, 201800, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, College of Chemistry, Jilin University, China
dGraduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 2-4 Hibikino, Wakamatsu, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan. E-mail: tinglima@dlut.edu.cn
Received 
      20th May 2015
    , Accepted 4th August 2015First published on 5th August 2015AbstractDye- or quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (DSCs or QDSCs) comprise a sensitizer, a semiconductor, an electrolyte containing redox couple, and a counter electrode (CE), which have inspired a new wave of research. The challenges in realizing the practical application of such photovoltaic devices are the enhancement of photovoltaic performance, stability, and the reduction of fabrication costs. The CE is an important component, and the exploration of low cost CE catalysts to match the redox couples has become a feasible route in the pursuit of high power conversion efficiency and low production cost of the devices. This article reviews the development of CE catalysts for the regeneration of each type of iodide-free redox couple, including inorganic, organic, and transition metal complex-based redox couples, among others.Mingxing WuMingxing Wu received his M.S. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) in 2009. He received his D.E. degree in Applied Chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 2012. He has now become an associate professor and continues his research in Hebei Normal University. His research focuses on solar cells, hydrogen production by solar energy, and study of the synthesis of functional materials.Xiao LinXiao Lin is currently a researcher intern at the Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, CAS. She received her Masters degree in fine chemicals from Dalian University of Technology in 2012. Her current research interests include the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials, transition metal oxide nanomaterials and some composite materials for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical catalytic water splitting.Yudi WangYudi Wang graduated from the Dalian University of Technology and received her B.E. degree in Chemical Engineering in 2010 and M.E. degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology in 2013, under the direction of advisors Prof. Tingli Ma and Zhicong Shi. Then she pursued her doctorate degree in Jilin University guided by Prof. Guangshan Zhu. Currently, her research focuses on porous organic frameworks for perovskite solar cells.Tingli MaTingli Ma is a professor of Chemistry at the Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology in Japan. She obtained her PhD in 1999 at Kyushu University (Japan). She held numerous research positions such as a researcher at the Kyushu Centre of Japan's National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), assistant professor at the Kyushu University, professor at the Dalian University of Technology (China) and visiting researcher at the California Institute of Technology (USA) and Imperial College London (UK). She currently leads a research team studying dye-sensitized solar cells and other related projects including development of catalysts, hydrogen production, functional dyes and semiconductors.
1. Introduction
Continuously growing world energy consumption and environmental problems drive the search for alternative renewable energy sources. Fortunately, the sun provides us with an inexhaustible source of solar energy. Solar cells are photovoltaic devices in which sunlight is converted into electricity. In the last few decades, photovoltaic production has maintained a high growth rate of over 20%, making it the fastest growing energy conversion technology.1 Although the photovoltaic industry is presently dominated by silicon-based solar cells, enthusiasm for the development of new types of solar cells is very high. Among these, dye- and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (DSCs and QDSCs) are of particular interest. These photovoltaic devices commonly contain three components: a photoanode (sensitizer adsorbed on the surface of a semiconductor), an electrolyte (containing a redox couple) or hole transport material (HTM), and a counter electrode (CE). The acknowledged merits of DSCs include environmental friendliness, transparency, good plasticity, building integration and a simple fabrication procedure. Currently, laboratory-scale DSCs have reached power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of ∼13% under standard conditions, while the efficiency generated by larger modules is 9.9%.2 In short, DSCs provide a promising alternative to conventional p–n junction photovoltaic devices. Based on the structure of DSCs, quantum dots have been introduced as an alternative to dyes, resulting in the so-called QDSCs.3 Very recently, the record PCE value of QDSCs jumped to over 8.21%.4
DSCs were the original models of this type of photovoltaic devices, carried forward by Michael Grätzel et al. through the introduction of the mesoporous TiO2 semiconductor film.5 These devices simulate photosynthesis which has been occurring naturally for over 3.5 billion years; this technology is therefore often described as “artificial photosynthesis”.6aFig. 1 depicts the electricity generating principle of DSCs. Under illumination, a sensitizer molecule (S) jumps to an excited state (S*), and the unstable S* releases a photoelectron (e−) into the conduction band (CB) of the semiconductor, leaving behind a sensitizer hole (S+). Next, the photoelectrons in the CB are collected by the substrate, flow through the external circuit, and reach the CE. The oxidation state (Ox) of the redox couple is reduced to the reduction state (Red) by the electrons at the CE. Meanwhile, S+ is regenerated by Red, which is oxidized to Ox at the same time, completing the circuit. The electron transfer process is always accompanied by electron recombination: the recombination process occurs between the photoelectrons and S+ or Ox. Recombination is a major cause of efficiency loss in DSCs.
 Fig. 1  Electricity generating principle of the DSCs. 
The realization of commercial applications for DSCs (or QDSCs) requires a substantive increase of the PCE and a drastic decrease in the production cost. The design of sensitizers with a broad absorption band seems to be the key path to improving the PCE. The open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the device is determined by the gap between the quasi-Fermi level (EF) of the electrons in the oxide under illumination and the redox potential of the electrolyte (Eredox). A redox couple with a higher potential yields a higher Voc and a powerful path to higher PCE. More information about redox couples is available in a previous review article.6 In DSCs (or QDSCs), the CE functions as a catalyst or hole extractor, responsible for the regeneration of the redox couple, and demanding the advantages of high catalytic activity toward the selected redox couple, high electronic conductivity, low cost, and good stability during long-term use. In addition to the conventional Pt CE, carbon materials, transition metal compounds and polymers can be used as CE catalysts. Studies have found that CE catalysts and redox couples closely relate to each other, a matching issue between them.7 This suggests that we should re-consider the behavior of CE catalysts toward a fixed redox couple in the pursuit of high PCE values. Furthermore, the development of low cost Pt-free CE catalysts is a promising path to the reduction of production costs by replacing the expensive Pt CE. The exploration of low cost CE catalysts for fixed redox couples is therefore of great interest, and here we summarize the recent progress in CE catalysts combined with iodide-free redox couples.
2. Counter electrode (CE) catalysts in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs)
2.1 CE catalysts for inorganic iodide-free redox couples
In DSC systems, I−/I3− is the prevalent redox couple because the iodide electrolyte has desirable kinetic properties that meet the requirements of “asymmetric behaviour” in the DSCs: the forward electron donation by I− facilitates rapid diffusion to guarantee efficient dye regeneration while the recombination of I3− with the electron in the photoanode is inactive for high carrier collection efficiency. Pt was first used to catalyze the regeneration of the I−/I3− redox couple and the mechanism of I3− reduction at the Pt/electrolyte interface has been thoroughly investigated.8 Because of the high cost and limited reserves of Pt, many Pt-free CE catalysts have been applied to replace Pt, such as carbon materials, polymers, inorganic materials, multiple compounds, composites, etc.9 In terms of redox couples, the I−/I3− based electrolyte has obvious shortcomings which cannot keep up with the ongoing advancements of DSCs. First, the iodide electrolyte absorbs short wavelength light, resulting in lower short circuit current density (Jsc) and PCE. Second, I3− corrodes Ag and Cu electron collectors. Third, sublimation of I2 is a potential threat to the long-term use of DSCs. Moreover, the mismatch (approximately 0.6 eV) between the redox potential of a typical sensitizer (EF,redox ≈ 1.0 eV vs. NHE) and that of I−/I3− (EF,redox ≈ 0.4 eV vs. NHE) leads to a Voc loss. To overcome these shortcomings, alternatives to I−/I3− are being developed, including other inorganic, organic, and transition metal complex-based redox couples. In addition to I−/I3−, inorganic redox couples include Br−/Br3−, SCN−/(SCN)3−, etc. Br−/Br3− presents a high positive redox potential of 1.1 V vs. NHE. Furthermore, the Br−/Br3− electrolyte absorbs much less visible light than the I−/I3− electrolyte. Sun et al. applied the Br−/Br3− redox couple in DSCs with the dyes TC301 and TC306, which produced PCE values of 3.7 and 5.2% with high Voc values of 1.16 V and 0.94 V, respectively.10 Meyer et al. reported that the pseudohalide redox couples of SCN−/(SCN)3− and SeCN−/(SeCN)3− also had more positive redox potentials than I−/I3−; however, the original performance of the pseudohalide was very disappointing. The highest incident photocurrent conversion efficiency (IPCE) values of SCN−/(SCN)3− and SeCN−/(SeCN)3− based DSCs are only 4 and 20%, much lower than that of I−/I3− based DSCs under the same conditions. This is likely due to the inefficient regeneration of the N3 dye by these types of pseudohalide redox couples.11 Grätzel and co-workers developed ionic liquid electrolytes using the SCN−/(SCN)3− redox couple for high-efficiency DSCs which produced unprecedented PCE values of 7.5–8.3%.12 In the aforementioned work, Pt was used as the CE catalyst for Br−/Br3− and the pseudohalide redox couples. Sun et al. prepared the sulfide redox couple ((CH3)4N)2S/((CH3)4N)2S2 with good solubility in organic solvents. Based on an organic dye (TH305), the DSCs yielded a PCE of 5.24% with a CoS CE. The same DSCs using a Pt CE gave a PCE of 4.55%.13 The higher catalytic activity of CoS over Pt toward ((CH3)4N)2S/((CH3)4N)2S2 can be ascribed to the lower charge transfer resistance (Rct) and series resistance (Rs) of the CoS CE. The experimental conditions and results for the inorganic iodide-free redox couple-based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S1.†
Halide and pseudohalide redox couples are the widely used iodide-free inorganic redox couples in DSCs and Pt is the dominant CE catalyst. There are few reports on Pt-free catalysts with iodide-free inorganic redox couples.
2.2 CE catalysts for organic redox couples
In addition to the inorganic redox couples, another important and fashionable redox couple family is the organic compounds, including 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO/TEMPO+), phenothiazine (PTZ/PTZ+), tetraphenyl-diamine (TPD/TPD+), hydroquinone/benzoquinone (HQ/BQ), thiolate/disulfide, etc.14 Compared to inorganic redox couples, organic redox couples have the following merits: (1) diversity of the redox couples, (2) easy modification of the molecules and the subsequent redox potential, (3) colorless organic redox electrolytes. Based on these merits, organic redox couples have great potential to replace inorganic redox couples.
In 2006, M. Grätzel et al. employed a stable organic radical (TEMPO) and its oxidized state (TEMPO+) as the redox couple in DSCs.14a The standard redox potential of TEMPO/TEMPO+ was approximately 0.8 V vs. NHE, 0.4 V higher than the conventional I−/I3−. Combined with an organic dye (D149) with matched energy levels and the traditional Pt CE, the device showed an expected high Voc of 0.83 V and a PCE of 5.4%. The relatively low PCE value can be ascribed to the short electron lifetime due to the recapture of photoelectrons from the photoanode, accomplished much faster by TEMPO+ than I3−, which leads to a low photovoltage and photocurrent. PTZ has a smaller reorganizational energy associated with the electron transfer and is thus considered for co-redox couples. Bignozzi et al. used PTZ and a Co-complex as the co-redox couple in DSCs. Combined with the dye Z907 and a Pt CE, the device generated a PCE of 1.44% with a Voc of 0.673 V.14b As a well-known hole conductor, TPD has also been introduced into DSCs. The TPD/TPD+ redox couple has a large redox potential of 1.095 V vs. NHE. N3 sensitized DSCs with a Pt CE produced a low PCE < 1% with a high Voc of 0.9 V.14c,d HQ is a very robust reductant and can lose two electrons, forming BQ. The redox potential of HQ/BQ is more positive than that of I−/I3− but more negative than the HOMO level of most sensitizers, indicating that HQ/BQ is a promising redox couple for DSCs in pursuit of higher Voc and PCE. Sun et al. investigated the impact of various CEs on HQ/BQ electrolyte-based DSCs.14e,f For the N719-based DSCs, the application of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) CEs showed PCEs of 5.2 and 4.9%, respectively, higher than that of the device using the traditional Pt CE (4.7%). Similarly, for the organic dye CM309 sensitized DSCs, the devices using PEDOT and MWCNT CEs also behaved better than Pt. This result indicates that Pt-free catalysts are much more suitable for the regeneration of the HQ/BQ redox couple. As the HQ/BQ electrolyte is not stable, few subsequent reports on the HQ/BQ redox couple or the CE catalysts can be found. The experimental conditions and results of the above-mentioned organic redox couple-based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S2.†
In 2010, the Grätzel group first introduced thiolate/disulfide (T−/T2) as a redox couple in DSCs, where T− represents the 5-mercapto-1-methyltetrazole ion and T2 stands for its dimer.14gFig. 2 shows the molecular structures of T−, X+, and T2, where the substituent R can be Me, Et, n-Bu, n-Oct, etc. and X+ can be N(CH3)4+, Li+, Na+, and K+. The redox potential of T−/T2 (R = Me, X+ = N(CH3)4+) is 0.485 V vs. NHE. With a Pt CE, the DSCs using T−/T2 showed a PCE of 6.48%. In the following years, T−/T2 derived redox couples were introduced into DSCs. In this process, it was found that some Pt-free CE catalysts were more suitable for the regeneration of the T−/T2 redox couple. M. Grätzel compared the conventional Pt to CoS and PEDOT CEs for the T−/T2 redox couple. Using N719 dye and a PEDOT CE, the device produced a PCE of 6.9%. Replacing the N719 dye with Z907 dye, the PCE increased to 7.9%.14h
 Fig. 2  Molecular structure of the organ redox couples TMEPO, PTZ, TBD, HQ/BQ, and T−/T2. 
We have introduced carbon materials, transition metal carbides, nitrides, oxides, sulfides, phosphides, and composites into the T−/T2 redox couple.7 As carbides performed better in the iodide redox couple,9d we first used TiC, VC, and Cr3C2 nanoparticles to catalyze the regeneration of the T−/T2 redox couple.7a As we expected, all of the carbide CEs brought clear advantages to the T−/T2 electrolyte. The corresponding DSCs showed high PCEs of 4.96 (TiC), 4.06 (VC), and 4.54% (Cr3C2). Compared with the Pt CE based DSCs, the PCE values were significantly improved by 35.5, 10.9, and 24.4%, respectively. Nitrides, oxides, sulfides, and phosphides have also been introduced into the T−/T2 system, and all of the Pt-free catalysts showed higher activity than Pt.7c–f In addition, the effect of the morphologies of the CE materials on catalytic activity in the applied T−/T2 redox couple has been investigated. The prepared Mo2C nanotubes (Mo2C-NTs) gave an impressive catalytic activity compared to the Mo2C nanoparticles (Mo2C-Ps).7b Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements revealed that the Rct of the Mo2C-NTs was 0.8 Ω, which was much lower than in the Mo2C-Ps (2.0 Ω). Moreover, the Mo2C-NTs showed low diffusion impedance (ZN) values relative to the Mo2C-Ps, stemming from the mesoporous structure of the Mo2C-NTs as shown in the TEM images (Fig. 3a and b). Both Rct and ZN values proved that the redox reaction between T− and T2 occurs easily on the Mo2C-NTs electrode. Similarly, VN “peas” showed higher catalytic activity than VN cubes.7c The possible reasons are summarized as follows: (1) as depicted in Fig. 3c and d, VN “peas” have a smaller average particle size as well as a larger BET surface area, providing a large number of catalytic sites; (2) the different electron structures depend on the particle shape and size, leading to different catalytic activities;15a (3) previous studies have noted that the catalyst with the smallest particle size has the highest activity because of the change in the d-band.15b
 Fig. 3  SEM images of Mo2C (a) nanoparticles, (b) nanotubes, VN (c) cubes and (d) peas.14c 
 Fig. 4  TEM images of the (a) solid, (b) open-ended, and (c) hollow carbon spheres.16a 
In addition to transition metal compounds, carbon is also a promising CE catalyst for DSCs because of its high catalytic activity, low cost, ready accessibility, excellent thermal stability and corrosion resistance. Traditional carbon materials, such as activated carbon (Ca), carbon black (Cb), carbon dye (Cd), and mesoporous carbon (MC) have been previously used for the T−/T2 redox couple.14d,g The DSCs based on these carbon CEs produced respective PCE values of 4.96, 5.05, 4.75, and 4.60%. All of the carbon materials behaved better than Pt for the T−/T2 redox couple. Recently, a new type of carbon spheres (denoted as OCS) with an open end on the surface was introduced into DSCs for the T−/T2 redox couple (Fig. 4).16a The OCS CE fabricated in a N2 atmosphere showed higher catalytic activity than the conventional solid and hollow carbon sphere CEs, indicating its potential to replace the expensive Pt CE. The OCS CE based DSCs produced a high PCE of 6.4%, much higher than that of Pt CE based DSCs (4.1%). The high catalytic activity of OCS stems from the sufficient contact between the redox couple and the external and internal surfaces of the OCS because of its open end, which provides a diffusion channel for the electrolyte into the inside of the OCS. Lin et al. arranged single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) onto FTO glass vertically by a transfer technique. This CNT CE featured remarkably higher catalytic activity toward the T−/T2 redox couple than Pt CEs.16b After optimization, the device using this CNT CE produced a PCE of 5.25%, which was significantly higher than the Pt CE based DSCs. Further, Peng et al. fabricated wire type DSCs using the CNT CE combined with the T−/T2 redox couple.16c The flexible wire device achieved a maximal PCE of 7.33%, again much higher than the PCE value of 2.06% for the Pt CE based DSCs. Interestingly, this type of DSCs using a T−/T2 redox couple surpassed the conventional I−/I3− redox couple based DSCs. The Zou group assembled DSCs with integrated graphite CEs, which worked as the substrate as well as the catalyst, combined with the T−/T2 redox couple. The device showed a PCE of 4.79%, also higher than the Pt CE based DSCs (3.97%).16d
Several carbonaceous materials have been used as CEs in DSCs. To further improve their catalytic activity, composites were used in which carbon materials were often the supports due to their high stability and large surface area. We synthesized composites such as VC-MC, WC-MC, Ni5P4-MC, and WO2-MC, where MC was the support and the carbides, oxides, and phosphides were the catalysts, then introduced the composites into DSCs for the regeneration of the T−/T2 redox couple.14a,d,f,g All of the composites showed higher catalytic activity than Pt and the very high catalytic activity of the composites can be explained as follows: (1) the intrinsic high catalytic activity of the catalysts, (2) the synergistic catalytic effect of the catalyst and support, (3) the improved conductivity stemming from the MC, (4) the large porosity of the composites which is beneficial to electrolyte diffusion. Zhang et al. utilized Cb as a support and several conductive polymers as catalysts to make composite CEs for the T−/T2 electrolyte.17 Specifically, they polymerized pyrrole (Py), aniline (ANI), and 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) on a Cb film which was then screen printed on FTO glass to form Cb/polypyrrole (PPy), Cb/polyaniline (PANI), and Cb/PEDOT composites for the T−/T2 redox couple. The corresponding DSCs showed PCE values of 5.2 (Cb/PPy), 5.2 (Cb/PANI), and 7.6% (Cb/PEDOT). The photovoltaic discrepancies are rooted in the fill factor (FF), which determines the PCE partly. The FF of a bare Cb CE is only 0.31. After loading PPy, PANI, and PEDOT on the Cb film, the FFs were increased to 0.49, 0.46 and 0.70, respectively. The experimental conditions and results of the organic T−/T2 (R = Me) redox couple based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S3.†
The above-mentioned organic redox couples were all T−/T2, and the R group was methyl. The champion device based on this organic redox couple gave the highest PCE of 7.6%. However, the Voc values of the T−/T2 based DSCs are all less than 0.7 V due to the substantially negative redox potential (Eredox) of T−/T2 relative to the Fermi levels of the anode semiconductor, thus posing a barrier to further improvement of the PCE. To solve this problem, Han et al. used DFT calculations to design a group of sulfide redox couples by introducing electron-donating and-withdrawing groups to the T− backbone.18a As shown in Fig. 2, the R groups include p-phenyl, p-methylphenyl, p-methoxyphenyl, p-chlorophenyl, p-trifluoromethylphenyl, and p-nitrophenyl. The values of Eredox were tuned in the range of 0.32 to 0.49 V vs. NHE and the Voc of the devices were 0.620 to 0.715 V. When the R group was p-methoxyphenyl, the sulfide redox couple exhibited the best electrochemical behavior. However, the conventional Pt CE showed poor catalytic activity toward all of the modified sulfide redox couples and the corresponding DSCs produced PCE values lower than 1%. The authors found that all of the T−/T2 redox couples are much more compatible with carbon CEs than Pt CEs. Furthermore, the authors prepared a novel graphene modified CE called GGCM, resulting in higher PCE values of 5.65 (R = p-phenyl), 5.90 (R = p-methylphenyl), 6.14 (R = p-methoxyphenyl), 3.76 (R = p-chlorophenyl), 3.14 (R = p-trifluoromethylphenyl), and 3.25% (R = p-nitrophenyl). Note that the redox couples with electron-donating groups behaved better than those with electron-withdrawing groups. After optimizing the concentration of the oxidized state of the redox couple, the DSCs with T−/T2 (R = p-methoxyphenyl) and a GGCM CE gave the highest PCE of 6.53%. In addition, they applied two types of PEDOT CEs (PEDOTUT, PEDOTBE) for the modified T−/T2 redox couple, where R = p-phenyl, and the DSCs produced high PCE values of 6.07 (PEDOTUT) and 4.57% (PEDOTBE).18b Importantly, PEDOTBE showed a high transparency >91%, and the DSCs showed a high PCE of 4.35% from rear-side irradiation.
Transparent NiS CEs were electrodeposited by the facile periodic potential reversal (PR) technique in 1 period (denoted as NiSPR1) for the T−/T2 redox couple where R = Et.18c The NiSPR1 CE showed a high transparency of 90% and the DSCs yielded a PCE of 6.25%, higher than the Pt CE based DSCs (3.98%). The high catalytic activity, transparency, and low temperature methods make this NiSPR1 CE of great potential in bifacial, flexible and transparent DSCs when combined with the sulfide electrolyte. Further, a graphene modified mesoscopic carbon (GMC) CE was introduced for this type of redox couple, and a high PCE of 6.55% has been obtained for the corresponding DSCs, which was an increase of 35% over the analogous DSCs using a mesoscopic carbon CE (4.82%); both carbonaceous materials performed better than Pt.18d Funabiki et al. also prepared T−/T2 redox couples with long alkyl R groups such as n-Bu, n-Hex, and n-Oct. With a PEDOT CE, the DSCs employing these organic sulfide redox couples gave optimized PCE values of 4.25 (R = n-Bu), 4.32 (R = n-Hex), and 3.61% (R = n-Oct). The lower efficiency behavior of the redox couple (R = n-Oct) stems from the increased resistance of electrolyte diffusion in the DSCs.18e The experimental conditions and results for the organic T−/T2 (R = other units) redox couples based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S4.†
The above-mentioned T−/T2 redox couples are based on the tetrazole frame, differentiated by R groups. Investigations have been performed to study the impact of the R group on the electrochemical properties of the T−/T2 redox couples and the impact of the CE catalytic materials for the T−/T2 redox couples. Based on 2-mercapto-5-methyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole (McMT), Sun et al. prepared a class of McMT−X+/BMT (Fig. 5) redox couples, where X+ can be TBA+, EMI+, or DMHI+.19 The redox potential of McMT−/BMT (X+ = TBA+) was 0.155 V vs. NHE. After optimization, the device using this redox couple and a Pt CE produced a PCE of 5.1% with a high Voc of 0.774 V, rivalling the iodide redox couple based DSCs. EIS measurements revealed that the main reason for the lower PCE value can be attributed to the considerably higher Rct at the CE, leading to low FF and PCE values. This indicates that Pt is not an efficient catalyst for the reduction of BMT.19a To solve this problem, the authors introduced a PEDOT CE for the McMT−/BMT (X+ = TBA+) redox couple, and the device gave a PCE of 6.0%.19b As the TBA+ is changed to EMI+, DMHI+ while the two thiolates are pure ionic liquids at room temperature. Thus, the researchers dissolved 0.2 M BMT in the two ionic liquids to obtain solvent-free T−/T2 electrolytes, namely IL1 and IL2. The devices using these IL electrolytes and PEDOT CEs produced PCE values of 0.7 (IL1) and 0.1% (IL2) under a light intensity of 1 sun. However, the PCE increased remarkably to 3.4 (IL1) and 0.8% (IL2) when the light intensity decreased to 0.1 sun. These results imply that the mass transport of BMT in the IL electrolytes plays an important role with respect to the disappointing FF and PCE values which are likely caused by the low catalytic activity of the PEDOT CE or diffusion resistances in the electrolyte, which have been confirmed by the EIS results. Furthermore, four modified T−/T2 redox couples were synthesized: A−/A2, B−/B2, C−/C2, and D−/D2, as shown in Fig. 5. A−/A2, C−/C2, and D−/D2 showed similar structures with McMT−/BMT by changing the S atom to O in the molecular framework. The redox potentials were determined to be 0.25 (A), 0.37 (B), 0.01 (C), and 0.29 V (D) vs. NHE. Combined with a Pt CE, the DSCs yielded PCE values of 3.3 (A), 0.6 (B), 0.2 (C), and 1.6% (D).
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of the T−/T2 derivatives. 
Ghaddar et al. developed a new organic redox couple using 1-methyl-3-propylimidazole-2-thione (T) and 2,2′-dithiobis(1-methyl-3-propyl-2-imidazolinium) ditriflate (DT).20 As shown in Fig. 5, the redox couple is denoted as T/DT2+. The redox potential of T/DT2+ was 0.62 V vs. NHE, 0.2 V more positive than the conventional I−/I3− redox couple. This implies a theoretical increase in the Voc of 0.2 V compared to the I−/I3− electrolyte based device, which should provide a comparable regeneration rate for the oxidized sensitizer and a comparable recombination rate for the photoelectron with DT2+ and the oxidized state of the sensitizer. The behavior of different CE catalysts toward this redox couple was further investigated. MWCNTs and CoS CEs showed better catalytic activity than Pt towards the regeneration of T/DT2+. The DSCs showed PCEs of 4.12 (MWCNTs) and 3.99% (CoS), higher than that of the Pt CE based DSCs (2.80%). The high catalytic activity of MWCNTs can be attributed to the high surface area. In addition, the Rct values were 10, 15.4, and 37.8 Ω cm2 for MWCNTs, CoS, and Pt, respectively. As early as 2010, Meng et al. used tetramethylthiourea (TMTU) and its oxidized dimer, the tetramethylformaminium disulfide dication (TMFDS2+), to prepare a TMTU/TMFDS2+ redox couple.21a They found that a Cb CE on FTO glass outperformed Pt for this type of redox couple, and the DSCs with the N3 dye gave PCE values of 3.1 (Cb) and 0.6% (Pt). Furthermore, they deposited Cb films on Al and SS substrates, and both CEs exhibited relatively good performance. The stability test showed that the two metals were stable in the TMTU/TMFDS2+ electrolyte. The authors attributed the efficient behavior of Cb to the high surface area of the porous carbon film as well as the corrosive resistance toward the TMTU/TMFDS2+ electrolyte. Subsequently, Wang et al. used Z907 and D131 to replace the N3 dye for the TMTU/TMFDS2+ based DSCs, which produced PCE values of 2.08 (Z907) and 3.88% (D131) with the help of a Cb CE.21b The different performances of the devices using Z907 and D131 may result from the different sensitizer regeneration rates. Kang et al. designed a new thiolate/disulfide redox couple (M−/M2, Fig. 5). Using a Pt CE, the DSCs yielded a lower PCE of 0.3%. To improve the device performance, they combined M−/M2 with T−/T2 to make binary redox couples M−/T2 and T−/M2.22 The PCE values of Pt CE based devices using M−/T2 and T−/M2 redox electrolytes were improved to 2.3 and 0.8%, respectively. With the Cb CE, the PCE values were further improved to 4.1 and 2.9%. Furthermore, the Cb CE showed much better stability in M−/T2 based DSCs compared to the traditional Pt CE. The experimental conditions and results for the above-mentioned organic redox couple based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S5.†
In summary, the lower light absorption of organic sulfide redox electrolytes is advantageous over the iodide redox electrolyte. This advantage is promising in the practical application of the transparent, organic solvent based, non-corrosive electrolytes and flexible devices. Moreover, the Pt-free CE catalysts were found to be more suitable for the thiolate/disulfide redox couples. For the Pt CE, the Pt particles deposited on the FTO layer are very limited and the Pt compact layer is too thin to come into contact with. Iodide redox couples with a small molecule size can make sufficient contact with the Pt particles, thus allowing the Pt to catalyze the iodide redox couple regeneration effectively. In contrast, for the thiolate/disulfide redox couples, the large molecules cannot make sufficient contact with the Pt particle, and the Pt therefore presents “lower” catalytic activity. For the Pt-free catalysts, the thiolate/disulfide redox couples can make sufficient contact with the large scale and mesoporous structured catalysts, inducing a high catalytic activity. Finally, the thiolate/disulfide based DSCs showing the highest PCEs are still inferior to the iodide electrolyte based DSCs, leaving room to optimize the thiolate/disulfide redox couple by inhibiting recombination, improving the stability, and tuning Eredox.
2.3 CE catalysts for transition metal complex redox couples
As one-electron redox couples, transition metal complexes are promising alternatives to the iodide redox couples for DSCs systems due to their reversible electrochemical properties, such as weak absorption towards visible light, less aggressiveness towards metal electrodes, and easily tunable redox potential through changing the central metal atom or the ligand. The metal complexes contain iron (Fe), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), manganese (Mn), vanadium (V), and cobalt (Co) (Fig. 6). Among these transition metals, Fe is the cheapest one and ferrocene/ferrocenium (FeCp20/+) is the most common redox couple.23 Gregg et al. revealed that, as compared with the iodide system, the FeCp20/+ redox couple gives higher dark current with the N3 sensitized work anode, indicating the limited photovoltaic properties of DSCs using the FeCp20/+ redox couple and Pt CE.14c Hupp and co-workers introduced chlorine atoms into FeCp20/+, obtaining the redox couples Fe(ClCp)20/+ and ClCpFeCp0/+, whose redox potentials are more positive than that of FeCp20/+. However, the highest PCE is still lower than 1% using the Ru based sensitizer and Pt CE.23a Bach et al. combined the FeCp20/+ redox couple with an organic dye named Carbz-PAHTDTT to fabricate DSCs. Using a Pt CE, the DSCs reached a high Voc of 0.842 V and an impressive PCE of 7.5%.23b Relative to the above organic electrolytes, aqueous ones are more attractive for practical use, which reduces the difficulty of encapsulation and contamination. Bach et al. developed an aqueous electrolyte containing ferricyanide [Fe(CN)64−/3−] redox couple. After optimization, a PCE of 4.1% was achieved using Pt CE.23c This result undoubtedly strides forward to a greener and cheaper aqueous DSCs system.
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of Fe, Ni, Cu, Mn, and Co complexes. 
Fukuzumi et al. employed Cu complexes [Cu(SP)(mmt)]−/0, [Cu(dmp)2]+/2+, and [Cu(phen)2]+/2+ as the redox couples for DSCs.24a Based on Pt CE and N719 dye, the DSCs employing [Cu(SP)(mmt)]−/0, [Cu(dmp)2]+/2+, and [Cu(phen)2]+/2+ redox couples achieved PCE values of 1.3%, 1.4%, and 0.1%, respectively. The low performance can be attributed to the mismatch between the energy level of the applied sensitizer and the copper complex redox couples. Wang's group introduced an organic dye named C218 into the redox couple of [Cu(dmp)2]+/2+ in DSCs.24b With conductive Cb deposited Pt as the CE, a high PCE of 7.0% with a high Voc of 0.932 V was achieved. Interestingly, the authors found that the redox couple exhibited very lower electron transfer rates on some noble metals, Cb, or conducting oxides, generating a poor FF. Thus, it is an urgent requirement to develop an effective CE catalyst to improve the performance of the DSCs using this copper redox couple.
Hupp et al. developed Ni complexes (Ni3+/4+) as redox couples in DSCs.25a Among the Pt, Au, and Ag CEs, they found that the DSCs using the Au CE showed the highest Jsc, FF, and PCE (1.5%), owing to the better electrode reflectivity, increasing the utilization of illumination. Further, they compared a class of Ni3+/4+ redox couples by changing the ligands and the researchers obtained more information on the tuned redox potential, shuttle polarity, solubility, and binding properties. The devices using this kind of Ni3+/4+ CEs gave PCE values of 0.7–2.0%.25b Oyaizu et al. introduced an oxovanadium(IV/V) redox couple into DSCs. With Pt CE, the device showed a PCE of 5.4%.26 Spiccia et al. used manganese (Mn) complexes [Mn(acac)3]0/+ as redox couples for DSCs.27 They found that PEDOT CE behaved better than Pt and Au, combined with [Mn(acac)3]0/+ and a new sensitizer named K4. When commercially available MK2 or N719 was applied as the sensitizer, the device showed a PCE of 4.4% with the help of PEDOT CE.
Compared to the aforementioned redox couples, Co complexes have lower extinction coefficients in the visible light region, diminishing the competition with photosensitizers. Co redox couples are the most widely studied metal complexes by changing the ligands, resulting in different redox potentials, solubilities, stabilities, absorbances, etc. With regard to Co complex redox couples, different kinds of CE catalysts have been applied to catalyze their regeneration. Pt is the most commonly used CE catalyst thanks to its superior conductivity and catalytic activity towards the regeneration of Co redox couples. Using Co2+/3+ (bpy)3 as the electrolyte, Grätzel's group obtained a DSCs with a PCE of 12.3% among the various Co redox couples investigated, using Pt CE and zinc porphyrin (YD2-o-C8) and organic dyes (Y123) as co-sensitizers.28 This result suggests that Pt can effectively catalyze the reduction of Co3+ to Co2+. Although Co based redox couples have many advantages, the charge recombination between them and dyes is significantly high. Boschloo's research revealed that the recombination can be prevented by choosing an appropriate sensitizer such as an organic dye composed of a donor–π–acceptor bridge.29 Although Pt shows excellent catalytic activity toward Co redox couples, it is an expensive and scarce noble metal. Thus finding low cost Pt-free catalysts to replace Pt is also an urgent requirement to decrease the cost and to improve the competitiveness of Co redox couple based DSCs. Previous research proved that glassy carbon showed better reversible cyclic voltammograms towards Co complex redox couples than Pt,30 indicating a more reversible electron transfer on glassy carbon. Hence carbon should be a potential substitute for Pt in Co complex systems.
Ca and ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) were employed to catalyze the regeneration of Co complex redox couples.31 EIS revealed much smaller Rct for Ca and OMC than Pt in catalysing the reduction of Co3+ to Co2+, corresponding to higher PCE values of Ca (3.43%) and OMC (4.05%) than Pt (2.91%) in the DSCs system. Boujtita et al. prepared screen printed carbon electrodes (SPCEs).32 Although the J–V characterization of the SPCE/Co redox couple cell was 30% lower than that of the Pt/iodide redox couple cell both without optimization, screen printing was a reproducible manufacturing process for obtaining a stable and conductive carbon film, which was suitable for industrialization. Considering the portable applications, flexible plastic CEs have been fabricated by depositing SWCNTs on plain polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates.33 The Rct of the SWCNTs was 0.6 Ω m2, much smaller than that of Pt on ITO-PET (4 Ω cm2) and Pt on FTO glass (1.7 Ω cm2). However, the Rs of SWCNTs/PET without the ITO layer was larger than that of the two kinds of Pt CEs. Thus the SWCNTs/PET CE displayed similar performance to Pt/ITO-PET or FTO glass for Co redox couple based electrolytes. Moreover, graphite and Cb were also tested as CE catalysts for Co3+ reduction, which performed similarly to Pt.34
Many carbon catalysts were applied for Co redox couples and initially worked well, but were unstable.30 Graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) were found to have superior electrocatalytic activity towards Co redox couples with better stability under potential cycling than Pt.35 The test of the photo-to-electron property witnessed that the PCE exceeding 9% for the GNP CE outperformed the value of 8% for the Pt CE under comparable conditions. Studies revealed that the active sites for charge transfer on the GNP/electrolyte interface were defects and oxidic surface groups on GNPs, which can be illustrated by the fact that the optical absorbance of the GNP electrode was inversely proportional to the Rct value.35a This means that more mass loading of GNP leads to smaller Rct and better catalytic activity. However, for a given transparency, the Rct for GNP/Co2+/3+ was 60 or 300 times smaller than that for Pt/I−/I3−. Such excellent electrochemical catalytic activity of graphene indicates that GNP/Co2+/3+ based DSCs can exhibit high photovoltaic performance with the semi-transparent GNP CE. Whereas the splendid catalytic activity of GNPs for Co2+/3+ cannot be extended to other redox couples such as I−/I3−. Aksay's group introduced functionalized graphene sheets (FGS) as the CE by using ethyl cellulose as a sacrificial binder which was partially pyrolyzed.36 The prepared FGS had a large surface area containing lattice defects and oxidic functional groups such as hydroxyls, epoxides, and carboxylic acids, which were essential for a promising catalyst. Moreover, the binder residue can improve the electrode's structural stability in an acetonitrile containing electrolyte. Importantly, the prepared FGS electrodes were versatile and performed as well as or even better than Pt CEs for I-, Co-, and S-based redox couples.
Since the GNP CE was mechanically unstable due to the poor adhesion between GNPs and the substrate, detachment of GNPs from the support may be responsible for the high dark current for GNP based DSCs. A lot of research focused on improving the mechanical stability of the graphene CE through increasing adhesion to the supports. Graphene oxide (GO) is an amphiphilic graphene material which consists of abundant oxidic functional groups on condensed aromatic backbones. Kavan's group fabricated GO film with wear resistance and good adhesion to the FTO substrate, which was probably caused by the intimate interaction of the hydrophilic groups in GO and the hydroxylated surface on the FTO surface.37 They found that the pristine GO CE showed almost no activity towards reducing Co3+, indicating that the sole presence of oxidic functional groups on the carbonaceous skeleton was not essential for catalytic activity. When the GO film was reduced through hydrazine or heat treatment, the electrocatalytic activity was improved dramatically. In view of this phenomenon, they presumed that the activity stemmed from the dangling bonds at the graphene edges. DSCs with a thermally treated composite of GO and GNPs as the CE exhibited the best photovoltaic performance exceeding 9%.
Furthermore, doping or loading was an efficient method employed for graphene nanoplatelets to improve the catalytic activity and mechanical stability of the graphene CE. TaON nanoparticles embedded in reduced GO nanocomposites (TaON-RGO, Fig. 7a) were prepared by Wang et al.38 The composite displayed much better catalytic property towards Co2+/3+ than sole RGO or TaON, suggesting the synergistic effect from the intimate interaction of RGO and TaON. Silver nanowires (AgNWs) are promising nanomaterials for energy application owing to their unique electrical and optical properties. Kim et al. prepared hybrid AgNWs/GNPs as CEs for the reduction of Co3+, obtaining a PCE higher than that of individual GNPs or AgNW CEs similar to that of the Pt CE.39 In addition, heteroatom-containing graphene was also synthesized and served as the CE in DSC systems for Co redox couples. Both carbon and nitrogen doped graphene can enhance the mechanical stability as well as maintain the catalytic performance. The resulting PCEs were all better than those using Pt.40
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of a TaON-RGO composite;38 (b) SEM image of PANI nanowires.45 
A wide variety of transition metal compounds with outstanding electrochemical property open a new horizon for Pt-free CEs based on inorganic materials. TiC and NbO2 have been introduced into Co mediated DSCs.31 EIS measurements showed that TiC and NbO2 exhibited much smaller Rct towards the reduction of Co3+ than Pt, corresponding to the higher PCEs for TiC and NbO2 based DSCs. Moreover, a pyrite (FeS2) film was prepared as CE for Co mediated DSCs, and a PCE of 6.34% was achieved. It was found that the charming catalytic activity of FeS2 was attributed to the good optical reflectivity, which enhanced the light distribution in the cell, leading to an improved current.41 In addition, nanocomposites of cobalt selenide and nickel selenide (Co0.85Se/Ni0.85Se) were prepared and used as CEs, which manifested better catalytic activity for Co redox electrolytes than Pt.42 However, the poor adhesion of transition metal compounds to FTO glass and the requirement of a large quantity of compound loading for high efficiency still limit the application of these materials.
Among various Pt-free CE catalysts, conductive polymers play an important role because of their high conductivity, good plasticity, low cost, and high catalytic activity as well. PEDOT was found to be an outstanding conducting polymer utilized as CE for Co3+ reduction.43 Grätzel's group fabricated a DSC using PEDOT CE in conjunction with a Co redox couple, yielding an excellent PCE of 10.3%.43a The result of the current transient test announced the absence of photocurrent decay for PEDOT, indexing an alleviated diffusion limitation of Co reduction current, which may help in retaining the maximum of the attainable current in the cell. They suggested that this effect could be due to the 3-dimensional and porous morphology of the PEDOT layer, which reduced the diffusion distance and generated diffusion fields with radial symmetry. Carli et al. compared three different kinds of PEDOT based CEs with different additives, including LiClO4 (ClO4), sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), and polystyrenesulfonate (PSS). The PEDOT/ClO4 electrodes were found to exhibit the best performance among the three CEs towards the Co redox couple.43b
Apart from PEDOT, some other organic materials were also attempted as CE catalysts for Co redox couples. The most challenging one was nanoporous poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT) introduced by Yum et al. With a large surface area, PProDOT displayed much lower Rct (2.5 Ω) in comparison to the value of 50 Ω for Pt, leading to an advanced FF and a higher PCE of 10.08% for Co mediated DSCs.44 PANI was another fairly good alternative for Co3+ reduction due to its good catalytic activity and simple fabrication process at a low temperature. Compared to the drop-cast PANI film with a random network, an oriented PANI nanowire array (Fig. 7b) was grown in situ by Wang et al., along which the electron transfer was expected to be faster.45Rs and Rct of the PANI nanowire array were smaller than those of the drop-cast PANI film as expected; hence a better photovoltaic performance of 8.24% was observed.
Organic conducting polymers are promising candidates for CE catalysts, which are most likely to realize portable applications on account of their simple low temperature fabrication process. The experimental conditions and results for the metal complex redox couples based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S6.†
2.4 CE catalysts for hole transport materials (HTMs)
Although recent studies on liquid electrolyte based solar cells have yielded the highest PCE of 13% after successive advances in sensitizers and electrolytes, there is debate over whether a liquid electrolyte may limit the realization of stable and efficient DSCs for commercial applications. To overcome these disadvantages, alternative liquid-free electrolytes have been a long-term goal in this field.2c As a consequence, solid state DSCs (ssDSCs) have been extensively studied for their advantages in avoiding leakage and corrosion. Similar to conventional liquid DSCs, the basic configuration of ssDSCs includes a conducting glass substrate (FTO or ITO), a mesoporous TiO2 film anchored with dye molecules, a CE, and a hole transport material (HTM) to replace the liquid redox electrolyte.46 The HTM for ssDSCs must be able to transfer holes from the oxidized state dye. The CE mainly collects the charges to complete an electronic circuit. In ssDSCs, the CE should have high conductivity, mechanical stability and chemical/electrochemical stability. Moreover, to match the HTM, a CE with a large work function is also required. Currently, most HTM based ssDSCs use a noble metal layer (such as Pt, Au, or Ag) for the hole collecting CE.
Although most studies are focused on inorganic47 or organic small molecule HTMs,48 the CE is still a key component in ssDSCs. In 1998, using Pt as a CE, Grätzel et al. reported efficient ssDSCs using N3 dye and amorphous 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD, Fig. 8) as the HTM, with which a maximum IPCE of 33% and an overall PCE of 0.74% were obtained.49 The low PCE was caused by interfacial recombination losses. This system was further optimized in 2011 using a cobalt complex as a dopant, employing a high absorption coefficient organic dye (Y123) and thermally evaporating 200 nm of an Ag CE, whereby the PCE of spiro-OMeTAD based ssDSCs was improved to 7.2%.50 Thus far, spiro-OMeTAD remains the most effective organic HTM for ssDSCs. However, previous studies have demonstrated that spiro-OMeTAD still faces serious challenges such as a high synthesis cost and low hole mobility.51 In parallel with spiro-OMeTAD, several other molecular and polymeric p-type organic semiconductors such as PANI,52a PPy,52b poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT),52c and PEDOT52d have been successfully implemented in HTM based ssDSCs. Recently, an inorganic perovskite, CsSnI3, was reported as an efficient HTM in ssDSCs. After optimization, the PCE of ssDSCs with the inorganic semiconductor CsSnI2.95F0.05 doped with SnF2 as an HTM, N719 dye and a Pt CE improved to 10.2% under standard AM 1.5, which was the highest efficiency of ssDSCs obtained by utilizing an inorganic HTM to date.53 Generally, the PCE of ssDSCs still cannot compete with that of liquid DSCs. In the pursuit of significantly increasing the performance of ssDSCs, the interfacial contact between the HTM and the photoanode or CE should be of serious concern, as it plays a key role in improving the hole or electron collection, and hence the PCE.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the HTM of spiro-OMeTAD, P3HT, and PEDOT. 
In 1995, a ssDSC with CuI as an HTM was reported, using evaporation of Au film as the CE to realize electrical contact.47a The PCE of CuI based ssDSCs has subsequently been greatly increased to 3.75% by the addition of the CuI crystal growth inhibitor triethylamine hydrothiocyanate (HTT) and the use of Au film as the CE.54 CuI as an HTM still poses some challenges, including a detectable drop in Jsc and Voc when the cell is illuminated for several hours. However, with the evaporation of 30 nm of Au CE, a record efficiency of 4.1% for ssDSCs was attained using the dye D102 and spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM.55a To effectively fill thick nanoparticle based mesoporous TiO2 films with HTM, the Gao group fabricated high efficiency ssDSCs using multilayer TiO2 coated ZnO nanowire arrays sensitized with Z907 dye as the photoanode and developed a multi-step spiro-OMeTAD HTM filling process that effectively fills sensitized films as thick as 50 μm with HTM, in which a 100 nm thick layer of Au was deposited by e-beam evaporation on top of the HTM as the CE. The resulting ssDSCs yielded an average PCE of 5.65%.55b At the same time, polymer HTM penetration into the TiO2 porous electrodes has been accomplished via the in situ polymerization of pre-penetrated monomers. For example, Liu et al. reported an indoline dye (D149) based DSCs with in situ photoelectron-polymerization of bis-EDOT forming the polymer HTM. Using Au as the CE, the devices gave an average PCE of 6.1%, representing a remarkable improvement for polymer HTM-based ssDSCs.56
As with liquid DSCs, Pt film is a conventional CE in ssDSCs. The Liu group fabricated flexible ssDSCs on the low cost Ti foil substrate using D102 as the sensitizer, P3HT as the HTM, and a semi-transparent Pt CE. Because the Ti substrate is non-transparent, the device must be illuminated from the rear side, by which a significant proportion of the radiation is absorbed and scattered by P3HT and Pt, respectively. It is therefore important to limit the amount of Pt and P3HT to reduce absorption and scattering. Under optimized conditions, a PCE of 1.20% is obtained for the devices illuminated from the Pt CE side. The lower efficiency compared to conventional devices is due to light loss from the Pt CE and strong absorbance from the P3HT layer.57 In addition, Pt CE is usually used in sandwich-type ssDSCs. The Kim group reported an in situ solid state polymerizable method for the preparation of PEDOT HTM based ssDSCs with an excellent performance and improved electrode/HTM interfacial properties using N719 dye and a Pt CE.58 The device gave a PCE of 5.4%.
Although Ag CE is not suitable for liquid iodide electrolyte based DSCs, because it is easily dissolved by iodide electrolytes, Ag is a common CE in ssDSCs. Ag CE can be fabricated via a thermal evaporation method59 or by spray solution containing Ag nanoparticles on top of the device.60 All of these electrodes require an annealing step to optimize the conductivity, which causes rapid degradation of the ssDSCs. It is therefore of great interest to find a method for fabricating Ag film with low sheet resistances and high transmission without annealing. The McGehee group fabricated an Ag nanowire (Ag NWs, Fig. 9a) mesh on a separate substrate and then transferred it using appropriate pressure on the top of spiro-OMeTAD, thereby achieving comparable device performance with standard thermally deposited Ag electrodes.61 The laminated Ag NWs are defective due to the pressing procedure, whereby each wire may come into contact with the soft hole conductor to be transferred, and are too thick to be completely transferred to another substrate. A new process, completely in solution, was then developed for Ag NW/PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes at room temperature, and the device showed a PCE of 3.7%.62 Obviously, the fact that these CEs use expensive metals is still an issue for HTM based ssDSCs in wide scale applications. Carbon, on the other hand, is an abundantly available and low cost material that can be deposited through a simple process such as screen printing or spray coating. Cb and graphite are the most common carbon materials that have been used in ssDSCs.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of Ag NWs;61 (b) TEM image of ITO nanoparticles.69 
In 2002, the O'Regan group reported ssDSCs using CuSCN as the HTM, TiO2 as the electron conductor, N3 dye and graphite as the CE. The device showed a Jsc of 8 mA cm−2, Voc of 600 mV, and PCE of 2% at 1 sun, similar to the results of CuSCN based ssDSCs with an evaporated Au CE.63 The Sakamoto group prepared large surface area CEs blending nanosize Cb in the PEDOT:PSS dispersion, after which the CE with a larger number of NCS groups was covered with a solution containing guanidine thiocyanate. The resulting ssDSCs exhibited a dramatically higher PCE of 7.4%. The EIS results revealed that adding nano-size carbon decreased the CE/HTM interface resistance, while the lower electrical resistance of PEDOT:PSS with carbon also contributed to the higher cell performance.64 The Han group has developed highly efficient P3HT based ssDSCs with low cost carbon CEs. Compared to blank graphite CE based devices, those with graphite and Cb CEs show a PCE of 3.1%. The EIS results further indicated that Cb enhanced electron injection from the CE to P3HT, leading to a decreased recombination rate between injected electrons and holes.65 Recently, the same group further optimized the ratio of Cb in the graphite CE, whereby a considerable efficiency of 4.03% was obtained combined with spiro-OMeTAD and the organic dye D102.66
To broaden the scope of electrode materials in ssDSCs, metal oxides have been studied because those with high work functions satisfy certain basic requirements for CEs in ssDSCs. In 2010, the Xia group used V2O5/Al as a novel CE in ssDSCs with spiro-OMeTAD as the HTM.67 They observed that the performance of these ssDSCs depended on the thickness of the V2O5 film. If it is too thin to cover the spiro-OMeTAD layer, it can cause a short-circuit, whereas if the film is too thick, it can result in poor conductivity. The ssDSCs with a 10 nm thick V2O5/Al CE reached a PCE of 2.0% after optimization, approaching the performance of ssDSCs using Ag CE. The Chen group reported bifacial transparent ssDSCs based on an indium tin oxide (ITO)/Au CE made through sputtering technology and obtained an efficiency of 1.96% through photoanode side illumination and 1.50% through ITO CE side illumination.68 In the pursuit of non-sputtered and non-noble metal CEs, the Han group recently reported a fully printable transparent ssDSC with a mesoscopic ITO CE. Fig. 9b is the TEM image of the ITO nanoparticles.69 The ssDSC with D102 dye and spiro-OMeTAD HTM presented a PCE of 1.73% when irradiated from the front side and 1.06% when irradiated from the rear side. The experimental conditions and results for the hole transport material (HTM) based DSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S7.†
Fabricating highly efficient and low cost ssDSCs is one major challenge in this area. Most studies currently focus on developing small organic molecule HTMs and add various dopants to improve the conductivity of the HTM and its pore-filling property. However, studies on non-metal CEs in ssDSCs are also important to improve the fabrication process and to reduce the cost of the ssDSCs.
3. Counter electrodes in quantum dots-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs)
Quantum dots (QDs) are an attractive photo-absorber because of the advantages of large absorption coefficients and tunable absorption onset in the visible region by regulating the particle size and composition. Based on the DSC's structure, QDs are introduced into DSCs as an alternative to the dye, and the produced devices are called QD-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs).70 Although the redox couples in DSCs can be transferred into QDSC systems, the S2−/Sn2− (polysulfide) redox couple has proven to be the most effective one so far because of its optimal redox potential, efficient hole extraction from the QDs, and ability to chemically stabilize QDs such as CdS, PbS, and Ag2S. The CE catalysts must be able to recycle the electrolyte to complete the circuit. The common CE catalyst used for evaluating QDSCs is Pt and Au. However, noble metals are quickly poisoned by the polysulfide electrolyte, resulting in a significant drop in current. Thus, Pt and Au CEs are unsuitable for long term use in QDSCs. Moreover, Pt and Au are rare and expensive, and replacing them with an inexpensive, earth-abundant material is an ideal solution.
Metal sulfides such as Cu2S, PbS, and CoS are highly active in polysulfide reduction, although early studies have shown that they may not be stable under normal operating conditions. Specifically, the PbS device displayed 10% drop in its initial current density after two weeks.71 Consequently, choosing a suitable CE catalyst is important to create highly efficient and stable QDSCs. In this section, we will discuss the various CE catalysts, including metals, metal sulfides, carbides, nitrides, carbon materials, polymers, and multiple compounds, and note the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Although Pt and Au are not the best choices for CE catalysts in QDSCs due to the poison effect, there are a few reports on them in the literature. Choi et al. synthesized AuPt bimetallic nanoparticles (AuPt-BNPs) using a dry plasma reduction (DPR) technique and introduced them in QDSCs as a transparent CE which exhibited a high catalytic activity. The device employing the AuPt-BNP CE reached a PCE of 2.4% under front side illumination and 2.2% under rear side illumination.72a Although the performance of AuPt-BNPs is higher than that of both Pt and Au CEs, they are still not the ideal CE for QDSCs. In the polysulfide redox couple system, sulfur atoms are adsorbed on the Pt surface, suppressing the surface activity and conductivity. To overcome this issue, a thin passivating layer of CuS was deposited on the Pt surface to prevent the corrosion from the polysulfide redox couple. The QDSCs with a CuS-modified Pt CE gave a PCE of 2.27%, much higher than Pt based QDSCs.72b Another solution is to replace the S2−/Sx2− redox couple with a non-corrosive redox electrolyte. Sun et al. introduced the organic redox couple TMTU/TMFDS2+ (Fig. 5).72c This device produced a PCE of 0.86% with a high FF of 0.58 due to the reduced impedance between the electrolyte and the Pt CE. The performance of the TMTU/TMFDS2+ based device reached an efficiency three times higher than that of the device based on the common S2−/Sx2− electrolyte (0.27%). The authors also applied another organic redox couple, McMT−/BMT.72d Combined with a Pt CE, the device yielded a PCE of 0.6%, much higher than the conventional S2−/Sx2− redox couple based device (0.3%). The EIS results showed that the charge recombination in the McMT−/BMT based QDSCs was much lower than that in the polysulfide based QDSCs. In addition to the organic redox couple, metal complex redox couples were also tested. Morris et al. compared Mn2+/3+ and Co2+/3+ complexes as promising redox couple alternatives in QDSCs.72e High Voc values of approximately 1 V were achieved in a liquid-junction solar cell (a three-electrode arrangement employing a quantum dot-sensitized photoanode as the working electrode, a Pt CE, and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode). The low solubility of the Mn2+/3+ electrolyte prevented the redox mediators from sustaining high photocurrent due to mass transport limits. Although the FF was up to 0.6, a low PCE of 0.33% was achieved under 0.2 Sun. Compared to Co2+/3+, Mn2+/3+ showed more positive reduction potentials and slower recombination rates. Improving the solubility is one of the key issues for metal complex redox couples in QDSC systems.
The most commonly used CE materials are metal sulfides, among which copper sulfides are the most widely used because of their superior catalytic activity toward polysulfide electrolyte redox couples.73 Specifically, Cu2S deposited on brass foil is the most commonly used CE in high efficiency QDSCs. However, the corrosion caused by polysulfide poses an obstacle for the brass substrate. To resolve this problem, the brass substrate is commonly replaced by FTO glass. Zhong et al. deposited a Cu2S film on FTO glass by electrodeposition of a copper film via a multipotential step technique followed by dipping it into polysulfide methanol solution. As shown in Fig. 10a, the Cu2S film takes an interconnected nanoflake shape.74a A CdSe based device with an optimized Cu2S/FTO CE exhibited a PCE of 5.21%, comparable to that of the commonly used Cu2S/brass CE (5.41%), while the Cu2S/FTO CE showed good stability under the working conditions over 10 h, showing no decrease in PCE, which was a severe challenge for the Cu2S/brass CE.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of sulfide catalysts: (a) Cu2S;74a (b) NiS;77a (c) m-Fe2S;78a (d) Bi2S3.79b 
The Zhao group prepared CuS nanosheet film on FTO glass by a facile and low temperature hydrothermal method to prepare CEs for QDSCs.74b The thickness of the CuS film was controlled by the precursor Cu film with thicknesses of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 μm. Under front side illumination, the QDSCs using the CuS CE prepared with 1.0 μm Cu yielded the highest PCE of 3.65%. Most importantly, all CuS CEs behaved better than Pt CE. Interestingly, a thinner CuS CE prepared with a ∼0.2 μm thick Cu film showed excellent transparency. A bifacial QDSC was achieved using this transparent CE, and a similar PCE was achieved under both front and rear illumination. Wang et al. prepared a Cu2S CE by ion exchange of ZnS films deposited on mesoporous ITO electrodes with a Cu+ containing electrolyte solution. This device with a Cu2S CE exhibited a high PCE of 4.78%, matching the performance of a Cu2S/brass-based device. The ion exchange technique is a promising route to fabricate other sulfide CEs, such as PbS and CoS.74c Meng used a mesh structured Cu2S CE in tandem QDSCs which produced a PCE of 3.65%.74d A Cu2S nanorod CE was also employed and a PCE of 4.12% was achieved.74e The Lee group synthesized Cu1.8S microspheres with a diameter of 500 nm as CE catalysts and the device produced a PCE of 3.65%.75a Joo et al. developed a simple hydrothermal method to synthesize a Cu1.8S/CuS film on FTO glass as an efficient CE for QDSCs.75b Under the illumination of one sun (100 mW cm−2), a device using the prepared Cu1.8S/CuS CE gave a PCE of 1.66% with Jsc = 5.46 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.539 V, and FF = 0.564. A compact (c-CuxS) and a porous (p-CuxS) film on FTO glass were obtained through a chemical bath deposition (CBD) technique and used as CEs in QDSCs.75c Compared to the c-CuxS film, the p-CuxS film exhibited enhanced catalytic activity and the QDSCs yielded a PCE of 3.17%. The number of redox active reaction sites in the p-CuxS film was 57.9% higher than those available in the c-CuxS film, resulting in the improved performance of p-CuxS CE based QDSCs.
The Zaban group prepared a PbS CE on Pb metal, and the device yielded a PCE of 3.01%, much higher than the Pt CE based device (0.8%).76a EIS revealed that the high performance of the PbS CE was the result of the improved charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, causing a change in the ion concentration in the solution by reducing the recombination rates at the working electrode/electrolyte interface and strongly impacting both the Jsc and the FF. Kim et al. studied the impact of Mn2+ doping on the catalytic activity of PbS CEs.76b The QDSCs with a Mn2+ doped PbS CE showed a PCE of 3.61%, which was ∼40% higher than that of the device with the bare PbS CE (2.59%). The catalytic ability of the PbS CE was improved significantly by Mn2+ doping, which can be attributed to the following two reasons: intentional impurities impact the structure of the host material, increasing the surface roughness, and the Mn2+ dopant creates new energy states which can delay the exciton recombination time and allow charge separation to be activated. Interestingly, Mn2+ doped PbS QDs also behave as additional photoelectron donors under illumination, resulting in vigorous redox reactions in the polysulfide electrolyte. The Gopi group prepared a NiS CE by a facile and low temperature CBD method under different temperatures of 80, 90, and 100 °C.77 The NiS (Fig. 10c) CE prepared at 90 °C showed the highest catalytic activity toward the polysulfide redox couple, and the device gave a PCE of 3.30%, higher than that of the Pt CE based device (1.89%). Ion sulfides have also been used as CEs in QDSCs.78 Mesoporous honeycomb-like FeS2 microspheres (m-FeS2, Fig. 10c) with diameters of 500–800 nm and pore sizes of 25–30 nm along with solid FeS2 microspheres (s-FeS2) with diameters of approximately 2 μm have been synthesized by a simple solvothermal method.78a Both types of FeS2 microspheres presented more effective catalytic activity in QDSCs than Pt, while the m-FeS2 behaved better than s-FeS2. As a consequence, using a ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe photoanode, the QDSCs with the m-FeS2 CE yielded a PCE of 3.90%, higher than the performance of the s-FeS2 CE based device (3.50%). Liu and Li et al. prepared FeS and FeS/Fe3S4/Fe2S CEs on a carbon steel substrate. The FeS device produced a PCE of 3.34% with a high Jsc of 20.40 mA cm−2, much higher than the FeS/Fe3S4/Fe2S CE based device (1.76%).78b,c MoS2, Bi2S3 (Fig. 10d), and CoS have also been used as CEs in QDSCs, presenting decent catalytic activity.79a–c Li deposited CuS, CoS, NiS, and PbS on ITO porous films, prepared by the SILAR method, were used as CEs in QDSCs.79d The authors found that CuS CEs with 12 SILAR cycles exhibited the highest catalytic activity, followed by the CoS CE, and that NiS and PbS CEs showed similar catalytic activity, significantly lower than that of a Pt CE.
We fabricated low cost QDSCs using SnS quantum dots based on an earth abundant element with S2−/Sx2−, T−/T2, and I−/I3− redox couples, comparing the performance of CE catalysts of Pt, TiC and SnS.80a The results indicated that Pt and TiC showed similar catalytic selectivity toward I−/I3− and SnS was not an ideal catalyst for I−/I3−. However, TiC behaved better than Pt for T−/T2. With a TiC CE and T−/T2 redox couple, the SnS based QDSCs yielded a PCE of 1.03%, much higher than the device using the S2−/Sx2− redox couple (0.16%). These results indicate the great potential of transition metal carbide catalysts in organic redox couple based QDSCs. In addition to TiC, TiN was also applied in QDSCs as a CE, which produced an unsatisfactory PCE of 0.8%.80b Loading TiN on graphene or CNTs may greatly improve the catalytic activity.
As in DSCs, carbon materials are also competitive CEs for QDSCs. In 2010, an ordered multimodal porous carbon (OMPC, Fig. 11a) was developed as a CE for QDSCs. The corresponding QDSCs employing the OMPC CE presented a PCE of 4.36%, significantly higher than those of Pt and Ca CE based devices (2.29%, Pt and 3.30%, Ca).81a The unique mesoporous structure endows the OMPC with a large surface area and a well developed 3D interconnected ordered macropore framework with open mesopores embedded in the macropore walls. This allows the electrode to exhibit fast mass transfer kinetics toward the polysulfide electrolytes, which is the major reason behind the high catalytic activity of OMPC over Ca and Pt. Yu et al. compared hollow core mesoporous shell carbon (HCMSC) with Pt in QDSCs using I−/I3− and polysulfide redox couples.81b For the expensive Pt CE, the S2−/Sx2− redox couple showed better matching ability than the I−/I3− redox couple, and the QDSCs using S2−/Sx2− and the Pt CE gave a PCE of 1.05%. The S2−/Sx2− based device using an HCMSC CE demonstrated a PCE of 1.08%, much higher than devices using mesoporous carbon like (CMK) CE. The higher catalytic activity of HCMSC can be attributed to its unique structural characteristics, such as large specific surface area, high mesoporous volume, and a 3D interconnected well-developed hierarchical porous network, all of which facilitate fast mass transfer with less resistance from the polysulfide electrolyte.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of OMPC;81a SEM images of (b) PEDOT;82a (c) CuSnS3;75a (d) CuS/Cf.85b 
Lee et al. prepared a mesocellular carbon foam with a high surface area of 911 m2 g−1 and a large pore size of 25 nm. The CdS/CdSe/TiO2 QDSCs using this carbon foam CE show a PCE of 1.75%, much higher than those of the devices employing Pt CE (1.22%) or carbon CE (0.94%).81c The large surface area of the carbon foam provides more effective catalytic sites for Sx2− reduction while the ∼25 nm mesochannels with an interconnected pore structure facilitate electrolyte diffusion. As a result, the carbon foam CE shows much improved catalytic activity in comparison to the conventional Pt and carbon CEs. Furthermore, the authors introduced the carbon foam CE to a ZnO nanowire array photoelectrode based QDSC.81d The cell with the carbon foam CE yielded a higher PCE of 3.60%, which was much higher than that of the TiO2 photoanode based QDSCs, because the ZnO nanowire structure provided efficient photoelectron collection and light harvesting. Similarly, the carbon foam CE exhibits a low Rct between the CE/electrolyte interface due to the extremely high surface area and facile diffusion of the redox couple compared to conventional Pt and Au CEs. Furthermore, the carbon foam electrode is much more durable in the polysulfide electrolyte than Au and Pt electrodes. Carbon nanofiber (CNF) has been used as a CE in SnO2 photoanode based QDSCs.81e The device using CNF CE showed a PCE of 2.5%, surpassing the Pt CE based device (2.1%). Zhu et al. inspected the impact of N-doping on the performance of hollow carbon nanoparticle (HCNP) CEs in QDSC systems. The QDSCs using this N-doped carbon CE achieved a PCE of 2.67%, higher than HCNP, CNTs and Pt CE based devices. The EIS results revealed that the Rct of the N-HCNP CE toward the polysulfide redox couple greatly decreased compared to that of HCNP, CNT and Pt CEs. In addition, the N-HCNP electrode showed better electrochemical stability and tolerance to sulfur poisoning in the polysulfide electrolyte. The better performance of the N-HCNP electrode is primarily attributed to the fact that N-doping may introduce more active catalytic sites in the porous structure, although this conclusion needs further validation.
Ho et al. introduced the conducting polymers polythiophene (PT), PPy, and PEDOT (Fig. 11b) as CEs into QDSCs.82a The QDSCs with a PEDOT CE exhibited the highest PCE of 1.35%, much higher than those of the devices using Pt CE (0.09%) or PPy CE (0.41%). EIS results showed that the PEDOT CE had higher electrocatalytic activity and lower Rct at the CE/electrolyte interface than either PT or PPy. The SEM images depicted a regular porous structure in PEDOT with net-like fibers of various dimensions, while the others did not exhibit any special matrix structure, explaining why PEDOT possesses the highest catalytic activity toward the polysulfide redox couple among the three polymers. Shu et al. compared different CE catalysts with the organic redox couples of T−/T2 and C7H5N4S−/C14H10N8S2 (AT−/BAT) in QDSC systems.82b The AT−/BAT redox couple showed better matching ability than the conventional polysulfide redox couple with the Pt, CoS or PEDOT CEs, and the PEDOT CE exhibited higher catalytic activity than Pt and CoS. A PCE of 1.53% was achieved for the QDSCs using PEDOT CE combined with the AT−/BAT redox couple. Moreover, with the PEDOT CE, it was found that the QDSCs based on the AT−/BAT redox couple outperformed the QDSCs based on the T−/T2 redox couple due to the suppressed charge recombination.
The above-mentioned metal sulfides and carbides belong to binary inorganic compounds (comprising two elements), whereas multiple compounds comprising three or more elements have also been introduced into QDSCs as CE catalysts. In a previous study,75a Lee et al. prepared CuSnS3 (Fig. 11c) to catalyze the redox reaction of S2−/Sx2− in QDSC systems and the device gave a PCE of 4.06%, higher than the conventional copper sulfide CE. The Wang group synthesized porous Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 by a simple spray method for use as CEs in QDSCs.83a With the CdSe quantum dot based photoanode, the devices using Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 CEs achieved PCEs of 2.19 and 4.35%. The higher performance of Cu2ZnSnSe4 than Cu2ZnSnS4 can be attributed to the intrinsic nature of Cu2ZnSnSe4 as well as the porous structure of the catalytic film formed under the high sintering temperatures, confirmed by SEM and EIS measurements. Using a pyrolysis procedure, Shi et al. prepared a porous structured Cu2ZnSnS4 thin film with pore sizes of 100–200 nm for CEs in QDSCs. After optimization, the device yielded a PCE of 2.56%.83b Lee et al. prepared a class of Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 nanocrystals with different S/Se ratios (x = 0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.85, and 1) and investigated the impact of those ratios on catalytic activity.83c Firstly, all of the Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 samples exhibited higher catalytic activity than Pt toward the regeneration of S2−/Sx2−. Secondly, the ratios of S/Se were found to play a crucial role in determining the catalytic activities for the redox reaction of S2−/Sx2−, confirmed by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and EIS, which revealed that the electron transfer kinetics and diffusion resistance of the electrolyte were related to the S/Se ratios. As a result, the device with Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4, where x = 0.5, as the CE achieved the highest PCE of 3.01%, much higher than the devices using other S/Se ratios. Xiao et al. compared the performance of a hollow NiCo2S4 single crystalline nanorod array and amorphous NiCo2S4 toward the S2−/Sx2− redox couple in QDSCs.83d The EIS experiments showed that the Rct of the hollow NiCo2S4 CE was 11.9 Ω, lower than that of the amorphous NiCo2S4, indicating that the hollow NiCo2S4 CE exhibited better catalytic activity while the QDSCs yielded a PCE of 4.22%. The excellent behavior of hollow NiCo2S4 can be ascribed to the large catalytic active area, which facilitates electrolyte transport, and the single crystalline 1D nanostructure which promotes fast electron transport, as evidenced by the different capacitance values in EIS and by the SEM images.
Au deposited on reduced graphene (RG) generated a composite Au/RG CE catalyst for QDSCs. The RG/Au composite CE showed a higher catalytic behavior than conventional Au or Pt CEs due to the ideal combination of the high catalytic activity of Au and the conductivity of the RG network structure. This device showed a PCE of 1.36%.84 Song et al. deposited Cu2S nanocrystals on the surface of ITO nanowires to form a Cu2S/ITO composite as a CE for QDSCs.85a The QDSCs with this ITO/Cu2S composite CE demonstrated a PCE of 4.06%, much higher than the plain Cu2S CE based device. The improved catalytic activity caused by the reduced sheet resistance of the CE facilitated electron transfer from ITO to Cu2S because of the high quality tunnel junctions with short carrier transport paths (less than 100 nm) between them. In addition, the 3D structure of the nanowire array provided more active catalytic sites and easy accessibility for the polysulfide redox couple, which led to a decreased Rct, contributing to the high catalytic activity. Meanwhile, CuS nanoparticles were grown in a controlled fashion on carbon nanofibers (CuS/Cf, Fig. 11d) by combining the versatility of the electrospinning technique and a hydrothermal process.85b The combination of the high catalytic activity CuS nanoparticles and the good charge transport provided by the 3D nanofiber framework generated a very high catalytic activity. The QDSCs using this composite CE produced a PCE of 3.86%, much higher than that of the traditional bare CuS CE based device. In the catalytic process, CuS behaves as the main catalyst in the reduction of the oxidized polysulfide, while the carbon nanofibers provide the 3D framework, facilitating the charge transport.
The Meng group prepared a PbS/Cb composite CE with different PbS/Cb weight ratios.86a In this composite CE, PbS provided a large area of catalytic sites and Cb worked as an excellent electrical tunnel for fast electron transport from the external circuit to the PbS surface. When the weight ratio of PbS/Cb was 10:1, the PbS/Cb composite showed the best catalytic activity and the QDSCs achieved a PCE of 3.91%. Furthermore, a durability test over 1000 h proved that the PbS/Cb composite CE was highly stable under the working conditions. PbS nanoparticles were also loaded on graphene sheets that had been pre-deposited on FTO glass, resulting in a graphene/PbS composite CE for CdS/CdSe QDSCs.86b Under standard conditions, the device showed a PCE of 2.63%, remarkably higher than those using PbS (1.28%) or graphene (0.23%) CEs.
Wang et al. fabricated a composite CE by combining PbS nanoparticles with ZnO nanorod arrays.86c Compared with planar CEs, the ZnO nanorod array framework presented a larger surface area capable of loading more PbS catalysts and resulting in easy accessibility of the electrolyte. Moreover, the 3D structure of the ZnO nanorod arrays provides an excellent electron pathway for shuttling electrons to PbS catalytic sites. As a result, the ZnO/PbS composite CEs exhibited much higher catalytic activity for polysulfide and the QDSCs yielded a PCE of 3.06%. Yuan et al. fabricated a CoS/graphene composite and found that the graphene played a crucial role in forming the nanostructure of the electrode, endowing it with a high specific surface area and further excellent catalytic activity toward the polysulfide redox couple. Consequently, the QDSCs using the CoS/graphene composite CE showed a PCE of 2.90%.87a Using CoS nanorod arrays on graphite paper (GP) as a composite CE, combined with a flexible ZnO photoanode, Pan et al. assembled a flexible QDSC.87b The CoS/GP composite CE showed high catalytic activity and exchange current density and lower Rct toward the polysulfide redox couple with a PCE of 2.70%, higher than those of QDSCs using Pt (0.52%) and GP (0.71%) CEs. This work also provides a feasible path to fabricate flexible electrodes for DSCs.
Using the CBD technique, Lin et al. prepared a fiber shaped Co9S8/Cf CE which showed much higher catalytic activity toward the reduction of Sx2− than the conventional Pt CE.87c Using this fiber shaped composite CE, the researchers assembled fiber shaped QDSCs, obtaining a PCE of 3.79%. As previously mentioned, CoS and NiS CEs showed decent catalytic activity toward the polysulfide redox couple. Gopi et al. prepared FTO/CoS/NiS and FTO/NiS/CoS composite CEs.87d Interestingly, the QDSCs with the FTO/CoS/NiS CE exhibited a PCE of 3.40%, much higher than the device using FTO/NiS/CoS (2.53%). The photovoltaic difference is caused by the different values of Rs, the electron transport resistance, the mass transport resistance and the Rct at the composite CEs. The Meng group introduced a ternary compound CuInS2 to QDSCs as a CE,88a resulting in a PCE of 3.63%. After adding an appropriate amount of Ca/Cb mixture to the CuInS2 electrode, they obtained a CuInS2/Ca/Cb composite with improved catalytic activity and stability. After fixing the weight ratio of CuInS2/Ca + Cb at 1:1, this device showed a high PCE of 4.32%. In addition, a long term stability test indicated that the CuInS2/Ca/Cb composite CE exhibited good stability under the working conditions for 1000 h.
Using water soluble MWCNTs and Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) nanoparticles, the Chen group obtained MWCNTs/CZTSe composites with different weight ratios.88b When the weight ratio of MWCNTs/CZTSe was 0.1, the composite CE achieved optimal behavior and the device produced a PCE of 4.60%. Based on the assumption that the MWCNTs provide a fast electron transfer channel in combination with fast interfacial electron exchange through the catalytic active surface of the CZTSe, they proposed a “composite charge transmission” model to explain the differences in the catalytic activity of the composite CEs with various weight ratios. This study revealed potential low cost and high efficiency QDSCs. Shu et al. fabricated a PEDOT/TiO2 composite CE by an electro-polymerization method with different deposition charge capacities of 40, 80, 120, 160 mC cm−2.89 The QDSCs with the composite CE prepared at 120 mC cm−2 achieved a PCE of 1.56%. The higher catalytic activity was mainly due to the increased active surface area without the formation of large pores and aggregation under intermediate deposition charge capacities. The experimental conditions and results for the QDSCs using different CE catalysts are summarized in Table S8.†
The redox couples in QDSCs are not developing as fast as those in DSC systems and the most widely used redox couple is still polysulfide. The developments in CE materials are more dramatic and include carbon materials, transition metal carbides, nitrides, sulfides, oxides, multiple compounds, and composites.
4. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, DSCs have made remarkable strides with novel Pt-free CE catalysts accompanied by iodide-free redox couples, overcoming the challenges of high prices, limited Pt reserves, absorption of short wavelength light and strong corrosion of the iodide redox couple. We have reviewed a number of Pt-free CE catalysts for various iodide-free redox couples including inorganic, organic, and metal complex materials, among others. The Pt-free CE catalysts contain carbon materials, polymers, metal compounds, multiple compounds, and composite materials.
Among the Pt-free catalysts, carbon materials, such as Ca, Cb, CNTs, and graphene, have the merits of low cost, mature preparation processes, high catalytic activities and considerable stability. We believe that carbon CEs are the most promising candidates in the commercial production of DSCs. Organic polymers are the ideal transparent flexible CEs because they have the advantages of transparency, low cost, availability, and high catalytic activity. Nevertheless, there remain some problems to be resolved, such as the development of a gentle method to prepare flexible polymer CEs at low temperature, the exploration of new polymers, improved stability, and so forth. To date, metal carbides, nitrides, oxides, sulfides, phosphides, selenides, and tellurides have been proposed as CE catalysts in DSCs, with most of them showing high catalytic activity. The main problem with this type of catalyst is that the synthesis procedures generally consume large amounts of energy. Thus, the exploration of new synthesis routes with lower consumption is necessary for metal compound CEs. Multiple compound CEs are newcomers, and their long-term stability must be evaluated under harsh conditions. We believe that an increasing number of multiple compound CEs will be introduced into DSCs. Composites are the main force in Pt-free CE catalysts, and all of the composite catalysts work better than their individual components. The fundamental reasons for the higher catalytic activity of composites and the role of each component should be further investigated.
It has been proven that a matching issue exists between CE catalysts and redox couples. Therefore, design of low cost Pt and TCO-free CEs, such as integrated carbon sheets, is a promising path in the pursuit of low cost DSCs with high efficiency. In this process, researchers should note that every part of a DSC correlates with each other and a slight variation in one part may affect the overall status. The realization of the industrialization of DSCs requires comprehensive consideration of each component of DSCs.
In QDSC systems, a metal CE cannot be suitable for the widely used polysulfide redox couple. The commonly used CEs are transition metal sulfides, such as Cu2S, CuS, FeS, NiS, CoS, etc. Carbon materials, polymers, multiple compounds and composite materials are used only sporadically. Redox couples in QDSCs show slow development and there are few reports about polysulfide-free redox couples compared to the iodide-free redox couples in QDSC systems. Improving the PCE of QDSCs is the main task of current research in that area.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21303039, 51273032), Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province (Grant No. B2015205163, B2013205171), and Support Program for Hundred Excellent Innovation Talents from the Universities of Hebei Province, BR2-220).
Notes and references
A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Science, 1999, 285, 692–698 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaic, 2014, 22, 701–710 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Ye, X. Wen, M. Wang, J. Iocozzia, N. Zhang, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Mater. Today, 2005, 18, 155–162 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hod and A. Zban, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7264–7273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Grätzel and S. M. Zakeeruddin, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 11–18 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Wang, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9394–9405 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Wu, X. Lin, Y. Wang, L. Wang, W. Guo, D. Qi, X. Peng, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and T. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3419–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Wu, Y. Lin, H. Guo, K. Wu and X. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7625–7627 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Wu, H. Guo, Y. Lin, K. Wu, T. Ma and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12625–12631 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) M. Wu, X. Lin, L. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Wang, J. Xiao, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22598–22602 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, N. Yu, L. Wang, L. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19298–19301 RSC ; 
  (f) M. Wu, J. Bai, Y. Wang, A. Wang, X. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11121–11127 RSC ; 
  (g) L. Wang, W. Wu, Y. Gao and T. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 221102 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (h) H. Zhou, Y. Shi, L. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Zhao, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7626–7628 RSC .

  (a) A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457–3466 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Hou, D. Wang, X. H. Yang, W. Q. Fang, B. Zhang, H. F. Wang, G. Z. Lu, P. Hu, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1583 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Hao, P. Dong, Q. Luo, J. Li, J. Lou and H. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2003–2019 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Wu, Y. Lin, H. Guo, T. Ma and A. Hagfeldt, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Wu, X. Lin, Y. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3520–3524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Teng, X. Yang, C. Yuan, C. Li, R. Chen, H. Tian, S. Li, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 5542–5545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Oskam, B. V. Bergeron, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6867–6873 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7164–7165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Gao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5573–5575 RSC .

  (a) Z. Zhang, P. Chen, T. N. Murakami, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 341–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Cazzanti, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, C. M. Elliott and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9996–9997 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) B. A. Gregg, F. Pichot, S. Ferrere and C. L. Fields, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1422–1429 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Tian and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC ; 
  (e) M. Cheng, X. Yang, C. Chen, J. Zhao, F. Zhang and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15146–15151 RSC ; 
  (f) M. Chen, X. Yang, F. Zhang, J. Zhao and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9896–9899 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (g) M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) J. Burschka, V. Brault, S. Ahmad, L. Breau, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. Marsan, S. K. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6089–6097 RSC .

  (a) K. M. Bratlie, H. Lee, K. Komvopoulos, P. D. Yang and G.
A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3097–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. P. Zhou, A. Lewera, R. Larsen, R. Masel, P. Bagus and A. Wieckowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13393–13398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Wu, Y. Lin, H. Guo, W. Li, Y. Wang and X. Lin, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 540–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Hao, P. Dong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Loya, R. Hauge, J. Li, J. Lou and H. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 368 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Pan, Z. Yang, H. Li, L. Qiu, H. Sun and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10622–10625 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) H. Wu, Z. Lv, Z. Chu, D. Wang, S. Hou and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14815–14820 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Long, S. G. Miralles, J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago and M. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7131–7136 RSC .

  (a) X. Li, L. Liu, G. Liu, Y. Rong, Y. Yang, H. Wang, Z. Ku, M. Xu, C. Zhong and H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3344–3353 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Li, Z. Ku, Y. Rong, G. Liu, L. Liu, T. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Wang, M. Xu, P. Xiang and H. Han, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14383–14390 RSC ; 
  (c) Z. Ku, X. Li, G. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Rong, M. Xu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 237–240 RSC ; 
  (d) G. Liu, X. Li, H. Wang, Y. Rong, Z. Ku, M. Xu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang and H. Han, Carbon, 2013, 53, 11–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) K. Funabiki, Y. Saito, M. Doi, K. Yamada, Y. Yoshikawa, K. Manseki, Y. Kubota and M. Matsui, Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 6312–6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Tian, X. Jiang, Z. Yu, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7328–7331 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Tian, Z. Xu, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9413–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Noureldine, T. Shoker, M. Musameh and T. Ghaddar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 862–869 RSC .

  (a) D. Li, H. Li, Y. Luo, K. Li, Q. Meng, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3358–3365 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, M. Parameswaran and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 564–571 RSC .
W. Cho, D. Song, Y. Lee, H. Chae, Y. R. Kim, Y. B. Pyun, S. Nagarajan, P. Sudhagar and Y. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 233–236 CAS .

  (a) T. W. Hamann, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19756–19764 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Daeneke, T.-H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 213–217 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Daeneke, Y. Uemura, N. Duffy, A. Mozer, N. Koumura, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Hattori, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Bai, Q. Yu, N. Cai, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4376–4378 RSC .

  (a) T. C. Li, A. M. Spokoyny, C. She, O. K. Farha, C. A. Mirkin, T. J. Marks and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4580–4582 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. M. Spokoyny, T. C. Li, O. K. Farha, C. W. Machan, C. She, C. L. Stern, T. J. Marks, J. T. Hupp and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oyaizu, N. Hayo, Y. Sasada, F. Kato and H. Nishide, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 16090–16095 RSC .
I. R. Perera, A. Gupta, W. Xiang, T. Daeneke, T. Bach, R. A. Evans, C. A. Ohlin and L. Spiccia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12021–12028 RSC .
A. Yella, H. Lee, H. Tsao, C. Yi, A. Chandiran, M. Nazeeruddin, E. Diau, C. Yeh, S. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feldt, E. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Sapp, C. M. Elliott, C. Contado, S. Caramori and A. Bignozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11215–11222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, E. Diau, M. Wu, H. Lu and T. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2600–2602 RSC .
F. Ghamouss, R. Pitson, F. Odobel, M. Boujtita, S. Caramori and C. Bignozzi, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6517–6522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Aitola, J. Halme, S. Feldt, P. Lohse, M. Borghei, A. Kaskela, A. Nasibulin, E. Kauppinen, P. Lund, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feldt, E. Gibson, G. Wang, G. Fabregat, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Polyhedron, 2014, 82, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Kavan, J. Yum and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5501–5506 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Kavan, J. Yum, M. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9171–9178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roy-Mayhew, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and I. Aksay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2794–2800 CAS .
L. Kavan, J. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6999–7006 CAS .
Y. Li, H. Wang, Q. Feng, G. Zhou and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8217–8224 CAS .
M. Al-Mamun, J. Kim, K. Lee, Y. Ko, J. Lee, I. In, J. Lee, Y. Sung and S. Kim, Synth. Met., 2013, 177, 77–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Stefik, J. Yum, Y. Hut and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4982–4987 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Ju, J. Kim, H. Choi, I. Choi, S. Kim, K. Lim, J. Ko, J. Lee, I. Jeon, J. Baek and H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5243–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shukla, N. Loc, P. Boix, T. Koh, R. Prabhakar, H. Mulmudi, J. Zhang, S. Chen, C. Ng, C. Huan, N. Mathews, T. Sritharan and Q. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10597–10605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhou, S. Pang and G. Cui, Chin. J. Chem., 2014, 32, 491–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Tsao, J. Burschka, C. Yi, F. Kessler, M. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4921–4924 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Carli, E. Busatto, S. Caramori, R. Boaretto, R. Argazzi, C. Timpson and C. Bignozzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5142–5153 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Kashif, J. Axelson, N. Duffy, C. Forsyth, C. Chang, J. Long, L. Spiccia and U. Bach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16646–16653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Moehl, S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, A. Marchioro, E. Ghadiri, J. Moser, C. Yi, M. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Feng, F. Gong, Y. Li, G. Zhou and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 97–104 CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Cheng, X. Yin and B. Liu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 15–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Tennakone, G. R. R. A. Kumara, A. R. Kumarasinghe, K. G. U. Wijayantha and P. M. Sirimanne, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1995, 10, 1689–1693 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. O'Regan and D. T. Schwartz, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1501–1509 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J. Bandara and H. Weerasinghe, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 385–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. Zhang, R. Zhu, F. Li, Q. Wang and B. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 15, 7038–7043 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Xu, E. Sheibani, P. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Tian, N. Vlachopoulos, G. Boschloo, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6629–6634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N. L. Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042–18045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, H. Tian, D. Bi, E. Gabrielsson, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14467–14470 CAS .

  (a) S. X. Tan, J. Zhai, M. X. Wan, L. Jiang and D. B. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2003, 137, 1511–1512 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Murakoshi, R. Kogure, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Chem. Lett., 1997, 471–472 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Gebeyehu, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, D. Vangeneugden, R. Kiebooms, D. Vanderzande, F. Kienberger and H. Schindler, Synth. Met., 2002, 125, 279–287 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Li, T. Osasa, Y. Hirayama, T. Sano, K. Wakisaka and M. Matsumura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, 8728–8732 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. A. Kumara, S. Kaneko, M. Okuya and K. Tennakone, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 10493–10495 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Schemidt-Mende, U. Bach, R. Humphy-Baker, T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, S. Ito, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 813–815 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2420–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Zhang, S. Uchida, L. Cai, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E150–E155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, L. Wang, W. Liu and B. Liu, Renewable Energy, 2014, 72, 22–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Koh, J. Kim, B. Kim, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1641–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Girotto, B. P. Rand, S. Steudel, J. Genoe and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip, K. Leong and A. K. Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, W. Gaynor, I.-K. Ding, S.-B. Rim, P. Peumans and M. D. McGehee, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 875–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Margulis, M. G. Christoforo, D. Lam, Z. M. Beiley, A. R. Bowring, C. D. Bailie, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan, F. Lenzmann, R. Muis and J. Wienke, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 5023–5029 CrossRef .
H. Sakamoto, S. Igarashi, M. Uchida, K. Niume and M. Nagai, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 514–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, G. Liu, X. Li, P. Xiang, Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2025–2029 CAS .
M. Xu, G. Liu, X. Li, H. Wang, Y. Rong, Z. Ku, M. Hu, Y. Yang, L. Liu, T. Liu, J. Chen and H. Han, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 628–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, C. Yuan and S. Yanagida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2136–2139 CAS .
Y.-F. Chiang, C.-H. Tsai, P. Chen and T.-F. Guo, Sol. Energ., 2012, 86, 1967–1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Ri, Y. Rong, L. Liu, T. Liu, M. Hu, X. Li and H. Han, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17743–17747 RSC .
H. K. Jun, M. A. Careen and A. K. Arof, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 22, 148–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 544–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) V. Dao, Y. Choi, K. Yong, L. L. Larina, O. Shevaleevskiy and H. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 831–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Justin Raj, K. Prabakar, A. D. Savariray and H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 103, 231–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Ning, C. Yuan, H. Tian, Y. Fu, L. Li, L. Sun and H. Ågren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6032–6037 RSC ; 
  (d) Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, L. Li, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6330–6333 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. J. Haring, M. E. Pomatto, M. R. Thornton and A. Morris, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15061–15067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Braga, S. Giménez, I. Concina, A. Vomiero and I. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Z. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Feng and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5215–5222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Zhao, H. Yu, H. Zhang and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5683–5690 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Ke, G. Fang, H. Lei, P. Qin, H. Tao, W. Zeng, J. Wang and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 809–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. Shen, L. Sun, Z. Yu and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2807–2813 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Yang, Q. Zhang, T. Wang, L. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Zhang, X. Hu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 44–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Z. Peng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, K. Chen, Y. Cheng and W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 276–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Xu, X. Yang, T. Wong and C. Lee, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6537–6542 RSC ; 
  (b) S. S. Kalanur, S. Y. Chae and O. S. Joo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 103, 91–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) I. Lim, D. Y. Lee, S. A. Patil, N. K. Shrestha, S. H. Kang, Y. Nah, W. Lee and S. Han, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 148, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Tachan, M. Shalom, I. Hod, S. Rühle, S. Tirosh and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6162–6166 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Kim, M. Son, S. Kim, N. Hong, S. Park, M. Jeong, H. Seo, K. Prabakar and H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 117, 92–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Kim, T. Yeo, S. Kim, S. S. Rao, A. D. Savariraj, K. Prabakar and C. V. V. M. Gopi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 4281–4286 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Kim, D. Kim, S. S. Rao, A. D. Savariraj, K. Kyoung, M. Son, C. V. V. M. Gopi and K. Prabakar, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 427–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Xu, H. Xue, X. Yang, H. Wei, W. Li, Z. Li, W. Zhang and C. Lee, Small, 2014, 10, 4754–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Quan, W. Li, L. Zhu, H. Geng, X. Chang and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 546–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. Chen, L. Zhu, H. Liu and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 406–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. T. Finn and J. E. Macdonald, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400495 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Yu, H. Bao, K. Zhao, Z. Du, H. Zhang and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16602–16610 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Balis, V. Dracopoulos, K. Bourikas and P. Lianos, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) H. Chen, L. Zhu, H. Liu and W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3739–3746 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. Guo, Y. Shen, M. Wu, L. Wang, L. Wang and T. Ma, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7862–7868 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. H. Youn, M. Seol, J. Y. Kim, J. Jang, Y. Choi, K. Yong and J. S. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 261–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Fan, B. Fang, J. H. Kim, B. Jeong, C. Kim, J. Yu and J. Ko, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13644–13649 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. S. Paul, J. H. Kim, M. Kim, K. Do, J. Ko and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Sudhagar, E. Ramasamy, W. Cho, J. Lee and Y. S. Kang, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 34–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Seol, E. Ramasamy, J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22018–22024 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) V. Ganapathy, E. Kong, Y. Park, H. M. Jang and S. Rhee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3296–3301 RSC ; 
  (f) J. Dong, S. Jia, J. Chen, B. Li, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, Z. Wang and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9745–9750 RSC .

  (a) M. Yeh, C. Lee, C. Chou, L. Lin, H. Wei, C. Chu, R. Vittal and K. Ho, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 57, 277–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Shu, X. Li, Z. Ku, S. Wang, S. Wu, X. Jin and C. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 700–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, W. Chen, X. Xu, M. Wang and Y. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 359–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang, C. Shi, X. Dai, F. Liu, X. Fang and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 41–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Cao, Y. Xiao, J. Jung, H. Um, S. Jee, H. M. Choi, J. H. Bang and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Xiao, X. Zeng, W. Chen, F. Xiao and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11734–11736 RSC .
G. Zhu, L. Pan, H. Sun, X. Liu, T. Lv, T. Lu, J. Yang and Z. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 769–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Ge, B. Yu, Y. Zou, W. Jiang, W. Song, L. Wan and J. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 365–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Li, P. Zhu, S. Peng, M. Srinivasan, Q. Yan, A. S. Nair, B. Liu and S. Samakrishna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16526–16535 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Yang, L. Zhu, H. Sun, X. Huang, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6162–6168 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Parand, M. Samadpour, A. Esfandiar and A. I. Zad, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 323–330 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Song, M. Wang, J. Deng, Y. Ju, T. Xing, J. Ding, Z. Yang and J. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 661–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Hu, J. Ding, J. Qian, Y. Li, L. Bai and N. Yuan, Mater. Lett., 2014, 114, 7–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Que, W. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Li, Q. Hua, L. Dong and C. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13661–13666 RSC ; 
  (c) W. Guo, C. Chen, M. Ye, M. Lv and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3656–3663 RSC ; 
  (d) H. Kim, S. Kim, C. V. V. M. Gopi, S. Kim, S. S. Rao and M. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 163–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Gong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5954–5960 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Zeng, D. Xiong, W. Zhang, L. Ming, Z. Xu, Z. Huang, M. Wang, W. Chen and Y. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6992–6998 RSC .
T. Shu and Z. Ku, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 586, 257–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1–S8 summarize the photovoltaic parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03682hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Mingxing Wu	Mingxing Wu received his M.S. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) in 2009. He received his D.E. degree in Applied Chemistry from Dalian University of Technology in 2012. He has now become an associate professor and continues his research in Hebei Normal University. His research focuses on solar cells, hydrogen production by solar energy, and study of the synthesis of functional materials.
Xiao Lin	Xiao Lin is currently a researcher intern at the Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, CAS. She received her Masters degree in fine chemicals from Dalian University of Technology in 2012. Her current research interests include the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials, transition metal oxide nanomaterials and some composite materials for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical catalytic water splitting.
Yudi Wang	Yudi Wang graduated from the Dalian University of Technology and received her B.E. degree in Chemical Engineering in 2010 and M.E. degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology in 2013, under the direction of advisors Prof. Tingli Ma and Zhicong Shi. Then she pursued her doctorate degree in Jilin University guided by Prof. Guangshan Zhu. Currently, her research focuses on porous organic frameworks for perovskite solar cells.
Tingli Ma	Tingli Ma is a professor of Chemistry at the Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology in Japan. She obtained her PhD in 1999 at Kyushu University (Japan). She held numerous research positions such as a researcher at the Kyushu Centre of Japan's National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), assistant professor at the Kyushu University, professor at the Dalian University of Technology (China) and visiting researcher at the California Institute of Technology (USA) and Imperial College London (UK). She currently leads a research team studying dye-sensitized solar cells and other related projects including development of catalysts, hydrogen production, functional dyes and semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  Electricity generating principle of the DSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structure of the organ redox couples TMEPO, PTZ, TBD, HQ/BQ, and T−/T2.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of Mo2C (a) nanoparticles, (b) nanotubes, VN (c) cubes and (d) peas.14c	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of the (a) solid, (b) open-ended, and (c) hollow carbon spheres.16a	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of the T−/T2 derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of Fe, Ni, Cu, Mn, and Co complexes.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of a TaON-RGO composite;38 (b) SEM image of PANI nanowires.45	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the HTM of spiro-OMeTAD, P3HT, and PEDOT.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of Ag NWs;61 (b) TEM image of ITO nanoparticles.69	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of sulfide catalysts: (a) Cu2S;74a (b) NiS;77a (c) m-Fe2S;78a (d) Bi2S3.79b	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of OMPC;81a SEM images of (b) PEDOT;82a (c) CuSnS3;75a (d) CuS/Cf.85b	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1–S8 summarize the photovoltaic parameters. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03682h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
