Heterostructured semiconductor nanowire arrays for artificial photosynthesis  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6MH00063K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6MH00063K
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 270-282Heterostructured semiconductor nanowire arrays for artificial photosynthesis

        
          
            Siqi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Han
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zi-Rong 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350002, P. R. China
bCollege of Chemistry, New Campus, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350108, P. R. China. E-mail: zrtang@fzu.edu.cn; yjxu@fzu.edu.cn
Received 
      8th March 2016
    , Accepted 22nd April 2016First published on 25th April 2016AbstractThe current rapid industrial development generates a high need for alternative sustainable sources of energy. Artificial photosynthesis, which can directly convert solar energy into usable or storable energy resources, provides such a promising alternative. Semiconductor nanowires have gained growing interest in artificial photosynthesis due to their unique geometrical and electronic characteristics, which can provide large aspect-ratios, direct pathways for charge transport, decoupling the direction of charge carrier collection, and low reflectance induced by light scattering and trapping. In particular, heterostructured semiconductor nanowire arrays (NWAs) have recently been of great interest in artificial photosynthesis because of their unique structural and physicochemical properties. Nanowire structure can lower the electrochemical over-potential while the heterojunctions can enhance light absorption and charge separation, which thus increase the artificial photosynthesis efficiency of heterostructured semiconductor NWAs. In this review, we will highlight recent advances in the application of heterostructured semiconductor NWAs to artificial photosynthesis. An emphasis will be placed on the unique characteristics and benefits of using heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with different heterojunctions for artificial photosynthesis, as well as the associated challenges and directions for future research in this area.
Siqi Liu
Siqi Liu is now pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell composites and one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites for heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Chuang Han
Chuang Han is now pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the plasmon-enhanced and carbon-enhanced photocatalysis.
Zi-Rong Tang
Zi-Rong Tang is an associate professor now working at the College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her current research interests primarily focus on the fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and thermocatalysis.
Yi-Jun Xu
Prof. Yi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of metal-based and semiconductor-based nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based, one-dimension-based and core–shell structure-based composite photocatalysts, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Introduction
Strong dependence on non-renewable fossil fuels such as oil, ethanol, natural gas, and coal has made our economy susceptible to price spikes, and the low-efficiency power generation from burning fossil fuels produces a large amount of carbon dioxide, which causes a significant greenhouse effect.1,2 Despite the projected persistent increase in oil and gas prices, a very small part of global energy production is predicted to come from renewable energy sources, such as hydroelectricity, solar, wind, hydrothermal plants, and biomass.3 In order to moderate global reliance on exhaustible natural resources and their environmentally hazardous combustion, developing a clean and renewable alternative to fossil fuels is a matter of utmost urgency.2,3 Among the various alternative energy strategies, artificial photosynthesis, which directly converts abundant and clean solar energy to chemical energy and solar fuels, has been considered as a promising one.4–6 Typical chemical reactions that produce fuels include splitting water into H2 and O2 and reducing carbon dioxide to organic molecules.7 This solar-to-fuel process, termed artificial photosynthesis, mimics natural photosynthesis and is an alternative approach to photo-voltaic cells for production of carbon-neutral energy from sunlight.7–10 The overall artificial photosynthesis process consists of the following parts: light absorption and generation of excited charge carriers, and the utilization of photo-excited carriers to drive catalytic reactions.11 Since the seminal report on photoelectrochemical water splitting to H2 over the TiO2 electrode,12 massive research attention has been paid to the development of novel efficient photocatalysts to improve the performance of semiconductor-based artificial photocatalytic redox processes.13
Nanostructured semiconductors have been demonstrated to increase the quantum efficiency of bulk materials for artificial photosynthesis since charge carriers recombination can be mitigated by decreasing the distance necessary for the charge carriers to diffuse to the surface.14 In particular, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires (NWs), especially vertical nanowire arrays (NWAs), are of special interest in artificial photocatalytic solar energy conversion because of a combination of several favorable properties. Firstly, NWAs can benefit the absorption, diffusion, and charge separation steps of photocatalytic systems because of the unique properties of 1D materials at these length scales.3,15–17 Secondly, NWA templates suppress light reflection and enhance light scattering and trapping, which permits the use of significantly less material than a planar architecture.14,18,19 Because the diameter and spacing of the nanowires could be adjusted on the same length scale as the wavelength of visible light, light-trapping effects are very strong and promote absorption within the semiconductor even though much less material is used,20,21 including direct band gap semiconductors such as GaAs.22 This effect reduces the material cost input for the device, which is important for commercial applications.7 However, NWAs synthesized from single materials are still precluded for practical artificial photosynthesis application because of the limited efficiency and energy input requirement which is affected by the nature of the chemical reactions involved.10,22–26 For example, the thermodynamic potential needed to drive the artificial photocatalytic reaction of interest is typically greater than 1 V as shown below (eqn (1)–(4)).11,27 Additionally, an electrochemical over-potential is needed to overcome the kinetic barriers for a high reaction rate.11,28 This voltage restriction limits the choice of materials to wide band gap semiconductors if only one light-absorber is utilized.28 H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔE = 1.23 V(1) CO2 + H2O → HCOOH + 1/2O2, ΔE = 1.40 V(2) CO2 + H2O → HCHO + O2, ΔE = 1.34 V(3) CO2 + 2H2O → CH4 + 2O2, ΔE = 1.06 V(4)
To circumvent this problem, various heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with integration of the properties from different materials have been fabricated.29–32 In particular, heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with special spatially ordered architectures such as three-dimensional (3D) branched structures and core–shell NWAs have recently been of great interest in artificial photosynthesis due to their unique structural and physicochemical properties.7,16,31,33,34 On one hand, the introduction of nanowire morphology with a large surface area could reduce the electrochemical over-potential required.7 Because solar-to-fuel conversion requires a chemical reaction at the interface, the nanowire structure could lower the electrochemical over-potential,35 which is partially determined by the kinetic barrier for the chemical reaction.7 This facilitates reactions that are kinetically slow,36 and reduces the required use of noble-metal electro-catalysts37 or allows the use of less active earth-abundant ones.38,39 On the other hand, heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with various heterojunctions including p–n junctions, Schottky junctions as well as Z-scheme approaches can improve the photocurrent and consequently the artificial photosynthesis efficiency by enhancing light absorption and charge separation.29–31,40–42 In addition, the formation of heterojunctions can also improve the chemical stability by choosing a corrosion resistive material to interface with electrolytes.29 In this review, we will highlight recent advances in the application of heterostructured semiconductor NWAs to artificial photosynthesis. It is not our intention to do a comprehensive research survey of the field, but rather a set of typical examples concisely demonstrating the unique properties of these 1D materials. An emphasis will be placed on describing heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with different heterojunctions, which include semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunctions, metal–semiconductor heterojunctions, carbon–semiconductor heterojunctions as well as multi-component heterojunctions, for artificial photosynthesis. Finally, some challenges and directions for future research are prospected.
Formation of semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
p–n heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
A 1D semiconductor NWA coupled with another semiconductor forming a p–n junction is an effective architecture for highly efficient charge carrier collection and separation.43 In general, when the p- and n-type semiconductor nanowires are in contact, they form a p–n junction with a space-charge region at the interfaces due to the diffusion of electrons and holes, and thus create a built-in electrical potential that can direct the electrons and holes to travel in the opposite direction (Fig. 1). When the p–n heterojunctions are irradiated by photons with energy higher or equal to the band gaps of the semiconductors, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs can be quickly separated by the built-in electric field within the space charge region.44 Driven by the electric field, the electrons are transferred to the conduction band (CB) of the n-type semiconductors and the holes to the valence band (VB) of the p-type semiconductors.45 These p–n type heterostructured semiconductor NWAs have several advantages: (1) a more effective charge separation; (2) a rapid charge transfer to the catalyst; (3) a longer lifetime of the charge carriers; and (4) separation of locally incompatible reduction and oxidation reactions in nano-space.46,47 All of these features endow the p–n type heterostructures with enhanced photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the p–n heterojunctions. 
Wang et al. have reported the fabrication of 3D branched nanowire (NW) heterostructures, consisting of periodically ordered vertical p-Si NW trunks and n-ZnO NW branches, and their application for solar water splitting (Fig. 2).48 The branched NW photoelectrodes with p–n junctions show orders of magnitude higher photocurrent than bare Si NW electrodes. This improved photocurrent is because of the enhanced light absorption in Si NWs, the increased surface area for redox reaction, and improved charge separation, which are due to the effective junction between p-Si and n-ZnO NWs, and improved gas evolution (faster gas bulb evolution) caused by the large surface curvature of ZnO NWs. Under the light illumination, the photo-generated electron–hole pairs in the depletion region increase the number of electrons in the CB of n-ZnO NWs and the number of holes in the VB of p-Si NWs. The large band bending at the p-Si and n-ZnO NW junction and reduced barrier between the n-ZnO NW and the electrolyte (Fig. 2b), caused by the high reverse bias, facilitate the electron transfer into the n-ZnO NW, which consequently travels to the ZnO surface, leading to large photocathodic current, and reduces water to hydrogen. In addition, they have also shown that selective photoelectrochemical (PEC) water reduction or oxidation can be accomplished by tuning the doping concentration in the p-type Si NW core. The branched NWA with a lightly doped Si NW core showed broad band absorption from the UV to near IR region and photocathodic water reduction, while the branched NWs with a heavily doped Si NW core exhibited photoanodic water oxidation with only UV photo-response.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of 3D ZnO/Si branched NW heterostructures, (b) proposed energy band diagrams of n-ZnO/p-Si branched nanowires at reversed biasing potential (−1.5 V) and (c) current density versus applied potential of b-(10m-ZnO/12m-p-Si) NWs with the Si NW array pitch size of 700 nm. The red and black lines represent the current density under illumination and at dark, respectively. The insets show the current density versus time for the corresponding branched NW arrays at −1.5 V versus Ag/AgCl RE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Other semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
In addition to p–n type heterostructures, there are also other non-p–n type heterojunction systems, where the staggered band-gap type is the most suitable for artificial photosynthesis. In this type as shown in Fig. 3, different semiconductors with matching band potentials are tightly bonded to construct efficient heterostructures. The lower CB and VB level of one semiconductor-B than that of another semiconductor-A leads to the transformation of photo-generated electrons in the CB of semiconductor-A and photo-generated holes in the VB of semiconductor-B to those of semiconductor-B and semiconductor-A, respectively. As a result, the recombination of photo-generated electron–hole pairs can be efficiently inhibited because of the internal field induced separation and migration of photo-generated charge carriers. A larger number of electrons on the semiconductor-B surface and holes on the semiconductor-A surface can, respectively, participate in artificial photo-redox reactions, and thus the photocatalytic reaction efficacy can be enhanced greatly.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the non-p–n heterojunctions. 
Many heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with staggered band-gap type heterojunctions have been fabricated for artificial photosynthesis such as InGaN/GaN,49 WO3/BiVO4,50 ZnO/TiO251 and ZnO/CdS.52 For example, He et al. have synthesized composition-graded ZnO/ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell NWAs on ITO substrates via a hydrothermal method followed by a CVD method (Fig. 4).53 The ZnO/ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell NWAs show a broad absorption range from UV to NIR by adjusting the shell composition. The introduction of the ZnxCd1−xTe shell to the ZnO nanowires can profoundly improve the photo-generated charge-separation process due to the formation of a type II heterojunction at the interface. As shown in Fig. 4a, the photocatalytic H2-production activity of pure ZnO nanowires is revealed during 5 h of light illumination. In the presence of ZnxCd1−xTe, the H2-evolution properties are remarkably enhanced. The amount of H2 generated on the basis of sample P3 with optimal proportion reaches 1.326 mmol g−1, which is over 2-fold greater than that of pure ZnO nanowires (0.522 mmol g−1). These results are of great significance for the design of composition-modulated core–shell electrodes with a large and controllable absorption range from UV to NIR.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photocatalytic H2-production activity of the pristine ZnO nanowire and ZnO/ ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell nanowire array electrodes (P1–P2, and P3) under UV-vis irradiation and (b) schematic illustration for charge transfer and separation in the ZnO/ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell nanowire array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Yang's group has reported core–shell NWAs with n–n heterojunctions between Si and TiO2.29 As shown in Fig. 5a, higher photocurrent is expected for the n–n junction as compared to p-Si/n-TiO2 since band bending at the junction helps charge separation.29 Under the illumination, the photo-generated holes in TiO2 (TiO2h+) move toward the n-TiO2/electrolyte interface and oxidizes OH− to oxygen, while photo-generated electrons in the n-TiO2 (TiO2e−) move away from the front surface because of the Schottky barrier at the interface with the electrolyte. In addition to the charge separation, the interface between n-Si and n-TiO2 reduces the loss of holes in the TiO2 region, which results in an enhanced photoanodic current. The potential barrier seen by the holes at the n-Si/n-TiO2 junction reflects holes back into the TiO2 layer (Fig. 5b). This is analogous to the back surface field of a solar cell which has shown larger photocurrent and larger output voltage by adding a heavily doped region adjacent to the contact. To complete the circuit, the photo-generated electrons in the n-Si (Sie−) move to the counter electrode where the reduction reaction takes place. The photo-generated holes in n-Si (Sih+) move toward the n-Si/n-TiO2 junction and recombine with the TiO2e−. Therefore, n-Si/n-TiO2 core–shell structure shows the largest increase in photocurrent since its band alignment at the junction helps reduce recombination under illumination. In the case of p-Si/n-TiO2 junctions, the flow of electrons and holes at the junction of p-Si/n-TiO2 is opposite to the desirable direction. Fig. 5c shows that TiO2h+ can move either to the electrolyte or to the p-Si in the p–n junction. Therefore, the p-Si/n-TiO2 junction has smaller observed photoanodic current density than n-Si/n-TiO2. The n–n heterojunction is a promising structure for solar water splitting since the photovoltage at the junction can compensate the lower energy level of the CB of the shell semiconductor. Also, the n–n heterojunction could potentially increase the efficiency of the photovoltaic cell due to a higher open circuit voltage and higher photocurrent.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density versus bias potential (vs. SCE) of Si/TiO2 photoanodes and schematic representation of band energies and charge transfer (b) for n-Si/n-TiO2 and (c) for p-Si/n-TiO2 under the illumination. Si EENW/TiO2 samples have 2.5 times larger photocurrent density than Si planar/TiO2. n-Si/n-TiO2 photoanodes have more negative onset potential than p-Si/n-TiO2 both for planar and nanowire structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
It is known that band energy levels of the semiconductor nanostructures are highly dependent on the crystal phase.54 Therefore, heterojunctions can be formed between different phases of one type of semiconductor with the same chemical composition. Similarly, charge separation can be promoted by the slight band alignment between different phases across the heterojunction. A typical example is TiO2, and Wu et al. have constructed a 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanostructured array which is composed of a core–shell structure where the core portion is a rutile TiO2 nanodendrite (ND) array and the shell portion is rutile and anatase TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) sequentially located on the surface (Fig. 6).55 Except for the morphology advantages of 3D configuration in providing a larger surface area for more efficient photo-charge separation without significantly sacrificing the electron collection efficiency, anatase TiO2 NPs constructed on the surface of the ND/rutile TiO2 NP nanostructured array enhance charge separation and suppress charge recombination at the interfacial region due to the higher CB edge of anatase TiO2 than that of rutile TiO2. Through both morphology and interfacial energetic controls for the PEC photo-electrode, a remarkable photocurrent density and the highest photo-conversion efficiency of 2.08 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and 1.13% at 0.51 V vs. RHE are, respectively, attained using the hierarchical TiO2 nanostructured array PEC cell under illumination of AM 1.5G.
 Fig. 6  (a) PEC properties of TiO2 nanostructured arrays and (b) schematic diagram illustrating the respective band positions and photo-generated charge separation in the hierarchical anatase/rutile TiO2 nanostructured arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Formation of metal–semiconductor heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
Schottky junctions in heterostructured NWAs
The close contact of a metal with an n-type semiconductor normally creates a Schottky junction with a potential barrier that prevents most electrons and holes from passing through them. The opposite case of a p-type semiconductor–metal junction represents an ohmic contact. Fig. 7 illustrates the energy band diagram of a typical metal–semiconductor Schottky junction.56 The height of the potential barrier (Φb) depends on the band bending of the semiconductor and the Fermi level of metal at equilibrium. Upon excitation of the semiconductor, the photo-generated electrons are able to transfer across the Schottky junction to the contacting metal, resulting in a shift of the Fermi level of the metal towards that of the semiconductor with a new equilibrium (Fig. 7).57–59 In this manner, the metal acts like an electron sink to enable the separation of photo-generated electrons and holes, thus allowing more time for the holes on the semiconductor surface for oxidation reaction.60 Furthermore, the metal surface may provide active sites to lower the over-potentials for H2 generation and CO2 photo-reduction.61
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the Schottky junction with energy level alignment. 
Li et al. have reported a 3D branched TiO2/Cu nanowire heterostructure with excellent photocatalytic activity for H2 generation (Fig. 8).62 The corresponding H2 production rate is 5104 μmol h−1 g−1 with an apparent quantum yield (AQY) of 17.2%, a remarkably high AQY among the noble-metal free TiO2 photocatalysts.62 The interface between the metal and semiconductor results in an oriented electron flow to the metals, which can effectively inhibit photo-generated electron–hole pair recombination. Meanwhile, the strong TiO2/Cu interaction with its large interface and the excellent electric-conductivity of Cu created a Schottky barrier, which further facilitates the photoelectron transfer. Moreover, the Cu nanowires can also act as co-catalysts for photocatalytic H2 generation, and the enriched photoelectrons on the Cu nanowires promote H+ reduction to produce H2. The joint cooperation of light harvesting, separation of photoelectrons from holes, and co-catalysts plays important roles in determining the H2 production efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of TiO2/CuNW heterostructures, (c) and (d) performances of different photocatalysts in photocatalytic H2 production under UV-LED irradiation (λ = 365 nm) and (e) proposed photocatalytic reaction mechanism of CuNW/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to H2 evolution, the metal–semiconductor Schottky junction can also be utilized for enhanced CO2 photo-reduction, and the loaded metal may exhibit certain selectivity for hydrocarbon formation. For example, CO2 photo-reduction over Pd-loaded TiO2 leads to CH4 as the main product and minor production of C2H6 and CO.27 Wang et al. have demonstrated that the film of 1D single crystal TiO2 coated with ultrafine Pt nanoparticles (0.5–2 nm) exhibited very high efficiency of CO2 photo-reduction with the selective formation of methane (1361 μmol per g cat per h) as shown in Fig. 9.63
 Fig. 9  Photo-reduction analysis of Pt–TiO2 thin films. (a) Representative CH4 and CO yields on a Pt–TiO2 thin film as a function of irradiation time, (b) CO and CH4 yields of commercially available TiO2 powders (P25), pristine TiO2 columnar films (TiO2 film), and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times and (c) schematic diagram of the CO2 photo-reduction mechanism by using Pt–TiO2 nanostructured films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Plasmonic heterojunctions in NWAs
In the past few decades, some noble metals such as Au, Ag and Pd, with characteristic surface plasmon resonance (SPR), referring to the collective coherent oscillations of metal surface electrons against the restoring force of positive nuclei, have received much attention in artificial photosynthesis.64–66 The SPR wavelengths highly depend on the composition, size, shape, geometric arrangement, and dielectric environment of the plasmonic metal nanostructures.67–69 Generally, the SPR effect has been used to improve the light-harvesting capability in visible and infrared regions because of light-trapping by the localized oscillating electric field of metal nanostructures.70–72 In addition, the roles of the SPR feature in promoting artificial photosynthesis are typically ascribed to the following three aspects. (i) The hot-plasmon electrons generated upon SPR excitation can be used for some chemical reactions. For this hot electron injection mechanism, the photoactivity enhancement can occur at energy well below the band gap of the semiconductors.73–75 (ii) The plasmon-enhanced localized electric field has been considered as another major contribution to the improved artificial photosynthesis efficiency over plasmonic metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures.76,77 Upon SPR excitation, the local electric field nearby the metal particle surfaces can be significantly improved, and the enhancement factor exponentially drops along with the distance from the metal surface.64 Hence, the semiconductor that is located very near the metal surface would be exposed to this strong plasmonic field, which can enhance the semiconductor excitation with more exciton formation,78–80 leading to higher photocatalytic efficiency. (iii) The SPR effect of metal nanoparticles can also promote the charge separation of the nearby semiconductor through a process of plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer (PIRET), in which the plasmonic energy is transferred from the metal to semiconductor through dipole–dipole interactions to induce charge separation in the semiconductor.81 Importantly, the PIRET process enables the generation of charge carriers even when the excitation photon energy is below the band-gap, and thereby allows us to utilize a wide range of low energy photons for artificial photosynthesis.82
Li et al. have demonstrated that the photoactivity of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes for PEC water oxidation can be effectively enhanced in the entire UV-visible region from 300 to 800 nm by manipulating the shape of the decorated Au nanostructures.83 As shown in Fig. 10, the SPR wavelength-dependent incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) feature signifies that excitation of the Au SPR is responsible for the improved visible-light photoactivity of the synthesized Au-decorated TiO2 nanowires. The results also demonstrate that the plasmon-enhanced photoactivity of TiO2 is wavelength tunable by manipulating the shape of the decorating Au nanostructures. In addition, the roles of Au nanostructures in increasing the photoactivity of semiconductors in the UV and visible region have been proposed. The wavelength-dependent finite-difference time domain (FDTD) study supports the fact that the enhanced IPCE values of Au NP-decorated TiO2 nanowires in the UV region are because of the increased optical absorption of TiO2 resulting from the PIRET effect. On the other hand, the increase in the electric field in the visible region is significant for both Au NP- and Au NR-decorated TiO2, and it could be accountable for the observed visible light photoactivity enhancement. The results show that the enhanced photoactivity of Au NP-decorated TiO2 nanowires in the UV region is because of effective surface passivation as well as the electric-field amplification effect, while the photoactivity enhancement in the visible region for Au nanostructure-decorated TiO2 samples is mainly caused by the electrical field amplification effect and hot electron generation upon SPR excitation.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram illustrating the reaction mechanism of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes for photoelectrochemical water oxidation and magnified IPCE plots of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes in the incident wavelength between 450 and 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Most recently, organic ligand protected gold clusters (Au clusters) have emerged as a class of novel photo-sensitizers, which are able to extend the light response and photo-activity of wide band-gap semiconductors.84–86 These Au clusters with few dozen metal atoms in the core with bound organic ligands in the shell possess unique atom-packing mode, strong electron energy quantization induced by the ultra-small cluster size, sizable band-gap, and controllable catalytic properties.87 Their photophysical properties resemble those of molecular organometallic complexes, thus making Au clusters offer the flexibility in photocatalytic systems similar to semiconductor quantum dots.88 In addition, Au clusters have also been shown to directly catalyze charge transfer processes.89 The combination of photo- and catalytic activity makes Au clusters an ideal choice for multifunctional use in artificial photosynthesis systems as they can serve as both photo-sensitizers and catalytic centers.85 Au cluster–semiconductor heterojunctions for water splitting have been reported with visible light photoactivity.85 However, the use of Au cluster–semiconductor heterostructured NWAs for overall water splitting and CO2 reduction is still scarce, which is believed to be worthy of future research in this promising field.
Formation of carbon–semiconductor heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
Nanocarbon materials including activated carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene generally possess high conductivity, superior electron mobility and large specific surface area4,90–92 which are beneficial for constructing the carbon–semiconductor heterostructured NWAs93–96 toward artificial photosynthesis. Large scale fabrication at low cost of nanocarbon materials also makes them important guest/host components with potential for making various functional materials toward practical solar energy conversion applications.13,46
Wang's group has reported carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWAs for efficient water reduction (Fig. 11).97 They have shown that the carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh photocathode generates a photocurrent density of −3.95 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is the highest ever reported for Cu2O materials without the use of any co-catalyst, and it is much higher than −2.28 mA cm−2 generated on the bare Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results in Fig. 11f have shown that the carbon layer facilitates the electron transfer from Cu2O to the electrolyte, resulting in an overall reduced charge transfer resistance, which also explains the better PEC performance of the carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh. In addition, the carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh exhibits considerably improved photo-stability, increasing almost linearly with the carbon layer thickness before reaching a plateau at 80.7% with a carbon layer thickness of 20 nm, which demonstrates the protective role of the carbon layer coating as displayed in Fig. 11g.
 Fig. 11  Photocathode synthesis strategy of the C/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh: (a) electrochemical anodization of the Cu mesh in 3 M NaOH solution; (b) Cu(OH)2 NWAs on the Cu mesh; (c) glucose coating on the Cu(OH)2 NWAs; (d) carbonization of glucose; (e) carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWAs. (f) Nyquist plots for the Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh and C/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh photocathodes in the dark and under illumination and (g) photocurrent densities and photo-stability of the C-x/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh photo-electrodes as a function of glucose concentration and thus carbon layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Except for the carbon layer coating, nanocarbon materials such as CNTs and graphene can also act as substrates for growing semiconductor NWAs toward artificial photosynthesis. For example, Zhang et al. have reported the adhesive growth of ZnO-NWs on the vertically aligned multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) forming ZnO-NW/MWCNT heterojunctions.98 The short-circuit photocurrent of the heterostructured ZnO-NW/MWCNTs is 10 times higher than that of the pure ZnO-NWs because of the electron acceptor role of MWCNTs with an inductive effect, facilitating the separation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs to thwart their recombination. Moreover, growing ZnO-NWs onto the 1D CNT substrate also improves the active surface area, which enhances the effective absorption of photons, while the 1D ZnO-NWs provide a continuous pathway for the transportation of photo-induced electrons. The electron transfer process in the ZnO-NW/MWCNT heterojunction is similar to that in the semiconductor–metal composite, as indicated in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of charge separation and transportation at the ZnO-NW/MWCNT heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Graphene with a large surface area and excellent electronic conductivity can promote the transport of photo-generated electrons to the surface of the composite, inhibiting the recombination between photo-generated electrons and holes.99–102 Furthermore, the introduction of graphene with a high surface area into the heterostructured NWAs can increase the amount of active sites.103,104 Fu's group has reported the growth of TiO2 nanowires on the surface of RGO nanosheets for photocatalytic H2 production (Fig. 13).105 As shown in Fig. 13b, the amount of H2 evolution of RGO–TiO2 with a rate of 20.12 mmol h−1 is 2.5 times higher than that of pure TiO2 (7.86 mmol h−1), which can be attributed to the synergetic catalytic effect of a special hierarchical structure and strong interaction between RGO and anatase TiO2. Surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPV) and transient photovoltage (TPV) results shown in Fig. 13c and d demonstrate the strong interaction between TiO2 and RGO, which leads to the efficient generation and separation of the electron–hole pairs in the excited anatase TiO2 nanowires.
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the morphological evolution process of the hierarchical RGO–TiO2 composite, (b) effect of the RGO–TiO2 molar ratio in the composites on the photocatalytic H2 evolution rates under UV light illumination: from a-2 wt% to d-5 wt%, (e) & (d) are 3 wt% RGO–TiO2 generated by mechanical mixing and pure TiO2, respectively, and surface photovoltage spectroscopy (c) and transient photo-voltage (TPV) responses (d) of different samples: a-3 wt% RGO–TiO2 composite, b-3 wt% RGO–TiO2 generated by mechanical mixing, and c-TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Formation of multi-component heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
Because of the limited efficiency and energy input requirement which is affected by the nature of the chemical reactions involved, heterostructured NWAs with a single type of heterojunctions are still inefficient for some artificial photosynthesis process, especially for overall water splitting and CO2 photo-reduction. For further improving the artificial photosynthesis efficiency of the heterostructured NWAs, a system-level engineering of multi-component heterojunctions is actually desirable.11 The joint integration of various features from different components might achieve heterostructured NWAs with a broad light response region, high optical absorption capability, efficient spatial charge carrier transport and separation, superior electron mobility, large specific surface area and high selectivity of the products for potential practical applications. Various multi-functional devices can also be obtained by the rational design of multi-component heterostructured NWAs.
All-solid-state Z-scheme heterostructured NWAs
The light reaction of natural photosynthesis occurs via a series of step-wise electron-transfer processes to create sufficient energy for water-splitting and CO2 reduction.8 These processes, known as the ‘Z-scheme’, are shown in Fig. 14. Two photo-systems (photo-system I (PSI) and photo-system II (PSII)) collect light energy through an assembly of light-harvesting chlorophylls and pump electrons to a higher electronic state (excitation) inside a reaction centre.106,107 These photo-systems are connected in series with an electron transfer chain. At the donor side of PSII, a water oxidation reaction occurs at a manganese calcium oxide cluster.108,109 These processes ensure that the charge separation quantum efficiency is close to 100% under optimal conditions. For artificial photosynthesis systems, a two-step process is an alternative technique that is analogous to the natural photosynthesis Z-scheme.110 Compared to the excitation of a single light absorber, excitation of the two light absorbers, or a “Z-scheme” system, allows capture of lower energy photons from a larger part of the solar spectrum,10 which can potentially lead to a higher photocatalytic efficiency.28 Moreover, photo-systems I and II arrange side by side on the thylakoid membrane with the electron transport chain between them for efficient charge transfer. In addition, the spatial separation of the reduction and oxidation catalytic centers minimizes the undesirable back-reaction of the photosynthetic products. This careful arrangement of photosynthetic constituents results in a fully integrated system that facilitates the conversion of solar energy into chemical fuels.111
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) natural photosynthesis charge-separation processes, including type (i) and (ii) reaction centres (simplified Z-scheme), (b) liquid-based Z-scheme artificial photosynthesis charge-separation processes and (c) “all-solid-state” Z-scheme consisting of semiconductor I (Sc I)–metal–semiconductor II (Sc II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 and 113. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (a) and (b), and 2014 Wiley (c). 
The same concept of an integrated system of nanostructures can be applied to artificial photosynthesis. In the artificial Z-scheme photocatalytic systems, the electron acceptor/donor (A/D) pair is a common electron mediator.112 However, the A/D pair is often difficult to retain the long-term stable state over a wide range of pH values, which reduces the number of available A/D pairs.113 Therefore, all-solid-state Z-scheme photocatalytic systems without the A/D pair are constructed by employing a conductor (Fig. 14c) as the electron mediator, and attracts more and more scientific attention.
Yang's group has demonstrated a fully integrated functional nanosystem for direct solar water splitting.114 The nanowire morphology of both TiO2 and Si materials has been applied because of the large surface area and shorter distances that charge carriers must travel to reach the semiconductor–electrolyte surface. Upon illumination, photo-excited electron–hole pairs are generated in Si and TiO2, which absorb different regions of the solar spectrum. Because of the band-bending at the semiconductor–electrolyte interfaces (Fig. 15a), the photo-generated electrons in the Si nanowires migrate to the surface and reduce protons to generate H2; meanwhile the photo-generated holes in the TiO2 nanowires oxidize water to evolve O2. The holes from Si and electrons from TiO2 recombine at the ohmic contact, completing the relay of the “Z-scheme”, similar to that of natural photosynthesis. Owing to the difference of the two materials in catalytic and electrical transport properties, a nanoscale tree-like light-harvesting architecture is employed to maximize the performance of overall water splitting (Fig. 15c and d).
 Fig. 15  A proof-of-concept fully integrated nanosystem for direct solar water splitting was demonstrated. (a) The tree-shaped heterostructure is designed on the basis of different material properties of Si and TiO2 photo-electrodes, (b) which leads to unassisted water splitting (c). The overall integrated structure contains spatial separation of the photocathode and the photoanode (d and e), analogous to natural photosynthesis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
While historical Z-scheme photocatalysis systems are mostly used for water splitting, the exploration of Z-scheme systems for photo-conversion of gaseous CO2 into renewable hydrocarbon fuel in the presence of water vapor has been seldom reported.115 Moreover, almost all of the Z-scheme photocatalysts developed to date are powder systems. For practical applications, an integrated nanosystem of two individual components closely connected by charge transport unity is actually desirable. Zou's group has designed an all-solid-state Z-scheme system array built on the stainless-steel mesh (SSM) for the photo-conversion of gaseous CO2 into CH4.116 In the Z-scheme system, 1D Fe2V4O13 arrays and CdS NPs act as the visible-light active photocatalysts with good ability to bring about the conversion of CO2 into CH4. RGO as an interlayer between Fe2V4O13 and CdS offers a high speed charge transfer channel, leading to enhanced charge separation efficiency, and also protects CdS against photo-corrosion. The photocatalytic CH4 evolution rate of the Fe2V4O13/RGO/CdS system is 1.3 and 4 times higher than those of the Fe2V4O13/CdS type-II heterostructure and bare Fe2V4O13, respectively. It can be attributed to the mechanism of the Z-scheme system, as graphically illustrated in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  FESEM images of Fe2V4O13 (a and b, inset a: an enlarged image of a) and Fe2V4O13/RGO/CdS (e), (c) specific CH4 evolution activities of as-prepared samples and (d) schematic illustration of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into CH4 over the Fe2V4O13/RGO/CdS Z-scheme system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other multicomponent heterojunctions in heterostructured NWAs
In addition to the Z-scheme heterostructures, multi-component heterostructured NWAs always involve a multi-level electron transfer process. For example, Zhu et al. have developed a novel bimetal–graphene–semiconductor stack catalyst design for solar-driven conversion of CO2 into methanol, in which 3D ultrathin graphene layers encapsulate Cu2O NWAs that support an optimized combination of Au–Cu nanoalloys (Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O).117 When 3D Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O NWAs capture solar illumination, Cu2O simultaneously generates electrons and holes. Because of the less negative work function than the CB of Cu2O,118 the photo-generated electrons can migrate to the graphene layer from the CB of Cu2O. The formation of a Schottky junction in the 3D Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O system leads to the further migration of electrons from graphene to Au–Cu nanoalloys due to the SPR effect under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 17b). In particular, the Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O system generates an electromagnetic field which promotes the migration of electrons through the charge flow of Cu2O NWAs to the graphene layer to Au–Cu nanoalloys. As a result, the photo-generated charge carriers are efficiently separated and a methanol production rate of 18.80 ppm cm−2 h−1 is achieved on the 3D Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O array, which is considerably higher than the previous reports over Cu2O-based catalysts (Fig. 17a).
 Fig. 17  (a) Yields of methanol as a function of time for tunable Cu2O, graphene/Cu2O, and Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O arrays and (b) diagram of the CO2 photo-reduction mechanism for the Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 Wiley. 
Mi et al. have reported wafer level artificial photosynthesis for both overall water splitting119 and CO2 reduction to CH4 and CO120 using gallium nitride (GaN) NWAs incorporated with Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell nanostructures acting as co-catalysts (Fig. 18). On one hand, the formation of a metal–semiconductor junction between Rh and GaN can efficiently promote H2 evolution. On the other hand, the water forming back reaction over Rh can be effectively prevented by the Cr2O3 shell. Moreover, the introduction of Rh/Cr2O3 metal–semiconductor heterojunction core–shell nanostructures into GaN NWAs has shown an enhancement of the reaction rate and selectivity toward CH4 over CO.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the photo-reduction processes of CO2 on Rh/Cr2O3-decorated GaN nanowires, (b) CH4 and (c) CO production on as-grown GaN nanowires and Rh/Cr2O3-decorated GaN nanowires as a function of illumination time, (d) schematic illustration of water splitting on GaN nanowires with the incorporation of Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell nanostructures as cocatalysts and (e) their experimental overall photocatalytic water splitting performances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 and 120. Copyright 2011 (a), (b) and (c), and 2015 (d) and (e) American Chemical Society. 
Conclusions
Significant advances have been achieved in the design and fabrication of heterostructured semiconductor NWAs for efficient artificial photosynthesis in the past few decades. In this review, we have focused on discussing heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with various types of heterojunctions for artificial photosynthesis. In particular, heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with p–n junctions, n–n junctions, Schottky junctions, plasmonic heterojunctions, as well as Z-scheme approaches in artificial photosynthesis have been elaborated with some selected typical examples.
Although the performances of artificial photosynthesis, in most cases, can be enhanced by forming appropriate heterojunctions in heterostructured semiconductor NWAs, actual solar-to-fuel conversion efficiencies are still a far cry from meeting the criteria for commercialization. High over-potentials for artificial photosynthesis reactions, weak absorption in the Vis-NIR region, as well as the long-term instability of the photocatalysts fundamentally limit the practical application of not only the heterostructured semiconductor NWAs but also all of the photocatalysts. In addition to the above issues, some challenges still need to be addressed in the design and fabrication of heterostructured semiconductor NWAs to achieve satisfactory efficiency in the practical applications of artificial photosynthesis.
Firstly, integration and optimization of various 1D materials into functional solar energy conversion devices by a seamlessly control of diverse materials under continuous synthesis conditions still remain a challenge. A simple yet efficient method to synthesize heterostructured semiconductor NWAs with precise structure control, high-quality, high density, high aspect ratio, large-area uniformity, and perfect vertical alignment is highly desirable. Therefore, the development of advanced nanomanufacturing processes for 1D nanostructure growth and assembly would be critical for commercial adaptation of structure based technologies.
Secondly, the fundamental understanding of charge kinetics across the heterojunctions of 1D-based semiconductor NWAs is relatively still limited. There is very few direct experimental evidence or spectroscopic observations that unambiguously reveal the detailed mechanism of the photo-induced charge transfer process at the interface of heterojunctions. The effects of the surface status such as crystal facets, defects and trapping sites in the heterostructured semiconductor NWAs and surface reaction kinetics during artificial photosynthesis processes are rarely studied. When two or more components in heterostructured semiconductor NWAs are photo-excited, the charge carrier transfer pathway and interactive synergy need to be unequivocally understood, which in turn is important for further rational design and optimization of the interface in heterostructured semiconductor NWAs at the nanoscale with high photocatalytic efficiencies.
Finally, although some of the heterojunctions can enhance the light absorption capability of heterostructured semiconductor NWA systems, their photo-conversion efficiency is relatively low. The overall solar-to-fuel efficiency is determined not only by charge separation and transfer, but also by the efficacy of charge participating in surface photoredox reactions. Therefore, in the preparation and design of heterostructures, it is important to balance the heterojunction interfaces with the available active surface area or site for redox reactions, effective light absorption and charge separation/transfer enhancement.
Heterostructured semiconductor NWAs are believed to be powerful tools for the design and realization of integrated infrastructure systems, and it is possible that their use would enable practical applications of efficient and affordable solar-to-fuel conversion provided that more systematic and in-depth studies are required to explore theories or experimental methods to optimize the heterojunctions with more elegant and precise fundamental design guidelines.
Acknowledgements
The support from the Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1463204), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20903023, 20903022 and 21173045), the Award Program for Minjiang Scholar Professorship, the Natural Science Foundation (NSF) of Fujian Province for Distinguished Young Investigator Grant (2012J06003), the Independent Research Project of State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment (No. 2014A05), the 1st Program of Fujian Province for Top Creative Young Talents, and the Program for Returned High-Level Overseas Chinese Scholars of Fujian province is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148 RSC .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371 RSC .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 527 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240 RSC .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2791 CAS .
P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Wurthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847 RSC .
N. P. Dasgupta, J. Sun, C. Liu, S. Brittman, S. C. Andrews, J. Lim, H. Gao, R. Yan and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185 RSC .
T. Faunce, S. Styring, M. R. Wasielewski, G. W. Brudvig, A. W. Rutherford, J. Messinger, A. F. Lee, C. L. Hill, H. deGroot, M. Fontecave, D. R. MacFarlane, B. Hankamer, D. G. Nocera, D. M. Tiede, H. Dau, W. Hillier, L. Wang and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1074 Search PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, N. P. Dasgupta and P. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 415 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Dasgupta and P. Yang, Front. Phys., 2013, 9, 289 CrossRef .
E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053 RSC .
R. K. Joshi and J. J. Schneider, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5285 RSC .
L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu and A. Lal, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, C.-Y. Chi, K. T. Fountaine, M. Yao, H. A. Atwater, P. D. Dapkus, N. S. Lewis and C. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1879 CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 CAS .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605 CAS .
A. P. Goodey, S. M. Eichfeld, K.-K. Lew, J. M. Redwing and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peng, X. Wang and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 163103 CrossRef .
W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tak, S. J. Hong, J. S. Lee and K. Yong, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5945 RSC .
X. Zhao, P. Wang and B. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6768 RSC .
M. Seol, H. Kim, W. Kim and K. Yong, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Rao, L. Cai, C. Liu, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, J. M. Weisse, P. Yang and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, R. Yan and M. Fardy, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573 CAS .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. A. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653 CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Zhu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Tao, S. Hark, X. Xiao and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Myung, D. M. Jang, T. K. Sung, Y. J. Sohn, G. B. Jung, Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim and J. Park, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. C. Crittenden, S. Hackney, L. Sutter and D. W. Hand, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1950 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dai, J. Yu and G. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7339 CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. He, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Li and Q. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 99378 RSC .
A. Kargar, K. Sun, Y. Jing, C. Choi, H. Jeong, Y. Zhou, K. Madsen, P. Naughton, S. Jin, G. Y. Jung and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kibria, H. P. T. Nguyen, K. Cui, S. Zhao, D. Liu, H. Guo, M. L. Trudeau, S. Paradis, A.-R. Hakima and Z. Mi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11141 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hernández, V. Cauda, A. Chiodoni, S. Dallorto, A. Sacco, D. Hidalgo, E. Celasco and C. F. Pirri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12153 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, M. Seol, J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25429 CAS .
X. Zhan, Q. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Cao, M. Safdar and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2878 CAS .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934 CAS .
J.-S. Yang, W.-P. Liao and J.-J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7425 CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. C. Leung, X. Fu, C. Wang, M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, X. Wang and X. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, P. Liu, W. Zhu, G. Li, D. Zhang and H. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-N. Wang, W.-J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813 RSC .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Lee, M.-S. Hsu, Y.-C. Hsu, C.-W. Lo and C.-L. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6222 CAS .
X. Lang, L. Qian, P. Guan, J. Zi and M. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 093701 CrossRef .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Willets and R. P. V. Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang, H. V. Demir and Y. K. Gun'ko, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 85 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C.-J. Chen, L.-C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y.-Y. Hsu, T.-S. Chan, J.-F. Lee, R.-S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133 CAS .
Y.-C. Pu, G. Wang, K.-D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y.-K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C.-M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Stamplecoskie, Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1370 CAS .
G. Li and R. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343 RSC .
C. G. Long, J. D. Gilbertson, G. Vijayaraghavan, K. J. Stevenson, C. J. Pursell and B. D. Chandler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fan, H. Zhu, K. Wang, J. Wei, X. Li, Q. Shu, N. Guo and D. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 721 CAS .
A. M. Munshi, D. L. Dheeraj, V. T. Fauske, D.-C. Kim, A. T. J. van Helvoort, B.-O. Fimland and H. Weman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Xu, X. Wang, S. Wang, C. Pan, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 221 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, R. Dua, L. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-D. Zhang, L.-C. Jiang and J.-S. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16247 CAS .
N. Zhang, M. Q. Yang, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. Qu, Q. Liu, S. Gao, Z. Yan, W. Yan, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3761 RSC .
X. Cao, G. Tian, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4366 CAS .
J. L. Herek, W. Wohlleben, R. J. Cogdell, D. Zeidler and M. Motzkus, Nature, 2002, 417, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Fleming, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, K. Amarnath and J. Zaks, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 27 RSC .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. M. Siegbahn, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda, K. Domen, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Q. Xu, X. Meng, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 800 RSC .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 8600 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, A. Pierre, M. G. Kibria, K. Cui, X. Han, K. H. Bevan, H. Guo, S. Paradis, A.-R. Hakima and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. AlOtaibi, S. Fan, D. Wang, J. Ye and Z. Mi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5342 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Siqi Liu
	Siqi Liu is now pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell composites and one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites for heterogeneous photocatalysis.

Chuang Han
	Chuang Han is now pursuing his PhD degree with the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His main research interests include the plasmon-enhanced and carbon-enhanced photocatalysis.

Zi-Rong Tang
	Zi-Rong Tang is an associate professor now working at the College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. Her current research interests primarily focus on the fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductor-based nanostructured composites and their applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis and thermocatalysis.

Yi-Jun Xu
	Prof. Yi-Jun Xu is a full professor now working at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P. R. China. His current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of metal-based and semiconductor-based nanostructured materials, such as graphene-based, one-dimension-based and core–shell structure-based composite photocatalysts, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔE = 1.23 V	(1)
CO2 + H2O → HCOOH + 1/2O2, ΔE = 1.40 V	(2)
CO2 + H2O → HCHO + O2, ΔE = 1.34 V	(3)
CO2 + 2H2O → CH4 + 2O2, ΔE = 1.06 V	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the p–n heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of 3D ZnO/Si branched NW heterostructures, (b) proposed energy band diagrams of n-ZnO/p-Si branched nanowires at reversed biasing potential (−1.5 V) and (c) current density versus applied potential of b-(10m-ZnO/12m-p-Si) NWs with the Si NW array pitch size of 700 nm. The red and black lines represent the current density under illumination and at dark, respectively. The insets show the current density versus time for the corresponding branched NW arrays at −1.5 V versus Ag/AgCl RE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the energy band structure and electron–hole pair separation in the non-p–n heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photocatalytic H2-production activity of the pristine ZnO nanowire and ZnO/ ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell nanowire array electrodes (P1–P2, and P3) under UV-vis irradiation and (b) schematic illustration for charge transfer and separation in the ZnO/ZnxCd1−xTe core–shell nanowire array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photocurrent density versus bias potential (vs. SCE) of Si/TiO2 photoanodes and schematic representation of band energies and charge transfer (b) for n-Si/n-TiO2 and (c) for p-Si/n-TiO2 under the illumination. Si EENW/TiO2 samples have 2.5 times larger photocurrent density than Si planar/TiO2. n-Si/n-TiO2 photoanodes have more negative onset potential than p-Si/n-TiO2 both for planar and nanowire structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) PEC properties of TiO2 nanostructured arrays and (b) schematic diagram illustrating the respective band positions and photo-generated charge separation in the hierarchical anatase/rutile TiO2 nanostructured arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the Schottky junction with energy level alignment.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of TiO2/CuNW heterostructures, (c) and (d) performances of different photocatalysts in photocatalytic H2 production under UV-LED irradiation (λ = 365 nm) and (e) proposed photocatalytic reaction mechanism of CuNW/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photo-reduction analysis of Pt–TiO2 thin films. (a) Representative CH4 and CO yields on a Pt–TiO2 thin film as a function of irradiation time, (b) CO and CH4 yields of commercially available TiO2 powders (P25), pristine TiO2 columnar films (TiO2 film), and Pt–TiO2 films with different Pt deposition times and (c) schematic diagram of the CO2 photo-reduction mechanism by using Pt–TiO2 nanostructured films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram illustrating the reaction mechanism of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes for photoelectrochemical water oxidation and magnified IPCE plots of Au-decorated TiO2 electrodes in the incident wavelength between 450 and 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photocathode synthesis strategy of the C/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh: (a) electrochemical anodization of the Cu mesh in 3 M NaOH solution; (b) Cu(OH)2 NWAs on the Cu mesh; (c) glucose coating on the Cu(OH)2 NWAs; (d) carbonization of glucose; (e) carbon-layer-protected Cu2O NWAs. (f) Nyquist plots for the Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh and C/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh photocathodes in the dark and under illumination and (g) photocurrent densities and photo-stability of the C-x/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh photo-electrodes as a function of glucose concentration and thus carbon layer thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of charge separation and transportation at the ZnO-NW/MWCNT heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the morphological evolution process of the hierarchical RGO–TiO2 composite, (b) effect of the RGO–TiO2 molar ratio in the composites on the photocatalytic H2 evolution rates under UV light illumination: from a-2 wt% to d-5 wt%, (e) & (d) are 3 wt% RGO–TiO2 generated by mechanical mixing and pure TiO2, respectively, and surface photovoltage spectroscopy (c) and transient photo-voltage (TPV) responses (d) of different samples: a-3 wt% RGO–TiO2 composite, b-3 wt% RGO–TiO2 generated by mechanical mixing, and c-TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of (a) natural photosynthesis charge-separation processes, including type (i) and (ii) reaction centres (simplified Z-scheme), (b) liquid-based Z-scheme artificial photosynthesis charge-separation processes and (c) “all-solid-state” Z-scheme consisting of semiconductor I (Sc I)–metal–semiconductor II (Sc II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 110 and 113. Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (a) and (b), and 2014 Wiley (c).	 

 	Fig. 15  A proof-of-concept fully integrated nanosystem for direct solar water splitting was demonstrated. (a) The tree-shaped heterostructure is designed on the basis of different material properties of Si and TiO2 photo-electrodes, (b) which leads to unassisted water splitting (c). The overall integrated structure contains spatial separation of the photocathode and the photoanode (d and e), analogous to natural photosynthesis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  FESEM images of Fe2V4O13 (a and b, inset a: an enlarged image of a) and Fe2V4O13/RGO/CdS (e), (c) specific CH4 evolution activities of as-prepared samples and (d) schematic illustration of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into CH4 over the Fe2V4O13/RGO/CdS Z-scheme system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Yields of methanol as a function of time for tunable Cu2O, graphene/Cu2O, and Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O arrays and (b) diagram of the CO2 photo-reduction mechanism for the Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2015 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the photo-reduction processes of CO2 on Rh/Cr2O3-decorated GaN nanowires, (b) CH4 and (c) CO production on as-grown GaN nanowires and Rh/Cr2O3-decorated GaN nanowires as a function of illumination time, (d) schematic illustration of water splitting on GaN nanowires with the incorporation of Rh/Cr2O3 core–shell nanostructures as cocatalysts and (e) their experimental overall photocatalytic water splitting performances. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 and 120. Copyright 2011 (a), (b) and (c), and 2015 (d) and (e) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
