Dual-purpose tunnel oxide passivated contact on silicon photoelectrodes with high photovoltages for tandem photoelectrochemical devices enabling unass ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA07996H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA07996H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 4194-4204Dual-purpose tunnel oxide passivated contact on silicon photoelectrodes with high photovoltages for tandem photoelectrochemical devices enabling unassisted water splitting†

        
          
            Choongman 
            Moon
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Filipe Mesquita 
            Alves Martinho
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Gihun 
            Jung
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jaehyuk 
            Koh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alireza 
            Assar
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sung-Wook 
            Nam
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Stela 
            Canulescu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Byungha 
            Shin
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: byungha@kaist.ac.kr
bDepartment of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark
cDTU Nanolab, National Centre for Nanofabrication and Characterization, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
dDepartment of Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41404, Republic of Korea
Received 
      13th October 2022
    , Accepted 20th January 2023First published on 23rd January 2023AbstractA tandem photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting device for solar hydrogen production consists of two light absorbers with different bandgaps. Silicon photoelectrodes have been widely investigated as the low bandgap bottom cells of tandem devices because of their bandgap (1.12 eV). Herein, we apply a tunnel oxide passivated contact (TOPCon) on the front and back sides of a Si wafer to prepare a TOPCon Si PEC device. Because TOPCon has a SiO2 tunnel oxide layer providing superior surface passivation and working as a diffusion-blocking layer, TOPCon Si photoelectrodes exhibit superior photovoltage and thermal stability. Both photocathode and photoanode are tested over a broad pH range (0–14) and demonstrate high photovoltages of 640–650 mV under 1 sun illumination and excellent thermal stability by enduring a high processing temperature of up to 600 °C for 1 h in air. These advantages of TOPCon Si would provide high efficiency and great design flexibility for monolithic tandem cells. As a preliminary demonstration of the tandem integration, we test two wired tandem PEC devices based on earth-abundant materials, which are a BiVO4 photoanode–TOPCon Si photocathode and halide perovskite photocathode–TOPCon Si photoanode. These devices show STH conversion efficiencies of 0.24 and 3.6%, respectively.
1 Introduction
A photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting device combines semiconductors and electrocatalysts into a single device to minimize peripheral components around the device to facilitate practical solar hydrogen production.1–3 Hydrogen production without any external power supply is also viable if the PEC device can generate sufficient photovoltage to drive the water-splitting reaction. A large bandgap (>2 eV) can enable semiconductor light absorbers to generate a sufficient photovoltage for unassisted water-splitting; however, only a small portion of the solar spectrum can be absorbed, which severely limits the photocurrent, and consequently, the solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency. An alternative and more practical approach is to use a tandem (or multijunction) structure in which two or more light absorbers with different band gaps are stacked electrically (and most often optically) in series. The theoretical studies4,5 have identified the band gap combination of ∼1.7 and ∼1.1 eV for the top and bottom cells, respectively, for maximum power extraction from solar irradiation. As expected from the theoretical works, the experimental studies6–8 testing similar band gap combinations using rare-earth III–V light absorbers also showed high solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiencies. There also have been attempts to prepare top and bottom cells with earth-abundant elements instead of the rare III–V elements. In the case of low band gap bottom cell, crystalline silicon, the most successful photovoltaic material, has been investigated as a promising candidate, because of its natural abundance, long carrier lifetime, and ideal band gap (1.12 eV) as a bottom cell. The coupling of the silicon bottom cell with a large bandgap metal oxide top cell consisting of earth-abundant elements,9–14 such as BiVO4, Cu2O and Fe2O3, would be ideal for the fast deployment of solar fuel technology.
State-of-the-art photoelectrodes based on a large bandgap metal oxide typically produce photovoltage of around 1.0 V or above, and therefore, the rest of the photovoltage necessary for the water-splitting reaction must be provided by the crystalline silicon bottom cell. While various silicon photoelectrodes based on metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) junction,15–21 silicon heterojunction (SHJ),22 p–n junction23–28 and semiconductor–liquid junction (SLJ)29,30 have been investigated, recent progress in silicon photovoltaics reveals that passivating the surface of silicon with a proper passivation layer can improve the performance of the silicon photoelectrodes. For example, the insulating layer in MIS junction or hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) in SHJ demonstrated high photovoltages owing to its low recombination rate and efficient carrier transport.
Although the photovoltages of silicon bottom cells have improved over time, there has been little consideration on thermal stability, which is critical for realizing a monolithic tandem PEC device. When preparing a monolithic device, a large-bandgap metal oxide top cell should be deposited directly onto the Si bottom cell and it is usually carried out at high temperatures. The typical process temperature of BiVO4, for example, ranges from 450 °C to 500 °C,31–39 and therefore, Si bottom cell must be able to withstand such a level of high temperature while maintaining its photovoltage. For example, SHJ with a-Si:H passivation layer demonstrated superior surface passivation comparable to that of TOPCon,40 however, it cannot endure temperatures higher than 350 °C because of the diffusion of dopants across the Si interfaces.41 In the case of MIS, because of the presence of an insulating layer in the structure which can serve as a diffusion barrier, it exhibits higher thermal stability than other configurations.41–44 However, little attention has been paid to achieving both high photovoltage and thermal stability.
In this study, we prepared Si photoelectrodes based on a tunnel oxide passivated contact (TOPCon), which is a type of MIS junction, to achieve both high photovoltage and thermal stability compared to other junctions. TOPCon structure is comprised of heavily n+ or p+ doped polycrystalline Si (n+-polySi or p+-polySi) and SiO2 contacting on a crystalline silicon wafer as shown in Fig. 1 (see Fig. S1a† for transmission electron microscope (TEM) image and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping). TOPCon can reduce the recombination loss at the interfaces of Si via passivation with a very thin SiO2 (1–2 nm),40 while the charge carriers can still be transported through the SiO2 passivation layer by tunneling (see Fig. S2† for the band diagram of TOPCon Si photocathode and photoanode). The TOPCon is applied on both sides of n-Si substrate to maximize the passivation effect, and the thickness of the SiO2 layer is kept to be lower than 2 nm to allow a high probability of tunneling. In addition, when subjected to a high temperature, intrinsic impurities44 in n-Si wafer (and even extrinsic impurities43 introduced during device preparation) can diffuse across the SiO2 and be collected by polycrystalline Si. This gettering of impurities helps further purify the n-Si wafer and increases the lifetime of charge carriers. Furthermore, the thin SiO2 layer can also work as a diffusion barrier blocking the thermal diffusion of transition metals into the n-Si substrate. Because the thermal diffusivity of most transition metals in SiO2 is 4–6 orders of magnitude lower than that in Si,45 the presence of SiO2 can improve the thermal stability by preventing the contamination of the n-Si substrate from thermally diffusive elements that could be introduced during high-temperature processing (e.g. deposition of a recombination layer or a top cell). It should be noted that there is trade-off between tunneling current, gettering effect and thermal stability when optimizing TOPCon structure. For example, increasing the thickness of SiO2 would enhance the thermal stability by thickening the diffusion barrier, however, it will lower the tunneling current and reduce the gettering effect. The TOPCon structure in this study is carefully optimized to acquire high thermal stability as well as the photovoltage higher than 640 mV, which is the best value among those reported from PEC devices based on a crystalline Si photoelectrode. We also showed that TOPCon Si possesses excellent thermal stabilities up to 600 °C, and it is applicable to photocathodes as well as photoanodes. This provides great flexibility in designing tandem PEC devices based on TOPCon Si as it can be coupled with an n-type metal oxide (such as BiVO4) photoanode or a p-type metal oxide (such as Cu2O) photocathode as a top cell. To demonstrate the feasibility of unassisted water-splitting by a monolithic tandem PEC device consisting of a wide bandgap top cell and a TOPCon Si bottom cell, we demonstrate equivalent wired tandem PEC devices comprising either TOPCon Si photocathode or photoanode. The devices are capable of unbiased water-splitting with a photocurrent density of 0.2 mA cm−2 with BiVO4 top cell and 3 mA cm−2 with halide perovskite top cell, corresponding to STH conversion efficiency of 0.24% and 3.6%, respectively.
 Fig. 1  The structure of TOPCon photoelectrodes. Both photocathode and photoanode were prepared by using a TOPCon Si. Depending on the electrochemical reaction (HER or OER) and pH of the electrolyte (0, 7 or 14), 10 or 20 nm of Ti layer was deposited on n+-polySi (for HER) or p+-polySi side (for OER) to protect an active area. Ag was coated on the backside to make an electrical contact, and the device was encapsulated with epoxy except the active area. 
2 Experiment
2.1 TOPCon Si wafer preparation
The TOPCon Si wafers were prepared from a set of double-side polished wafers (diameter = 100 mm, thickness = 350 μm) based on (100) monocrystalline Si grown by the Czochralski method. The resistivity of the wafers varied between 2 and 3 Ω cm, corresponding to n-type doping with phosphorus (1.55–2.36 × 1015 cm−3). The SiO2 tunnel oxide was grown by chemical oxidation in HNO3 at 95 °C for 10 min, and the polycrystalline Si layers were deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition using SiH4. In situ doping was done using B2H6 or PH3 as precursors for p+-polySi or n+-polySi, respectively. The doping densities of p+-polySi and n+-polySi were in the range of 2–6 × 1019 cm−3. A thickness of 200 nm was deposited on both polycrystalline Si layers. After the resulting TOPCon structure was finished, a hydrogenation step using SiN:H was applied using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition, followed by a hydrogen drive-in process at 400 °C for 30 min to further improve the passivation quality and protect the wafer surfaces until the subsequent photoelectrode fabrication steps. Further details on the TOPCon and SiN:H fabrication sequences are described in a previous study.46
The effective minority carrier lifetime (τeff) of the resulting structure of SiN:H/p+-polySi/SiO2/n-Si/SiO2/n+-polySi/SiN:H was characterized by the microwave-detected photoconductance decay method, in a steady-state configuration under 1 sun illumination (∼1015 cm−3), with an MDPmap lifetime scanner from Freiberg Instruments. The τeff values were mapped across the wafers, and the statistical mean and median values were used as indicators of the passivation quality of the wafers. Additionally, the implied open-circuit voltage under 1-sun illumination was estimated by transient photoconductance measurements, using a WCT-120 Sinton lifetime tester (analyzed by the generalized method). The typical τeff and implied open-circuit voltage values of the TOPCon Si wafers used in this study were 1–4 ms and 683–706 mV, respectively.
2.2 TOPCon Si photoelectrode preparation
A TOPCon Si wafer encapsulated with SiN:H layers was cleaved into small pieces (1–1.5 cm2) using a diamond tip scriber. The SiN:H capping layers were removed by immersing the pieces in a 2.5% aqueous HF solution for 5 minutes, unless otherwise indicated. After the etching process, TOPCon Si was immediately placed in a vacuum chamber to mitigate oxidation of the n+-polySi and p+-polySi surfaces. The front side, where the electrochemical reaction takes place (the n+-polySi side for a photocathode and the p+-polySi side for a photoanode), was covered with a 10–20 nm thick Ti protection layer deposited by an e-beam evaporator. A 10 nm-thick Ti protection layer provided good stability in the acidic or neutral electrolyte, while a minimum thickness of 20 nm was required to ensure stability in an alkaline electrolyte. The Ti layer was partially oxidized to amorphous TiO2 in air or electrochemical environments, which allowed reasonable transmittance for PEC experiments. On top of the Ti layer, electrocatalysts were deposited using an e-beam evaporator. The electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) was Pt nanoparticles regardless of the pH of the electrolyte, and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst was Ir nanoparticles in acidic and neutral electrolytes, or Ni0.8Fe0.2, nanoparticles in an alkaline electrolyte. The electrocatalysts are deposited by an e-beam evaporator and the nominal thickness of the catalysts was set to be 2 nm, to control the mass loading of Pt and Ir to be 4–5 μg cm−2 and that of Ni0.8Fe0.2 to be ∼2 μg cm−2. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) image in Fig. S1b† shows that the morphology of the Pt catalyst is nanoparticles embedded in the TiOx layer. The backside of the device was covered with an Ag film using a thermal evaporator to make electrical contact. A metal wire was attached to the Ag contact using an Ag paste, and the entire TOPCon device was encapsulated with an epoxy leaving an active area (0.5–0.8 cm2) exposed on the front side.
2.3 BiVO4 photoanode preparation
Photoanodes consisting of a SnO2/BiVO4 heterojunction were fabricated using a metal–organic decomposition method,34,38 and its scanning electron microscope (SEM) image is shown in Fig. S3a.† SnO2 layer was deposited to block the hole transport from BiVO4 to FTO substrate using the following sequences: 0.3 M of SnCl2·2H2O was dissolved in isopropyl alcohol, and the solution was kept under ambient conditions for 1 day before use. The Sn precursor solution was then spin-coated on a pre-cleaned fluorine-doped tin oxide substrate (FTO) substrate (7 Ω sq−1), and the film was annealed at 500 °C for 1 h. Next, the BiVO4 film was synthesized on the SnO2 film. Solutions of 0.5 M Bi(NO3)3·5H2O in acetic acid and 0.075 M VO(acac)2 in methanol were mixed together in a 1:6 volume ratio. The mixed solution was spin-coated on the FTO/SnO2 film at 2000 rpm and then annealed at 475 °C on a hot plate for 25 min under ambient conditions. The spin-coating and annealing process was repeated two times to attain the desired BiVO4 thickness of ∼180 nm. The BiVO4 electrodes were covered with 2 nm-thick Ni0.8Fe0.2 to catalyze OER.
2.4 Halide perovskite photocathode preparation
A photocathode comprising a halide perovskite solar cell was prepared on an indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate. 17 nm-thick NiOx was first deposited on the ITO substrate using radiofrequency sputtering. Poly(triaryl amine) (PTAA, 5 mg ml−1 in toluene) was spin-coated on the NiOx film at 6000 rpm and then annealed at 100 °C on a hot plate for 10 min. Perovskite (1.4 M in DMF and NMP mixed solution) solution whose composition is FA0.65MA0.2Cs0.15Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 was spin-coated on the PTAA film at 3000 rpm for 10 s, and it was immediately immersed in a diethyl-ether (DE) bath for 30 s. In the DE bath, the yellowish film was converted to a dark brown color, indicative of the formation of crystalline perovskite. After bathing, the film was annealed at 100 °C for 3 min. A 30 nm-thick C60 layer was deposited on the perovskite film using a thermal evaporator, then polyethyleneimine (PEIE, 0.2 wt% in methanol) was spin-coated at 4500 rpm. Finally, 70 nm-thick ITO was deposited on the C60/PEIE film using radiofrequency sputtering. All the spin-coating processes for the halide perovskite cell were done in a glove box (N2 atmosphere). To protect halide perovskite in a liquid electrolyte, a single crystal TiO2 (rutile, 10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm) was transferred onto the perovskite cell by using a transparent conductive adhesive (TCA).47 Before the transfer process, the single crystal TiO2 was annealed under hydrogen to increase the conductivity, and Pt catalyst (2 nm) and ITO contacts were deposited on its electrochemically active side and the other side, respectively. Two ITO contacts on TiO2 and the perovskite solar cell are electrically connected by using TCA, which is prepared by embedding Ag-coated PMMA particles in a UV-curable polymer (NOA 86H). TCA sandwiched between the TiO2 and halide perovskite cell is cured by a LED light (wavelength: 420 nm) through TiO2 under mechanical pressure. The SEM image on the halide perovskite photocathode is shown in Fig. S3b.†
2.5 Characterization of PEC devices
The performance of the TOPCon Si photoelectrodes was measured in a 3-electrode electrochemical cell with an optical window. To test the devices under various pH conditions, the electrochemical cell was filled with either 1 M perchloric acid (HClO4, pH 0), 1 M potassium phosphate (KPi, pH 7), or 1 M potassium hydroxide (KOH, pH 14). The reference electrodes used in this study were Ag/AgCl in 3 M KCl (at pH 0 or 7) or Hg/HgO in 3 M NaOH (pH 14), and they were calibrated before each experiment. The counter electrode was a platinum coil in all experiments. A TOPCon Si working electrode was illuminated by a xenon lamp light filtered by an AM 1.5G filter (Newport Corporation) through an optical window. The intensity of the light source was calibrated to 1 sun using a silicon photodetector. To avoid adventitious reactions, the electrolytes were saturated with Ar gas, and in the case of the neutral electrolyte, vigorous stirring by a magnetic stir bar was applied to minimize the ion transport limitation. The ohmic resistance in this electrochemical setup is around 5–10 Ω (see Fig. S4† for electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements).
Unassisted solar water-splitting experiments using wired BiVO4–TOPCon Si and halide perovskite–TOPCon Si tandem PEC devices were carried out in a PEC cell filled with 1 M potassium borate (KBi, pH 9) and 0.5 M sulfuric acid (H2SO4, pH 0), respectively. The electrochemically active sides of the top cell and the TOPCon Si bottom cell were facing each other with a separation of ∼3 cm. Chronoamperometry measurement was carried out by short-circuiting two electrodes for carrying out unassisted solar water-splitting experiments.
3 Results
3.1 Characterization of photocathodes
The surface of the photocathode was decorated with 2 nm of Pt as the HER catalyst. The photovoltages of Si photocathodes were determined by comparing onset potential and hydrogen redox potential (0 V vs. RHE) and found to be 640–650 mV (see Fig. 2a). The fill factor of the photocathode tested in the acidic electrolyte was 61%, and it is reasonably high compared to previous studies.17 The slope of CV at the low current regime (0–1 mA cm−2) is lower in the neutral and alkaline electrolytes, and hence the fill factors of photocathodes. When considering the slope of CV depending on pH is comparable to Tafel slopes of Pt catalysts tested at various pH values in the previous study,48 the pH-dependent change in the performance is mostly attributed to the electrocatalytic activity of platinum toward HER. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results also support that charge transfer resistance would be the main cause of the pH dependence, and the series resistance differences between the electrolytes also had a modest effect (see Fig. S4 in ESI† for EIS measurement).
 Fig. 2  The photovoltages of TOPCon Si photoelectrodes were measured by cyclic voltammetry. The photovoltages of (a) photocathode and (b) photoanode were measured by cyclic voltammetry over a broad range of pH. The red, green and blue graphs represent the cyclic voltammetry from 1 M HClO4 (pH 0), 1 M KPi (pH 7) and 1 M KOH (pH 14), respectively. The electrolytes were saturated by Ar and the scan rate was 50 mV s−1. 
3.2 Characterization of photoanodes
Depending on the pH of the electrolyte, either 2 nm of Ir (for pH 0 and 7) or 2 nm of Ni0.8Fe0.2 (for pH 14) were chosen as OER catalysts. The photovoltages of Si photoanodes were characterized by comparing CVs from the Si photoanode under light with the same catalysts and titanium layer deposited on heavily p-doped silicon in dark, and found to be similar to that from the photocathodes (see Fig. 2b). The performance of photoanodes is also largely affected by the catalytic activities toward OER depending on pH.49–51 Please note that CV from photoanodes showed kinked slopes (so-called S-shape), while that from photocathodes maintained the straight slopes in the low current regime. The different shapes of CV from photocathode and photoanode are related to the electrochemical charge transport at the surface of catalysts. Nearby the onset potential of photocathode, ion (proton or hydroxide) adsorption or desorption taking place over the Pt catalyst can transport photocurrents from the MIS junction with a minimal energy loss. On the other hand, photoanodes with OER catalysts have large overpotentials that work as a charge extraction barrier and cause the kinked CV shapes.
The high photovoltage from TOPCon Si photoanode is reconfirmed in potassium ferri/ferrocyanide (KFFC) electrolyte to avoid ambiguity from comparing two CVs. The KFFC electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 0.5 M of KCl, 0.1 M of potassium ferricyanide and 0.1 M of potassium ferrocyanide. The measurements were carried out in a two-electrode setup with a platinum counter electrode, and the electrolyte was saturated with Ar and vigorously stirred by a magnetic bar to minimize a current limitation by ion transport. Due to the parasitic absorption of light by the KFFC solution, the photovoltages and photocurrents are lower than that in other transparent electrolytes. To estimate the photovoltage under 1 sun intensity, we measure the photovoltage under various optical intensities and fit the data points to the following equation.19Voc = a + blog(I)Here, Voc and I are the photovoltage and the relative optical intensity absorbed by a device compared with 1 sun, and a and b are fitting parameters, respectively. Optical intensity is controlled by changing the power input to the light source (150–300 W), and the relative intensity is inferred by comparing the saturated current density with that from a transparent electrolyte. The photovoltages of photoanodes decorated with Ir or Ni0.8Fe0.2 under the various intensities (red, orange, green and blue graphs in Fig. 3a and c) were determined. The fitting results (Fig. 3b and d) show that the photovoltages would reach 664 or 660 mV under 1 sun illumination from the photoanode decorated with Ir or Ni0.8Fe0.2 catalyst, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltage of photoanodes measured in potassium ferri/ferrocyanide. (a) The cyclic voltammetry of a photoanode decorated with Ir in KFFC electrolyte under various light source intensities (red, orange, green and blue), and the same photoanode in 1 M HClO4 (gray). (b) The photovoltage of the photoanode with Ir in the KFFC solution depending on the optical intensity incident on the photoanode. The optical intensity was calibrated by comparing the photocurrent to that acquired from 1 M HClO4. (c and d) The same experiment was also carried out by using Ni0.8Fe0.2 and 1 M KOH instead of Ir and 1 M HClO4. 
3.3 Comparison of photovoltage with previous studies

Fig. 4a shows the averages and standard deviations of the photovoltages from the three batches of photoelectrodes for each condition (photoanode vs. photocathode and different pH values). All photovoltage values were similar within the measurement uncertainty, from 640 to 650 mV (see Table S1† for the average and standard deviation values). The dry TOPCon Si devices provide photovoltages of 650–668 mV, which is slightly higher than that of the TOPCon Si photoelectrode by 10–30 mV (see Fig. S5† for J–V curve from the dry TOPCon Si cell). We presume that the small photovoltage drop in the photoelectrodes is attributed to the recombination of charge carriers at the edges of cleaved TOPCon Si pieces, as a similar level of voltage drop was observed from cleaved devices in the previous study.46 Therefore, scaling up the device to a larger size may further improve the photovoltage. A noteworthy conclusion from the electrochemical measurements shown in Fig. 2a and b is that all the Si PEC devices implementing the TOPCon structure, regardless of the reaction type, catalyst, and pH, exhibited high photovoltages. Fig. 4b shows the photovoltages of the crystalline silicon photoelectrodes from our study as well as from the literature (see Table S1† for details). While the Si photoelectrodes based on an MIS junction exhibit relatively higher photovoltages compared to the other junctions, our TOPCon Si photoelectrodes generate the highest photovoltages from both, the photoanode (upright triangle) and photocathode (inverted triangle) over the broad range of pH's, by having the MIS junction on both sides of the device.
 Fig. 4  The summary of the photovoltages from TOPCon Si photocathodes and photoanodes. (a) The bar graphs and the error bars represent the average and standard deviation from 3 different samples, respectively, in each case. (b) Photovoltages of Si photoelectrodes of this work as well as from the previous studies. 
3.4 Thermal stability of TOPCon Si
A prerequisite for the realization of monolithic tandem PEC devices based on a wide-gap metal-oxide top cell, which often requires a high processing temperature, is the good thermal stability of the bottom cell. To validate the applicability of TOPCon Si as a bottom cell in tandem PEC devices, we tested the thermal stability of TOPCon Si devices at various temperatures. TOPCon Si wafer, which was encapsulated in SiN:H capping layers for long-term storage, was annealed at 200, 400, 600, and 800 °C in air for 1 h. By carrying out the annealing with SiN:H capping, we can assess the thermal stability of SiO2 passivation layer without the influence of surrounding environment (e.g. by surface oxidation). Photocathodes using the annealed TOPCon Si devices were prepared in the same way as described in the Experimental section, except that longer etching times were used to remove the capping layer, 5, 10, 15, and 40 min with 2.5% HF solution for the samples annealed at 200, 400, 600, and 800 °C, respectively. The need for longer etching times for the annealed samples is likely due to the partial oxidation of the capping layers forming SiOxNy. Fig. 5 presents the CV measurements of the photocathodes prepared with the annealed TOPCon Si. There was no significant change in the performance after thermal annealing up to 600 °C for 1 h in air. Annealing at 800 °C caused the degradation of the TOPCon Si, which most likely originated from the breach of the SiO2 tunnel oxide passivation layer. We carried out time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) on the p+ side of TOPCon Si before and after annealing to investigate the thermal diffusion across the SiO2 (see Fig. S6†). Before annealing, the signals from process-relevant elements (such as P and B dopants and N from SiN:H capping) are large around the SiO2 layer and it shows SiO2 works as a diffusion barrier. Note that the SiN:H capping layer was deposited at 400 °C for 30 min but nitrogen did not diffuse into n-Si substrate because of the presence of SiO2. The previous study43 based on the same TOPCon Si shows that SiO2 can also block the diffusion of external elements introduced during a high-temperature process. However, after annealing TOPCon Si at 800 °C for 1 hour, the thermal diffusion of elements across the SiO2 is observed, consistent with the electrochemical performance degradation. It should be noted that 800 °C exceeded the typical processing temperatures of promising wide bandgap semiconductor candidates for the top cell, such as BiVO4, Cu2O, and Fe2O3. Therefore, the high thermal stability is a clear advantage of TOPCon structure over other structures that have a limited processing temperature due to the diffusion of dopants. Future studies on a recombination layer between the metal oxide top cell and the TOPCon Si would realize a monolithically integrated tandem PEC device based on earth-abundant materials.
 Fig. 5  The effect of high processing temperatures on the performance of TOPCon Si photocathode. Before removing the SiN:H capping layers, the wafer was annealed for 1 hour in air to simulate a high-temperature metal-oxide deposition process. The blue, green, yellow and red graphs represent annealing temperatures of 200, 400, 600 and 800 °C, respectively. The control sample without annealing is also shown by the gray graph. 
4 Discussion
4.1 Charge transport mechanism through TOPCon Si/TiO2/catalyst
The Ti protection layer would transform into amorphous TiO2, which is n-type large band gap semiconductor. It is generally accepted that electrons from n-type semiconductors can easily migrate to TiO2 because their conduction bands are favorably aligned for electron transport, thus, TiO2 protection layer on photocathode (n+-polySi/TiO2) can work as an electron transporting layer. However, the charge transport mechanism across a p+-polySi/TiO2 interface remains elusive because the downward band bending of the p+-Si at the interface is expected to hinder hole transport to TiO2.52 Nevertheless, PEC devices with p+-Si/TiO2 interfaces have been shown to work, which was explained by the conduction through defect states23,52,53 or by the recombination of electrons from the TiO2 and holes from the p+-Si at the interface.24,25,54
The Si photoanodes with Ir tested in an acidic or neutral electrolyte showed an electrical potential difference between the anodic and cathodic scans of ∼40 mV in the acid and ∼100 mV in the neutral electrolyte (Fig. 2b), which signifies relatively larger pseudocapacitive areas. In the other configurations (photoanode with Ni0.8Fe0.2 in the alkaline or photocathodes in any electrolyte shown in Fig. 2a and b), the scans in both directions almost overlap each other. The origin of the pseudocapacitive behavior is intangible, but possible sources are (i) a charge transport barrier at the solid–solid interfaces (p+-polySi/TiO2 or TiO2/Ir), or (ii) electrochemical phenomena (redox of Ir,55 ion transport limitation49,56 or surface charging57) in the vicinity of the solid–liquid junction (Ir/electrolyte). We can exclude the possibility of a charge transport barrier at the p+-polySi/TiO2 interface because the Ni0.8Fe0.2-decorated TOPCon photoanode with the same interface did not show such a large pseudocapacitive behavior (blue graph in Fig. 2b and 3c). In contrast, the TiO2/Ir interface must be, at least partially, responsible for the large pseudo capacitance because the same photoanode tested in KFFC, which offers a completely different electrochemical environment from 1 M HClO4 or 1 M KPi, also showed a potential difference of ∼20 mV between the anodic and cathodic scans (see Fig. 3a). Some studies that investigated a similar structure (amorphous TiO2/Ir) also reported pseudocapacitive behavior from their devices.53,58 With regard to the Ir/electrolyte interface, a much larger pseudo capacitance in the neutral electrolyte than in the acidic electrolyte implies that the Ir/electrolyte interface also affects the pseudo capacitance. CV measurements at various scan rates showed that the potential gap between the cathodic and anodic scans was marginally affected by the scan rate in the acid, whereas the gap became narrower with the decreasing scan rate in the neutral electrolyte (see Fig. S6†). This scan-rate dependence may be related to the sluggish mass transport in the neutral electrolyte.49,56 Lowering the scan rate during the anodic scan would allow sufficient time for OH− ions to be consumed at lower potentials and therefore, suppress OH−-mediated OER at higher potentials.
4.2 Tandem PEC devices comprising TOPCon Si bottom cell
The superior photovoltage and thermal stability of the TOPCon Si make it attractive as the bottom cell of a tandem PEC device. By developing an earth-abundant large band gap top cell and introducing a proper recombination layer between the top cell and the TOPCon Si bottom cell, it would be possible to realize a monolithically integrated tandem PEC device capable of unassisted PEC water-splitting. Because TOPCon Si can serve as both photocathode and photoanode over a broad range of pH, it can couple with any type of top cell material, which would be a great advantage for future studies investigating various top cell materials. To present the flexible applicability and feasibility of the monolithic tandem PEC device, we prepare BiVO4 photoanode and halide perovskite photocathode as a potential top cell, which are promising wide band gap light absorbers, and characterized a BiVO4–TOPCon Si and halide perovskite–TOPCon Si wired tandem devices. Lastly, we provide further discussion on practical issues that may arise when constructing a monolithic tandem device with TOPCon Si as a bottom cell.

4.2.1 BiVO4 photoanode–TOPCon Si photocathode. 

Fig. 6a shows a schematic diagram of BiVO4 photoanode–TOPCon Si photocathode wired tandem device, and Fig. 6b shows the PEC performances of the photoelectrodes individually characterized in an Ar-saturated 1 M KBi (pH 9). The BiVO4 thin film decorated with 2 nm of Ni0.8Fe0.2 alloy as OER catalysts showed an onset potential of 0.37 V vs. RHE (red graph in Fig. 6b). The performance of the TOPCon Si photocathode was measured under 1 sun intensity (the gray graph in Fig. 6b) and BiVO4-filtered 1 sun intensity (blue graph in Fig. 6b), by placing BiVO4/SnO2 on an FTO substrate in front of the photocathode to examine the effect of the optical absorption by the BiVO4 top cell on the performance of the TOPCon Si bottom cell (please note that the sign of the current density on the y-axis is inverted). The photovoltage and photocurrent decreased slightly under the BiVO4-filtered illumination, as anticipated, owing to the reduced intensity. The CV curves of the BiVO4 photoanode and TOPCon Si photocathode overlap with each other (the crossing point between the blue and red graph in Fig. 6b), demonstrating that their performance is high enough to drive the unassisted PEC water-splitting. It is worth noting that the larger photovoltage of the TOPCon Si photocathode compared to other Si photocathodes allowed the crossing with the CV of the BiVO4 photoanode at a higher current density, and therefore, a higher STH efficiency. The enhancement of STH would be possible by enhancing the BiVO4 photoanode. For example, passivating surface or controlling the crystalline orientation of BiVO4 may bring a significant enhancement to the photocurrent from BiVO4.31,33,35,36 Alternative approaches to improve the photocurrent from Si photoelectrode by structuring surface or controlling TiO2 thickness for reducing reflection loss, however, these approaches would bring only marginal improvement as the slope already looks almost vertical in the low current regime. The inset of Fig. 6b shows a two-terminal chronoamperometry measurement on the two short-circuited photoelectrodes under 1 sun illumination over 24 h. The initial current density was ∼0.2 mA cm−2, as expected from the crossing point of two CV measurements, equivalent to an STH conversion efficiency of 0.24%. The current density decreased gradually over time, and the CV of the TOPCon Si photocathode after 24 h of the chronoamperometry measurement (the light blue graph in Fig. 6b) reveals that the photovoltage of the Si photocathode decreased by ∼200 mV, most likely due to the corrosion of Si in the alkaline 1 M KBi electrolyte (pH 9). However, we expect that the monolithic integration of BiVO4 and TOPCon Si should be able to substantially enhance the stability of the device as Si, which is intrinsically unstable in an alkaline electrolyte, would not be directly exposed to the electrolyte by having the top cell on its optical front side.
 Fig. 6  (a) The BiVO4 photoanode with Ni0.8Fe0.2 and the TOPCon Si photocathode with Pt served as the top cell and bottom cell of the wired tandem device, respectively. (b) The halide perovskite photocathode with Pt and TOPCon Si photoanode with Ir served as the top cell and bottom cell of the wired tandem device, respectively. (c) The performance of the tandem device was characterized in Ar-saturated 1 M KBi (pH 9) by carrying out cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry for 24 hours. (d) The performance of the tandem device was characterized in Ar-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0) by carrying out cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry for 9 hours. 


4.2.2 Halide perovskite photocathode–TOPCon Si photoanode. 

Fig. 6c shows a schematic diagram of halide perovskite photocathode–TOPCon Si photoanode wired tandem device, and Fig. 6d shows the performances of the photoelectrodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0). The gray and blue graphs compare the CV of TOPCon Si photoanode under 1 sun and perovskite-filtered 1 sun illumination. The reduction in the photovoltage and photocurrent by the perovskite filter is larger compared to that by the BiVO4 filter because of the lower optical transmittance of the perovskite filter. The red graph shows the performance of the perovskite photocathode protected by TiO2 (please note the inverted sign convention). The overlap between the CVs of perovskite photocathode and TOPCon Si photoanode is at ∼3 mA cm−2, which corresponds to STH efficiency of ∼3.6%. Notably, the STH efficiency from the perovskite–TOPCon Si device is in the range of the best records among the tandem PEC devices based on earth-abundant elements (see Table S2† for STH efficiencies from tandem PEC devices made of earth-abundant elements). The inset of Fig. 6d shows the chronoamperometry measurement from the perovskite–TOPCon Si tandem device without external bias. Gas chromatography measurement during the chronoamperometry shows that Faraday efficiency toward HER and OER are ∼100%, respectively (see Fig. S7† for details on the gas chromatography measurement). The gradual decrease in the current density is attributed to the degradation of halide perovskite in the acidic electrolyte over time despite the application of the TiO2 protection layer, while the performance of TOPCon Si photoanode was stable in the acidic electrolyte. We expect that a better encapsulation strategy for the halide perovskite cell would improve the operation time of the wired tandem device.


4.2.3 Considerations for constructing a monolithic tandem PEC with TOPCon Si as its bottom cell. 
We showed that TOPCon Si photoelectrode coupled with potential top cells (BiVO4 or halide perovskite) can generate a sufficient photovoltage for unassisted water-splitting, however, there are challenges to be addressed when integrating the top and TOPCon Si bottom cell to prepare a monolithic tandem PEC device. The monolithic device preparation requires a series of processing steps for a recombination layer and a top cell, which are often oxide deposited at a high temperature. For example, transparent conductive oxides (TCO) or transition metal oxides are widely used as the recombination layer and should be in direct contact with n+ or p+ polySi of TOPCon Si.59 Although the thermal stability tests with SiN:H capping layer shown in Fig. 5 demonstrated that the SiO2 tunneling layer can withstand high-temperature processing, however, the deposition of oxide material over TOPCon without SiN:H may cause increased contact resistance by oxidizing the polySi surface. To avoid the oxidation of polySi surface during deposition, one may try to reduce the exposure of the surface to oxygen by (1) depositing the oxide in a vacuum chamber with a low oxygen partial pressure rather than in air, and/or (2) depositing a thin layer of elemental metal before depositing metal oxide. Furthermore, the electrochemical stability of the polySi surface is also important when a top cell material is not a compact film (e.g. porous or nanowire structure) and the TOPCon Si bottom cell is exposed to an electrolyte. While TOPCon Si shows reasonable stability in acid, it is rather unstable in an alkaline electrolyte as can be seen in Fig. 6, therefore, a uniform and electrochemically stable protection layer is needed. For example, electrochemically stable materials would be preferred as a recombination layer.

5 Conclusions
We prepared PEC devices based on TOPCon Si, an ideal candidate for the bottom cell of a monolithic tandem PEC device, because of its high performance and superior thermal stability. Furthermore, by having a TOPCon structure on both the front and back sides, the TOPCon Si can act as a photocathode as well as a photoanode, which allows great flexibility in the design of tandem PEC devices. PEC devices based on TOPCon Si produced photovoltages of 640–650 mV, the highest among those reported for Si photoelectrodes, which are essential for enhancing the efficiency of the tandem device. Both TOPCon Si photocathodes and photoanodes yielded high photovoltages over a broad range of pH (0–14); therefore, the device is compatible with any type of top cell material. TOPCon Si also showed superior thermal stability up to 600 °C in air. The high thermal stability enables the TOPCon Si to accommodate a large bandgap metal oxide top cell deposition, which often requires a high processing temperature during the fabrication of a monolithic tandem device. Future studies on a recombination layer between the metal oxide top cell and the TOPCon Si would realize a monolithically integrated tandem PEC device, a true artificial leaf, based on earth-abundant materials. As a preliminary examination of the performance of such tandem PEC devices, we selected BiVO4 and halide perovskite as a potential top cell material, and prepared a wired tandem PEC device, by combining a BiVO4 photoanode and a TOPCon Si photocathode, or combining perovskite photocathode and TOPCon Si photoanode. The wired tandem devices showed STH efficiencies of 0.24% from BiVO4–TOPCon Si tandem, and 3.6% from the perovskite–TOPCon Si tandem. These wired tandem experiments demonstrate the flexible applicability of TOPCon Si photoelectrode as both photocathode and photoanode.
Author contributions
C. M. and B. S. conceptualized the project. C. M. prepared TOPCon Si photoelectrodes and halide perovskite photocathodes. F. M. A. M., A. A. and S. C. prepared TOPCon Si cells. G. J. prepared BiVO4 photoanodes. J. G. prepared perovskite cells. C. M. carried out electrochemical characterizations. C. M. wrote the original draft with inputs from all authors. B. S. supervised the project.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (No. 2021M3I3A1085009, No. 2022R1I1A1A01063534). This research was supported by the Nano Material Technology Development Program (Green Nano Technology Development Program) through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (No. 2018M3A7B4065662).
References
R. van de Krol and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Energy Sustain., 2017, 4, 13 CrossRef .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
R. Sathre, J. B. Greenblatt, K. Walczak, I. D. Sharp, J. C. Stevens, J. W. Ager and F. A. Houle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 803–819 RSC .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984 RSC .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, J. Feng, T. Fang, X. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9905–9910 RSC .
R. van de Krol and Y. Liang, Chimia, 2013, 67, 168–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Noh, B.-R. Kim, G.-J. Yoon, S.-C. Jung, W. Kang and S.-J. Kim, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2012, 8, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
W. Vijselaar, P. P. Kunturu, T. Moehl, S. D. Tilley and J. Huskens, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2287–2294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, J. T. Song, H. S. Jang, M.-J. Choi, D. M. Sim, S. Yim, H. Lim, Y. S. Jung and J. Oh, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2017, 13, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, A. C. Meng, K. Tang, O. L. Hendricks, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14596–14603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, B. J. Trześniewski, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5462–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bae, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Iandolo, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Today, 2017, 290, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, S. Feng, L. Yang, C. Li, Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 221–228 RSC .
J. Hemmerling, J. Quinn and S. Linic, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903354 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chuang, Y.-Y. Lai, C.-H. Hou and Y.-J. Cheng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3902–3908 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801155 CrossRef .
H.-P. Wang, K. Sun, S. Y. Noh, A. Kargar, M.-L. Tsai, M.-Y. Huang, D. Wang and J.-H. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2817–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, T. Moehl, S. Siol and S. D. Tilley, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3085–3092 RSC .
B. Mei, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, D. Bae, R. Frydendal, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15019–15027 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, M. T. McDowell, A. C. Nielander, S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, F. Yang, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 592–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, D. S. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Grätzel and I. Chorkendorff, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25902 RSC .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, K. W. Kemp, T. Ito, A. Walsh, C. E. D. Chidsey, P. K. Hurley and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 99–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 84–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Venugopal, R. Kas, K. Hau and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 18581–18591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lamers, S. Fiechter, D. Friedrich, F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18694–18700 RSC .
H. S. Han, S. Shin, D. H. Kim, I. J. Park, J. S. Kim, P.-S. Huang, J.-K. Lee, I. S. Cho and X. Zheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1299–1306 RSC .
S. Byun, G. Jung, S.-Y. Y. Moon, B. Kim, J. Y. Park, S. Jeon, S.-W. W. Nam and B. Shin, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 244–252 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, W. Wang, C. Zhou, X. Tong, M. Liu, G. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 287–294 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16498–16521 RSC .
B. J. Trześniewski and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2919–2926 RSC .
S. Byun, B. Kim, S. Jeon and B. Shin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6905–6913 RSC .
X. Lu, K. Ye, S. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Huang and H. Ji, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131027 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schmidt, R. Peibst and R. Brendel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 187, 39–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. De Wolf and M. Kondo, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 103707 CrossRef .
K.-W. A. Chee, B. K. Ghosh, I. Saad, Y. Hong, Q. H. Xia, P. Gao, J. Ye and Z. J. Ding, Nano Energy, 2022, 95, 106899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Assar, F. Martinho, J. Larsen, N. Saini, D. Shearer, M. V. Moro, F. Stulen, S. Grini, S. Engberg, E. Stamate, J. Schou, L. Vines, S. Canulescu, C. Platzer-Björkman and O. Hansen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 14342–14358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Krügener, F. Feldmann, J.-I. Polzin, B. Steinhauser, M. Aleshin, T. T. Le, D. Macdonald and A. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200578 CrossRef .
J. D. McBrayer, R. M. Swanson and T. W. Sigmon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1242–1246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hajijafarassar, F. Martinho, F. Stulen, S. Grini, S. López-Mariño, M. Espíndola-Rodríguez, M. Döbeli, S. Canulescu, E. Stamate, M. Gansukh, S. Engberg, A. Crovetto, L. Vines, J. Schou and O. Hansen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 207, 110334 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Choi, C. U. Kim, W. Park, H. Lee, M. H. Song, K. K. Hong, S. Il Seok and K. J. Choi, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104044 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa and K. Takanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20453–20458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nishimoto, T. Shinagawa, T. Naito and K. Takanabe, J. Catal., 2020, 391, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Kuo, J. K. Kawasaki, J. N. Nelson, J. Kloppenburg, G. Hautier, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom and J. Suntivich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3473–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Görlin, J. Halldin Stenlid, S. Koroidov, H.-Y. Wang, M. Börner, M. Shipilin, A. Kalinko, V. Murzin, O. V. Safonova, M. Nachtegaal, A. Uheida, J. Dutta, M. Bauer, A. Nilsson and O. Diaz-Morales, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6181 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ros, N. M. Carretero, J. David, J. Arbiol, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29725–29735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nunez, M. H. Richter, B. D. Piercy, C. W. Roske, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. D. Losego, S. J. Konezny, D. J. Fermin, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 20116–20129 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, S. T. Omelchenko, D. A. Jacobs, S. Yalamanchili, Y. Wan, D. Yan, P. Phang, T. Duong, Y. Wu, Y. Yin, C. Samundsett, J. Peng, N. Wu, T. P. White, G. G. Andersson, N. S. Lewis and K. R. Catchpole, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 1–13 Search PubMed .
A. Grimaud, A. Demortière, M. Saubanère, W. Dachraoui, M. Duchamp, M.-L. Doublet and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16189 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hodnik, C. Baldizzone, S. Cherevko, A. Zeradjanin and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Electrocatalysis, 2015, 6, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Nong, L. J. Falling, A. Bergmann, M. Klingenhof, H. P. Tran, C. Spöri, R. Mom, J. Timoshenko, G. Zichittella, A. Knop-Gericke, S. Piccinin, J. Pérez-Ramírez, B. R. Cuenya, R. Schlögl, P. Strasser, D. Teschner and T. E. Jones, Nature, 2020, 587, 408–413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Richter, W.-H. Cheng, E. J. Crumlin, W. S. Drisdell, H. A. Atwater, D. Schmeißer, N. S. Lewis and B. S. Brunschwig, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 1265–1275 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Bastiani, A. S. Subbiah, E. Aydin, F. H. Isikgor, T. G. Allen and S. De Wolf, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2791–2809 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07996hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The structure of TOPCon photoelectrodes. Both photocathode and photoanode were prepared by using a TOPCon Si. Depending on the electrochemical reaction (HER or OER) and pH of the electrolyte (0, 7 or 14), 10 or 20 nm of Ti layer was deposited on n+-polySi (for HER) or p+-polySi side (for OER) to protect an active area. Ag was coated on the backside to make an electrical contact, and the device was encapsulated with epoxy except the active area.	 

 	Fig. 2  The photovoltages of TOPCon Si photoelectrodes were measured by cyclic voltammetry. The photovoltages of (a) photocathode and (b) photoanode were measured by cyclic voltammetry over a broad range of pH. The red, green and blue graphs represent the cyclic voltammetry from 1 M HClO4 (pH 0), 1 M KPi (pH 7) and 1 M KOH (pH 14), respectively. The electrolytes were saturated by Ar and the scan rate was 50 mV s−1.	 
Voc = a + blog(I)

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltage of photoanodes measured in potassium ferri/ferrocyanide. (a) The cyclic voltammetry of a photoanode decorated with Ir in KFFC electrolyte under various light source intensities (red, orange, green and blue), and the same photoanode in 1 M HClO4 (gray). (b) The photovoltage of the photoanode with Ir in the KFFC solution depending on the optical intensity incident on the photoanode. The optical intensity was calibrated by comparing the photocurrent to that acquired from 1 M HClO4. (c and d) The same experiment was also carried out by using Ni0.8Fe0.2 and 1 M KOH instead of Ir and 1 M HClO4.	 

 	Fig. 4  The summary of the photovoltages from TOPCon Si photocathodes and photoanodes. (a) The bar graphs and the error bars represent the average and standard deviation from 3 different samples, respectively, in each case. (b) Photovoltages of Si photoelectrodes of this work as well as from the previous studies.	 

 	Fig. 5  The effect of high processing temperatures on the performance of TOPCon Si photocathode. Before removing the SiN:H capping layers, the wafer was annealed for 1 hour in air to simulate a high-temperature metal-oxide deposition process. The blue, green, yellow and red graphs represent annealing temperatures of 200, 400, 600 and 800 °C, respectively. The control sample without annealing is also shown by the gray graph.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The BiVO4 photoanode with Ni0.8Fe0.2 and the TOPCon Si photocathode with Pt served as the top cell and bottom cell of the wired tandem device, respectively. (b) The halide perovskite photocathode with Pt and TOPCon Si photoanode with Ir served as the top cell and bottom cell of the wired tandem device, respectively. (c) The performance of the tandem device was characterized in Ar-saturated 1 M KBi (pH 9) by carrying out cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry for 24 hours. (d) The performance of the tandem device was characterized in Ar-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0) by carrying out cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry for 9 hours.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07996h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
