Influence of metal substitution on hybrid halide perovskites: towards lead-free perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA09943F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA09943F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3793-3823Influence of metal substitution on hybrid halide perovskites: towards lead-free perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Soumyo 
            Chatterjee
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Amlan J. 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Solid State Physics, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, India. E-mail: sspajp@iacs.res.in
Received 
      11th November 2017
    , Accepted 15th January 2018First published on 15th January 2018AbstractThe revolutionary impact of hybrid halide perovskites in the field of solution-based photovoltaics has made them one of the most-promising technologies for next-generation solar cells. However, such a breakthrough has natural drawbacks, since all these perovskite materials yielding high efficiency contain lead as a primary element in their chemical composition. There is hence a substantial hurdle for their acceptance in industries and society alike. Substitution of lead in the perovskite structure by a suitable nontoxic metal has therefore become one of the significant pivotal challenges associated with these wonder materials of the present decade. We hereby review the progress in this emerging field of research to summarize the influence of alternative elements in replacing lead vis-à-vis the materials' properties and characteristics of solar cells based on the metal-substituted hybrid halide perovskites. Moreover, we have discussed the prospects of next-generation of lead-free perovskites, namely 2D layered perovskites, defect ordered and double perovskites with a focus on their properties, stability, and photovoltaic applications.Soumyo ChatterjeeSoumyo Chatterjee was born in Kolkata, India in 1991. In 2013, he received his M.Sc. degree in physics from the University of Calcutta, India. Presently, he is a final year graduate student as an INSPIRE fellow at the Indian Association of Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. He was selected as a participant from India in the 9th HOPE Meeting with Nobel Laureates conducted by JSPS (Tokyo, 2017). He has been selected for Newton Bhabha PhD Placements Programme 2017–18. His research focuses on the formation of hybrid halide perovskites and fabrication and characterization of perovskite solar cells.Amlan J. PalAmlan J. Pal is a JC Bose National Fellow and Professor at the Department of Solid State Physics, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. He received M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in physics from the University of Calcutta and Jadavpur University, respectively. His research interests include materials engineering leading to organic electronics, solar cells based on organic and inorganic semiconductors, hybrid perovskites, and 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, scanning tunneling spectroscopy, organic spintronics, and so forth.
1. Introduction
In the past few years, unmatched progress in power conversion efficiency (PCE) coupled with solution processable technology has made hybrid halide perovskites the wonder materials in the research arena of solar cells.1,2 To date, owing to intense worldwide research, fabrication of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with a high PCE in excess of 22.1% has been reported.3 This achievement along with little to no performance degradation over extended outdoor testing indicates that PSCs are quickly approaching a maturity level developed for commercialization.4
In order to meet the commercial requirement, low-cost, simple and scalable processing technology as well as long term stability is a prerequisite for PSCs. Since their demonstration in 2009,5 a significant amount of investigation on material and device engineering has been carried out on these perovskites to overcome the roadblocks for practical deployment.6 Structurally, a typical PSC contains a perovskite thin-film sandwiched between an electron selective contact (ESC) and a hole selective contact (HSC) making it a heterojunction device.7 The choice of selective contacts and the subsequent arrangement of the perovskite layer classify the device designs of PSCs ranging from mesoscopic to planar like geometry with a regular (n–i–p) or inverted (p–i–n) structure.8,9 From a materials perspective, the PSCs are indeed very fascinating. Generally, over the years, a range of hybrid halide perovskite materials with the general formula of AMX3, where the A-site is usually occupied by an organic monovalent cation, the M-site by lead, and the X-site by a halogen, has been employed as light absorbers. Due to their solution-based fabrication approach, a wide range of alterations at these sites has become possible leading to alteration of the band gap and conductivity-type in perovskite materials.10,11
Therefore, most recent efforts of researchers working in the field of hybrid perovskites have been focused on the design of novel materials with improved optoelectronic characteristics and more importantly stability via substitutional doping.12,13 As a result, the primary champion perovskite methylammonium lead iodide, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3 or MAPI henceforth) is now turning out to be a representative of a large group of similar compounds with comparable properties suitable for efficient solar cell applications. In this direction, substitutions of the iodide by bromide and chloride (X-site) and the methylammonium ions by formamidinium and cesium (A-site) have so far been the primary compositional engineering.14 In contrast, partial substitution of lead with alternative metal species influencing the material properties of the perovskites and photovoltaic performance of the corresponding PSCs is less explored. Also, from the standpoint of environmental viability, this is the most desired substitution site in the conventional perovskite structure.
This review article primarily discusses the possible substitutions at the lead site and their influence on material and photovoltaic properties. Furthermore, a systematic discussion on the emerging perovskites, such as two-dimensional (2D) layered perovskites, defect-ordered perovskites and double perovskites has also been made. With these materials, discussions towards efficiency optimization of the PSCs vis-à-vis structural stability and also solar cell stability have been considered. We distinguish our review in terms of the extent of the scope covered as well as insights achieved through relevant studies till date.
2. Composition dependent self-doping in a perovskite structure
The search for the secret behind the phenomenal success of MAPI as a photovoltaic material revealed the tolerance of this unique family of materials to defects.15,16 Moreover, these theoretical calculations evidenced the possibility of self-doping in these perovskite structures through defect-engineering. A pioneering study in this direction has been carried out by Wang et al.17 They have successfully changed the majority carrier type in their perovskite thin-films by altering the composition during film fabrication. By varying the proportion of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead iodide (PbI2), which are the two precursors for the MAPI perovskite, both MAI-rich and PbI2-rich perovskite films can be prepared with p-and n-type conductivity, respectively. Such a variation in composition of the perovskite films led to a significant variation in the electron and hole concentration and thereby formation of the desired types of MAPI (Fig. 1a). In the report of Huang et al., Hall effect measurements on the widely used precursor ratio of PbI2/MAI = 1.0 revealed a high electron concentration and thus a strong n-doping. Reducing the ratio to 0.65 and further to 0.3 gradually changed the carrier type to hole, i.e. p-type self-doping. In contrast, a higher PbI2/MAI ratio of 1.7 led to stronger n-type conductivity. Such a reversal in conductivity was also evidenced in the respective band-diagrams derived from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements. With increasing PbI2 content, in the film the Fermi level (EF) was found to move closer to the conduction band (CB) leaving the pristine band gap unaltered. Quantitatively speaking, the Fermi level moved from 0.08 eV below the mid-gap position for PbI2/MAI = 0.3 to 0.35 eV below the CB for PbI2/MAI = 1.7 supporting the thesis of conductivity-type conversion in MAI that had a band gap of 1.55 eV (Fig. 1b). Quite obviously, such a composition driven type-switching is expected to create an impact on the band-alignment of the perovskite with the selective contacts. Carrier mobility, on the other hand, showed a monotonic decrease in value with increasing precursor ratio. Since an increase in dopant concentration leads to more scattering centers, such a decline in mobility is justified.
 Fig. 1  (a) Variation of carrier concentration and Hall mobility of composition varied perovskite films formed by one-step (black) and two-step interdiffusion (blue) methods and (b) UPS-measured energetic levels of perovskite films formed by the one-step method with different precursor ratios. The column colors of pink and blue represent the p- and n-type conductivity, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC. 
Reporting independently, Chang et al. also aimed to tune the precursor ratio of the perovskite to enhance the performance of their planar solar cells.18 Tuning the molar ratio of PbI2 to MAI in the precursor solution, they investigated the role of excess PbI2 or MAI on the structure and properties of the perovskite films and correlated it with the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs. Their study revealed that at a high PbI2/MAI ratio, the presence of an excess PbI2 in the perovskite film decreased the light absorption of the films and affected the charge carrier transport at grain boundaries as well. On the other hand, an increased MAI content was found to affect the device performance by increasing the series resistance of the respective devices. The energy levels of the perovskites showed a clear change in the position of the Fermi level under PbI2-rich and PbI2-deficient conditions (Fig. 2a). As a result, in their current–voltage (J–V) characteristics, a significant variation of PCE and open-circuit voltage (VOC) could be observed when the precursor ratio in forming MAPI-films was varied (Fig. 2b). The decreasing value of VOC with increasing MAI content in the perovskite is indeed a signature of the gradual p-type doping of the perovskite. Similarly, since the perovskite became more and more n-type with increasing PbI2-content, the Fermi level shifted towards the CB and hence pushed the overall energy levels of the perovskite down in energy; in a heterojunction, a high VOC was thus expected and also observed experimentally. It may be stated that VOC primarily originates due to the energy difference between the quasi-Fermi energy of the perovskite/ESC interface and the VB of the HSC.19
 Fig. 2  (a) Energy band diagram of active materials in perovskite solar cells, with composition-varied perovskite film and (b) variation of power conversion efficiency and VOC with the PbI2/MAI precursor ratio. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Insights into such composition dependent self-doping could be achieved by considering the induction of point-defects in the perovskite films through such a variation. In perovskite films having a low PbI2/MAI ratio, the deficiency of PbI2 leads to formation of a large number of lead and iodine vacancies. According to the calculated results of Yin et al.,20 vacancies at the lead sites have a much lower formation energy than iodine-vacancies. Therefore, such lead-vacancies contribute significantly to the p-type conductivity of the respective perovskite films. A similar analysis in the case of MAI-deficient materials showed the presence of three kinds of point defects in the respective films: lead interstitial, methylammonium vacancy, and iodine vacancy. As the formation energies of both lead interstitials and methylammonium vacancies are too large, it is probably iodine vacancies that cause n-doping behavior in these films (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of conductivity-type conversion in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin-films by a composition-dependent self-doping. The condition for such conversion is stated above the arrow whereas the corresponding elemental defects are listed below. Among the possible defects, the one in bold font is expected to be responsible for the conversion. 
In contrast to CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbBr3 (or MAPbBr3) shows a unique self-doping behavior. In spite of its large optical gap of 2.2 eV, most of the possible point-defects in MAPbBr3 create only shallow levels leading to a low bulk non-radiative carrier recombination rate.21 As a result, MAPbBr3 exhibits a unipolar self-doping behavior, i.e., it can be formed only with p-type conductivity under thermal equilibrium conditions. A density functional theory (DFT) based approach has shown that among all the possible point defects in MAPbBr3, viz. MA, Pb, and Br vacancies (VMA, VPb, and VBr), MA, Pb, and Br interstitials (MAi, Pbi, and Bri), MA on Pb and vice versa, cation substitutions (MAPb and PbMA), and antisite substitutions, such as MA on Br (MABr), Pb on Br (PbBr), Br on MA (BrMA), and Br on Pb (BrPb), only four defects, namely, Pbi, PbBr, BrMA, and BrPb produce deep-levels in the band gap; all other defects have been found to create only shallow levels. It may further be stated that MAi, PbMA, VBr, and MABr are shallow donors, whereas Bri, MAPb, VMA, and VPb are shallow acceptors. These four deep-level defects have large formation energies. As a result, under both Br-rich/Pb-poor (formation of VPb) and Br-poor/Pb-rich (formation of VBr and VMA) conditions, unlike its surrogate MAPbI3, MAPbBr3 exhibits p-type conductivity. Generally, in MA-based hybrid iodide perovskites, n-type behavior can be achieved by compositional engineering through the creation of MA interstitial point-defects. Due to its smaller lattice constant, the formation energy of such defects in MAPbBr3 is too high to make it n-type. On the other hand, in MAPbBr3, Pb-s and Br-p antibonding coupling is stronger than the Pb-s and I-p antibonding coupling in MAPbI3. Therefore, the formation energy of lead vacancies (VPb) is smaller in MAPbBr3 than in MAPbI3. As a consequence, MAPbI3 exhibits an ambipolar behavior, whereas MAPbBr3 demonstrates a unipolar behavior under self-doping.
3. Goldschmidt's tolerance factor: an empirical approach towards elemental substitution
Ideally, the AMX3 structure of a perovskite compound is cubic, where the smaller M-cations are octahedrally coordinated by six X-anions, and the larger A-cations are coordinated to twelve X-anions in a cuboctahedral symmetry as depicted in Fig. 4a.22 Depending upon the size of the A-cation and its interaction with the corner-sharing MX6 octahedra, perovskites can adapt different crystal structures.23 Goldschmidt's approach towards the stability and distortion of the perovskite structure resulted in an empirical parameter that is commonly known as Goldschmidt's tolerance factor (t). The factor depends on the effective ionic radius of the actual ions in the AMX3 structure and is defined as the ratio of the (A–X) distance to the (M–X) distance.24  where, RA, RM, and RX are the effective ionic radii of A, M, and X ions, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of cubic AMX3 perovskites. The A, M and X ions are presented in blue, gray and purple circles respectively, (b) correlation between the tolerance factor and crystal structure of perovskite materials, and (c) the 2D layered structure of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22 and 31. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited and 2016 American Chemical Society, respectively. 
Investigation has showed that a tolerance factor value in the range of 0.9–1 is compatible with the cubic perovskite structure (Fig. 4b).22,24 The maximum structural stability is obtained when t = 1, and distortion of the MX6 octahedron (tiltation) is expected when ‘t’ deviates from unity. If the size of the A-cation is small, or the M-cation is large, a tolerance factor value in the range between 0.71 and 0.9 is obtained and the resulting structure turns orthorhombic, rhombohedral, or tetragonal in nature (distorted perovskite structure). At the other extremity, for a large A-cation, t becomes larger than unity resulting in a layered perovskite structure viz. a Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase (Fig. 4c).25,26 Non-perovskite structures are obtained for tolerance factor value less than 0.7. Therefore, in general, stable perovskite structures usually correspond to 0.75 < t < 1.0. Additionally, the octahedral factor is defined as μ = RM/RX, and stable perovskite structures tend to have 0.44 < μ < 0.90.22 For the most investigated MAPI structures, with ionic radii of Pb2+, I−, and MA+ being 0.132, 0.206, and 0.180 nm, respectively, the corresponding value of tolerance factor becomes 0.81 with the octahedral factor μ = 0.64.27 This value is consistent with a non-cubic stable perovskite structure; at room temperature, a tetragonal structure has indeed been observed from X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies.28 However, depending upon the temperature, the conventional MAPI perovskite can undergo a structural evolution from the tetragonal to the cubic phase that can be ascribed to a variation of the ratio of the out-of-plane to in-plane lattice parameter (c/a) due to a change in the cell volume.29 It is worthy to note here that unlike inorganic perovskites, the MA cations can reorient themselves in MAPI; this freedom depends on the chemical bonding between MA+ ions and the inorganic PbI6 cage.30 Due to the rotational degrees of freedom of MA cations, it is difficult to determine the exact radius of the organic cation and calculate the absolute tolerance factor.31 However, qualitatively this tolerance factor analysis is still helpful to understand the structural transition in such materials upon doping.
4. Metal substitution in halide perovskites: influence on photovoltaic and material properties
Since the perovskites yielding the most efficient solar cells contain a non-negligible (>30 wt%) percentage of lead, manufacturing, deployment, and disposal of PSCs are harmful to the environment. To address this toxicity issue of the material, substitution at the lead-sites of MAPI has been a possible avenue to follow. Based on Goldschmidt's model, a number of potential metals have been considered in this direction.
4.1 Homovalent substitution at the lead site
All the elements that own a stable oxidation state of +2 are potential candidates for homovalent substitution of lead in the hybrid halide perovskite structure. With this consideration, a range of materials can be envisaged. Amongst bivalent group-14 (same group of lead) elements, alkaline earth metals, transition metals, lanthanides, and p-block elements (Fig. 5), many of them may not be suitable for implementation in the perovskite structure due to their toxicity (Cd2+ and Hg2+), large band gap in the resultant perovskite (Be2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+), radioactivity, instability of the +2 oxidation state, etc.
 Fig. 5  Homovalent elements from the periodic table of elements to replace lead in perovskites. 

4.1.1 Group-14 elements. 
The first two proposed candidates for homovalent substitution of lead in the perovskite structure were tin and germanium. Both these elements have similar electronic configuration to lead and possess interesting optoelectronic properties. For both these alternatives, the stability of the corresponding halide perovskites has been a critical concern to the research community. A detailed discussion is presented below.
4.1.1.1 Tin. 
Being a group-14 element with comparable ionic radii, tin (Sn2+) was the first metal considered as a replacement of lead in the MAPI structure. Having an optical gap closer to the optimum requirement without compromising carrier mobility, tin-based halide perovskites are indeed very promising materials for environment-friendly solar cells and optoelectronic applications. Pure tin-based perovskites ASnI3, with A being cesium (Cs), methylammonium (MA), or formamidinium (FA) ions, have shown near infrared (NIR) active direct optical gap of around 1.2–1.4 eV,32 which is lower than their Pb-analogues primarily due to different relativistic interactions. However, such advantages came at the expense of air-stability. With mixtures of lead and tin at the M-sites of a perovskite, a comparable band gap can be obtained along with significantly enhanced air stability.33 These band gaps are suitable for a bottom cell in a perovskite-on-perovskite tandem configuration with PCE that could go up to approximately 40%.34 Recent developments in this direction have been recorded in a four-terminal perovskite-on-perovskite tandem solar cell with PCE reaching up to 20%.34
In one of the early efforts towards lead-free perovskite solar cells, Noel et al. were the first to report fabrication of completely lead-free solution-processed MASnI3-based perovskite solar cells.35 Based on a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, PCE of the lead-substituted solar cells reached 6.4% under 1 sun illumination. Remarkably, containing an absorber material having 1.23 eV optical gap, a VOC over 0.88 V was recorded in these devices. This report essentially indicated that a high VOC, which is a promising property of hybrid halide perovskites, is not limited to lead as the metal cation in the structure.
The tin-based approach towards lead-free perovskite solar cells has also been reported by Hao et al.36 Similar to Noel's report, they have also evidenced a red-shift of the band gap in MASnI3 (1.30 eV) as compared to its conventional counterpart MAPbI3 (1.55 eV). As far as the photovoltaic performance is concerned, the solid-state devices based on the traditional mesoporous structure showed a high short-circuit current (JSC) of 16.3 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.68 V, a moderate fill factor (FF) of 48%, and correspondingly a PCE of 5.23% under 1 sun. In comparison to the lead-based structure, the tin halide perovskites provided a lower VOC presumably due to the lowering of the conduction band edge (CBE) upon tin doping. Therefore, to increase the VOC of these lead-free perovskite devices, chemical substitution of the iodide atom with bromide was applied to engineer the band gap. In the mixed halide MASnI3−xBrx (x = 0–3) compounds, the color (band gap) of the compound could be varied chemically from black for MASnI3 to dark brown for MASnI2Br and finally to yellow for MASnBr3 with increasing bromide content (Fig. 6a and b). Such a variation obviously affected the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding devices. JSC reduced with increasing bromide content due to the blue-shift of absorption onset whereas VOC increased due to this band gap widening resulting in a highest efficiency of 5.73% with the MASnIBr2 compound (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram of CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx with TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD as selective contacts, (b) real device images indicating the colors of the photovoltaic devices made with a varied I/Br ratio and (c) J–V characteristics of devices based on CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx (x = 0–3) perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Analysis of such a poor photovoltaic performance of MASnI3 however revealed certain serious concerns. Majority of the tin-based perovskites exhibit exciton binding energies within a range similar to that of the lead-based perovskites (2–50 meV). Feeble ionization of excitons is therefore not a limiting factor in these materials.37 The major drawback of using tin as a replacement of lead is the facile oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ when exposed to ambient conditions.35,36 Such an undesired process unfortunately destroyed the charge neutrality of the perovskite structure and structural stability through the formation of oxides/hydroxides of tin and methylammonium iodide.38 In addition, the oxidized product Sn4+, as a p-type dopant, makes the material metallic via a self-doping process.39 Furthermore, though tin apparently seems to be a greener alternative to lead, one of the degraded products, SnI2, is as lethal as its lead counterpart (PbI2) due to its strong acidification property.40,41 Another drawback of using MASnI3 is its tendency of rapid crystallization during film formation without any need for annealing42 and uncontrollable crystallization in the solution process.43 These are actually barriers to fabricate homogeneous thin-films of such perovskites. Pure tin-based perovskites also showed a very high layer resistance that adversely affected the device performance.36 Therefore, altogether solely tin-based perovskites have not become feasible options towards lead-free perovskite solar cells.
Partial substitution of lead (Pb2+) by tin (Sn2+) ions in hybrid perovskites demonstrated much better performance in terms of both PCE and stability.33,38,44 The presence of tin in those mixed cation films allowed achievement of a reduced band gap, and lead was deemed to be essential in retarding the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. Following such a strategy MASnxPb1−xI3 mixed cation based solar cells were fabricated and characterized.44 With a control over the lead to tin ratio, the perovskites showed a range of optical band gaps from 1.51 eV (for Pb:Sn = 1:0) to 1.10 eV (for Pb:Sn = 0:1) (Fig. 7a). In a direct structure with mesoporous TiO2 and P3HT, which is the commonly abbreviated name of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl), as carrier-selective contacts, the J–V curves and in turn the photovoltaic parameters of the devices were found to depend a lot on the composition of the perovskite (Fig. 7b and c). Quantitatively, the devices did not yield a measurable photovoltaic response until 30% lead was included in the binary mix. The efficiency reached its maxima of 2.37% at a ratio of Pb:Sn = 0.5:0.5 and decreased upon further Pb addition. The poor performance at the two extremities has been attributed to higher charge recombination in Sn-rich samples (low shunt resistance) and energy level mismatch with P3HT in the Pb-rich case (high series resistance). Further optimization of the composition-optimized devices resulted in an efficiency of 4.18% showing the potential of these all-solid-type NIR active perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram of CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3 perovskite, (b and c) relationship between JSC, efficiency and FF, VOC with Sn content (x) for CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3 perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Similar investigation on ASn1−xPbxI3 (A = MA, FA, Cs, or a combination of these cations) perovskites showed that substitution of lead by 50% or more in this perovskite structure can fundamentally change the oxidation mechanism making them more stable under ambient conditions. The oxidation reaction was also found to depend on the size of the A-site cation. Incorporation of a small cation like Cs+ led to shrinkage of the cubic lattice and in turn slowed down the oxidation reaction.38 Apart from structural stability, inclusion of cesium ions also resulted in an improvement of film morphology leading to an improved device performance.33 Liu et al. unveiled such a dual role of Cs+ by replacing MA+ and FA+ in Pb:Sn binary perovskite solar cells. With APb0.5Sn0.5I3 as the absorber, the PCE value of the solar cells improved from 6.36 to 10.07% after inclusion of 10 mol% Cs+ in place of MA+. With a lesser amount of tin, that is, APb0.75Sn0.25I3, the PCE improved from 10.27 to 14.46% with 20 mol% Cs+ in place of FA+. Besides, more importantly, these devices retained 75% of their initial PCE in an inert atmosphere for 12 days and preserved 76% of their initial PCE in an ambient environment with a relative humidity of 35 ± 5% for 20 days supporting the dual benefit of cesium addition in the Pb:Sn binary perovskites for stable and efficient low band gap PSCs.33 Conversely, use of mixed organic cations (FA with MA) has been observed to resolve the morphological issues of both pure and binary tin-perovskite thin-films and thereby an increment in the efficiency of the respective devices has been reported.45–47 Besides the compositional engineering at the cationic sites, efforts with a mixed anion approach also resulted in an improved stability of the tin-perovskites along with high efficiency.48,49 In such halide engineering, inclusion of bromides in partially replacing the iodides resulted in an increment of the optical gap of the respective perovskites.49 For pure lead based perovskites, such an anionic combination has been reported to be prone to light-induced instability due to the complex phase segregation into iodide- and bromide-rich perovskite phases under illumination.50 In a Pb:Sn binary perovskite, engineering of the internal bonding environment makes such mixed halide perovskites less vulnerable to phase segregation and therefore an improvement in the photovoltaic lifetime can be observed.48,49 In essence, compounds like MA1−x(FA)xPb1−ySnyI3−zBrz with optimized elemental composition may provide the desired combination of stability and efficiency.
On the other hand, in spite of their attractive optoelectronic properties, successful application of completely inorganic tin-based perovskites like CsSnI3 has been hindered by their serious instability in an ambient environment. If not perfectly encapsulated, CsSnI3 has been reported to decompose into CsI and SnI2, affecting the device performance.51 Moreover, due to the aforesaid “self-doping” effect induced by the easy oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ and the low formation energy of tin-vacancies, the semiconducting CsSnI3 is prone to show metallic behavior.52 Previously used as a hole-selective contact in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) due to its extremely high carrier mobility (∼2000 cm2 V−1 s−1) and strong p-type nature, the use of CsSnI3 as an absorber has not therefore flourished. Use of tin-compensating additives like SnF2 (ref. 53 and 54) or SnCl2,55 reducing agents (in the presence of SnF2) such as hydrophosphoric acid (H3PO2 or HPA)56 or hydrazine (N2H4),57 and self-compensation of tin58 however showed some promise in this direction by suppressing the formation of Sn-vacancies.59 Measures have also been taken to improve the JSC by adding SnF2,54VOC by chemical doping with bromide,60 and air stability by cation and anion mixing.60,61 The PCE of the devices still remained around 3%.7,56
4.1.1.2 Germanium. 
Germanium, as another group-14 element, can also be named as a new candidate in this direction. The divalent germanium cation (Ge2+) is in the same oxidation state as Pb2+; as a result, these perovskites possess similar optical and transport properties as compared to their lead analogues.62,63 To get an insight into the optical gap of Ge-perovskites with the conventional AMX3 structure, where A = Cs, or MA, and X = Cl, Br, or I, theoretical results established a dependence of band gap on the halide ions which followed the trend AGeCl3 > AGeBr3 > AGeI3 for both cesium64 and MA63 ions, respectively (Fig. 8a). On the other hand, the influence of A-site cations on the band gap of Ge-perovskites has also been explored.65 In general, the A-site cations in the perovskite structure govern the dimensionality of the perovskite also along with its band gap. In these Ge-perovskites, substitution of small cesium ions (188 pm) by larger ones like methylammonium (217 pm), formamidinium (253 pm), or acetamidinium increased the band gap maintaining its three dimensional (3D) structure; introduction of still bulkier cations like isopropylammonium, guanidinium (278 pm) and trimethylammonium not only increased the band gap but also reduced the dimensionality to one dimensional (1D) due to the stereochemical activation of the 4s2 lone pair65 (Fig. 8b). Such a reduction in dimension also changed the nature of the band gap from direct to an indirect one. As has been seen, for most of the Ge-perovskites, the band gap is large; these materials are therefore more relevant as a top absorber in tandem devices instead of their role as the principal absorber. With methylammonium and formamidinium, the band gaps may however look promising; due to its sturdy lone-pair effect, inclusion of Ge2+ in such perovskites leads to lower-dimensional structures with poor conductivities. As a result Ge-perovskites have never drawn significant attention as a photovoltaic absorber in spite of the atoxic nature and promising abundance of germanium. When incorporated in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells, CsGeI3 and MAGeI3 yielded PCE values 0.11 and 0.20%, respectively, which is limited mainly by the oxidation of germanium and defect chemistry in the material.66 So far, a maximum PCE of 3.2% has been recorded with the CsGeI3 structure,67 where the stability of Ge2+ is significantly reduced due to the low binding energy of its 4s2 electrons.68 So, in order to succeed as an absorber in perovskite solar cells, the oxidation issue of Ge-perovskite needs to be addressed. Use of layered perovskite structures could be a feasible option in this direction.
 Fig. 8  (a) Dependence of the band gap of AGeX3 (A: Cs or MA) perovskites on X-site elements and (b) variation of the band gap of AGeI3 perovskites with different A-site cations. 


4.1.2 Transition metals and alkaline-earth metals. 
Due to their high abundance in the earth's crust and mostly nontoxic nature, transition metals and alkaline-earth metals are lucrative choices to replace lead in halide perovskites. Alkaline-earth metals such as strontium, calcium, etc. have a stable +2 oxidation state and suitable effective ionic radii (Sr2+: 118 pm; Ca2+: 100 pm) to form conventional AMX3 perovskites.69 They may however be strongly moisture-sensitive. On the other hand, transition metals like copper, iron, or palladium have lower ionic radii than lead (Cu2+: 73 pm; Fe2+: 78 pm; Pd2+: 86 pm; Pb2+: 119 pm) leading to the formation of lower-dimensional layered perovskites isostructural to the Ruddlesden–Popper phase. Also the multiple oxidation states of transition metals hinder the chemical stability of the perovskite. A more detailed discussion in this direction has been made in the following section.
Filip et al. explored all possible homovalent elements that can substitute lead in the perovskite structure with the help of computational screening.70 Focusing on the crystal structure of the perovskites and their band gap as two parallel criteria, their investigation identified 25 possible materials including 15 novel materials for application in optoelectronics. Among the isovalent elements replacing lead, materials like tin and germanium have been the choice of interest for a long period of time but candidates like magnesium, vanadium, manganese, nickel, cadmium, mercury, and gallium have not been studied intensively so far. The band structure inspection revealed that cesium metal halide perovskites, with magnesium, cadmium or mercury at the metal site (such as, CsMgI3 and so forth), are direct band gap semiconductors, whereas the compounds based on nickel, vanadium, manganese, and gallium (such as CsNiBr3 and so forth) exhibit indirect band gap. So, selecting only those nontoxic metals in CsMX3 perovskite that would result in a direct band gap in the visible range, the final list of potential alternatives refined down to four elements: magnesium, manganese, vanadium and nickel. Among these, nickel-based perovskites such as CsNiCl3 and CsNiBr3 showed a low band gap which is important for photovoltaic applications.
Navas et al. presented new insights by doping the lead-sites with homovalent tin, strontium, cadmium, and calcium.71 Their work was mostly focused on the structural study of the perovskite after doping from both experimental and theoretical point of view. As far as the crystalline phase is concerned, the perovskites doped with Sn2+ and Sr2+ showed the same pure tetragonal phase of MAPI. For Sn2+, no significant loss of crystallinity was observed, whereas inclusion of Sr2+ decreased the perovskite's crystallinity. The Cd2+ doped samples also showed the desired tetragonal phase; the presence of residual PbI2 however showed the negative role of cadmium doping during the formation of the perovskite. Interestingly, doping with Ca2+ resulted in a drastic change in the crystalline phase of the perovskite. Instead of the traditional tetragonal phase, a predominant cubic phase was obtained in this case without any trace of residual PbI2. Such a trend was also observed in the respective band gap of the samples. Doping with Sn2+ did not affect the optical gap, while the other three dopants produced small decrements according to the order Sr2+ < Cd2+ < Ca2+ < Pb2+; the band gap however did not depend on the concentration of dopants. Such a behavior can be explained with the help of the electron localization function (ELF) analysis, which showed similar electron localizations for pristine and Sn2+-doped structures; Sr2+- and Cd2+-doped cases however differed. The more ionic nature of Sr–I interaction in comparison with the Pb–I (and Sn–I) led to a redistribution of electronic localization among iodine atoms. Electron localization on cadmium is lower than that on strontium; as a result Cd–I interaction is stronger than Sr–I. In the case of Ca-doping, due to lower electron localization and unpolarized interaction with iodine atoms, Ca–I interaction becomes weaker than Cd–I, i.e. more ionic in nature. Such a result implied that greater the ionic nature of the interaction between the metal dopant and I, the lower is the band gap.
On the basis of the report of Navas et al.,71 strontium (Sr2+) seems to be a promising dopant with its nearly equal ionic radius to that of lead, abundant availability (it is the 15th most common element in the earth's crust) and nontoxic nature (strontium acetate is a key ingredient of some branded toothpastes). In a contemporary report, such possibilities of strontium has been explored with the help of classical crystal chemistry, the concept of tolerance factor from Goldschmidt's approach along with quantum mechanical considerations and DFT calculations.72 The computations unveiled that, due to similar charge and almost identical radius of Sr2+ and Pb2+, the perovskite crystal structure is immune to Sr2+ doping (Fig. 9a). The study also revealed that Sr2+, like Pb2+, has a spherically symmetric electron configuration around it. Such symmetry is important to maintain a high degree of ionic character and a low amount of directional bonding in the metal halogen octahedron when lead is replaced by strontium.
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3SrI3 and (b) comparison of the DOS spectra of the respective perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
However, a wide band gap of 3.6 eV may not make CH3NH3SrI3 an ideal surrogate of MAPI. As revealed by the periodic crystal calculations and corresponding density of states (DOS) studies, such a widening of band gap after the inclusion of Sr2+ can be attributed to the upward shift of the conduction band (Fig. 9b). The VBE in hybrid perovskites is made of an antibonding combination of Pb-6s and I-5p orbitals, whereas, the CBE is primarily made of Pb-6p orbitals along with a little amount of hybridization of I-5p, I-5s and the states of the organic ions.73 In the case of CH3NH3SrI3, the contribution of Sr2+ results in a more extensive hybridization of Sr-5s, I-5p and I-5s. Contribution of the organic part may be neglected here as the orbital overlap between the organic part and the strontium is weaker than the coupling between the halogen and the metal. From another perspective, since strontium (0.95) has a lower electronegativity than lead (2.33), the electron cloud gets shifted towards the iodine ions in the lattice perturbing the local dipole moments. It has been reported that in perovskites with the general formula AMX3, optical gap increases with decreasing electronegativity of the M-cation74 and such a behavior has been observed in the case of Sr2+-based perovskites also.
Synthesis of CH3NH3SrI3 is an additional drawback of this compound. Due to the less open crystal structure of SrI2 in comparison with the layered structure of PbI2, a larger energy barrier has to be overcome during perovskite formation from its precursor solution. Therefore, the commonly used solution based chemical intercalation method has not remained ideal for CH3NH3SrI3 formation.
Pazoki et al. provided a theoretical insight into the effect of replacing Pb2+ by alkaline earth metals Ca2+, Ba2+ and Sr2+ on the electronic structure of respective perovskites.75 Considering the standard CH3NH3MI3 (M = Ca2+, Ba2+, or Sr2+), they have used DFT calculations to predict the formation of stable perovskite materials with these metals along with their electronic properties. With adequate ionic radii (Ca2+: 100 pm, Ba2+: 135 pm, and Sr2+: 118 pm), all three metals were predicted to form stable perovskite materials with crystal structures similar to MAPI. As evidenced from the molecular orbital DOS spectra and electronic band structure from DFT calculations, the optical gap of these perovskites depended on the electronegativity and work-function difference of the metal and iodide. Quantitatively speaking, with decreasing work function of the metals, Ca (2.87 eV) > Ba (2.70 eV) > Sr (2.59 eV), the optical gap of the perovskites increased MACaI3 (2.95 eV) < MABaI3 (3.3 eV) < MASrI3 (3.6 eV). Such a variation in the work function actually resulted in an upward shift of the CBE in these alkaline earth metal perovskites as compared to the lead perovskite. A large optical gap in combination with a high CBE actually counters their application as the principal absorber in solar cells. But due to their largely different electron and hole effective masses, their application as a carrier selective contact however can be envisaged.
Possibility of another alkaline-earth metal, namely magnesium (Mg2+) as a suitable alternative to lead has been initially explored by theoretical approaches.70,76 In spite of the smaller effective ionic radius of Mg2+ (72 pm) compared to Pb2+ (119 pm), Mg-perovskites have been proposed to form stable 3D perovskites with a tunable direct band gap. Filip et al. varied the A-cation in the AMgI3 structure and the band gap was found to decrease with increasing size of the A-cation (CsMgI3: 1.7 eV > MAMgI3: 1.5 eV > FAMgI3: 0.9 eV).70 The band gaps may look promising for solar cell applications but so far the strong sensitivity of Mg-perovskites to humidity has remained a roadblock to their implementation as an absorber material.
A significant effort in replacing lead in the perovskite structure by homovalent metal species has been reported by Klug et al.77 They have considered a wide range of divalent metals viz. Co, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Ni, Sn, Sr, and Zn and explored their possibilities in terms of photovoltaic performance and optical properties. A systematical replacement of lead by such a range and different amounts of metal species showed the remarkable tolerance of the perovskite lattice without affecting the electronic properties in a large manner. From this study, apart from the well-known tin, other elements like copper, zinc, and cobalt emerged as attractive candidates in this context. Amongst them, cobalt showed interesting performance (Fig. 10a). In spite of its homovalency to lead, introduction of cobalt ions into the MAPI structure shifted the Fermi level and the band edges without modifying the pristine band gap.
 Fig. 10  (a) Compiled average PCE performance matrices of doped perovskite solar cells at five different molar ratios with Pb, (b) energy levels of the MA(Pb:Co)I3 materials relative to the vacuum level at different doping concentrations and (c) trend of JSC, VOC and PCE with Co2+ doping concentration in MA(Pb:Co)I3 systems along with a schematic of the current leakage process at high Co2+ doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
This is actually a contrast to the concept of elemental doping in materials. In general, heterovalent dopants are used to modulate a material electronically. Such dopants introduce extra carriers in the system that contributes to the conduction process and leads to carrier type (p- or n-) engineering.78,79 In this case of Co-doped MAPI perovskites, UPS measurements revealed the reason behind such an anomaly. The results evidenced that with increasing cobalt content, the energies of the bands shifted downwards with respect to vacuum (Fig. 10b). But, since the energy difference between the Fermi level and valence band edge remained mostly unaltered, the perovskite was not electronically doped. The shift could be due to modification of the electric dipoles near the surface of the perovskite in the presence of the Co2+ dopant. Such a modulation of band energies was also reflected in the corresponding device performance of the materials. The planar solar cells showed an improvement of VOC with increasing concentration of Co2+ in the structure due to the better energetics until creation of a large number of trap centers counteracted this benefit (Fig. 10c). So, an optimized concentration of Co2+ in the perovskite structure could be envisaged, a certain amount of which was beneficial as it enhanced the photovoltage and thereby efficiency, whereas a large amount of doping resulted in a leakage current that reduced the photocurrent drastically due to increased recombination in the structure. On this basis, a tolerance limit for the metal substitution in lead halide perovskites can be estimated. For most of the transition metals, the perovskite structure seemed to tolerate replacement of the lead content up to 6%, beyond which trap states affected the performance. In a couple of special cases, iron introduced such trap states at much lower concentrations, whereas for tin, the devices withheld their performance up to a high doping concentration of 25%.
Frolova et al. presented a systematic study on substitution of lead by a range of bivalent elements in the MAPI structure.80 Homovalent elements like Hg2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Fe2+, Ni2+ and Co2+ were introduced in the lead-site as dopants. Surprisingly, most of them have resulted in a deterioration of structural, morphological, optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties of the respective doped perovskites. This is a striking contrast to the previously reported efforts on elemental substitution of lead. In spite of their documented promising performances, the bivalent elements in this case acted as traps and affected the fundamental mechanisms of the charge generation and transport in the perovskite and deteriorated the device performance adversely. The only element that was observed to outperform MAPI-device was mercury. Due to its isovalent nature to Pb2+, the perovskite structure showed flexibility until a high amount of Hg2+ was incorporated. Especially, having a unique ability to undergo co-crystallization with lead, the mercury doped samples were structurally unaltered until a very high amount of doping (>30%) was introduced. The lead to mercury substitution obviously influenced the photovoltaic performance of planar solar cells. The PCE was found to vary with the Hg2+ content in the film and maximized at a doping concentration of 10% Hg with a PCE value of 13%. Such a variation with doping concentration was actually due to the dependence of the morphology of the perovskite film on the amount of mercury present in the film. At doping concentrations up to 10%, the average grain size of the film was observed to increase maintaining the homogeneity of the film, whereas at a concentration range of 10–30%, a highly inhomogeneous film with a lower surface coverage was obtained. Therefore, at high concentrations of doping, emergence of a large number of shunting pathways in the perovskite film resulted in a significant amount of recombination and thereby reduced the photovoltaic performance of the devices. A very important aspect of this work is the flexibility that the perovskite structure showed under a considerably high amount (30%) of Hg2+ doping in spite of the smaller ionic radius of Hg2+ as compared to Pb2+.


4.1.3 Lanthanides. 
The use of rare earth metals as a potential alternative to lead in the perovskite structure resulted in interesting optical properties of the resultant perovskites. Introduction of Eu2+ at the metal sites of the standard AMX3 perovskite structure resulted in an intense blue photoluminescence (PL) (due to the emission of Eu2+ at λ = 460 nm) from the material at room temperature with a narrow peak width (FWHM = 24 nm). This implied the promise of such Eu-perovskites in hybrid optoelectronic devices, such as LEDs.81 Apart from complete substitution, the role of rare earth metals has also been explored as dopants in conventional perovskites. Lanthanides such as Eu2+, Tm2+ and Yb2+ have been introduced as dopants in AMX3 (A = Cs or K; M = Mg, Ca, or Sr; X = Cl, Br, or I) perovskites and their optical properties were analyzed. Generally, these rare earth dopants occupy the six-fold octahedrally co-ordinated alkaline earth metal sites of the host perovskite and result in interesting PL properties. Introduction of Eu2+ dopants in AMCl3 perovskites with A = Cs, or K, and M = Mg, Ca, or Sr, showed an intense PL emission from all the perovskites except KMgCl3 with the intensity according to the order AMgCl3 < ACaCl3 < ASrCl3.82 Suta et al. carried out similar studies on Eu2+ activated iodide perovskite materials containing identical metal cations and also recorded a very efficient PL emission at room temperature.83 In a subsequent report, the same group has also explored the PL properties of Yb2+-doped perovskites CsMX3 (M = Ca, or Sr, X = Cl, Br, or I) at the M-site.84 Grimm et al. reported doping of CsCaX3 perovskites with Tm2+ ions and observed interesting light-emission and photophysical properties.85 Due to such a strong photoluminescence emission, lanthanide-based perovskites are yet to find their application in photovoltaics as novel absorber materials.

4.2 Heterovalent substitution at the lead site
The objective behind elemental doping at the metal sites of the perovskite structure was to achieve new functions by modulating both optical and electrical properties of the perovskite. Homovalent dopants can introduce electronic levels and thereby alter the optical properties of the perovskite but their impact on the type or concentration of majority charge carriers is not significant. Heterovalent dopants, in contrast, have the ability to switch the majority carrier type and thereby the type of conductivity of the material. Therefore, heterovalent substitution of lead in MAPI has a large significance from the point of view of perovskite homojunctions.

4.2.1 Trivalent dopants. 
The associated challenge with such altervalent doping in any material is to maintain the pristine crystal structure after doping. In the case of perovskites also, the differently charged metal cations must maintain the MX6 octahedral symmetry and also the tolerance factor cannot be overlooked. Such possibilities have recently been studied by Abdelhady et al.86 By an in situ chemical approach, the authors have successfully incorporated a controlled amount of trivalent dopants like Bi3+, In3+, and Au3+ in the conventional MAPbBr3 structure. Such incorporation of foreign elements in the perovskite structure however has not disobeyed the formation of stable perovskite structures; since their impurity energy-levels were within the band gap of the host perovskite, overlapping with the true band edges resulted in band gap narrowing in the doped perovskites (Fig. 11a). Such a red-shift of the band gap was most prominent in the case of Bi3+ doping. Bismuth, a group-15 element, is an interesting choice to replace lead. The trivalent bismuth ion has a similar (6s26p0) electron configuration to lead and has a comparable electronegativity (Bi: 2.03; Pb: 2.33) and ionic radius (Bi3+ = 103 pm, Pb2+ = 119 pm). As a result, it is possible to dope the pristine perovskite with a high amount of Bi3+ dopants. In this report, the authors have achieved a high doping concentration of Bi3+ reaching ∼1019 cm−3, demonstrating the flexibility of the perovskite structure to the host Bi3+ cations. DFT studies have proposed that since Bi3+ creates deeper, less localized and more interacting states than Au3+ and In3+, the red-shift of the band gap was more prominent for the former. Apart from a notable band gap narrowing (by ∼300 meV), the incorporation of Bi3+ dopants has also increased charge carrier concentration, improved the conductivity by 3–4 orders of magnitude, and most importantly switched the sign of the majority carriers.
 Fig. 11  (a) Steady-state absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 crystals with and without cation dopants as stated in the legends, (b) band gap narrowing as a function of Bi-concentration in the crystal and (c) corresponding band-energies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Investigation on the influence of doping concentration on the optical properties of such perovskites has shown that the band gap narrowing is proportional to the Bi3+ concentration in the system (Fig. 11b). The band gap value decreased from 2.17 eV in the undoped perovskite to 1.89 eV at 10% doping level. Interestingly, also at a very low level of doping <0.1%, the red-shift of the band gap was noticeable (Fig. 11c). In general, for any doped sample, the interaction between the electrons and the positive impurities results in the reduction of band gap.87 In this case, in addition, the higher electronegativity of bismuth created more covalent bonds with bromide and resulted in such a red-shift. Bi3+ doping has also showed the tendency to engineer the conductivity type of the perovskite. While intrinsic CH3NH3PbBr3 is known to be a p-type semiconductor,21 band gap measurement through photoelectron spectroscopy and Hall effect measurement both evidenced switching in behavior from p- to n-type after Bi3+ doping. Such a behavior can be generalized to the family of hybrid perovskites including MAPI. Since the performance of such perovskite based optoelectronic devices depends on properties like band gap, carrier concentration and conductivity, such heterovalent substitution of lead can guide us to a new dimension in this direction.
Zhang et al. reported a pioneering study on partial substitution of lead by another trivalent element antimony in the standard MAPI structure.88 In contrast to Bi3+ doping, which resulted in band gap narrowing, Sb3+ doping increased the band gap of the perovskite. Moreover, while the band gap was found to be influenced by a very tiny amount of Bi3+ in the structure, in the case of Sb3+ doping it remained mostly unaffected with even a large amount of Sb3+ doping. From the measured band gap and the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies for the VBE potentials, it has been observed that the widening of the band gap with increasing Sb3+ content in the perovskite crystal occurred via a two step process. The measurements revealed that while substituting lead with antimony by an amount ≤25%, the CBE gradually up-shifted slightly towards the vacuum level. Since the VBE also moved marginally, the band gap remained mostly unaltered in the range of the doping level. At a high doping extent (>50%), such an upshift of CBE was accompanied by a simultaneous downshift of VBE resulting in a prominent blue-shift of the band gap. Such a blue-shift of band gap can be visualized by observing the color of the film also. The color varied from dark brown for pure CH3NH3PbI3 (0% Sb, Eg = 1.55 eV) to brown under 50–75% Sb-doped CH3NH3PbI3 (Eg = 1.61–1.95 eV) and finally turned into reddish orange for 90–100% Sb-doping (Eg ∼ 2.06 eV) (Fig. 12a). Since the introduction of Sb-5p impurity states contributed significantly to the composition of CBE and shifted it upwards as compared to the VBE, such a widening of the band gap is justified. From another perspective, since Sb3+ has a lower electronegativity than Pb2+, the stronger Sb–I bonds reduced the Pb–I binding energy and resulted in the blue shift of band gap upon doping. Using DFT calculations, it was found from the partial density of states (PDOS) studies that the Fermi energy level was shifted towards the CBE in the doped perovskites, unveiling the n-type doping (Fig. 12b). Since Sb3+ has more valence electrons than Pb2+, the doping effect resulted in excess electrons in the perovskite system.
 Fig. 12  (a) The estimated band-edge energies of Sb-doped CH3NH3PbI3 with 0–100% of Sb along with the CB and HOMO level energy of TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD respectively, (b) calculated PDOS of pristine and 25% Sb-doped CH3NH3PbI3, and (c) J–V characteristics of PSCs under illumination conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The influence of antimony doping on the photovoltaic performance of MAPI perovskite (0–100% Sb) was investigated by incorporating the perovskites within the conventional regular device structure of perovskite solar cells. Sandwiched between layers of TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD, the perovskites showed a high efficiency of 15.6% when doped with 1% Sb (Fig. 12c). Though all the photovoltaic parameters were not maximized at this level of doping, the devices showed the highest VOC of the group. Since under such a low level of doping, contribution from the band gap widening was marginal, the increment of VOC must be larger than the movement of the CB. The reason behind such anomalous behavior of VOC could be due to the upward movement of the quasi-Fermi level under illumination after Sb-doping. Since the photovoltage of a perovskite solar cell with the regular structure is dependent on the quasi-Fermi energy of the perovskite/TiO2 interface and the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) energy level of the spiro-OMeTAD HSC (i.e. the built-in voltage),19 such a modulation of the quasi-Fermi level could have increased the built-in voltage and in turn the VOC value. With increasing antimony content in the perovskite structure beyond 1%, the performance of the solar cells decreased mainly due to a rapid collapse in the JSC. Intensity modulated spectroscopies (IMPS and IMVS) revealed that the transport properties of the perovskites decreased with increasing antimony content in the range of doping, and this was mainly due to a reduction in effective diffusion coefficient (Dn) and electron lifetime (τn). In consequence of this, the diffusion length (Ln) of the perovskite also decreased resulting in a higher probability of charge recombination in the respective devices and thus affected the photovoltaic performance.
Effect of Sb3+ addition in MAPI structure and on the photovoltaic parameters was independently investigated and reported by Oku et al.89 Similar to Zhang's report,88 antimony, being a group-15 element, worked as an electron donor at the lead sites (group-14 element). The concentration of the Sb-dopant in the precursor solution of the perovskite was varied within 0–15% of Pb and the corresponding device performance was monitored in the regular device architecture with TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD as the ESC and HSC, respectively. The measured photovoltaic parameters optimized at a doping level of 3% yielding a maximum PCE of 9.07%. The structural studies showed that the lattice constant of the perovskite increased after Sb-doping and more importantly antimony addition suppressed the formation of residual PbI2 in the perovskite film. The residual PbI2 is known to have a detrimental effect on the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells unless its amount is optimized for a device structure.90,91
Progressing further with such Sb-doping in the MAPI structure we have carried out an extensive study on the morphological aspect of such heterovalent doping.92 To form dopant concentration optimized perovskite films, we have followed a unique sequential deposition method where the amorphous domains of the as-deposited ‘wet’ PbI2 film were exposed to the MAI solution to penetrate and intercalate. This led us to precisely control the residual PbI2 content in the doped perovskite films as well as over the film morphology. As recorded by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) of the perovskites and density of states spectra thereof, a widening of the optical gap after incorporation of antimony was observed that is similar to the previous reports (Fig. 13a).88,89 The wide band gap of the Sb-doped MAPI has also been efficiently reflected in the VOC of inverted planar heterojunction devices. A high VOC of 1.13 V along with a promising PCE of 12.8% has been achieved in such cost effective device architecture with a small photocurrent hysteresis (Fig. 13b). In this work, we have successfully shown how the amount of remnant PbI2 in the final perovskite film governs the efficiency and associated performance parameters in a PSC. The fruitful application of STS to determine the appropriate location of band edges of the active materials is another take away point from this report. The relevance of STS in solar cells is a relatively new dimension of research. With its ability to probe the local density of states (LDOS) with a high spatial and energetic resolution, STS provides the opportunity to locate the band edges of a semiconductor from the viewpoint of the charge carriers.93 In the case of PSC, STS has been utilized in a couple of reports. In one of those, STS measurements were carried out on individual thin films of Cu2O (HSC), MAPI, and PCBM (ESC) to “visualize” the possibility of charge separation and carrier transport in the planar p–i–n PSCs.94 In another one, STS played an additional role; here, p-doping of the 2D-MoS2 HSC through deepening the work function was evidenced in pristine and vacancy-engineered MoS2 films.95
 Fig. 13  (a) Band diagram of Cu@NiO|CH3NH3Pb(Sb)I3|PCBM heterojunctions without and with the antimony dopant as obtained from the DOS spectra and (b) J–V characteristics of the heterojunction under dark and 1 sun illumination conditions with and without the antimony dopant and with and without loading time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
A couple of important conclusions can hence be drawn from these studies on antimony-doping in perovskites. Due to its higher valency than lead, each antimony ion contributed an extra charge carrier in the structure and increased JSC; antimony-doping engineered the band edges of the perovskite. Widening of the band gap and prevention of PbI2 elimination that in turn improves the nature of the TiO2/perovskite interface occur upon doping. These two effects contributed favorably towards increasing the VOC of the devices and thereby the efficiency of the solar cells after suitable amount of antimony-doping.
In contrast to the successes of trivalent dopants in lead halide perovskites, in the report of Frolova et al., trivalent dopants In3+ and Bi3+ affected the performance of the respective perovskites adversely.80 Both these trivalent elements resulted in an almost 9-fold decrease in PCE as compared to the lead-based perovskite devices. The decrease in the PCE has been attributed to the hindered charge generation and transport in the perovskite after introduction of these dopants.


4.2.2 Monovalent and tetravalent dopants. 
With the success of trivalent dopants in the perovskite structure, it is quite expected that doping with monovalent elements may open up another avenue of heterovalent doping in perovskites and PSCs. Due to their lower oxidation number than lead, these monovalent dopants, when incorporated in the perovskite structure, should result in creation of additional holes in the system and are therefore expected to guide towards p-type doping in the perovskite structure. In the case of a binary chalcogenide, such p-type doping has been reported in PbS thin-films formed by the dip-coating technique, where substitutional-doping of the cationic sites by Ag+ resulted in a downshift of Fermi energy towards the VB.96 In the case of perovskites, the role of Ag+ as a p-type dopant has been explored recently.97 The report indicated an improvement of crystallinity, conductivity and photovoltaic performance of the perovskite films after silver-doping. Here, the predicted conversion of the perovskite from n-type to p-type was evidenced. Doping with silver was found to be beneficial to the morphology and crystallinity of the perovskite film at the expense of additional PbI2 release in the film. Since Ag+ has less ionic valency than Pb2+, it could not attach iodine (I−) ions at their sites and resulted in the elimination of PbI2. Considering all these, a doping level of 1% was optimized for device fabrication.
For a thorough investigation on the effect of such type reversal of the perovskite, both regular (n–i–p) and inverted (p–i–n) structured devices were fabricated and characterized. In terms of PCE, the perovskite devices with Ag+ doping (PCE = 12.0%) were superior to their undoped counterpart (PCE = 9.5%) in the p–i–n structure. For the n–i–p structure, PCE decreased from 12.5% (undoped) to 7.6% upon Ag+ doping (Fig. 14a). In accordance with such structure-dependent photovoltaic performance, the steady state PL spectra also showed a higher level of quenching when the Ag-doped perovskite layer was deposited on p-type PEDOT:PSS, which is a common abbreviation of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate, as compared to films on n-type TiO2 (Fig. 14b). Calculation of the individual extraction time for interfacial electron- and hole-transfer provided the reason for such PL-quenching behavior. After Ag+ doping, the extraction time for electrons increased almost twice (4.4 ns to 9.6 ns) indicating deceleration in the electron extraction process from the TiO2/perovskite interface. The corresponding hole extraction time, on the other hand, has decreased by a factor of 2.5 after Ag+ doping (19.2 ns to 7.8 ns) enhancing the extraction process of holes from the PEDOT:PSS/perovskite interface via effective non-radiative relaxation channels (Fig. 14c). As a result, the p-doped perovskites yielded better performance in indirect solar cell geometries.
 Fig. 14  
J–V plots of (a) p–i–n (up) and n–i–p (down) planar devices under illumination conditions, (b) steady state PL spectra and (c) PL decay profiles of perovskite films with and without Ag+ doping on PEDOT:PSS and TiO2 coated substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The role of Cu+ and Ag+ as monovalent dopants in hybrid lead halide perovskites has also been investigated by Frolova et al.80 When such monovalently doped perovskites were introduced in inverted solar cell architectures, the variation of efficiency was marginal from the undoped one. Such dopants hence did not aid or affect the device performance in a favorable manner. In the same report, the role of tetravalent dopants, viz. Sn4+ and Ti4+, was also studied in terms of device performance. These dopants, when introduced in the perovskite structure, resulted in a deterioration of the structural, morphological, optoelectronic, and photovoltaic properties of the doped perovskites. However, in order to properly understand the true essence of monovalent or tetravalent doping in MAPI structures, it is believed that further studies are required.
As can be seen from this discussion on metal-doping in hybrid halide perovskites, compositional alteration and heterovalent doping are the effective routes to tune the conductivity-type of the perovskite materials. Since both these traditional routes have not proven to succeed in increasing device efficiencies, a slightly off-beat avenue of doping has also been envisaged. The electrochemical approach has been utilized effectively to dope a range of semiconducting materials including oxide thin-films,98,99 polymers,100etc. The process utilizes an external bias to either reduce or oxidize the semiconductors in an electrolyte environment resulting in n- and p-type doping, respectively. To balance the creation of excess charge carriers, i.e., to maintain overall charge neutrality, cations or anions are intercalated in the doped semiconductors to modulate their optical and electrical properties.
An approach to dope halide perovskites through such a non-conventional path has been reported recently.101 In a lithium salt-based electrolyte environment, CsPbBr3 has been reduced and, owing to the intercalation of the lithium ions in the perovskite structure, n-type doping along with an improvement in electrical conductivity and optical absorption has been recorded. Such a phenomenon is however not limited to inorganic structures only, since hybrid perovskites such as MAPbCl3 have also shown similar electrochromic behavior. Moreover, the process was also effective for mixed halide (CsPbBr2Cl) or pseudohalide thiocyanate (CsPb(SCN)2Br) perovskites. The process in addition provided some choices regarding the selection of the electrolyte. Due to the small size of lithium and sodium ions, electrolytes based on these cations offered similar electrochromism. Larger cations like potassium or cesium based electrolytes exceeded the intercalation limit of the perovskite crystals; no such electrochromism phenomenon was hence observed. To summarize, the small alkali ions, when electrochemically intercalated in perovskites, expand the perovskite crystal lattice and preferentially occupy the octahedral interstitial sites over the substitutional and tetrahedral interstitial sites due to its remarkably low formation energy. These foreign ions act as a donor-type impurity and push the Fermi level towards the CB-edge creating n-type doping. The presence of such alkali metal ions in perovskite crystals also increases the electrical conductivity and thereby improves their transport properties (Tables 1 and 2).
Table 1 Optical gap of perovskite compounds with homovalent substitution at the lead-site (which has not been introduced in solar cells)




Perovskite compound
Simulated/experimental
Band gap (eV)
Ref.




MAMgI3
Simulated
1.5

70



FAMgI3
Simulated
0.9

70



CsMgI3
Simulated
1.7

70



MACaI3
Simulated
2.9

102



Experimental
3.8

75



MASrI3
Simulated and experimental
3.6

75



MABaI3
Simulated
3.3

75





Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters and device structures of perovskite solar cells with homovalent and heterovalent dopants in the metal sites (the ‘#’ mark represents reports with fully substituted perovskites)




Metal dopant
Device structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.





Homovalent substitution at the lead site



Sn2+
Regular
16.8
0.88
42
6.4

35#


11.73
0.82
57
5.73

36#


20.04
0.42
50
4.18

44



Ge2+
Regular with cesium
5.7
0.07
27
0.11

66#


Regular with MA
4.0
0.15
30
0.20


Co2+
Inverted
19.82
0.85
74
11.37

77



Cu2+
18.19
0.93
66
10.14


Fe2+
4.29
0.84
66
2.29


Mg2+
16.39
0.91
73
9.71


Mn2+
17.25
0.91
71
10.38


Ni2+
18.40
0.91
77
9.95


Sn2+
20.40
0.73
71
9.25


Sr2+
19.17
0.88
75
10.81


Zn2+
19.71
0.89
73
10.62


Hg2+
18.1
0.94
76
13.0

80







Heterovalent substitution at the lead site



Sb3+
Regular
21.82
0.98
69
15.6

88



Regular
19.2
0.84
56
9.07

89



Inverted
17.4
1.13
65
12.8

92



Ag+
Inverted
20.02
0.83
72
12.0

97



Regular
15.96
1.01
47
7.6





5. Towards lead-free perovskites
The reported attempts to substitute lead in the standard 3D AMX3 perovskite structure raise a fundamental question that is it actually possible to completely substitute lead in hybrid perovskites by nontoxic elements, without compromising efficiency and stability? Korbel et al. provided a computational insight in this direction by considering all the halide perovskite compounds that can form stable AMX3 structures. Among over 30000 hypothetical perovskites, only lead, germanium, and tin based perovskites can be expected to show promising photovoltaic properties which show their uniqueness in terms of optoelectronic properties.103 Similarly, Filip et al. considered perovskites with the CsMX3 structure with Cl, Br and I in place of X and all elements that may form di-halide salts with M. They came up with more than hundred unique perovskites having similar structures and concluded that no other metal cation is able to match the unique optoelectronic properties of Pb- and Sn-based perovskites.70
The scenario for lead-free perovskites looks promising if we consider perovskites with crystal structure and dimension beyond the traditional AMX3. A few avenues can be proposed under such a consideration. The first one has a lower-dimensional layered configuration isostructural to the Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites. The second one is a derived structure from the conventional AMX3, where a portion of the metal sites is replaced by vacancies; these perovskites are commonly known as defect-ordered perovskites. The third one is the well known double perovskite structure, where the bivalent metal cations are replaced by a pair of monovalent and trivalent cations (co-doping), maintaining the charge neutrality of the species. A further and in-depth discussion of all the perovskites beyond the MAPI structure is given underneath.
5.1 Two dimensional (2D) layered perovskites
The emergence of the 2D layered perovskites can be considered to be necessitated to address the long-term stability of the traditional 3D perovskite devices besides their intrinsically remarkable electronic and optical characteristics.104,105 Such layered 2D perovskites can be considered as derivatives of the common 3D perovskites where the 3D frameworks are sliced into well-defined 2D slabs. In terms of composition, such 2D perovskites have the generic chemical formula of (RNH3)2(A)n−1MX3n+1 (n is an integer), where RNH3 is a primary aliphatic or aromatic alkylammonium cation, A and M are cations, and X represents an anion like their 3D counterparts.104 In these perovskites, the 2D network containing the inorganic perovskite layers of the corner-sharing [MX6]4− octahedron is confined between interdigitating bilayers of long-chain alkylammonium cations that act as a spacer between the perovskite layers. A combination of coulombic and hydrophobic forces hold the unit layers together maintaining the structural integrity.106 These 2D layered perovskites are commonly known as the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase perovskites due to their structural analogy to the oxide perovskites described by Ruddlesden and Popper.107
To achieve the RP phase of lead based perovskites, the small MA+ ions of MAPbX3 perovskites are replaced by bulkier organic primary ammonium (phenethylamine, butylamine, etc.) cations. These cations restrict the perovskite to the 2D phase by the steric effect; due to the presence of long organic chains in these bulky cations, they act as insulating spacer layers between the conducting inorganic sections and affect the out-of-plane conductivity. Besides, these 2D analogues possess wider band gap as compared to their 3D counterpart. Due to a significant mismatch of dielectric constant between the organic and inorganic sections (dielectric confinement), the excitons become strongly bound (higher electron–hole interactions) and localized in the planes of the perovskite.108 As a reflection of all these constraints, the recorded PCE in lead-based 2D perovskite solar cells has mostly been around 4–5% so far,104,109 except for the report by Tsai et al. where they have achieved a remarkable 12.5% PCE after addressing the charge transport issue in 2D perovskites.25
2D layered configurations isostructural to the Ruddlesden–Popper phase can also be achieved by altering the metal cations in the AMX3 perovskites (Fig. 4c). Apart from addressing the poor conductivity issue, this leads to the additional benefit of non-toxicity which is a prerequisite goal to be achieved with these halide perovskites. Complete replacement of lead by transition metals like copper, iron and palladium sterically hinders the formation of the 3D structure due to their much smaller ionic radii than that of lead (Cu2+: 73 pm, Fe2+: 78 pm, Pd2+: 86 pm).

5.1.1 Copper halide perovskites. 
2D perovskites of copper have been investigated for their structural and magnetic,110 UV photochromatic,111 solar absorbing properties,112,113etc. Approaching in this avenue, Cui et al. synthesized (p-F-C6H5C2H4NH3)2CuBr4 and (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2CuBr4 2D layered copper perovskites by a low temperature solution based technique. In contrast to lead-based RP phase perovskites (Eg = 2.43 eV for n = 1),105 these 2D perovskites of copper exhibited optical gaps of around 1.75 eV, which is useful for solar energy conversion. Unfortunately, when employed as absorbers in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells, the devices produced a low PCE of 0.51% and 0.63%, respectively.113 Cortecchia et al. opted to tune the band gap of such copper-based layered 2D perovskites by changing the composition of halides in the perovskite. They have varied the ratio of bromide to chloride in (CH3NH3)2CuClxBr4−x layered 2D perovskites and observed a change in the optical gap from the visible to NIR region with increasing bromide content. When incorporated in mesoscopic perovskite solar cells as absorbers, the highest PCE of 0.017% was recorded for (CH3NH3)2CuCl2Br2 perovskite.112
Such a poor photovoltaic performance of copper based perovskites can be attributed to the high effective mass of holes, low absorption coefficient, inherent low conductivity of the 2D phase and so on.112,113 In addition, the composition of halides in these perovskites is another crucial factor as the halides play an essential part not only in tuning the optical gap of the perovskite but also in its stability.112 Introduction of bromide ions can reduce the band gap; they however promote the partial reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+ that affects the PCE by creating anion vacancies (electron traps). Chloride ions provide the essential stability against such undesired reduction of Cu2+ and also improve the crystallinity. In order to achieve a promising PCE with these copper-based layered 2D perovskites, it is necessary to address other concerns with care.


5.1.2 Iron halide perovskites. 
Similar to Cu2+, Fe2+ also possesses a smaller ionic radius than Pb2+. As a result, AFeX4 2D layered perovskites were formed with Fe2+ as the metal cation. Such iron based 2D perovskites like (RNH3)2FeCl4 (where R = CH3, C2H5, C3H7, etc.) and (CH3NH3)2FeClxBr4−x have been investigated so far mainly for their magnetic properties114 while their application possibilities in photovoltaic devices are yet to be investigated. The possible reasons behind researchers' lack of interest can be the unsuitable band gap for solar cell applications and instability of the material for the multiple valency of iron (Fe2+ and Fe3+).115


5.1.3 Palladium halide perovskites. 
With an ionic radius of 86 pm, Pd2+ based perovskites are expected to form 3D perovskites according to Goldschmidt's tolerance factor approach (t = 0.96). However, when (CH3NH3)2PdCl4 perovskite was prepared by a low temperature solution approach, Huang et al. observed a layered (2D) phase isostructural to the RP phase.116 The perovskite exhibited a direct optical gap of ∼2.2 eV with a high absorption coefficient and improved air stability. The intrinsic band gap of the material is on the higher side and hence not suitable for photovoltaic applications but the possibility to tune the band gap by changing the halide part (to iodide for instance) may resolve this issue.
Similar to Huang's report,116 Cheng et al. have also recorded the occurrence of a 2D layered phase in their (C8H17NH3)2PdCl4 perovskites.117 This material was used as a template to grow self-assembled highly ordered ultrathin Pd-nanosheets. Such ordered sheets reorganized into a layered structure in the presence of non-polar organic solvents. Such a phenomenon can be generally applied to any hybrid perovskite systems to obtain the respective metal nanosheets. Proceeding to this quest for nontoxic and stable Pd-based perovskites, Sakai et al. reported the synthesis and characterization of cesium hexabromopalladate(IV) or Cs2PdBr6 perovskite.118 The perovskite was synthesized by a solution-approach using an in situ oxidation of Pd2+ to Pd4+ during the synthesis, which is quite unique both for Pd-based materials and of course for perovskites. The optical gap of the material was estimated using DFT calculations and the value of the lowest direct band gap (at the X-point) appeared to be ∼1.6 eV. In addition, DFT based measurements showed a smaller effective mass of the electrons as compared to holes leading to a higher mobility of electrons in the material i.e. n-type semiconducting nature. Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) studies carried out on this material resulted in a long lifetime and direct band-to-band transition which are very encouraging indicators for their potential applications in optoelectronic devices, such as photon-sensors, light-emitting diodes, and photovoltaic devices. However, the most important and significant property of this compound was its moisture tolerance. Sakai's team has soaked Cs2PdBr6 crystals in water at room temperature for 10 min with no signature of phase change or chemical decomposition of the crystallites.

5.2 Defect ordered perovskites
It is aforesaid that in defect ordered perovskites, a portion of the metal sites of the perovskite structure is replaced by vacancies. One such derived and defect ordered perovskite structure is A2MX6 where the M sites are generally occupied by Sn4+ cations. It has been previously discussed on how the stability of pure Sn-perovskites limits their application in devices. Nevertheless, Sn-based perovskites can be reconsidered as a candidate for lead free perovskite solar cells if a derived structure like A2SnX6 is considered. In such a crystal structure, which is cubic in nature, half of the M-sites are void, creating isolated [SnX6] octahedra. The sites between such octahedra are filled with A-atoms in a regular 12-fold coordination environment of X-atoms (Fig. 15a).119 Therefore, the crystal structure resembles that of conventional double perovskites with half of the metal atoms removed to vacancies and thereby leading to coining of the term defect ordered double perovskites. Importantly, since tin is in its stable +4 oxidation state in such a perovskite structure, these perovskites showed improved stability under moisture and air.
 Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structure of the defect perovskite A2MX6. M-atoms reside in the gray octahedra formed by X-atoms (purple) and A-atoms (blue) occupy the interstitial sites. Thick black lines represent the unit cell edges. (b) Schematic picture of the A3M2X9 structure. M-atoms are marked with green color while the A- and X-atoms are presented in blue and purple colors respectively. The unit cell is marked with dark lines and the inorganic octahedra are marked with a cyan color. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 and 125, respectively. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society and 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, respectively. 
A typical member of this family is Cs2SnX6 which is considered as a molecular salt, since it is formed from discrete cations and anions with no extended network structure. Due to their high conductivity, Cs2SnX6 defect perovskites have been utilized as a hole-selective contact for DSSCs,119,120 though their use as a lead-free perovskite light absorber is still in its infancy. Qiu et al. fabricated Cs2SnI6 based lead-free perovskite solar cells with zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorod arrays as the ESC and P3HT as the HSC and achieved PCE close to 1% by controlling the length and pore size of the nanorods.121 With compact TiO2 as the ESC, the PCE remained around that mark (0.96%).51 In the case of hybrid iodometalate perovskites, the size and functionality of the organic cation have shown to influence the dimensionality and connectivity of the inorganic lattice greatly.122 Maughan et al. replaced the Cs+ ions with aromatic cycloheptatrienyl (tropylium) ions (C7H7+) in the ASnI6 structure and utilized the delocalized positive charge of tropylium to tune the optical and electronic properties of the as-prepared zero-dimensional perovskite, (C7H7)2SnI6.123 Tropylium exhibits extraordinary charge transfer properties which depend on the polarity of the solvent environment124 and its delocalized positive charge leads to chemical stability as a reactant. When introduced in an inorganic framework of the perovskite structure, the coupling between the inorganic lattice and the delocalized electron density in the tropylium ring enhances the electronic properties of the (C7H7)2SnI6 perovskites.
Proceeding further with this concept of vacancy ordered perovskites, structures like A3M2X9 have been envisaged where A is a monovalent cation (Cs+ or MA+) and M is a trivalent metal cation (Bi3+ or Sb3+). These A3M2X9 perovskites consist of metal halide MX6 octahedral layers and the voids between the layers are filled by the A-cations (Fig. 15b). Such metal halide octahedra can be joined by edges or vertices and when they are completely filled, the classical perovskite structure AMX3 can be visualized.126 Depending on the arrangement of the metal halide layers, it is therefore possible to distinguish different types of A3M2X9 compounds.
Typically, in this extensive family of A3M2X9 perovskites, A- and X-atoms are closest-packed and the M-atoms occupy 2/3 of the octahedral X6 voids. As a result, a couple of structures can be distinguished. One of these is a zero dimensional (0D) hexagonal close packing structure containing isolated M2X93− clusters as dimer units comprising pairs of face-sharing MX6 octahedra (e.g. Cs3Sb2I9, MA3Sb2I9, etc.) and the other one is a two dimensional (2D) defect perovskite with corrugated double layers based on corners connected to the MX6 octahedron giving birth to M2X93− sub-units (e.g. Cs3Sb2I9, Rb3Sb2I9, etc.).127 For such defect ordered structures, the synthesis procedure has also been observed to exert an impact on the dimension of the resultant perovskites. For example, Cs3Sb2I9 has been found to possess 0D dimer species when formed by a solution process, whereas the same material is found in the 2D layered form when fabrication techniques like co-evaporation or solid-state reaction were opted.128 However, irrespective of their fabrication techniques, all these perovskites have a band gap of around 2 eV possessing improved air-stability compared to conventional MAPI.125,129

5.2.1 Bismuth halide perovskites. 
Bismuth-based perovskites are interesting options towards lead-free perovskite photovoltaics. Bi3+ has the same 6s2 lone pair like Pb2+, a comparable electronegativity value (Bi: 2.02; Pb: 2.33) and similar ionic radius (Bi3+: 103 pm; Pb2+: 119 pm) making it an attractive alternative to lead in hybrid perovskite structures. So far, bismuth based oxide perovskites, like BiFeO3,130 BiMnO3,131 BiFe2CrO6,132 BiVO4,133 Bi2WO6,134etc., have been reported to exhibit photovoltaic properties which are although not quite comparable to those of hybrid halide perovskites; these inorganic perovskites are however enriched with other functions, like chemical and thermodynamic stability,135 and multiferroicity130 (co-existence of ferroelectric and magnetic properties). In the case of bismuth halide perovskites with the A3Bi2X9 (A = MA or Cs) structure, a few initial studies have been reported with investigations of crystal structures, optical, and photovoltaic properties.
Park et al. introduced solution processed Cs3Bi2I9, MA3Bi2I9, and MA3Bi2I9−xClx perovskites in planar structured solar cells, which exhibited A-site dependent photovoltaic properties.125 These A3Bi2I9 perovskites consist of bioctahedral (Bi2I9)3− clusters that are surrounded by the A-site cations (Cs+ or MA+); as a result, the light absorption properties and crystal structure are dependent on the choice of the A-cation. The band gaps of the as-prepared samples were observed to follow the trend MA3Bi2I9−xClx (2.4 eV) > Cs3Bi2I9 (2.2 eV) > MA3Bi2I9 (2.1 eV) (Fig. 16a) along with a similar trend in the exciton binding energy: MA3Bi2I9−xClx (300 meV) > Cs3Bi2I9 (270 meV) > MA3Bi2I9 (70 meV). However, in terms of PCE, the Cs3Bi2I9 solar cells were the best amongst the three. A comparison of photovoltaic parameters of these three solar cells clearly showed a sharp increment in all three parameters, JSC, VOC and FF in the case of Cs3Bi2I9 resulting in PCEs in the order Cs3Bi2I9 (1.09%) > MA3Bi2I9 (0.12%) > MA3Bi2I9−xClx (0.003%). These initial results may not have shown much promise in terms of PCE, but the devices excelled in stability retaining their performance over a period of one month (stored in the dark with humidity <10%) (Fig. 16b).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic drawing of the energy level diagram of A3Bi2I9 perovskites and (b) stability performance of Cs3Bi2I9 and MA3Bi2I9 PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Taking cue from the report of Park et al.,125 a range of efforts has been reported on methylammonium iodobismuthate perovskites, (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 or MBI. Eckhardt et al. provided the crystallographic insights into the MBI perovskites and assigned the space group P63/mmc to the perovskite single crystals.136 Structurally, MBI perovskite crystals are different from traditional MAPI as the characteristic corner sharing octahedron is absent in the former. Instead, MBI crystals consist of two isolated face-sharing octahedral anion clusters, which are separated by MA+ ions (Fig. 14b). To address the role of the fabrication method in the poor performance of MBI perovskite solar cells, Hoye et al. reported the formation of phase pure MBI by solution and vapor processing approaches.137 The as-prepared films showed remarkable stability under ambient conditions with ∼65% relative humidity and 22 °C temperature over almost a month, whereas the standard MAPI perovskite degraded after five days. Regarding this degradation issue, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) offered a very interesting result. Since the sublimation vapor pressure of BiI3 is higher than that of PbI2, MBI is not more thermally stable than PbI2 under inert conditions. But the XRD analysis showed that unlike MAPI, which degrades to PbI2 under air exposure, MBI perovskite forms a protective layer of Bi2O3 or BiOI after air exposure preventing its degradation to BiI3. Moving on to the optical properties, MBI showed a PL decay time of around 760 ps, with the bulk lifetime possibly closer to 5.6 ns, which is a significant initial value for a new solar energy material. But the PL quantum efficiency (PLQE) was measured up to 0.4% (in vapor-assisted conversion film) that is quite larger than the PLQE of some other known semiconductors, such as silicon (PLQE of 0.004%). So, the presence of non-radiative pathways is a limiting factor in MBI perovskites affecting their photovoltaic performance.
Reporting independently, MBI single crystals and films have been developed and investigated by Lyu et al.138 Energy levels of MBI crystals, as obtained from DFT studies, showed an indirect band gap of 2.25 eV which is close to the experimental value of 2.11 eV. The total density of states (DOS) study on such MBI crystals showed that the VBE and CBE of the crystals are composed of filled I-5p orbits and an empty hybrid of I-6p and Bi-6p orbits, respectively, and they are well distributed in energy. The calculated positions of VBE and CBE with respect to the vacuum level were found to be at −5.70 and −3.45 eV, respectively, with the Fermi energy predicted to be around −5.25 eV. These values were a very close match to the experimental findings. On the basis of such energy levels, MBI-based planar and mesoscopic perovskite solar cells were designed with P3HT as a HSC. The PCE obtained from the planar structure was 0.08% which was improved to a value of 0.19%, when a mesoscopic structure was employed. However, both the obtained PCE values, and in particular the VOC (0.51 and 0.35 V, respectively), were quite low as compared to those of conventional perovskites. The reason behind such low VOC and PCE values can be the photovoltage loss while dissociating excitons in the MBI perovskite due to its large exciton binding energy. It was however encouraging to observe that the devices showed almost no hysteresis and very limited performance degradation even after storage in air for 21 days. It can hence be inferred that by simply changing the metal cation of the organic–inorganic hybrid material from tin/lead to bismuth, the moisture stability can be improved significantly.
Oz et al. also fabricated planar heterojunction solar cells in inverted geometry with MBI as the principal absorber. The respective devices produced a PCE of 0.1% which was limited mainly by a poor JSC of 0.22 mA cm−2.139 This was also a reflection of the large exciton binding energy of this perovskite leading to inefficient charge-separation and thereby carrier extraction from devices having a planar geometry.138 Singh et al. carried out a crucial step towards efficiency improvement in MBI-based perovskite solar cells. In their effort, they have investigated the role of various TiO2 based ESCs (anatase and brookite) in planar and mesoscopic solar cells140 and found that the use of mesoporous anatase TiO2 as the ESC could result in a higher PCE (0.26%) as compared to both planar (0.11%) and mesoporous brookite TiO2 (0.09%) as ESCs. Characteristics revealed that the mesoporous anatase TiO2/perovskite interface had a more continuous nature as compared to the rest and, as a result, a low junction resistance as well as little charge recombination contributed to the highest PCE. Interestingly, the as-prepared devices (without sealing) were moderately stable under ambient conditions for more than a couple of months. Proceeding further with TiO2 as the ESC, Zhang et al. considered the use of indium tin oxide (ITO) along with a specially annealed TiO2 based ESC in their MBI devices and successfully improved the PCE values in both planar and mesoscopic structures as compared to the reports where fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) was used as the transparent contact.141 They have found that the morphology of the MBI active layer and in turn the PCE of the devices is immensely dependent on the processing conditions and the geometry (compact or mesoporous) of the ESC. With spiro-OMeTAD as the HSC, the planar devices produced a PCE of 0.14%, which turned 3-fold higher in mesoscopic devices (0.42%). Abulikemu et al. studied the structural and optoelectronic properties of MBI perovskites in their thin-film, powder, and single crystal forms.129 Their study revealed that depending upon the degree of crystallinity, the optoelectronic properties of the perovskite varied resulting in a change in band gap in both single crystal and thin-film forms. Photovoltaic devices fabricated using this material with a regular structure yielded a low PCE of 0.11%, although with a promising VOC of 0.72 V. Li et al. revealed an intercalation process between BiI3 and MA that is favorable for crystallization of the MBI perovskite.142 Based on this study, they have substituted dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent and introduced ethanol to achieve more uniformity and homogeneity in MA3Bi2I9 perovskite films as well as make the fabrication process greener. Devices based on such films, when implemented as absorbers in perovskite solar cells, yielded a higher VOC (VDMFOC: 0.45 V; VethanolOC: 0.84 V) and PCE (ηDMF: 0.022%; ηethanol: 0.053%) for the ethanol based approach. Achievement of more uniform, compact and smooth MBI perovskite thin-films has been reported by following a unique two-step evaporation–spin-coating fabrication strategy.143 Such films, when incorporated in planar heterojunction devices, exhibited a PCE of 0.39% with a high VOC of 0.83 V, demonstrating a low potential loss in such solar cells. Solvent engineering with N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) as an additive has also been reported to be a successful route to improve the performance and stability of the MBI-based perovskite solar cells.144 An optimized amount of NMP additive developed the morphology of the perovskite and thereby enhanced the PCE of the respective devices reaching 0.31%. Mali et al. followed an antisolvent assisted crystallization solution process (ASACP) to form cuboids of MBI and studied its photovoltaic performance in regular structure devices.145 The best devices showed a PCE of 0.36% with excellent air and moisture stability over a couple of months.
A low-toxic bismuth perovskite with a unique CsBi3I10 structure has been investigated recently.146 In contrast to the zero-dimensional Cs3Bi2I9, this new perovskite has a layered structure which has been achieved by controlling the stoichiometry of the common precursors (CsI and BiI3). Such a change in dimension has also resulted in a red-shift of the optical gap from 2.03 eV for Cs3Bi2I9 to 1.77 eV for this new perovskite CsBi3I10. Therefore, with respect to the Cs3Bi2I9, the latter one possesses improved light-harvesting properties. In addition, with CsBi3I10, far more uniform and pin-hole free films could be obtained. These improvements have been rightfully reflected in the PCE of CsBi3I10 based mesoscopic solar cells with P3HT as the HSC. CsBi3I10-based solar cells resulted in a PCE of 0.40%, which is higher than that achieved with Cs3Bi2I9 (0.02%) in the same device architecture.
Of late, a few more bismuth-based layered perovskites have been reported. Compounds like K3Bi2I9, Rb3Bi2I9,127 and (NH4)3Bi2I9,147 have been synthesized by solution-based or solid-state reaction approaches. They exhibited improved stability under ambient conditions as compared to their lead analogues. These 2D layered defect-perovskites possess an optical gap of around 2 eV of direct nature as proposed from band structure calculations. However, all these materials are yet to be incorporated as the principal absorbers in perovskite photovoltaic devices.
Apart from 0D and 2D structures, 1D bismuth-based perovskites have also been opted to examine their photovoltaic ability. Fabian et al. trialed the 1D hexanediammonium bismuth iodide (HDABiI5) in a mesoscopic structure and recorded a very low PCE of 0.003%.148 However, the film coverage and thermal stability of these perovskites were remarkably higher than those of the common MAPI.


5.2.2 Antimony halide perovskites. 
Antimony (Sb3+) is another promising heterovalent element to replace lead in hybrid halide perovskite structures. Sb3+ has a similar s2 valence electron configuration and comparable electronegativity to Pb2+; these parameters, along with its chemical stability and nontoxic nature, make the element an ideal alternative to lead. But due to its significantly smaller ionic radius (76 pm) as compared to lead (119 pm), complete substitution of lead by antimony leads to a significant impact on the dimensionality of the respective perovskites. In such cases, 0D (Cs3Sb2I9), 1D (MA3Sb2Cl9), and 2D (Rb3Sb2I9) perovskites could be imagined depending on the choice of A site cation and X site anion species.
Hebig et al. studied the optoelectronic properties of MA3Sb2I9 perovskites formed by a low temperature and one-step spin-coating approach.149 The material was found to possess a direct optical gap of 2.14 eV and a high absorption coefficient. When introduced in planar heterojunction solar cells, the perovskite absorber yielded a PCE of 0.5% with a very small photocurrent hysteresis. The PCE was mainly limited due to a low photocurrent as a result of inefficient charge extraction from the device. Saparov et al. investigated the effectiveness of Cs3Sb2I9 as an absorber for perovskite photovoltaics with the regular device architecture.128 Cs3Sb2I9 has been reported to have an optical band gap of ∼2 eV in its layered polymorph.150 However, the devices showed a very low VOC of 0.3 V and a low PCE of <1%. Harikesh et al. synthesized a more stable layered form of A3Sb2I9 perovskites via a solution route by replacing Cs+ (188 pm) with a smaller Rb+ (172 pm) at the A-sites.151 As a result, the Rb3Sb2I9 perovskites were effectively stabilized in the 2D layered structure in comparison to the 0D dimer modification polymorph of Cs3Sb2I9. Such a replacement of A-site cations has resulted in a slight blue-shift of the optical gap of the material (Eg = 2.24 eV) maintaining the value of the absorption coefficient. Rb3Sb2I9 perovskites showed a promising PCE of 0.66% in a regular device architecture which is higher than its Cs or MA analogues. In recent times, Boopathi et al. reported a single step solution approach to fabricate A3Sb2I9 (A = Cs, MA) thin-films by controlling the precursor concentrations and using hydrogen iodide as an additive.152 This novel additive-assisted approach improved the morphology of the films greatly and, as a result, the planar heterojunction devices with MA3Sb2I9 resulted in a PCE of 2.04%, the highest efficiency recorded so far with this lead-free perovskite.
Therefore, in terms of PCE, these defect ordered perovskites so far have not been as efficient as alternatives to the wonder material MAPI. Owing to the trivalent oxidation state of the metal cations (Bi and Sb), members of this family have mostly formed low-dimensional phases with a large (∼2 eV) and indirect band gap, high exciton binding energy (70–300 meV), and relatively low charge transport ability.125,149 A comparison between the efficiencies of mesoscopic and planar structured devices having the same defect ordered alternate perovskite absorber has shown slightly superior performance in the case of the former.138 So, the main limiting factor in the device performance with these materials could be an inefficient creation and collection of charge carriers. Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements have also shown such a possibility as a very low value of IPCE has been recorded in such devices in spite of the high absorption coefficient of these alternative perovskites.125,149 Also as discussed, the VOC value is on the lower side considering the wide band gap that these materials possess.138,146
With the challenges to find nontoxic and ambient-stable analogs to MAPI, strategies to address the limitations of defect ordered perovskites will indeed be significant. Improvement in this emerging field of perovskite solar cells can be envisioned by a reduction of trap density in the perovskite films and a proper selection of carrier selective contacts in the devices. Besides, compositional engineering, for example introduction of optoelectronically active organic cations, can increase the optical absorption cross-section of these perovskites making them more photoactive. Preparation of multidimensional perovskites by mixing the 2D and 3D materials can also be an effective strategy to balance the pros and cons of these two different dimensional systems. Addressing the inherent low-conductivity of these 2D perovskites will be another significant leap towards improvement of device efficiency. Designing new perovskite materials with covalently bound metal-anion networks within the interlayers of the host 2D perovskite can improve the vertical charge transport of the parent perovskite while retaining the basic lattice structure (Fig. 17). Such a topotactic transformation process can be envisaged to be carried out by a cation-exchange method using the layered perovskite structure as a template and after incorporation of the new metal-anion network, the respective perovskite will possess a couple of inorganic sublattices interconnected to each other. Therefore, the choice of the metal cation will be instrumental for the success of this process. Not only superior electrical conductivity is desired but also the new metal-anion unit should fit into the existing perovskite lattice. Transition metals like copper (Cu2+) can be a judicious choice in this regard due to its small size and high conductivity. In addition, interlayer charge density of the parent perovskite is another factor that governs the success of such cation exchange processes in a layered structure. Such a charge density can modulate the available interlayer spacing in the host structure which in turn would maintain the overall charge neutrality after cation-exchange. Considering the scope of material engineering that hybrid halide perovskites offer, researchers are quite optimistic that this kind of cation-exchange prospect can be successfully followed in the case of layered perovskites isostructural to the Ruddlesden–Popper or Dion–Jacobson phase. A summary of the photovoltaic performance of defect ordered perovskites has been presented in Table 3.
 Fig. 17  The crystal structures of the (a) Dion–Jacobson phase (A[A′n−1BnX3n+1]) and (b) transformed layered halide perovskite after the cation exchange process. In the structures, the light blue octahedra represent BX6 units, the green spheres and the large dark sphere represent A′ and A cations, respectively. In (b), the copper cations and associated halide anions are depicted as navy and purple spheres, respectively. The structures are reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 3 Photovoltaic parameters of bismuth and antimony halide perovskites along with the respective device structures




Absorber
Dimension
Device structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

η (%)
Ref.





Bismuth halide perovskites



Cs3Bi2I9
0D
Regular
2.15
0.85
60
1.09

125



Regular
0.18
0.26
37
0.02

146



MA3Bi2I9
0D
Regular
0.52
0.68
33
0.12

125



Regular
1.16
0.35
46
0.19

138



Regular
0.36
0.51
44
0.08


Inverted
0.22
0.66
49
0.10

139



Regular with anatase TiO2
0.83
0.56
48
0.26

140



Regular with brookite TiO2
0.57
0.53
30
0.09


Regular (planar)
0.61
0.51
33
0.11


Regular
1.00
0.67
62
0.42

141



Regular
0.49
0.67
35
0.14


Regular with perovskite in DMF
0.13
0.45
36
0.02

142



Regular with perovskite in ethanol
0.17
0.84
35
0.05


Inverted
1.39
0.83
34
0.39

143



Regular
1.10
0.65
50
0.36

145



Regular
0.94
0.51
61
0.31

144



Regular
0.49
0.72
32
0.11

129



MA3Bi2I9−xClx
0D
Regular
0.18
0.04
38
0.003

125



CsBi3I10
2D
Regular
3.40
0.31
38
0.40

146



HDABiI5
1D
Regular
0.12
0.40
43
0.03

148







Antimony halide perovskites



Cs3Sb2I9
0D
Regular
<0.10
0.31
—
<1.0

128



Inverted
2.91
0.60
48
0.84

152



MA3Sb2I9
Inverted
1.00
0.89
55
0.5

149



Inverted
5.41
0.62
61
2.04

152



Rb3Sb2I9
Regular
2.12
0.55
57
0.66

151






5.3 Double perovskites (elpasolites)
Realization of lead-free perovskites has also been approached through a different materialistic avenue. In this approach, the conventional 3D structure of the perovskite material has not been disturbed but the Pb2+ cations at the M-sites were replaced by a pair of heterovalent cations with +1 and +3 valencies. This gave rise to a new class of perovskite materials with the structure of A2B+B3+X6 where B3+ = Bi, Sb, or In; B+ = Cu, Ag, or Au; X = Cl, Br, or I. These materials are commonly known as “double perovskites”. Such an expansion of the perovskite motif enabled the authors to achieve a 3D perovskite structure with metals beyond the group-14 elements. In the family of oxide semiconductors, double perovskites are well known for their application in fuel cells.154 Investigation with multiferroic oxide materials like Bi2CrFeO6 and La2NiMnO6 as potential solar energy materials has also been carried out. With an optical gap of 1.6–1.9 eV, Bi2CrFeO6 has already shown a high PCE of 8.1%,132 whereas with a closer to optimal band gap of 1.5 eV, La2NiMnO6 is yet to be incorporated in solar cells.155
The first step towards the halide double perovskite avenue was documented with the experimental synthesis of two fully inorganic members of this family, Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6.156 Both these compounds crystallized in a highly symmetric face-centered cubic double-perovskite structure commonly known as elpasolite. In this double perovskite structure, replacement of divalent lead cations by a pair of heterovalent cations (monovalent–trivalent) maintains the total charge neutrality. A search for the trivalent cations in the nitrogen family results in bismuth and antimony as the most desired choice avoiding arsenic for its toxicity. For the monovalent ones, noble metals like copper, silver, or gold have been chosen for their superior electrical conductivity with possibilities in optoelectronic applications.157 An added advantage of this combination of cations is the similarity in ionic radii between the Cu+ (73 pm), Ag+ (115 pm), and Au+ (137 pm) with Pb2+ (119 pm), Sb3+ (76 pm), and Bi3+ (103 pm) in an octahedral environment.69 The band structures of the double perovskites were estimated from first-principles using DFT studies. The results evidenced an indirect band gap for all the perovskites with its value tunable in the visible range i.e., 1.6–2.7 eV for Cs2BiAgX6, 0.9–2.1 eV for Cs2CuSbX6, 1.1–2.6 eV for Cs2AgSbX6, 0.0–1.3 eV for Cs2AuSbX6, 1.3–2.0 eV for Cs2CuBiX6, and 0.5–1.6 eV for Cs2AuBiX6 (Fig. 18a). The construction of the band edges was also investigated; the bottom of CB and top of VB were found to be predominantly comprised of trivalent cation-p and halogen-p character, respectively. The band gap increases while moving up in the halogen column in the periodic table; a similar trend was anticipated for elements in the group-15 column. But with respect to the size of the noble metal cation no such definite trend was observed (Fig. 18a). The experimental findings matched well with the estimated values. The quantitative discrepancy between the calculated electronic gaps and measured optical gap was ∼0.5 eV which obviously did not affect the physical trend of the band gaps.
 Fig. 18  (a) Electronic band gaps calculated for all compounds in the halide double perovskite family using DFT and (b) comparison of the molecular orbital diagrams of Cs2BiAgCl6 (left) and Cs2BiAgBr6 (right). The atomic one-electron energies are marked by black thick lines. Dark blue and gray rectangles correspond to the Bi-halide and Ag-halide hybrid bands, respectively. The light blue rectangles represent the bands formed in Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6, respectively. Filled and empty rectangles represent VB and CB, respectively. All bands are aligned with respect to the all-electron energy level of the Bi-5d1/2 and then red-shifted by 1.5 eV for visualization purposes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156 and 158, respectively. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
A detailed investigation on the band structure of these double perovskites has been carried out by Filip et al.158 Similar to Volonakis's report,156 the electronic structures of both Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6 were investigated by calculating the band structures using DFT. The value and nature of the band gaps were similar to the former report, while detailed information regarding the composition of the band edges was provided clarifying some salient features of the band structures of these compounds. Primarily, the CB in both these double perovskites was formed from an antibonding Bi-p/X-p state and the top of the VB contained a small contribution of the Bi-s/X-p antibonding state. On the other hand, due to the monovalent character of silver, the Ag-s states are pushed to the CB whereas hybridized Ag-d/X-p states were dominant throughout the valence band in both the compounds (Fig. 16b).
The alteration in the band gap, as we move from chloride to bromide, can also be explained from the compositional information of the band edges. Since the difference in energy between the Ag-d and Br-p levels is smaller as compared to Ag-d and Cl-p, the band gap gets narrowed down during such a transition. Interestingly, the electronic structures of these Bi–Ag based double perovskites showed similar properties to ternary chalcopyrite semiconductors namely CuInS2 (CIS), CuGaS2 (CGS), and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS). In both these classes of compounds, the noble metal's d-states are dominant in the VB and the p-orbitals of the anion contribute to both the CB and VB.
In the context of suitability of Cs2BiAgBr6 for photovoltaic applications, Slavney et al. characterized the double perovskite material in both crystal and powder forms with time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurement, which delivered the fundamental recombination lifetime of the material.159 As presented in their report, the entire time-scale of the decay process can be divided into three parts, namely, a short-lifetime process, an intermediate-lifetime process, and a long-lived process. Among these, in the first two processes, the powder and the crystal forms of the material showed dissimilarity in the lifetime value. Since the powder form contained typically more number of defects and surface states than a single crystal, the short- and intermediate-lifetime processes have been attributed to trap and/or surface-state emission. Interestingly, the long lived component (τ = 660 ns) was independent of the metallic form and could be assumed to be the proper recombination lifetime of Cs2BiAgBr6. Since the optical gap of the material is indirect in nature, this lifetime is also due to the non-radiative decay rate and should be longer in the case of radiative processes (i.e. direct band gap). Surprisingly, this recombination lifetime in its powder form is higher in value as compared to that of MAPbBr3 (τ = 170 ns) and comparable to the well-known MAPI (τ = 736–1000 ns) (Fig. 19a). Besides, some lucrative aspects of Cs2BiAgBr6 are its inherent thermal stability and endurance against moisture and light. In spite of the infamous light sensitivity of silver halides, the Cs2BiAgX6 perovskites have shown strong resistance against material decomposition under both light and moisture (Fig. 19b). The thermal stability of solar energy materials is equally important considering the temperature of ambient operating conditions (50–70 °C). TGA and differential thermal analysis of the double perovskite have shown no mass loss up to a high temperature 430 °C without any phase transition within this range. Such a remarkable improvement over the traditional MAPI can be ascribed to the absence of organic species in this double perovskite structure leaving further scope for stability using effective encapsulation.
 Fig. 19  (a) Time resolved room-temperature PL and fits for the PL decay time (τ) in the powder and single-crystal forms, and (b) powder XRD patterns after exposure to humidity (55% relative humidity) or light (0.75 sun) of Cs2BiAgBr6. Asterisks in (b) denote signals from the sample holder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In spite of their non-toxicity and high stability, the indirect nature of the optical gap and low solubility of precursors for both Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6 have been major concerns regarding their application in thin-film perovskite photovoltaics. Volonakis et al. proposed a new class of halide double perovskites with In3+ and Ag+ as the cation combination to resolve this band gap issue.160 Cs2InAgX6 (where X = Cl, Br or I) is expected to show a direct band gap according to first principles calculations ranging from the visible (with iodide) to the ultraviolet (with chloride) region. As far as the stability of Cs2InAgX6 compounds is concerned, a preliminary assessment using Goldschmidt's empirical tolerance factor approach has resulted in tolerance factor and octahedral factor (t, μ) combinations as (0.94, 0.54), (0.93, 0.50) and (0.91, 0.44), respectively, for X = Cl, Br and I, respectively. It is worthy to note here that, due to the double perovskite nature of the compounds, the average ionic radii of the B+ and B3+ ions were employed during such calculations and the calculated value fell within the well-accepted limit of stable perovskite formation.22 However, the limiting cases, where the entire B-sites are occupied by either the B3+ or the B+ cations, lead to an interesting result. In such stringent cases, though the stability factor values for the compounds were within the stability limit, the octahedral factor fell outside the recommended region (μ > 0.41) for X = Br and I. A large difference between the ionic radii of I− (=220 pm) and In3+ (=80 pm) can be attributed to such an anomaly since a small indium cation cannot coordinate six iodine anions to form a stable InI6 octahedron. Therefore, the possibility to obtain a stable double perovskite with the In–Ag cation combination is viable for selected anions, namely Cl−, Cl−/Br− mixes, and possibly also Br−.
Since Cs2InAgCl6 is expected to be a stable compound, its synthesis has been approached by a solution method. The resultant material showed a white powder-like appearance; with a measured optical gap of ∼2.1 eV, the true color of the sample should have been orangish. Indeed under photoexcitation, the material transformed to an orange colored powder. Such a photochromic behavior has been assigned to changes in the oxidation state of silver upon illumination that in turn altered the Ag–Cl bond lengths and thus the electronic structure of Cs2InAgCl6. So, the measured optical gap of 2.1 eV has been proposed to be related to photoinduced defect states, while the actual band gap was way above this value.
In contrast to fully inorganic perovskites, integration of hybrid perovskites in devices is easier and advantageous due to some exclusive optoelectronic properties of the latter. In this direction, synthesis and characterization of hybrid double perovskites have been approached by Wei et al.161 Opting for K+–Bi3+ cation combination to replace Pb2+ in a hybrid double perovskite structure, formation of MA2KBiCl6 has been experimentally achieved and also investigated by DFT calculations. Similar to Cs-based double perovskites, the indirect nature of the band gap (∼3 eV) was still persistent in this material (Fig. 20a). The structure, as evidenced by DFT, contained alternate corner sharing KCl6 and BiCl6 octahedra in a 3D framework. But, due to a mismatch of ionic radii between K+ (138 pm) and Bi3+ (103 pm), the 3D framework has been found to be distorted from cubic-stacking which can be found in cesium based double perovskites.156 The KCl6 octahedra were slightly distorted whereas the BiCl6 octahedra were more regular in shape (Fig. 20b). Band structure analysis revealed that similar to the traditional MAPI, the MA+ cation here did not contribute to states near the VBE or the CBE. Similar to Cs-based inorganic double perovskites, the CBE of this hybrid double perovskite is composed of Bi-6p, Cl-3p antibonding states together with a small contribution from Cl-3s; the VBE is composed of Bi-6s and Cl-3p antibonding states. But unlike the contribution of Ag+ to the states near the VBE in Cs-based double perovskites, K+, in this case, does not contribute to the formation of the VBE of MA2KBiCl6 due to the low lying position of K-3p states.
 Fig. 20  (a) Tauc plot as derived from the absorption spectra of MA2KBiCl6 and (b) crystal structure of MA2KBiCl6, obtained from single crystal XRD, viewed along the a axis (atoms in red: Bi, brown: K, green: Cl, white: C, and blue: N). BiCl6 and KCl6 octahedra are shown in blue and purple, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Replacing pairs of the lead atoms in traditional MAPI perovskite by antimony/silver altervalent units, Li et al. synthesized a hybrid double perovskite MA2AgSbI6 with optical properties and stability typical of such a class of perovskites.142 Tolerance factor calculation ensured the formation of a stable perovskite structure (t = 0.90); DFT calculations revealed a large dependence of the band gap on the orientation of MA cation in the inorganic framework. As compared to traditional MAPI, the double perovskites contained a couple of metal–iodine bonds (Sb–I and Ag–I in this case) in their inorganic framework. This actually leads to a different kind of electronic coupling between the organic cation and the inorganic framework leading to such dependence. MA2AgSbI6, as appeared from theoretical calculations, possessed an indirect band gap of around 2 eV with an orthogonal structure. The Fermi energy was found to be closer to the CBE indicating a tentative n-type nature of the perovskite. The band-edges in the orthogonal phase of MA2AgSbI6 were evidenced as the VBE being composed of contributions from I and Ag atoms while states of Sb atoms formed the CBE. Similar to MAPI, MA2AgSbI6 also possessed a higher effective mass for holes as compared to electrons which accounted for its facile electron-transport ability and presence of anisotropy in the charge transport phenomenon. The thermal degradation temperature of MA2AgSbI6 was recorded to be around 260 °C under a N2 gas flow. As a result, the material showed higher air and thermal stability as compared to MAPI.
Among the reported members of the double perovskite family, so far only Cs2AgBiBr6 has been utilized in an active device. Resolving the issues regarding the film quality, phase-pure Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite has been synthesized and successfully incorporated in a regular structured device very recently.162 The work suggested that both a post-deposition annealing step and a preheating-step are essential to achieve phase-pure and high-quality Cs2AgBiBr6 films with improved optoelectronic properties. These successful optimizations were reflected in a promising performance of the respective devices with PCE close to 2.5% and a VOC exceeding 1 V in spite of its indirect band gap. These are currently the highest recorded parameters in bismuth halide perovskites and therefore this report is indeed a breakthrough in the processing and application of the double perovskite materials towards lead free PSCs.
The family of pnictogen-noble metal halide double perovskites is indeed interesting for application in photovoltaic devices due to the band gap and dimensional similarity of their structure with those of the traditional lead based perovskites. Due to the presence of a combination of metal cations with mixed valency instead of a single metal cation, such a structure offers a huge variety of material compositions in association with organic and inorganic cations (A-site) and halides (X-site). As a result, it is possible to tune the band gap of these materials by altering the cation combination depending upon their application. Moreover, these elpasolite-structured double perovskites possess improved stability under ambient conditions in terms of heat and moisture as compared to the lead-based halide perovskites. However, there is so far only a solitary report on solar cell performance with these materials. The reason behind such a lack of efforts could be assigned to the nature of the band gap in these materials and the difficulties associated with their processing route. As discussed in the previous section, most of the proposed or synthesized double perovskites possess an indirect band gap, which is not a desired property in any photovoltaic material. The only exception in this family that is expected to evidence a direct band gap is Cs2InAgCl6; the estimated band gap of this material is however quite high as compared to the optimal value researchers look for. Conversely, prior to the effort of Greul et al.162 there was no reported strategy to fabricate device quality thin-films of these double perovskites due to their processing complexity especially for bromide or iodide based systems. Hence, now it is worthy to anticipate that research in this arena will find acceleration both in terms of new materials and device processing (Table 4).
Table 4 Optical data of double perovskites. The only member with a direct gap is marked with an asterisk




Cation at the site
Anion
Optical gap (eV)
Simulated/experimental
Ref.


A
B3+
B+
X




Cs
Bi
Cu
Cl
2.0
Simulated

156



Br
1.9


I
1.3


Ag
Cl
2.7
Experimental

163



Br
2.3


I
1.6
Simulated

156



Au
Cl
1.6
Simulated

156



Br
1.1


I
0.5


MA


K
Cl
3.0
Experimental

161



Ag
I
2.0
Simulated and experimental

164



Cs
Sb
Cu
Cl
2.1
Simulated

156



Br
1.6


I
0.9


Ag
Cl
2.6


Br
1.9


I
1.1


Au
Cl
1.3


Br
0.7


I
0.0


In
Ag
Cl
2.1*
Simulated and experimental

160





6. Outlook
With the phenomenal accomplishment of MAPI as a photovoltaic material, it is worthy to envision that these perovskites will be a key material in solar cell industries. Along with high-efficiency, low-cost, and high-durability, they are also expected to possess multiple functionalities like tunable color, semi-transparency, flexibility etc. Nontoxic nature and stability are therefore prime concerns for these perovskites to be commercialized. As discussed in this review, attempts in this direction have already been envisaged and the initial success of those efforts proves that the strategies are fruitful ones in this context.
Partial substitution of the metal (lead) in the perovskite structure can be an important compositional engineering to tune its optical and electronic properties and thereby the device performance. Among several metal dopants highlighted in this article, tin (Sn2+) has been the choice of long-standing research interest. However, the sensitivity of tin still remains a roadblock to its success. The scenario is similar for another group-14 element, germanium (Ge2+). As alternatives, a number of alkaline-earth metals and transition metals have been incorporated in the perovskite structure by partially replacing lead. The earth-abundance and non-toxicity of materials like antimony (Sb3+), cobalt (Co2+), manganese (Mn2+), etc. have made them attractive candidates in this context and with increased interest the respective efficiencies are expected to increase. However, a partial replacement can never completely address the toxicity issue of lead as it has been theoretically predicted and experimentally evidenced that a major contribution of lead is a prerequisite to achieve high-efficiency in solar cells with such partially substituted perovskites.
To deal with this environmental aspect, materials beyond the traditional structure of MAPI are being projected. Defect ordered perovskites and double perovskites with completely nontoxic materials have shown a remarkable endurance against operational conditions (air and moisture), although several challenges still remain with these materials en route to attaining high-efficiency. Almost all the double perovskites reported till date have an indirect band gap that is not desired in photovoltaic materials. On the other hand, though defect ordered perovskites like Cs3Bi2I9 and Cs3Sb2I9 have direct or nearly direct band gaps, the flat nature of the bands translates into a heavy effective carrier mass deteriorating charge-separation and also carrier mobility and hence their solar cell performances. A useful strategy to resolve the band gap issue of double perovskites can be engineering of the material itself by altering the elemental composition. Since accommodation of a variety of trivalent and monovalent species is possible in the said structure, it can be expected that more elements akin to Cs2InAgCl6 with a direct band gap will emerge. Fabrication of device quality phase-pure thin-films is another prerequisite for the double perovskites to be competitive for optoelectronic applications. To improve the phase-purity as well as uniformity and coverage of double perovskite films, a post-deposition annealing technique has recently been suggested in the case of Cs2AgBiBr6; this technique is expected to be equally effective to other double perovskites as well. In the case of defect ordered perovskites, the main limiting factor to achieve high efficiency has been inefficient collection of charge carriers. The mesoscopic structure has already shown better collection efficiency as compared to the planar solar cells based on these perovskites; further device engineering can hence be expected to improve the performance. Selection of carrier selective contacts also plays a crucial role in the collection of charge carriers. By a judicious choice of such selective contacts followed by perfect alignment of bands and minimal lattice mismatch with the perovskite, unhindered transport of charge carriers can be achieved. Addressing the carrier transport ability of the perovskite itself can be another route to improve the overall performance of the devices based on these materials. Materials-engineering through introduction of new metal-anion networks in the existing layered-structures or fabrication of multidimensional-systems by mixing the 2D and 3D perovskites may turn out fruitful strategies to resolve the standing issue of inherent low vertical charge-transport ability of these layered perovskites.
Each of these new classes of perovskite has its own merits as an alternative material to the traditional MAPI perovskite and, therefore, it is expected that both of these will find their respective applications in the field of perovskite photovoltaics. To conclude, we believe that further advancement in the field of metal-substituted perovskites will point towards the exploration of the most effective doping approaches and emergence of novel perovskites beyond MAPI. Such a dream perovskite will finally lead to the development of next-generation sustainable PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Abbreviations

AMAir mass
ASACPAntisolvent assisted crystallization solution process
CBConduction band
CBEConduction band-edge
DFTDensity functional theory
DMFDimethylformamide, HCON(CH3)2
DOSDensity of states
DSSCsDye-sensitized solar cells

E
F
Fermi level

E
g
Band gap
ELFElectron localization function
ESCElectron-selective contact
FFFill factor
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide
FWHMFull width at half maximum
HDABiI5Hexanediammonium bismuth iodide
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HSCHole-selective contact
IMPSIntensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy
IMVSIntensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy
IPCEIncident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency
ITOIndium tin oxide

J
SC
Short-circuit current

J–V characteristicsCurrent–voltage characteristics
MAMethylammonium
MAIMethylammonium iodide
MAPIMethylammonium lead iodide, CH3NH3PbI3
MBIMethylammonium iodobismuthate, (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9
NIRNear infrared
NMP
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
PbI2Lead iodide
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate
PLPhotoluminescence
PLQEPL quantum efficiency
PSC(s)Perovskite solar cell(s)
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)
RPRuddlesden–Popper
Spiro-OMeTAD2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene
STSScanning tunneling spectroscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TRPLTime-resolved photoluminescence
UPSUltraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
VBValence band
VBEValence band-edge

V
OC
Open-circuit voltage
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction

Acknowledgements
A. J. P. acknowledges the JC Bose Fellowship (SB/S2/JCB-001/2016) of SERB and S. C. acknowledges the DST INSPIRE Fellowship [IF 140158]. The authors acknowledge financial assistance from the SERIIUS project bearing the grant number IUSSTF/JCERDC-SERIIUS/2012.
References
M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. Snaith, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 641–645 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .

          Efficiency Chart, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg.
X. Li, M. Tschumi, H. W. Han, S. S. Babkair, R. A. Alzubaydi, A. A. Ansari, S. S. Habib, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 551–555 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Boix, K. Nonomura, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Q. Guo, S. Yuan, C. H. Yan, J. X. Lin, Z. Y. Liu, Y. M. Lu, C. Y. Bai, Q. Lu, S. Y. Dai and C. B. Cai, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2016, 42, 625–639 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, J. B. You, T. F. Guo and Y. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 155–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Subbiah, S. Agarwal, N. Mahuli, P. Nair, M. van Hest and S. K. Sarkar, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1601143 CrossRef .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhou, Z. M. Zhou, M. Chen, Y. X. Zong, J. S. Huang, S. P. Pang and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17623–17635 CAS .
S. Q. Luo and W. A. Daoud, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8992–9010 CAS .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. C. Shao, H. P. Xie, L. Lyu, X. L. Liu, Y. L. Gao and J. S. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163508 CrossRef .
J. J. Chang, H. Zhu, J. X. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, Z. H. Lin, Y. Hao, K. Y. Zeng, Q. H. Xu and J. Y. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7943–7949 CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Yang, J. W. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
T. T. Shi, W. J. Yin, F. Hong, K. Zhu and Y. F. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 103902 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Johnsson and P. Lemmens, in Handbook of Magnetism and Advanced Magnetic Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2007 Search PubMed .
C. H. Li, X. G. Lu, W. Z. Ding, L. M. Feng, Y. H. Gao and Z. G. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. S. Toumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, D. D. Zhang and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5489–5494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, H. X. Zhao, Z. R. Hong and H. P. Zhou, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi, J. M. Ball, V. D'Innocenzo, C. Tao, S. Pathak, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 155–163 CAS .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 681–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 11033–11038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. J. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. B. Yang, C. C. Chueh, A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, Y. Sun and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17939–17945 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T. W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H. G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2159–2165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi, R. Obara, Z. Z. Lin, T. Naito, T. Inabe, S. Ishibashi and K. Terakura, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5563–5568 RSC .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Babayigit, D. D. Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H. G. Boyen and B. Conings, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokoyama, D. Y. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. B. Song, Y. Sato, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 776–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518–11549 CAS .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. L. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Liao, D. W. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, K. Ghimire, C. R. Grice, C. L. Wang, Y. Q. Xiao, A. J. Cimaroli, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu, R. G. Xiong and Y. F. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12360–12363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C. C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Zhao, F. D. Gu, Y. L. Li, W. H. Sun, S. Y. Ye, H. X. Rao, Z. W. Liu, Z. Q. Bian and C. H. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700204 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Hsu, L. Ji, M. S. Du, J. Zhao, E. T. Yu and A. J. Bard, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Yang, A. Rajagopal, S. B. Jo, C. C. Chueh, S. Williams, C. C. Huang, J. K. Katahara, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7739–7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, C. Bi, Y. B. Yuan, Y. Bai and J. S. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500301 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Qiu, B. Q. Cao, S. Yuan, X. F. Chen, Z. W. Qiu, Y. A. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Q. Wang, H. B. Zeng, J. Liu and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, J. H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh, M. Asta, M. Graetzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Marshall, M. Walker, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16178 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Li, J. W. Li, J. L. Li, J. D. Fan, Y. H. Mai and L. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17104–17110 CAS .
T. B. Song, T. Yokoyama, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Logsdon, D. H. Cao, M. R. Wasielewski, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 836–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yokoyama, T. B. Song, D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, S. Y. Chen, H. J. Xiang, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6068–6072 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sabba, H. K. Mulmudi, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Krishnamoorthy, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1763–1767 CAS .
Y. K. Jung, J. H. Lee, A. Walsh and A. Soon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3181–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Qian, B. Xu and W. J. Tian, Org. Electron., 2016, 37, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Sun, Q. S. Li, L. N. Yang and Z. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1503–1512 RSC .
L. C. Tang, Y. C. Chang, J. Y. Huang, M. H. Lee and C. S. Chang, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 112402 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Frazer, D. J. Clark, Y. S. Kim, S. H. Rhim, A. J. Freeman, J. B. Ketterson, J. I. Jang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6804–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Krishnamoorthy, H. Ding, C. Yan, W. L. Leong, T. Baikie, Z. Y. Zhang, M. Sherburne, S. Li, M. Asta, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23829–23832 CAS .

          C. Huang, X. Yan, G. Cui, Z. Liu, S. Shu and H. Xu, Patent CN201410173750,  2014 .
A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5755–5760 CAS .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
M. R. Filip and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 166–173 CAS .
J. Navas, A. Sanchez-Coronilla, J. J. Gallardo, N. C. Hernandez, J. C. Pinero, R. Alcantara, C. Fernandez-Lorenzo, D. M. De los Santos, T. Aguilar and J. Martin-Calleja, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6216–6229 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25673–25683 CAS .
G. Giorgi, J. I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12176–12183 CAS .
A. B. Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 851–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pazoki, T. J. Jacobsson, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and T. Edvinsson, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 144105 CrossRef .

          K. Choudhary, arXiv: 1505.01238,  2015.
M. T. Klug, A. Osherov, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, P. R. Brown, S. Bai, J. T. W. Wang, X. N. Dang, V. Bulovic, H. J. Snaith and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 236–246 CAS .
A. Sahu, M. S. Kang, A. Kompch, C. Notthoff, A. W. Wills, D. Deng, M. Winterer, C. D. Frisbie and D. J. Norris, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stavrinadis, A. K. Rath, F. P. G. de Arquer, S. L. Diedenhofen, C. Magen, L. Martinez, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2981 Search PubMed .
L. A. Frolova, D. V. Anokhin, K. L. Gerasimov, N. N. Dremova and P. A. Troshin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4353–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Liang and D. B. Mitzi, US pat. US5882548A,  1999 .

          D. H. Gahane, N. S. Kokode, B. M. Bahirwar and S. V. Moharil, in Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Luminescence and Optical Spectroscopy of Condensed Matter: Posters, ed. S. C. Rand, T. Carmon and M. Jarrahi, Elsevier Science Bv, Amsterdam,  2012, pp. 42–45 Search PubMed .
M. Suta and C. Wickleder, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5233–5245 RSC .
M. Suta, W. Urland, C. Daul and C. Wickleder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13196–13208 RSC .
J. Grimm, J. F. Suyver, E. Beurer, G. Carver and H. U. Gudel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2093–2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. Katsiev, E. Alarousu, R. Comin, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, E. H. Sargent, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 295–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Palankovski, G. Kaiblinger-Grujin and S. Selberherr, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1999, 66, 46–49 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. H. Shang, P. Wang, X. K. Huang, J. Xu, Z. Y. Hu, Y. J. Zhu and L. Y. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 535–541 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oku, Y. Ohishi and A. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 134–136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Du, H. K. Cai, H. B. Wen, Y. X. Wu, Z. L. Li, J. Xu, L. K. Huang, J. Ni, J. Li and J. J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 101250–101258 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. H. Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J. E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chatterjee, U. Dasgupta and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20177–20187 CAS .
U. Dasgupta, A. Bera and A. J. Pal, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1428–1437 CAS .
U. Dasgupta, S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 353–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bhunia, B. Kundu, S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 551–558 RSC .
S. Shahbazi, C. M. Tsai, S. Narra, C. Y. Wang, H. S. Shiu, S. Afshar, N. Taghavinia and E. W. G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3673–3679 CAS .
R. van de Krol, A. Goossens and J. Schoonman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7151–7159 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, H. Shimotani, Y. Iwasa and M. Kawasaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 252107 CrossRef .
D. Macinnes, M. A. Druy, P. J. Nigrey, D. P. Nairns, A. G. Macdiarmid and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1981, 317–319 RSC .
Q. L. Jiang, M. M. Chen, J. Q. Li, M. C. Wang, X. Q. Zeng, T. Besara, J. Lu, Y. Xin, X. Shan, B. C. Pan, C. C. Wang, S. C. Lin, T. Siegrist, Q. F. Xiao and Z. B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1073–1079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Uribe, D. Ramirez, J. M. Osorio-Guillen, J. Osorio and F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16393–16398 CAS .
S. Korbel, M. A. L. Marques and S. Botti, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3157–3167 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
J. Calabrese, N. L. Jones, R. L. Harlow, N. Herron, D. L. Thorn and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2328–2330 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1958, 11, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, H. Li, D. Cortecchia, C. Soci and J. L. Bredas, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Willett, H. Place and M. Middleton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 8639–8650 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Pan, G. Wu, M. Wang and H. Z. Chen, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci., A, 2009, 10, 710–715 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cortecchia, H. A. Dewi, J. Yin, A. Bruno, S. Chen, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar, C. Soci and N. Mathews, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1044–1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Cui, K. J. Jiang, J. H. Huang, Q. Q. Zhang, M. J. Su, L. M. Yang, Y. L. Song and X. Q. Zhou, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Mostafa and R. D. Willett, Phys. Rev., 1971, 4, 2213–2215 Search PubMed .
P. P. Boix, S. Agarwala, T. M. Koh, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 898–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Huang, Z. X. Thiang, X. S. Yin, C. H. Tang, G. J. Qi and H. Gong, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2146–2152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Cheng, D. C. Pan, H. F. Wang, M. L. Pang, Y. C. Han and J. Lin, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 506–511 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, A. A. Haghighirad, M. R. Filip, P. K. Nayak, S. Nayak, A. Ramadan, Z. P. Wang, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6030–6033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kaltzoglou, M. Antoniadou, A. G. Kontos, C. C. Stoumpos, D. Perganti, E. Siranidi, V. Raptis, K. Trohidou, V. Psycharis, M. G. Kanatzidis and P. Falaras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11777–11785 CAS .
B. Lee, C. C. Stoumpos, N. J. Zhou, F. Hao, C. Malliakas, C. Y. Yeh, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. P. H. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15379–15385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Qiu, Y. A. Jiang, H. L. Zhang, Z. W. Qiu, S. Yuan, P. Wang and B. Q. Cao, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 587–591 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mercier, N. Louvain and W. H. Bi, CrystEngComm, 2009, 11, 720–734 RSC .
A. E. Maughan, J. A. Kurzman and J. R. Neilson, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 370–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Kosower, J. Org. Chem., 1964, 29, 956–957 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Park, B. Philippe, X. L. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chabot and E. Parthe, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1978, 34, 645–648 CrossRef .
A. J. Lehner, D. H. Fabini, H. A. Evans, C. A. Hebert, S. R. Smock, J. Hu, H. B. Wang, J. W. Zwanziger, M. L. Chabinyc and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7137–7148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov, F. Hong, J. P. Sun, H. S. Duan, W. W. Meng, S. Cameron, I. G. Hill, Y. F. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5622–5632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abulikemu, S. Ould-Chikh, X. H. Miao, E. Alarousu, B. Murali, G. O. N. Ndjawa, J. Barbe, A. El Labban, A. Amassiana and S. Del Gobbo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12504–12515 CAS .
M. Alexe and D. Hesse, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 256 CrossRef .
J. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li and F. Rosei, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 215402 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li, L. Cardenas, W. Huang, J. Chakrabartty and F. Rosei, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, Y. P. Guo, B. Guo, H. Li, H. Z. Liu and T. W. Joel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6925–6929 CAS .
Z. K. Liu and F. Yan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Y. Lu, L. X. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Eckhardt, V. Bon, J. Getzschmann, J. Grothe, F. M. Wisser and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3058–3060 RSC .
R. L. Z. Hoye, R. E. Brandt, A. Osherov, V. Stevanovic, S. D. Stranks, M. W. B. Wilson, H. Kim, A. J. Akey, J. D. Perkins, R. C. Kurchin, J. R. Poindexter, E. N. Wang, M. G. Bawendi, V. Bulovic and T. Buonassisi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2605–2610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Lyu, J. H. Yun, M. L. Cai, Y. L. Jiao, P. V. Bernhardt, M. Zhang, Q. Wang, A. J. Du, H. X. Wang, G. Liu and L. Z. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 692–702 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oz, J. C. Hebig, E. W. Jung, T. Singh, A. Lepcha, S. Olthof, J. Flohre, Y. J. Gao, R. German, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, K. Meerholz, T. Kirchartz and S. Mathur, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 195–201 CrossRef .
T. Singh, A. Kulkarni, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14542–14547 CAS .
X. Q. Zhang, G. Wu, Z. W. Gu, B. Guo, W. Q. Liu, S. D. Yang, T. Ye, C. Chen, W. W. Tu and H. Z. Chen, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2921–2930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Wu, Y. Yan, B. Chi, J. Pu, J. Li and S. Priya, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3994–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Ran, Z. X. Wu, J. Xi, F. Yuan, H. Dong, T. Lei, X. He and X. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni, T. Singh, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9456–9460 RSC .
S. S. Mali, H. Kim, D. H. Kim and C. K. Hong, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1578–1585 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Johansson, H. M. Zhu and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3467–3471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Sun, S. Tominaka, J. H. Lee, F. Xie, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 031101 CrossRef .
D. M. Fabian and S. Ardo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6837–6841 CAS .
J. C. Hebig, I. Kuhn, J. Flohre and T. Kirchartz, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Peresh, V. I. Sidei, O. V. Zubaka and I. P. Stercho, Inorg. Mater., 2011, 47, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Harikesh, H. K. Mulmudi, B. Ghosh, T. W. Goh, Y. T. Teng, K. Thirumal, M. Lockrey, K. Weber, T. M. Koh, S. Z. Li, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7496–7504 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Boopathi, P. Karuppuswamy, A. Singh, C. Hanmandlu, L. Lin, S. A. Abbas, C. C. Chang, P. C. Wang, G. Li and C. W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20843–20850 CAS .
D. Montasserasadi, M. W. Granier, L. Spinu, S. C. Rai, W. L. Zhou and J. B. Wiley, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 10654–10660 RSC .
Y. H. Huang, R. I. Dass, Z. L. Xing and J. B. Goodenough, Science, 2006, 312, 254–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Lan, S. Zhao, T. T. Xu, J. Ma, S. Hayase and T. L. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 655, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
G. Volonakis, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1254–1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beaglehole, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 1966, 87, 461–471 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Filip, S. Hillman, A. A. Haghighirad, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2579–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Volonakis, A. A. Haghighirad, R. L. Milot, W. H. Sio, M. R. Filip, B. Wenger, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 772–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Wei, Z. Y. Deng, S. J. Sun, F. Xie, G. Kieslich, D. M. Evans, M. A. Carpenter, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 328–332 RSC .
E. Greul, M. L. Petrus, A. Binek, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19972–19981 CAS .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348–1354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Li, T. Wu, L. Sun, R. X. Yang, L. Jiang, P. F. Cheng, Q. Q. Hao, T. J. Wang, R. F. Lu and W. Q. Deng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 35175–35180 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Soumyo Chatterjee	Soumyo Chatterjee was born in Kolkata, India in 1991. In 2013, he received his M.Sc. degree in physics from the University of Calcutta, India. Presently, he is a final year graduate student as an INSPIRE fellow at the Indian Association of Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. He was selected as a participant from India in the 9th HOPE Meeting with Nobel Laureates conducted by JSPS (Tokyo, 2017). He has been selected for Newton Bhabha PhD Placements Programme 2017–18. His research focuses on the formation of hybrid halide perovskites and fabrication and characterization of perovskite solar cells.
Amlan J. Pal	Amlan J. Pal is a JC Bose National Fellow and Professor at the Department of Solid State Physics, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, India. He received M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in physics from the University of Calcutta and Jadavpur University, respectively. His research interests include materials engineering leading to organic electronics, solar cells based on organic and inorganic semiconductors, hybrid perovskites, and 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, scanning tunneling spectroscopy, organic spintronics, and so forth.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Variation of carrier concentration and Hall mobility of composition varied perovskite films formed by one-step (black) and two-step interdiffusion (blue) methods and (b) UPS-measured energetic levels of perovskite films formed by the one-step method with different precursor ratios. The column colors of pink and blue represent the p- and n-type conductivity, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Energy band diagram of active materials in perovskite solar cells, with composition-varied perovskite film and (b) variation of power conversion efficiency and VOC with the PbI2/MAI precursor ratio. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of conductivity-type conversion in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin-films by a composition-dependent self-doping. The condition for such conversion is stated above the arrow whereas the corresponding elemental defects are listed below. Among the possible defects, the one in bold font is expected to be responsible for the conversion.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of cubic AMX3 perovskites. The A, M and X ions are presented in blue, gray and purple circles respectively, (b) correlation between the tolerance factor and crystal structure of perovskite materials, and (c) the 2D layered structure of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22 and 31. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited and 2016 American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Homovalent elements from the periodic table of elements to replace lead in perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram of CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx with TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD as selective contacts, (b) real device images indicating the colors of the photovoltaic devices made with a varied I/Br ratio and (c) J–V characteristics of devices based on CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx (x = 0–3) perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic energy-level diagram of CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3 perovskite, (b and c) relationship between JSC, efficiency and FF, VOC with Sn content (x) for CH3NH3SnxPb1−xI3 perovskite solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Dependence of the band gap of AGeX3 (A: Cs or MA) perovskites on X-site elements and (b) variation of the band gap of AGeI3 perovskites with different A-site cations.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3SrI3 and (b) comparison of the DOS spectra of the respective perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Compiled average PCE performance matrices of doped perovskite solar cells at five different molar ratios with Pb, (b) energy levels of the MA(Pb:Co)I3 materials relative to the vacuum level at different doping concentrations and (c) trend of JSC, VOC and PCE with Co2+ doping concentration in MA(Pb:Co)I3 systems along with a schematic of the current leakage process at high Co2+ doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Steady-state absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 crystals with and without cation dopants as stated in the legends, (b) band gap narrowing as a function of Bi-concentration in the crystal and (c) corresponding band-energies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The estimated band-edge energies of Sb-doped CH3NH3PbI3 with 0–100% of Sb along with the CB and HOMO level energy of TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD respectively, (b) calculated PDOS of pristine and 25% Sb-doped CH3NH3PbI3, and (c) J–V characteristics of PSCs under illumination conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Band diagram of Cu@NiO|CH3NH3Pb(Sb)I3|PCBM heterojunctions without and with the antimony dopant as obtained from the DOS spectra and (b) J–V characteristics of the heterojunction under dark and 1 sun illumination conditions with and without the antimony dopant and with and without loading time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  
J–V plots of (a) p–i–n (up) and n–i–p (down) planar devices under illumination conditions, (b) steady state PL spectra and (c) PL decay profiles of perovskite films with and without Ag+ doping on PEDOT:PSS and TiO2 coated substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

MAMgI3	Simulated	1.5	
70

FAMgI3	Simulated	0.9	
70

CsMgI3	Simulated	1.7	
70

MACaI3	Simulated	2.9	
102

Experimental	3.8	
75

MASrI3	Simulated and experimental	3.6	
75

MABaI3	Simulated	3.3	
75



Homovalent substitution at the lead site

Sn2+	Regular	16.8	0.88	42	6.4	
35#
11.73	0.82	57	5.73	
36#
20.04	0.42	50	4.18	
44

Ge2+	Regular with cesium	5.7	0.07	27	0.11	
66#
Regular with MA	4.0	0.15	30	0.20
Co2+	Inverted	19.82	0.85	74	11.37	
77

Cu2+	18.19	0.93	66	10.14
Fe2+	4.29	0.84	66	2.29
Mg2+	16.39	0.91	73	9.71
Mn2+	17.25	0.91	71	10.38
Ni2+	18.40	0.91	77	9.95
Sn2+	20.40	0.73	71	9.25
Sr2+	19.17	0.88	75	10.81
Zn2+	19.71	0.89	73	10.62
Hg2+	18.1	0.94	76	13.0	
80



Heterovalent substitution at the lead site

Sb3+	Regular	21.82	0.98	69	15.6	
88

Regular	19.2	0.84	56	9.07	
89

Inverted	17.4	1.13	65	12.8	
92

Ag+	Inverted	20.02	0.83	72	12.0	
97

Regular	15.96	1.01	47	7.6

 	Fig. 15  (a) Crystal structure of the defect perovskite A2MX6. M-atoms reside in the gray octahedra formed by X-atoms (purple) and A-atoms (blue) occupy the interstitial sites. Thick black lines represent the unit cell edges. (b) Schematic picture of the A3M2X9 structure. M-atoms are marked with green color while the A- and X-atoms are presented in blue and purple colors respectively. The unit cell is marked with dark lines and the inorganic octahedra are marked with a cyan color. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 and 125, respectively. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society and 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic drawing of the energy level diagram of A3Bi2I9 perovskites and (b) stability performance of Cs3Bi2I9 and MA3Bi2I9 PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 17  The crystal structures of the (a) Dion–Jacobson phase (A[A′n−1BnX3n+1]) and (b) transformed layered halide perovskite after the cation exchange process. In the structures, the light blue octahedra represent BX6 units, the green spheres and the large dark sphere represent A′ and A cations, respectively. In (b), the copper cations and associated halide anions are depicted as navy and purple spheres, respectively. The structures are reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Bismuth halide perovskites

Cs3Bi2I9	0D	Regular	2.15	0.85	60	1.09	
125

Regular	0.18	0.26	37	0.02	
146

MA3Bi2I9	0D	Regular	0.52	0.68	33	0.12	
125

Regular	1.16	0.35	46	0.19	
138

Regular	0.36	0.51	44	0.08
Inverted	0.22	0.66	49	0.10	
139

Regular with anatase TiO2	0.83	0.56	48	0.26	
140

Regular with brookite TiO2	0.57	0.53	30	0.09
Regular (planar)	0.61	0.51	33	0.11
Regular	1.00	0.67	62	0.42	
141

Regular	0.49	0.67	35	0.14
Regular with perovskite in DMF	0.13	0.45	36	0.02	
142

Regular with perovskite in ethanol	0.17	0.84	35	0.05
Inverted	1.39	0.83	34	0.39	
143

Regular	1.10	0.65	50	0.36	
145

Regular	0.94	0.51	61	0.31	
144

Regular	0.49	0.72	32	0.11	
129

MA3Bi2I9−xClx	0D	Regular	0.18	0.04	38	0.003	
125

CsBi3I10	2D	Regular	3.40	0.31	38	0.40	
146

HDABiI5	1D	Regular	0.12	0.40	43	0.03	
148



Antimony halide perovskites

Cs3Sb2I9	0D	Regular	<0.10	0.31	—	<1.0	
128

Inverted	2.91	0.60	48	0.84	
152

MA3Sb2I9	Inverted	1.00	0.89	55	0.5	
149

Inverted	5.41	0.62	61	2.04	
152

Rb3Sb2I9	Regular	2.12	0.55	57	0.66	
151


 	Fig. 18  (a) Electronic band gaps calculated for all compounds in the halide double perovskite family using DFT and (b) comparison of the molecular orbital diagrams of Cs2BiAgCl6 (left) and Cs2BiAgBr6 (right). The atomic one-electron energies are marked by black thick lines. Dark blue and gray rectangles correspond to the Bi-halide and Ag-halide hybrid bands, respectively. The light blue rectangles represent the bands formed in Cs2BiAgCl6 and Cs2BiAgBr6, respectively. Filled and empty rectangles represent VB and CB, respectively. All bands are aligned with respect to the all-electron energy level of the Bi-5d1/2 and then red-shifted by 1.5 eV for visualization purposes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156 and 158, respectively. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Time resolved room-temperature PL and fits for the PL decay time (τ) in the powder and single-crystal forms, and (b) powder XRD patterns after exposure to humidity (55% relative humidity) or light (0.75 sun) of Cs2BiAgBr6. Asterisks in (b) denote signals from the sample holder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Tauc plot as derived from the absorption spectra of MA2KBiCl6 and (b) crystal structure of MA2KBiCl6, obtained from single crystal XRD, viewed along the a axis (atoms in red: Bi, brown: K, green: Cl, white: C, and blue: N). BiCl6 and KCl6 octahedra are shown in blue and purple, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Cs	Bi	Cu	Cl	2.0	Simulated	
156

Br	1.9
I	1.3
Ag	Cl	2.7	Experimental	
163

Br	2.3
I	1.6	Simulated	
156

Au	Cl	1.6	Simulated	
156

Br	1.1
I	0.5
MA	
	K	Cl	3.0	Experimental	
161

Ag	I	2.0	Simulated and experimental	
164

Cs	Sb	Cu	Cl	2.1	Simulated	
156

Br	1.6
I	0.9
Ag	Cl	2.6
Br	1.9
I	1.1
Au	Cl	1.3
Br	0.7
I	0.0
In	Ag	Cl	2.1*	Simulated and experimental	
160

AM	Air mass
ASACP	Antisolvent assisted crystallization solution process
CB	Conduction band
CBE	Conduction band-edge
DFT	Density functional theory
DMF	Dimethylformamide, HCON(CH3)2
DOS	Density of states
DSSCs	Dye-sensitized solar cells

E
F
	Fermi level

E
g
	Band gap
ELF	Electron localization function
ESC	Electron-selective contact
FF	Fill factor
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
HDABiI5	Hexanediammonium bismuth iodide
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HSC	Hole-selective contact
IMPS	Intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy
IMVS	Intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy
IPCE	Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency
ITO	Indium tin oxide

J
SC
	Short-circuit current

J–V characteristics	Current–voltage characteristics
MA	Methylammonium
MAI	Methylammonium iodide
MAPI	Methylammonium lead iodide, CH3NH3PbI3
MBI	Methylammonium iodobismuthate, (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9
NIR	Near infrared
NMP	
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
PbI2	Lead iodide
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate
PL	Photoluminescence
PLQE	PL quantum efficiency
PSC(s)	Perovskite solar cell(s)
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)
RP	Ruddlesden–Popper
Spiro-OMeTAD	2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene
STS	Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TRPL	Time-resolved photoluminescence
UPS	Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
VB	Valence band
VBE	Valence band-edge

V
OC
	Open-circuit voltage
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
