One-dimensional hybrid nanostructures with light-controlled properties  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B822935J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B822935J
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2009, 6447-6457Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOne-dimensional hybrid nanostructures with light-controlled properties

        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yuliang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), CAS Key Laboratory of Organic Solids, Center for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: ylli@iccas.ac.cn;  Fax: +86 10 8261 6576;   Tel: +86 10 6258 8934
bGraduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P. R. China
Received 
      19th December 2008
    , Accepted 19th March 2009First published on 20th April 2009AbstractOne-dimensional organic–inorganic nanostructure has gained extensive attention among photo and photoelectronic applications. Organic and inorganic (metal or semiconductor) nanowires that could, through bottom-up fabrication, as well as template directed synthesis, enable diverse applications in nanoscale electronics and photoelectronics. In comparison, semiconductor organic–inorganic hybrid nanowires have initiated a growing aspect due to their improved photoelectronic and photovoltaic devices as well as light-controlled properties. The motivation of this perspective is to describe the fundamental principles and photonic applications on hybrid nanowires, in which synthesis and light-controlled properties of hybrid organic–inorganic semiconductor nanowires was highlighted.Xiaofeng LiuXiaofeng Liu was born in 1981 in Shanxi, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a Master–Doctor combined program graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research interest focuses on organic–inorganic hybrid materials.Yuliang LiYuliang Li is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and non-covalent supramolecular self-assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photoelectroactive organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.
Introduction
Nowadays, nanotechnology has emerged as a significant role in modern science. Generally speaking, it involves materials that at least one of the dimensions is smaller than 100 nm. Properties of such materials vary sharply depending on their size, shape and surroundings. Such nanomaterials include zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires and nanotubes and two-dimensional (2D) nanofilms and nanowalls. Compared to highly studied 0D1–4 and 2D5–8nanostructures, 1D nanomaterials have become a hot spot of intense research very recently.9–11 1D nanomaterials possess unique optical and photoelectronic properties due to the low dimensionality and high aspect ratio. During the past decades, there is growing considerable attention in such 1D nanostructures because of the diverse functional electronic characteristics and the exciting prospects for utilizing these materials in future electronic and photonic applications.11 The nanowire photo- and electronic devices mainly include field-effect transistors (FET) and logic gates,12–14 light emitting diodes (LEDs),15–18 photodetectors.19,20 Apart from their potential electronic applications, compositionally modulated semiconductor nanowires are interesting for possible applications in solar energy conversion.21–24 Moreover, many researches significantly focused on photovoltaic properties based on nanowire devices, especially on single nanowire.25,26
These applications mainly involve the use of heterostructures in which materials of different compositions meet at interfaces. For example, by attaching n-type and p-type semiconductor nanowires, Lieber and co-workers have made nanoscale light-emitting diodes14 and photovoltaic devices. However, most of these researches were fabricated out of inorganic metals or semiconductors. In comparison with inorganic materials, organic materials have peculiar electronic and optical properties. They are readily synthesized, show remarkable improvements on stability, and can be polyfunctionalized to allow for tailoring their optical, electronic, and chemical properties. There are some preparation methods available for organic nanomaterials, such as precipitation,27evaporation,28 microemulsion,29 and ion coordination.30 Nanoscale materials that integrating both inorganic and organic counterparts are capable of presenting inorganic semiconductors. For the development of nanoscale building blocks for nanometre-sized devices, it is important the optical properties, electrical properties and mechanical flexibility of organic semiconductors with the high stability of that the potential barrier between adjacent constituents has the appropriate current–voltage characteristics. Many new concepts for controlling synthesis hybrid nanocomposites have been studied, such as metal–metal junctions,31 metal–polymer junctions,32 inorganic semiconductor junctions,33 inorganic semiconductor–metal junctions34 and semiconductor–carbon nanotube junctions.35 Specifically, homogeneous hybrid nanowires have been previously used as FET, photodetectors, sensors, and LEDs by assembling both organic and inorganic part of hybrid nanowires into crossed junctions. Although most of the work to date has concentrated on the synthesis of homogenous structures, realization of well-defined 1D heterostructures is generating a great deal of interest for their potential applications. Hitherto, synthesis of 1D heterostructures has been developed through various pathways, including chemical vapour deposition (CVD),36–38 controlled solid–solid reaction,39electrodeposition,40–42 template-assisted synthesis,43–46 and electrospinning technique.47,48 Within these methodologies, a variety of 1D nanostructures have been prepared using porous template as “moulds”,43–46,49 such as anodic alumina oxide (AAO) and nuclear track etch polymer membranes. They have been used to make 1D nanostructures consisted of metals,50,51 semiconductors,52,53 and polymers.54,55 Such bottom-up processes based on solid-phase, solution-phase and gas-phase syntheses, have now emerged as efficient approaches to fabricate high quality optical and photoelectronic elements for device integration, as compared to traditional approaches.
In this perspective, we focus on synthesis of 1D nanostructure of diverse components, including organic π-conjugated molecules, polymers, ion coordinating supramolecules, metal–organic charge transfer complexes, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials, in which light-controlled properties have been investigated by performing photoelectronic devices on single nanowire. Nanotubes, nanobelts, nanorods, and nanowires have been fabricated through a number of techniques that involving thermal evaporation, solution-based methods, and template-assisted synthesis, electrodeposition, and coordination induced polymerization.
This perspective is devoted to reviewing synthesis of 1D hybrid nanomaterials and recent research trend of light-controlled properties based on results in our lab.
Synthesis of 1D nanostructures
Organic π-conjugated molecules present special predominance in conductance, magnetic, optical, and photoelectronic devices.56 Organic π-conjugated molecular systems are readily synthesized and can be polyfunctionalized. Thus, these allow their optical, electronic, and chemical properties to be modulated to fabricate versatile devices,57–60 in comparison with inorganic materials. Such novel 1D nanoscale devices based on organic π-conjugated molecules may utilize diverse functional and self-assembled superstructures to show more developed functions as compared to that observed in bulk materials. This may involve both improved chemical and physical properties that can be exploited for fabricating electronic, photoelectronic, electrochemical, and electromechanical devices with nanometre-scale dimensions.12,61 The assortment of methods for preparing 1D nanostructures based on organic π-conjugated molecules includes vapour phase, solution phase, solid phase synthesis. The following present our efforts on synthesis of 1D nanostructures based on these methods by utilizing organic charge transfer (CT) processes, π–π interactions, light- and coordination-induced polymerization, electrocrystallization, self assembly and template-assisted preparation. Furthermore, we have developed and investigated 1D organic–inorganic hybrid nanostructures by template-assisted methods. These methods can be chosen according to the substance nature, material properties, and dimensions. For examples, the solid phase reaction can be applied for preparing single-crystallized materials. However, it suffers from material decomposing in high temperature. Template-assisted method is often carried out in mild conditions, and the morphologies are well controlled, while it remains limitation for poor solubility materials.
Organic charge transfer (CT) complexes are an important class of organic–inorganic hybrid materials, which have unique photo-, electrical, and photoelectronic properties and show high densities of charge carriers, which allow them to be good candidates for developing nanometre scale materials for nanodevice applications.62 For example, large-area complex nanowires of AgTCNQ (TCNQ: 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane) and CuTCNQ were prepared by organic solid phase reactions that give good and facile control over the uniformity.63 It has been found use for preparation of AgTCNQ and CuTCNQ nanowires on other substrates such as glass and silicon. Fig. 1 shows large-scale AgTCNQ and CuTCNQ nanowires grown on the silver and copper foil through organic vapour–solid phase reaction. The length of the nanowires is about several tens of micrometers, and the diameter of the nanowires is in the range of 40–150 nm. Another example of (BEDT-TTF)2Cu(SCN)2 (BEDT-TTF: bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene) nanorod arrays were also prepared on platinum foil and indium tin oxide (ITO) glass by an electrocrystallization approach, which can easily tune the size and shape by adjusting the growth current density.64 The (BEDT-TTF)2Cu(SCN)2 nanorods are crystalline and grow along the [001] face and the diameter was in the range of 100–200 nm. A novel CT complex (Cu-TCNAQ) based on TCNAQ (tetracyanoanthraquinodimethane) and copper was successfully synthesized very recently, which exhibits very competitive candidates for high performance field emitters.65
 Fig. 1  (A) AgTCNQ nanowires grown on the silver foil with area of 8 × 3.6 cm2. (B) CuTCNQ nanowires grown on the copper foil with area of 14.3 × 3.4 cm2. SEM images: (C) AgTCNQ nanowires. The inset is higher magnification of AgTCNQ nanowires. (D) CuTCNQ nanowires. The inset is higher magnification of CuTCNQ nanowires. Reprinted with permission from: H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120. © 2005 American Chemical Society.63 
In our recent studies, A novel and generic technique has been developed to fabricate the anthracene (AN) nanowires and perylene (PY) nanorods on the basis of solid phase organic reactions and π–π interactions under controlled conditions, in which the temperature and the supersaturation ratio are the two dominant factors in controlling the morphology.27 The lengths of AN nanowires are in the range of several to tens of micrometres, while their diameters are in the range of tens of nanometres to several micrometres (Fig. 2A). The aspect ratio of the corresponding nanowires lies in the range of about 50–100. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the AN nanowires show it to be a monoclinic crystalline system. The PY nanorods were also obtained with lengths in the range of hundreds of nanometres to several micrometers, while their diameters are in the range of tens of nanometres to hundreds of nanometres (Fig. 2B). The XRD patterns of the products reveal the PY nanorods to be an α-perylene crystal. The luminescence study of the nanowires during synthesis displays dramatic differences from those of bulk crystals (Fig. 2C and D). Additionally, growing nanotubes, nanotube junctions, and nanorods of 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ) is achieved through combination of a vapour–solid process and self-assembly.66 The geometrical shapes of the AQ nanotube junctions are mono-cross and poly-cross-shaped, in which there is perfect symmetry between two arms in every nanotube junction.
 Fig. 2  (A) SEM image of the AN nanostructures to show the large quantity of nanowires. (B) SEM image of the PY nanostructures to show the large quantity of nanorods. (C) The luminescence spectra of AN nanowires (solid line) and the bulk crystal of AN (dash line). (D) The luminescence spectra of PY nanorods (solid line) and the bulk crystal of PY (dash line). Reproduced with permission from: H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Gan, T. Jiu, H. Li, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu, B. Xiang, Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10794. © 2003 American Chemical Society.27 
Research on 1D nanostructures of C60 has been studied with intense attention due to their practical advantages in device preparation as well as the inherent interest in new architectures that might show unprecedented properties.67,68 In our studies, we use template-assisted synthesis method for fabrication of C60 1D nanostructures based on C60 powder, which was found to be one of the most efficient ways to fabricate nanotubes with controlled size, shape, and structural properties.67 The pores are arranged in a regular hexagonal lattice. For the preparation, the AAO template was repeatedly dipped into a toluene solution of C60, and the solvent was allowed to dry between dipping. After a number of “dip-and-dry” cycles, the templates were heated to 500 °C for 5 h under an argon atmosphere and then cooled to room temperature. The as-prepared nanotubes of C60 show uniform orientation formed from toluene solution by a “dip-and-dry” method, which have a smooth and clean surface with a diameter of 220–310 nm and a length of 60 μm, which correspond to the diameter of the pores of the membrane and the thickness of the template used (60 μm), respectively. After selectively dissolving the template, the remaining nanotube array still exhibits its hexagonal long-range order. The nanotubes grown from the membrane exhibit a straight alignment perpendicular to the substrate and are well-ordered. The I–V characteristics of the annealed C60nanotubes indicate that a Schottky barrier exists between the electrode and the nanotube, which can be modified by annealing in vacuum.69 The activation energy of the annealed samples is close to the value of a single C60 crystal. In addition, fullerene derivative of C60(O)(OOtBu)4 with excellent solubility in chloroform, can be easily decomposed by heat to prepare fullerene nanotubes by a template-assisted method at room temperature.68 The fullerene nanotubes can be formed at higher temperatures by pyrogenic decomposition. The fullerene-derived nanotubes in the alumina pores have monodisperse diameters of 220–270 nm and a wall thickness of 20–35 nm. Owing to its versatility, such template-assisted approach has been applied to prepare other organic molecular nanostructures by molecular aggregation (i.e.polymers, inorganic, and organic compounds).
The self-assembly of π-conjugated polymers to form diverse morphologies has currently gained considerable attention for applications in sensors, solar cells, and nanoscale devices. The self-assembly of organic molecules with the assistance of noncovalent forces, such as hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, and π-stacking, provides an efficient method for creating nanoscopic and mesoscopic structures.70–74 Among these π-conjugated polymers, polydiacetylenes (PDAs) receive considerable attention because of their quasi-1D electronic structure, fast and large non-linearity responses, and very fast photoconduction properties.75 Recently, we have shown a facile method for self-assembled compounds to form 1D self-polymerized supramolecular nanomaterials under UV illumination.76 In brief, a solution of diacetylenic derivative CYDIOL (6-carbazol-9-ylhexa-2,4-diyl-1-ol) in chloroform was applied onto a piece of copper foil and placed in the dark to let the solvent evaporate. Following, the foil was irradiated with UV light for 2 h. Under such conditions, the CYDIOL self-assembled to form large-area ordered poly-CYDIOL nanowires with a width of 50–120 nm and a length of several micrometers, driven by π-stacking and hydrogen-bonding interactions. As been further studied on constructing 1D nanostructures of π-conjugated molecules, the self-assembly of perylene bisimides with functional groups by hydrogen-bond interactions have been extensively studied. We have systemically investigated the assembly of perylene bisimide derivatives and found that the morphologies of the assembly could be controlled by adjusting the functional groups of the perylene bisimides.77,78Perylene bisimides with bis-urea functions can self-assemble into nanorods through three-centered intermolecular hydrogen-bond interactions between the urea groups and π-stacking interactions of the perylene rings.77 However, perylene bisimides that contain 2,6-diacylaminopyridine groups can assemble into nanofibers by hydrogen-bond interactions between the 2,6-diacylaminopyridine groups and the imide groups and π-stacking interactions of the perylene rings. In the supramolecular system, the solvents can also play an important role to affect the sizes and lengths of the nanofibers.78 Importantly, irradiation of the self-assembled nanostructured films with white light generates a steady, rapid, and highly stable anodic photocurrent response, and the response to on/off cycling is prompt and reproducible.
In a relative study, we have successfully constructed chiral 1D nanostructure out of an achiral organic π-conjugated molecule through ion-coordination induced polymerization. Macroscopic chirality could be realized by a stereoregular arrangement without any chiral auxiliaries, where molecular configuration plays crucial roles. We designed and synthesized a novel achiral tripodterpyridine ligand, in which three terpyridine components were introduced into respective sites of a silicon core to form a tripodal configuration.79 The special conformation of the ligand, together with a strong coordination ability of the terpyridine unit with silver ions is presented to give novel and spontaneous chiral supramolecules with helical 1D nanostrips (Fig. 3). The coordination supramolecules were easily obtained by reactions of ligand and ions at the dichloromethane/water interface. The strips twist in a right- or left-hand helix, with indefinite helical pitch. The width of these strips ranges from 100 to 500 nm and the thickness of a single strand is about 30–40 nm. The observed helical structure is derived from cooperation of rigid tripodal skeleton of the ligand and its unique association mode with Ag cations. The coordination units tilted with respect to the local layer normal and the favored spirals from neighbour to neighbour leads the whole strip to twist into a superhelix. It should be pointed out that inorganic nanoparticles that modified by organic conjugated molecules with functional groups are able to assemble into 1D aggregates through ligand–metal interactions. Several results have proved that π–π interactions between conjugated molecules as well as concentration ratio between ligand and inorganic nanoparticles play dominant roles in formation of 1D nanostructures.80–83
 Fig. 3  (Up) Proposed formation mechanism of the superhelix: free ligand molecules in dichloromethane (a), original flat strips with Ag cations (b), (c), and twisted strips induced by continuous tilt of coordination planes between ligand and Ag cations. Yellow and cyan spheres represented silicon and Ag cations, respectively. Dark blue lines stand for terpyridine parts. (Down) SEM (on Pt substrate) images of helical strips from silver-coordination suprastructures. Reproduced with permission from: X. He, Q. Li, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Song, X. Liu, M. Yuan, W. Xu, H. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Shuai, D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 8063. © 2007 American Chemical Society.79 
Template-assisted growth have been provided as very efficient way for fabrication of heterojunction nanowires, which was previously used to synthesize single-component nanowires. In a typical procedure, one side of AAO template was coated firstly with metal layer. After washing over the unattached substance, one type of component segments was filled into the template either by electrodeposition or by “dip-and-dry” method. Secondly, the template was further filled with another type of segments through corresponding method. Finally, the heterojunction nanowires were released by dissolving the AAO template in aqueous sodium hydroxide solution. Fig. 4 exhibits representative procedures for template growth and release of heterojunction nanowires. By performing such template-assisted procedure, various heterojunction nanowires have been prepared and investigated. For example, Mallouk and co-workers have prepared metal–CdSe–metal nanowires by electrochemical replication of AAO and polycarbonate track etch membranes.46 The semiconductor is sandwiched between metal segments. Dissolving the template yields a colloidal suspension of free-standing nanowires. The end-on junction between the semiconductor and the metal makes it possible to align these nanowires between metal contact pads and to make contact exclusively to the metal segments.
 Fig. 4  Representative pathway for template growth and release of heterojunction nanowires. An AAO template is filled in one side with one type of component segments (A). The other side of template was further filled with another type of segments (B). The heterojunction nanowires were released by selectively etching the AAO template (C). 
Combining chemical and physical advantages of both organic and inorganic semiconductor materials, we have prepared homogenous 1D nanostructures based on organic conjugated molecules and inorganic quantum dots using modified template-assisted method. The growth depends on selecting use of the organic unit of ester ended oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV3) and CdS for formation of organic–inorganic hybrid interface with ordered arrays, which present different optical properties compared with that of single component nanorods.84 The nanorods exhibit same orientation with a diameter of 150–200 nm and length of 2–5 μm. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) reveals the ratio of CdS and OPV3 in the hybrid nanorods is approximate 13 : 1. Importantly, in our experiment, blue-green and red fluorescent emissions are detected on a single hybrid nanorod. It also suggests a homogenous dispersion of CdS and OPV3 in the hybrid nanorod through investigation based on confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images (Fig. 5A) and CLSM fluorescence spectra (Fig. 5a) on a single hybrid nanorod within wide wavelength scale (366–929 nm). The combination of organic–inorganic semiconductor nanorods exhibited a different optical property than the two individual component nanorods, which may be caused by a large amount of homogeneous hybrid interfaces. We have further performed studies on 1D nanostructures of intramolecular charge-transfer (ICT) compounds (TCBD)2OPV3.85 Such D–A-substituted conjugated molecules are highly polarized and widely used as second- or third-order non-linear optical (NLO) materials.86 We have successfully fabricated 1D nanotubes using a re-precipitation method based on intermolecular charge-transfer interaction (i.e. dipole–dipole interactions). along with the formation of nanotubes, they exhibit strong aggregation induced emission (AIE) enhancement property with fluorescence wavelength covered near-infrared (NIR) region at 750–850 nm (Fig. 5B and 5b).
 Fig. 5  (A) CLSM images (λex > 405 nm) of a single CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod collected from 366 nm to 929 nm; (a) The CLSM fluorescence spectra of OPV3 nanorods, CdS nanorods and CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods. Reproduced with permission from: Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Lv, C. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Cui, L. Jiang, H. Liu, S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8223. © 2008 American Chemical Society.84 (B) CLSM images of (TCBD)2OPV3 1D nanostructures excited with laser light at 559 nm. (b) Fluorescence spectra of (TCBD)2OPV3 solution in THF and nanostructure suspension in hexane with excitation wavelength at 470 nm. Inset: Photograph showing the fluorescence emission of (TCBD)2OPV3 solution in THF (left) and nanostructure suspension in hexane (right) under 365 nm illumination. Reproduced with permission from: J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Lv, M. Zhu, C. Huang, W. Zhou, X. Yin, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ye, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4231. © 2008 American Chemical Society.85 
More recently, we have attempted to construct p–n heterojunction organic–inorganic nanowires by performing template-assisted synthesis utilizing ordered porous AAO templates and chose a p-type organic semiconductor of polypyrrole (PPY) and an n-type inorganic semiconductor of CdS.87 The CdS–PPY p–n heterojunction nanowires present well-defined interfaces, smooth surface with a diameter of 200–400 nm (Fig. 6A). Clear interface can be observed between organic and inorganic segments on each single nanowire (Fig. 6B). Element mapping on single nanowire (Fig. 6C) reveal an end-to-end structure, which shows the dispersion of C element (green) and Cd element (red). EDS results collected from the two different parts of the hybrid nanowires clearly display the detailed chemical components, which indicated that the hybrid nanowire was indeed composed of CdS and PPY. The segmented structure of the CdS–PPY hybrid nanowire can also be confirmed by an optical image (Fig. 6D) and a fluorescence image (Fig. 6E), in which red part is attributed to CdS, for its surface-trap emission ranged from 570 to 670 nm under the excitation of a 405 nm laser. The dark part corresponds to PPY because PPY does not exhibit any fluorescence emission under excitation. All of the above data are consistent with the asymmetric structure within the single nanowire.
 Fig. 6  
          SEM images of CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowires: (A) side view image of CdS–PPY nanowires inside the AAO template; (B) typical image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (C) element mapping of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (D) optical image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (E) fluorescent image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire excited by a 405 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198. © 2008 American Chemical Society.87 
Light-controlled properties
The motivation for fabrication of 1D nanostructures based on diverse materials has been pursued in many research fields. 1D semiconductor nanostructures have attracted specific attention as building blocks for nanoscale electronic and photoelectronic devices. For example, metal, inorganic semiconductor, organic polymer nanowires hold great promise for nanoscale electronic devices and photon-integrated systems due to their potential properties that function both as miniaturized device components for logic, detector, and optoelectronic applications and also as electrical interconnects.88,89 Specifically, organic and inorganic nanowires have also attracted increasing interests as building components for integrating photon and enabling photon-energy conversion in nanoscale systems, since they can perform as field-effect transistors,90,91 emissive devices,15–18 photodetectors,19,20,92 and solar cells.22,24,93 With respect to the latter, although many researchers have focused on photo-related applications that perform on macroscopic systems for years, nanoscale manipulation on such devices has been investigated very recently. A few results corresponding to photoconductance measurements have been reported for a range of single inorganic nanowire devices. While inorganic nanowires and carbon nanotubes have been explored in depth, the challenge of controlled fabrication of 1D nanostructures based on organic molecular materials as well as organic/inorganic hybrid materials suitable for integrated photoelectronic applications has yet to be as comprehensively addressed. In the following context, we have summarized light-controlled properties based on single nanowire photoelectronic devices, which exhibit dramatically different behaviours as compared to that in macroscopic scale or in bulk materials. The devices that investigated in recent researches mainly include photodetectors, photovoltaic devices, FET-based optical switches, and light-controlled diodes.
As is equally significant to light generation in nanoscale devices, detecting optical inputs and processing them as electrical outputs hold considerable promise in photoelectronic devices. For nanowire photodetector, a nanowire is configured to monitor the photo-induced current as a function of photon intensity. This layout allows a constant bias across the nanowire to be applied, and using an optical flux to switch the nanowire from an insulating to a conducting state. Due to a proportional relationship between the photocurrent and the number of carriers produced along with an optical excitation process, the single nanowire devices can be performed as linear photodetector. The photodetectors started with Yang's group on studies of highly sensitive nanowire switches by exploring the photoconducting properties of individual semiconducting ZnO nanowires.61 Upon illuminated with ultraviolet light intermittently, the conductivity of the single ZnO nanowires can be reversibly switch between “OFF” and “ON” states, behaving as an photodetector to wavelengths shorter than the band gap of ZnO. Another study on ZnO nanorod devices by Harnack reveals a photoresponsive current rectification effect, with up to 2 orders of magnitude increase of the diode current in the forward bias at 2 V under 366 nm light irradiation.94 This study suggests that the interface properties between the gold electrode and the ZnO nanorod have a dominant impact on the transport properties.
After the template-assisted synthesis was developed, nanowires with diverse components have been fabricated such as metals, semiconductors, organic small molecules, and polymers. Although the single-component nanowires have been intensively investigated in photodetective property, relative work was started very recently on heterojunction nanowires by Mallouk and co-workers.46 They have prepared Au–CdSe–Au and Ni–CdSe–Ni heterojunction nanowires and performed nanowire photodetector. Under intermittent light and dark conditions, I–V characteristics of a single 350 nm diameter Au–CdSe–Au nanowire exhibits that the light and dark curves are both non-linear with a conductance gap near the origin (Fig. 7). The curve with higher values of current is a scan from 10 to −10 V under white-light illumination from a microscope objective. A change in conductivity by a factor of about 15 was observed in both the positive and negative branches of the I–V curve when the light was alternately switched on and off. This behaviour is consistent with an increase in the number of free carriers in the light, as expected from the optical properties of both bulk and nanoscale CdSe. It also shows the switching effect within 5 s intervals upon the light on and off while continuously varying the bias between the two contacts. The response with respect to light illumination is rapid in both increase (∼1 s) and decay (∼0.2 s). The mechanism was proved to be a role of band-gap excitation in the photoconduction.95,96 specifically, the number of free carriers increase owing to white light irradiation, which are quenched rapidly in the dark through recombination and transport under the applied bias. Similar photoeffects were observed with Ni–CdSe–Ni nanowires and with 70 nm diameter wires of both compositions.
 Fig. 7  I–V curves of an Au–CdSe–Au nanowire taken in the light and dark and with the light switched on and off at 5 s intervals during the voltage sweep. Reprinted with permission from: D. J. Peña, J. K. N. Mbindyo, A. J. Carado, T. E. Mallouk, C. D. Keating, B. Razavi and T. S. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7458. © 2002 American Chemical Society.46 
Organic compounds possess excellent chemical and physical properties, which hold potential applications in optical, electrical and photo-responsive devices. Nanowires composing organic components and/or inorganic parts may lead to new perspectives on nanoscale photoelectronic devices with more developed and diverse performance. In particular, semiconducting polymers attract due to their chemically tunable optical and electronic properties, as well as their facility for solution processing.97 However, the technology for fabrication of 1D nanostructures based on such polymers require both suitable methods and good control over critical parameters include diameter, length, morphology and chemical composition. Besides, template-assisted approach using solution-based or molten material does not need specialized apparatus and is widely applicable in a range of various materials.98 Redmond's group reported synthesis and photoconductive properties of poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(bithiophene)] (F8T2) nanowire devices.19Fig. 8a shows representative top-contact single nanowire device with interelectrode gaps of ca. 5 μm. The currents measured under intermittent illumination at 405 nm exhibit good accordance with that measured under continual dark condition and light illumination (Fig. 8b). The responsivity of F8T2 nanowire is around 0.4 mA W−1 and external quantum efficiency of approximately 0.1% under monochromatic illumination. The results demonstrate enable these novel nanostructures as ultra-miniature devices with potential in photon integration systems.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a top-contact nanowire device. (b) I–V characteristics of a top-contacted F8T2 nanowire acquired in the dark (blue line) and under 405 nm illumination (red line). Reversible switching in I–V data measured under manually chopped 405 nm illumination is also shown (green line). Inset: optical microscopy image of a typical top-contacted F8T2 nanowire device. Scale bar: 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from: G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379. © 2006 Wiley-VCH.19 
Lee et al. reported a systematic study on the photoconductive characteristics of single-crystal methyl-squarylium (MeSq) nanowires.99 The nanowires were synthesized via a simple solution route. By performing single nanowire devices, MeSq nanowires show high sensitivity to light, and the conductance increases by almost three orders of magnitude under illumination. Moreover, the MeSq nanowire photodetector shows spectral sensitivity dependence on light intensity. Fig. 9 shows I–V curves of a thin MeSq nanowire (diameter = 180 nm) device measured in the dark and under different illumination intensities at an excitation wavelength of 600 nm. The MeSq nanowire behaves highly insulating in the dark, while under illumination, the photocurrent increases almost by 3 orders of magnitude as compared to that in the dark. Carrier traps in the nanowire that distributed homogenously within the energy gap are responsible for fractional power dependence. The surrounding conditions as well as diameter of the nanowires also play significant role on the photoelectrical properties of the nanowire devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) I–V curves of a single MeSq nanowire measured in dark (gray line) and under light irradiation of varying intensity at 600 nm (black lines). (b) Photocurrent at different light intensity under an excitation wavelength of 600 nm and a bias voltage of 20 V. Reprinted with permission from: X. Zhang, J. Jie, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Luo, Z. He, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, C. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2427. © 2008 Wiley-VCH.99 
The ability of solar-to-electric energy conversion emerges as major point in modern science. Many of these strategies utilize the sequence of physical processes consisting light induced electron-hole pair generation, charge separation, and carrier transportation in these respective phases. With respect to such principles, both organic and inorganic materials have been used to demonstrate this approach.100,101 Since the nanowires are currently used as photo-responsive devices, the researches on photovoltaic properties of nanowires, especially single nanowire, have been actualized very recently on semiconductor nanowires and p–n junction nanowires. The good control over structure and composition of semiconductor nanowires and nanocrystals make them perform attractive features as building blocks for understanding factors determining and potentially improving photovoltaic device efficiency.101–103 For the dye-absorbed nanowire array, the electron transport can be improved along the nanowires by avoiding the hopping of surface-attached dyes. Moreover, the nanowire morphology can increase the likelihood that all photo-generated electrons have a direct connection to the collection electrode. Holding similar motivation, Norris and Aydil have examined the combination of CdSe QDs and ZnO nanowire arrays in a photovoltaic cell.24 Remarkable photocurrent is observed from quantum dots sensitized nanowire solar cell, in which the morphology of the nanowires provides the photoinjected electrons with a direct electrical pathway to the photoanode.
Fundamental studies of modulated nanowire photovoltaics are supposed to allow the intrinsic limits of nanoscale elements to be defined, where such elements hold substantial promise for the development of nanoscale solar energy conversion systems. Former studies on photovoltaic devices have been exploited based on chemically synthesized silicon nanowires (SiNWs).26 In recent research, Lieber et al. have performed photovoltaic devices on single coaxial p-type/intrinsic/n-type (p–i–n) siNWs.25 I–V characteristics both under dark and illumination suggest clear and reproducible diode characteristics for the p–i–n and p–n SiNW devices (Fig. 10). Under simulated one-sun irradiation, optimized p–i–n SiNW devices exhibited an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.29 V, a maximum short-circuit current density (Isc) of 3.5 mA cm−2, and maximum efficiency of 0.5%. The results show a systematic improvement in both Voc and Isc with increasing i-segment length, where the largest increase is observed in moving from the p–n to p–i–n structural motif. Additionally, they have performed devices based on tandem single SiNW solar cell (called p–i–n+–p+–i–n), which reveals a Voc that is on average 57% larger than the equivalent single junction p–i–n device.
 Fig. 10  
          Transport properties of p–n and p–i–n diodes. (A) Dark I–V characteristics of p–i–n SiNWs with different i-region lengths; red, green, and black curves correspond to i-segment lengths of 0, 2, and 4 μm, respectively. (Inset) SEM image of p–i–n SiNW device with i-length of 2 μm; scale bar is 4 μm. (B) Light I–V characteristics for the i-length = 0, 2, and 4 μm devices in panel A; the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G. Reprinted with permission from: T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456. © 2008 American Chemical Society.25 
Photovoltaic devices based on organic bulk heterojunction materials have been intensively studied for years. The most efficient performance was achieved through bulk heterojunction solar cells consisting of low polymer semiconductors and C60 derivatives.104–106 In comparison with the traditional technique, Jenekhe et al. have found an elevated power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.0% (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5, 10 mm2 device area, in air) arising from photovoltaic cells comprising poly(3-butylthiophene) nanowires (P3BT–NW) as the donor and C71-PCBM as the acceptor.95 The relative work based on novel organic nanowire devices expands new aspect of promising materials and architecture designs for efficient organic heterojunction solar cells.
As is concerned in another aspect, field effect transistor (FET) behaves as an exponential charge-to-current converter. by trapping charges on surfaces, it proves a potential effect on the characteristics of the device, thus leads to metastability and hysteretic behavioir. Here, semiconducting 1D nanostructure-based FETs consisting of redox-active molecules have been proved to show spectacular memory effects with long retention times and multiple levels.107,108 Recent researches on the light-control of the surface state of redox-active molecule-coated FETs have been carried out. Such devices were capable of both as light-controlled memories and as switches.91,109–111 Bouchiat's studies on porphyrin-coated SiNWs reveal that porphyrin-coated SiNW–FETs are efficient optical switches, with transfer characteristics tunable by both the gate voltage and illumination.112 The hybrid nanowires were facilely prepared by coating porphyrin derivatives on SiNWs. Due to hole injection from organic molecule to the SiNW, the conductance drops upon coating with porphyrin. However, large, stable, and reproducible conductances increase can be observed upon white light illumination, which mainly due to photo-induced negative charge transfers from the porphyrin to the SiNW (Fig. 11). The author suggests that light-induced reduction of porphyrin enable a partial decrease of the hole surface density.
 Fig. 11  (a) Transfer characteristics of a back-gated SiNW–FET, before (black curves) and after porphyrin coating (purple curves). Dashed curves represent values obtained in the dark, continuous curves represent values obtained under white light illumination of about 100 W m−2. All data are taken in vacuum at room temperature at a gate sweeping rate of 0.3 V s−1 and a constant drain–source voltage of 50 mV. (b) Drain current record of a porphyrin-coated SiNW–FET with source–drain voltage (Vds) at 20 mV and back-gate voltage (Vg) at 50 V. Upon illumination (shaded periods) the conductance of the device is largely and reproducibly enhanced. Reprinted with permission from: C. B. Winkelmann, I. Ionica, X. Chevalier, G. Royal, C. Bucher and V. Bouchiat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1454. © 2007 American Chemical Society.112 
In other word, porphyrin layer turns into an excited state upon illumination, and thus depressing the charge transfer from coating layer to semiconductor. The charge transfers between semiconducting channel and coating porphyrin exhibit exactly opposite signs as compared to former porphyrin-coated CNT–FETs,111 which mainly arise from the p/n nature of the respective majority carriers involved. Commonly, organic chromophore-sensitized SiNW–FETs hold potential promise for application in sensing devices. Such top-down methodology for sensitization of semiconductor nanowire allow straightforward integration of these nanoscale devices into large array and open new aspect to systematic photoelectronic researches of photoresponsive molecules.
As summarized in the context for the template-assisted synthesis of mono- and heterojunction nanowires, single nanowire devices have been designed and fabricated. We have performed electrical conductivity measurements on a single C60nanotube fabricated via template growth technique.69 It shows that C60nanotubes have very low dark conductivity at room temperature. However, we found that the C60nanotube exhibits a large photoconductivity under light illumination. Fig. 12a shows the I–V curves of a single C60nanotube measured at 50 °C. the photocurrent increases with increasing the intensity of illuminating light, which reaches almost two order magnitude change at a low bias around 0.4 V. temperature-dependent measurements on the photoconductivity are also performed under ∼40 W light illumination (Fig. 12b). The photocurrent shows increases with elevation of temperature. The results reveal more potential candidate of the C60nanotubes in the construction of 1D nanoscale optical nanodevices.
 Fig. 12  (a) The photocurrent versus voltage of a single C60nanotube measured at 50 °C. The nanotube was illuminated with a bulb through an optical fiber. (b) The temperature dependence of the photoconductivity excited under 40 W light between 40 and 200 °C. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Xing, G. Jing, J. Xu, D. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 263117. © 2005 American Institute of Physics.69 
In a very recent work, we have examined photoconductivity on a single p–n heterojunction nanowire.87 The p–n heterojunction nanowire devices exhibit distinct photoresponsive rectifying effect, that the conducting property of the organic–inorganic p–n junction nanowire can be tuned by changing the intensities of incident light (Fig. 13). The nanowire with well-defined surfaces and interfaces that consists of PPY as p-type semiconductor segment and CdS nanoparticles as n-type semiconductor part, which was readily prepared by modified template-assisted approach. The device was fabricated by a top-contact configuration. Based on insulating in the dark with the resistivity of 1.055 × 107 Ω cm, and remarkable photoresponse can be observed upon white light illumination. The I–V characterization of single PPY nanowire suggests a semiconductor behaviour with a resistivity of 65.2 Ω cm. While the electrical properties of p–n heterojunction nanowire do not show any diode effect, we have observed unique light-controlled diode effect arising from single CdS–PPY nanowire. The typical I–V curves of p–n similar devices, individual CdS nanowire shows highly junctions within the organic–inorganic hybrid nanowires were performed under irradiation of different light intensity. Considerable current rectification emerges along the CdS–PPY nanowire at ambient condition. The conductivity of the CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowire increases with respect to incremental incident light intensity. With an applied bias of 5.0 V, the rectification ratio of the diode increased from 8.0 to 13 along with the enhancement of light intensity from 1.12 to 5.76 mW cm−2. The rectification ratio of the diode at 10.0 V is the same as the ratio at 5.0 V (about 13), under 5.76 mW cm−2 illuminations. We believe that the new aspect on organic–inorganic p–n junction nanowires may have great influence in current research on both basic and device manipulation within nanometre scale.
 Fig. 13  Typical current–voltage (I–V) curves for a single CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowire under light illumination with different intensities at room temperature. Inset: SEM image and EDS line analysis of the measured nanodevice. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198. © 2008 American Chemical Society.87 
Conclusion and perspective
1D nanoscale structures have emerged as intriguing materials both in fundamental researches and potential applications based on photo-related properties. Feasibility of fabrication for 1D nanomaterials facilitates device manipulation at the nanoscale. Performance of such nanoscale devices significantly depend on good control over the morphology and counterparts optimization. We have summarized in this perspective the synthesis of 1D nanostructures based on diverse components including semiconductors, organic π-conjugated molecules, polymers, ion coordinating supramolecules, metal–organic charge transfer complexes, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials. The devices based on such materials require both morphology control and structure manipulation, which can be satisfied through structure modulation including nanotubes, nanobelts, nanorods, and nanowires. The methodologies leading to such diverse 1D nanostructures involve either physical or chemical pathways summarizing as thermal evaporation, solution-based methods, re-precipitation, template-assisted synthesis, electrodeposition, and coordination induced polymerization. Such approaches have open up new possibilities in the construction of 1D nanomaterials based on organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
We suppose that the different hierarchies of self-organization based on organic and inorganic 1D nanostructure may offer a unique platform as novel photonic elements for producing nanoscale devices. In comparison to the lithographically defined counterparts, chemically synthesized 1D nanostructures are free-standing, mechanically flexible entities that enable micromanipulation to facilitate further augment the research of novel physical and biological phenomena. As we have summarized, 1D-nanostructures based on organic–inorganic hybrid materials have been applied in photodetectors, light-controlled rectifiers, photovoltaic devices, photoresponsive FET, and light-controlled p-n junction diodes. To further utilize on the novelty of organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, several issues must be emphasized. First, the intrinsic organizations of organic and inorganic counterparts need to be solved. The interaction forces between each part may infinitely influence the performance of nanodevices. Second, fabrication pathways leading to hybrid nanostructures should be optimized. The integration of such photonic elements into useful architectures vary significantly depending on the morphologies and synthesis methods. Last, geometric perfection, size distribution, and shape uniformity are also important issues for developing devices based on 1D nanostructures. Despite these current limitations on both elements optimization and morphologies control, such organic–inorganic hybrid 1D nanostructures are definitely promising materials for future photonic devices with improved performances.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (20531060 and 10874187) and the National Basic Research 973 Program of China.
Notes and references
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Appl. Phys. A, 1991, 53, 465 CrossRef .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 Search PubMed .
A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 1 CrossRef CAS .
T. Someya, R. Werner, A. Forchel, M. Catalano, R. Cingolani and Y. Arakawa, Science, 1999, 285, 1905 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Gerard, B. Sermage, B. Gayral, B. Legrand, E. Costard and V. Thierry–Mieg, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 1110 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Nakamura, W. Takamatsu, M. Yamanishi, Y. Lee and T. Ishihara, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 3380 CrossRef CAS .

          B. R. Nag, Physics of Quantum Well DeVices, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2000 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1295 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 85 CAS .
J. T. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 851 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Duan, Y. Cui, L. J. Lauhon, K.-H. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 630 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, Y. Li, S. Gradecak, D. Wang, C. J. Barrelet and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1975 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Choi, H.-K. Seong, J. Chang, K.-I. Lee, Y.-J. Park, J.-J. Kim, S.-K. Lee, R. He, T. Kuykendall and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1351 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Gudiksen, L. J. Lauhon, J. Wang, D. C. Smith and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 415, 617 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. F. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Small, 2005, 1, 142 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hayden, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 352 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Chen, W. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Pern and A. Mascarenhas, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3248 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5424 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Cheung, C. T. Yip, A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung and W. K. Chan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 555 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache–Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, D. B. Turner–Evans, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 710 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li, L. Jiang, H. Luo, S. Xiao, H. Fang, H. Li, D. Zhu, D. Yu, J. Xu and B. Xiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13370 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, S. Wang, H. Gan, J. Li, N. Wang, X. He and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3639 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 947 .
Y. Li, N. Wang, H. Gan, H. Liu, H. Li, Y. Li, X. He, C. Huang, S. Cui, S. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 9686 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Wang, M.-L. Tian, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lahav, E. A. Weiss, Q.-B. Xu and G. M. Whitesides, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2166 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Wang, J.-H. Song, P. Li, J. H. Ryou, R. D. Dupuis, C. J. Summers and Z.-L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7920 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, B. K. Kelley and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12738 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hu, O. Y. Min, P. D. Yang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1999, 399, 48 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Bjork, B. J. Ohlsson, T. Sass, A. I. Persson, C. Thelander, M. H. Magnusson, K. Deppert, L. R. Wallenberg and L. Samuelson, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 87 CrossRef .
L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, C. L. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 420, 57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Ichihashi, E. Landree, F. Nihey and S. Iijima, Science, 1999, 285, 1719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. C. Kung, D. K. Taggart, C. Xiang, F. Yang, M. A. Brown, A. G. Güell, T. J. Kruse, J. C. Hemminger and R. M. Penner, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2447 CrossRef CAS .
G.-R. Li, Y.-X. Tong, L.-G. Kay and G.-K. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8965 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5260 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Tan, A. S. M. Chong, X. S. E. Tang and H. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4964 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Rice, D. C. Arnold, M. T. Shaw, D. Iacopina, A. J. Quinn, H. Amenitsch, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 133 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Yi, H. Pan, J. Y. Lin, J. Ding, Y. P. Feng, S. Thongmee, T. Liu, H. Gong and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1170 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Peña, J. K. N. Mbindyo, A. J. Carado, T. E. Mallouk, C. D. Keating, B. Razavi and T. S. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7458 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, H. Wu and W. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3968 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Sun, D. Lin, R. Zhang, C. Zhang and W. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1 .
D. Xu, X. Shi, G. Guo, L. Gui and Y. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. M. Garcia, R. M. Dorin, H. Wang, Y. Qiu, E. N. Coker, W. A. Steen, J. E. Miller and J. A. Shelnutt, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, G. Sauer, P. Göring, K. Nielsch, R. B. Wehrspohn and U. Gösele, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 5, 1100 Search PubMed .
C.-L. Hsu, S.-J. Chang, Y.-R. Lin, S.-Y. Tsai and I.-C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3571 RSC .
S. L. Sewell, R. D. Rutledge and D. W. Wright, Dalton Trans., 2008, 29, 3857 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5260 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cui, H. Liu, L. Gan, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2918 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, H. Liu and Y. Li, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 639 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Int. J. Nanotechnology, 2007, 4, 197 Search PubMed .
L. Jiang and Y. Li, J. Porph. Phthal., 2007, 11, 299 Search PubMed .
H. Kind, H. Q. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bendikov, F. Wudl and D. F. Perepichka, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 14899 .
H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Liu, S. Cui, C. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Yu, Y. Li and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3544 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cui, Y. Li, Y. Guo, H. Liu, Y. Song, J. Xu, J. Lv, M. Zhu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Li, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, B. Xiang, Y. Chen and D. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 7744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Gan, T. Jiu, H. Li, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu, B. Xiang and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10794 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gan, H. Liu, Y. Li, L. Gan, L. Jiang, T. Jiu, N. Wang, X. He and D. Zhu, Carbon, 2005, 43, 205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, G. Jing, J. Xu, D. Yu, H. Liu and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 263117 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, Y. Li, H. Gong, M. Liu, S. Xiao, H. Liu, H. Li, S. Xiao and D. Zhu, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 1179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, Y. Li, H. Fang, H. Li, H. Liu, Z. Shi, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 3063 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Q. Xiao, H. M. Li, Y. L. Li, H. B. Liu, F. S. Lu, J. P. Zhuang and D. B. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6256 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ye, X. Xu, X. Li, H. Liu, C. Huang, S. Cui and D. Zhu, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2785 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 222 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gan, H. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, S. Wang, T. Jiu, N. Wang, X. He, D. Yu and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12452 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, L. Jiang, H. Gan, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhuang, F. Lu and D. Zhu, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 9049 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Zhuang, H. Liu, Y. Li, F. Lu, H. Gan, T. Jiu, N. Wang, X. He and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 1210 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, Q. Li, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Song, X. Liu, M. Yuan, W. Xu, H. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Shuai and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 8063 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. He, T. Jiu, M. Yuan, J. Xu, J. Lv, H. Liu and Y. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 906 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Zhu, S. Chen, M. Yuan, Y. Guo, Y. Song, H. Liu and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11967 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Wang, Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Xu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Liu, M. Yuan, J. Li, Y. Guo, J. Xu, M. Zhu, J. Lv, H. Liu and Y. Li, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Lv, C. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Cui, L. Jiang, H. Liu and S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Lv, M. Zhu, C. Huang, W. Zhou, X. Yin, H. Liu, Y. Li and J. Ye, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4231 CrossRef CAS .
T. Michinobu, C. Boudon, J.-P. Gisselbrecht, P. Seiler, B. Frank, N. N. P. Moonen, M. Gross and F. Diederich, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 1889 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Pure Appl. Chem., 2004, 76, 2051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2004, 34, 83 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tans, R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 393, 49 CrossRef CAS .
J. Borghetti, V. Derycke, S. Lenfant, P. Chenevier, A. Filoramo, M. Goffman, D. Vuillaume and J.-P. Bourgoin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2535 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abdula and M. Shim, ACS nano, 2008, 2, 2154 CrossRef CAS .
O. Harnack, C. Pacholski, H. Weller, A. Yasuda and J. M. Wessels, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1097 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 87, 1361 .
J. Vaitkus, R. Jasinskaite, V. Kazlauskiene, J. Miskinis, J. Sinius and A. Zindulis, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 212 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS .
M. Steinhart, J. H. Wendorff, A. Greiner, R. B. Wehrspohn, K. Nielsch, J. Schilling, J. Choi and U. Gosele, Science, 2002, 296, 1997 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Jie, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Luo, Z. He, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, C. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2427 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsakalakos, J. Balch, J. Fronheiser, B. A. Korevaar, O. Sulima and J. Rand, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233117 CrossRef .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blouin, A. Michaud, D. Gendron, S. Wakim, E. Blair, R. Neagu–Plesu, M. Belletête, G. Durocher, Y. Tao and M. Leclerc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 732 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Günes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, W. Fan, B. Lei, D. Zhang, S. Han, T. Tang, X. Liu, Z. Liu, S. Asano, M. Meyyappan, J. Han and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1950 .
C. Li, J. Ly, B. Lei, W. Fan, D. Zhang, J. Han, M. Meyyappan, M. Thompson and C. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, L. Huang, S. O'Brien, P. Kim and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15045 CrossRef CAS .
A. Star, Y. Lu, K. Bradley and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hecht, R. Ramirez, M. Briman, E. Artukovic, K. Chichak, J. F. Stoddart and G. Grüner, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2031 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Winkelmann, I. Ionica, X. Chevalier, G. Royal, C. Bucher and V. Bouchiat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1454 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
Xiaofeng Liu	Xiaofeng Liu was born in 1981 in Shanxi, China. He is now studying at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences as a Master–Doctor combined program graduate student under the supervision of Prof. Yuliang Li. His research interest focuses on organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
Yuliang Li	Yuliang Li is a Professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests lie in the fields of functional organic molecular systems, covalent and non-covalent supramolecular self-assembly systems, and fullerene chemistry, with particular focus on the design and synthesis of photoelectroactive organic–inorganic hybrid materials and nanoscale and nano-structural materials.

 	Fig. 1  (A) AgTCNQ nanowires grown on the silver foil with area of 8 × 3.6 cm2. (B) CuTCNQ nanowires grown on the copper foil with area of 14.3 × 3.4 cm2. SEM images: (C) AgTCNQ nanowires. The inset is higher magnification of AgTCNQ nanowires. (D) CuTCNQ nanowires. The inset is higher magnification of CuTCNQ nanowires. Reprinted with permission from: H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120. © 2005 American Chemical Society.63	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) SEM image of the AN nanostructures to show the large quantity of nanowires. (B) SEM image of the PY nanostructures to show the large quantity of nanorods. (C) The luminescence spectra of AN nanowires (solid line) and the bulk crystal of AN (dash line). (D) The luminescence spectra of PY nanorods (solid line) and the bulk crystal of PY (dash line). Reproduced with permission from: H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Xiao, H. Gan, T. Jiu, H. Li, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu, B. Xiang, Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10794. © 2003 American Chemical Society.27	 

 	Fig. 3  (Up) Proposed formation mechanism of the superhelix: free ligand molecules in dichloromethane (a), original flat strips with Ag cations (b), (c), and twisted strips induced by continuous tilt of coordination planes between ligand and Ag cations. Yellow and cyan spheres represented silicon and Ag cations, respectively. Dark blue lines stand for terpyridine parts. (Down) SEM (on Pt substrate) images of helical strips from silver-coordination suprastructures. Reproduced with permission from: X. He, Q. Li, Y. Li, N. Wang, Y. Song, X. Liu, M. Yuan, W. Xu, H. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Shuai, D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 8063. © 2007 American Chemical Society.79	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative pathway for template growth and release of heterojunction nanowires. An AAO template is filled in one side with one type of component segments (A). The other side of template was further filled with another type of segments (B). The heterojunction nanowires were released by selectively etching the AAO template (C).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) CLSM images (λex > 405 nm) of a single CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorod collected from 366 nm to 929 nm; (a) The CLSM fluorescence spectra of OPV3 nanorods, CdS nanorods and CdS–OPV3 hybrid nanorods. Reproduced with permission from: Y. Guo, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Xu, J. Lv, C. Huang, M. Zhu, S. Cui, L. Jiang, H. Liu, S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8223. © 2008 American Chemical Society.84 (B) CLSM images of (TCBD)2OPV3 1D nanostructures excited with laser light at 559 nm. (b) Fluorescence spectra of (TCBD)2OPV3 solution in THF and nanostructure suspension in hexane with excitation wavelength at 470 nm. Inset: Photograph showing the fluorescence emission of (TCBD)2OPV3 solution in THF (left) and nanostructure suspension in hexane (right) under 365 nm illumination. Reproduced with permission from: J. Xu, X. Liu, J. Lv, M. Zhu, C. Huang, W. Zhou, X. Yin, H. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ye, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4231. © 2008 American Chemical Society.85	 

 	Fig. 6  
          SEM images of CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowires: (A) side view image of CdS–PPY nanowires inside the AAO template; (B) typical image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (C) element mapping of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (D) optical image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire; (E) fluorescent image of a single CdS–PPY nanowire excited by a 405 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198. © 2008 American Chemical Society.87	 

 	Fig. 7  I–V curves of an Au–CdSe–Au nanowire taken in the light and dark and with the light switched on and off at 5 s intervals during the voltage sweep. Reprinted with permission from: D. J. Peña, J. K. N. Mbindyo, A. J. Carado, T. E. Mallouk, C. D. Keating, B. Razavi and T. S. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7458. © 2002 American Chemical Society.46	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a top-contact nanowire device. (b) I–V characteristics of a top-contacted F8T2 nanowire acquired in the dark (blue line) and under 405 nm illumination (red line). Reversible switching in I–V data measured under manually chopped 405 nm illumination is also shown (green line). Inset: optical microscopy image of a typical top-contacted F8T2 nanowire device. Scale bar: 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from: G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379. © 2006 Wiley-VCH.19	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) I–V curves of a single MeSq nanowire measured in dark (gray line) and under light irradiation of varying intensity at 600 nm (black lines). (b) Photocurrent at different light intensity under an excitation wavelength of 600 nm and a bias voltage of 20 V. Reprinted with permission from: X. Zhang, J. Jie, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Luo, Z. He, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, C. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2427. © 2008 Wiley-VCH.99	 

 	Fig. 10  
          Transport properties of p–n and p–i–n diodes. (A) Dark I–V characteristics of p–i–n SiNWs with different i-region lengths; red, green, and black curves correspond to i-segment lengths of 0, 2, and 4 μm, respectively. (Inset) SEM image of p–i–n SiNW device with i-length of 2 μm; scale bar is 4 μm. (B) Light I–V characteristics for the i-length = 0, 2, and 4 μm devices in panel A; the illumination intensity was 100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5 G. Reprinted with permission from: T. J. Kempa, B. Tian, D. R. Kim, J. Hu, X. Zheng and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3456. © 2008 American Chemical Society.25	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Transfer characteristics of a back-gated SiNW–FET, before (black curves) and after porphyrin coating (purple curves). Dashed curves represent values obtained in the dark, continuous curves represent values obtained under white light illumination of about 100 W m−2. All data are taken in vacuum at room temperature at a gate sweeping rate of 0.3 V s−1 and a constant drain–source voltage of 50 mV. (b) Drain current record of a porphyrin-coated SiNW–FET with source–drain voltage (Vds) at 20 mV and back-gate voltage (Vg) at 50 V. Upon illumination (shaded periods) the conductance of the device is largely and reproducibly enhanced. Reprinted with permission from: C. B. Winkelmann, I. Ionica, X. Chevalier, G. Royal, C. Bucher and V. Bouchiat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1454. © 2007 American Chemical Society.112	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The photocurrent versus voltage of a single C60nanotube measured at 50 °C. The nanotube was illuminated with a bulb through an optical fiber. (b) The temperature dependence of the photoconductivity excited under 40 W light between 40 and 200 °C. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Xing, G. Jing, J. Xu, D. Yu, H. Liu, Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 263117. © 2005 American Institute of Physics.69	 

 	Fig. 13  Typical current–voltage (I–V) curves for a single CdS–PPY heterojunction nanowire under light illumination with different intensities at room temperature. Inset: SEM image and EDS line analysis of the measured nanodevice. Reprinted with permission from: Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang, D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198. © 2008 American Chemical Society.87	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
