Direct measurement of radiative decay rates in metal halide perovskites   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03426J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03426J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1211-1221Direct measurement of radiative decay rates in metal halide perovskites†

        
          
            Angelica 
            Simbula
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Riccardo 
            Pau
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fang 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luyan 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stefano 
            Lai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alessandra 
            Geddo-Lehmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Alessio 
            Filippetti
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Maria A. 
            Loi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Daniela 
            Marongiu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Quochi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michele 
            Saba
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrea 
            Mura
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Giovanni 
            Bongiovanni
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Fisica, Università di Cagliari, Cittadella Universitaria, I-09042 Monserrato (CA), Italy. E-mail: saba@unica.it; giovanni.bongiovanni@dsf.unica.it
bZernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 09747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands
cIstituto Officina dei Materiali (CNR – IOM) Cagliari, Cittadella Universitaria, I-09042 Monserrato (CA), Italy
Received 
      2nd November 2021
    , Accepted 24th January 2022First published on 24th January 2022AbstractThe rate of light emission per unit carrier concentration, or radiative rate, is a fundamental semiconductor parameter that determines the limit photoconversion efficiency of solar cells. In hybrid perovskites, a champion materials class for photovoltaics, optical emission results from a bimolecular process, so that the radiative rate depends on the carrier density and cannot be directly measured with standard techniques. Instead, it is estimated either from UV-Vis absorption or from the kinetics of photoexcitation decays in time-resolved spectroscopy experiments. In this work, an ultrafast radiometric experiment is introduced to directly assess the radiative decay rate in perovskite thin films through a calibrated measurement of the instantaneous photoluminescence flux under pulsed laser excitation. The measured radiative decay rate is found to be significantly lower than the second order decay constant determined from photoluminescence decay kinetics, contrary to what is often assumed; it is also 50–100 times slower than estimates for a plasma of free excitons and free charged carriers, obtained from absorption coefficients through optical reciprocity relations. We attribute the microscopic origin of the measured low radiative rate to the formation of a population of dark excitations, specifically large polarons. Our results provide a coherent framework to rationalize radiative and non-radiative carrier recombination processes in metal halide perovskites, as well as the photophysical basis to optimize device performances for this emerging class of semiconductors.

Broader context
Hybrid metal halide perovskites may usher low-cost commercial photovoltaics based on multijunction solar cells with over 30% energy conversion efficiency. Like all solar cells, perovskite ones are designed to absorb photons and store their energy in excited carriers that are then directed on an electric load. Detrimental decay channels reduce the power available for the external load, while light emission is the only unavoidable loss for optical excitations, because of reciprocity between photon absorption and emission. In perovskites, light emission stems from a bimolecular process; as a consequence, its rate increases with carrier concentration and cannot be measured with standard photovoltaic characterization experiments. Here the radiative rate is directly measured with a radiometric time-resolved photoluminescence experiment and compared with non-radiative decays. Experiments demonstrate that bimolecular recombination is mostly non-radiative, even in the best quality samples we examined; much like the familiar monomolecular trapping, it is sensitive to film surface and photo-healing. The radiative rate is found to be much lower than previously reported or foreseen from the absorption coefficient, presumably because of a majority population of large polarons. The possibility to minimize all extrinsic non-radiative recombination to balance the very low radiative decay rate stands out as the key feature of the superior photoconversion efficiencies.

Introduction
Performances of semiconductor-based optoelectronic devices depend critically on their radiative emission efficiency. While the connection is apparent for light-emitting devices, it holds for solar cells as well, since pure radiative recombination is needed to approach the Shockley–Queisser limit for photoconversion efficiency.1–4 The goal in solar cell optimization is to reduce unwanted, non-radiative decay rates below the benchmark set by the radiative rate, so that their effects on solar cell efficiency are negligible. The progress towards the radiative limit has been rapid in solar cells based on hybrid lead-halide perovskites, where in a few years voltage losses due to non-radiative decay have been reduced to the level of the best silicon solar cells.5–7 However, the actual values of radiative decay rates in perovskites are currently not agreed upon. The catch with perovskite solar cells is that radiative recombination is a bimolecular process whose rate increases proportionally to the carrier concentration. In turn, carrier concentration under continuous-wave (CW) excitation is determined by the balance between generation and recombination rates, so that a CW measurement alone cannot access the radiative recombination rate because carrier concentration is unknown. To supplement CW measurements, ultrafast time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) is typically employed to measure real time decay rates for photoexcitations created by ultrafast laser pulses; radiative and non-radiative decay rates are then estimated by fitting the photoluminescence time traces with a rate equation model, also known as the ABC model, that includes a monomolecular term (A), usually attributed to traps, a bimolecular term (B), assumed as radiative recombination, and a trimolecular term (C), due to Auger recombination.8–11 Such time-domain determination of radiative recombination rates is however based on the unproven assumption that, since radiative recombination is a bimolecular recombination process between two free carriers, then all bimolecular recombination in perovskites is radiative, even though some studies have suggested otherwise.12–16 Restricting the field to methylammonium lead halide CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI), the prototype of perovskites successfully employed in solar cells, analyses based on rate equations produced a wide variety of results for the bimolecular radiative recombination rate coefficients, within the range 2 × 10−11 ÷ 2 × 10−8 cm3 s−1.17–25 Such a wide spread cannot be attributed to variations in the oscillator strength of optical transitions, given that measurements for the absorption coefficient at the exciton peak, which results from the inverse process of optical emission,26,27 are for MAPI consistently reported within a much narrower interval, around 3 × 104 cm−1.21,27–32 This inconsistency has been tentatively attributed to either extrinsic effects, like spatial diffusion and vertical inhomogeneity of charge carriers,19,20,33,34 or to intrinsic effects that breach the symmetry between absorption and emission, like Rashba effect or the formation of large polarons.13,35–41 It appears therefore of paramount importance to establish a reliable value for the radiative recombination rate.
The aim of this work is to provide an experimental technique to directly access the radiative recombination rate by measuring at the same time the absolute photon emission flux and the carrier density. In the setup proposed here, ultrafast laser excitation creates a known density of photoexcitations, while the instantaneous absolute flux of photons emitted per unit time is measured with a radiometrically calibrated streak camera set-up. The technique has been applied to a variety of hybrid perovskite compounds of interest for optoelectronics, both with iodine and bromine as halide anions. The values obtained for the radiative recombination rates are at least one order of magnitude lower than the bimolecular decay rates measured from photoluminescence time traces, and up to two orders of magnitude lower than the radiative rates estimated from optical absorption under the assumption of a population of free electrons, holes, and excitons. Such results are interpreted as evidence for the presence of dark photoexcitations, namely the formation of large polarons.
Results
Direct measurement of the radiative decay rates
Direct measurement of the radiative bimolecular recombination constant requires absolute measurements of both the carrier density n and the emitted radiance. When a semiconductor thin film is optically excited above the gap with laser pulses much shorter than the carrier recombination time, the optically injected carrier density, n(t = 0) = n0, can be estimated accurately from the pulse photon fluence times the absorptance, divided by the film thickness. The ensuing instantaneous photoluminescence (PL) emitted over a time interval much shorter than the carrier lifetime, namely PL(t = 0) = PL0, represents the external light radiance emitted perpendicularly to the films surface, produced by the carrier density n0. The goal of our experiment is to measure the absolute PL0 value through a calibrated streak camera spectrometer. A sketch of the experimental setup used for the determination of absolute PL emission is shown in the upper panel of Fig. 1. Optical excitation was provided by a wavelength-tuneable regenerative amplifier laser source delivering 100 fs long pulses at 1 kHz repetition rate. A portion of photoluminescence emitted perpendicularly to the sample surface in the backward direction, collected over a small solid angle, is focused onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer coupled to a 2D streak camera. The image of the excitation spot is shown in the left inset of Fig. 1(a), where the small green rectangle, much smaller than the laser spot, represents the intersection of the spectrometer vertical entrance slit with the horizontal streak camera slit, highlighting that the probed PL comes from a homogeneously excited region on the in-plane sample surface. The streak camera response was calibrated by directing a laser pulse of known fluence through the same setup through which PL is collected, yielding the detection quantum yield as the ratio of streak camera counts to incident photons; the absolute calibration was repeated at all wavelengths of interest. More details about the calibration procedure can be found in Experimental section.
 Fig. 1  (a) Sketch of the experimental setup for the measurement of the absolute time resolved PL radiance, with a pulsed source exciting the front side of the sample and a portion (in yellow) of the PL emission being collected and focused on the entrance slit of the time-resolving detection system. Light emission is assumed to follow a Lambertian angular dispersion as represented by the green lobe in front of the sample surface. Inset on the left is an image of the excitation spot in the plane of the sample, with horizontal and vertical profiles fitted by Gaussian functions. Here the small homogeneously pumped region probed in the measurement is represented by the green rectangle resulting from the intersection of the images of the spectrometer and streak camera entrance slits. In order to ensure vertically-homogeneous excitation, the pump laser wavelength was 630 nm for MAPI and mixed perovskite films, 430 nm for MAPB. Graph (b): Values of Bext obtained from absolute t = 0 radiance (PL0) as a function of the injected carried density n0 for MAPB (green), mixed perovskite (orange), and MAPI (red), with thick lines representing the best fit with a linear function and resulting in the average values reported on top of the graph, excluding the data at high injected carrier density, where Auger effect becomes dominant. PL measurements in the lower carrier density regime for MAPI and MIXED were not accessible due to lower emission efficiency of the samples. On the right side: (c) absolute PL radiance time profiles obtained from spectrograms (d and e) measured in the same MAPB sample inside a vacuum chamber, with (d) recorded at atmospheric pressure, and (e) measured at low pressure, temporarily recovering the behaviour previous to photohealing. The two decay profiles in (c) have the same PL0 but very different photoluminescence decay times. 
We investigated three different lead iodide and bromide perovskites, that will be referred to as MAPB (CH3NH3PbBr3), MAPI (CH3NH3PbI3) and mixed perovskite ((CH3NH3)1−x−y(CH(NH2)2)xCsyPbI3−zBrz), a mixed-cation, mixed-halide variant that is successfully applied in solar cells.17 All samples were thin films, spin-coated on glass and covered with a protective poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) layer. The film thickness was around 100 nm, comparable to the penetration depth of light at the excitation wavelength, resulting in minimal spatial inhomogeneities in the carrier density across the sample depth (see Fig. S1, ESI†). The angular dispersion of the emission is assumed to be Lambertian, namely with intensity proportional to cosθ, where θ is the angle between the normal to the surface and the photon direction, as schematically represented by the green lobe in Fig. 1(a). Only the light emitted within a small solid angle along the backward direction perpendicular to the film surface is detected, highlighted as the yellow cone in Fig. 1(a).
A set of absolute TRPL measurements as a function of the injected carrier density n0 was performed for each sample under study. We then considered rext,0, i.e., the total number of photons emitted per unit time and unit film volume which eventually escape the film from both the front and back film surfaces after multiple emission and absorption processes. We obtain rext,0 = (2π/d)PL0, where d is the film thickness and 2π accounts for the effective emission solid angle of the two emitting surfaces under the assumption of a Lambertian angular dispersion. The validity of this latter hypothesis was confirmed by photoluminescence measurements in an integrating sphere, whose results will be discussed in the next paragraph. By exploiting the relation between rext,0 and the injected carrier density n0, Bext = rext,0/n02,(1)we could determine the external radiative bimolecular recombination constant Bext. The results are reported in Fig. 1(b), where the quadratic dependence of rext,0 from n0 is confirmed by Bext being approximately constant over a wide range of excitation densities, with deviations at higher densities due to saturation effects. The average Bext values are reported on top of the graph. The fact that Bext does not depend on the excitation fluence also demonstrates that the residual background doping is negligible with respect to the injected carrier concentrations, even at the lowest fluences we have explored.
In Fig. 1(d and e) are shown two PL spectrograms of a MAPB film: spectrogram (d) was recorded in a vacuum chamber filled with air after a prolonged film illumination at atmospheric pressure, while (e) was taken holding the sample at low pressure. Photo-healing increases PL decay times to more than 100 ns, while lifetime is reverted to less than 10 ns when the sample is kept in vacuum. This increased non-radiative lifetime is a well-known phenomenon, resulting in an increase in the time-integrated PL and consequently in the photoluminescence quantum yield (QY).42–46 The radiometric measurements demonstrates that the absolute radiance at t = 0 (PL0), which is proportional to Bext, is actually not affected by photohealing, showing no evident correlation between the radiative recombination rate constant derived from eqn (1) and the characteristic time of the PL decay. To exclude possible ultrafast decays of the excited population, also femtosecond differential transmission measurements have been performed on the MAPB film kept in vacuum, as reported in Fig. S2, ESI.†

B
ext also depends on film interfaces, which can be suitably designed to enhance the fraction of light emitted externally, as is often done in light emitting devices. The intrinsic recombination constant of the material is Bint = rint,0/n02, where rint,0 is the spontaneous photon emission rate per unit of volume inside the bulk material. In the limit of isotropic internal light emission, rint,0 can be estimated from the knowledge of PL0 alone, namely the external light radiance emitted perpendicularly to the film surface, whose value would not be affected by the angular dispersion possibly deviating from a Lambertian pattern. In the limit of very thin layers, Bint reads: (2)where ñfilm represents the film refractive index, R the sample reflectance at the PL emission wavelength. According to our definition of Bext, it can be shown that Bint = 2ñfilm2/(1 − R)Bext. We refer to Section S3 in ESI† for a detailed analysis of the thermodynamic equations connecting Bint to PL0 and Bext. The values of Bint and Bext are reported in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1 Radiative and non-radiative bimolecular decay rate constants







B
ext (cm−3 s−1)

k
2 (cm−3 s−1)




External radiative bimolecular recombination constant Bext is obtained by applying eqn (1) to experimental data reported in Fig. 1(b). The second order rate constant k2 is obtained from the global fit of PL decays, represented with blue squares in Fig. 2(d–f).




MAPB
1.1 × 10−11
1.1 × 10−10


MAPI
4.0 × 10−12
2.7 × 10−10


Mixed MAPI
7.5 × 10−12
1.6 × 10−10




Table 2 Internal radiative decay rates from PL and from absorption







B
int (cm−3 s−1)


Measured from PL
Calculated from abs




Values for the internal bimolecular radiative recombination rate coefficient Bint derived from the calibrated measurement of the PL radiance through eqn (2), or estimated from the absorption coefficient through the generalized Planck law, using eqn (6) and (7), with effective masses me = 0.22 m0, mh = 0.23 m0 for electron and hole respectively in MAPI27 and me = 0.277 m0, mh = 0.245 m0 in MAPB56 (see Fig. S9, ESI). The bandgaps extracted from absorption through Elliott formula are Eg = 1.648 eV for MAPI and Eg = 2.40 eV for MAPB.




MAPB
1.8 × 10−10
1.5 × 10−8


MAPI
6.3 × 10−11
2.2 × 10−9




Radiative and non-radiative bimolecular decays
To determine the nature of the processes governing the carrier recombination kinetics in our films, we first analysed the temporal PL decays at different excitation fluences. In Fig. 2(a–c) Markov plots are shown,13 obtained by shifting each PL transient along the time axis until it overlaps with the decay curve corresponding to the next higher fluence. In each of the investigated films of MAPI, mixed perovskite and MAPB, the resulting PL transients merge with each other, identifying a single decay curve extending over more than six orders of magnitude in the PL instantaneous intensity. The existence of a single decay curve for each sample implies that, at any time after excitation, the PL radiance does not depend on the previous history of the excited state, but only on the instantaneous value of the carrier density n, the key feature defining a Markov process.
 Fig. 2  Upper panel (a–c): Markov plot of the PL time decays in log–log scale, obtained shifting the initial time of each decay to match the PL radiance curves at higher excitations. Black curves represent the result of the global fit with an ordinary differential equation with a common set of k1, k2 and k3 coefficients for all the decay profiles of the same sample. The insets in the upper right corner of each graph show the decay rate (the inverse of the decay time) versus the injected carrier density in log–log scale: experimental data are reported as coloured dots, while the black curve represents the fitted decay equation. Lower panel: Comparison between Bext and k2 at different temperatures in the range 130–300 K for MAPB (d), mixed perovskite (e) and MAPI (f). The values of Bext, obtained from absolute PL0 radiances, are represented with red squares, while horizontal red segments represent the highest achievable Bext, under the assumption that all the light waveguided along the film plane ultimately leaves the sample. The range of Bext values resulting from only a partial extraction of the waveguided light is represented by the yellow areas. The global fit coefficients k1, k2 and k3 are reported in graphs (g–i), (d–f) and (j–l) respectively, with the light-blue region in (d–f) highlighting the difference between maximum Bext and k2 for the same set of measurements. In (d) we report with crossed squares the results for MAPB after photo-healing treatment, with the values of Bext before and after photo-healing not distinguishable since overlapped. 
The Markovian nature of the decay allows us to neglect contributions of non-Markovian kinetics in the analysis of the PL transients, such as excitation-induced saturation of electronic traps, which would introduce trapped populations as further excited-state parameter, or the kinetics of carrier diffusion, which would require the introduction of a spatial population profile spreading over time.12
The charge carrier concentration n being the only relevant parameter, the transient PL decay could be modelled by solving the standard ABC rate equations, with three elementary processes, related to monomolecular (rate constant k1), bimolecular (rate constant k2) and trimolecular Auger recombination (rate constant k3): (3)A global fit was then performed on all the PL time profiles recorded for each sample. The squares of the solutions for the rate equations n2(t) ∝ PL(t), reported as solid black curves in Fig. 2(a–c), reproduce the Markov recombination curve with remarkable accuracy in all the three perovskite films, across six orders of magnitude in photoluminescence signal amplitude and five decades in time span (30 ps to 3 μs). Such an agreement ensures us that the rate coefficients are not depending on the carrier density, otherwise the ABC model would not be able to provide a global fit.
The three processes contribute differently to the total decay rate, with the third order k3 term being the dominant one in the first few tens of ps after excitation at the highest fluence, then the bimolecular k2n rate taking over for several hundreds of picoseconds, and finally, when the density n is substantially reduced, the monomolecular trapping rate causing the long mono-exponential decay, that may extend for over a microsecond. The one-to-one correspondence between the carrier density n and time t allows to invert the solution of rate equations and plot the decay rate (i.e., the inverse of the decay time), namely (−dn/dt)/n as a function of the density n, as shown in the insets of Fig. 2(a–c).
The main takeaway from the rate equation analysis, shown in Fig. 2(d–f), is that the value of the bimolecular k2 constant extracted from the PL dynamics is much higher than the value of the radiative constant Bext. In other words, we find a dominant contribution to k2 that comes from non-radiative bimolecular annihilation processes, which is not affecting Bext.
Our conclusion is strengthened by comparing the results obtained before and after photo-healing of the MAPB film (crossed squares in Fig. 2(d)): we found a reduction by a factor ∼7 of k2 with respect to the value before treatment, without any concomitant change in the radiative decay constant Bext, whose value is indistinguishable before and after photo-healing.
A non-radiative contribution to k2 requires going beyond a conventional annihilation process of the electron–hole pair, in which the energy of the couple is transferred to the photon, according to the scheme e + h → ħω. One possibility is non-radiative recombination of free carriers through shallow traps, i.e. traps with energy depth smaller than the energy difference between the band edge and the quasi-Fermi level. In such a case, the trap-assisted recombination would still be bimolecular, because the trapped carrier population is in equilibrium with the free carrier population. Another mechanism could be trap-mediated Auger recombination, which involves two free charges and one trapped.47 An alternative explanation has been recently proposed, which is peculiar of metal halide perovskites and naturally results from the non-radiative decay of excitons, considering that the excited state contains both charged carriers and neutral bright excitons, the former constituting the majority population and the latter the minority one.13
Since all decay rate constants are known to depend on temperature, our analysis was extended from 300 K down to 130 K (see Fig. S4 and S5, ESI†). Fig. 2(d–l) show the best values of k1, k2 and k3 coefficients resulting from the global fits. The values of k2 (blue squares) are to be compared with the values of Bext (red squares) extracted from absolute PL radiances coming from the same sets of measurements, whose room-temperature values are reported in Table 1.
At all temperatures and for all the samples under analysis, the second order recombination constant k2 is much higher than Bext. The horizontal segments above the red squares represent the maximum values of Bext that can be achieved depending on the extraction efficiency of photons generated inside the film, that can be up to ñcap2 times higher, with ñcap the refractive index of the capping layer on top of the surface (see Fig. 3(b) and Fig. S6, ESI† for more details). The possible range of values that can be taken by Bext is represented by the red bars in Fig. 2(d–f), with interpolated regions depicted as yellow shaded areas. It is evident that, even accounting for different photon extraction efficiencies, the discrepancy between Bext and the corresponding k2 can exceed one order of magnitude even at low temperatures, as highlighted also by the blue-shaded regions in Fig. 2(d–f).
 Fig. 3  (a) QY measured under pulsed excitation as a function of injected carrier density n0 at room temperature. Green, orange, and red squares are estimated from the time-integral of calibrated radiance measurements of MAPB, mixed perovskite and MAPI, respectively. Black squares show the results of measurements on MAPB using the setup sketched in inset (b), keeping the sample under the same pulsed excitation inside an integrating sphere to collect emission (sizes are not to scale for sake of clarity). The edges of the glass were blackened to block the light propagating in the plane of the glass or PMMA. Emission from MAPI and mixed perovskite samples was so feeble that could not be measured with the integrating sphere, due to a limitation in the maximum exposure time. In (a) solid lines are representing the QY versus n0 computed as explained in the main text, considering Bext as the radiative decay rate, while dashed lines represent the values of QY if considering k2 in place of Bext. 

Fig. 3(a) reports the QY measured under pulsed excitation, where QY data (empty squares) are obtained by integrating over time the transient PL radiance, divided by the injected carrier density n0 and multiplied by 2π to account for the overall emission form the front and back film surfaces. As an independent validation, we measured the QY of the MAPB sample with an integrating-sphere PL set-up (Fig. 3(b)), under the same pulsed excitation as in the absolute radiance measurements. The results, represented by black squares in Fig. 3(a), are consistent with those obtained in the radiometric time-resolved PL setup assuming a Lambertian angular dispersion of light emission (see Fig. S6 for integrating sphere measurements and the contribution to the external PLQY by light propagating along the film plane, ESI†).
The solid curves in Fig. 3(a) represent the QY estimated as . The instantaneous carrier density n(t) was calculated from eqn (3) with the initial condition n(0) = n0, using the decay rate constants ki from the global fit analysis. Looking at the QY trend versus n0 in Fig. 3(a), a bell shape can be recognised, with the QY being limited by the monomolecular trapping process at lower excitation fluences, and by Auger recombination at higher fluences. In Fig. 3(a), we also show the QY (dashed lines) calculated as , i.e., assuming that all bimolecular decays are radiative. The resulting QY largely exceed the experimental one, confirming that k2 ≫ Bext.
Reciprocity law between light emission and absorption
The analysis performed so far on different perovskite films does not require any assumption on the nature of the light-emitting species. In this section, the absorptance and photoluminescence spectra of perovskite films are analysed to identify which are the excitations responsible of photon emission and their contributions. The starting point of our analysis, based on the reciprocity between photon absorption and emission (in the non-quantum-degenerate Boltzmann limit), is the Planck law for a black body, generalized by Würfel to extend its validity to semiconductors:48 (4) (5)Here rħω,ext and rħω,int are the external and internal spontaneous photon emission rate per unit of photon energy ħω and of film volume. In the above relations a(ħω) is the film absorptance, α(ħω) the absorption coefficient, ñr(ħω) the real index of refraction and μ the chemical potential of the electron and hole pairs, namely the split of the quasi Fermi level. If electronic excitations are only created by thermal energy, μ = 0 holds and eqn (5) recovers the Van Roosbroeck–Shockley relation, which simply states that, according to the principle of detailed balance, the spontaneous photon emission rate equates the absorption rate of thermal radiation at any given photon energy.49 This reciprocity law is widely used to estimate the radiative limit of the open circuit voltage of a solar cell,50,51 and specifically of perovskite-based photovoltaic devices.52 Since a(ħω) and α(ħω) were measured in a spectrophotometer, as described in Experimental section, the integration of eqn (4) and (5) allows us to determine the overall external and internal thermal emissions, respectively. The factor 2 in the numerator of (4) is due to the contributions coming both from back and front surface (more details on the derivation can be found in Fig. S3, ESI†). We used these equations to infer the internal radiative bimolecular recombination constant Bint, and to distinguish the contributions resulting from the decay of excitons and of free electron–hole pairs.
We first checked whether the generalized Planck law (4) reproduced the spectrum of spontaneous emission in our films, focusing on the experimental data of MAPB, whose absorption spectrum features a pronounced contribution from excitonic transitions as can be seen in Fig. 4 (the same analysis for MAPI is reported in Fig. S7, ESI†). The central graph in Fig. 4 shows a good agreement between the measured PL spectrum PLexp (green) and the spectrum rext (yellow) obtained by applying eqn (4). The low-energy shoulder in the experimental PL spectrum is also reproduced, indicating that it may be arising from ground-state defects. This positive check ensures us that the same states and transitions are involved in photon absorption and emission.
 Fig. 4  Sketches of light absorption (left) and emission (right) processes, with black and dashed red curves representing electron–hole and exciton bands, respectively; purple circles on the right represent polaronic states. Graphs in the centre compare experimental and theoretical absorption coefficient α and PL spectra for MAPB film. Left graph: Theoretical absorption coefficient (black) resulting from the contributions of exciton (pink filling) and valence-to conduction band transitions (light blue filling), in good agreement with experimental absorption coefficient spectrum (green trace). Right graph: Experimental PL spectrum (PLexp, green) compared with the external rext (yellow) and internal rint (red) luminescence estimated, respectively, from absorptance and absorption spectra through the generalized Planck laws. As the investigated film was very thin, the spectral shapes of rext and rint are indistinguishable. The close correspondence between PLexp and rext confirms that the same states are involved in absorption and emission processes. PL spectrum estimated from theoretical absorption coefficient through the same generalized Planck law is represented in black, with exciton and band-to-band contributions also shown as pink and light blue filled areas, respectively. 
As a second step, the absorption coefficient was fitted with Elliott's law for excitonic band-edge absorption to disentangle excitonic transitions from band-to-band ones (see discussion in Fig. S8, ESI†). Once the two absorption contributions were fixed, we calculated the overall internal emission rħω,int and the contributions resulting from exciton and unbound electron–hole pair recombination. As shown in Fig. 4, most photons are emitted following exciton annihilation.
We may now estimate the predicted recombination rate as: (6)i.e., by integrating eqn (5) and dividing it by the square of the thermal population: nth ∼ 2(2πmkT/h2)3/2e−Eg/2kT,(7)where m is the effective mass of photoexcitations and Eg the energy gap (see discussion Fig. S9, ESI† for more details on the calculation of Bint and nth). The resulting values are reported in Table 2: the value predicted from absorption with the described calculation turned out to be 80 times larger than the experimental value of Bint, directly measured from PL without any assumption on the nature of the excited state population. Similar results were also found for MAPI (Table 2). Our result considering the free-carrier contribution only to Bint, as assessed from the Van Roosbroeck–Shockley relation, is in good agreement with values reported in literature.21,27 Yet, the approximation of neglecting the radiative recombination of excitons is not justified in the light of the previous discussion (see Fig. 4).
Discussion
Rigid-lattice assumption versus polaron formation
The excited-state picture emerging from our set of optical measurements in MAPI and MAPB is characterized by: (i) a sharp absorption edge and an excitonic spectral feature with absorption coefficient in excess of 104 cm−1; (ii) spontaneous light emission resulting from excitons through the same optical transitions involved in the absorption spectrum; (iii) a quadratic dependence of the PL intensity on the density of photoexcitations, and most important (iv) a bimolecular recombination of carriers mostly nonradiative in nature, with a radiative rate ∼80 (in MAPB) and ∼40 (in MAPI) times smaller than those expected for a population of excitons and free carriers.
At first sight, point (ii) and (iii) could appear in contrast with the monomolecular radiative decay of excitons.21 Yet, as discussed in ref. 13, the quadratic dependence of the PL intensity can be naturally explained by assuming that charged carriers represent the majority population, while excitons are minority bright species, formed following bimolecular pairing of charges with opposite sign (see Fig. 4a in ref. 13 for a scheme of decay processes). On one side the generalized Planck law in hybrid perovskites accurately reproduces the emission spectrum, on the other hand the measured Bint is much lower than the value expected from the optical emission of excitons and free electron–hole pairs, the excited species created upon absorption. A re-examination of the evaluation of Bint is therefore warranted, particularly of the charged carrier effective masses and bandgap energies employed to calculate the value of the thermal population nth. There exists a growing body of experimental evidence in literature indicating that the perovskite lattice relaxes around electrons and holes to form large charged polarons.53–55 Lattice reorganization in the excited state to form charged polarons shifts the chemical equilibrium between excitons and charged carriers towards these latter. In other words, the presence of polarons reduces the concentration of light-emitting excitons, being polarons heavier and closer in energy to excitons with respect to lattice-unrelaxed charges. As a result, a thermal population constituted by polarons is considerably larger than what obtained under rigid lattice assumption.
A simple estimate based on the Feynman polaron model gives a thermal population enhancement factor of 58.5 for MAPI (details of the calculation are in Fig. S10, ESI†), not far from the factor 40 suppression in the radiative coefficient reported in Table 2.
The physics of electron and hole polarons in hybrid perovskites was recently simulated through advanced ab initio molecular dynamics,40 where it was found that the spatial overlapping between electrons and holes in MAPI is reduced by about two-orders of magnitude following lattice relaxation. The degree of overlap determines the rate at which polarons of opposite sign pair to form bright excitons.
The results of these simulations appear therefore consistent with our experimental results, the bimolecular radiative decay constant Bint being in MAPI (MAPB) 40 (80) times smaller than estimates under the assumption of no lattice deformation in the excited state.
Effects on the prediction of solar cell performances
The competition between radiative and nonradiative bimolecular recombination plays a key role in determining the photoconversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells and is central for approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit. The maximum open circuit voltage can be achieved in the pure radiative limit, and depends on the ratio between the injection rate of electron–hole pairs due to absorption of solar and thermal radiation.52 As such, the radiative limit efficiency is independent of the actual radiative decay rate. Conversely, every drop of a factor 10 in the QY leads to an additional 60 meV voltage loss. For this reason, the very low radiative recombination rate of hybrid perovskites necessarily requires an even slower nonradiative decay to maximize the QY.

Fig. 5 illustrates the expected quantitative effects of photohealing of the MAPB film on the CW emission quantum yield (QYcw) under steady-state excitation with sunlight, i.e., how close a solar cell based on such materials may operate to the radiative limit. The rate equation is solved by equating the total decay rate k1n + k2n2 + k3n3 to the carrier generation rate  due to the absorption of sunlight (S(ħω) is the AM 1.5G spectrum, 100 mW cm−2, and I is the applied sunlight intensity measured in suns) by the MAPB film with absorption coefficient α(ħω). Once the carrier density n(I) is extracted as a function of the applied light intensity, QYcw = Bextn2/(k1n + k2n2 + k3n3) is obtained as the ratio between radiative and total decay rates. In the MAPB films we studied, light irradiation under atmospheric pressure reduced the monomolecular decay constant k1 by a factor ∼70, and the second order one, k2, by a factor ∼7, as reported in the table on the right side of Fig. 5. The solid blue curve is calculated with the values of k1 and k2 of MAPB film before photo-healing, while the red one is obtained from the values of k1 and k2 reduced due to photo-healing. The dashed pink and purple curves are calculated considering the effect of photo-healing on k1 or k2 only, respectively. From this projection, it appears that the increase in QYcw following photo-healing results from the synergy between both contributions of k1 and k2, while the decrease of the monomolecular decay rate alone is not sufficient to explain the total improvement in QYcw. The green line in Fig. 5 also shows the highest QYcw that could be obtained if Auger recombination, assumed as intrinsic, would be the only nonradiative decay channel. This analysis points to the fact that small k1 values in high quality samples allow the build-up of a large carrier density, which however in turn enhances the contribution of the bimolecular nonradiative decays. The contribution of k2 to the overall non-radiative decay rate under 1 sun illumination may therefore become important, even the dominant one, and needs to be dealt with to approach the radiative Shockley–Queisser limit. To create the range of injected carrier densities considered in this work under cw illumination, intensities significantly greater than 1 sun are needed, causing significant temperature variations in perovskite films and sample instabilities; for such reasons calculations in Fig. 5 could not be supported with experimental data.
 Fig. 5  Expected quantum yield under continuous wave excitation (QYCW) versus the intensity of the applied sunlight, distinguishing different scenarios where k1 and k2 are affected or not by photohealing. The corresponding values of k1 and k2 are reported in the table on the right, for each QYCW curve. The blue solid curve (not healed) represents the QYCW obtained with values of k1 and k2 from the fit of MAPB PL decay without photo-healing. The red curve is obtained considering the values of k1 and k2 after photo-healing. Pink and purple dashed curves are hypothetical results that would be obtained if photo-healing was affecting only k1 or k2, respectively. Green solid line finally represents the ideal case in which both k1 and k2 are negligible, and Auger recombination is considered as the only intrinsic effect. 
Conclusions
In this work we determined the radiative recombination rates in 3D hybrid perovskite thin films by setting up a radiometric time-resolved PL experiment. The measured radiative recombination constants are much lower than the ones estimated from the absorption spectrum through the Van Roosbroeck–Shockley relation under the assumption that only excitons and free carriers are present, pointing to the existence of a majority population of dark excitations, possibly large polarons. The bimolecular radiative decay constant Bext is also substantially smaller than the second order constant k2 obtained from the PL decay dynamics, demonstrating that bimolecular decay in hybrid perovskites is mostly non-radiative and extrinsic in nature. Photo-healing is found to reduce the second order nonradiative decay channel (k2) in addition to the first order one (k1). The findings reported here impose stringent limits on improving the open circuit voltage and efficiency of solar cells, since unwanted, non-radiative decay rates need to be suppressed much further than previously thought.
Experimental
Samples preparation
All the film depositions were performed inside a nitrogen-filled glove box. Bromide, iodide and mixed I–Br perovskite thin films were fabricated by one-pot, two-steps and antisolvent spin coating deposition, respectively.
The CH3NH3PbBr3 (MAPB) solution was prepared by dissolving MABr + PbAc2·3H2O with a molar ratio 3:1 in dimethylformamide (DMF) and a final concentration of 0.5 M. The films were deposited on a glass slide spun at 6000 rpm for 60 s and annealed at 100 °C for 5 minutes.
The CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPI) film was prepared by spinning a 0.5 M PbI2 solution in DMF on a glass slide at 6000 rpm for 30 s followed by annealing at 80 °C for 10 min. Then some drops of MAI dissolved in isopropanol (10 mg mL−1) were cast on the film and left to react for 2 minutes before the spinning. The MAPI film was annealed at 100 °C for 30 min and then washed with isopropanol with a subsequent annealing at 100 °C for 1 h.
The MA1−x−yFAxCsyPbI3−zBrz perovskite film was prepared with a 0.3 M precursor solution of FAI, MABr, CsI, PbI2 and PbBr2 with final stoichiometry Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45 in a mixed solvent of DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) with a volume ratio of 4:1. The spin coating procedure in this case is assisted by an antisolvent: first, two drops of solution were spun at 2000 rpm for 10 s with an acceleration of 200 rpm s−1, then at 4000 rpm for 20 s with an acceleration of 1000 rpm s−1. Ten seconds before the end of the whole spinning cycle, 100 μL of chlorobenzene were dropped on the substrate. The substrate was then thermally treated at 100 °C on a hotplate for 10 min.
After the annealing, all the films were coated with a layer of PMMA dissolved in chlorobenzene.
Calibrated time-resolved PL measurements
The ultrafast pulsed laser source was a Ti:sapphire regenerative amplifier (Coherent Libra) delivering 100 fs long pulses at 794 nm, with energy up to 4 mJ and 1 kHz repetition rate. The frequency conversion of the pulses was obtained with an optical parametric amplifier (TOPAS 800 from Light Conversion) equipped with nonlinear crystals, providing the excitation wavelength of 430 nm for MAPB and 630 nm for MAPI and mixed MAPI. Time-resolved detection system was constituted of a grating spectrometer (Acton 2300i) coupled to a streak camera (Hamamatsu C10910). In the low-temperature measurements the sample was kept inside a cryostat (Janis ST-500). Images of the laser spot in the plane of the sample were detected with a visible camera (Thorlabs DCC1545M).
The calibration procedure to obtain the absolute intensity of the PL signal was based on the determination of quantum efficiency of the spectrometer and streak camera detection system, i.e., by measuring the signal generated by laser pulses of known intensity under the very same operating conditions and streak camera settings used for the PL. The ultrafast pulsed laser source (Coherent Libra + TOPAS) was set at the wavelength range of the PL emission (530 nm for MAPB, 760 nm for MAPI and mixed perovskite) and was first measured with a power meter – photodiode system (PD300R-UV by Ophir Photonics). The laser pulses were then attenuated with calibrated neutral optical densities filters (the actual OD value for each filter when illuminated by femtosecond laser pulses was measured) and sent into to the streak camera, keeping both horizontal and vertical slits wide open, so that all the incoming power was collected. Comparing the spectrally and time integrated counts per frame with the injected number of photons per pulse, the quantum efficiency in the spectral region of the PL emissionwas determined to be QE = 2.8 × 10−3 counts per photon at 530 nm and QE = 3.3 × 10−4 counts per photon at 760 nm. To independently check the wavelength dependence of the calibration, the relative response was tested in the spectral region of interest using a radiometric calibrated lamp (Ocean Optics HL-3P-Cal) as a source.
To evaluate the fraction of collected emission with respect to the Lambertian PL emitted from the surface, we fixed the solid angle of collection of the PL by placing an iris after the PL collection lens. By varying the iris aperture radius, the detected signal was verified to scale linearly with the collection solid angle.
Absorptance measurements
Optical absorption spectra of thin films in the UV-vis range was measured with a dual-beam spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere accessory (Agilent Technologies Cary 5000 UV-vis-NIR) in order to avoid losses due to diffused transmission and reflection, collected in hemispherical configuration.57
Integrating sphere measurements
The time-integrated quantum yield measurements were cross-checked by placing the samples within an integrating sphere (LabSphere), 6 inches in diameter, connected via an optical fiber to a compact spectrometer (Photon Control SPM-002-ET64) to acquire the PL signal generated by the femtosecond laser excitation.
Author contributions
Samples were prepared by R. P., F. L., L. W. and D. M. Film characterization was performed by F. L., L. W., A. G -L. and D. M. A. S., R. P., M. S. and A. M. set up the calibrated PL radiance apparatus and performed the corresponding measurements. D. M., S. L. and F. Q. performed absorptance measurements. A. S. performed the measurements with integrating sphere. G. B. proposed the original idea of the PL calibrated radiometric measurements. A. F. did the calculations for the polaron model. M. A. L. critically discussed the interpretation of measurements. A. S., F. Q., M. S. and G. B. analysed the data and wrote the manuscript, finalized with contributions from all the authors. This work was coordinated by M. S. and G. B. All the authors approved the final version of the paper.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge access to research infrastructure in CeSAR—Centro Servizi di Ateneo per la Ricerca—at Università degli Studi di Cagliari and thank Dr M. Marceddu for technical assistance. A. S. was supported by PON “Ricerca e Innovazione” 2014–2020 – Fondo Sociale Europeo, Attraction and International Mobility – AIM1809115-2, Linea 2.1. This work was funded by Regione Autonoma della Sardegna through PO-FSE Sardegna 2007–2013, L.R. 7/2007, “Progetti di ricerca di base e orientata,” Projects No. CRP3-114, CRP-17571, CRP-18353, CRP-18013, and CRP-24978, and through Delibera CIPE n. 31 del 20.02.2015 e deliberazione n. 52/36 del 28.10.2015 “Piano Strategico Sulcis,” through Project No. SULCIS-820889 and SULCIS-820947, as well as by MUR (Italian Ministry of University and Research) through PRIN PERovskite-based solar cells: toward high efficiency and long-term stability (PERSEO), project id 20155LECAJ. The work was also supported by Fondazione di Sardegna through project 2F20000210007 “Perovskite materials for photovoltaics.” A. F. thanks Project PRIN 2017 “TOPSPIN”, funded by Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR).
References
J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–56 Search PubMed .
N. G. Park and H. Segawa, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2970–2977 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green, E. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2021, 29, 3–15 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Peng, D. Walter, Y. Ren, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Wu, T. Duong, Q. Lin, J. Li, T. Lu, M. A. Mahmud, O. L. C. Lem, S. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Shen, L. Li, F. Kremer, H. T. Nguyen, D. Y. Choi, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Science, 2021, 371, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Shen, G. O. Mueller, S. Watanabe, N. F. Gardner, A. Munkholm and M. R. Krames, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 144101 CrossRef .
J. Cho, J. T. DuBose and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2570–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Peán, S. Dimitrov, C. S. De Castro and M. L. Davies, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 28345–28358 RSC .
J. M. Richter, M. Abdi-Jalebi, A. Sadhanala, M. Tabachnyk, J. P. H. Rivett, L. M. Pazos-Outón, K. C. Gödel, M. Price, F. Deschler and R. H. Friend, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Simbula, R. Pau, Q. Wang, F. Liu, V. Sarritzu, S. Lai, M. Lodde, F. Mattana, G. Mula, A. Geddo Lehmann, I. D. Spanopoulos, M. G. Kanatzidis, D. Marongiu, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiligaridis, P. A. Frantsuzov, A. Yangui, S. Seth, J. Li, Q. An, Y. Vaynzof and I. G. Scheblykin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brenes, D. Guo, A. Osherov, N. K. Noel, C. Eames, E. M. Hutter, S. K. Pathak, F. Niroui, R. H. Friend, M. S. Islam, H. J. Snaith, V. Bulovi, T. J. Savenije, S. D. Stranks, V. Bulović, T. J. Savenije and S. D. Stranks, Joule, 2017, 1, 155–167 CrossRef CAS .
F. Staub, T. Kirchartz, K. Bittkau and U. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5084–5090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. Correa Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(1), e1501170,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.1501170 .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. Neutzner, V. D’Innocenzo, F. Tassone, M. Gandini, Q. A. Akkerman, M. Prato, L. Manna, A. Petrozza and G. Lanzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13604–13611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938–7944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Innocenzo, A. Ram, S. Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini and A. Petrozza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17730–17733 CrossRef PubMed .
C. La-o-vorakiat, T. Salim, J. Kadro, M.-T. Khuc, R. Haselsberger, L. Cheng, H. Xia, G. G. Gurzadyan, H. Su, Y. M. Lam, R. A. Marcus, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle and E. E. M. Chia, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sestu, M. Cadelano, V. Sarritzu, F. Chen, D. Marongiu, R. Piras, M. Mainas, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4566–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Davies, M. R. Filip, J. B. Patel, T. W. Crothers, C. Verdi, A. D. Wright, R. L. Milot, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 293 CrossRef PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, T. Salim, N. Mathews, M. Duchamp, C. Boothroyd, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and Y. M. Lam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 399–407 RSC .
M. Habibi, F. Zabihi, M. R. Ahmadian-Yazdi and M. Eslamian, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1012–1031 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tablero Crespo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Crothers, R. L. Milot, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, J. Schlipf, P. Müller-Buschbaum, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5782–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meggiolaro, F. Ambrosio, E. Mosconi, A. Mahata and F. De Angelis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902748 CrossRef .
M. J. Schilcher, P. J. Robinson, D. J. Abramovitch, L. Z. Tan, A. M. Rappe, D. R. Reichman and D. A. Egger, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2162–2173 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghosh, E. Welch, A. J. Neukirch, A. Zakhidov and S. Tretiak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3271–3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Puppin, S. Polishchuk, N. Colonna, A. Crepaldi, D. N. Dirin, O. Nazarenko, R. De Gennaro, G. Gatti, S. Roth, T. Barillot, L. Poletto, R. P. Xian, L. Rettig, M. Wolf, R. Ernstorfer, M. V. Kovalenko, N. Marzari, M. Grioni and M. Chergui, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 124, 206402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4758–4761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ambrosio, J. Wiktor, F. De Angelis and A. Pasquarello, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 101–105 RSC .
A. Filippetti, C. Caddeo, P. Delugas and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28472–28479 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Motti, M. Gandini, A. J. Barker, J. M. Ball, A. R. Srimath Kandada and A. Petrozza, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 726–730 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Dequilettes, S. Koch, S. Burke, R. K. Paranji, A. J. Shropshire, M. E. Ziffer and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Z. Ge, X. Zhang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4379–4414 RSC .
J. S. W. Godding, A. J. Ramadan, Y. H. Lin, K. Schutt, H. J. Snaith and B. Wenger, Joule, 2019, 3, 2716–2731 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, H. Wei, J. Yang, G. R. Blake, J. Huang, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1–10 Search PubMed .

          P. T. Landsberg, Recombination in Semiconductors, Cambridge University Press,  2003 Search PubMed .
P. Wurfel, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 3967–3985 CrossRef .
W. Van Roosbroeck and W. Shockley, Phys. Rev., 1954, 94, 1558–1560 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tiedje, E. Yablonovitch, G. D. Cody and B. G. Brookd, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, 31, 711–716 Search PubMed .
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 1–8 CrossRef .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guzelturk, T. Winkler, T. W. J. Van de Goor, M. D. Smith, S. A. Bourelle, S. Feldmann, M. Trigo, S. W. Teitelbaum, H. G. Steinrück, G. A. de la Pena, R. Alonso-Mori, D. Zhu, T. Sato, H. I. Karunadasa, M. F. Toney, F. Deschler and A. M. Lindenberg, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 618–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Cannelli, N. Colonna, M. Puppin, T. C. Rossi, D. Kinschel, L. M. D. Leroy, J. Löffler, J. M. Budarz, A. M. March, G. Doumy, A. Al Haddad, M. F. Tu, Y. Kumagai, D. Walko, G. Smolentsev, F. Krieg, S. C. Boehme, M. V. Kovalenko, M. Chergui and G. F. Mancini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9048–9059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Komesu, X. Huang, T. R. Paudel, Y. B. Losovyj, X. Zhang, E. F. Schwier, Y. Kojima, M. Zheng, H. Iwasawa, K. Shimada, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Shi, A. L. Abdelhady, O. M. Bakr, S. Dong, E. Y. Tsymbal and P. A. Dowben, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21710–21715 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marongiu, S. Lai, V. Sarritzu, E. Pinna, G. Mula, M. Laura Mercuri, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, M. L. M. L. Mercuri, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10021–10027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03426jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Hybrid metal halide perovskites may usher low-cost commercial photovoltaics based on multijunction solar cells with over 30% energy conversion efficiency. Like all solar cells, perovskite ones are designed to absorb photons and store their energy in excited carriers that are then directed on an electric load. Detrimental decay channels reduce the power available for the external load, while light emission is the only unavoidable loss for optical excitations, because of reciprocity between photon absorption and emission. In perovskites, light emission stems from a bimolecular process; as a consequence, its rate increases with carrier concentration and cannot be measured with standard photovoltaic characterization experiments. Here the radiative rate is directly measured with a radiometric time-resolved photoluminescence experiment and compared with non-radiative decays. Experiments demonstrate that bimolecular recombination is mostly non-radiative, even in the best quality samples we examined; much like the familiar monomolecular trapping, it is sensitive to film surface and photo-healing. The radiative rate is found to be much lower than previously reported or foreseen from the absorption coefficient, presumably because of a majority population of large polarons. The possibility to minimize all extrinsic non-radiative recombination to balance the very low radiative decay rate stands out as the key feature of the superior photoconversion efficiencies.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Sketch of the experimental setup for the measurement of the absolute time resolved PL radiance, with a pulsed source exciting the front side of the sample and a portion (in yellow) of the PL emission being collected and focused on the entrance slit of the time-resolving detection system. Light emission is assumed to follow a Lambertian angular dispersion as represented by the green lobe in front of the sample surface. Inset on the left is an image of the excitation spot in the plane of the sample, with horizontal and vertical profiles fitted by Gaussian functions. Here the small homogeneously pumped region probed in the measurement is represented by the green rectangle resulting from the intersection of the images of the spectrometer and streak camera entrance slits. In order to ensure vertically-homogeneous excitation, the pump laser wavelength was 630 nm for MAPI and mixed perovskite films, 430 nm for MAPB. Graph (b): Values of Bext obtained from absolute t = 0 radiance (PL0) as a function of the injected carried density n0 for MAPB (green), mixed perovskite (orange), and MAPI (red), with thick lines representing the best fit with a linear function and resulting in the average values reported on top of the graph, excluding the data at high injected carrier density, where Auger effect becomes dominant. PL measurements in the lower carrier density regime for MAPI and MIXED were not accessible due to lower emission efficiency of the samples. On the right side: (c) absolute PL radiance time profiles obtained from spectrograms (d and e) measured in the same MAPB sample inside a vacuum chamber, with (d) recorded at atmospheric pressure, and (e) measured at low pressure, temporarily recovering the behaviour previous to photohealing. The two decay profiles in (c) have the same PL0 but very different photoluminescence decay times.	 
Bext = rext,0/n02,	(1)
	(2)


MAPB	1.1 × 10−11	1.1 × 10−10
MAPI	4.0 × 10−12	2.7 × 10−10
Mixed MAPI	7.5 × 10−12	1.6 × 10−10



MAPB	1.8 × 10−10	1.5 × 10−8
MAPI	6.3 × 10−11	2.2 × 10−9

 	Fig. 2  Upper panel (a–c): Markov plot of the PL time decays in log–log scale, obtained shifting the initial time of each decay to match the PL radiance curves at higher excitations. Black curves represent the result of the global fit with an ordinary differential equation with a common set of k1, k2 and k3 coefficients for all the decay profiles of the same sample. The insets in the upper right corner of each graph show the decay rate (the inverse of the decay time) versus the injected carrier density in log–log scale: experimental data are reported as coloured dots, while the black curve represents the fitted decay equation. Lower panel: Comparison between Bext and k2 at different temperatures in the range 130–300 K for MAPB (d), mixed perovskite (e) and MAPI (f). The values of Bext, obtained from absolute PL0 radiances, are represented with red squares, while horizontal red segments represent the highest achievable Bext, under the assumption that all the light waveguided along the film plane ultimately leaves the sample. The range of Bext values resulting from only a partial extraction of the waveguided light is represented by the yellow areas. The global fit coefficients k1, k2 and k3 are reported in graphs (g–i), (d–f) and (j–l) respectively, with the light-blue region in (d–f) highlighting the difference between maximum Bext and k2 for the same set of measurements. In (d) we report with crossed squares the results for MAPB after photo-healing treatment, with the values of Bext before and after photo-healing not distinguishable since overlapped.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) QY measured under pulsed excitation as a function of injected carrier density n0 at room temperature. Green, orange, and red squares are estimated from the time-integral of calibrated radiance measurements of MAPB, mixed perovskite and MAPI, respectively. Black squares show the results of measurements on MAPB using the setup sketched in inset (b), keeping the sample under the same pulsed excitation inside an integrating sphere to collect emission (sizes are not to scale for sake of clarity). The edges of the glass were blackened to block the light propagating in the plane of the glass or PMMA. Emission from MAPI and mixed perovskite samples was so feeble that could not be measured with the integrating sphere, due to a limitation in the maximum exposure time. In (a) solid lines are representing the QY versus n0 computed as explained in the main text, considering Bext as the radiative decay rate, while dashed lines represent the values of QY if considering k2 in place of Bext.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  Sketches of light absorption (left) and emission (right) processes, with black and dashed red curves representing electron–hole and exciton bands, respectively; purple circles on the right represent polaronic states. Graphs in the centre compare experimental and theoretical absorption coefficient α and PL spectra for MAPB film. Left graph: Theoretical absorption coefficient (black) resulting from the contributions of exciton (pink filling) and valence-to conduction band transitions (light blue filling), in good agreement with experimental absorption coefficient spectrum (green trace). Right graph: Experimental PL spectrum (PLexp, green) compared with the external rext (yellow) and internal rint (red) luminescence estimated, respectively, from absorptance and absorption spectra through the generalized Planck laws. As the investigated film was very thin, the spectral shapes of rext and rint are indistinguishable. The close correspondence between PLexp and rext confirms that the same states are involved in absorption and emission processes. PL spectrum estimated from theoretical absorption coefficient through the same generalized Planck law is represented in black, with exciton and band-to-band contributions also shown as pink and light blue filled areas, respectively.	 
	(6)
nth ∼ 2(2πmkT/h2)3/2e−Eg/2kT,	(7)

 	Fig. 5  Expected quantum yield under continuous wave excitation (QYCW) versus the intensity of the applied sunlight, distinguishing different scenarios where k1 and k2 are affected or not by photohealing. The corresponding values of k1 and k2 are reported in the table on the right, for each QYCW curve. The blue solid curve (not healed) represents the QYCW obtained with values of k1 and k2 from the fit of MAPB PL decay without photo-healing. The red curve is obtained considering the values of k1 and k2 after photo-healing. Pink and purple dashed curves are hypothetical results that would be obtained if photo-healing was affecting only k1 or k2, respectively. Green solid line finally represents the ideal case in which both k1 and k2 are negligible, and Auger recombination is considered as the only intrinsic effect.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03426j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
