Substrate-driven switchable molecular orientation in bulk heterojunction films identified using infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy  - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9ME00165D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9ME00165D
(Paper)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2020, 5, 559-564Substrate-driven switchable molecular orientation in bulk heterojunction films identified using infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy

        
          
            Md. 
            Shahiduzzaman
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tomoki 
            Hirayama
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tatsuki 
            Chikamatsu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tomoyuki 
            Koganezawa
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Masahiro 
            Nakano
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tetsuhiko 
            Miyadera
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Makoto 
            Karakawa
          
        
      abd, 
      
        
          
            Kohshin 
            Takahashi
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Tetsuya 
            Taima
          
        
      *abcd
aNanomaterials Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. E-mail: shahiduzzaman@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp; taima@se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp;  Fax: +81 76 264 4739;   Tel: +81 76 264 4739
bGraduate School of Frontier Science Initiative, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan
cGraduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan
dInstitute for Frontier Science Initiative (InFiniti), Kanazawa University, Kakuma, 920-1192 Kanazawa, Japan
eIndustrial Application Division, Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI), Hyogo 679-5198, Japan
fResearch Center for Photovoltaics (RCPV), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan
Received 
      26th November 2019
    , Accepted 17th December 2019First published on 17th December 2019AbstractThis research evaluated the substrate effects of two organic molecules, zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) and coronene on a glass/Au/coronene substrate (coro sub) and coronene:C60 BHJ film on a glass/Au/ZnPc substrate (ZnPc sub). The interaction strength of the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction (BHJ) films was measured. The molecular orientation angles of each molecule in the BHJ films were detected by in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy. Coronene molecules in the coronene:C60 film on the ZnPc sub could be precisely controlled to attain a lying-down orientation owing to the strong π–π interaction between the coronene–ZnPc molecules. In contrast, the ZnPc molecules in ZnPc:C60 adopted a standing-up orientation on the coro sub owing to the weak π–π interaction between the ZnPc sub and ZnPc molecules. The present work presents an important finding which indicates that substrate-dependent molecular orientation switches may be possible for both transistor and solar cell applications.

Design, System, Application
A dispersed network of heterointerfaces in the photoactive layer originates from the electron-donating and electron-accepting materials, in which crucial photo-physical actions take place. However, in terms of understanding the structural properties of these interfaces, the lack of techniques available to measure the local area and three-dimensional complex arrangement of the material can hamper progress. Molecular orientation interrelated to the donor/acceptor heterojunctions can be important parameters for achieving high-performance organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Thus, precise control of the molecular orientation of the resultant films could influence and subsequently improve the performance of the OPVs. The work presented here outlines a technique to detect the molecular orientation angles of each molecule in a BHJ film by using in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IR-RAS). The resulting outcomes demonstrate important insights into molecular orientation switching by changing the different combinations of molecules and substrates, and will enable the design of organic electronics with an improved performance.

Introduction
Over the past few years, significant progress has been made into determining the structure–function relationships that effect the performance of a material in the field of organic electronics.1,2 Among these, small molecules and π-conjugated polymers are very encouraging, particularly in field-effect transistors3,4 and bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs).5,6 Thin-film-OPVs offer a potentially low-cost, mechanically-flexible, high-throughput solution processing and lightweight platform that can absorb a large proportion of the solar spectrum for the efficient conversion of sunlight to electricity.7–9 Usually, the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure is used as an active layer in OPVs as it facilitates a large interface area for the dissociation of the exciton and an interpenetrated nanoscale network for charge carrier transport.10,11 Rafique et al.12 discussed the importance of stability for the device lifetime and distinct degradation factors, which effect the operational entity of the OPVs. Several reports demonstrated more than a 10% power conversion efficiency (PCE) in solution-processed BHJ OPVs, which utilized a blend of polymers and acceptors.13–15 Kurpiers et al.16 reported that photoactive blends could produce the activation energy for free charge photogeneration in a broad range of photon energies by using the technique of a time-delayed collection field. Their findings indicated that charge generation in blends is yielded by thermalized charge transfer states to dissociate most of the states into free charges. Ade et al.17 reported high-performance OPVs by manipulating the degree of molecular orientation. Recently, Praveen et al.18 demonstrated the impact of the molecular arrangement (symmetric and asymmetric) of π-conjugated semiconductors on the resultant device performance. Previously, we developed a wet processing technique to enhance the adoption of a face-on molecular orientation of DRCN5T via a strong interaction between the d-orbital of CuI and the π-conjugation of the DRCN5T molecules.19 This method opened up the possibility of fabricating OPVs by wet processing. We also reported the performance enhancement of OPVs by changing the crystal polymorph of the evaporated α-sexithiophene thin films from high-temperature to low-temperature by simply keeping them under a vacuum overnight.20 In contrast, the use of the co-evaporation method opened up a way to precisely control the nano-order layer thickness in the BHJ structure by controlling the evaporation rates and times.21 However, it is very difficult to control the molecular orientation, morphology, and crystallinity of the co-evaporated BHJ, even by changing the evaporation parameters. Several properties of the molecules, including the intra-molecular interaction, molecule–substrate interactions, and adsorption or desorption ability of the molecules on the substrates were considered to create the BHJ structure.22–24 Meanwhile, Sakurai et al.25 further increased the performance of the OPVs by precise control of the interactions between the molecules, and between the molecules and the substrate. Their research indicated that molecular aggregation, grain boundaries, and deviation points in the donor–accepter molecular ratio were the key factors that produce an ideal BHJ structure without carrier traps. Sun et al.26 demonstrated that building a three-dimensional structure, along with an extended effective π-conjugation could be a promising strategy for achieving the efficient performance of perylenediimide-based OPVs. Previously, Taima et al.27 successfully controlled the molecular orientation of an evaporated film onto the substrate by controlling the interactions between molecules, and those between the molecules and substrates.
Small molecular organic semiconductors such as zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) can attain a standing-up molecular orientation on conventional substrates such as, glass, indium–tin–oxide (ITO), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). Conversely, ZnPc molecules demonstrate a face-on molecular orientation owing to the π–d interaction between the ZnPc molecules and the copper iodide (CuI) on the CuI substrate.28,29 The standing-up molecular orientation of the ZnPc molecules promotes an improvement in the light absorption coefficients and also an efficient charge transfer ability in the BHJ film. A higher light absorption coefficient was obtained by the lying-down molecular orientation ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ film owing to the π–d interaction.30 Recently, Chikamatsu et al.31 successfully identified the lying-down molecular orientation of ZnPc molecules in ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on CuI interlayers and the lying-down ZnPc substrates via the strong π–π interactions between the BHJ film and the substrate. On the other hand, coronene C12H24 (6-circulene) is the smallest two-dimensional aromatic and π-conjugated compound that can hold a single circulated benzene ring entirely in the center. Consequently, coronene can be considered as one of the smallest molecular agents of graphene.32,33 The use of low-molecular-weight materials such as coronene or coronene derivatives has opened up a new way to enhance the performance of solar cells.34 Yu et al.35 reported the performance enhancement of OPVs with a coronene based electron-transporting layer. The discotic geometry promoted lying-down π–π stacking in the solid-states, which was favorable for providing a suitable charge carrier mobility in the vertical direction. In addition, the chemical structure of coronene is simple and subsequently molecular stacking is quite easy on the substrate. Therefore, coronene can be a good counterpart of the ZnPc molecule as a donor in the co-evaporated BHJ film to develop a desirable orientation on different substrates.
This study introduced a facile in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IR-RAS) optical measurement technique to identify the correlation between the interaction strength of ZnPc and the coronene molecules in co-evaporated BHJ films deposited on different substrates. The results suggested that the orientation of molecules in co-evaporated BHJ films was different on the substrates. The comparison of the π–π interaction between the ZnPc and coronene molecules and the π–d interaction between the ZnPc molecules and coronene in the co-evaporated BHJ film were investigated.
Experimental methods
Materials
Coronene and ZnPc were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Tokyo, Japan). C60 was bought from Frontier Carbon Corporation (Tokyo, Japan). After this, the coronene and ZnPc were further purified three times prior to use in our laboratory. The samples were fabricated on ITO-patterned glass substrates. Oxygen plasma cleaning was used for 20 min prior to the start of deposition to pretreat the ITO-patterned glass substrates. The Au (20 nm) layer was deposited on the glass-substrate via vacuum deposition. Then, the coronene (20 nm) and ZnPc (20 nm) films were evaporated onto this substrate, respectively. Finally, the coro:C60 (40 nm) and ZnPc:C60 (40 nm) co-evaporated BHJ film was evaporated. Co-evaporation was conducted on the coro/Au/glass (coro substrate), and the ZnPc/Au/glass (ZnPc substrate) layer stack to precisely investigate the control of the molecular orientation by the π–d and π–π interactions. As a reference, single component coronene films and ZnPc films on a PEDOT:PSS substrate and CuI substrate were also measured.
Characterization
The molecular orientations and crystal structure of the thin-films were measured using X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Rigaku diffractometer. Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) was conducted at a synchrotron radiation facility (SPring-8, BL46XU). X-rays with a wavelength (lambda) of 0.1 nm were used. The incident angle of the X-rays was 0.12 degrees. The distance (L) between the sample and the detector (PILATUS 300K) was 173.5 mm at wavelength 1 Å. The coronene and ZnPc molecular orientation were identified via in situ IR-RAS measurement using a Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) device (FT/IR 6300, JASCO). The FT-IR device was connected to the vacuum chamber with a pressure of below 2.0 × 10−6 Pa. Thus, we were able to perform measurement of the in situ conditions during vacuum co-evaporation. At the substrate surface in the vacuum chamber, the infrared light generated by the FT-IR device is p-polarized and reflected at a glancing angle of ∼80° to the direction perpendicular to the substrate surface. All spectra were accumulated while connected to the FT-IR spectrometer equipped with an N2 cooled mercury telluride detector.
Results and discussion
Previously, the lying-down molecular orientation of the ZnPc molecules in the ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the CuI interlayers and the lying-down ZnPc substrates were successfully identified via the strong π–π interactions between the co-evaporated BHJ film and the substrate. The IR-RAS results showed stronger π–π interactions between the individual ZnPc molecules compared to the π–d interactions between the ZnPc molecules and CuI in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ films. The orientation parameter S values were calculated according to the equation described by Yokoyama et al.36 On the other hand, the solely coronene based-OPVs showed a high efficiency.35 Coronene is a low-molecular-weight material, whereas ZnPc is a planar high crystallite molecule. Thus, coronene can be a good counterpart for ZnPc molecules. In the present work, we developed a desirable orientation in the co-evaporated BHJ film deposited on different substrates and investigated the molecular interaction strength between the BHJ film and the substrates. The chemical structures of coronene, ZnPc, and C60 are shown in Fig. 1a–c, respectively.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structure of (a) coronene, (b) ZnPc and (c) C60. 

Fig. 2a shows that the values of S from the IR-RAS measurements for the single-component coronene films were around 0.5 for both substrates (on the PEDOT:PSS and CuI sub), which promoted the standing-up orientation in both cases because of the weak interactions between the coronene molecules and the substrates. In contrast, ZnPc adopted a similar orientation on the PEDOT:PSS and CuI substrates.31 The molecular orientation was further confirmed by the XRD spectra. The XRD spectra of the single-component coronene films showed no change to the peak position of the coronene film owing to the presence or absence of CuI (Fig. 2b). Thus, we assumed that the molecular orientation of the coronene and ZnPc films on PEDOT:PSS and CuI sub were mostly similar. The detected molecular orientation obtained using the IR-RAS measurements substantiated the XRD results. In addition, the top-view SEM images of the coronene film grown on PEDOT:PSS and CuI sub, respectively, exhibited rod-like and needle-like crystals regardless of the presence or absence of CuI (Fig. 2c and d). We concluded that the coronene thin film cannot be controlled on CuI, as it has been commonly used as an orientation control material. However, we replaced CuI with an Au substrate and used this to deposit coronene with a precise orientation control to yield strong interactions between the co-evaporated BHJ film and the substrates.
 Fig. 2  (a) The calculated values of the orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The blue, red, black and pink lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/CuI sub, coronene/PEDOT:PSS, and ZnPc/CuI sub, respectively. (b) XRD spectra of the coro film deposited on each substrate; SEM images of coronene on (c) PEDOT:PSS and (d) CuI sub. 
The coronene film grown on the Au substrate exhibited a value of −0.2 (the values of S are calculated from the IR-RAS measurements), whereas the coronene film grown on the CuI substrate showed a value of 0.5, indicating a lying-down orientation (Fig. 3a). The coronene single film exhibited the same orientation behavior as the ZnPc single film when formed on the Au substrates (Fig. 3b and c). Thus, we concluded that the coronene thin film could be controlled in a similar way to the ZnPc and the orientation could be dictated by the π–d interactions. Thus, we considered the coronene/Au/glass (coro substrate), ZnPc/Au/glass (ZnPc substrate) layer stack to precisely investigate the molecular orientation control using the π–d and π–π interactions in co-evaporated BHJ films.
 Fig. 3  (a) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The blue, black, pink, and red lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/CuI sub, ZnPc/CuI sub, and coronene/Au, respectively. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc film on Au and (c) the coronene film on Au. 
According to the value of S from the IR-RAS measurement as shown in Fig. 4a, the single-component ZnPc film deposited on the coro sub was almost the same (S = −0.1) as the ZnPc grown on the CuI sub which indicated a lying-down orientation of the ZnPc molecule.31 This clearly showed successful orientation control via a π–π interaction when the ZnPc and coronene were used Fig. 4b. In contrast, we checked and compared whether the orientation of the coronene molecules could be controlled in a similar way as the ZnPc single film while forming a single coronene film on the ZnPc sub. According to the value of S shown in Fig. 4c, the coronene film grown on the ZnPc sub exhibited a value of S = −0.1, suggesting the controllability of coronene molecules into a lying-down orientation on the ZnPc sub. In all, the orientation control of the single-component coronene and the ZnPc film indicated almost the same orientation behavior (Fig. 4b and d).
 Fig. 4  (a) IR-RAS calculated values of the orientation parameter S for the ZnPc film grown on: (a) the coro sub, and the coronene film grown on (c) the ZnPc sub. The pink, red, and green lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coro/ZnPc sub, and ZnPc/CuI sub, respectively. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc films on the coro sub and (d) the coronene film on the ZnPc sub. 
The orientation of the ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the coro sub were analyzed using XRD which showed the diffraction peak at 2θ = 27.8 which corresponded to the lying-down orientation. In addition, the single-component coronene film exhibited diffraction peaks at 2θ = 26.2 and 26.7, which also corresponded to the lying-down orientation. However, no constructive signal could be detected using XRD for the co-evaporated BHJ film on the coro sub as the crystallinity of the ZnPc was reduced as it was blended with C60, resulting in a co-evaporated BHJ film that retained an amorphous structure (Fig. 5a). Therefore, a versatile GIWAXS technique was used to investigate the molecular orientation in the co-evaporated BHJ film owing to the ability of GIWAXS to provide detailed crystal information.
 Fig. 5  (a) XRD spectra of the ZnPc:C60 film grown on the coro sub. GIWAXS images of (b) the ZnPc/coro sub, and (c) the ZnPc:C60/coro sub. (d) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The pink, blue, red and green lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, ZnPc:C60/coro sub, and ZnPc/coro sub, respectively. 
The GIWAXS images of the ZnPc and ZnPc:C60 film grown on the coro sub, respectively, are shown in Fig. 5b and c. The ZnPc film grown on the coro sub exhibited a strong peak (red circled area), indicating a lying-down orientation in the high-angle region under the out-of-plane direction Fig. 5b. In the case of the ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer, diffraction at the in-plane orientation (red circled area) was observed, which suggested a randomly orientated crystal was the orientation of the ZnPc molecules that may be controlled in the region in which the film thickness was small (Fig. 5c). However, the observations from the GIWAXS data were further validated using IR-RAS. The S values for four different film thicknesses, which were determined from the IR-RAS spectra are shown in Fig. 5d. The value of S in the single-component ZnPc films on the coro sub was S = −0.1, which suggested the lying-down orientation owing to the π–π interaction with the coro sub (Fig. 4a). In contrast, the value of S (0.6) for ZnPc in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ film grown on the coro sub, indicated a standing-up orientation. These results concluded that the orientation control effect by the π–π interaction between the different molecules might be weaker than the π–π interaction between the same molecules.
The coronene:C60 BHJ layer and the ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer grown on different substrates were compared in terms of the value of S from the IR-RAS as shown in Fig. 6a. The coronene:C60 BHJ layer grown on the coro sub revealed S = 0.1, which suggested the lying-down orientation of the coronene molecules in the BHJ layer owing to the π–π interaction between the same molecules (coronene–coronene) as well as the ZnPc molecules. It also indicated the controllability of the molecular orientation was also in the BHJ layer owing to the strong π–π interaction between the same molecules (ZnPc–ZnPc and coronene). The coronene:C60 BHJ layer showed a small S value of about 0.2, even when the film thickness was 40 nm, indicating the availability of the orientation control over a large thickness range.
 Fig. 6  (a) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the ZnPc sub and (c) the coronene:C60 BHJ films on the coro sub. The blue, red, and green lines represent the coronene/Au, ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS and ZnPc/CuI, respectively. 
The values of S from the IR-RAS measurement are shown in Fig. 7a. The coronene:C60 BHJ film grown on the ZnPc sub showed a lying-down orientation at around S = 0, whereas ZnPc:C60 grown on the coro sub showed a standing-up orientation at around S = 0.6. These results indicated the extension of the π-conjugation of the aromatic ring on both the substrates (coro sub and ZnPc sub) which resulted in the formation of a π–π interaction with the molecules in the BHJ layer. However, the ZnPc molecules in the ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer grown on the coro sub promoted the standing-up orientation. In contrast, the coronene molecules in the coronene:C60 BHJ layer formed on the ZnPc sub demonstrated a lying-down orientation owing to the π–π interaction between the ZnPc–coronene molecules. Finally, we concluded that the π–π interactions between the different molecules are weaker than the π–π interactions between the same molecules. The combination of molecules can control the orientation. Subsequently, these results suggested that the molecule chemical structures and the orientation switching (standing-up or lying down) can be changed using the stacking substrates, and that these can be governed for the design of promising transistor and OPV applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) The IR-RAS spectra of the films shows the calculated values of the orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. Schematic illustration of (b) ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the coro sub and (c) the coronene:C60 BHJ films on the ZnPc sub. The blue, red, and green lines represent the coronene/Au, ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS and ZnPc/CuI, respectively. 
Conclusions
The IR-RAS measurement technique was used to strongly identify and compare the single component coronene and ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated BHJ layer on different substrates. Different combinations of molecules and substrates significantly affected the resulting molecular orientation and interaction. It was clear that the ZnPc film grown on the coro sub could be precisely controlled to adopt a lying-down orientation, whereas the ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer on the coro sub adopted a standing-up orientation. On the other hand, the orientation of the coronene molecules in the co-evaporated coronene:C60 BHJ layer could be precisely controlled to adopt the lying down orientation by using the π–π interactions between the different molecules (ZnPc–coronene), while the ZnPc molecules in the co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer on the coro sub adopted a standing-up orientation. This evidence indicates that the π–π interactions between the different molecules are weaker than the π–π interactions between the same molecules. We assumed that the differences in the π–π interaction strength came from the size effects of the molecules, such as those between the large ZnPc and the small coronene molecules. The strength of the π–π interactions also varied with changes in the substrates used.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no financial and nonfinancial interests.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research Grant Number 16K05882 for financial support. GIWAXS measurements were performed at SPring-8 BL46XU with the approval of the Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute (JASRI; Proposal no. 2017A0136).
References
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Klauk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2643–2666 RSC .
M. Zhang, H. N. Tsao, W. Pisula, C. Yang, A. K. Mishra and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3472–3473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Lin, M. Zhang, S.-W. Liu, T.-L. Chiu and J.-H. Lee, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2011, 12, 476–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Varotto, C.-Y. Nam, I. Radivojevic, J. P. C. Tomé, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, C. T. Black and C. M. Drain, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2552–2554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vohra, K. Kawashima, T. Kakara, T. Koganezawa, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and H. Murata, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chueh, C. Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 RSC .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber and N. S. Sariciftci, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1929–1940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rafique, S. M. Abdullah, K. Sulaiman and M. Iwamoto, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 84, 43–53 CrossRef .
C. Liu, C. Yi, K. Wang, Y. Yang, R. S. Bhatta, M. Tsige, S. Xiao and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4928–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174–179 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Chen, C. Cui, Y.-Q. Li, L. Zhou, Q.-D. Ou, C. Li, Y. Li and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kurpiers, T. Ferron, S. Roland, M. Jakoby, T. Thiede, F. Jaiser, S. Albrecht, S. Janietz, B. A. Collins, I. A. Howard and D. Neher, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2038 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Tumbleston, B. A. Collins, L. Yang, A. C. Stuart, E. Gann, W. Ma, W. You and H. Ade, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kumar, A. A. Raheem, K. Pandian, V. Nandakumar, R. Shanmugam and C. Praveen, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 7015–7027 RSC .
K. Yamamoto, M. Shahiduzzaman, A. Yamada, T. Takaya, T. Chikamatsu, T. Koganezawa, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
T. Taima, M. Shahiduzzaman, T. Ishizeki, K. Yamamoto, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara and K. Takahashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19699–19704 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riede, C. Uhrich, J. Widmer, R. Timmreck, D. Wynands, G. Schwartz, W.-M. Gnehr, D. Hildebrandt, A. Weiss, J. Hwang, S. Sundarraj, P. Erk, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3019–3028 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yim, S. Heutz and T. S. Jones, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 165308 CrossRef .
W. Chen, D.-C. Qi, H. Huang, X. Gao and A. T. S. Wee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 410–424 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari and Y. Yoshida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6369–6377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakurai, R. Fukasawa, K. Saito and K. Akimoto, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 702–708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. Song, J. Xie, P. Sun, P. Gu, C. Liu, F. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z.-K. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29924–29931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4146–4152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Cheng, J. Wang, G. T. Du, S. H. Shi, Z. J. Du, Z. Q. Fan, J. M. Bian and M. S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 083305 CrossRef .
J. Lee, D. Park, I. Heo and S. Yim, Mater. Res., 2014, 58, 132–135 CAS .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 233302 CrossRef .
T. Chikamatsu, M. Shahiduzzaman, K. Yamamoto, M. Karakawa, T. Kuwabara, K. Takahashi and T. Taima, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 5678–5684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Newman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1940, 62, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fedik and A. I. Boldyrev, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 8585–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Davy, G. Man, R. A. Kerner, M. A. Fusella, G. E. Purdum, M. Sezen, B. P. Rand, A. Kahn and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 673–681 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Y. Xi, C.-C. Chueh, J.-Q. Xu, H. Zhong, F. Lin, S. B. Jo, L. D. Pozzo, W. Tang and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 454–460 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, Y. Setoguchi, A. Sakaguchi, M. Suzuki and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 386–391 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Design, System, Application
A dispersed network of heterointerfaces in the photoactive layer originates from the electron-donating and electron-accepting materials, in which crucial photo-physical actions take place. However, in terms of understanding the structural properties of these interfaces, the lack of techniques available to measure the local area and three-dimensional complex arrangement of the material can hamper progress. Molecular orientation interrelated to the donor/acceptor heterojunctions can be important parameters for achieving high-performance organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Thus, precise control of the molecular orientation of the resultant films could influence and subsequently improve the performance of the OPVs. The work presented here outlines a technique to detect the molecular orientation angles of each molecule in a BHJ film by using in situ infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IR-RAS). The resulting outcomes demonstrate important insights into molecular orientation switching by changing the different combinations of molecules and substrates, and will enable the design of organic electronics with an improved performance.


 	Fig. 1  Molecular structure of (a) coronene, (b) ZnPc and (c) C60.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The calculated values of the orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The blue, red, black and pink lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/CuI sub, coronene/PEDOT:PSS, and ZnPc/CuI sub, respectively. (b) XRD spectra of the coro film deposited on each substrate; SEM images of coronene on (c) PEDOT:PSS and (d) CuI sub.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The blue, black, pink, and red lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coronene/CuI sub, ZnPc/CuI sub, and coronene/Au, respectively. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc film on Au and (c) the coronene film on Au.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) IR-RAS calculated values of the orientation parameter S for the ZnPc film grown on: (a) the coro sub, and the coronene film grown on (c) the ZnPc sub. The pink, red, and green lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, coro/ZnPc sub, and ZnPc/CuI sub, respectively. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc films on the coro sub and (d) the coronene film on the ZnPc sub.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) XRD spectra of the ZnPc:C60 film grown on the coro sub. GIWAXS images of (b) the ZnPc/coro sub, and (c) the ZnPc:C60/coro sub. (d) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. The pink, blue, red and green lines represent ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS, ZnPc:C60/coro sub, and ZnPc/coro sub, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. Schematic illustration of (b) the ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the ZnPc sub and (c) the coronene:C60 BHJ films on the coro sub. The blue, red, and green lines represent the coronene/Au, ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS and ZnPc/CuI, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The IR-RAS spectra of the films shows the calculated values of the orientation parameter S for four different film thicknesses. Schematic illustration of (b) ZnPc:C60 BHJ films on the coro sub and (c) the coronene:C60 BHJ films on the ZnPc sub. The blue, red, and green lines represent the coronene/Au, ZnPc/PEDOT:PSS and ZnPc/CuI, respectively.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
