2D layered insulator hexagonal boron nitride enabled surface passivation in dye sensitized solar cells  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR03767C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR03767C
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11275-112822D layered insulator hexagonal boron nitride enabled surface passivation in dye sensitized solar cellsMariyappan Shanmugam, Robin Jacobs-Gedrim, Chris Durcan and Bin Yu*College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering, State University of New York, Albany, NY 12203, USA. E-mail: byu@albany.edu;  Fax: +1 518 956-7492;   Tel: +1 518 956-7492Received 22nd July 2013, Accepted 3rd September 2013First published on 6th September 2013AbstractA two-dimensional layered insulator, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), is demonstrated as a new class of surface passivation materials in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) to reduce interfacial carrier recombination. We observe ∼57% enhancement in the photo-conversion efficiency of the DSSC utilizing h-BN coated semiconductor TiO2 as compared with the device without surface passivation. The h-BN coated TiO2 is characterized by Raman spectroscopy to confirm the presence of highly crystalline, mixed monolayer/few-layer h-BN nanoflakes on the surface of TiO2. The passivation helps to minimize electron–hole recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces. The DSSC with h-BN passivation exhibits significantly lower dark saturation current in the low forward bias region and higher saturation in the high forward bias region, respectively, suggesting that the interface quality is largely improved without impeding carrier transport at the material interface. The experimental results reveal that the emerging 2D layered insulator could be used for effective surface passivation in solar cell applications attributed to desirable material features such as high crystallinity and self-terminated/dangling-bond-free atomic planes as compared with high-k thin-film dielectrics.IntroductionHybrid photovoltaic cells employing organic and inorganic semiconductor materials have been demonstrated to show great potential in solar energy harvesting due to their relatively simple fabrication process, low cost, and promising photo-conversion efficiency.1–4 Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are an important category of hybrid photovoltaic technology exhibiting up to ∼11% photo-conversion efficiency (η) and improved stability by using solid state hole-conducting materials.5–7 Large-surface-area electron acceptor materials such as titanium dioxide (TiO2) and zinc oxide are potential candidates for DSSC applications due to the capability of loading a large number of photoactive dye molecules on the surface.8,9 The surface area and porosity of TiO2 can be controlled by tuning the nanoparticle size in the colloidal film. While the surface-to-volume ratio in TiO2 can be engineered, the number of surface states in TiO2 also increases, which largely impacts carrier transport and recombination processes in DSSCs and degrades solar cell performance.10–16 It is important to lessen the adverse contribution of surface states in order to achieve high performance of DSSCs. In addition, while thermal annealing (e.g., at 450 °C) is essential to form anatase-phase TiO2, preferred for DSSCs, oxygen vacancies (OVs) are typically created during the process. The OVs lead to the formation of stoichiometrically unstable sub-oxides which deteriorate the material properties of anatase TiO2via generating excessive bulk and surface defects, resulting in degraded stability and performance of solar cells.17,18Surface passivation is an effective approach to screen out the undesirable effects caused by surface states and interfacial defects of semiconductors. When the technique is applied to solar cells, the impact of surface states and material defects near the interface on carrier transport can be significantly mitigated. The passivated semiconductor with minimum surface energy is more stable which helps to achieve effective transport of photo-generated carriers. Additionally, a thin surface passivation layer provides an energy barrier to reduce the probability of electron–hole recombination via defect or surface states and hence boosts the photo-conversion efficiency. In the past, surface passivation has been performed by using high-k dielectric thin films to saturate the dangling bonds at semiconductor surfaces. A number of high-k dielectrics, such as Al2O3, ZrO, MgO, and ZnO, have been reportedly used to passivate the TiO2 surface, resulting in improved solar cell performance.19–27 However, several critical issues associated with high-k initiated surface passivation remain unsolved, including difficulty in achieving conformal coverage over a large area, blockage of photo-injected electrons from the organic dye molecules (due to the relatively thick dielectric layer), and the reduced porosity of TiO2 which impedes dye-adsorption and leads to low short-circuit current density (JSC).Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), a 2D layered insulator with a graphene-like hexagonal in-plane lattice structure, a wide energy bandgap (EG ∼ 5.5 eV) and a medium value of dielectric constant (k ∼ 4), has emerged recently as a functional material candidate for a range of nano-device applications.28–31 Chemical and micromechanical exfoliation of monolayer and few-layers of h-BN have been demonstrated by dissociating the weak van der Waals coupling between individual atomic planes.32,33 Recently, growth of large-area monolayer/few-layer h-BN was reported by a chemical-vapour-deposition method.34 It is relatively easy to achieve very high crystallinity of h-BN, a 2D layered material, by an exfoliation approach, whereas most of the high-k dielectrics are amorphous in nature. Being chemically stable, the wide-bandgap h-BN is highly preferred in solar cell applications as a surface passivation material which absorbs no photons in the visible spectral range, while modifying the surface/interface behaviour of photo-active semiconductors.In this paper we demonstrate the application of 2D layered insulator h-BN as a new class of materials for surface passivation on semiconductor TiO2 to improve the material's electronic quality and performance of the resulting DSSC. The critical material properties of h-BN and comparison of key device performance metrics of DSSCs (with and without h-BN surface passivation) are presented. The demonstrated experimental work elucidates the potential advantages of the 2D layered insulator over the previously reported amorphous-phase high-k dielectric materials with respect to surface passivation for semiconductors in the next-generation photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices.ExperimentalTwo types of DSSC devices were fabricated and characterized to demonstrate the capability of h-BN as a material candidate for surface passivation. (i) A DSSC without h-BN surface passivation on TiO2 (as the reference device) and (ii) a DSSC with h-BN coated TiO2. For the DSSC without h-BN surface passivation, a colloidal TiO2 nanoparticle film was deposited on an indium-tin-oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate, followed by a thermal annealing process at 450 °C for 30 minutes under atmospheric chamber conditions. cis-Diisothiocyanato-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)ruthenium(II) bis(tetrabutylammonium), or known as N-719 dye, was coated onto the TiO2 nanoparticle electrode as a photon-absorbing layer. A Pt thin film of ∼50 nm thickness was deposited by electron-beam evaporation on the glass substrate as a counter electrode. DSSCs were fabricated using two electrodes separated by a parafilm spacer with a pre-made narrow channel through which an iodide/tri-iodide (I−/I−3), also known as Iodolyte AN-50, redox electrolyte was injected as an electron donor (hole conductor) to the dye molecules. For the fabrication of the DSSC with h-BN surface passivation, the colloidal TiO2 was covered by h-BN nanoflakes obtained from ultra-sonicated h-BN crystals in 2-propanol solution.The h-BN powder (Momentive Specialty Chemicals Inc.), with an average particle size of about 10 μm, was manually ground to obtain particles with smaller sizes. The ground fine powder of h-BN (5 mg) was dissolved in 15 mL of 2-propanol solution for the ultra-sonication process. A bath sonicator was used to exfoliate the monolayer/multilayer combination of h-BN from the larger sized particles. We observed that 15 minute ultra-sonication provided homogeneously mixed h-BN nanoflakes in 2-propanol. The h-BN solution was spin-coated onto the TiO2 surface and subsequently annealed at 100 °C to evaporate the excess solvent present in the film. The rest of the fabrication process is exactly the same as that for the DSSC without the h-BN surface passivation layer. Fig. 1 shows the key process steps starting from ultra-sonicated h-BN nanoflakes in 2-propanol solution which was then spin-coated onto the TiO2 nanoparticle film deposited on the ITO transparent electrode, followed by annealing at 100 °C. Fig. 2(a) shows the schematic diagram of the fabricated DSSC with a h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticle electrode. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the major physical processes involving photo-generated electrons and holes during DSSC operation. Process (1) shows electron injection from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to the conduction band of TiO2. Process (2) represents electron diffusive transport in the TiO2 nanoparticle layer towards the ITO contact. Process (3) shows electron capture by TiO2 surface states, while processes (4) and (5) represent hole capturing by surface states from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the dye and electrolyte, respectively. Here, processes (3), (4) and (5) lead to interfacial recombination. If the density of the TiO2 surface states is effectively minimized by an ultra-thin surface passivation layer, the interfacial recombination can be better controlled to improve the solar cell performance. Fig. 1  Schematic of the material preparation process showing the ultra-sonicated h-BN nanoflakes in 2-propanol solution which is spin-coated onto the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles deposited on the ITO electrode after annealing at 100 °C.  Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated DSSC showing a h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticle electrode serving as an electron acceptor with the capability of minimizing the interfacial recombination loss. (b) Illustration of electron transport and recombination pathways showing (1) electron injection from the dye to TiO2, (2) diffusive electron transport in TiO2 towards ITO, (3) electron capturing by TiO2 surface states, and (4) and (5) hole capturing by TiO2 surface states from the dye and electrolyte, respectively. The surface morphology of the TiO2 nanoparticles coated with h-BN nanoflakes was characterized using a LEO 1550 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Raman spectroscopy (Horiba Scientific) with a laser of 532 nm was performed on the samples to confirm the h-BN on TiO2. A Camspec M550 double-beam scanning UV-visible spectrometer was used to study the photo-absorption of N719 in a wavelength window of 350–750 nm. The current density vs. voltage (J–V) characteristics of the DSSCs fabricated with and without h-BN surface passivation were measured under both dark and the standard AM 1.5 illumination conditions using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyzer. A Xe arc lamp was used to simulate the solar light. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) characteristics of the solar cells were measured in the spectral range of 350–750 nm using a Newport monochromator (equipped with the same Xe arc lamp that was used to measure the J–V characteristics).Results and discussionFig. 3 shows the surface morphology of the TiO2 nanoparticle film with spin-coated h-BN nanoflakes on the surface with a scale bar of 300 nm. The SEM micrograph shows a highly porous TiO2 matrix consisting of a well-connected nanoparticle network which is highly desired for effective electron transport in DSSCs. The TiO2 nanoparticles present in the film were about ∼20 nm in size. Fig. 3  Surface morphology of the h-BN nanoflake-coated TiO2 nanoparticle electrode used for DSSC fabrication showing a highly porous, well-connected TiO2 network with randomly distributed nanoparticles. It is noticed that h-BN nanoflakes do not impact the porosity of the TiO2 nanoparticle film due to the presence of combined monolayer/few-layers of nanoflakes in the 2-propanol solution obtained by ultra-sonication. It is relatively difficult to distinguish h-BN nanoflakes on the TiO2 surface, as the flakes conformally cover the nanoparticles and are ultra-thin (monolayer/few-layers) in nature. Recently, it has been reported that atomic-layer-deposition based dielectric surface passivation provides highly conformal surface coverage.19 In our case, it is nontrival to achieve highly conformal surface coverage via the spin-coating process used in this experiment. However, we expect that h-BN surface passivation has a negligible impact on the porosity of the TiO2 network and does not lead to any cluster formation on the surface, as can be observed in the surface morphology image shown in Fig. 3. It is essential to use ultra-thin nanoflakes as surface passivation materials to avoid the blocking of electron transport at the critical material interfaces. The ultra-sonicated h-BN nanoflakes are few atoms thick in 2-propanol solution and hence they are suitable to be coated on any nanoparticle network employed in hybrid photovoltaic solar cells.Fig. 4 shows the Raman spectroscopic measurements on the h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticle layer. TiO2 exists in three phases such as anatase, rutile and brookite, depending upon the material preparation process. The anatase phase is mostly preferred as the electron acceptor material due to its improved stability and electrical conductivity among all three phases. In general, the anatase phase of TiO2 nanoparticles can be achieved by annealing at 450 °C under atmospheric conditions. The anatase phase of TiO2 nanoparticles is confirmed from the Raman signature peaks at wavenumbers of 145.7 cm−1, 397.1 cm−1, 513.5 cm−1, and 636.1 cm−1, respectively. The inset of Fig. 4(a) shows a closer view of the three small signature peaks of TiO2 nanoparticles corresponding to the three active vibrational modes as circled in the figure. The two vibrational modes at 145.7 cm−1 and 636.1 cm−1 correspond to Eg, while the other two modes 397.1 cm−1 and 513.5 cm−1 represent B1g and A1g Raman active modes, respectively. The Raman peak corresponding to the h-BN surface passivation layer observed at 1367.2 cm−1 confirms the high crystallinity and hexagonal nature of h-BN on the TiO2 nanoparticle layer. While Fig. 4(a) confirms the presence of h-BN coating on TiO2 nanoparticles, Fig. 4(b) and (c) show the Raman spectra obtained from three different spots of the same sample. In the case of TiO2, the Raman peak did not show any wavenumber shift in all three measurement spots. Fig. 4  Raman spectroscopic data obtained from h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticles, (b) Raman spectra of the TiO2 nanoparticle layer obtained from three different spots suggesting that there is no change in the phase as well as in the size of the nanoparticles and (c) Raman spectra of the h-BN nanoflakes obtained from three different spots showing a shift. On the other hand, a change in peak position associated with h-BN was observed at three different spots, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The observation suggests that the phase and size of TiO2 nanoparticles present in the sample remain about the same everywhere, while the thickness of h-BN varies slightly. In the case of h-BN, the wavenumber shift confirms the presence of mixed monolayer and few-layers on the TiO2 surface. The liquid-derived exfoliation by ultra-sonication of h-BN nanocrystals yields randomly distributed nanoflakes which contain mixed monolayer/few-layers in 2-propanol solution. It is rather difficult to control the layer thickness in ultra-sonication based exfoliation of h-BN. The TiO2 nanoparticle layer is highly porous (at the micron scale) which can accommodate mixed monolayer/few-layer h-BN in its bulk. Hence it is possible to achieve surface passivation all over the surface of the TiO2 film. The annealing process at 100 °C on h-BN nanoflake-coated TiO2 nanoparticles improves the electrical contact between h-BN and TiO2 by enhancing the physical adhesion by evaporating the excess solvent present between h-BN nanoflakes and TiO2. This also helps to improve the surface passivation of h-BN on TiO2 by eliminating the excess solvent present at the material interface.Fig. 5(a)–(c) show the dark, illuminated J–V characteristics in an applied forward bias range of 0–1 V and the output power characteristics for the DSSCs without and with h-BN surface passivation, respectively. The DSSC with no surface passivation exhibits a JSC of 12.8 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 770 mV, the maximum power (PMAX) of 3.64 × 10−4 W, and a photoconversion efficiency (η) of 5.2%. The DSSC employing h-BN passivated TiO2 exhibits JSC, VOC, PMAx, and η of 15.7 mA cm−2, 782 mV, 5.72 × 10−4 W, and 8.2%, respectively. Both types of solar cells were measured under the same illumination condition of 100 mW cm−2. About 23% enhancement in JSC is observed in DSSC employing h-BN surface passivation on the TiO2 electrode with reference to that of the DSSC without surface passivation, suggesting that the photo-injected electrons in the TiO2 nanoparticle electrode were more effectively collected in the device with h-BN surface passivation. Furthermore, we observe ∼57% enhancement in η of the DSSC with h-BN surface passivation as compared with the reference device without surface passivation, implying that surface states at the TiO2/electrolyte interface were effectively suppressed by the h-BN layer, while it favours electron transport. It should also be noted that the h-BN layer on TiO2 does not impede the electron transport from dye molecules to TiO2, attributed to the ultra-thin nature (a combination of monolayer/few-layers) of h-BN. Fig. 5  Dark and illuminated J–V characteristics of the DSSCs (a) with no surface passivation and (b) with h-BN surface passivation. (c) Output power characteristics of DSSCs without and with h-BN surface passivation, respectively. Incident photons in the spectral window of 350–750 nm generate excitons in N719 molecules adsorbed on the surface of TiO2. While the holes at the HOMO of the dye are transported to the electrolyte, electrons from the LUMO of the dye are injected into the conduction band of TiO2, the electron acceptor. In the case of the untreated TiO2, photo-injected electrons at the conduction band can be captured by the TiO2 surface states. If holes are also captured by TiO2 surface states then these two processes (electron and hole capturing) lead to interfacial recombination. In the case of h-BN passivated TiO2, the density of surface states is expected to be much lower than that in untreated TiO2. Moreover, the thin h-BN layer on the surface of TiO2 acts as a barrier for reverse electron transport from TiO2 back to dye molecules and hence exhibits the extremely low probability of interfacial recombination. From the enhancement in device performance due to h-BN passivation, it is suggested that h-BN provides an energy barrier between trapped electrons and holes at the HOMO of dye molecules to suppress the interfacial carrier recombination, leading to enhancement in solar cell performance metrics. If the probability of electron capturing by TiO2 surface states can be minimized, photo-injected electrons at the conduction band of the TiO2 have a longer lifetime, resulting in effective electron collection at the ITO electrode. In the case of the DSSC with no surface passivation, the probability of electron capturing by surface states may dominate over electron collection at the ITO, leading to interfacial recombination.While the illuminated device J–V characteristics confirm the performance enhancement due to h-BN surface passivation on the TiO2 electrode, the dark J–V characteristics represent the quality of material interfaces that impacts carrier transport and recombination in the DSSCs. It is essential to suppress the dark current of a solar cell to improve the net photocurrent, as it is in the opposite direction under device operational conditions. Fig. 5(a) shows the comparison of the dark J–V characteristics of the DSSCs with and without h-BN surface passivation in a forward-applied bias region of 0–1 V. In the linear scale, an exponential increase of dark current in the DSSC without surface passivation is observed, while there is a significant control on the dark current of the DSSC employing h-BN surface passivation on TiO2. The increase in the dark current, as can be seen in the bias range of 0.65–1 V for the DSSC without surface passivation, confirms that TiO2 surface states actively participate in electron and hole capturing processes from the conduction band of TiO2 and the electrolyte, respectively, leading to trap-assisted interfacial recombination which is responsible for low performance. In the case of the h-BN passivated DSSC, the dark current is significantly suppressed, suggesting that reverse electron transport is in very good control which allows the solar cell to efficiently collect photo-injected electrons from the conduction band of TiO2 to the ITO as the electron and hole capture processes are minimized.Shunt resistance (RSH) is an important quantity which needs to be as high as possible in DSSCs. The values of RSH for the two DSSCs (with and without h-BN passivation) were obtained in the low forward bias region of the illuminated current values shown in the inset of Fig. 6(a). The value of RSH for the DSSC with no passivation is 1.9 kΩ, while the device with h-BN passivation is 3.0 kΩ. This suggests that leaky transport pathways are effectively blocked in the case of the DSSC with surface passivation and hence a higher value of RSH as compared with the device with no surface passivation. The ultra-thin nature and high crystallinity of h-BN offer unique advantage to the DSSC to block the unwanted leaky transport pathways by providing an increased RSH value. Fig. 6  (a) Dark J–V characteristics of the DSSCs with no surface passivation as compared with the DSSC employing h-BN surface passivation, measured at forward applied bias conditions. The inset shows the illuminated J–V characteristics in the low applied bias region used to extract the values of RSH. (b and c) Semi-log plot of J–V characteristics under dark conditions at low and high forward bias conditions, respectively. The dark current densities of the two DSSCs are compared in the low (0–0.35 V) and high (0.6–1 V) forward-bias regions to understand the role of the h-BN surface passivation layer, as shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c), respectively. The linear region in the semi-log plots of J–V characteristics is fit into a single-diode model, as shown in eqn (1), to extract the dark saturation current density (J0): (1)Here JD(V) is the dark-current density, q is the electronic charge, V is the applied voltage to the solar cell, n is the ideality factor, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature at which the solar cell operates (300 K). The model fitting using eqn (1) from Fig. 6(b) yields a J0 of 1 × 10−6 A cm−2 and 2.5 × 10−7 A cm−2 for the DSSCs without and with h-BN surface passivation, respectively. Similarly, in Fig. 6(c) the values of J0 are 1.6 × 10−4 A cm−2 and 3.5 × 10−4 A cm−2, respectively, for the two solar cells. A lower dark saturation current in the low forward bias region and a higher dark saturation current in the higher forward bias region are required for a good solar cell.The DSSC with h-BN passivated TiO2 exhibits a lower dark saturation current than that of the DSSC with no surface passivation, as seen in Fig. 6(b), suggesting that h-BN passivation improves the interfacial material quality of the DSSC which in turn results in enhanced solar cell performance. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the dark saturation current in the DSSC with h-BN passivation is increased as compared with that with no surface passivation, confirming that the h-BN layer does not block the electron transport at the material interface, while providing effective passivation of the surface states to improve solar cell performance. It is well known that electron transport occurs in the opposite direction under dark and illuminated conditions. Thus, improving the net photocurrent from a solar cell requires low dark current. A high level of dark current significantly reduces the net photocurrent according to eqn (2), J(V) = JSC − JD(V)(2)Here J(V) is the net photocurrent density and JSC is the short-circuit current density of the solar cell.It is evident that decreasing J0 increases the net photocurrent and therefore improves the photovoltaic performance of the solar cell. The device with h-BN surface passivation exhibits lower dark saturation current density as compared with that with no surface passivation, leading to enhanced solar cell performance. A VOC enhancement of ∼12 mV is observed in the DSSC with h-BN surface passivation, which is explained using the following relationship, (3)When J0 decreases, VOC increases logarithmically as shown in eqn (3). The DSSC with h-BN surface passivation exhibits a lower J0 as compared with that without surface passivation, and hence an improved VOC.Fig. 7 shows the EQE spectra of the fabricated DSSCs in a wavelength region of 350–750 nm. The DSSC employing h-BN surface passivation exhibits ∼10% enhancement in the EQE in the region of 425–600 nm, as compared with that without passivation. Fig. 7  EQE spectra of the DSSC with no surface passivation and that with h-BN surface passivation in the spectral range of 350–750 nm. The results show suppressed interfacial recombination due to surface passivation, resulting in more effective electron collection as compared with the device without h-BN surface passivation. The observed enhancement in EQE of the solar cell utilizing h-BN surface passivation is almost consistent from 350 nm to 700 nm. In this study, we use N-719 dye molecules as the photon-absorbing material which has an effective absorption in the wavelength range of 350–750 nm as shown in the inset. Similar EQE spectra of the two devices confirm that the photon-absorbing layer is the same in both cases, while the change in magnitude comes from the difference in effective electron collection achieved by h-BN surface passivation. The enhancement in the EQE of the solar cell with h-BN surface passivation is attributed to better control of interfacial recombination that leads to effective electron collection at the ITO electrode.In general, 2D layered materials are highly crystalline crystals exhibiting very good electrical properties in comparison with conventional bulk or thin-film semiconductors. The graphene-like layer-structured nanosheets are free of unsaturated dangling bonds on the surface, forming self-terminated crystallographic planes. This helps when 2D layered materials are stacked on other semiconductors, resulting in a surface-state-free interface at which the recombination loss is minimized and hence efficient carrier transport is possible. The weak van der Waals forces holding individual atomic planes can be broken easily by exfoliation (e.g., via ultra-sonication), yielding nanoflakes of h-BN consisting of monolayer/few-layer stacks with self-terminated surfaces. For these self-terminated nanoflakes deposited on the TiO2 surface, the electronic quality is significantly improved by passivating the surface states of TiO2. Minimum surface energy is created at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface by incorporating h-BN passivation which is highly desirable to suppress electron and hole capturing processes initiated by TiO2 surface states. While recent development in the field of surface passivation makes use of a number of high-k dielectrics, all these materials are generally prepared by the deposition or sputtering method resulting in a low-quality amorphous form. 2D layered insulators with very high crystallinity can be prepared by mechanical/chemical exfoliation or chemical vapour deposition, representing promising material candidates for semiconductor surface passivation. While it may be difficult to claim conformal surface coverage of h-BN on TiO2, the nanoflakes of h-BN on TiO2 do not form any clusters which could affect electron transport in DSSCs. The device performance demonstrated supports that there is no cluster formation and hence efficient electron transport is achievable with h-BN surface passivation on TiO2.ConclusionWe demonstrated a 2D layered insulator h-BN passivated TiO2 semiconductor which significantly improves the performance metrics of DSSCs by suppressing the surface state effect on photo-generated carriers. The experimental results indicate that h-BN effectively modifies the semiconductor TiO2 surface and helps to reduce the probability of carrier recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfaces via controlled electron and hole capturing processes. The h-BN surface passivation layer provides an energy barrier separating photo-injected electrons (in TiO2) and holes (in dye/electrolyte). While posting a negligible influence on electron transport at the interface, the h-BN serves as a surface passivation material to minimize the adverse contribution of TiO2 surface states to electron transport. Moreover, unlike reported amorphous-phase high-k materials, 2D layered insulator h-BN is highly crystalline with a graphene-like in-plane lattice structure free of dangling bonds. These combined features offer a material interface with high quality critical to efficient electron transport.ReferencesM. Wright and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. W. Zeng, H. H. Lo, C. H. Chang, Y. Y. Lin, C. W. Chen and W. F. Su, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 952–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Günes and N. S. Sariciftci, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 581–588 CrossRef PubMed .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. O'regan and M. Grfitzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Y. Kim and M. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 233, 20–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Giannouli and F. Spiliopoulou, Renewable Energy, 2012, 41, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Kang, J. Y. Kim and Y. E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5242–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Bisquert, A. Zaban and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8774–8782 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthörl, A. J. Nozik, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yu, K. Wu and D. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 192104 CrossRef .J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4292–4294 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Leng, Z. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15008–15023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Zhu, N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25174–25180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhanga, H. Tianc, X. Wangc, G. Xueb, Z. Tian, J. Zhang, S. Yuan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Mater. Lett., 2013, 100, 51–53 CrossRef PubMed .S. R. Kim and M. K. Parvez, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 26, 1012–1017 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Bakke, K. L. Pickrahn, T. P. Brennan and S. F. Bent, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3482–3508 RSC .C. Prasittichai and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .C. Lin, F. Y. Tsai, M. H. Lee, C. H. Lee, T. C. Tien, L. P. Wang and S. Y. Tsai, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2999–3003 RSC .S. C. Choi, H. S. Lee, S. J. Oh and S. H. Sohn, Phys. Scr., 2012, 85, 025801 CrossRef .T. P. Brennan, J. R. Bakke, I. K. Ding, B. E. Hardin, W. H. Nguyen, R. Mondal, C. D. Bailie, G. Y. Margulis, E. T. Hoke, A. Sellinger, M. D. McGehee and S. F. Bent, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12130–12140 RSC .H. S. Jung, J. K. Lee and M. Nastasi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10332–10335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Wu, H. Han, Q. Tai, J. Zhang, S. Xu, C. Zhou, Y. Yang, H. Hu, B. Chen, B. Sebo and X. Z. Zhao, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 215704 CrossRef PubMed .E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 475–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. S. Wang, C. H. Huang, Y. Y. Huang, Y. J. Hou, P. H. Xie, B. W. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 678–682 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Pacilé1, J. C. Meyer, Ç. Ö. Girit and A. Zettl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 133107 CrossRef .C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Jain, T. Bansal, C. A. Durcan, Y. Xu and B. Yu, Carbon, 2013, 54, 396–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. Tang, H. Kuwahara and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .C. Lee1, Q. Li, W. Kalb, X. Z. Liu, H. Berger, R. W. Carpick and J. Hone, Science, 2010, 328, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .L. Song, L. J. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. H. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the material preparation process showing the ultra-sonicated h-BN nanoflakes in 2-propanol solution which is spin-coated onto the surface of TiO2 nanoparticles deposited on the ITO electrode after annealing at 100 °C.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated DSSC showing a h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticle electrode serving as an electron acceptor with the capability of minimizing the interfacial recombination loss. (b) Illustration of electron transport and recombination pathways showing (1) electron injection from the dye to TiO2, (2) diffusive electron transport in TiO2 towards ITO, (3) electron capturing by TiO2 surface states, and (4) and (5) hole capturing by TiO2 surface states from the dye and electrolyte, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface morphology of the h-BN nanoflake-coated TiO2 nanoparticle electrode used for DSSC fabrication showing a highly porous, well-connected TiO2 network with randomly distributed nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman spectroscopic data obtained from h-BN coated TiO2 nanoparticles, (b) Raman spectra of the TiO2 nanoparticle layer obtained from three different spots suggesting that there is no change in the phase as well as in the size of the nanoparticles and (c) Raman spectra of the h-BN nanoflakes obtained from three different spots showing a shift.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dark and illuminated J–V characteristics of the DSSCs (a) with no surface passivation and (b) with h-BN surface passivation. (c) Output power characteristics of DSSCs without and with h-BN surface passivation, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Dark J–V characteristics of the DSSCs with no surface passivation as compared with the DSSC employing h-BN surface passivation, measured at forward applied bias conditions. The inset shows the illuminated J–V characteristics in the low applied bias region used to extract the values of RSH. (b and c) Semi-log plot of J–V characteristics under dark conditions at low and high forward bias conditions, respectively.	 
	(1)
J(V) = JSC − JD(V)	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 7  EQE spectra of the DSSC with no surface passivation and that with h-BN surface passivation in the spectral range of 350–750 nm. The results show suppressed interfacial recombination due to surface passivation, resulting in more effective electron collection as compared with the device without h-BN surface passivation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
