A new strategy to engineer polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells with thick active layers via self-assembly of the tertiary columnar phase   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR03789A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR03789A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11511-11522A new strategy to engineer polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells with thick active layers via self-assembly of the tertiary columnar phase†

        
          
            Hongfei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenhua 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Pan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Naisheng 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sushil K. 
            Satija
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dilip 
            Gersappe
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Yong 
            Nam
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Miriam H. 
            Rafailovich
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA. E-mail: miriam.rafailovich@stonybrook.edu
bCenter for Neutron Research, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
cCenter for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA. E-mail: cynam@bnl.gov
Received 
      27th May 2017
    , Accepted 13th July 2017First published on 14th July 2017AbstractWe report that the addition of a non-photoactive tertiary polymer phase in the binary bulk heterojunction (BHJ) polymer solar cell leads to a self-assembled columnar nanostructure, enhancing the charge mobilities and photovoltaic efficiency with surprisingly increased optimal active blend thicknesses over 300 nm, 3–4 times larger than that of the binary counterpart. Using the prototypical poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):fullerene blend as a model BHJ system, we discover that the inert poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) added in the binary BHJ blend self-assembles into vertical columns, which not only template the phase segregation of electron acceptor fullerenes but also induce the out-of-plane rotation of the edge-on-orientated crystalline P3HT phase. Using complementary interrogation methods including neutron reflectivity, X-ray scattering, atomic force microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and molecular dynamics simulations, we show that the enhanced charge transport originates from the more randomized molecular stacking of the P3HT phase and the spontaneous segregation of fullerenes at the P3HT/PMMA interface, driven by the high surface tension between the two polymeric components. The results demonstrate a potential method for increasing the thicknesses of high-performance polymer BHJ solar cells with improved photovoltaic efficiency, alleviating the burden of stringently controlling the ultrathin blend thickness during the roll-to-roll-type large-area manufacturing environment.
Introduction
Organic polymer solar cells, especially those based on a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure, have generated extensive interest in the past few decades due to their mechanical flexibility, solution processability, and potentially lower manufacturing costs.1 Typically, BHJ solar cells consist of binary blend thin films, where a photoactive polymer is mixed with a fullerene-based electron acceptor, and the exciton dissociation occurs along the interfaces generated between the two components.2 Owing to the advances in material development and the associated device engineering, the best BHJ solar cell efficiency has surpassed 10%.3–5 However, this high efficiency, achieved in small-scale devices, has not been readily translated into high performances of the BHJ solar cells fabricated by large-area fabrication methods such as the roll-to-roll (R2R) or slot-die coating, which generally leads to considerably lower device efficiencies (<5%).6,7
One of the practical issues of the large-area fabrication method is that typical high-performance organic BHJ blend solar cells have sub-100 nm optimal active layer thicknesses, and the uniform coating of such ultrathin organic BHJ blend layers by these large-area coating technologies is non-trivial. Instead, much higher layer thicknesses, for instance over 300 nm, are preferable in order to fabricate uniform active BHJ blend layers without pin-holes and defects that cause dysfunctional devices.8,9 In general, the high photovoltaic performance, particularly the photocurrent output, of BHJ solar cells requires an increased amount of photons absorbed by the active blend layer and high mobility of free charge carriers in the active layer for the efficient collection of free charge carriers.10,11 In principle, an improvement in photon absorption can be achieved by simply increasing the active layer thickness for a given system, but because of the typically low charge mobility inside the active BHJ layer, the increased active layer thickness over the usual optimal value (≲100 nm) does not yield an improved photocurrent output but rather was found to reduce the photovoltaic parameters and overall performance.12,13 The issue is especially prevalent in most of the state-of-the-art low band gap polymers, as their optimal BHJ blend layer thicknesses tend to be <80 nm.14 Fundamentally, the low charge mobility is in part caused by the nanoscale phase-separated morphology in the active BHJ layer, which creates long circuitous pathways for charge transport, rendering the free charge carriers more prone to recombination loss.15–17
It is thus recognized that the improvement in the charge carrier collection in the BHJ blend layer is critical not only for improving the overall solar cell efficiency but also for realizing an increased device optimal thickness, desired for the reliable large-area device fabrication. While earlier studies for improving the charge transport and collection have focused on optimizing the nanoscale BHJ morphology by, for instance, varying the polymer:fullerene blend ratio and thermal or solvent annealing conditions,18–20 there have been efforts to explore the development of an ordered BHJ structure, which in principle consists of well-defined, phase-separated p- and n-type regions with straight charge transport pathways toward electrodes.21,22 Many studies related to the latter approach have reported the use of micro- or nanolithography to create template patterns onto substrates, which then could be filled by photoactive components. Despite some success in achieving improved device performance, these methods are time consuming and expensive to apply, and have often been shown to be ineffective,23 due to improper segregation of electron acceptors in the template structures or the radical groups on the template surface, which results in an undesirable charge recombination before their extraction to electrodes.24,25 Furthermore, these approaches could not increase the optimal blend layer thickness beyond the typical optimal values.
In a separate branch of research efforts, several groups have postulated that performance enhancement in the BHJ solar cell could be achieved by introducing a tertiary polymer phase into the binary BHJ, creating ternary blend BHJ solar cells. One of the first studies reported by Bazan's group has demonstrated an enhanced PV efficiency of polymer:fullerene binary BHJ solar cells upon the addition of less than one percent of high-molecular-weight photo-inactive polystyrene as an additive for optimizing the BHJ morphology.26 More recent works have focused on adding photoactive tertiary polymer components, which not only improved the morphology of the active blend layer,27–29 resulting in an enhanced charge transport,30,31 but also expanded the solar spectral coverage compared with the original binary blend.31–34 Nevertheless, these methods were also still limited by the diminishing efficiency when the blend layer thickness was increased over 100 nm.30,31,35,36 In our previous work, we showed that another factor potentially applicable for improving the performance of ternary blend BHJ solar cells was the self-assembly of ordered columnar structure consisting of an inert tertiary phase which templated more efficient pathways for extracting free charge carriers to the electrodes.37,38
In this study, we report that the self-assembled inert tertiary columnar polymer phase added to the polymer:fullerene binary BHJ solar cells enables a significantly increased optimal polymer BHJ solar cell thickness, which was accompanied by an improved device photovoltaic performance, compared with the binary control device. We apply our ternary blend scheme to a model binary blend system, the archetypical poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) BHJ solar cell. When a non-photoactive poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is blended in the binary P3HT:PCBM BHJ, the champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ternary blend devices reaches nearly 4% at the optimal ternary blend layer thickness over 300 nm, despite the fact that ∼40% of the ternary blend is the photo-inactive PMMA. By combining complementary neutron reflectivity and X-ray scattering measurements, atomic force microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, molecular dynamics simulation, and device electrical and photovoltaic characterization, we identified that the large surface tension between the two polymeric components, P3HT and PMMA, induces the self-assembly of vertical PMMA columnar domains and the spontaneous segregation of PCBM layer at the P3HT/PMMA interface. These result in the increased electron and hole mobilities through the BHJ device and eventually an enhanced P3HT:PCBM blend phase material photovoltaic performance with much higher optimal active layer thickness. This finding demonstrates a potential method for improving the material charge transport properties in existing photovoltaic BHJ materials and, consequently, increasing their optimal device thicknesses to make them more suitable for large-area, R2R-type mass manufacture.
Experimental section
Neutron reflectivity
Neutron reflectivity experiments were performed using the NG7 reflectometer at the Cold Neutron Facility of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (Gaithersburg, MD) with a wavelength (λ) of 4.76 Å and Δλ/λ ∼0.025. First, an approximately 30 nm P3HT thin film was spin-cast onto a 5 mm thick polished silicon wafer treated with a 5% hydrofluoric acid solution. Then, an approximately 40 nm deuterated PMMA (dPMMA) thin film was floated off on the surface of the deionized water bath. Finally, we picked up the floating film with a substrate covered by P3HT layers in the water bath. 50 wt% PCBM was added onto the top or bottom layer (in the solution phase before spin-coating) to investigate the diffusion and aggregation of PCBM in the polymer bilayer matrix. X-ray reflectivity measurements were applied prior to neutron reflectivity experiments to measure the thicknesses of bilayer samples.
Grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements
GIWAXS measurements for binary and ternary blend thin films were carried out at the X9 beamline (λ = 0.0918 nm (13.5 keV)) at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven National Laboratory. Two-dimensional scattering patterns were collected using a MAR-CCD area detector. The incident angle (α) of 0.18° was used to investigate the structure information of the thin film. All the results were collected at room temperature under vacuum. An X-ray exposure time of 120 s was used for all measurements.
Conducting atomic force microscopy (AFM)
Conductivity mapping measurements of the ternary blend active layer were conducted using an atomic force microscope (Bruker Dimension Icon). The P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend solution (1:1:1 wt ratio, in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on a Si wafer or indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate further coated with a 30 nm thick TiO2 layer prepared by spin-casting a precursor solution and annealing at 400 °C for 2 h on a hot plate in ambient air. The TiO2 precursor solution was prepared by the sol–gel method: 10 ml of tetrabutyl titanate was first dissolved in 100 ml of ethanol, followed by the sequential addition of acetic acid (10 ml), acetylacetone (10 ml), and de-ionized water (10 ml). The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 min. The conductivity mapping data were obtained by using a peak-force tunnelling (PF-TUNA) module (1 nN peak force, 2 V DC bias, an Au-coated Si AFM tip with a spring constant of 0.4 N m−1).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization
To prepare the cross-sectional TEM sample, P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films were prepared on a silicon wafer first by spin-coating and then the focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out technique was used to prepare the cross-sectional TEM sample (FEI Helios FIB). All the TEM images were taken under 80 kV (JEOL 1400).
Solar cell fabrication and photovoltaic characterization
ITO-coated glass substrates were treated with ultraviolet (UV)-ozone for 10 min. Then, an approximately 50 nm-thick poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) layer was spin-coated on the ITO substrate at 5000 rpm for 45 s. The substrate was baked on a hot plate at 140 °C, followed by spin-coating the binary or ternary polymer blend solution (20 mg ml−1, 1:1 or 1:1:1 wt ratio in chlorobenzene) in ambient air. The spin speed was varied from 700 rpm to 3000 rpm to achieve different film thicknesses. A 70 nm-thick Al top contact was deposited by thermal evaporation at a pressure of less than 3 × 10−7 Pa. The fabricated devices were annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum. The photovoltaic characteristics of the device were measured under 1 Sun air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) illumination conditions (set by a calibrated Si solar cell standard (Newport)) in ambient air on a modified probe station equipped with a 150 W solar simulator (Oriel) and a precision semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent).
Hole- and electron-only device fabrication for mobility measurements
For the hole-only device, the top Al contact of the solar cell was replaced by MoO3 (8 nm)/Ag (90 nm), wherein MoO3 acts as an electron blocking layer. The layers were deposited by thermal evaporation at a pressure of less than 3 × 10−7 Pa. The fabricated devices were annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum. For the electron-only device, the bottom PEDOT:PSS of the solar cell was replaced by TiO2 (30 nm) deposited by spin-casting a TiO2 sol–gel precursor solution and annealing at 400 °C for 2 h on a hot plate in ambient air. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the fabricated devices were measured by using a semiconductor parameter analyzer under dark ambient-air conditions using a probe station. The measured I–V characteristics were analysed by using the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) model: I = A (9/8) μεoεrV2L−3, where A is the device area, μ mobility, εo vacuum permittivity, εr semiconductor dielectric constant (∼3), and L the blend layer thickness. From the slopes of the linear portions of I–V2 plots, the corresponding μ values were determined.
Molecular dynamics simulations
We used a bead-spring model to simulate two immiscible polymers,39 labelled A (non-photoactive) and B (photoactive), confined in a thin film domain. A large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator (LAMMPS) package was used for our simulations. All the quantities in the simulation are reduced to a dimensionless format by setting the energy unit ε, the distance unit σ, and the Boltzmann constant kb to unity. Standard velocity-Verlet time integration was utilized with a step length of Δt = 0.005τ, where τ is the time scale. To simulate the thin film geometry, particle walls were imposed on the top and bottom of the simulation domain. Each wall, made of two layers of Lennard–Jones spheres densely packed in a (111) face-centered cubic lattice, moved as an entity. The other two dimensions (x and y) were periodic with a fixed length of 60σ. The model simulates an isothermal–isobaric ensemble. The temperature was set at unity by using a Nose–Hoover thermostat, and the pressure was controlled by slightly moving the top wall to adjust the internal pressure to be close to 0. The thickness of the systems therefore can have small variations, but they were limited to 0.5σ as we observed in the simulations. The polymers had a uniform length of 8 segments in our simulation and bonds were simulated by the finitely extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) potential UFENE: (1)where R0 is the maximum extensible length for the chemical bond (set at 1.5σ), and k is the spring constant (set at 30).40 We used a fixed composition of 20% polymer A and 80% polymer B for all the simulations and adjusted the thickness by increasing the total number of particles. All the results presented were taken at simulation time = 1.5 × 105τ.
Results and discussion
Photovoltaic performance of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend BHJ solar cells
We tested the photovoltaic characteristics of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend and P3HT:PCBM control binary blend BHJ solar cells and found that the addition of the tertiary PMMA phase significantly improved the photovoltaic performance of the material and enabled an increase of optimal device active layer thickness. The tested device structure consists of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PMMA:PCBM (1:1:1 wt ratio) or P3HT:PCBM (1:1 wt ratio) blend/Al (see the Experimental section for more details). Fig. 1a shows the representative J–V (J: current density) characteristics for the champion ternary blend and control binary blend solar cells under 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2), AM1.5G illumination conditions, with the corresponding photovoltaic parameters summarized in Table 1. The major performance enhancement with the addition of PMMA in the binary blend device arises from the increased apparent short circuit current density (JSC) from ∼8 mA cm−2 to ∼12 mA cm−2, with the power conversion efficiency (PCE) improving from 2.5% to 3.8% (cf., the open circuit voltage (VOC) remains at ∼0.6 V). More significantly, the optimal active layer thickness of the champion ternary blend device was much larger than that of the P3HT:PCBM binary blend device; Fig. 1b and c describe the variation of PCE and JSC for the ternary and binary blend solar cells as a function of the active blend layer thickness. Clearly, PCE and JSC of the control binary blend cell decrease rapidly with increasing film thickness beyond 100 nm (fill factor (FF) decreases similarly while the decrease in VOC is relatively insignificant. See Tables S1 and S2†). This trend has been well documented by several research groups and is ascribed to the increasing internal electrical resistance in the blend film and the consequently increased charge carrier recombination caused by the tortuosity of the phase-separated blend phases.41–43 In contrast, the ternary blend solar cell overall has a higher apparent PCE, which reaches a peak at blend thicknesses between 300 nm and 400 nm. We note that another important factor that influences the blend-thickness-dependent JSC and PCE is the optical interference effect caused by the reflection of incident light at the interfaces within the device stack and the top metal contact.44 However, the variation in the light absorption becomes relatively small for blend thicknesses beyond ∼300 nm for the P3HT:PCBM device with identical contact structures to those in the current study,44 suggesting that the observed ‘peaking’ behavior of JSC and PCE is mostly caused by the increase of internal electrical resistance. Nevertheless, the determination of precise optimal blend thickness will indeed require a data fitting that accounts for the optical interference within the device.
 Fig. 1  (a) Representative J–V characteristics of champion P3HT:PCBM binary (black line) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary (blue line) BHJ blend solar cells measured under 1 Sun AM1.5G simulated solar illumination. (b) PCE vs. active layer thickness for the binary blend (black sphere) and ternary blend (blue sphere) solar cells. Red spheres are for the ternary blend after normalizing to the photoactive blend volume. (c) JSCvs. active layer thickness for the binary blend (black sphere) and ternary blend (blue sphere) solar cells. Red spheres are for the ternary blend after normalizing to the photoactive blend volume. The dashed lines in (b) and (c) are only a guide to the eye. 
Table 1 Summary of champion device photovoltaic performance parameters in Fig. 1a




Blend condition

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE




Binary
0.605
8.47
49.4%
2.53%


Ternary
0.615
11.73
53.2%
3.84%




The enhanced PCE is remarkable considering that the ternary blend contains ∼38% of non-photoactive PMMA and consequently has a ∼40% lower measured optical absorption compared with the binary blend film of identical thickness (Fig. S1†). The average JSC of the ternary blend device normalized by the photoactive volume reaches 15.2 ± 0.7 mA cm−2 as a result, which is slightly larger than what was previously observed in the P3HT:PCBM binary blend confined in cylindrical nanopores with a conformal TiO2 electron contact layer (14.6 mA cm−2).45 If the apparent JSC is normalized by the photoactive volume, the corresponding PCE per volume of photoactive P3HT:PCBM in the ternary blend reaches ∼5.1% on average. Generally, the optimal blend active layer thickness in BHJ solar cells is determined by the interplay between the amount of light absorption and the extent of free charge carrier recombination, both of which increase for a larger blend thickness. With the increase of blend thickness, a significant charge recombination will dominate eventually, decreasing the device photovoltaic performance. The observed increase in optimal blend thickness with the addition of ternary PMMA phase suggests an improved charge collection efficiency through the photoactive P3HT:PCBM phase. A similar increase in the optimal blend thickness has previously been reported for P3HT:PCBM binary blend BHJ solar cells when carbon nanotubes were added as three-dimensional hole collecting electrodes into the device.46
Self-assembly of PMMA columnar domains and spontaneous segregation of PCBM at the P3HT/PMMA interface
The internal structure of the ternary blend film was investigated by combining AFM and TEM, and we identified the self-assembly of vertical PMMA columnar domains and the spontaneous segregation of PCBM layers at the P3HT/PMMA domain interface. We spin-cast a P3HT:PMMA:PCBM solution (1:1:1 wt ratio, in chlorobenzene) on a PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO-glass substrate and examined the surface structure of the cast ternary blend film by AFM after subjecting the film to 150 °C thermal annealing for 1 h. The topographical and deformational AFM images shown in Fig. 2a and b reveal that there exist two major phase-separated domains, a more deformable continuous matrix and an imbedded spherical phase with higher mechanical rigidity. Given the much higher glass transition temperature (Tg) of PMMA (∼100 °C) compared with that of P3HT (Tg ∼ 12 °C),47 we deduce that the spherical domains are most likely PMMA. The diameter of spherical domains appears to have a bimodal distribution, the smaller ones with a mean diameter of ∼0.75 μm and the larger ones with ∼3 μm (Fig. 2c). The total areal fraction occupied by the spherical PMMA domains (conversely, volume fraction if the domains extend vertically from the top to the bottom) is approximately 38%, which, as discussed, translates into a reduced amount of light absorption compared with the binary blend film of identical thickness because PMMA is not photoactive (Fig. S1†). We note that the AFM data indicate an appreciable height difference between PMMA domains and the P3HT:PCBM matrix, and even after the top metal contact deposition, this surface topography was transferred to the top (Fig. S2†).
 Fig. 2  AFM images of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary BHJ blend thin films (1:1:1 wt ratio, spin-cast on the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrate, annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum). (a) Topography (height) and (b) associated deformation (indentation depth) images, respectively. The scan size for all images is 40 μm × 40 μm. (c) Histogram showing the distribution of the diameters of circular domains obtained from (a). Solid lines denote Gaussian fits. 
A TEM study of the ternary blend thin film reveals that PCBM is predominantly segregated at the P3HT/PMMA interface, which is consistent with the neutron reflectivity measurements performed on layered control thin film samples as discussed later. The blend films were floated off from the ITO-glass substrate in water (by dissolving the PEDOT:PSS layer) and transferred onto TEM grids. Fig. 3a shows a representative bright-field TEM image, where the spherical PMMA phase displays a brighter contrast than the continuous P3HT:PCBM blend matrix due to more significant beam damage on the PMMA phase. We noticed prominent dark rings at the interface between the spherical PMMA domains and the P3HT matrix, regardless of the PMMA domain diameter. Considering the higher electron stopping power of PCBM compared with those of P3HT and PMMA,48 we expect that these dark rings are mainly composed of PCBM. Cross-sectional TEM further shows that the spherical PMMA domains span over the whole thickness of the ternary blend film, forming three-dimensional cylindrical volume elements extending from the top air interface to the bottom substrate (Fig. 3b). The dark interfacial layer at the P3HT/PMMA interface is also observed again, delineating the segregated interfacial PCBM layer vertically extended throughout the blend thickness, which should serve as efficient and direct pathways for the electron conduction toward the electrode. The width of the interfacial layer (marked by two red solid lines in Fig. 3b) is estimated to be ∼7 nm by measuring the difference of the contrast.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image (top-view) of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films (1:1:1 wt ratio, the film was floated off on a TEM grid and then annealed for 1 h at 150 °C under ∼10 millitorr vacuum). (b) Cross-sectional TEM image from the ternary blend thin films (identical blend conditions to those in (a), see the Experimental section for details of sample preparation). The width of the region marked by two red solid lines is ∼7 nm. 
The described phase segregation information is further confirmed using PF-TUNA AFM, where an electrically grounded ternary blend sample is locally biased by an Au-coated Si conducting AFM tip, and the relative magnitude of electrical currents through the sample is mapped across the surface. Fig. 4a shows a representative low-magnification conducting AFM image, where the continuous P3HT matrix clearly displays higher current conduction (i.e., brighter in the color scheme) than the non-conductive spherical PMMA domains. In a higher resolution scan (Fig. 4b), highly conducting (bright) rings with a width of ∼8 nm are observed around the spherical PMMA domains regardless of their diameters, which is comparable to the thickness of the PCBM interfacial layer observed in TEM. Since the smaller spherical domain has a longer perimeter per area than the larger domain, the contribution of the interfacial PCBM layer around the smaller PMMA domains to the electron conduction per area should be more significant than that around the larger PMMA domains. From the diameter distribution we observed (Fig. 2c), we estimate that the smaller diameter domains (average diameter 0.75 μm) should contribute at least 60% to the total electron conduction, if excluding the electron conduction through the network of PCBM remaining in the P3HT matrix.
 Fig. 4  PF-TUNA current images of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend (1:1:1 wt ratio) thin films spin-cast on a Si or ITO substrate. The blend film was annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum before the measurements. (a) Image of the ternary thin films spin-cast on a Si substrate, 40 μm × 40 μm scan size. (b) Higher resolution image of ternary thin films spin-coated on the ITO substrate coated with 30 nm TiO2 layers, 14 μm × 14 μm scan size. (c) TUNA current vs. distance profile along the line between two red dots marked in (b). It is noted that the TUNA current observed in (a) is substantially larger than (b) because the sample in (b) has a TiO2 bottom layer that acts as the hole-blocking contact while the TUNA current at the top surface is probed by an Au-coated AFM tip that primarily collects the hole current. 
Origin of self-assembly of PMMA columnar domains and spontaneous PCBM segregation
We study the fundamental phase separation behavior between P3HT, PMMA, and PCBM via the neutron reflectivity measurements on control bilayer thin film samples. The reflectivity data were fitted to the reflectivity profiles calculated from the model scattering length density (SLD) profiles via Parratt's recursion method.49 The fitting was performed using the Levenberg–Marquardt nonlinear least-squares method by adjusting the film thickness, SLD, and interfacial width (i.e., two times the roughness of the bottom layer) of the layers as the fitting parameters. Then, we could calculate the associated volume fraction profiles of each component phase by integrating the SLD profiles based on the same calculation method as that used in our previous work.37

Fig. 5a shows the neutron reflectivity data and the corresponding best fits obtained from deuterated PMMA (dPMMA)/P3HT bilayer films without PCBM and with 50 wt% PCBM in either dPMMA or P3HT after thermal annealing. Fig. 5b plots the resulting component volume fraction profiles for the dPMMA/P3HT bilayer case, which clearly indicate that P3HT and PMMA are highly immiscible as they form a sharp interface with less than ∼5 nm interfacial thickness upon spin-casting (top panel) and even after annealing at 150 °C for 90 min (bottom panel). When a dPMMA film with 50 wt% PCBM was floated onto a pure P3HT layer (top panel) and annealed (bottom panel), the PCBM particles diffused into the P3HT layer, forming ∼5 nm thick layers at the P3HT/dPMMA and Si/P3HT interfaces (Fig. 5c). When a dPMMA layer was floated onto a P3HT layer having 50 wt% PCBM (Fig. 5d), two segregated PCBM layers spontaneously emerged even without annealing (top panel), one at the dPMMA/P3HT interface (∼3.5 nm thick) and the other at the P3HT:Si interface (∼5 nm). Meanwhile, we found no discernible diffusion of PCBM into the dPMMA layer even after thermal annealing (bottom panel). These results indicate that PCBM does not have an appreciable miscibility in PMMA and prefers the P3HT phase, which is consistent with what has been reported previously.50–52 More importantly, the segregation of PCBM at the P3HT/PMMA interface, regardless of the initial conditions, suggests that the PCBM segregation is an equilibrium phenomenon that is expected to occur in the P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend.
 Fig. 5  (a) Representative measured neutron reflectivity profiles of control bilayer films after thermal annealing at 150 °C under ∼10 millitorr vacuum: dPMMA/P3HT (red sphere), dPMMA:PCBM blend (50 wt%)/P3HT (blue sphere), and dPMMA/P3HT:PCBM blend (50 wt%) (green sphere) bilayers, respectively. (b)–(d) Volume fraction profiles extracted from the best fit results of neutron scattering data showing the as-cast (dashed line, top panel) vs. after 90 min thermal annealing (solid lines, bottom panel) conditions: (b) dPMMA/P3HT, (c) dPMMA:PCBM blend (50 wt%)/P3HT, and (d) dPMMA/P3HT:PCBM blend (50 wt%) bilayers, respectively. 
Influence of PMMA columnar domains on the molecular structure of the P3HT:PCBM blend
To study the potential influence of PMMA columnar domains on the molecular structural characteristics of the P3HT:PCBM blend phase, we performed GIWAXS measurements on the control P3HT:PCBM binary blend (Fig. 6a, left panel) as well as the P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend (Fig. 6a, right panel) thin films. In both cases, we observe up to the third order scattering peaks corresponding to the “edge-on” P3HT lamellar stacking on the qz axis (qz = 1.15 Å−1).15,52 Additionally, we find that the size of the edge-on lamellar domain is nearly identical for both cases (∼20 nm, calculated from the measured full-width at half maximum of scattering peaks (Fig. S3†) using the Scherrer equation.53 See details in the ESI†). However, we note that there is a depletion of PCBM from the P3HT:PCBM blend phase upon the addition of PMMA—the X-ray scattering ring corresponding to a polycrystalline PCBM phase, whose intensity is proportional to the amount of PCBM in the matrix,54,55 is clearly visible in the control binary sample (Fig. 6a, left panel; q ∼ 1.43 Å−1)52,56 but disappears completely for the ternary blend case (Fig. 6a, right panel). This indicates significant depletion of PCBM from the P3HT:PCBM blend matrix upon the addition of PMMA because PCBM preferentially segregates at the P3HT/PMMA interface. The absence of a crystalline PCBM X-ray scattering signature, despite the visible presence of a ∼5 nm thick PCBM layer at the P3HT/PMMA interface, is most likely caused by the physical confinement that frustrates the PCBM crystallization; the PCBM domain size in the binary blend, calculated from the Scherrer equation, is ∼9.9 nm. This is consistent with the typical values reported in previous studies (10–20 nm)55,57 but larger than our observed PCBM interfacial layer width between the PMMA columnar domains and the P3HT matrix in the ternary blend sample. A closer examination of the P3HT scattering feature also reveals the randomization of the P3HT domain orientation. In Fig. 6b, we compare the angular intensity distribution of the scattering peak at q ∼ 1.71 Å−1, related with the “face-on” (i.e., π–π) P3HT lamellar stacking configuration,52,58 and find that the angular intensity distribution becomes nearly constant with the introduction of the tertiary PMMA phase. This implicates that the orientation of the face-on lamellar configuration becomes more randomized in the ternary blend film. In contrast, the angular distribution of the edge-on lamellar stacking peak (q ∼ 1.15 Å−1) virtually remains unchanged upon the addition of PMMA (Fig. 6c). This asymmetric impact of PMMA on the two different P3HT stacking orientations can be in part understood from the nearly immobile edge-on P3HT phase adjacent to the substrate due to its low interfacial energy,59 which will hinder the lamellar reorientation upon the introduction of PMMA. Meanwhile, the P3HT phase in the middle portion of the blend film has a higher fraction of face-on orientations,55,56,60 which can be reoriented and randomized around the PMMA columnar domains in the ternary blend.
 Fig. 6  (a) GIWAXS data, displaying two-dimensional distribution of X-ray scattering intensity from P3HT:PCBM binary blend (left panel) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend (right panel) thin films. (b) Angular distribution of the (010) face-on P3HT lamellar stacking peak (q = 1.71 Å−1). (c) Angular distribution of the (300) edge-on P3HT lamellar stacking peak (q = 1.15 Å−1). 
Charge transport in the ternary blend thin film
We determined the influence of the ternary blend structure on the charge transport parameters, in particular electron and hole mobilities, by fabricating and characterizing electron- and hole-only blend devices adopting carrier selective contacts (see the Experimental section). In both devices, the trap-free space SCLC model was used to obtain the charge mobilities from the slopes of the linear portions of the measured I–V2 curves (Fig. 7a).58,61 We found that the measured average hole mobility is 4.5 ± 0.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the ternary system, ∼10 times higher than the mobility measured from the P3HT:PCBM binary blend control device (3.1 ± 0.24 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1; both measured under ambient air) (Fig. 7b; Table 2). The average electron mobility of the ternary blend was found to be 8.4 ± 0.35 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, ∼2 times higher than that of the control devices, 4.6 ± 0.35 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 7b; Table 2), which is in accordance with the previous result reported in a similar blend system.38 We note that this relatively large difference in hole and electron mobilities can cause unbalanced charge transport and may have been responsible for the somewhat low FF values (≲0.53) observed in both the binary and ternary blend devices in the current study.
 Fig. 7  (a) Representative measured I–V2 characteristics for the hole-only (top panel) and electron-only (bottom panel) devices made from P3HT:PCBM binary (dashed lines) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary (solid lines) blend thin films. The linear portions of data were used to determine the slope and the corresponding charge mobilities by using the SCLC model. (b) Histograms comparing hole and electron motilities obtained from P3HT:PCBM binary and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films. Average values are displayed (measured from five devices for each condition). (c) Schematic illustration of the internal structure of the P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin film. Stacked red rectangles represent P3HT lamellar domains, grey cylinders vertical PMMA columns, and blue spheres PCBM molecules. 
Table 2 Summary of average hole and electron mobilities measured by SCLC analysis for P3HT:PCBM binary and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films




Charge type
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)


Binary blend
Ternary blend




Hole
3.1 ± 0.24 × 10−3
4.5 ± 0.2 × 10−2


Electron
4.6 ± 0.35 × 10−5
8.4 ± 0.35 × 10−5




The hole mobility of semi-crystalline P3HT is well known to be sensitive to the polymer crystallinity as well as molecular orientation. The enhancement of hole mobility has previously been reported in ternary systems, and its origin has been attributed to the change in the P3HT lamellar orientation from the edge-on to the face-on direction with respect to the substrate plane.61–63 The hole mobility observed in our control binary blend sample is relatively high compared with the values reported in previous reports, which is consistent with the GIWAXS data displaying the presence of a large population of face-on P3HT configuration in the control binary blend (Fig. 6a, left panel).60,64 The addition of PMMA into the binary blend randomized the face-on P3HT lamellar orientation while resulting in insignificant changes in the size and orientation of edge-on P3HT lamellar domains as discussed, and this is in fact expected to alleviate the grain boundary effect and cause an increase in hole mobility: it has been shown that the misorientation between neighboring crystalline polymer domains (i.e., grains) could negatively affect the inter-grain charge transport.65–68 Our control binary blend film had both highly ordered edge-on and face-on domains in the polymer matrix as confirmed by GIWAXS data, indicating the presence of highly misoriented (i.e., 90 degrees) polymer domains. The tertiary PMMA phase induced an appreciable randomization of the face-on P3HT lamellar orientation, relaxing the domain misorientation with the edge-on phases, and this subsequently should be able to improve the hole transport across neighboring polymer domains.
Another factor that is likely to have contributed to the enhanced hole mobility in the ternary blend is the observed depletion of PCBM from the P3HT:PCBM blend matrix surrounding the columnar PMMA domains, induced by the spontaneous segregation of PCBM to the P3HT/PMMA interface. Specifically, the top-view AFM image of the ternary blend we discussed earlier (Fig. 2a) suggests that approximately 70 wt% of PCBM is segregated along the perimeter of the PMMA columns, being removed from the P3HT:PCBM blend matrix (assuming ∼5 nm interfacial PCBM width and vertically extending cylindrical PMMA domains; see the ESI†). Previous studies have shown that the presence of PCBM in conjugated polymer:PCBM blends could reduce the hole mobility due to the increased bimolecular carrier recombination and more tortuous charge transport pathways along the polymer phase.69,70 The presence of PCBM can also reduce the polymer crystallinity by hindering the long-range ordering of lamellar structures.69,71 Meanwhile, the improved electron mobility can be attributed to the interfacial PCBM segregation on the columnar PMMA domains as it provides shortened pathways vertically traversing the film thickness for direct electron transport toward the electrode.
The above discussed structural characteristics enable us to deduce the structural configuration of individual components within the P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin film (Fig. 7c). First, the tertiary PMMA self-assembles into vertical columns extending from the bottom to the top of the ternary blend film and exerts an influence on the structures of P3HT and PCBM—the orientation of the P3HT lamellar domains predominantly stays immobilized as edge-on at the bottom substrate surface but becomes more randomized toward the upper portion of the film, most likely driven by the interaction between P3HT and the self-assembled PMMA vertical columns, which becomes stronger away from the bottom surface. This is the primary factor that increases the hole mobility. The vertical PMMA columns also induce depletion of PCBM from the P3HT:PCBM binary blend matrix and segregation of PCBM on the surface of PMMA columns with a segregation layer thickness of ∼5 nm, which frustrates the PCBM crystallization. The segregated surface PCBM domain extends across the ternary blend film thickness, improving the electron mobility as observed.
Prediction of the thickness-dependent stability of PMMA columnar domains
As shown above, the most important factor that contributed to the improved charge transport properties and photovoltaic performance of ternary blend BHJ solar cells with increased optimal blend layer thickness is the presence of self-assembled vertical PMMA columnar domains within the blend film. By using molecular dynamics simulations, previously we could reproduce the spontaneous formation of PMMA columns and subsequent segregation of PCBM to the P3HT/PMMA interface in the ternary blend thin film.37 Using the same approach, here we studied the structural stability of columnar PMMA domains and found that the PMMA columns become unstable as the blend film thickness increases, ultimately failing to extend vertically throughout the whole thickness.
For details, we used a bead-spring model to simulate the ternary blend film, where the system was confined between the top and bottom surfaces. Since the PCBM is not interfering with the phase separation behavior of the two polymer components, we only focus on the interaction between the two polymers, each represented as Lennard–Jones (LJ) particles labelled polymer A (non-photoactive) and polymer B (photoactive), with number fractions of 20% and 80%, respectively. The interaction between the monomers was modeled with the LJ potential ULJ: (2)where r is the inter-spacing between particles, σ is the characteristic distance at which the potential equals zero for paired particles, and ε is the depth of the potential well, which is set to unity for the same type of polymer. The miscibility between the two polymers is controlled by varying from 0.5 to 1.0, where the smaller ε indicates a higher immiscibility (more details in the Experimental section). The simulated thin film thickness, z, was varied from 27σ to 43σ. The simulation shows that a continuous vertical columnar domain is stable for the whole surveyed thickness range when ε equals 0.5 (Fig. 8). However, if the interfacial tension between the two polymers is decreased by increasing ε to 0.9, the columnar domain quickly becomes unstable with increasing film thickness; we found that the columnar domain is formed for small thicknesses (z < ∼27σ) but becomes unstable and breaks down to metastable hemispherical domains if z increases beyond 29σ (see Fig. S4 in the ESI† for a complete description of the critical film thickness at which the columnar structure breaks down, as a function of the interfacial tension). These results point out that the high interfacial energy between the two polymeric components is important for stabilizing the columnar structure with increasing the ternary blend film thickness. Given the large immiscibility between P3HT and PMMA confirmed by the neutron reflectivity measurements, the simulation study well describes the observed spontaneous formation of PMMA columnar domains in the ternary BHJ blend thin film. In addition, the predicted instability of the column structure with increasing blend thin film thickness appears to coincide with the eventually decreasing, measured device photovoltaic performance in the ternary blend solar cells. Though a concrete conclusion warrants further structural characterization of thick ternary blend films, these data implicate that the phase stability of PMMA columnar domains could also be contributing to the observed thickness dependence of ternary blend solar cell performance.
 Fig. 8  Visualization of the internal morphology of a ternary blend thin film obtained by molecular dynamics simulation with different interfacial tensions and thicknesses. Since PCBM is not interfering with the phase separation of the two polymeric components in the ternary blend, it is not included in the simulation. The non-photoactive polymer component A is represented as a blue sphere, and the photoactive polymer component B occupies the rest of the volume and is not displayed for clarity. Schematics show the morphologies obtained at: (a) ε = 0.9 and a thickness of 31σ; (b) ε = 0.9 and a thickness of 35σ; (c) ε = 0.5 and a thickness of 35σ; and (d) ε = 0.5 and a thickness of 43σ. 
Conclusion
We have demonstrated that the photovoltaic performance of the organic binary P3HT:PCBM BHJ blend could be improved by the addition of a tertiary PMMA phase via the spontaneous formation of columnar PMMA domains, resulting in the significantly increased optimal blend layer thickness. The systematic structural interrogation combining various complementary experimental measurements and molecular dynamics simulation showed that the high phase immiscibility between P3HT and PMMA was driving the self-assembly of vertical PMMA columnar domains, which induced the randomization of the P3HT lamellar domain orientation, alleviating the negative grain boundary effects on the hole transport through the P3HT phase. The PMMA columnar domain also resulted in the preferential segregation of PCBM at the P3HT/PMMA interface, improving the electron transport. The overall photovoltaic performance, including JSC and PCE, of the ternary blend solar cells was improved accordingly compared with control binary blend devices, and more significantly, this enhancement was accompanied by the substantial increase in the optimal blend layer thickness over 300 nm, which should be highly useful for enabling reliable large-area R2R-type organic solar cell fabrication. The identified rationale for the ternary blend BHJ structure has potential to facilitate the reliable, practical large-area manufacture of organic solar cells as well as the further improvement of organic solar cell performance upon, for instance, the addition of a photoactive tertiary polymer component of high phase immiscibility into binary BHJ blend solar cells.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the NSF-1344267 programme. This research was in part carried out at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials (CFN) of Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), which is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under contract no. DE-SC0012704. We also acknowledge the access to the ThINC facility at the Advanced Energy Center, Stony Brook University. We also thank Kim Kisslinger (BNL) for cross-sectional TEM experiments.
References
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
Y. Liu, C. C. Chen, Z. Hong, J. Gao, Y. M. Yang, H. Zhou, L. Dou, G. Li and Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3356 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, A. K. K. Kyaw, J. R. Pouliot, M. Leclerc and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300835 CrossRef .
H. J. Park, M. G. Kang, S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E247–E253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gu, Y. Zhou, K. Gu, T. Kurosawa, Y. Guo, Y. Li, H. Lin, B. C. Schroeder, H. Yan, F. Molina-Lopez and C. J. Tassone, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602742 CrossRef .
J. Alstrup, M. Jørgensen, A. J. Medford and F. C. Krebs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2819–2827 CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CAS .
C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077–1086 RSC .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704 CrossRef .
M. O. Reese, A. J. Morfa, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, G. Rumbles and D. S. Ginley, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, C. C. Chen, Z. Hong, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, R. Xu, S. Ye, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3873–3978 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yin and M. Dadmun, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4756–4768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885–3887 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, Y. Park, D. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. Hasko, S. Huttner, U. Steiner, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. Huck, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-C. Chen, Y.-K. Lin and C.-J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 023307 CrossRef .
J. E. Allen, K. G. Yager, H. Hlaing, C.-Y. Nam, B. M. Ocko and C. T. Black, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 163301 CrossRef .
K. M. Coakley, B. S. Srinivasan, J. M. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927–1932 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, W. Wen, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade, E. J. Kramer and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4168–4172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant and D. D. C. Bradley, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 105–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, W. Chen, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chang, H.-C. Liao, Y.-T. Shao, Y.-M. Sung, S.-H. Hsu, C.-C. Ho, W.-F. Su and Y.-F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2447–2452 CAS .
Y. M. Yang, W. Chen, L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, T. Xu, W. Chen, E. S. Landry and L. Yu, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 716–722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, C. Y. Hsu, R. Y. Y. Lin, K. C. Ho and J. T. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 20–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Goh, J.-S. Huang, B. Bartolome, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Vaisman, M. L. Lee and A. D. Taylor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18611–18621 CAS .
J.-S. Huang, T. Goh, X. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, E. A. Bielinski, S. Tomasulo, M. L. Lee, N. Hazari and A. D. Taylor, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Savoie, S. Dunaisky, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400891 CrossRef .
L. Yang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5432–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, H. Li, B. Akgun, S. K. Satijia, Y. Zhu, D. Xu, J. Ortiz, D. Gersappe and M. H. Rafailovich, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1812–1819 CrossRef CAS .
G. Krausch, E. J. Kramer, M. H. Rafailovich and J. Sokolov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 2655–2657 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Grest and K. Kremer, Phys. Rev. A, 1986, 33, 3628 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kremer and G. S. Grest, J. Chem.
Phys., 1990, 92, 5057–5086 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Nam, J. Huh and W. H. Jo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1118–1124 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Sievers, V. Shrotriya and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 114509 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Allen and C. T. Black, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7986–7991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Nam, Q. Wu, D. Su, C.-Y. Chiu, N. J. Tremblay, C. Nuckolls and C. T. Black, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 064307 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. V. Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. V. Mele, J. Phys. Chem., 2009, B113, 1587–1591 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Drummy, R. J. Davis, D. L. Moore, M. Durstock, R. A. Vaia and J. W. Hsu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 907–912 CrossRef .
L. G. Parratt, Phys. Rev., 1954, 95, 359 CrossRef .
A. J. Parnell, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. J. Pearson, P. A. Staniec, A. J. C. Dennison, H. Hamamatsu, M. W. A. Skoda, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2444–2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kiel, B. J. Kirby, C. F. Majkrzak, B. B. Maranville and M. E. Mackay, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 641–646 RSC .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiu, U. Jeng, C.-H. Su, K. S. Liang and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573–2578 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Gomez, K. P. Barteau, H. Wang, M. F. Toney and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 436–438 RSC .
P. Kohn, Z. Rong, K. H. Scherer, A. Sepe, M. Sommer, P. Muller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and S. Hüttner, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4002–4013 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verploegen, R. Mondal, C. J. Bettinger, S. Sok, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3519–3529 CrossRef CAS .
W.-R. Wu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-J. Su, K.-H. Wei, M.-S. Su, M.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Chen, W.-B. Su, C.-H. Su and A.-C. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6233–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. A. Koster and P. W. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
T. Agostinelli, S. Lilliu, J. G. Labram, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. Hampton, E. Pires, J. Rawle, O. Bikondoa, D. D. Bradley, T. D. Anthopoulos and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1701–1708 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, C. G. Shuttle, M. F. Toney, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15224–15231 RSC .
C.-Y. Nam, D. Su and C. T. Black, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3552–3559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, V. V. Duzhko and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kang, H.-J. Yun, D. S. Chung, S.-K. Kwon and Y.-H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14896–14899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Chu, H. Yang, W.-J. Hou, J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103306 CrossRef .
R. Street, J. Northrup and A. Salleo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 71, 165202 CrossRef .
L. H. Jimison, M. F. Toney, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney and A. Salleo, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1568–1572 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. Brown, R. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. Langeveld-Voss, A. Spiering, R. A. Janssen, E. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. De Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
B. Walker, A. B. Tamayo, X.-D. Dang, P. Zalar, J. H. Seo, A. Garcia, M. Tantiwiwat and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3063–3069 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Van Bavel, M. Bärenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03789aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Representative J–V characteristics of champion P3HT:PCBM binary (black line) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary (blue line) BHJ blend solar cells measured under 1 Sun AM1.5G simulated solar illumination. (b) PCE vs. active layer thickness for the binary blend (black sphere) and ternary blend (blue sphere) solar cells. Red spheres are for the ternary blend after normalizing to the photoactive blend volume. (c) JSCvs. active layer thickness for the binary blend (black sphere) and ternary blend (blue sphere) solar cells. Red spheres are for the ternary blend after normalizing to the photoactive blend volume. The dashed lines in (b) and (c) are only a guide to the eye.	 

Binary	0.605	8.47	49.4%	2.53%
Ternary	0.615	11.73	53.2%	3.84%

 	Fig. 2  AFM images of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary BHJ blend thin films (1:1:1 wt ratio, spin-cast on the PEDOT:PSS-coated ITO substrate, annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum). (a) Topography (height) and (b) associated deformation (indentation depth) images, respectively. The scan size for all images is 40 μm × 40 μm. (c) Histogram showing the distribution of the diameters of circular domains obtained from (a). Solid lines denote Gaussian fits.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image (top-view) of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films (1:1:1 wt ratio, the film was floated off on a TEM grid and then annealed for 1 h at 150 °C under ∼10 millitorr vacuum). (b) Cross-sectional TEM image from the ternary blend thin films (identical blend conditions to those in (a), see the Experimental section for details of sample preparation). The width of the region marked by two red solid lines is ∼7 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  PF-TUNA current images of P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend (1:1:1 wt ratio) thin films spin-cast on a Si or ITO substrate. The blend film was annealed at 150 °C for 1 h under ∼10 millitorr vacuum before the measurements. (a) Image of the ternary thin films spin-cast on a Si substrate, 40 μm × 40 μm scan size. (b) Higher resolution image of ternary thin films spin-coated on the ITO substrate coated with 30 nm TiO2 layers, 14 μm × 14 μm scan size. (c) TUNA current vs. distance profile along the line between two red dots marked in (b). It is noted that the TUNA current observed in (a) is substantially larger than (b) because the sample in (b) has a TiO2 bottom layer that acts as the hole-blocking contact while the TUNA current at the top surface is probed by an Au-coated AFM tip that primarily collects the hole current.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Representative measured neutron reflectivity profiles of control bilayer films after thermal annealing at 150 °C under ∼10 millitorr vacuum: dPMMA/P3HT (red sphere), dPMMA:PCBM blend (50 wt%)/P3HT (blue sphere), and dPMMA/P3HT:PCBM blend (50 wt%) (green sphere) bilayers, respectively. (b)–(d) Volume fraction profiles extracted from the best fit results of neutron scattering data showing the as-cast (dashed line, top panel) vs. after 90 min thermal annealing (solid lines, bottom panel) conditions: (b) dPMMA/P3HT, (c) dPMMA:PCBM blend (50 wt%)/P3HT, and (d) dPMMA/P3HT:PCBM blend (50 wt%) bilayers, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) GIWAXS data, displaying two-dimensional distribution of X-ray scattering intensity from P3HT:PCBM binary blend (left panel) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend (right panel) thin films. (b) Angular distribution of the (010) face-on P3HT lamellar stacking peak (q = 1.71 Å−1). (c) Angular distribution of the (300) edge-on P3HT lamellar stacking peak (q = 1.15 Å−1).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Representative measured I–V2 characteristics for the hole-only (top panel) and electron-only (bottom panel) devices made from P3HT:PCBM binary (dashed lines) and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary (solid lines) blend thin films. The linear portions of data were used to determine the slope and the corresponding charge mobilities by using the SCLC model. (b) Histograms comparing hole and electron motilities obtained from P3HT:PCBM binary and P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin films. Average values are displayed (measured from five devices for each condition). (c) Schematic illustration of the internal structure of the P3HT:PMMA:PCBM ternary blend thin film. Stacked red rectangles represent P3HT lamellar domains, grey cylinders vertical PMMA columns, and blue spheres PCBM molecules.	 


Hole	3.1 ± 0.24 × 10−3	4.5 ± 0.2 × 10−2
Electron	4.6 ± 0.35 × 10−5	8.4 ± 0.35 × 10−5
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Visualization of the internal morphology of a ternary blend thin film obtained by molecular dynamics simulation with different interfacial tensions and thicknesses. Since PCBM is not interfering with the phase separation of the two polymeric components in the ternary blend, it is not included in the simulation. The non-photoactive polymer component A is represented as a blue sphere, and the photoactive polymer component B occupies the rest of the volume and is not displayed for clarity. Schematics show the morphologies obtained at: (a) ε = 0.9 and a thickness of 31σ; (b) ε = 0.9 and a thickness of 35σ; (c) ε = 0.5 and a thickness of 35σ; and (d) ε = 0.5 and a thickness of 43σ.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr03789a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
