Organophosphoric acid-derived CoP quantum dots@S,N-codoped graphite carbon as a trifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting and Zn–air b ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR03299H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR03299H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14613-14626Organophosphoric acid-derived CoP quantum dots@S,N-codoped graphite carbon as a trifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting and Zn–air batteries†

        
          
            Tao 
            Meng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi-Ning 
            Hao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lirong 
            Zheng
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Minhua 
            Cao
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Cluster Science, Ministry of Education of China, Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China. E-mail: caomh@bit.edu.cn
bBeijing Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. E-mail: zhenglr@ihep.ac.cn
Received 
      22nd April 2018
    , Accepted 24th June 2018First published on 28th June 2018AbstractDeveloping highly efficient, low-cost, and multifunctional electro-catalysts to replace noble metals is of significant importance for energy storage and conversion systems. Herein, we demonstrate a facile strategy for the preparation of CoP quantum dots (QDs) embedded in S,N-codoped graphite carbon (CoP@SNC) by using organophosphoric acid as both phosphorus and carbon sources. Benefiting from the strong coupling and synergistic effect between CoP QDs and highly conductive S,N-codoped carbon, well-structured porosity and high specific surface area, the resulting CoP@SNC exhibits excellent activities for oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), making it a trifunctional electro-catalyst for overall water splitting and rechargeable Zn–air batteries. When CoP@SNC is used for overall water splitting, a cell voltage as low as 1.64 V is required to reach the current density of 10 mA cm−2; the obtained rechargeable Zn–air battery with CoP@SNC as the air cathode exhibits a high open-circuit voltage of 1.45 V, a very low discharge-charge voltage gap (0.83 V at 10 mA cm−2), and a long cycle life (up to 180 cycles). This work not only offers a new strategy for the synthesis of CoP@SNC but also presents its huge potential as a trifunctional electro-catalyst for clean energy systems.
Introduction
Cobalt phosphides (CoP) have attracted considerable attention due to their low cost, metalloid characteristics and good electrical conductivity, and have been intensively studied as efficient electro-catalysts to replace the state-of-the-art noble metal catalysts (e.g., Pt, Ir, and Pd-group) for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).1–3 Some of them can also work as bifunctional catalysts for HER/OER, HER/ORR, or OER/ORR.2,4–6 However, highly active trifunctional CoP catalysts for HER, OER, and ORR in the same electrolyte have rarely been reported due to their unstable or inactive nature in an unfavorable pH environment, although these reactions play an essential role in energy storage and conversion systems such as rechargeable metal–air batteries and overall water splitting.7–9 Therefore, constructing CoP with integrated performance for clean energy systems is still a challenge. Recently, the controllable preparation of CoP electro-catalysts has mainly focused on the high temperature phosphorization, ion exchange, and electrochemical deposition methods.4,10–12 However, these strategies still suffer from many disadvantages. Particularly, the high temperature phosphorization method is not only a multi-step and time-consuming process but also should be treated with excess phosphorus species due to their easy sublimation at lower temperature, which would often lead to excess growth and coarsening of the as-formed CoP crystallites, undoubtedly resulting in a low density of catalytically active sites.
Organophosphoric acid, containing carbon species and the phosphate group, can in situ provide carbon and phosphorus sources to prepare metal-free heteroatom-doped carbons for various applications.13–15 Besides, organophosphoric acid with abundant functional phosphate groups also shows a strong complexation ability with various cation ions, such as transition-metal ions (Co2+, Ni2+, etc.) and proton-based bases.16–18 A representative case is the formation of a metal–organophosphate complex based on the interaction between the metal cations and the phosphate group. At high temperature, the metal–organophosphate complex can provide phosphorus and carbon species to form a metal phosphide in situ coupled with highly conductive carbon, while the strong complexation of the phosphate group and metallic cations also can increase the reduction temperature of metallic cations, thus ensuring the formation of small-sized metal phosphides. As reported, the high conductivity and ultrafine structure of the catalyst can obviously improve its catalytic performance.1,19 Therefore, composite materials based on strongly coupled Co2+ and organophosphoric acid (named the Co-organophosphate hybrid) can serve as an appealing precursor for preparing a nano-structured CoP@C hybrid.
Recently, experimental and theoretical studies on electro-catalysts have revealed that introducing heteroatoms (e.g. B, N, P, S, and I) on carbon backbones can significantly enhance the catalytic activity.13,20–22 This is because the heteroatoms can tune the electron-donating/withdrawing capability of the electro-catalysts to increase the catalytic (adsorption) sites.13,20–22Particularly, the co-doping of two or more selected heteroatoms into the designed sites of the carbon matrix is becoming one of the major trends in improving the catalytic performance based on the fact that co-doping could create a unique electronic structure with a synergistic coupling effect among these heteroatom dopants.23–25 For instance, N,P-codoped carbons showed noticeable catalytic activity for ORR/OER;13 N,S-codoped graphitic sheets revealed much better ORR, OER, and HER performances.24 Although such great progress has been achieved, the controllable tuning of dopant species still remains a challenge as it is seriously inhibited by expensive instruments or relatively harsh and time-consuming synthesis procedures. In view of the above-mentioned facts, exploring new approaches to engineer heteroatom-doped carbons (supports) with unique structures and thereby favorable catalytic properties has received utmost attention. Herein, we, for the first time, demonstrated the preparation of CoP quantum dots (QDs) embedded in S,N-codoped carbon sheets (denoted as CoP@SNC) by using organophosphoric acid as both the carbon and phosphorus sources. The resultant CoP@SNC can be used as an advanced trifunctional electro-catalyst for energy storage and conversion units, rechargeable Zn–air batteries and overall water splitting. In our case, the organophosphoric acid can provide phosphorus and carbon species to react with the cobalt precursor to form CoP in situ coupled with graphite carbon, and can also ensure the small size of CoP QDs by the strong complexation of the phosphate group and Co cations. Moreover, thiourea was used as S and N sources and meanwhile it also serves as a template for the formation of carbon sheets. Additionally, the pyrolysis process can release a large amount of gases, which can ensure the as-formed CoP@SNC with abundant channels and a large specific surface area (99.6 m2 g−1). As a consequence, benefiting from the strong coupling between CoP QDs and highly conductive carbon, the synergistic effect of S,N-dual-doping into carbon, well-structured porosity and high specific surface area, the resulting CoP@SNC as a trifunctional electro-catalyst exhibits excellent activities for overall water splitting and rechargeable Zn–air batteries.
Experimental
Preparation of CoP@SNC
In a typical procedure, 0.8 mmol Co(Ac)2·4H2O, 5 mmol 1-hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid (HEDP), and 0.8 mmol thiourea were first dissolved in 20 mL of deionized water under magnetic stirring for 30 min to get a homogeneous solution. Then, the above solution was subjected to freeze-drying for 24 h to yield a precursor. Finally, the typical sample (CoP@SNC) can be obtained by annealing the precursor at 900 °C for 3 h with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere. For comparison, the precursor was also annealed at 850 °C and 950 °C, respectively, while keeping other reaction parameters constant. In addition, the usage of Co(Ac)2·4H2O was also adjusted from 0.8 mmol to 0.4, 1.0, and 1.2 mmol, respectively, while other reaction conditions were the same as those of the typical sample, and the thus-obtained samples were denoted as CoP@SNC-0.4, CoP@SNC-1.0, and CoP@SNC-1.2.
Preparation of CoP@NC
CoP@NC was prepared by a process similar to that of the typical sample (CoP@SNC) only replacing urea with thiourea.
Preparation of CoP@C
CoP@C was prepared by a process similar to that of the typical sample (CoP@SNC) only without the thiourea.
Preparation of N,S-codoped carbon (named SNC)
5 mmol HEDP and 0.8 mmol thiourea were first dissolved in 20 mL of deionized water under magnetic stirring for 30 min to get a homogenous solution. Then, the above solution was subjected to freeze-drying for 24 h to yield a precursor. Finally, the SNC sample was obtained by annealing the precursor at 900 °C for 3 h at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere.
Preparation of CoP
Co(Ac)2·4H2O and HEDP powders were put in two separate positions in a porcelain boat. Then the porcelain boat was put into a furnace with HEDP powder at the upstream side of the furnace and heated at 900 °C for 3 h with a heating speed of 5 °C min−1 under a N2 atmosphere.
Physically mixed CoP and NC
The as-obtained CoP was physically mixed with SNC by grinding treatment and the resultant sample was denoted as CoP&SNC.
Material characterization
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were obtained using a Bruker VECTOR 22 spectrometer by the KBr pellet technique, and the range of spectrograms was from 4000 to 400 cm−1. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a TA SDT Q600 instrument at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ ≈ 0.154 nm) at 40 kV and 40 mA in the scanning range of 10–80° (2θ). Raman spectra were obtained on an Invia Raman spectrometer with the excitation laser wavelength of 633 nm. X-ray spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on an ESCALAB 250 spectrometer (PerkinElmer). The morphologies of the as-obtained products were observed on a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-6490LV). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) measurements were performed on a JEOL JEM-2010 microscope. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) element mapping images were obtained on a scanning electron microscope (SEM). N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were obtained on a Belsorp-max sorption analyzer at liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). Before measurement, the CoP@SNC sample was degassed at 200 °C for 3 h. The surface area was calculated by the multi-point Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. The pore-size distribution was calculated from the adsorption branch using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method. The X-ray absorption fine structure spectra (Co K-edge) were obtained at 1W1B station in Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF). The storage rings of the BSRF were operated at 2.5 GeV with a maximum current of 250 mA. Using a Si(111) double-crystal monochromator, data collection was carried out in transmission mode using an ionization chamber for Co foil, CoP-based samples. All spectra were obtained under ambient conditions. The acquired EXAFS data were processed according to the standard procedures using the ATHENA module implemented in the IFEFFIT software packages. k3-weighted EXAFS spectra were obtained by subtracting the post-edge background from the overall absorption and then normalizing with respect to the edge-jump step. Subsequently, k3-weighted χ(k) data of Co K-edge were Fourier transformed to real (R) space using hanning windows (dk = 1.0 Å−1) to separate the EXAFS contributions from different coordination shells.
Electrochemical measurements
The working electrodes for electrochemical measurements were prepared by the following processes: 4 mg of the as-prepared sample were dispersed into 1 mL of solution containing 900 μL of ethanol and 100 μL of 0.5 wt% Nafion solution followed by ultrasonication for 30 min. Then, 30 μL of the above slurry was coated onto a glassy carbon electrode with a diameter of 5 mm and dried naturally at room temperature.
OER measurements were performed in a three-electrode system using a rotating disk electrode (PINE Research Instrumentation, at a rotation speed of 1500 rpm) and the data were collected using a CHI 760E electrochemical workstation (CH instrument, Chenhua). An Ag/AgCl (KCl, 4 M) electrode and a graphite rod were used as the reference electrode and the counter electrode, respectively. All current densities were normalized to the geometrical surface area and the measured potentials vs. Ag/AgCl were converted to the potentials vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) according to E(RHE) = E(Ag/AgCl) + (0.205 + 0.059 pH)V. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements were obtained at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 to obtain polarization curves, and 1.0 M KOH solution was used as the aqueous electrolyte with a continuous flow of O2 maintained during the test in order to ensure the O2/H2O equilibrium at 1.23 V vs. RHE. The Tafel slope was calculated according to the Tafel equation η = blog(j/j0) (η is the overpotential, b is the Tafel slope, j is the current density, and j0 is the exchange current density). Overpotential was calculated by η = E(vs. RHE) – 1.23, considering O2/H2O equilibrium at 1.23 V vs. RHE. In order to investigate the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution mechanism, rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) voltammograms were recorded in a RRDE configuration (Pine Research Instrumentation, USA) composed of a disk electrode (glassy carbon) and a ring electrode (platinum). 30 μL of electro-catalyst ink was coated onto the disk electrode, and a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 was utilized for RRDE experiments at a rotation rate of 1500 rpm. In order to determine the reaction pathway for OER by detecting the HO2− formation, the ring potential was held constant at 1.50 V vs. RHE to oxidize the possible HO2− intermediate in O2− saturated KOH aqueous solution during the OER process. Next, a continuous OER (disk electrode) to ORR (ring electrode) process occurring on the RRDE was used to confirm that the observed anodic current originates from the OER process rather than other side reactions and to further collect the faradaic efficiency. The ring potential of the RRDE was kept constant at 0.4 V vs. RHE to reduce the O2 produced from the catalyst on the disk electrode in a N2-saturated electrolyte (see Ma et al.47 and Zhu et al.4). The faradaic efficiency (ε) was calculated based on the following equation: ε = Ir/(IdN), where Id and Ir stand for the disk current and the ring current, respectively, and N represents the current collection efficiency of RRDE. Furthermore, since IrO2 is free of probable carbon oxidation during the OER process and a well-established benchmark OER catalyst with almost 100% faradaic efficiency, a IrO2 thin-film electrode is selected for the calibration of the collection efficiency of the RRDE (see Nakagawa et al.65). Thus, the N value is determined to be 0.2. To collect the faradaic efficiency, the disk electrode current was held at a small constant current of 200 μA, which is large enough to ensure an appreciable O2 production and sufficiently small to minimize local saturation and bubble formation at the disk electrode (see McCrory et al.66). The long-term stability was determined using an i–t curve at a certain potential for 10 h using a rotating speed of 1500 rpm. To evaluate the electrochemical double-layer capacitance (EDLC), cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were tested from 1.15 to 1.19 V (vs. RHE, in 1.0 M KOH) with scan rates ranging from 10 to 50 mV s−1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at the potential of 1.6 V vs. RHE with frequencies from 500000 to 1 Hz with an amplitude of 5 mV. All the data presented were not corrected for iR losses.
For HER measurements, the typical process is similar to that of OER, in which a flow of N2 instead of O2 was maintained over the electrolyte throughout the electrochemical tests to ensure the H2/H2O equilibrium at 0 V vs. RHE.
To evaluate the full water electrolysis, the CoP@SNC catalyst coated onto a nickel foam substrate was used as both the anode and cathode. The electrolyte was purged with N2 gas for 30 min under ambient conditions before the electrochemical tests.
For ORR measurements, the typical strategy is similar to that of OER. The electrochemical experiments were carried out in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte for the oxygen reduction reaction. The potential range is cyclically scanned between 0.2 and 1.1 V vs. RHE with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. CVs and LSVs were obtained at ambient temperature after purging O2 or N2 gas for 30 min. The potential cycling was repeated until the stable voltammogram curves were obtained. RDE measurements were carried out at rotating rates varying from 400 to 2025 rpm at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. The kinetic parameters can be obtained on the basis of the Koutecky–Levich equations as follows:1/J = 1/Jk + 1/(Bω1/2)B = 0.2nFCoDo2/3ν−1/6Jk = nFkCowhere J is the measured current density, Jk is the kinetic current density, ω is the rotation speed (the constant 0.2 was used when the rotation speed is expressed in rpm), n is the transferred electron number, F is the Faraday constant (964 85 C mol−1), Co is the saturated concentration of O2 in the electrolyte (1.21 × 10−3 mol L−1), Do is the diffusion coefficient of O2 in the solution (1.9 × 10−5 cm s−1), ν is the kinetic viscosity of the electrolyte (0.01 cm2 s−1), and k is the electron-transfer rate constant.
Rechargeable Zn–air batteries were tested in home-made electrochemical cells, and the prepared CoP@SNC was coated on a carbon paper substrate as the air cathode, a polished Zn plate was employed as the anode, and a 6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution was utilized as the electrolyte. Battery tests were performed using a carbon paper substrate as the air cathode, a polished Zn plate was employed as the anode, and a 6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2 aqueous solution was utilized as the electrolyte. Battery tests were performed at room temperature on a LAND CT2001A instrument. For cycling tests, one cycle consisted of one discharging step (10 mA cm−2 for 5 min) followed by one charging step of the same current density and duration time.
Results and discussion
The fabrication process of CoP QDs anchored on SNC (CoP@SNC) using HEDP as both the carbon and phosphorus sources is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a (for details, see the Experimental section). Typically, HEDP, thiourea and Co species were first dissolved in deionized water under magnetic stirring to form a homogeneous solution, and then this solution was subjected to freeze-drying to form a precursor. During this freeze-drying process, a cross-linking effect between the HEDP and base thiourea occurs due to the acid–base interaction and meanwhile, the rich functional groups of HEDP and thiourea could homogeneously coordinate with Co2+ (Fig. S1a†), which have been confirmed from Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra. As shown in Fig. S1b,† the characteristic bands corresponding to the phosphonic and amine groups not only slightly shift, but also weaken in intensity. Then, CoP@SNC can be obtained with a high yield by direct pyrolysis of the precursor under a nitrogen atmosphere. During this pyrolysis process, the thiourea polymerizes to form C3N4 nanoplates, which serve as the template for the formation of the final carbon nanosheets (Fig. 1b, c and Fig. S1c, d†), and on the other hand, the thiourea also acts as S and N sources for doping. The phase composition of the resultant sample was first characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 1d, a series of depressed diffraction peaks match well with the orthorhombic CoP phase (JCPDS No. 29-0497). Furthermore, Raman spectroscopy was performed to study the carbon species in CoP@SNC. From Fig. 1e, we can see that two prominent peaks at around 1342 and 1592 cm−1 are clearly observed, which are assigned to the D and G bands of carbon, respectively. The D band is related to the structural defects or partially disordered structures in carbon materials, while the G band is associated with the degree of graphitization. The relative strong peak of the G-band confirms the high graphitization degree of the carbon substrate in CoP@SNC. Furthermore, the broad 2D band around 2560 cm−1 also proves the existence of a highly graphitic carbon species, which can lead to an improved electrical conductivity of CoP@SNC.
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process for organophosphoric acid-derived CoP@SNC. (b) FE-SEM image (scan bar, 100 nm), (c) FT-IR spectrum of C3N4; (d) XRD pattern, and (e) Raman pattern of CoP@SNC. 
The surface chemical state of CoP@SNC was further accurately evaluated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As depicted in Fig. 2a, the XPS survey spectrum indicates the presence of C (76.97 at%), N (2.24 at%), O (15.57 at%), S (1.03 at%), P (3.73 at%), and Co (0.46 at%) elements in CoP@SNC. Fig. 2b shows a high resolution C 1s XPS spectrum, which can be deconvoluted into five peaks centered at 284.0, 284.6, 285.6, 286.8, and 289.2 eV, corresponding to C–S–C, C–C/CC, C–N, C–O, and O–CO bonds, respectively.24,26 The high resolution S 2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 2c) can be divided into three components with binding energies at 163.2, 164.5, and 168.3 eV, which can be assigned to –C–S–C–, –CS–, and C–SOx–C, respectively.26,27 Furthermore, high resolution N 1s XPS spectra (Fig. 2d) are deconvoluted into three components with binding energies at 398.5, 401.3, and 404.1 eV, which can be assigned to pyridinic N, graphitic N, and oxidized N, respectively.28,29 These results suggest that the S and N heteroatoms have been successfully doped into the carbon skeleton through thermal annealing. The high resolution Co 2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 2e) shows the peaks of Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 with binding energies at 782.0 and 797.8 eV as well as two satellite peaks at 785.9 and 801.3 eV. The Co 2p3/2 peak can be divided into two components with binding energies at 778.5 and 782.0 eV, corresponding to Co0 and Co2+, respectively.30,31 The Co2+ species may result from the surface oxidation under ambient air, consistent with the reported result.32Fig. 2f shows the high resolution P 2p XPS spectrum, in which the peaks at 129.5 and 130.3 eV are attributed to the P that bonds to Co0, while the wide peak at about 134.3 eV discloses the presence of POx.33,34 These XPS results confirm the surface chemical states of all the elements involved in CoP@SNC as well as the formation of S,N-codoped carbon.
 Fig. 2  (a) Survey XPS spectrum of CoP@SNC. The corresponding high-resolution spectra of C 1s (b), S 2p (c), N 1s (d), Co 2p (e), and P 2p (f). 

Fig. 3a shows a representative field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) image of CoP@SNC. CoP@SNC shows a curly and ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) sheet-like structure with a relatively rough surface. Furthermore, the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 3b) further discloses the nanosheet microstructure of CoP@SNC with rich pores. High-magnification TEM image provides more details about the microstructure of CoP@SNC. As shown in Fig. 3c and d, uniform CoP QDs with an average diameter as small as 4 nm are homogeneously embedded into the worm-like carbon matrix and no aggregate is detected. Such a small size of CoP is completely attributed to the HEDP used in our experiment, which has a relatively high decomposition temperature (Fig. S1c†). This ultrafine nature of CoP QDs is also confirmed from the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (the inset in Fig. 3b). Moreover, a representative high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 3e) clearly shows lattice fringes with two interplanar spacings of 0.19 and 0.34 nm, corresponding to the (211) plane of CoP1,6 and the (001) plane of graphite, respectively. Additionally, in agreement with the above XPS results, the energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum and the corresponding element mappings over a widespread region also confirm that the CoP@SNC sample is composed of C, N, Co, P, and S elements (Fig. 3f and g). Moreover, the N2 adsorption isotherms recorded on CoP@SNC belong to type IV with a hysteresis loop of type H4 (Fig. 3h), which is usually observed for mesoporous materials possessing slit-like pores. Correspondingly, the sizes of the mesopores are mainly in the range of 2–10 nm from the pore size distribution curve (the inset in Fig. 3h). The specific surface area according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller calculation is determined to be 99.6 m2 g−1. The rich porous channels and high specific surface area of CoP@SNC may originate from the pyrolysis and the escape of a large number of gases formed during the high temperature pyrolysis and carbonization process, and at the same time they are especially beneficial for improving its electro-catalytic performances.
 Fig. 3  (a) FE-SEM image, (b–d) TEM images, SAED pattern (inset of b), (e) HRTEM image, (f) EDS spectrum, and (g) the corresponding element mappings, (h) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm, and the corresponding pore size distribution curve for CoP@SNC (inset of h). 
Interestingly, a series of control experiments disclose that urea plays the same role as thiourea because they have a similar molecular mechanism. When thiourea was replaced by urea or no thiourea was used, we could also obtain CoP species and the resultant samples are denoted as CoP@NC and CoP@C, respectively (Fig. S2a†). Like CoP@SNC, CoP@NC also exhibits a sheet-like microstructure, which results from the C3N4 template formed from the polymerization of urea (Fig. S2b and c†), while the resultant CoP@C consists of aggregations with a very large size (Fig. S2d†). Besides, the introduction of urea can produce N-containing species (e.g., C2N2+, C3N2+, C3N3+) that act as N sources for N doping (Fig. S2e†). Moreover, CoP@NC also holds relatively abundant nanopores with a surface area of 70.5 m2 g−1, far larger than that of CoP@NC (19.2 m2 g−1) (Fig. S2f†). Fig. S2g† shows the surface area comparison of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. Clearly, CoP@SNC possesses the largest surface area among these three samples, while CoP@NC is next. This result indicates that the larger surface areas for CoP@SNC and CoP@NC are attributed to the thiourea and urea used in our experiments, both of which almost completely decompose into gases at high temperature.
More information about the charge states and electronic nature of these series of CoP was obtained from X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Co K-edge XANES spectra of the series of CoP contain three main excitations, labelled A, B, and C. Peak A is a pre-edge peak in which Co 1s electrons are primarily excited into unoccupied Co 3d states; peak B represents the excitation of Co 1s electrons into ligand (i.e. P 3p) antibonding states; peak C represents the excitation of Co 1s electrons into Co 4p transition or an EXAFS feature. Any significant change in the ligand–metal–ligand bond angles will alter the contribution of 4p orbitals involved in bonding. Moreover, peak A is a quadrupolar transition and therefore it is much weaker than peaks B and C. Similar transitions have been identified in the Mn K-edge spectrum of MnP.35 The CoP@SNC has the strongest signal at the ligand–metal–ligand peak (labelled B) (inset in Fig. 4a), indicating a decreased occupancy of the Co valence states in CoP@SNC relative to CoP@C. This result suggests the occurrence of secondary charge transfer from Co to the S,N-codoped carbon, which is further confirmed by the XPS results of CoP@SNC and CoP@C. As shown in Fig. 4b, the binding energies of Co 2p for CoP@SNC have a positive shift compared with those for CoP@C. Besides, the Co K-edges k3χ(k) oscillation curve of CoP@SNC in Fig. 4c shows an obvious difference relative to the CoP@NC and CoP@C, suggesting their distinct local atomic arrangement, which was further verified by their R-space curves in Fig. 4d. Furthermore, Fig. 4d shows the Fourier transformed k3-weighted EXAFS data for these CoP based materials. Clearly, CoP@C exhibits a strong peak at 1.81 Å, which can be assigned to the typical Co–P bond, while those for CoP@NC and CoP@SNC are relatively weak, indicating that the heteroatom doped carbon especially S,N-co-doped carbon can deeply influence the electron density of CoP. This can make the electro-catalytically active sites of Co more electrophilic, thus facilitating the adsorption and reaction of the OH− groups with CoP and resulting in an outstanding OER performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Co K-edge XANES spectra for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. (b) High-resolution XPS spectra of Co 2p for CoP@SNC and CoP@C. (c) Co k3χ(k) oscillation curves and (d) Fourier transformed k3-weighted EXAFS spectra for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. 
The electro-catalytic OER activity of CoP@SNC was first studied using polarization linear sweep voltammograms (LSVs) in a standard three-electrode system in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 (see the Experimental section for details). For comparison, CoP&SNC, CoP, SNC, commercial Pt/C, and IrO2/C were also tested under the same test conditions. CoP@SNC exhibits optimal performance with a mass loading of 0.6 mg cm−2 on a glassy carbon (GC) disk electrode (Fig. S3a†), while the catalysts prepared at lower or higher temperatures show slightly inferior OER performance (Fig. S3b†). As shown in Fig. 5a, CoP and SNC show negligible current densities below the potential of 1.60 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). In sharp contrast, CoP@SNC exhibits a significantly enhanced OER catalytic activity. Specifically, CoP@SNC affords a current density of 1 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.51 V, smaller than that of the physically mixed CoP&SNC (1.52 V), indicating that the synergistic effect of CoP and SNC as well as the in situ coupling between them are responsible for the excellent OER performance. Noticeably, although the noble IrO2/C reference affords the same current density of 1 mA cm−2 at a slightly lower potential of 1.47 V in comparison with CoP@SNC, the current density recorded on IrO2/C falls behind that of CoP@SNC when the potential sweeps beyond 1.61 V, indicating the excellent OER catalytic activity of CoP@SNC. Moreover, we further compared the operating potentials required for all the catalysts to deliver a current density of 10.0 mA cm−2, which is regarded as a metric related to solar fuel synthesis with an efficiency of 10%. CoP@SNC can achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.58 V, corresponding to an overpotential of 350 mV. This is slightly higher than that of the state-of-the-art IrO2/C catalyst (1.55 V), but much lower than those of CoP&SNC (1.63 V), CoP (1.70 V), SNC (1.75 V), and even the noble Pt/C (1.74 V), and many other reported catalysts, for example IrO2/C (1.60 V, 0.1 M KOH),36 Pt/C (1.83 V, 0.1 M KOH),37 CoP/C (1.59 V, 0.1 M KOH),38 CP@FeP (1.58 V, 1.0 M KOH),39 CoSe2/N-graphene (1.596 V, 0.1 M KOH),40 CoS2/N,S-GO (1.61 V, 0.1 M KOH),41 TCCN (1.65 V, 0.1 M KOH),42 and NG-CNT (1.70 V, 0.1 M KOH).43 A detailed comparison for a variety of active OER electro-catalysts with diverse chemical compositions and electrode configurations is presented in Table 1, further confirming the considerable electro-catalytic oxygen evolution behavior of CoP@SNC.
 Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of CoP@SNC, CoP&SNC, CoP, SNC, Pt/C, and IrO2/C in an O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (scan rate of 2 mV s−1). (c) The ring current of CoP@SNC on an RRDE (1500 rpm) in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (ring potential: 1.50 V vs. RHE). (d) The ring current of CoP@SNC on a RRDE (1500 rpm) in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (ring potential: 0.40 V vs. RHE). (e) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential (the potential at J around 10 mA cm−2) of CoP@SNC in comparison with that of IrO2/C. (f) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC before and after 1000 cycles. 
Table 1 Comparison of the OER activity for our catalyst with several recently reported highly active transition-/noble-metal and non-metal catalysts supported on different substrates




Catalysts
Potential@10 mA cm−2 (V vs. RHE)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Electrolyte (KOH)
Substrate
Ref.





a Glass carbon.
b Not given.
c Carbon fiber paper.
d Self-supported membrane.






CoP@SNC


1.58


68


1 M


GC



This work


IrO2/C
1.60
N.A.b
0.1 M
GC

36



Pt/C
1.83
169
0.1 M
GC

37



CoP/C
1.59
66
0.1 M
GC

38



CP@FeP
1.58
63.6
1 M
CFPc

39



CoP/rGO
1.57
66
1 M
GC

6



CoP
1.52
65
1 M
NF

4



CoSe2 ultrathin nanosheets
1.55
44
0.1 M
GC

44



CoSe2/N-graphene
1.596
∼40
0.1 M
GC

40



CoS2/N,S-GO
1.61
75
0.1 M
GC

41



TCCN
1.65
74.6
0.1 M
SSMd

42



NG-CNT
1.7
141
0.1 M
SSM

43



NiCo2O4 nanocages
1.61
50
1 M
GC

45



Co3O4/N-graphene
1.54
67
1 M
NF

46



Co3O4C-NA
1.52
70
0.1 M
Cu foil

47



ZnxCo3−xO4 nanoarrays
1.55
51
1 M
Ti foil

48



Co(OH)2 + N-rGO
1.66
N.A.
0.1 M
GC

49



SNG-Co2+
1.6
62
1 M
GC

50





The OER kinetics of the above catalysts were further examined using Tafel plots, which were fitted by the Tafel equation {η = b log(j) + a, where η is the overpotential, j is the current density, and b is the Tafel slope}.14Fig. 5b shows that the Tafel slopes are found to be 68, 109, 140, 148, 94, and 73 mV dec−1 for CoP@SNC, CoP&SNC, CoP, SNC, Pt/C, and IrO2/C, respectively. Clearly, the Tafel slope of CoP@SNC is not only far lower than those of the controlled materials and some of the previously reported OER catalysts (Table 1), but also lower than that of the IrO2/C (68 vs. 73 mV dec−1), revealing much more favorable electrochemical OER kinetics occurring on CoP@SNC. This result is also consistent with the larger anodic current density of CoP@SNC than that of IrO2/C in a higher potential range.
To further study the OER reaction mechanism, a rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) strategy with a Pt ring electrode potential of 1.50 V was employed to oxidize the peroxide intermediates formed on the CoP@SNC surface during the OER process. Fig. 5c shows that a fairly low ring current of 8.5 μA is detected and this value is 3 orders of magnitude lower than that of the disk current (mA scale), which is so small that it can be negligible, suggesting almost no formation of hydrogen peroxide. Hence, it can be reasonably concluded that CoP@SNC holds a desirable four-electron (4e−) dominated OER pathway (4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−).51–53 Moreover, in order to prove that the detected anodic current results from the electrochemical water oxidation process rather than other side reactions and also to further collect the Faradaic efficiency, an RRDE with a ring electrode potential of 0.40 V (a value to ensure that the ORR can take place) in the ORR region was employed to reduce the O2 produced on the disk after sweeping across the surrounding Pt ring, thus guaranteeing a continuous OER (disk electrode) to ORR (ring electrode) process (the inset in Fig. 5d). As depicted in Fig. 5d, the constant ring current output of 37.8 μA (collection efficiency 0.2) can be detected when the disk current is stabilized at 200 μA, indicating that oxygen molecules evolved from the CoP@SNC catalyst coated on the disk were immediately reduced by the active Pt ring.4,47 This result confirms that the anodic current catalyzed by CoP@SNC is attributed to the OER process also with a high faradaic efficiency of 94.5%.
Besides excellent activity, fast reaction kinetics, and high selectivity, long-term stability is another critical criterion for evaluating the OER performance of the electro-catalysts. As shown in Fig. 5e, the chronoamperometric response curve for CoP@SNC at a low potential of 1.58 V exhibits an anodic current attenuation as small as 1.6% within 10 h of continuous operation with no obvious structural change (Fig. S4†), demonstrating the remarkable and robust stability of CoP@SNC. In contrast, IrO2/C displays 32 times larger current decay (36.6%) than that of CoP@SNC. Furthermore, from the chronopotentiometric curve tested at a current density of 10.0 mA cm−2 (Fig. S5†), we can see that CoP@SNC holds a nearly constant operating potential around 1.58 V within 1000 seconds, and a serration-shaped line can be observed due to the alternate accumulation and release of the oxygen bubbles on the surface of the catalyst. Additionally, accelerated degradation studies were carried out by obtaining continuous cyclic voltammograms (CVs) at an accelerated sweep rate of 50 mV s−1 for 1000 cycles to probe the stability of the catalyst, only 10 mV of potential increase at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 is observed for CoP@SNC, also confirming its highly stable performance (Fig. 5f). Recently, for Co-based OER catalysts (i.e. CoP, SNG-Co2+), it is widely believed that the high oxidation state of Co species serves as the OER active site.4,50 So, CoP@SNC before and after the OER test was studied by the XPS technique. As shown in Fig. S6,† the high-resolution Co 2p XPS spectra of the post-OER CoP@SNC show a new peak at a binding energy of 780.1 eV compared to that of the fresh CoP@SNC, which can be assigned to Co3+. This result reveals the fact that CoP around the surface may in situ transform into Co–oxo/hydroxo species with a high oxidation state during the OER process, agreeing well with the literature results.4 During the OER process, the Co3+–OH and Co4+–O moieties within edge-sharing or vertex-sharing Co–oxo/hydroxo molecular units can introduce a high density of active sites to promote the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET).54,55 Hence, the enhanced OER activity and kinetics can be related to these enriched units, while the deep-located CoP can act as a conductive support to further facilitate electron transfer to the exterior active components.
The outstanding OER performance of CoP@SNC originates from the in situ coupling of the CoP QDs and highly graphitic S,N-codoped carbon, the synergistic effect of dual doping of S and N into the carbon framework, well-structured porosity and high specific surface area. Firstly, the in situ coupling of the CoP QDs and highly graphitic S,N-codoped carbon can greatly improve the conductivity and charge transfer capability of the CoP@SNC catalyst. The strong coupling effect between them can take full advantage of the superior electrical conductivity of the S,N-codoped carbon backbone, which can facilitate the charge transfer in the CoP@SNC catalyst, thus resulting in an enhanced OER activity and stability. For instance, CoP@SNC manifests a better OER activity with a smaller overpotential and a larger current density than those of the physically mixed CoP&NSC, and carbon-free CoP (Fig. 5a). The higher OER electro-catalytic activity of CoP@SNC benefits from its superior electrical conductivity, which is supported by the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) result as CoP@SNC has a small charge transfer impedance (Fig. S7†). Besides, ultra-small CoP QDs feature a large surface-to-volume ratio, and are beneficial for the exposure of active sites, hence improving its OER activity. For example, the inferior OER activities of the control samples synthesized with a large amount of Co precursor can be due to the fact that excessive Co can lead to the formation of larger-sized CoP particles (Fig. S8†).
Second, dual doping of S and N species into the carbon framework for the CoP@SNC catalyst is an effective way to enhance its OER catalytic activity and reaction kinetics. By introducing S and N species into the carbon substrate for CoP@SNC (as proved by XPS and EDS), it shows an enhanced OER performance with a smaller potential (1.58 V vs. RHE) compared to CoP@NC (1.60 V) and CoP@C (1.63 V) at the same current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6a). The possible reason may be that the S and N species can directly work as OER electro-active sites to cooperatively enhance the activity of the whole materials.24 Besides, heteroatom doping (e.g., S and N) can tailor the electron-donor properties of the CoP@SNC, thus leading to an improved OER performance.20,56 As depicted in Fig. 4a and b compared to those of CoP@NC and CoP@C, the Co K-edge XANES spectrum of the typical CoP@SNC exhibits an increased peak intensity at peak B, indicating that S,N-codoped carbon causes the impaired electron density of Co atoms. This can make the electro-catalytically active sites of Co more electrophilic, thus facilitating the adsorption and reaction of OH− groups with CoP and resulting in outstanding OER performance.57,58 Furthermore, compared to those of CoP@NC and CoP@C, both the Tafel slope (Fig. 6b) and EIS (Fig. 6c) of CoP@SNC show a faster reaction kinetics and smaller mass (charge) transfer impedance of CoP@SNC, again indicating that the S,N-codoped in carbon can obviously enhance the OER performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves, (b) Tafel plots, and (c) EISs of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. (d) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (e) CVs of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (f) Plots of the capacitive current at 1.25 V vs. RHE as a function of scan rates for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. 
Last but not least, the well-structured porosity and high specific surface area of CoP@SNC (as proved from the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm) generated by the escape of gases play very important roles in not only providing abundant and short diffusion pathways to facilitate mass and charge transport to boost the OER reaction kinetics but also affording a large active surface area for increasing the OER catalytic sites. Noticeably, the anodic current signal recorded on CoP@SNC is not susceptible to the scan rate increasing from 2 to 20 mV s−1 (Fig. 6d), indicating that the high porosity of CoP@SNC favors the efficient transfer of the electrolyte and the rapid diffusion of the O2 product. Furthermore, CoP@SNC affords a large active surface area, evaluated by the electrochemical double-layer capacitance (EDLC) and calculated the slope from the linear relationship of the current density against the scan rates (Fig. 6e and S10†). CoP@SNC has a Cdl value of 54 mF cm−2, which is far higher than those of CoP@NC (40 mF cm−2) and CoP@C (22 mF cm−2) (Fig. 6f), indicating an improved efficient catalytically solid–liquid contact surface area obtained for CoP@SNC for better exposure and enhanced utilization of electro-active sites to improve the OER performance. Thus, the rich nanopores and large solid–liquid contact surface area can obviously enhance the OER performance of CoP@SNC.
The opposite reaction initiated on the oxygen evolution electrode that can availably catalyze the corresponding cathode hydrogen evolution process as well, is an important figure of merit to pursue bifunctional water electrolysis electrodes and simplify the installation. Hence, the catalytic behavior of CoP@SNC for HER was observed in the same electrolyte as for OER (1.0 M KOH). Fig. 7a shows that CoP@SNC affords a current density of 1 mA cm−2 at a small operating potential of −79 mV, beyond which the cathodic current increases rapidly in a higher potential range, revealing its excellent electro-catalytic activity. The overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for CoP@SNC is 174 mV, which is higher than that of Pt/C (109 mV), but far smaller than those of CoP@NC (246 mV), CoP@C (294 mV), CoP (329 mV), SNC (441 mV), and some other reported non-noble metal HER electrocatalysts (Table S1†), confirming the considerable electro-catalytic hydrogen evolution behavior of CoP@SNC. Tafel curves were also examined to assess the HER reaction kinetics (Fig. 7b). According to the linear fitting of the Tafel plots, the Tafel slope value for CoP@SNC is calculated to be 82 mV dec−1, which is comparable to that of commercial Pt/C (104 mV dec−1), but far smaller than those of CoP@NC (111 mV dec−1), CoP@C (119 mV dec−1), CoP (125 mV dec−1), and SNC (190 mV dec−1). These results suggest that CoP@SNC has a favorable HER reaction kinetics corresponding to its high catalytic activity. Additionally, the chronoamperometric response demonstrates the remarkable stability of CoP@SNC within 15 h of continuous operation in basic solution (Fig. 7c). Furthermore, the polarization curves before and after continuously operating for 15 h in basic medium were also tested (Fig. S10†), which show similar robust durability, indicating the superior stability of CoP@SNC.
 Fig. 7  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC, and Pt/C for HER (N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1). (c) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential of −0.175 V vs. RHE. (d) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (e) A representative photograph of the system depicting H2 (left) and O2 (right) generation during overall water electrolysis. (f) Polarization curves of a two-electrode alkaline electrolyzer using CoP@SNC as both the cathode and anode at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH. 
The in situ coupling of the CoP QDs and highly conductive S,N-codoped carbon can increase the conductivity of CoP@SNC, which favors the charge transfer (as evidenced by EIS in Fig. S11†), hence allowing an enhanced HER activity. Recently, experimental and theoretical studies on HER catalysts reveal that the introduction of heteroatoms, such as B, N, P, S, and I into carbon backbones can enhance the catalytic activity because heteroatoms can tune the electron-donating/withdrawing capability to increase the catalytic (adsorption) sites. Here, co-doping of two selected heteroatoms of S and N into the carbon matrix can create a synergistic coupling effect to further increase the HER performance of CoP@SNC. Additionally, the HER current density for CoP@SNC is not susceptible to the scan rate increasing from 2 to 15 mV s−1 (Fig. 7d), revealing that the unique porous architecture of CoP@SNC contributes to the improved HER performance.
Encouraged by the excellent OER and HER performances, we accordingly assembled a water electrolyzer with a two-electrode configuration in 1.0 M KOH, and the as-prepared CoP@SNC was coated on a Ni foam substrate working as both the anode and the cathode (Fig. 7e). As depicted in Fig. 7f, a catalytic current is observed when the applied voltage is larger than 1.40 V, and the current density of 10 mA cm−2 can be achieved at a small cell voltage of 1.64 V, representing an overall overpotential of 410 mV for full water splitting. Besides, the overall water splitting performance of CoP@SNC not only is comparable to that of Pt/C–IrO2/C, but also outperforms those of the Pt/C–Pt/C electrode, and some reported electrocatalysts, for example, CoP–rGO (480 mV, overpotential at a current density of 10 cm−2),6 Co–P/NC (∼470 mV),59 NiFe-LDHs (470 mV),60 and NiCo2O4/Ni0.33Co0.67S2 (490 mV),61 making it a promising practical application for overall water splitting.
Interestingly, except for the excellent overall water splitting performance, CoP@SNC can also catalyze the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), affording it a promising application in rechargeable metal–air batteries or fuel cells. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were first performed on CoP@SNC to evaluate its catalytic activity towards ORR. For comparison, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC, and commercial Pt/C were also tested under the same conditions. Specifically, one characteristic ORR peak located at 0.81 V is observed in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution, indicating the electrochemical reduction of oxygen initiated on CoP@SNC, while, in sharp contrast, no obvious response is obtained in N2-saturated solution in the same potential range (Fig. 8a). Noticeably, this ORR peak (0.81 V) of CoP@SNC is close to that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.88 V) (Fig. 8b), but far more positive in comparison with those for CoP@NC (0.74 V), CoP@C (0.72 V), CoP (0.6 V), and SNC (0.72 V) (Fig. S12†), and the previously reported metal-phosphide ORR catalysts (e.g., −0.23 V vs. Ag/AgCl for CoP-CMP,62 −0.24 V vs. Ag/AgCl for CoxP-CNTs,63 0.78 V vs. RHE for CoNP@NC/NG5), indicating an easier ORR process on CoP@SNC (Table S2†). Moreover, CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC and commercial Pt/C catalysts were further evaluated by using the RDE technology at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm in 0.1 M O2-saturated KOH (Fig. 8c). Remarkably, CoP@SNC displays a significant ORR performance with a sharp onset potential at 0.87 V and a small half-wave potential around 0.79 V, which is the same as the half-wave potential of the commercial Pt/C (0.79 V). Also, CoP@SNC holds a large diffusion current plateau in LSV, which represents a diffusion-controlled process and corresponds to an efficient four-electron-dominated ORR pathway, like the ORR case on the Pt/C catalyst. Moreover, CoP@SNC also outperforms CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, CoP@SNC, and SNC in both the onset (half-wave) potential and limiting current density (Fig. 8c and Fig. S13†), and is comparable to some previously reported ORR electro-catalysts (Table S2†), revealing its superior ORR activity.
 Fig. 8  CV curves of CoP@SNC (a) and Pt/C (b) in 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Rotating-disk electrode polarization curves (LSVs) of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC, and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. (d) LSVs of CoP@SNC in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at rotating rates ranging from 400 to 2025 rpm with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (e) K–L plots of CoP@SNC obtained from the RDE data at 0.5, 0.45, 0.4, 0.35, and 0.3 V vs. RHE, and the corresponding electron-transfer number. (f) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC before and after 1000 cycles. 
Accordingly, a series of more detailed RDE tests were performed with rotating speeds ranging from 400 to 2025 rpm (Fig. 8d). It can be seen that the current density of CoP@SNC gradually increases on increasing the rotating speed, because of the enhanced diffusion rate at high speeds.64 The corresponding Koutechy–Levich (K–L) plots of CoP@SNC were obtained from LSVs with the potentials ranging from 0.5 to 0.3 V vs. RHE (Fig. 8e). All the plots show a fairly good linearity, the same as that observed in the case of Pt/C (Fig. S14a†), suggesting first-order reaction kinetics toward dissolved oxygen and a similar electron–transfer number (n) for the ORR process at different potentials. n is calculated to be in the range of 3.82 to 3.99 at the potential ranging from 0.5 to 0.3 V (Fig. 8e), indicating that the CoP@SNC electrode favors a four-electron oxygen reduction process. Moreover, CoP@SNC also possesses a higher Jk value of 27 mA cm−2 than the Pt/C catalyst (23.8 mA cm−2) (Fig. S14b†), again indicating its outstanding ORR activity. Additionally, accelerated degradation studies were carried out to probe the stability of the catalyst, and the polarization curves nearly overlap with each other before and after 1000 cycles, confirming its highly stable performance (Fig. 8f). Considering a four-electron pathway for OER, CoP@SNC favors a desirable four-electron pathway for reversible OER and ORR processes (O2 + 2H2O + 4e− ↔ 4OH−), which is of significant importance, especially for clean energy systems involving these two reactions, such as rechargeable metal–air batteries and regenerated fuel cells.
A proof-to-concept experiment was conducted to demonstrate the potential application of the CoP@SNC in rechargeable Zn–air batteries, since OER and ORR are the fundamental steps in this application. A home-made rechargeable Zn–air battery device was constructed by pairing a zinc plate anode, CoP@SNC loaded on a carbon fiber paper cathode, and a O2-saturated KOH/Zn(Ac)2 electrolyte (Fig. S15†). The battery has a high open circuit voltage as large as 1.45 V, and can work smoothly (Fig. 9a and b). It can also discharge smoothly at different cell voltages such as 1.38 V at 2 mA cm−2, 1.27 V at 5 mA cm−2, and 1.20 V at 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, Fig. 9c shows the cycling performance of the home-made rechargeable Zn–air battery, which was repeatedly charged or discharged at 10 mA cm−2 with a 10 min per cycle period (including discharging for 5 min, followed by charging with the same time). It can be clearly seen that the CoP@SNC as the air cathode affords a discharge voltage of 1.22 V and a charge voltage of 2.05 V with a small voltage gap of 0.83 V and a high trip efficiency of 59.51% in the first cycle. It also shows a high cycling stability with no obvious potential change for over 180 charge–discharge cycles within 30 h, which can be comparable to the reported results (Table S3†).
 Fig. 9  (a) A representative photograph for the open-circuit voltage of the home-made Zn–air battery tested by a multimeter. (b) The plots for the home-made Zn–air battery based on CoP@SNC as the air cathode tested at various current densities. (c) Cycling performance of the rechargeable Zn–air battery using CoP@SNC as the air cathode at 10 mA cm−2 with a 10 min cycle period. (d) A representative photograph for open-circuit voltage of two Zn–air batteries in series tested with a multimeter. (e) The photograph for red LED lights (∼2.0 V) powered by two Zn–air batteries in series. (f) The photograph of the system depicting H2 (left) and O2 (right) generation during overall water electrolysis. The inset in (f) shows the overall water electrolysis device powered by two Zn–air batteries in series. 
The excellent performance of the Zn–air battery for CoP@SNC endows it with promising practical applications for energy storage and conversion in daily life and industrial production. By integrating multiple Zn–air batteries into circuits, its practical cell voltage can be increased to further catch up with those of non-aqueous lithium (sodium)-type batteries to meet the specific energy/power needs for various applications. For instance, two series-connected Zn–air batteries based on the CoP@SNC as the air-cathode can achieve an increased practical cell voltage as high as 2.81 V (Fig. 9d), which enables them to easily power up a red light-emitting diode (LED, ∼2.0 V) panel displaying ‘BIT’ (Fig. 9e). Another interesting practical application of CoP@SNC is that it can work well as a trifunctional catalyst for both the overall water splitting and Zn–air battery. Two series-connected Zn–air batteries based on CoP@SNC can well power the device to efficiently catalyze the water splitting (the inset in Fig. 9f), and a large amount of H2 and O2 generated on the electrodes reflects the high HER and OER activities of the CoP@SNC electro-catalysts (Fig. 9f and Video S†). All of these results above indicate that CoP@SNC can work as a trifunctional catalyst with an excellent electro-catalytic performance for energy storage and conversion.
Conclusion
In summary, we have successfully prepared CoP@SNC by using organophosphoric acid as both phosphorus and carbon sources. The resulting CoP@SNC can efficiently catalyze the OER, HER, and ORR, and therefore can be used as a trifunctional electro-catalyst for overall water splitting and rechargeable Zn–air batteries for the first time. When used as an electrode for overall water splitting in alkaline solution, CoP@SNC shows a low cell voltage of only 1.64 V at the current density of 10 mA cm−2; and the obtained rechargeable Zn–air battery based on CoP@SNC as the air cathode exhibits a very low discharge–charge voltage gap (0.83 V at 10 mA cm−2) and a long cycle life (up to 180 cycles). Its excellent electrocatalytic performance can be attributed to the strong coupling between CoP QDs and highly conductive carbon, the synergistic effect of dual doping of S and N species into carbon, well-structured porosity and high specific surface area. Our work establishes a new strategy for the preparation of a CoP@SNC hybrid as an efficient and stable trifunctional electro-catalyst for overall water splitting and rechargeable Zn–air batteries.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21471016 and 21271023) and the 111 Project (B07012). The authors would like to thank the Analysis & Testing Center of the Beijing Institute of Technology for performing the FESEM and TEM measurements.
Notes and references
Q. Liu, J. Q. Tian, W. Cui, P. Jiang, N. Y. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 6828–6832 CrossRef .
H. Yang, Y. Zhang, F. Hu and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7616–7620 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Q. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7587–7590 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, Y. P. Liu, T. Z. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Wang, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10575–10584 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. X. Zhou and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
Y. G. Li, M. Gong, Y. Y. Liang, J. Feng, J. E. Kim, H. L. Wang, G. S. Hong, B. Zhang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805–1812 CrossRef PubMed .
F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, D. Bao, J. M. Yan and X. B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Duan, S. Chen, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8738–8745 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 5531–5534 CrossRef .
Z. H. Pu, Q. Liu, P. Jiang, A. M. Asiri, A. Y. Obaid and X. P. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4326–4329 CrossRef .
J. H. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. C. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao, Z. H. Xia and L. M. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, L. T. Qu, G. Q. Shi, J. Y. Liu, J. F. Chen and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 2270–2274 CrossRef .
T. Y. Ma, J. Ran, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4646–4650 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Y. Ma, Y. L. Liu, T. Z. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2014, 1, 360–383 RSC .
Y. P. Zhu, Y. L. Liu, T. Z. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6627–6636 RSC .
Y. Toda, M. Pink and J. N. Johnston, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14734 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Q. Liu, H. Cheng, N. Li, T. Y. Ma and Y. Z. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3777–3784 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783–3791 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Meng, D. Voiry, A. Goswami, X. Zou, X. Huang, M. Chhowalla, Z. Liu and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13554–13557 CrossRef PubMed .
C. G. Hu and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604942–1604951 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 205–211 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, H. G. Wang, Z. Wu and X. B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2422–2430 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Wohlgemuth, R. J. White, M. G. Willinger, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1515–1523 RSC .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Y. Wang and L. M. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
Y. Xiao and M. H. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 305, 1–9 CrossRef .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rösler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. Botz and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, T. Y. Ma, G. Gao, X. W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3708–3717 RSC .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Z. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16850–16856 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Grosvenor, R. G. Cavell and A. Mar, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 2702–2712 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390–2396 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lv, Y. Zhu, H. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Su, J. Huang, Y. Yao and C. Li, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 4148–4154 RSC .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H. J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef .
D. Xiong, X. Wang, W. Li and L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8711–8714 RSC .
M. R. Gao, X. Cao, Q. Gao, Y. F. Xu, Y. R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3970–3978 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ganesan, M. Prabu, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3625–3637 CrossRef .
T. Y. Ma, J. L. Cao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1138–1142 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2925–2930 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Cheng, M. Lyu, S. Fan, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Zhi, C. Wang, C. Xiao and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15670–15675 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Han, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4601–4605 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Chang, L. Luo, T. Xu, X. Lei, J. Liu and X. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1889–1895 CrossRef .
Y. Zhan, G. J. Du, S. L. Yang, C. H. Xu, M. H. Lu, Z. L. Liu and J. Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12930–12936 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, X. M. Ge, Z. L. Liu, L. Thia, Y. Yan, W. Xiao and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1878–1884 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7281–7285 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, P. Bian, Y. Tang, R. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500936–1500943 CrossRef .
T. Meng, J. W. Qin, S. G. Wang, D. Zhao, B. G. Mao and M. H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7001–7014 RSC .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P. A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Gerken, J. G. McAlpin, J. Y. C. Chen, M. L. Rigsby, W. H. Casey, R. D. Britt and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14431–14442 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 3192–3198 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Y. Xue, X. Yan, W. Yan, Q. Cheng and Y. Xie, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 521–530 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, H. Wang, D. Kong, K. Yan, P. C. Hsu, G. Zheng, H. Yao, Z. Liang, X. Sun and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4345–4352 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, S. Gul, J. Yano and Y. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7636–7642 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Peng, D. Jia, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402031–1402038 CrossRef .
Z. S. Wu, L. Chen, J. Liu, K. Parvez, H. Liang, J. Shu, H. Sachdev, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1450–1455 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, X. Huang, C. Wan and H. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7891–7894 RSC .
S. G. Wang, Z. T. Cui, J. W. Qin and M. H. Cao, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2270–2283 CrossRef .
T. Nakagawa, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15578 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr03299hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
1/J = 1/Jk + 1/(Bω1/2)
B = 0.2nFCoDo2/3ν−1/6
Jk = nFkCo

 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process for organophosphoric acid-derived CoP@SNC. (b) FE-SEM image (scan bar, 100 nm), (c) FT-IR spectrum of C3N4; (d) XRD pattern, and (e) Raman pattern of CoP@SNC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Survey XPS spectrum of CoP@SNC. The corresponding high-resolution spectra of C 1s (b), S 2p (c), N 1s (d), Co 2p (e), and P 2p (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) FE-SEM image, (b–d) TEM images, SAED pattern (inset of b), (e) HRTEM image, (f) EDS spectrum, and (g) the corresponding element mappings, (h) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm, and the corresponding pore size distribution curve for CoP@SNC (inset of h).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Co K-edge XANES spectra for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. (b) High-resolution XPS spectra of Co 2p for CoP@SNC and CoP@C. (c) Co k3χ(k) oscillation curves and (d) Fourier transformed k3-weighted EXAFS spectra for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of CoP@SNC, CoP&SNC, CoP, SNC, Pt/C, and IrO2/C in an O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (scan rate of 2 mV s−1). (c) The ring current of CoP@SNC on an RRDE (1500 rpm) in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (ring potential: 1.50 V vs. RHE). (d) The ring current of CoP@SNC on a RRDE (1500 rpm) in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (ring potential: 0.40 V vs. RHE). (e) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential (the potential at J around 10 mA cm−2) of CoP@SNC in comparison with that of IrO2/C. (f) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC before and after 1000 cycles.	 



CoP@SNC
	
1.58
	
68
	
1 M
	
GC


	This work
IrO2/C	1.60	N.A.b	0.1 M	GC	
36

Pt/C	1.83	169	0.1 M	GC	
37

CoP/C	1.59	66	0.1 M	GC	
38

CP@FeP	1.58	63.6	1 M	CFPc	
39

CoP/rGO	1.57	66	1 M	GC	
6

CoP	1.52	65	1 M	NF	
4

CoSe2 ultrathin nanosheets	1.55	44	0.1 M	GC	
44

CoSe2/N-graphene	1.596	∼40	0.1 M	GC	
40

CoS2/N,S-GO	1.61	75	0.1 M	GC	
41

TCCN	1.65	74.6	0.1 M	SSMd	
42

NG-CNT	1.7	141	0.1 M	SSM	
43

NiCo2O4 nanocages	1.61	50	1 M	GC	
45

Co3O4/N-graphene	1.54	67	1 M	NF	
46

Co3O4C-NA	1.52	70	0.1 M	Cu foil	
47

ZnxCo3−xO4 nanoarrays	1.55	51	1 M	Ti foil	
48

Co(OH)2 + N-rGO	1.66	N.A.	0.1 M	GC	
49

SNG-Co2+	1.6	62	1 M	GC	
50


 	Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves, (b) Tafel plots, and (c) EISs of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C. (d) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (e) CVs of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (f) Plots of the capacitive current at 1.25 V vs. RHE as a function of scan rates for CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, and CoP@C.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Polarization curves and (b) Tafel plots of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC, and Pt/C for HER (N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution with a scan rate of 2 mV s−1). (c) Chronoamperometric response at a constant potential of −0.175 V vs. RHE. (d) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC at different scan rates. (e) A representative photograph of the system depicting H2 (left) and O2 (right) generation during overall water electrolysis. (f) Polarization curves of a two-electrode alkaline electrolyzer using CoP@SNC as both the cathode and anode at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH.	 

 	Fig. 8  CV curves of CoP@SNC (a) and Pt/C (b) in 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (c) Rotating-disk electrode polarization curves (LSVs) of CoP@SNC, CoP@NC, CoP@C, CoP, SNC, and Pt/C in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at 1600 rpm. (d) LSVs of CoP@SNC in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at rotating rates ranging from 400 to 2025 rpm with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. (e) K–L plots of CoP@SNC obtained from the RDE data at 0.5, 0.45, 0.4, 0.35, and 0.3 V vs. RHE, and the corresponding electron-transfer number. (f) Polarization curves of CoP@SNC before and after 1000 cycles.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A representative photograph for the open-circuit voltage of the home-made Zn–air battery tested by a multimeter. (b) The plots for the home-made Zn–air battery based on CoP@SNC as the air cathode tested at various current densities. (c) Cycling performance of the rechargeable Zn–air battery using CoP@SNC as the air cathode at 10 mA cm−2 with a 10 min cycle period. (d) A representative photograph for open-circuit voltage of two Zn–air batteries in series tested with a multimeter. (e) The photograph for red LED lights (∼2.0 V) powered by two Zn–air batteries in series. (f) The photograph of the system depicting H2 (left) and O2 (right) generation during overall water electrolysis. The inset in (f) shows the overall water electrolysis device powered by two Zn–air batteries in series.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr03299h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
