Third generation photovoltaic cells based on photonic crystals  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC05461D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC05461D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3121-3145Third generation photovoltaic cells based on photonic crystals

        
          
            Junshi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mengnan 
            Yao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liang 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: shenliang@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      30th October 2018
    , Accepted 13th February 2019First published on 14th February 2019AbstractThird-generation photovoltaic cells (PVCs) represented by organic solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum dot solar cells and perovskite solar cells have attracted intense attention due to their low cost, light weight, flexibility and large area, enabling wide application in wearable devices, building photovoltaics and other fields. In order to meet the requirements of practical applications, PVCs need to have outstanding performance in both optics and electronics. The light management method using photonic crystals is considered to be one of the most promising methods to further improve the performance of the third generation OPVs. Benefiting from structure design combined with photonic modes such as Bloch structures, microcavity structures, and interference effects, PCs can be well-used as optics filters, reflectors, or photoanodes to intentionally enhance light trapping and color features. Creatively, third-generation PVCs based on different dimension PCs have been demonstrated by various methods and achieved excellent photovoltaic performance. This review provides a comprehensive and detailed summary of PC-based third-generation PVCs in terms of the structure design, physical mechanism and device performance.
Junshi Liu
Junshi Liu obtained her bachelor's degree from Jilin University of Electronic Science and Technology in 2017. After completing her bachelor's degree, she joined the team of Professor Liang Shen at Jilin University. Now, her research interests mainly focus on high-efficiency polymer/perovskite solar cells with light management.
Mengnan Yao
Mengnan Yao received her master's degree from Jilin University in 2017 under the supervision of Professor Liang Shen. Then, she continued her doctoral research in Shen's group at Jilin University. Her research interests focus on the fabrication and characterization of polymer solar cell devices and optical simulation.
Liang Shen
Liang Shen received his PhD in 2009 from Jilin University, and was promoted to a full professor in 2016. He mainly engaged in the research of semiconductor photovoltaic cells and photodetectors. In recent years, breakthroughs have been made in the research of high-efficiency perovskite/polymer photovoltaic cells, and highly sensitive and ultra-fast response perovskite photodetectors. He has published more than 110 SCI-indexed papers, which are cited more than 3000 times.
1 Introduction
With the emerging environmental deterioration and energy consumption throughout the world, great efforts have been devoted to photovoltaic technologies, which directly convert solar energy to electricity in a convenient and sustainable way.1–5 Despite first-generation silicon solar cells and second-generation thin-film solar cells being developed persistently,6 third-generation photovoltaic cells (PVCs) have attracted more and more attention owing to their unique advantages of low cost, large area, light weight, solution-process fabrication, and high flexibility. As a result, third-generation PVCs including organic solar cells (OSCs), dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs)1 have emerged and rivalled traditional first and second-generation PVCs. Besides, third-generation PVCs are mostly prepared by using organic and nano semiconductor materials, which can be intentionally designed for specific applications by adjusting the electronic and optical properties.7–10 Some examples include retractable OSCs,11 photonic filter integrated OSCs,12–14 semi-transparent (ST)-OSCs,15–22etc., which can be applied in flexible wearable devices, building photovoltaics (BIPV), automotive windshields, folding curtains and other fields.23–25 In order to better meet the requirements of actual applications, PVCs are required to have considerable power conversion efficiencies (PCE) and excellent color adjustability. However, the thickness of the active layer directly affects the PCE and color of PVCs, which inherently restrict each other. Therefore, how to balance the contradiction between the PCE and the color characteristics of PVCs has become an urgent problem to be solved, which has aroused widespread interest of researchers.
In recent years, improving the performance of PVCs with light management technology to implement overall regulation of the internal light field of devices has become a hot topic. A variety of light management techniques have been widely investigated to improve light absorption, including photonic crystals (PCs), microcavity structures, and plasmonic nanostructures. Among the proposed light management methods, in particular PCs based on advantageous optical properties like Bloch structures, microcavity structures, interference effects, etc. have attracted considerable attention due to the unique periodic structure. Actually, PC structures enhance light absorption by controlling the light reception and emission of the device, promoting the color features of PVCs by flattening the transmission spectrum. Herein, we provide an overview of the research progress of third-generation PVCs based on PCs. Firstly, this review summarizes the application and preparation of third-generation PVCs based on PCs with different dimensions (one-dimensional PCs (1D-PCs),26 two-dimensional PCs (2D-PCs)27 and three-dimensional PCs (3D-PCs)).28 Then, we systematically discuss the development history and the latest status of various PC-based OSCs, PSCs, and DSSCs. Finally, we summarize and look forward to the future development of PC-based third-generation PVCs.
2 The physical mechanism of PCs in third-generation OPVs
The concept of PCs was presented in 1987 by E. Yablonovitch29 and S. John30 who co-founded the idea of “Photonic Crystals” in this field. Since then, PCs have been rapidly developed and widely used in nano-photonics,31 biology,32,33 electronic communications,34–36 and other fields.
According to Maxwell's equations, the photon propagation equation in PCs can be expressed as,37,38 (2.1)where H represents the magnetic field, ε represents the relative dielectric constant of the medium, and ω represents the angular frequency of the light. Eqn (2.1) has a solution at some specific frequencies, and a photon energy band is formed at this time.39 However there is no solution at the remaining frequencies to form a photonic bandgap (PBG). Therefore, PCs are also known as PBG-PC structures. Actually, it refers to an artificial microstructure with a PBG characteristic, which can be periodically arranged by media of different refractive indices.40–42 Due to the periodic arrangement of atoms, Bragg scattering of periodic potential fields is generated to form an energy band structure. Similarly, in a PC structure, a band gap structure is obtained by a periodic change of refractive indexes. When the photon energy is within the PBG, the photon cannot enter the PC. Therefore, PCs have the function of wavelength selection, and can selectively pass light in a certain band and block the light of other wavelengths simultaneously. Therefore, we can intentionally adjust and control the movement of photons in PCs to meet the requirements of applications.43–45 According to the periodic dimension of the PBG in space, they can be divided into 1D-PCs, 2D-PCs, and 3D-PCs respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of 1D-PCs, 2D-PCs, and 3D-PCs. 
2.1 The physical mechanism of 1D-PCs in third-generation OPVs
A 1D-PC means that the dielectric function ε(x, y, z) varies periodically along a given direction z, and is uniform in the others, as in eqn (2.2),45 ε(x,y,z) = ε(x,y,z + mΛ)(2.2)where m represents an integer and Λ represents a period, that is, the length of a unit cell. A 1D-PC is actually equivalent to a multilayer film structure composed of different media, which is alternately covered by two materials in one direction, and the refractive index changes periodically. In the study of 1D-PCs, a quarter reference wavelength is usually used as the optical thickness of the film, and the whole structure is equivalent to a quarter-wave stack with a PBG.46,47
Herein, we discuss the TE mode (the electric field vector is perpendicular to the incident plane) commonly used in OSCs.47 Highly reflective coatings are typically designed by dielectric quarter-wavelength stacks of alternating high refractive index materials and low refractive index materials. The refractive indices of the two materials can be expressed as (nH, dH) and (nL, dL), and then the transmission matrix of PCs with N-layers can be expressed as,48,49 (2.3)wherein δH and δL are the optical phase thicknesses of the nH and nL layers, respectively. The optical phase thickness of each layer can be expressed as,47 (2.4)where θj represents the angle of refraction in the layer j, as determined by Snell's law, and j = H or j = L, n0sinθ0 = njsinθj. The transmission matrix of PCs can be obtained by multiplying the transmission matrices of the single layer media. If the number of dielectric layers of the PC is N, the relationship between the incident light field and the transmitted light field is,50 (2.5)where E0 and H0 represent the electric and magnetic field strengths above the medium, respectively. According to the above equation, the total reflection coefficient r and the total transmission coefficient t can be obtained, respectively. (2.6) (2.7)
Therefore, the transmittance, reflectance, and absorptivity of PCs in OPVs are, T = t·t*(2.8) R = r·r*(2.9) A = 1 − T − R(2.10)
Due to interference effects, 1D-PCs are often used in OPVs as distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs), in which case the interference of the wave at the origin of the PBG is affected by the period of the PC, the ratio of the refractive index, and the angle of the incident light. The refractive indices of the two materials are given as na, nb, the thickness is da, db, and the incident angle is θa, θb respectively. The physical period of 1D-PCs can be expressed as d = da + db, na·da and nb·db are the actual optical paths of light in the corresponding medium, and the optical period can be expressed as,50 (2.11)where , X is an adjustable parameter, and in the case of normal incidence, the normalized dispersion relation can be expressed as, (2.12)
According to eqn (2.11), the relationship between the position of the reflection peak and the optical thickness of PCs is inferred. Fig. 2a is a photograph of experimentally obtained 1D-PCs with different thicknesses.51 And as shown in Fig. 2b, the position of the Bragg peak changes due to the rotational speed and acceleration of the spin coating affecting the thickness of the PC. It is inferred that the Bragg peak produces a slight red shift as the optical thickness of the PC increases.52
 Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of experimentally obtained 1D-PCs with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Evolution of the Bragg peak position with the final rotation speed and ramp stage acceleration used in the spin-coating process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
According to eqn (2.12), it can be concluded that, in TE mode, the relative band gap width is positively correlated with the incidence angle. It can be inferred that the amplitude of the reflection coefficient at the interface between the two media increases monotonously with the incidence angle. According to the above equations, the width g in the PBG can be expressed as, (2.13)
Δg is a ratio of  in a cycle and Δg is a constant. Therefore, when X changes, the width g of the normalized PBG does not change. The change of optical period dab causes the change of the center wavelength, from which it can be inferred that the width of the PBG is positively correlated with the center wavelength. Fig. 3a shows the relationship between the specular reflection spectrum and the 1D-PC of N-layer SiO2/TiO2.53 The relationship between the 1D-PCs of N-cycle LiF/WO3 as well as the reflection and absorption shown in Fig. 3b can also be confirmed.54
 Fig. 3  (a) The relationship between the specular reflection spectrum and the 1D-PC of N-layer SiO2/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) The relationship between the 1D-PC of N-cycle LiF/WO3 and the reflection and absorption obtained from the experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
According to eqn (2.13), since , the relative PBG width is positively correlated with the refractive index ratio of the material; the band gap can be increased by increasing the refractive index of the high-refractive-index materials or decreasing the refractive index of the low-refractive-index materials.
Generally, OPVs can be divided into semitransparent OPVs and opaque OPVs in terms of device transparency, and 1D-PCs can promote the performance of both. PCs are usually used in ST-OSCs. Using interference effects, 1D-PCs were deposited on a transparent top electrode, and the PBG of the 1D-PCs was designed to match the absorption spectrum of the active layer. When incident light passes through the top electrode and reaches the 1D-PC interface, light cannot be transmitted inside the PCs due to the existence of a PBG and it can be totally reflected back to the active layer, so that the light can be reabsorbed to effectively increase the PCE of the devices. For the color diversity of devices, due to the existence of a photon bandgap, visible light of a specific frequency cannot pass through PCs, and coherent diffraction is formed on the surface of PCs with periodic structure, which macroscopically shows the color of visible light corresponding to a specific frequency.55 For opaque OPVs, such as PSCs, the main purpose of introducing PCs is to maximize the ratio of the interlayer refractive index by changing the porosity of each layer structure, thus increasing the relative PBG width. Then, PC reflection and the inherent strong absorption properties of the perovskite material were used to improve the color tunability of PSCs. They can be applied to building facades, fences, walls, awnings and car casings.56
2.2 The physical mechanism of 2D-PCs in third-generation OPVs
A 2D-PC refers to a material whose dielectric constant changes periodically in two directions and that has a photonic forbidden band characteristic in all directions of two-dimensional space, which is composed of a parallel and uniform arrangement of dielectric rods. The dielectric function of this structure in the direction perpendicular to the dielectric rods (both directions) is a periodic function of the spatial position, while the dielectric function does not vary with spatial position in a direction parallel to the dielectric rods.49,57
In practical applications, a 2D-PC structure can be embedded in a plane (flat) dielectric waveguide to form a PC plate, so as to absorb more light. Fig. 4a and b show two PC tablet structures.45 The 2D-PC enhances light absorption by (1) deviating from the light propagation direction and (2) optical interference effects.
 Fig. 4  Two PC tablet structures: (a) self-standing membrane or air bridge and (b) silicon-on-insulator (SOI). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) Springer International Publishing Switzerland. (c) The main light absorbing structure of thin-plate solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright (1982) Optical Society of America. 
In 1982, Eli Yablonovitch established the limit for enhancement in the fraction of absorbed light. This limitation can be achieved if the geometry of the unit is traversed.58 At the same time, Eli Yablonovitch used this principle to design a thin-plate solar cell.59 Although this is a silicon cell, the main structure of absorbing light is shown in Fig. 4c and the principle of increasing absorption by deviating from the light propagation direction is still applicable to third-generation OPVs using 2D-PCs. As shown in Fig. 4c, Eli Yablonovitch et al.59 embedded silicon particles into the glass plate, and then the device not only absorbed the light directly irradiated on the Si surface, but also collected most of the light received by the glass. It achieves an effect of enhancing light absorption by deviating from the light propagation direction.
However, it is worth noting that many people tend to associate ergodicity with randomness, but they are not always together. Ergodicity is not limited to randomness, but can also be achieved using a 2D periodic distribution of dielectric materials.
For example, in 2016, Mariano et al.60 achieved ergodic light propagation using a series of periodic light guide plates formed by interpenetrating fibers, as shown in Fig. 5a. In this photonic fiber plate (PFP), the front surface has the same texture as the back surface. Here the ratio of the array period to the cylinder diameter is defined as 1/d. As shown in Fig. 5b, when there is only one optical fiber, the incident wave focused at the center of the fiber will interfere with the reflected wave, at which point there is no significant light trapping and a fairly regular interference pattern is generated. In contrast, as shown in Fig. 5c, when the cross sections of the fibers overlap (1/d < 1), more disordered patterns are produced. At this point, since the fiber opening can capture light and generate an interference pattern over most areas of the fiber array, it can be inferred that light propagates in all directions, not just back and forth at the interfaces of the fiber, thus forming ergodic light propagation. In order to further prove that the propagation properties of photons cause PFP absorption enhancement, Mariano et al. consider the trajectory followed by normal incident photons. As shown in Fig. 5d, the motion trajectories of these photons follow the Fresnel reflection and refraction laws. Elementary geometrical considerations show that consecutive bounces (labeled by j) within the same fiber preserve the angle of internal reflection βj, Δβ = βj+1 − βj = 0(2.14)
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross section of the electric field distribution when a plane wave is incident on a PFP. Light trapping in a PFP (b) on an isolated fiber and (c) on an array of intercalated fibers. (d) The chaotic character in the photon trajectory is schematically shown by considering slightly different incident positions, rapidly leading to completely distinct paths. Here a change in the incidence corresponds to a lateral displacement of the ray without any angle change. Note that inside the fourth fiber, ray trajectory 1 follows a regular sequences of reflections akin to whispering gallery modes until crossing the gap connecting the fourth with the third fiber, at which point it undergoes a sudden change in reflection angle Δβ ≠ 0. (e) Measured EQE of a PFP organic solar cell (green) compared with a planar one (red line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Spring Nature. 
According to eqn (2.14), when 1/d, there is an opening in which a photon is transmitted directly from one fiber to another. When this occurs, βj changes abruptly, with high sensitivity to the initial point of incidence for a given photon. It can be inferred that in this cylindrical structure, photons follow a chaotic trajectory and have a higher probability of absorption. As shown in Fig. 5e, the EQE of the PFP-based OPV device is significantly improved, and the absorption capacity of light has been increased by more than 30%.
It should be noted that, as has been discussed in many papers, one may go beyond the conventional limit for light trapping, but this is always for a limited range of wavelengths, and typically this is not achieved using PCs. However, adjusting the 2D periodic distribution of the dielectric material to maximize the light propagation in the ergodic geometry is an effective method to improve the performance of 2D-PC based OPVs.
For device requirements, diffraction occurs when light is incident perpendicular to the 2D-PC and passes through the PC,55 following Bragg's law, λ0 = 2nadnklsinθdif(2.15)where λ0 is the diffraction wavelength of the sample in air, dnkl is the interplanar spacing, na is the average refractive index of the system, and θdif is the Bragg diffraction angle. It can be seen from formula (2.15) that changing the average refractive index or the interplanar spacing of the system can cause the PBG to move, thereby causing a color change of the device.
2.3 The physical mechanism of 3D-PCs in third-generation OPVs
3D-PCs are materials that have a dielectric constant that changes periodically in three directions and have a photonic band forbidden characteristic in all directions in three dimensions. 3D-PCs have a full range PBG, that is, light falling in the band gap is prohibited from propagating in any direction.49,57
For OSCs and PSCs, 1D-PCs and 2D-PCs can effectively improve the device performance. However, there is nothing that can be achieved using 3D ones that cannot be achieved using either 1D-PCs or 2D-PCs. The photonic structure preparation of 3D-PCs is more complicated, so there are no reports about 3D-PC based OSCs and PSCs to date. For DSSCs, different from OSCs and PSCs, the properties of DSSCs are primarily determined by dye photosensitizers and mesoporous membrane materials that can absorb a large number of dye molecules. 3D-PCs have large interconnected pores and specific surface area, which can provide more excellent carriers for sensitizers, increase the adsorption area of the surface, and enable dyes to fully permeate and adsorb, and PCs can also generate enough Bragg diffraction and multiple scattering phenomena.61
In DSSCs, the 3D inverse opal (IO) structure has the most extensive applications. It is composed of many tens to hundreds of nanometer air balls densely packed into a 3D ordered array in a material, which is face-centered cubic (FCC). The Bragg position of an IO film is related to the refractive index comparison between the background medium (air/electrolyte) and the target material. Therefore, the optical properties of 3D-IO-PCs depend on the periodic size and shape. Adjust formula (2.15) to get the Bragg equation as,45,62 (2.16)where d111 is the (111) plane spacing of the FCC structure, neff is the effective refractive index of the IO film, D is the diameter of the spherical cavity, m is the order of reflection (usually considered as the first order reflection m = 1), n1 and n2 are the refractive index of the target material and cavity, and f1 and f2 are the filling factors of volume, respectively. When the incident light is perpendicular to the (111) crystal plane, the position of the Bragg reflection peak can be estimated using formula (2.16). It is inferred that the position of the Bragg reflection peak can be adjusted by changing the cavity diameter of the 3D-IO, and the cavity diameter of the 3D-IO can be controlled by the diameter of polystyrene (PS). Fig. 6 shows the relationship between the diameter of the sphere and the reflection spectrum, and the position of the Bragg diffraction peak is positively correlated with the diameter of the sphere.62 In addition, the thickness of the IO film is limited. As the film thickness increases, multiple reflections and interferences are caused, resulting in a significant increase in the reflection intensity, and a slight redshift in the reflection peak can be observed. If the wavelength covered by the PBG changes, IO films of different colors will be realized.63
 Fig. 6  The relationship between the sphere diameter and the reflection spectrum of an IO PC is obtained experimentally. The inset shows the relationship between the Bragg diffraction peak and the diameter of the sphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2001) John Wiley and Sons. 
3 Application and preparation process of PCs
3.1 Application and preparation process of 1D-PCs
1D-PCs, as the simplest and most common PCs, refer to a dielectric structure which has periodic changes in 1D and appears uniform in the other two dimensions.26 It has been found that incorporating 1D-PCs into PVCs could cause the inherent periodicity of the PCs to be destroyed, adding additional degrees of freedom, and effectively collecting visible, near-infrared, and ultraviolet light inside the devices.45 They can be used as a Bragg reflector in third-generation PVCs.43,64 Common structures include (1) alternating deposition of two or more materials with different refractive indexes to form a photonic multilayer film,16,17,19,54,65–74 (2) nanostructures,75–77 and (3) a plurality of 1D-PCs in series.72 1D-PCs are deposited directly on the top or bottom of the cells in PVCs or coupled to a photoanode or a counter electrode to enhance PVCs’ performance.
Photonic multilayer films are generally prepared by alternately evaporating high refractive index materials and low refractive index materials under high vacuum conditions. Due to the uncomplicated operation technology, they have been widely used in experimental operation in recent years. Representative material combinations such as WO3/LiF, MO3/LiF, TiO2/SiO2, and TiO2/LiF have been reported. During the period of 2013–2018, the Shen group used a method of alternating deposition to prepare a 1D-PC with an N-layer periodic structure on the top Ag electrode of a PVC under a high vacuum. As an example, in 2013, a high-efficiency and high-transmittance OSC based on 1D-PCs was prepared;67 a maximum PCE of 4.12%, and a highest transmittance of 80.4% at 660 nm are obtained, in which the specific method of PCs was to prepare the completed OSCs under a high vacuum (5 × 10−4 Pa) without breaking the vacuum. Eight pairs of WO3 (62.4 nm)/LiF (90.5 nm) were alternately evaporated on the top Ag electrode, and the deposition rate was about 1 nm s−1, as shown in Fig. 7a and b. In 2016, Zhang et al.70 prepared a multi-layer high-refractive-index TiO2 and low-refractive-index SiO2 alternating PC by sputtering and then deposited a thin layer of ITO on the PC. In that work, the 1D-PCs were located at the bottom of the cell to enhance the photon absorption and improve the device performance. Comparing with those of OSCs without using 1D-PCs, the integrated photon flux density in the active layer is increased by 27.2%, and the PCE of 5.20% and JSC of 12.25 mA cm2 increased by 37% and 38%, respectively. The cell structure is shown in Fig. 7c.
 Fig. 7  (a) PC deposited directly on the top electrode, and (b) PC and Ag electrode cross-section scanning electron microscope (SEM) images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. (c) PC deposited on the bottom of the cell, and (d) PC structure in series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry and Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2015) Optical Society of America. 
The 1D-PC structure available in PVCs also includes nanostructured PCs. 1D nanostructured materials such as nanowires, nanorods, nanobelts and nanopillars have been used in the research of various optoelectronic devices.73 On the one hand, when the size of the nanostructure is smaller than the wavelength of the incident light, the light will experience a scattering effect in the nanostructure, which reduces the reflection loss at the surface and enhances the light absorption. On the other hand, 1D nanostructures have a high surface to volume ratio and aspect ratio, providing a sufficient diffusion length for photons, leading to enhanced transmission performance. Therefore, 1D nanostructures can effectively increase collection and transport properties.78 For example, TiO2 nanocolumns are a common nanostructured PC; the preparation process is roughly divided into the following steps: (1) potent anodizing treatment of a Ti crucible, followed by (2) ultrasonic treatment to obtain flat Ti, and finally (3) using periodically a high alternating current and a low alternating current to again anodize to obtain TiO2 nanocolumns.76,79,80
In 2016, F. Javier Ramos etc.73 put forward three different 1D-PC coupled photoanodes based on TiO2 nanocolumns, in which the alternately deposited nanocolumns have different refractive indices (n) and are deposited by the physical vapor deposition method at oblique angle deposition (PVD-OAD) in order to obtain an accurate and uniform thickness of the nanopillars. PC1 is alternately deposited by two kinds of TiO2 nanopillars with different refractive indexes by using an electron beam evaporator in PVD-OAD. Because the porosity of the individual layers changes during the deposition process, the refractive index also changes. In order to obtain a more significant refractive index change, SiO2 is introduced into PC2 and PC3 structures. PC2 directly deposits high refractive index TiO2 on the FTO substrate as the first layer of the PC, acting as a buffer layer, and then deposits SiO2 and TiO2 porous nanopillar layers successively while maintaining the deposition angle. In the same way, PC3 alternately deposits TiO2/SiO2/TiO2 nanopillars in the same manner, and the porosity of SiO2 and TiO2 layers is similar. It is worth noting that PC2 is deposited directly on the FTO, and in order to avoid the low fill factor caused by SiO2, the first layer of dense TiO2 film is replaced by nanopillars in PC3. Therefore, PC3 exhibits superior photovoltaic properties. In addition, Heiniger et al.81 used the strong reflectivity of a PC to combine SiO2 with ITO to form a PC as the counter electrode of DSSCs. Firstly, SiO2 nanoparticles were spin-coated on FTO substrates and then ITO was deposited on SiO2 by RF magnetron sputtering after annealing. The same operation was repeated 6 times to form 1D-PCs, and annealing was performed to form a counter electrode, which can enhance the performance while ensuring the transparency of the device.43
PCs can be also connected in series. Yang et al.72 designed a PVC structure in which two PCs were deposited in series on Ag cathodes and applied to a greenhouse. Each series of PCs was alternately deposited with 4 pairs of TiO2 and LiF, but the thickness of the two PCs connected in series was uniform. The specific structure is shown in Fig. 7d. Since PC1 is forbidden to reflect the wavelength band in the range of 700–900 nm and PC2 cannot form a PBG, the tandem PC exhibits higher transmittance than the PC alone, and is more suitable for practical applications.
All the above methods can produce 1D-PCs. Among them, the method of alternately evaporating a high refractive index material and a low refractive index material under vacuum has the advantages of a large evaporation rate and strong controllability, and is the most convenient method at present, and has universal applicability.
3.2 Application and preparation process of 2D-PCs
2D-PCs are made of a structure with a certain dielectric constant, which changes periodically in two directions of the spatial plane and remains stable in a direction perpendicular to the plane.27 2D-PC structures applied to PVCs include the micro-lens group,82,83 2D-PC plates with symmetrical triangular, square or hexagonal honeycomb lattices,84 2D-IO-PC,85 PFP,60,86 and 2D honeycomb stent structures (HC).87 Among them, the 2D-IO-PC structured film composed of an ordered array of voids surrounded by solid materials is a structure in which the high refractive index material and the low refractive index material are alternately and periodically arranged.88 2D-PCs are typically fabricated in a slab waveguide using nanoimprint or photolithographic techniques from top to bottom and have a full band gap photonic structure.71,89,90 The nanoimprinting comprises the following three steps: (1) heating the polymer deposited on the base, the heating temperature is required to be higher than the temperature at which the polymer is converted into glass, (2) preparing the polymer to be embossed and covering the stamp, and finally (3) lowering the temperature. When the temperature reaches room temperature, the stamp can be removed from the surface of the samples to complete the nanoimprint,84 which is shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Nanoimprint flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics. 
In 2014, Akshit Peer et al.82,83 proposed a micro-lens group, as shown in Fig. 9a. It is a polymer array existing at the interface between glass and air, which is manufactured by nanoimprinting and can efficiently collect and diffract light. The plasmon mode is enhanced by continuously adjusting the height to pitch ratio and the lateral spacing of the micro-lens array, further increasing the photocurrent, and then the micro-lens group is coupled to the metal cathode of a PVC to enhance the device performance; the enhancement was 38% for the photocurrent and 36% for the weighted absorption respectively. To further enhance the photon absorption of the active layer in PVCs, D. Duché et al.84 created a perforated PC plate with a hexagonal grid. The geometry of the 2D-PC plate was firstly optimized and simulated by the finite difference time domain method, and nanoimprinting was performed after ion etching. PVCs incorporating 2D-PC plates exhibit superior light absorption properties. Subsequently, Chen Ming et al.91 and Baek et al.92 proposed a 2D-PC of a TiO2 nanopillar array almost simultaneously in 2017. The former use a TiO2 nanopillar array as a counter electrode in PVC devices. The preparation process of the 2D-PCs can be summarized as follows:75 firstly, TiO2 nanoparticles are spin-coated and sintered to form a TiO2 electrode, then polystyrene is spin-coated on the electrode as a physical mask. Similar to the above method, 2D-PC electrodes were obtained by ion etching and nanoimprinting. In addition, in 2006 Meng et al.85 reported a 2D IO perovskite photonic film as the light absorbing layer, and the IO films have a honeycomb lattice. The specific method can be described as follows:85 firstly, the precursor solution was infiltrated and spin coated. Because the concentration of the precursor solution affects the quality of the IO perovskite film, it is necessary to adjust the concentration of the precursor solution according to the mask. Then, the solvent was evaporated and the perovskite films were crystallized. Finally, the mask was removed and the 2D-IO-PC was obtained, as shown in Fig. 10a. Recently, in 2017, Snaith et al.87 reported a 2D HC. Firstly, self-assembly is used to obtain PS, which is transferred to the substrate, and then, hexagonal non-close-packed single-layer PS is obtained by plasma etching. Subsequently, SiO2 is spin coated to fill the interstitial space and sintered to form a reverse SiO2 HC structure. Finally, the perovskite layer is spin-coated again and annealed to form a stable HC, as shown in Fig. 10b.
 Fig. 9  (a) Microlens array schematic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2015) SPIE. (b) Picture of the device used to make the PFP and (c) description of the preparation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Spring Nature. 
 Fig. 10  (a) IO PC preparation flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation of a two-dimensional HC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. 
3.3 Application and preparation process of 3D-PCs
3D-PCs exhibit a periodic change in refractive index in three directions perpendicular to each other in space, which is the most complicated one of the PC structures.43–45 IO is the most common type of 3D-PCs, and is mostly used as a photoanode or counter electrode in DSSCs. Due to the periodic arrangement, the pores in IO are large, which can effectively allow the electrolyte to penetrate, enhance the scattering effect, and improve the performance of the device.93
The IO structure can be fabricated by self-assembly of spheres in a colloidal solution, and then the IO voids are filled with TiO2 or Si or other materials having a higher refractive index, and finally, the mask is removed to obtain a completed IO structure,43 as shown in Fig. 11a. The self-assembly process and the void filling process are the main parts that affect the formation of the IO structure. Therefore, by optimizing the design of these two processes, a richer IO structure will be obtained. In the past, many researchers have studied this topic and proposed the vertical deposition method,43,94–104 the spin-on deposition method,43,105–109 the chemical vapor deposition method,43,96,97,99 the atomic layer deposition method,43,94–96 physical limitation etc.43,110 for optimal design. However, the photonic bandgap formed by these methods is inferior in stability, so in actual operation, a small amount of disorder occurs, and it is difficult to form a complete 3D-PC.45,111,112
 Fig. 11  (a) 3D IO PC preparation flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) 3D IO TiO2 PC flow chart on non-planar electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, Xu et al.93 produced a 3D IO TiO2 PC directly on a non-planar electrode in DSSCs, achieving higher power conversion efficiency of DSSCs. Firstly, spheres are synthesized from methyl methacrylate and self-assemble, and after sintering, they are infiltrated with TiCl4 to fill the voids therein. After annealing to remove the TiO2 network lattice, the sample was hung from a glass substrate with a doctor blade, etched with an HF solution, and finally deposited on the photoelectrode, as shown in Fig. 11b.
In summary, PCs have been widely used in the manufacture of third-generation PVCs due to their particular properties. Various studies have been carried out to prepare PCs using simpler methods and updated materials. Furthermore, the application of high-PCE PVCs based on PCs will become the main focus of new energy in the future.
4 Third-generation photovoltaic cells based on PCs
At present, the third generation of PVCs has become the main research direction. By skilfully incorporating PCs into third-generation photovoltaic structures, the device can effectively improve the optical absorption and PCE to achieve excellent performance. In this section, we systematically summarize the performance and applications of OSCs, PSCs, and DSSCs based on PCs of different dimensions in recent years, and hope to provide new solutions for the development of PVCs.
4.1 OSCs based on PCs
OSCs refer to solar cells based on organic semiconductors, and the thickness of the active layer is generally less than 100 nm due to the poor charge carrier mobilities.113 As an important part of OSCs, ST-OSCs can be applied to BIPV, automotive windshields, etc. due to their dual characteristics of optical transmission and power generation. They have become one of the most promising photovoltaic devices as a hot topic in this field. The light transmittance characteristics of ST-OSCs are based on the sacrifice of a portion of sunlight, which also leads to a reduction in the PCE of the device. Meanwhile, for the structure of ST-OSCs, top transparent electrodes are required to ensure total light transmittance. However, due to the thickness limitation of the electrodes, thin semitransparent electrodes cannot provide sufficient specular reflection, so that the active layer can only absorb part of the incident light. The rest of the light passes directly through the device and does not contribute to the ideal PCE. Therefore, using PCs as DBRs, when the 1D-PC matches the absorption spectrum of the active layer, the light in the PBG cannot be transmitted in the PC, which works as a DBR. Therefore, incident light can be reflected back into the device more times to improve the OSC performance. Meanwhile, light in other wavelength ranges can still be transmitted, to pass through the devices, which have a semitransparent characteristic. Structurally, 1D-PCs can be deposited directly on the top electrodes, applied to the interior of the cells, or deposited on the bottom of the cells.

4.1.1 OSCs with top 1D-PCs. 
1D-PCs can be deposited directly on the top electrode and act as a back reflector to adjust the light with a PBG. When the reflection spectrum matches the spectrum of the active layer, the incident light within the photonic forbidden band can be reflected back to the active layer more times, selectively enhancing light absorption in the high reflection range and allowing light to pass through the device in the high transmission range. Furthermore, PCs can also be designed to flatten an uneven transmission spectrum to obtain a neutral color. In addition, due to the optical interference effect of PCs, PCs have an angle dependence. When the incident light angle changes, the interference process inside the PC changes; as the angle increases, the transmittance of the device shifts significantly to short wavelengths.68
In 2013, the Shen group67 demonstrated that thermal evaporation of N pairs of WO3/LiF directly as a Bragg reflector on the top electrode can effectively improve the performance of ST-OSCs based on a poly (3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA) mixture. When the reflection spectrum of the 1D-PCs was matched with the absorption spectrum of the active layer, the light can be sufficiently absorbed due to the forbidden band limit. So, in the wavelength range of 460–580 nm, the combination of PCs and Ag electrodes achieved reflection near 100%, resulting in a PCE of 4.12% for the device, which was 24.1% higher than that of devices without 1D-PCs. Subsequently, in order to pursue more efficient OSCs, the same principles and methods were applied in a low band gap polymer to fabricate ST-OSCs. When the light illuminates from the ITO side, the device is capable of producing a powerful PVC effect. When light illuminates from the other side, the light within the forbidden band will be reflected back into the air. The PCE of the device reached 5.16% and the measured average visible light transmittance (AVT) was 29.3%.68 However, they found that the enhancement of the light absorption caused by PCs was always studied in the strong absorption region of the active layer; in the low incident photon-to-electron conversion (IPCE) region, the impact of PCs on light trapping has not been considered before, which has great potential for improving PCEs. Therefore, in order to prove the role of 1D-PCs in the weak absorption range, they proceed to design a 1D-PC that can effectively match the active layer in the low IPCE range.16 In the wavelength range of 400–500 nm, the device has a high reflectance close to 100% and a transmittance close to 0% simultaneously. The IPCE peak gradually appeared at around 450 nm compared with the reference devices, indicating that the JSC gradually increased, while the IPCE remained stable in other wavelength ranges, demonstrating that 1D-PCs achieved an enhancement of light absorption in the weak absorption range for the first time. The reflectance, transmittance spectra and IPCE characteristics are shown in Fig. 12a–c. Finally, the PCE was measured as high as 4.84%. Compared to the control device, JSC was increased by about 13.9% and the PCE was increased by about 14.2% respectively.
 Fig. 12  (a) Reflectance spectra of 1DPCs and the IPCE spectrum of the device, (b) transmittance spectra of 1DPCs and (c) IPCE characteristics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. 
With the rapid development of BIPV,114–116 the requirements for power supply and natural light can be met by ST-OSCs.117–123 How to make the color rendering index (CRI) close to 100 and the chromaticity difference (DC) ≤ 0.0054, which represent the application requirements in BIPV, has become the main problem in the research field. In 2015, the Shen group19 proposed an idea to balance the transmission spectra with PCs, which did not play a role of DBRs anymore. They still deposited the 1D-PCs directly on the top electrode, which consisted of 5 pairs of WoO3/LiF. By optimizing the PC pairs, as shown in Fig. 13a–e, the transmission spectrum is matched with the light absorption range of the active layer to make the OSC transmission spectrum flat and enhance the color rendering performance of the device. Meanwhile, the PCE of the device can be effectively guaranteed owing to the reflection of the 1D-PCs. The experimental results manifested that the PCE reached 5.31% accompanied by a CRI of 95, and the DC was 0.0005, which are almost the optimum parameters of ST-OSCs. Subsequently, they extended this idea to low bandgap polymer based OSCs, for which it was demonstrated that the introduction of ID-PCs was still effective for CRI enhancement. With the active layer of PSBTBT:PC60BM, the PC acts as a filter and a mirror, and the device structures shown in Fig. 14a had a CRI of 91.54 In 2017, they continued to work on improving the PCE and CRI of ST-OSCs; PCs and metal nanoparticles were introduced into OSCs simultaneously. The metal nanoparticles acted as plasmon resonance centers to increase the light absorption, and the PCs play a role in flatting the transmission spectrum. As a result, a PCE as high as 7.07% was obtained with a CRI of 95.66 Device structures showing different colors and the device efficiency are shown in Fig. 14b and c.
 Fig. 13  (a) DC and CCT of different pairs of 1DPCs under irradiation with an AM 1.5G illumination source. The dotted horizontal line marks DC = 0.0054. (b) CRI of TCS. (c) The average CRI of the equipment. (d) Total transmittance spectra of different devices with N pairs of 1D-PCs and (e) representation of the color coordinates of the STPSC devices with N pairs of 1DPCs under an AM 1.5G illumination light source in the CIE 1931 color space. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 14  (a) Total transmission spectrum with N pairs of 1DPC devices, the top left image is 3 pairs of 1DPCs and the original photo background. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The simultaneous introduction of plasma and PC device structure, and (c) J–V characteristics of devices C and F–H with the same plasma ratio and different PC center wavelengths under AM1.5G conditions, the illustrations show the different colors of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
In addition, Betancur et al.65 used a non-periodic 1D thin-film photonic structure to eliminate the inherent periodicity of PCs and increase the degrees of freedom, enabling it to capture near-infrared and near-ultraviolet photons, achieving a PCE over 5.6% and an AVT of 30% in ST-OSCs. Yang et al.72 designed an OSC that uses a series of 1D-PCs of different thicknesses in series to achieve an AVT of 40.3% in a visible wavelength range of 400–700 nm.
By depositing 1D-PCs directly as a back reflector on the top electrode, the PCE has been significantly enhanced by capturing light using the inherent interference characteristics of PCs. In addition, light/material interactions can be utilized to improve device light absorption, and can be achieved by introducing 1D-PCs into OSCs.


4.1.2 OSCs with internal 1D-PCs. 
Integrating 1D-PC tablets inside OSCs, the active layer is coupled with a slow Bloch mode (SBM) with a low group speed.84,124–128 The interaction of light/material can be effectively improved, and the lifetime of photons within the active layer is prolonged, resulting in enhanced light absorption.84
Based on this principle, D. Duché et al.84 studied the optical properties of two OSCs based on 1D-PCs and active layers of blends of (poly-3-hexylthiophene and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butirycacid methyl ester) (P3HT:PCBM) and (poly(3-(2-methyl-2-hexyl-carboxylate)thiophene-co-thiophene):PCBM, respectively. The 1D-PCs are composed of a 1D (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)poly(styrenesulfonate)) (PEDOT:PSS) grating and an Ag grating. The structure of the device is shown in Fig. 15a. The absorption spectra of active layers inside the two OSC after optimization are compared as shown in Fig. 15b and c. The absorption gains of the two OSCs were found to be 3.5% and 13.8%, respectively. It can be seen that the PCs inside the cells effectively enhance the ability to absorb photons.
 Fig. 15  (a) OSC structure image including a 1D-PC composed of a PEDOT:PSS grating and a Ag grating, and (b) and (c) absorption spectra of devices with active layers P3HT:PCBM and TDPTD:PCBM, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics. 
Although this structure can enhance light absorption, the velocity of the SBMs affects the time of the light/material interaction, resulting in enhancing light absorption while making optical coupling difficult.126,127 In addition, when processing PCs in high-refractive-index film layers, energy transfer is caused, affecting the device performance.129 Therefore, OSCs with internal 1D-PCs have not been further studied.


4.1.3 OSCs with bottom 1D-PCs. 
As for the research of OSCs based on 1D-PCs, a multilayer film photonic structure typically involved thermally evaporating low-refractive-index and high-refractive-index materials in a vacuum on the top of a solution-treated active layer. However, the penetration of hot metal atoms leads to damage of the active layers, which adversely affects the unformed devices.70,130 Therefore, considering the change of the device structure, the deposition order of the active layers and the 1D-PCs was adjusted. 1D-PC structures were fabricated in front of the active layers and deposited on the bottom of the OSCs as photoanodes.
In 2016, Zhang et al.70 demonstrated ST-OSCs based on bottom-located 1D-PCs. The top of the cell was a solution-treated PEDOT:PSS layer with high transmission and conductivity, ensuring that light can illuminate from the top to the bottom. Consistent with the principle mentioned above, excitons are generated in the device to enhance the photocurrent due to the interference effect; the PCs act as mirrors to reflect the light twice or more times. The J–V curve of the device is shown in Fig. 16a. The JSC of the device was experimentally determined to be 12.25 mA cm−2, and the PCE was 5.2%. The transmission spectrum obtained by the experiment is shown in Fig. 16b. In the visible light region, the transmittance changes from high to low, demonstrating the color tunability of the devices.
 Fig. 16  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) transmission spectra of a ST-OSC based on a bottom 1D-PC and a top solution treated PEDOT:PSS layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In summary, the interference effect of 1D-PCs can significantly improve the performance of OSCs, and 2D-PCs can also enhance the performance of the device by light absorption in the direction of light propagation. In addition, 2D-PCs prepared by nanoimprinting methods make it possible to use a roll-to-roll method to process large surfaces in production.131,132


4.1.4 OSCs based on 2D-PCs. 
It has been shown that 1D-PCs can effectively improve the performance of ST-OSCs, but 2D-PCs can supply more effective means based on light management by changing device structures. 2D-PC-based OSCs have been reported having two structures including a micro-lens array and a 2D-PC plate, both of which play a positive role in improving device performance.
Akshit Peer82,83 advocated OSCs based on a polymer micro-lens for the first time. A polymer micro-lens assembly is fabricated at the air–glass interface, which focuses and diffracts the light to create a dense waveguide mode network that enhances the photon component. Subsequently, the micro-lens group is coupled to a periodically textured metal cathode for broadband light absorption, thereby promoting the photocurrent. At the interface between the cathodes and the organic metals, conical metal protrusions with triangular lattice symmetry constitute a periodic array, and the symmetric micro-lens group on the top side of the glass has the same lattice shape as the cathode cone. In the experiment, by optimizing the micro-lens pitch (a = 500 nm), the weighted absorption enhancement of the device was 49%, and the photocurrent was enhanced by 58%, as shown in Fig. 17a.
 Fig. 17  (a) Effect of microlens spacing at the air–glass interface on device weighted absorption and JSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) OSC of a 2D-PC based on a hexagonal grid absorbs the variation of gain in the range of 400–680 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics. 
Subsequently, D. Duché et al.84 proposed to use the nanoimprint method to directly pattern the P3HT:PCBM film in OSCs to prepare a 2D-PC plate printed with a hexagonal grid. The lattice holes can effectively enhance the light absorption of the OSCs. The Bloch mode is coupled over a wide spectral range, and the geometry of this hexagonal mesh exhibits an enhancement of the electric field inside the material.133 In the wavelength range of 620–680 nm, the absorption gain is significantly enhanced, which is shown in Fig. 17b. It is also a practice that enables large-area preparation at low cost without changing the optical and electrical properties of the material.
In a nutshell, most of the research on PC-based OSCs has focused on 1D-PCs; so far there has been no report on 3D-PC coupled OSCs, which is related to the complex structure of 3D-PCs. However, the optical management function of PCs in OSCs has been effectively demonstrated, and it can be further optimized in the future to obtain OSCs with higher performance.

4.2 PSCs based on PCs
PSCs exhibit excellent potential in the field of photovoltaics due to their high efficiency, low cost, and simple preparation process. A large number of studies have been carried out by researchers, especially PSCs have achieved a 23.2% PCE with a hole transporting material with a fine-tuned energy level and a high glass transition temperature.134 In order to apply PSCs more widely to life such as in building windows, automobile windshields, etc., PSCs are required to have various color characteristics. However, due to the charge transport properties of PSCs, the total thickness of a PSC is typically 400 nm.135,136 Since the thickness of the device limits the color tunability, there is a contradiction between the color of the PSCs and the PCE.137 Therefore, the main purpose of introducing PCs is to effectively increase the color diversity of the device while not sacrificing efficiency.

4.2.1 PSCs based on 1D-PCs. 
PSCs are typically presented between the n-type and p-type charge collection layers or in the mesoporous layer of n-type TiO2 or an insulating dielectric material consisting of CH3NH3PbI3 or the mixed halide variant CH3NH3PbI3−xClx.138–142 Despite considerable efficiency, the color of the perovskite material is lacking blue and green.143,144 In order to broaden the color gamut and achieve a green-to-blue spectral coverage to meet BIPV application requirements, Snaith et al.135 constructed a porous 1D-PC using TiO2/SiO2 and coupled it into active layers of PSCs, as shown in Fig. 18a–c. Under the condition of ensuring high reflectivity, the interlayer refractive index contrast is maximized by changing the porosity of each layer structure. Colorful and non-transparent PSCs with shades of blue, cyan and green are achieved by PC reflection and strong absorption of the perovskite material. At the same time, the PCs can reflect the incident light of a specific frequency to reduce the heat gain in the PSCs, which is beneficial to enhance the conversion efficiency for further actual application. It is obvious that the introduction of PCs can make PSCs have more functions to expand their application field.
 Fig. 18  (a) Structure diagram and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the porous 1D-PC based on the SiO2/TiO2 composition, and (c) color displayed by devices with different PCs (from blue to red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
In 2016, Ahmad et al.73 used angle physical deposition technology (PVD-OAD) to prepare precise and uniform nanopillars. By adjusting the tilt angle and the film thickness of PVD-OAD and selecting different metal oxides, three different configurations of porous 1D-PCs were prepared as the photoanodes of PSCs based on CH3NH3PbI3. The structures of three devices are shown in Fig. 19a–f. As the incident angle of the deposition changes, the porosity and refractive index also change with it. PCs are used as the photoanodes, which can produce optical interference and dispersion effects together with the FTO, maximizing light absorption and causing photocurrent enhancement. The PCE of the three devices was 10.94%, 6.39%, and 12.03%, respectively.
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of a 1D-PC structure prepared by PVD-OAD, (a) and (b) are the PC1 structure, (c) and (d) are the PC2 structure, and (e) and (f) are the PC3 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In PSCs, the reflective properties of 1D-PCs can be used to enhance the device performance, while enhancing the light absorption and color improvement by improving the contact area between PCs and perovskites. The absorption principle of 2D-PCs is not exactly the same as that of 1D ones. 2D-PCs can enhance the light absorption in the propagation direction. For this reason, researchers discussed 2D-PC based PSCs.


4.2.2 PSCs based on 2D-PCs. 
The 2D-PCs applied to PSCs mainly include an IO structure, a nanotube array, a light management foil, a HC structure, etc. They can be used for the active layers of a device, the light absorbing layer or the outside layers of a device. Since 2D-PCs have multiple photon modes and can achieve ergodic light absorption, it is considered that the use of 2D-PCs is expected to improve the performance of colorful PSCs.
Marko et al.145 created a textured light management foil on the side of the front glass of inverted PSCs by nanoimprinting, which has excellent resistance to refraction and light absorption, reducing the loss of reflection and enhancing light trapping, contributing a measured PCE of 17.1%. However, the thickness of the active layer in high performance PSCs is generally greater than 300 nm. If the thickness of the active layer is lowered, the absorption of infrared light will be reduced.91,146 In order to solve the problem of incomplete light absorption, Chen et al.91 studied 2D-PC structures as the light absorption layer for ultra-thin lead halide PSCs, and TiO2 nanotubes as the electron transport layer. The device structure is shown in Fig. 20a and b. 2D nanotube arrays have a high specific surface area, which can reduce exciton recombination, increase the contact interface with perovskites, and have a positive impact on charge extraction and collection. As shown in the absorption spectrum of the active layer in Fig. 20c, the device has an absorption efficiency of 65.7% in the range of 350–800 nm, which is 18.4% higher than that of the planar unit. The results suggest that this structure can provide new ideas for future light management methods of PSCs.
 Fig. 20  (a) PSC structure with a 2D-PC, (b) illustrates a cross-sectional view of the 2D-PC cycle, active layer and anode thickness. (c) The photon structure and plane control the absorption spectrum of the PSC, and the corresponding absorption enhancement spectrum. Three enhanced peaks are marked. PSC based on IOP-500 and IOP-1000 MAPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright (2017) IEEE. 
In 2015, Fan et al.147 used a 2D-PC structure of a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) nano-cone array as an anti-reflective coating to enhance the light absorption of a flexible PSC. The 2D-PCs can improve the light transmittance of the glass substrate and have a hydrophobic effect, and the perovskite light absorbing layer is more stable, which can prolong the life of the device. As shown in Fig. 21a and b, the experimentally determined JSC was increased from 17.7 to 19.3 mA cm2, the PCE was increased from 12.06 to 13.14%, and it had good super-hydrophobicity. In addition, as shown in Fig. 21c, after 200 bends, 96% of the initial value is retained, and stable photoelectric performance can be maintained. In 2016, Park et al.148 obtained a moth-eye TiO2 mesoporous layer by means of shape-forming and nanoimprinting techniques using a moth-eye microstructure as a template, as shown in Fig. 22a and b. Compared with the ordinary TiO2 mesoporous layer, the light absorption was significantly enhanced due to the large pores of the moth-eye structure, and the PCE of the PSC increased from 15.31% to 17.48%.
 Fig. 21  (a) A J–V measurement of devices with and without a PDMS nano-cone film (the inset image is the schematic of light scattering in the device with a nano-cone layer), (b) the relationship between the different aspect ratios and the static contact angle of the water on the PDMS layer (the inset shows that when AR: 1.0, the maximum contact angle is 155°) and (c) changes in FF, JSC, VOC, and PCE during 200 bends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustrations of (a) preparing a silicon master and (b) patterning a mesoporous TiO2 layer with conical shaped moth-eye structures. (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE and JSC images of a PSC based on flat TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition, 2D porous perovskite films can control the crystallinity by controlling the concentration of the precursor solution and the pores of the film in PSCs. Benefitting from adjusting the energy level of the films, ensuring optical performance and further functionalization, a colorful and efficient PSC device can be obtained. Chen et al.85 used a 2D IO perovskite photonic film to achieve a colorful device with a PCE of 11.2%. This structure can enhance light trapping and inhibit potential contact between the electron and hole transport layers, thereby increasing the photovoltaic performance of the device. Due to the color diversity of the IO film, the device exhibits a variety of colors visible to the naked eye,149 as shown in Fig. 23a and b. Recently, Snaith et al.93 obtained a HC structure through a template. The application of 2D-PCs increased the open circuit voltage and the fill factor, resulting in a PCE of 10.3% and an AVT of 38%.
 Fig. 23  PSC based on IOP-500 and IOP-1000 MAPbI3 (a) forward biased to short-circuit J–V characteristics, inset for digital photographs, and (b) IPCE spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
In summary, the introduction of PCs ensures that PSCs can be diversified in terms of the color of the devices while maintaining high efficiency. There is no report on the application of 3D-PCs to PSCs until now. In the future, the device structure can be further designed and optimized to solve the contradiction between color and efficiency, which will promote the research of PSCs.

4.3 DSSCs based on PCs
DSSCs are one of the types of third generation PVCs, based on low-cost nano-titanium dioxide and photosensitive dyes. They have the advantages of a simple production process, no pollution, long service life, and low cost. They are also a new type of solar cells with intensely broad commercial prospects, so how to improve the low PCE of DSSCs is the focus of research. Further improvement of light absorption is still the challenging problem due to the influence of the thickness of the active layer and the limitation of illumination conditions.

4.3.1 DSSCs based on 1D-PCs. 
The periodic structure of 1D-PCs causes the PCs and the gap between the crystal layers to be exceeding dense, and the liquid electrolyte and dye do not sufficiently penetrate therein, which results in the restriction of the device PCE. Therefore, there is not a lot of research on DSSCs based on 1D-PCs. Miguéz et al.150 used TiO2/SiO2 nanoparticles to prepare multilayer PCs, which is shown in Fig. 24a–c. DSSCs with a PCE of 4.6% were obtained by using the resonant cavity generated between PCs and a dye nc-TiO2 electrode with a slow Bloch mode of PCs. However, as an insulating nanoparticle, SiO2 severely limits charge transport. Therefore, the Miguéz group151 changed the strategy to prepare 1D-PCs using TiO2, improving the device performance by adjusting the size of the TiO2 nanoparticles, the porosity between the PC layers, and the concentration of the precursor solution, so that the PCE was increased by 45%. However, the device performance still does not meet the requirements, so research turned to 2D-PCs and 3D-PCs.
 Fig. 24  DSSC based on a porous nanoparticle-based 1D-PC. (a) Schematic diagram of frontal illumination, and cross-sectional SEM image of (b) the dye-sensitized nc-TiO2 electrode and (c) of a layer of SiO2 and TiO2 layers constituting the 1D-PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons. 


4.3.2 DSSCs based on 2D-PCs. 
The application of TiO2 nanotube based 2D-PCs to semitransparent DSSCs as photoanodes is an effective way to improve the device performance. Utilizing the high specific surface area of TiO2 nanotubes, the Bragg reflection of PCs and the interference effect of light, the light trapping ability of DSSCs is greatly improved. As a result, the photocurrent is enhanced dramatically.
Guo et al.152 used a current pulse to prepare a non-periodic TiO2 nanotube PC as a photoanode, which can capture almost all visible light, resulting in a photocurrent increase of 27.01% and a PCE of 7.87%. Then, Huang et al.153 used anodic oxidation to seamlessly bond TiO2 nanotubes to DSSCs, making it possible to block the gap between the two electrodes and increase the fill factor, resulting in a 50% increase in device performance, as shown in Fig. 25a. Subsequently, the current pulse is used again to obtain the coupling of TiO2 nanotubes and the nc-TiO2 layer to form a double-layer photoanode, which plays a role of the PC effect and light scattering. Due to the selective reflection of PCs, the value of the PCE is inextricably linked to the wavelength. When the maximum absorption peak of the dye molecule matches the maximum value of the PC reflection, the PCE produces the largest enhancement (39.5%),154 as shown in Fig. 25b.
 Fig. 25  (a) J–V characteristics of AM 1.5 sunlight. The purple and green lines represent the PC layer axial lattice parameters of ∼150 and ∼190 nm, and the number of cycles is 30 and 20, respectively, and the corresponding HC pulse durations are 28 and 40 s, respectively. The purple 1 and purple 2 dye loadings are slightly different. The reference device differs only in the PC layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) The J–V characteristics of a 10 mm thick dye-sensitized TiO2 NP electrode coupled with different thickness TiO2 NT PCs and TiO2 NTs, the thickness of the reference electrode is about 12 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Relationship between different device angles and JSC enhancement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Since the cosine law of the incident angle affects the incident intensity of light, when the light deviates from normal, the output power of DSSCs will decrease. Therefore, how to reduce the dependence of DSSCs on the angle of the incident light is also a major problem to improve efficiency. In 2014, Guo et al.77 used TiO2 NP layer and TiO2 NT PC thin layer formed PCs as photoanodes in DSSCs. When the light is incident at an angle, the Bragg mirror will be blue-shifted, forming more overlap with the dye absorption peak and resulting in higher efficiency, which is shown in Fig. 25c. When the Bragg peak does not coincide with the dye absorption, since the TiO2 nanotubes are vertically aligned, the photocurrent compensation effect is mainly caused by the scattering effect of NTs. This helps the PC structures compensate for the energy loss in this case and reduces the angular dependence of the DSSCs.
Subsequently, with a view to the limitations of lighting conditions in practical applications, Guo et al.76 further changed the lattice constant and film thickness to improve the PCE under low photon flux conditions. As the intensity of the illumination decreases, the carrier density is lower, the VOC is increased and the FF is decreased. Under illumination of 50 mW cm−2, the PCE is 5.03%. With the deepening of research, Guo et al.75 recently proposed to apply a TiO2 nanotube PC layer and Au nanoparticles as photoanodes in DSSCs, which can significantly enhance light trapping due to the PC effect and the surface plasmon resonance effect of Au NPs. As shown in Fig. 26a and b, when the surface plasmon of the Au NPs is optimally matched with the band gap of the PC, the value of maximum JSC is obtained, at which time the PCE reaches 5.63%.
 Fig. 26  (a) Absorption spectra of TiO2 NT, Au NP/TiO2 NT and Au NP/TiO2 NTPC devices, and (b) absorption spectrum enhancement of Au NP/TiO2 NT and Au NP/TiO2 NTPC, absorption spectrum of the N719 dye and the reflection spectrum of NT/NTPC, the illustration is a digital photo of TiO2 NT/NTPC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
The introduction of 2D-PCs overlaps the Bragg peak with the dye absorption peak, causing an increase in DSSCs’ PCE. To further optimize the device performance, dyes need to penetrate more fully, so researchers have further applied 3D-PCs with large pores to DSSCs.


4.3.3 DSSCs based on 3D-PCs. 
In addition to the distinctive properties of PCs, 3D-PCs have a large number of interconnected pores, which can provide more carriers from the sensitizer and allow the dye to fully penetrate. PCs can also produce enough coherent diffraction phenomena, which is beneficial to the improvement of device performance. In addition, due to the forbidden band of the PCs, a resonance mode can be generated at the interface to enhance light absorption, so they are widely used in DSSCs.
Mallouk et al.155 applied 3D-PCs to DSSCs in 2003, achieving a 26% current increase and demonstrating that 3D-PCs play a positive role in improving DSSC performance. Subsequently, Miguéz et al.156 applied 3D IO as a single-layer photoanode in DSSCs. Due to the reflection effect of PCs on photons in the forbidden band, the sensitizer could not absorb enough photons, resulting in a decrease in the PCE. When PCs were combined with dyed TiO2, the PCE was significantly heightened, and it was concluded that PCs should work with other structures to enhance DSSC performance. Soon afterwards, Hwang et al.157 optimized DSSCs of the traditional sandwich structure; 3D-PCs were prepared on the back side of the cathode using vertical deposition techniques. Due to the coherent scattering phenomenon of PCs, the light reflected by the anode can be absorbed twice. When the reflection peak of the PCs matches the absorption peak of the dye, the light absorption in the long wavelength range can be enhanced, and the PCE is obtained as 10.8%, as shown in Fig. 27a. Further research led to a two-layer DSSC consisting of an nc-TiO2 layer and a TiO2 IO PC layer,158 as shown in Fig. 27b. The combination of the two forms a resonance mode, confining light to TiO2 NPs, and the dye is fully infiltrated with photons to obtain an 8.2% PCE, which is 50% higher than that of the single-layer photoanode device, as shown in Fig. 27c. It was found in the experiment that the morphology and sensitization degree of PCs had no effect on the resonance mode, but affected the thickness of the nc-TiO2 layer158,159 and the PC scattering intensity. It was observed that the application of PCs can greatly improve the selection and design of DSSCs.
 Fig. 27  (a) J–V characteristics of a DSSC in which a 3D-PC and Ag film are combined under one sun irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2012) IOPscience. (b) A DSSC structure diagram containing a 3D-PC, and (c) J–V characteristics of solar cells fabricated using different structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2013) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The application of 3D-IO-PCs with a single aperture to DSSCs has been reported many times in the last decade. In 2015, Jung Woo Lee and Jun Hyuk Moon160 first proposed a DSSC with a dual layer 3D-IO-PC electrode with different pore diameters. The maximum JSC was 13.98 mA cm−2 and the PEC was 6.46%. The double-layer 3D-IO-PC structure of the device is shown in Fig. 28, in which the macro-pore layer is a TiO2 IO structure with a pore diameter of 250 nm (photon band gap of 680 nm), and the mesopore layer is an IO structure with a pore size of 70 nm (photon band gap of 90 nm). The absorption peak of dye N719 is 580 nm, while that of dye N719 is weak at 680 nm. Since the PGB is 680 nm, photons can be efficiently captured and the absorption of the dye is enhanced. Recently, Reiss et al.93 reported the application of a synthetic mesoporous TiO2 nanostructured 3D-PC to DSSC photoelectrodes. At the time of preparation, SiO2 is removed after etching, and the specific surface area is increased to form mesoporous 3D-IO, and the load of the reinforcing dye acts as a scattering and sensitizing layer. After sensitizing the photoelectrode with the organic dye YKP88, the maximum PCE value was 10.35%, which was increased by 17% compared with the standard electrode. The efficiency was increased by 12% after sensitization with anthraquinone dye N719. The detailed PV parameters are shown in Table 1, which are the maximum values currently obtained using the IOP structure.
 Fig. 28  Schematic image of the bilayer IO layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters (maximum performance and average, standard deviation over five devices) for DSSC devices with photoelectrodes fabricated using different mesoporous 3D-IO and sensitized with dye YKP-88. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons




Photoanodes

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (3 mol% SiO2 removed)
19.64
0.72
69.5
9.86


19.52 ± 0.12
0.72 ± 0.02
68.9 ± 0.06
9.81 ± 0.05


Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (3 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1
18.51
0.73
70.7
9.60


18.62 ± 0.11
0.73 ± 0.02
70.3 ± 0.4
9.59 ± 0.03


Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (5 mol% SiO2 removed)
19.86
0.74
70.6
10.35


19.55 ± 0.40
0.74 ± 0.01
70.7 ± 0.8
10.21 ± 0.3


Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (5 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1
19.04
0.73
69.1
9.58


18.89 ± 0.15
0.73 ± 0.01
69.0 ± 0.1
9.49 ± 0.09


Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (8 mol% SiO2 removed)
19.20
0.73
68.4
9.54


18.89 ± 0.21
0.73 ± 0.01
68.8 ± 0.4
9.46 ± 0.08


Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (8 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1
18.50
0.73
69.8
9.40


18.67 ± 0.17
0.75 ± 0.02
69.0 ± 0.8
9.35 ± 0.05




It can be seen that 3D-PCs are widely used in DSSCs due to their distinctive properties, and have achieved considerable performance improvement. In the future, the optimization of DSSC materials and structures can be further explored. The current research lays a solid foundation for the development of DSSCs.

5 Summary and outlook
All in all, PC-based third-generation PVCs have demonstrated excellent device performance. This review summarizes the preparation methods of PCs with different dimensions and the photovoltaic properties of PC-based third-generation PVCs. As a periodic structure, PCs have intrinsic properties such as the Bragg effect, optical interference, coherent diffraction, etc. They can also have the advantages of (1) a selective response to the spectrum, ensuring device transparency, (2) reducing the angle-dependent cosine loss and enhancing light absorption, (3) flattening and enhancing the transmission spectrum to make the color clear, and (4) having a large specific surface area and porosity to improve the performance of PVCs. However, there are still two major problems with the PCE and color characteristics for practical applications of PC-based third-generation PVCs. On the one hand, the PCE of some PVCs still lags behind that of commercial inorganic silicon cells, which limits the application of PVCs. In response to this situation, great efforts should be devoted to further light harvesting, and more attention paid to the method of introducing PCs and other light management into PVCs at the same time, such as the strategy of combining PCs and plasmas mentioned in this paper. On the other hand, the application of BIPV requires PVCs to have considerable color characteristics. However, the charge transport properties of PVCs limit the thin active layer, which affects the color adjustability of PVCs. Therefore, tremendous efforts should be devoted to developing methods to solve the imbalance between color and photocurrent, focusing on further development of optical management technologies such as PCs, researching the diversity of PC structures and materials, and designing and optimizing PVC structures. It can be expected that PC-based third-generation PVCs will have an indispensable impact on the commercial application of PVCs in the future.
In addition, except for the PC structure, Alejandro W. Rodriguez et al.161–163 also used inverse design techniques to enhance the performance of a given device. These reverse inverse techniques have been widely used in nonlinear, topological, near-field, and integrated optics. Therefore, in the future, it is possible to extend the inverse design technique to PVCs to enhance light capture, which may be an effective method to improve the performance of PVCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61875072), and International Cooperation and Exchange Project of Jilin Province (20170414002GH, 20180414001GH) for the support of the work.
References
T. Earmme, Y.-J. Hwang, S. Subramaniyan and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6080–6085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. H. J. Conti, Short-Term Energy Outlook, The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA),  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Z. Long, B. Sun and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2783–2796 RSC .
B. Qu and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 053302 CrossRef .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Bagnall and M. Boreland, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4390–4396 CrossRef .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Shi, L. Zhou, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Wu, L. Zhu, J. Xiao, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2014, 85, 023103 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C.-K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771–1775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Park, T. Xu, J. Y. Lee, A. Ledbetter and L. J. Guo, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7055–7060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Taylor, T. Otanicar and G. Rosengarten, Light: Sci. Appl., 2012, 1, e34 CrossRef .
R. Menchon-Enrich, A. Llobera, J. Vila-Planas, V. J. Cadarso, J. Mompart and V. Ahufinger, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e90 CrossRef .
C. Chen, L. Dou, J. Gao, W. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2714–2720 RSC .
W. Yu, S. Ruan, Y. Long, L. Shen and W. Guo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 127, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, X. Jia, M. Yao, L. Zhu, Y. Long and L. Shen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23732 RSC .
S. Baek, S. J. Ha, H. Lee, K. Kim, D. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37006–37012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, J. Xu, Y. Long, L. Shen, Y. Liu, W. Guo and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9920–9928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Shen, S. Ruan, F. Meng, J. Wang, E. Zhang and W. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 212–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Shen, Y. Liu, W. Yu, X. Gao, Y. Song, W. Guo, S. Ruan and W. Chen, Synth. Met., 2014, 198, 1–5 CrossRef .
W. Yu, L. Shen, Y. Long, W. Guo, F. Meng, S. Ruan, J. Xu, H. Ma and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 153307 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chueh, S.-C. Chien, H.-L. Yip, J. F. Salinas, C.-Z. Li, K.-S. Chen, F.-C. Chen, W.-C. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, X. D. Zhu, K. Forberich, J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, M. Halik, S. Spallek, B. Butz, E. Spiecker, T. Ameri, N. Li, P. Kubis, D. M. Guldi, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. George, Z. Ma, J. Bergqvist, K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, E. Wang, L. M. Andersson, M. R. Andersson, F. Zhang and O. Inganäs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1467–1476 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Ha, Y.-C. Yang, J.-E. Kim, H. Y. Park, C.-S. Kee, H. Lim and J.-C. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 15 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chutinan and S. Noda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 4488 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Cheng and D. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2518 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486–2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Rue1, H. Chong, M. Gnan, N. Johnson, I. Ntakis, P. Pottier, M. Sorel, A. M. Zain, H. Zhang, E. Camargo, C. Jin, M. Armenise and C. Ciminelli, New J. Phys., 2006, 8, 256 CrossRef .
P. Vukusic and J. R. Sambles, Nature, 2003, 424, 852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Michielsen and D. G. Stavenga, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2008, 5, 85–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fink, J. N. Winn, S. Fan, C. Chen, J. Michel, J. D. Joannopoulos and E. L. Thomas, Sci., 1998, 282, 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Noda, M. Yokoyama, M. Imada, A. Chutinan and M. Mochizuki, Science, 2001, 293, 1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Temelkuran, S. D. Hart, G. Benoit, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Nature, 2002, 420, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Freymann, V. Kitaev, B. V. Lotschzc and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2528 RSC .
M. Plihal and A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 8565 CrossRef .
K. Ohtaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1978, 19, 5057 CrossRef .
E. Yablonovitch, Sci. Am., 2001, 285, 46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1492–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Nair and R. Vijaya, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2010, 34, 89–134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, M. Guo and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10665–10686 RSC .
C. Fenzl, T. Hirsch and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3318–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Organic and hybrid photonic crystals, ed. D. Comoretto, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,  2015 Search PubMed .
W. H. Southwell, Appl. Opt., 1999, 38, 5464–5467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Kim and C. K. Hwangbo, Appl. Opt., 2002, 41, 3187–3192 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of optics, Science Press, Beijing,  1978 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch and T. J. Gmitter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 67, 2295–2298 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of optics: electromagnetic theory of propagation, interference and diffraction of light, Elsevier,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. Guldin, M. Kolle, M. Stefik, R. Langford, D. Eder, U. Wiesner and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3664–3668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Calvo, O. Sánchez-Sobrado, S. Colodrero and H. Míguez, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2443–2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colodrero, M. Ocaña and H. Míguez, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Shen, J. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Guo and S. Ruan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54638–54644 RSC .
J.-T. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Chao and S. A. Asher, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 15230–15235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, T. J. Gmitter and K. M. Leung, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 67, 2295–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1982, 72, 899–907 CrossRef .
E. Yablonovitch and G. D. Cody, IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev., 1982, 29, 300–305 Search PubMed .
M. Mariano, G. Kozyreff, L. G. Gerling, P. Romero-Gomez, J. Puigdollers, J. Bravo-Abad and J. Martorell, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, 16216 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209 RSC .
B. G. Subramania, K. Constant, R. Biswas, M. M. Sigalas and K.-M. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 443–446 CrossRef .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094–3103 CrossRef CAS .
L.-P. Heiniger, P. G. O'Brien, N. Soheilnia, Y. Yang, N. P. Kherani, M. Grätzel and N. Tétreault, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5734–5741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Betancur, P. Romero-Gomez, A. Martinez-Otero, X. Elias and M. Maymo, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 995 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shen, G. Wang, B. Kang, W. Guo and L. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6513–6520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, L. Shen, Y. Long, P. Shen, W. Guo, W. Chen and S. Ruan, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 470–477 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, L. Shen, P. Shen, Y. Long, H. Sun, W. Chen and S. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 599–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Winn, Y. Fink, S. Fan and J. D. Joannopoulos, Nano Lett., 1998, 23, 1573–1575 CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Peng, C. Cai, Z. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Zheng, J. Yang, L. Hou and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11821–11828 RSC .
A. Jiménez-Solano, J.-M. Delgado-Sánchez, M. E. Calvo, J. M. Miranda-Muñoz, G. Lozano, D. Sancho, E. Sánchez-Cortezón and H. Míguez, Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1785–1792 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Hao, Y. Cui, W. Wang, T. Ji, F. Shi and B. Wei, Appl. Opt., 2015, 54, 10232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Ramos, M. Oliva-Ramírez, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipeb and S. Ahmad, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4962–4970 RSC .
G. Xu, L. Shen, C. Cui, S. Wen, R. Xue, W. Chen, H. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605908 CrossRef .
M. Guo, J. Chen, J. Zhang, H. Su, L. Liu, N. Fu and K. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, M. Guo, X. Liu and H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, K. Xie, X. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13060–13067 RSC .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther and A. J. Nozik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 951–954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Yip, H. Huang, L. Zhou, K. Xie, Y. Wang, T. Feng, J. Li and W. Y. Tam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, K. Xie, J. Lin, Z. Yong, C. T. Yip, L. Zhou, Y. Wang and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9881–9888 RSC .
L. P. Heiniger, P. G. O’Brien, N. Soheilnia, Y. Yang, N. P. Kherani, M. Grätzel, G. A. Ozin and N. Tétreault, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5734–5741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Peer and R. Biswas, Org. Photovoltaics, 2015, 9567, 95670H Search PubMed .
A. Peer and R. Biswas, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 840–847 CrossRef CAS .
D. Duché, C. Masclaux, J. L. Rouzo and C. Gourgon, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 053108 CrossRef .
K. Meng, S. Gao, L. Wu, G. Wang, X. Liu, G. Chen, Z. Liu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4166–4173 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mariano, F. J. Rodríguez1, P. Romero-Gomez, G. Kozyreff and J. Martorell, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4959 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. T. Hörantnerb, W. Zhang, Q. Yan and H. J. Snaith, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Braun and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1999, 402, 603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schilling, R. B. Wehrspohn, A. Birner, F. Muller, R. Hillebrand, U. Gosele, S. W. Leonard, J. P. Mondia, F. Genereux, H. M. V. Driel, P. Kramper, V. Sandoghdar and K. Busch, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., 2001, 3, 121–132 CrossRef .
K. M. Ho, C. T. Chan and C. M. Soukoulis, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Cui, F. Zhang, W. Qin, F. Zhu and Y. Hao, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 1324–1328 Search PubMed .
S. Baek, S.-J. Ha, H. Lee, K. Kim, D. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37006–37012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, C. Aumaitre, Y. Kervella, G. Lapertot and C. Rodríguez-Seco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706291 CrossRef .
W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, Z. Liu, J. Theiss, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4650–4655 RSC .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Hwang, B. Lee and D.-H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3017–3023 RSC .
H. Li, Q. Tang, F. Cai, X. Hu, H. Lu, Y. Yan, W. Hong and B. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 3430–3437 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mihi, C. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5712–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Harakeh and L. Halaoui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2806–2813 CrossRef .
C.-H. Yip, Y.-M. Chiang and C.-C. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8735–8740 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. A. Lee, N. M. Abrams, P. G. Hoertz and G. D. Barber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14415–14421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Kim and J. H. Moon, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 841–845 CrossRef .
J.-H. Shin and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6311–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Shin, J.-H. Kang, W.-M. Jin, J. H. Park, Y.-S. Cho and J. H. Moon, Langmuir, 2010, 27, 856–860 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mihi, M. E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Q. Huang, J. Xu, C. Li, G. Chen, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Huisman, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 85, 115–124 CAS .
A. Blanco, E. Chomski, S. Grabtchak, M. Ibisate, S. John, S. W. Leonard, C. Lopez, F. Meseguer, H. Miguez, J. P. Mondia, G. A. Ozin, O. Toader and H. M. V. Driel, Nature, 2000, 405, 437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Koenderink, L. Bechger, H. P. Schriemer, A. Lagendijk and W. L. Vos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 143903 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li, Y. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301645 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chueh, S.-C. Chien, H.-L. Yip, J. F. Salinas, C.-Z. Li, K.-S. Chen, F.-C. Chen, W.-C. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Chen, J.-F. Salinas, H.-L. Yip, L. Huo and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9551–9557 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H.-L. Yip, Y. Li, C.-Z. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5084–5090 CrossRef CAS .
K.-T. Lee, J. Y. Lee, S. Seo and L. J. Guo, Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e215 Search PubMed .
F. Guo, X. Zhu, K. Forberich, J. Krantz, T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, M. Halik, S. Spallek, B. Butz, E. Spiecker, T. Ameri, N. Li, P. Kubis, D. M. Guldi, G. J. Matt and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lim, J. H. Jeong, K. Hong, S. Nho, J.-Y. Lee, Q. V. Hoang, S. K. Lee, K. Pyo, D. Lee and S. Cho, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, X. Jiang, R. Wang, H. Xie, G. Ma, Q. Ou, Y. Chen, Y. Li and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10185–10190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Park, S. H. Yun, C. Y. Cho, Y. C. Kim, J. C. Shin, H. G. Jeon, Y. H. Huh, I. Hwang, K. Y. Baik, Y. I. Lee, H. S. Uhm, G. S. Cho and E. H. Choi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e222 CrossRef CAS .
D. Duché, L. Escoubas, J.-J. Simon, P. Torchio, W. Vervisch and F. Flory, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 193310 CrossRef .
Y. Park, E. Drouard, O. E. Daif, X. Letartre, P. Viktorovitch, A. Fave, A. Kaminski, M. Lemiti and C. Seassal, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 14312–14321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Duché, E. Drouard, J. J. Simon, L. Escoubas, P. Torchio, J. L. Rouzo and S. Vedraine, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, S18–S25 CrossRef .
G. Gomard, R. Peretti, E. Drouard, X. Meng and C. Seassal, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, A515–A527 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Pastorelli, S. Bidault, J. Martorell and N. Bonod, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 171–175 CrossRef .
A. Chutinan and S. John, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2008, 78, 023825 CrossRef .
S. T. Lee, Z. Q. Gao and L. S. Hung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1404–1406 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tana, A. Gilbertson and S. Y. Chou, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 1998, 16, 3926–3928 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, M. T. Hörantnerb, W. Zhang, Q. Yana and H. J. Snaith, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Becker, P. Wyss, D. Eisenhauer, J. Probst, V. Preidel, M. Hammerschmidt and S. Burger, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 RSC .
K.-T. Lee, M. Fukuda, S. Joglekar and L. J. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5377 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-K. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl and A. Marchioro, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
M. Jošt, S. Albrecht, L. Kegelmann, C. M. Wol, F. Lang, B. Lipovšek, J. Krč, L. Korte, D. Neher, B. Rech and M. Topič, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1232–1239 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, K.-H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kang, S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, J. Yoon, D.-E. Yoo, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Small, 2016, 12, 2443–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Meng, S. Gao, L. Wu, G. Wang, X. Liu, G. Chen, Z. Liu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4166–4173 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Häggman, M. Ocaña, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
C. López-López, S. Colodrero and H. Míguez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 663 RSC .
M. Guo, K. Xie, Y. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Yip, H. Huang, L. Zhou, K. Xie, Y. Wang, T. Feng, J. Li and W. Y. Tam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, K. Xie, J. Lin, Z. Yong, C. T. Yip, L. Zhou, Y. Wang and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9881 RSC .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, E. Calvo, J. A. Anta and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
D.-K. Hwang, B. Lee, D.-H. Kim and R. P. H. Chang, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 122301 CrossRef .
D.-K. Hwang, B. Lee and D.-H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3017 RSC .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5164–5168 RSC .
S. Molesky, Z. Lin, A. Y. Piggott, W. Jin, J. Vucković and A. W. Rodriguez, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 659–670 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sitawarin, W. Jin, Z. Lin and A. W. Rodriguez, Photonics Res., 2018, 6, 82–89 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, X. Liang, M. Lončar, S. G. Johnson and A. W. Rodriguez, Optica, 2016, 3, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Junshi Liu
	Junshi Liu obtained her bachelor's degree from Jilin University of Electronic Science and Technology in 2017. After completing her bachelor's degree, she joined the team of Professor Liang Shen at Jilin University. Now, her research interests mainly focus on high-efficiency polymer/perovskite solar cells with light management.

Mengnan Yao
	Mengnan Yao received her master's degree from Jilin University in 2017 under the supervision of Professor Liang Shen. Then, she continued her doctoral research in Shen's group at Jilin University. Her research interests focus on the fabrication and characterization of polymer solar cell devices and optical simulation.

Liang Shen
	Liang Shen received his PhD in 2009 from Jilin University, and was promoted to a full professor in 2016. He mainly engaged in the research of semiconductor photovoltaic cells and photodetectors. In recent years, breakthroughs have been made in the research of high-efficiency perovskite/polymer photovoltaic cells, and highly sensitive and ultra-fast response perovskite photodetectors. He has published more than 110 SCI-indexed papers, which are cited more than 3000 times.
	(2.1)

 	Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of 1D-PCs, 2D-PCs, and 3D-PCs.	 
ε(x,y,z) = ε(x,y,z + mΛ)	(2.2)
	(2.3)
	(2.4)
	(2.5)
	(2.6)
	(2.7)
T = t·t*	(2.8)
R = r·r*	(2.9)
A = 1 − T − R	(2.10)
	(2.11)
	(2.12)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of experimentally obtained 1D-PCs with different thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) Evolution of the Bragg peak position with the final rotation speed and ramp stage acceleration used in the spin-coating process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 
	(2.13)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The relationship between the specular reflection spectrum and the 1D-PC of N-layer SiO2/TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society. (b) The relationship between the 1D-PC of N-cycle LiF/WO3 and the reflection and absorption obtained from the experiment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Two PC tablet structures: (a) self-standing membrane or air bridge and (b) silicon-on-insulator (SOI). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) Springer International Publishing Switzerland. (c) The main light absorbing structure of thin-plate solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright (1982) Optical Society of America.	 
Δβ = βj+1 − βj = 0	(2.14)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross section of the electric field distribution when a plane wave is incident on a PFP. Light trapping in a PFP (b) on an isolated fiber and (c) on an array of intercalated fibers. (d) The chaotic character in the photon trajectory is schematically shown by considering slightly different incident positions, rapidly leading to completely distinct paths. Here a change in the incidence corresponds to a lateral displacement of the ray without any angle change. Note that inside the fourth fiber, ray trajectory 1 follows a regular sequences of reflections akin to whispering gallery modes until crossing the gap connecting the fourth with the third fiber, at which point it undergoes a sudden change in reflection angle Δβ ≠ 0. (e) Measured EQE of a PFP organic solar cell (green) compared with a planar one (red line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Spring Nature.	 
λ0 = 2nadnklsinθdif	(2.15)
	(2.16)

 	Fig. 6  The relationship between the sphere diameter and the reflection spectrum of an IO PC is obtained experimentally. The inset shows the relationship between the Bragg diffraction peak and the diameter of the sphere. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright (2001) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) PC deposited directly on the top electrode, and (b) PC and Ag electrode cross-section scanning electron microscope (SEM) images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. (c) PC deposited on the bottom of the cell, and (d) PC structure in series. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry and Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright (2015) Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 8  Nanoimprint flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Microlens array schematic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2015) SPIE. (b) Picture of the device used to make the PFP and (c) description of the preparation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Spring Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) IO PC preparation flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation of a two-dimensional HC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2017) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) 3D IO PC preparation flow chart. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) 3D IO TiO2 PC flow chart on non-planar electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Reflectance spectra of 1DPCs and the IPCE spectrum of the device, (b) transmittance spectra of 1DPCs and (c) IPCE characteristics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright (2014) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) DC and CCT of different pairs of 1DPCs under irradiation with an AM 1.5G illumination source. The dotted horizontal line marks DC = 0.0054. (b) CRI of TCS. (c) The average CRI of the equipment. (d) Total transmittance spectra of different devices with N pairs of 1D-PCs and (e) representation of the color coordinates of the STPSC devices with N pairs of 1DPCs under an AM 1.5G illumination light source in the CIE 1931 color space. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Total transmission spectrum with N pairs of 1DPC devices, the top left image is 3 pairs of 1DPCs and the original photo background. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The simultaneous introduction of plasma and PC device structure, and (c) J–V characteristics of devices C and F–H with the same plasma ratio and different PC center wavelengths under AM1.5G conditions, the illustrations show the different colors of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) OSC structure image including a 1D-PC composed of a PEDOT:PSS grating and a Ag grating, and (b) and (c) absorption spectra of devices with active layers P3HT:PCBM and TDPTD:PCBM, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) J–V characteristics and (b) transmission spectra of a ST-OSC based on a bottom 1D-PC and a top solution treated PEDOT:PSS layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Effect of microlens spacing at the air–glass interface on device weighted absorption and JSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) OSC of a 2D-PC based on a hexagonal grid absorbs the variation of gain in the range of 400–680 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2015) American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Structure diagram and (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the porous 1D-PC based on the SiO2/TiO2 composition, and (c) color displayed by devices with different PCs (from blue to red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of a 1D-PC structure prepared by PVD-OAD, (a) and (b) are the PC1 structure, (c) and (d) are the PC2 structure, and (e) and (f) are the PC3 structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) PSC structure with a 2D-PC, (b) illustrates a cross-sectional view of the 2D-PC cycle, active layer and anode thickness. (c) The photon structure and plane control the absorption spectrum of the PSC, and the corresponding absorption enhancement spectrum. Three enhanced peaks are marked. PSC based on IOP-500 and IOP-1000 MAPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright (2017) IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A J–V measurement of devices with and without a PDMS nano-cone film (the inset image is the schematic of light scattering in the device with a nano-cone layer), (b) the relationship between the different aspect ratios and the static contact angle of the water on the PDMS layer (the inset shows that when AR: 1.0, the maximum contact angle is 155°) and (c) changes in FF, JSC, VOC, and PCE during 200 bends. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustrations of (a) preparing a silicon master and (b) patterning a mesoporous TiO2 layer with conical shaped moth-eye structures. (c) J–V characteristics and (d) EQE and JSC images of a PSC based on flat TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  PSC based on IOP-500 and IOP-1000 MAPbI3 (a) forward biased to short-circuit J–V characteristics, inset for digital photographs, and (b) IPCE spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  DSSC based on a porous nanoparticle-based 1D-PC. (a) Schematic diagram of frontal illumination, and cross-sectional SEM image of (b) the dye-sensitized nc-TiO2 electrode and (c) of a layer of SiO2 and TiO2 layers constituting the 1D-PC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2009) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) J–V characteristics of AM 1.5 sunlight. The purple and green lines represent the PC layer axial lattice parameters of ∼150 and ∼190 nm, and the number of cycles is 30 and 20, respectively, and the corresponding HC pulse durations are 28 and 40 s, respectively. The purple 1 and purple 2 dye loadings are slightly different. The reference device differs only in the PC layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2011) John Wiley and Sons. (b) The J–V characteristics of a 10 mm thick dye-sensitized TiO2 NP electrode coupled with different thickness TiO2 NT PCs and TiO2 NTs, the thickness of the reference electrode is about 12 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Relationship between different device angles and JSC enhancement. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Absorption spectra of TiO2 NT, Au NP/TiO2 NT and Au NP/TiO2 NTPC devices, and (b) absorption spectrum enhancement of Au NP/TiO2 NT and Au NP/TiO2 NTPC, absorption spectrum of the N719 dye and the reflection spectrum of NT/NTPC, the illustration is a digital photo of TiO2 NT/NTPC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) J–V characteristics of a DSSC in which a 3D-PC and Ag film are combined under one sun irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2012) IOPscience. (b) A DSSC structure diagram containing a 3D-PC, and (c) J–V characteristics of solar cells fabricated using different structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright (2013) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic image of the bilayer IO layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (3 mol% SiO2 removed)	19.64	0.72	69.5	9.86
19.52 ± 0.12	0.72 ± 0.02	68.9 ± 0.06	9.81 ± 0.05
Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (3 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1	18.51	0.73	70.7	9.60
18.62 ± 0.11	0.73 ± 0.02	70.3 ± 0.4	9.59 ± 0.03
Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (5 mol% SiO2 removed)	19.86	0.74	70.6	10.35
19.55 ± 0.40	0.74 ± 0.01	70.7 ± 0.8	10.21 ± 0.3
Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (5 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1	19.04	0.73	69.1	9.58
18.89 ± 0.15	0.73 ± 0.01	69.0 ± 0.1	9.49 ± 0.09
Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (8 mol% SiO2 removed)	19.20	0.73	68.4	9.54
18.89 ± 0.21	0.73 ± 0.01	68.8 ± 0.4	9.46 ± 0.08
Mesoporous 3D-IO TiO2 (8 mol% SiO2 removed):P25 NPs = 3:1	18.50	0.73	69.8	9.40
18.67 ± 0.17	0.75 ± 0.02	69.0 ± 0.8	9.35 ± 0.05

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
