Fluoropolymers in biomedical applications: state-of-the-art and future perspectives  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00258E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00258E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 5435-5467Fluoropolymers in biomedical applications: state-of-the-art and future perspectives

        
          
            Jia 
            Lv
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yiyun 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *ab
aShanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200241, China. E-mail: yycheng@mail.ustc.edu.cn
bSouth China Advanced Institute for Soft Matter Science and Technology, School of Molecular Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, China
Received 
      23rd November 2020
    First published on 9th March 2021AbstractFluoropolymers have unique physicochemical properties such as hydrophobicity and lipophobicity, good chemical stability and bio-inertness, low surface energy and phase segregation. Owing to these properties, fluoropolymers have been widely used to prepare high performance materials. Especially, the use of fluoropolymers in biomedical applications has grown rapidly during the past decade. This critical review focuses on the recent advances of fluoropolymers in gene delivery, cytosolic protein delivery, drug delivery, magnetic resonance imaging, photodynamic therapy, anti-fouling and anti-bacterial applications, and tissue engineering. The mechanisms and features of fluoropolymers in these specific applications are discussed. Besides, we have reviewed the methods to synthesize water-soluble fluoropolymers for the applications and explained their supramolecular assembly behaviors in solutions. Finally, the opportunities and challenges of fluoropolymers in biomedical applications are discussed.
Jia Lv
Jia Lv received her PhD degree from the East China Normal University in 2018. She is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow at the South China University of Technology. Her research interests mainly focus on the intracellular delivery of biomacromolecules such as proteins and peptides.
Yiyun Cheng
Yiyun Cheng is a full professor of biomedical engineering at School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University. He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China and was a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis, MO. His research interests focus on the rational design of polymers for the delivery of biomacromolecules such as DNA, RNA, proteins and peptides.
1 Introduction
Fluorine is the most electronegative element (4.0) in the periodic table of elements. It has an atomic size close to that of hydrogen, and could be introduced into organic compounds to replace hydrogen without significantly altering the molecular size. The C–F bond is the strongest single bond (∼485 kJ mol−1) in organic chemistry, and the three lone pairs are tightly held by the fluorine nucleus due to its strong electronegativity.1 As a result, the C–F bond is highly polarized and unreactive. It has significant ionic character and could interact with others via dipole–dipole or charge–dipole interactions.2 Fluorination of organic chemicals usually brings unique and unexpected features such as high stability under extreme conditions. After more than half a century of development, the fluorine chemistry has been predominant in medicinal chemistry, agrochemicals, chemical biology and material chemistry.3–6
Now, more than 20% market drugs contain fluorine.7 The introduction of fluorine atoms into drug molecules can dramatically increase their metabolic stability due to the strong and low polarizable C–F bond. In addition, fluorination of drugs increases their membrane permeability, and may increase their binding affinity with targets via additional dipole/charge–dipole interactions.3 Besides, the introduction of fluorine atoms into organic chemicals may affect the molecular conformation due to the stereoelectronic interactions of the highly polarized C–F bond with adjacent functional groups.8,9 The fluorine substituent effect on stereochemistry could be used to design molecules with desired conformations for enhanced activity.9–12 The incorporation of fluorine atoms into proteins and peptides also imparts interesting properties to these biomolecules. Proteins and peptides bearing fluorinated amino acids such as leucine and phenylalanine were reported to possess much improved thermal and chemical stability compared to non-fluorinated ones.13–16 Perfluoro-aromatic/vinyl linkers were used to construct cyclic peptides with enhanced stability and membrane penetration.17,18 The introduction of fluorine into proteins and peptides could efficiently modulate their structures, assembly behaviors, mechanical properties and bioactivities.9,19,20 Similarly, fluorine atoms were introduced into the ribose/deoxyribose or nucleobases of nucleic acids to improve their stability against nuclease.21 Fluorinated chemicals were also used as probes for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The fluorine nucleus (19F) has spin 1/2 and a comparable gyromagnetic ratio with the 1H nucleus (40.08 vs. 42.58 MHz T−1), but a much larger chemical shift dispersion (>350 vs. ∼10 ppm).22 Therefore, it exhibits high sensitivity to chemical and solvation environments.23 Due to the lack of fluorine atoms in living species, fluorine containing chemicals and materials can be used as contrast agents for background-free MRI.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) are a class of bio-inert and low toxic fluorinated compounds widely used in medical applications.24 Due to low polarity and weak van der Waals interactions, PFCs possess high vapor pressure, low viscosity and low friction coefficient. PFCs have high affinity for gas molecules such as oxygen and carbon monoxide (CO), and thus could be used as carriers for gas delivery. They were used as blood substitutes for quick oxygenation to prevent hypoxia and ischemia, or for enhanced photodynamic cancer therapy.25,26 Several PFCs and their emulsions were approved to treat acute respiratory failure. Due to the low intermolecular attractive force and high vapor pressure, PFCs were widely used as contrasts for ultrasound imaging via bubbling the liquid PFCs,24,27–29 lubricants for self-cleaning and anti-fouling applications,30–33 and propellant-based inhalers for respiratory drug delivery.34,35 PFCs could be cleared from the body via the reticuloendothelial system and excreted through the lungs by exhalation.
As described above, the C–F bond has low polarizability and has a low surface energy. The surface energy of a trifluoromethyl group (–CF3) is only one fourth of that of a methyl group (–CH3, ∼6 vs. ∼23 mN m−1). As a result, highly fluorinated compounds such as PFCs are both hydrophobic and oleophobic.23,36 They exhibit phase segregation in both aqueous solution and most organic solvents, a phenomenon usually termed the “fluorous effect”.37 The fluorous chains have a high tendency to interact with other fluorinated materials via dipole–dipole interactions to avoid unfavourite interactions with water and other solvents. The phase segregation and fluorophilic behaviors of fluorous materials were widely used in green chemistry for chemical synthesis, catalysis and separation.38 Fluoroalkyl chains were used as tags in solid phase synthesis with greatly simplified purification procedures. The fluorous tagged molecules could be separated from non-tagged ones in reaction mixtures by fluorous solid-phase extraction.39,40 Fluorinated materials such as polymers, nanogels and microgels were synthesized to extract environmentally persistent perfluorinated pollutants such as perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) from wastewater by fluorophilic interactions.41–45 Besides, the fluorous tags were widely used in mass spectroscopy analysis due to the extreme stability of the C–F bond,46 and for labeling proteins for proteomic and metabolomic studies.23,47–49 Fluorous-tagged chemicals have a high tendency to assemble into aggregate structures in solutions to avoid the interactions of fluorous tags with the solvents.50
The introduction of fluorine into polymers generates many high performance materials, i.e. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, Teflon, Fig. 1) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, Fig. 1).51,52 Owing to the strong C–F bond, fluoropolymers are resistant to acid, base, oxidation, corrosion and heat.53 They also have low refractive index, flammability and surface energy.54,55 Fluoropolymers have various structures ranging from semi-crystalline to amorphous, and could give rise to thermoplastics, thermosets and elastomers.56 They were fabricated into various nanostructures on the substrate surface to yield superhydrophobic and chemical resistant surfaces.30,57–59 These surfaces are difficult to be wetted by water and non-fluorinated solvents, and could be used for water collection, anti-fouling and self-cleaning applications. PTFE is the most important fluoropolymer and accounts for more than 60% of the total fluoropolymer market.60 PTFE has a helical conformation owing to the strong repellence between fluorine atoms, and therefore the fluorine atoms are uniformly covered on the polymer chain. This property of PTFE makes it inert to nearly all the chemicals. PTFE and derivative polymers are widely used as non-stick coating,60 as triboelectric negative materials in triboelectric nanogenerators,61,62 in chemical resistant reactors and devices,63 as antireflection materials for invisible plastic optics,64 and as coating materials for medical devices such as vessel grafts and catheters.65 PTFE is highly crystalline with a helical conformation, and the aligned helical chains could slip past each other when subject to shear. Therefore, PTFE has a poor fatigue tolerance. In addition, the crystalline nanostructures can scatter light, leading to the opaque character of PTFE. To solve these disadvantages, expanded PTFEs such as fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP, Fig. 1) and perfluoroalkoxy (PFA, Fig. 1) were developed. The presence of a trifluoromethyl side chain in these polymers could reduce the crystallinity, leading to improved optical transparency, mechanical property and thermal stability. Besides, PTFE processing such as 3D printing is challenging due to its high melting temperature and melt viscosity. Polyfluoropolyether (PFPE, Fig. 1), a fluoropolymer with high optical transparency, was developed to construct chemical resistant devices and coatings. Photo-curable PFPE-methacrylate was developed as ink for these applications,66,67 and the optically transparent PFPE could be used for window coating with self-cleaning properties.63,68 PVDF is another star fluoropolymer in the chemical industry and materials science. Unlike PTFE, PVDF and copolymers such as poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP, Fig. 1) and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (PVDF-TrFE, Fig. 1) possess relatively high dielectric constant, good processability and breaking strength.2,69–71 These polymers are piezoelectric materials and could produce transient electric current when a mechanical force is applied. This property was used to mimic the function of sinoatrial node cells for cardiac pacemaking, and trigger the differentiation of stem cells for neuron regeneration without the use of external electrical stimulus.72–74 PVDF and copolymers were widely used in tissue engineering75–78 and drug delivery,79 and as underwater self-healing materials2 and energy storage materials, i.e. gate dielectrics in transistors80,81 and wearable healthcare electronics.82 Besides, fluorinated photovoltaic polymers were widely used in the preparation of high performance organic solar cells.83–85 Owing to the high electronegativity, the introduction of fluorine into donors or receptors could efficiently down-shift the energy levels of the polymer to reduce energy loss. In addition, fluorination could modulate the molecular packing and microstructures of the polymers for optimized power conversion efficiency.86 CYTOP (Fig. 1), a commercialized fluoropolymer, was widely used as a fluorine source for material fluorination.87–89 This chemical resistant polymer was also used as a wrapping material for biological tissues,90 sensors91 and optoelectronic applications.92,93
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of well-known fluoropolymers. 
During the past decade, more and more water-soluble fluoropolymers were synthesized for biomedical applications. These polymers were used as carriers for gene delivery, cytosolic protein delivery, drug delivery, and photodynamic therapy (PDT), and as 19F MRI contrast agents and antifouling/antibacterial materials. This review article will focus on the recent advances of fluoropolymers in these specific applications. The synthesis, assembly, as well as mechanisms and benefits of fluoropolymers in specific biomedical applications will be discussed.
2 Synthesis and assembly of fluoropolymers
The synthesis and properties of fluoropolymers have been intensively reviewed by several comprehensive review articles.1,52,54,60,70,94–100 Here, we focus on the synthesis of water-soluble fluoropolymers for biomedical applications and discuss their self-assembly behaviors in aqueous solutions.
2.1 Synthesis of fluoropolymers by polymerization
Fluoropolymers could be synthesized by different polymerization methods such as radical polymerization,101–103 photo-controlled radical polymerization,104,105 reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT),106 atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP),27,107–110N-carboxyanhydride ring-opening polymerization (NCA-ROP),28 ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROPM),100 and iodo-ene polymerization.111 Water-soluble fluoropolymers were widely synthesized by co-polymerization of fluorous monomers with hydrophilic molecules such as oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether acrylate (OEGMEA),112 2-(methylsulfinyl)ethylacrylate (MSEA),113 PEG methyl ether acrylate (PEGMEA),114 2-oxazoline,115 2-dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate (DMAEMA),116 and N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide (HPMA).117 For example, highly water-soluble fluoropolymers with fluorine contents up to 19.3 wt% were synthesized by RAFT polymerization of 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl acrylate (TFEA) and MSEA (Fig. 2a).113 Fluoropolymers consisting of poly(oligo(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate) (POEGMEMA) and poly(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl methyl ether acrylate) (PTFEMA) were synthesized by ATRP (Fig. 2b).118 A triblock polymer PEG–polylactide (PLA)–poly(1H,1H,2H,2H-heptadecafluorodecyl methacrylate) (PEG–PLA–PFMA) was synthesized by a combination of ROP and ATRP.27 Fluoropolymers were also synthesized by direct Michael additions or amine-oxirane reactions between amines and crosslinking reagents bearing multiple epoxy or acrylate groups (Fig. 2c).119–122 The fluorous segments could be incorporated into the polymer by using amines or crosslinkers bearing a fluorous tag. In addition, stimuli-responsive units could be incorporated into the crosslinkers to provide the fluoropolymers with biodegradability. For example, thioacetal containing crosslinkers bearing fluorous tags were reacted with amines to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS)-responsive fluoropolymers.122
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of water-soluble fluorocopolymers by RAFT polymerization113 (a), ATRP118 (b), and Michael addition119,120 (c), respectively. PF-PEG was synthesized by Michael addition reactions between bisphenol A glycerolate diacrylate (BG) and 1H,1H-undecafluorohexylamine (UFA) to yield fluorinated poly(β-amino ester)s, and further terminated with mPEG-NH2. 
Another method to synthesize water-soluble fluoropolymers is using hydrophilic macromolecules such as PEG and proteins as the chain transfer agents (CTAs) or initiators to polymerize fluorous monomers (Fig. 3a).106 In contrast, fluoropolymers such as PFPE were used as macro-CTAs to polymerize hydrophilic monomers such as OEGMEA and PEGMEA (Fig. 3b).112,115,123–125 Similarly, heptadecafluoroundecyl-amine (C11F17-NH2) was used as the initiator for ring-opening polymerization of β-benzyl-L-aspartate N-carboxyanhydride (BLA-NCA) to synthesize fluorous-tagged PBLA (Fig. 3c).28 The fluorinated PBLA was further reacted with diethylenetriamine (DET) to obtain C11F17-PAsp(DET) for gene delivery. Owing to the highly hydrophilic segments in the fluoropolymers, high water solubility could be achieved even at relatively high fluorine contents.
 Fig. 3  Synthesis of water-soluble fluoropolymers by using a protein-based CTA to polymerize fluorous monomers via RAFT106 (a), using a PFPE containing macro-CTA to polymerize hydrophilic monomers via RAFT123 (b), and using a fluorous compound as the initiator for NCA-ROP28 (c). 
Water-soluble fluoropolymers could be also synthesized by direct polymerization of highly water-soluble fluorous monomers. RAFT polymerization of N-(2-((2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)sulfinyl)ethyl)acrylamide (FSAM) yielded highly soluble fluoropolymers at fluorine contents up to 25 wt% (Fig. 4a).106 Owing to the presence of polar sulfoxide and amide groups in the monomer, PFSAM is a rare non-ionic water-soluble fluoropolymer. Similarly, zwitterionic monomers bearing various fluorous segments were synthesized and used to construct highly soluble zwitterionic fluoropolymers by radical polymerization (Fig. 4b).101
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of water-soluble fluoropolymers by RAFT polymerization106 (a) and radical polymerization101 (b) of water-soluble fluorous monomers. (c) Synthesis of degradable fluorine-containing copolymers via metal-catalyzed living radical polymerization of OEGMEMA, perfluoroalkyl methacrylates and BMDO.126 
Most fluoropolymers are non-degradable and are reported to accumulate in the body, which may raise environmental and health risks. To overcome this issue, fluoropolymers with a degradable backbone or side chains were synthesized. For example, degradable fluorine-containing copolymers were synthesized via metal-catalyzed living radical polymerization of OEGMEMA, perfluoroalkyl methacrylates and a cyclic ketene acetal 5,6-benzo-2-methylene-1,3-dioxepane (BMDO) (Fig. 4c).126 OEGMEMA in the copolymer ensures good aqueous solubility, while BMDO undergoes ring opening with the vinyl monomers, which incorporates degradable ester bonds into the backbone of fluoropolymers.
Branched fluoropolymers could be synthesized by copolymerization of fluorous monomers and hydrophilic monomers with a crosslinking monomer such as ethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) (Fig. 5)114,124,127 and N,N′-bis(acryloyl)cystamine (BAC).128 Alternatively, they could be synthesized by using a polymerizable CTA (Fig. 5).129 Highly branched fluoropolymers consisting of OEGMEMA and TFEA were synthesized by self-condensing vinyl copolymerization (SCVP) using the RAFT technique.
 Fig. 5  Synthesis of branched fluoropolymers by copolymerization of fluorous monomers and hydrophilic monomers with crosslinking monomers.114,129 
2.2 Synthesis of fluoropolymers by step-wise reactions
Dendrimers with well-defined structures and compositions are usually synthesized in a stepwise manner.130–132 For fluorine-containing dendrimers, they could be synthesized by either a divergent or a convergent strategy.133,134 The fluorous segment in a dendrimer could be the central core, repeated unit or surface functionality. For example, a fluorocarbon bearing two hydroxyl groups (1H,1H,12H,12H-perfluoro-1,12-dodecanediol) was reacted with cystamine, and further grafted with t-butyloxy carbonyl (BOC)-protected lysine for branching.133,135 By stepwise synthesis, different generations of polylysine dendrimers with a fluorous central core were obtained. Similarly, asymmetric and amphiphilic dendrimers bearing both OEG and fluorous surface functionalities were synthesized by multiple synthetic steps (Fig. 6).136–142 Besides dendrimers, peptidic fluoropolymers with precise chemical compositions could be synthesized by stepwise reactions. These polymers can be synthesized by fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (Fmoc)-based solid-phase peptide synthesis.143–146 These synthesized polymers are mono-disperse and the polymer structure could be easily modulated by choosing different building blocks. However, the synthesis of these well-defined fluoropolymers is time-consuming, especially for those with high molecular weights.147
 Fig. 6  Synthesis of asymmetric and amphiphilic dendrimers bearing both OEG and fluorous surface functionalities by multiple synthetic steps.136 
2.3 Synthesis of fluoropolymers by chemical modification
Direct conjugation of fluorous ligands to well-established polymers by different chemical reactions is another widely used method to synthesize fluoropolymers. This allows facile preparation of fluorinated polymers for which there are no suitable fluorous monomers.98 Polymers such as polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers, poly(propylenimine) (PPI) dendrimers, polyethylenimine (PEI), polylysine (PLL) and dendronized polymers were reacted with fluorine-containing anhydrides under mild conditions to synthesize fluorinated polymers.148–150 Heptafluorobutyric anhydride (HFA, Fig. 7) is the most widely used fluorination reagent for cationic polymers with high conversion efficiencies.148–177 Similarly, ethyl trifluoroacetate (Fig. 7) is used as a fluorination reagent to modify the cationic polymer PEI.178,179 Due to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of perfluorocarbon chains, the amide bond between polymer and the fluorous tag is not stable especially under basic conditions.180 To prepare highly stable fluoropolymers, cationic polymers were reacted with other fluorination reagents bearing epoxy,180–187 acyl chloride,179,188 carboxyl,189–191 acrylate,192 and chlorotriazine193 groups (Fig. 7). Besides, fluorous tags could be conjugated to cationic polymers via a disulfide linkage to ensure that the fluorous ligand could be cleaved under reducing conditions194,195 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Fluorination reagents used to synthesize fluoropolymers by surface modification. 
Besides these methods, fluorous ligands could be decorated on polymers by click chemistry. For example, fluorous compounds bearing an azide moiety were conjugated to alkyne functionalized α-helical polypeptides by alkyne–azide click chemistry (Fig. 8a).196 Fluoropolymers containing both amines and fluoroalkyl chains were synthesized by thiolactone chemistry (Fig. 8b).197D,L-Homocysteine thiolactone was firstly reacted with heptafluorobutyric acid via amidation to obtain fluoroalkyl-functionalized thiolactones. Then, different amine compounds were reacted with the thiolactones by ring opening reactions, followed by thiol-Michael addition reaction with poly[2-(acryloyloxy)ethyl methacrylate] (PAOEMA) to yield fluoropolymers.
 Fig. 8  Synthesis of fluoropolymers by alkyne–azide click chemistry196 (a) or thiolactone chemistry197 (b). 
2.4 Synthesis of fluoropolymers in living cells
Despite great success achieved in chemical synthesis, there are rare examples of production of fluoropolymers in living cells. Chang et al. reported the synthesis of a fluorinated and biodegradable polyester by using the biosynthetic machinery of bacteria (Fig. 9).198 Two plasmids encoding five genes were constructed and transduced into the microbial host E. coli for the biosynthesis. The first plasmid pFMAL encoded a sodium malonate transporter MadLM and a malonate:CoA ligase MatB, while the second plasmid pPOL encoded an acetoacetyl-CoA synthase NphT7, an acetoacetyl-CoA reductase PhaB and a polymerase PhaC. 2-Fluoromalonate was chosen as the building block to synthesize fluorinated PHA because it is stable in culture medium and well-tolerated by bacteria. 2-Fluoromalonate was transported inside bacterial cells via MadLM, and ligated to acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) by MatB to produce fluoromalonyl-CoA, which was further transformed to 2-fluoro-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA (FHB-CoA) in the presence of NphT7 and PhaB. Finally, FHB-CoA was polymerized to poly(FHB) by PhaC polymerase. Due to the presence of abundant endogenous malonyl-CoA, a metabolite in fatty acid biosynthesis, the non-fluorinated monomer also will be incorporated into poly(FHB) to produce a copolymer poly(FHB-co-HB) (Fig. 9). The successful synthesis of fluoropolymers in living cells was confirmed by several techniques. The molar ratio of FHB in the copolymer ranged from 5 to 15%. For a polymer with 7% FHB content, the molecular weight Mn was tested to be 600 kDa with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.69 by gel permeation chromatography (GPC). Interestingly, the molecular weight and PDI of poly(FHB-co-HB) were very similar to those of the non-fluorinated polymer poly(HB) produced by the bacteria, suggesting that the fluorous monomer FHB does not cause early chain termination. Though only a small fraction of fluorous monomers were incorporated, the synthesized poly(FHB-co-HB) showed distinct properties from the non-fluorinated polymer. The study provided a promising and effective strategy to synthesize fluoropolymers in living cells.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis of a fluorinated and biodegradable polyester in bacteria. (a) Synthesis of poly(FHB-co-HB) in bacteria. (b) Plasmid design for the synthetic organofluorine pathways. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
2.5 Self-assembly of fluoropolymers
Highly fluorinated ligands are both hydrophobic and lipophobic, and will aggregate into a fluorous phase in solutions to avoid interactions with solvent.139,199,200 The spontaneous self-association of fluorous compounds is a widely observed phenomenon in different systems. For example, phase segregation of fluorocarbon and hydrocarbon amphiphiles was observed in micelles, lipid bilayers, and even when they were coated on a nanoparticle surface.201–208 Fluorinated peptides were found to aggregate into oligomers in phospholipid bilayers.209 The self-assembly of amphiphilic fluoropolymers has been reported in a number of studies.130,143,210–221 Block terpolymers bearing fluorous segments were assembled into multicompartment micelles222,223 and cylinders.224 Fluorous segments in the copolymers could increase the stability of assembled nanostructures. For example, a triblock polymer consisting of poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), poly(2-cinnamoyloxyethyl methacrylate) (PCEMA), and poly(2-perfluorooctylethyl methacrylate) (PFOEMA) was assembled into nanocapsules followed by photo-crosslinking.225 The assembled nanocapsules could be filled with air and stably dispersed in water for more than three weeks. Such air nanobubbles have good stability under ultrasonication, which survived 100-fold longer than clinically used air microbubbles and nanocapsules formed by a non-fluorinated polymer.
For random fluorocopolymers, they could assemble into spherical nanostructures by single-chain folding. The strong fluorophilic interaction between fluorous side chains on the polymer drives the self-folding of such polymers (Fig. 10a).226 For example, random copolymers consisting of POEGMEMA and poly(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl methacrylate) (P13FOMA) or poly(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyl methacrylate) (P17FDeMA) were folded into thermo-responsive monomolecular nanomicelles with a fluorous core in water, but formed reverse micelles with a PEG core in fluorinated solvents. Similarly, random fluoropolymers consisting of poly(TFEMA-methacrylic acid) (P(TFEMA-r-MAA)) were assembled into nanomicelles, which were further packed into membranes with nanochannels. The membrane allowed the separation of small molecules with different charges (Fig. 10b).227
 Fig. 10  Assembly of random fluorocopolymers by self-folding. (a) Fluorocopolymers form nanomicelles with a fluorous core in water, or PEG-core micelles in fluorous solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Fluoropolymers were assembled into nanomicelles and further packed into membranes with nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Fluorinated Janus dendrimers assembled into onion-like vesicles by film hydration.138 Due to the phase segregation behavior of fluorocarbons, a self-sorting phenomenon was observed in the co-assembly system containing both fluorinated and hydrogenated Janus dendrimers.139 The introduction of a fluorinated/hydrogenated hybrid Janus dendrimer into the system generated various assembled structures including homogeneous onion-like vesicles, core–shell vesicles, dumbbell-shaped Janus dendrimersomes, and completely self-sorted hydrogenated and fluorinated vesicles, depending on the content of the hybrid dendrimer in the mixture (Fig. 11).137,139 In the dumbbell-shaped dendrimersomes, an onion-structured vesicle consisting of fluorinated dendrimers was tethered to another vesicle made of hydrogenated dendrimers.137 The hybrid dendrimer bearing both fluorocarbon and hydrocarbon segments plays an important role in stabilizing the interface between fluorinated and hydrogenated bilayers. The membrane fusion and fission behaviors of these nanovesicles are similar to those in biological systems, but the processes occur only by changing the dendrimer components without the help of any protein. The fluorocarbon greatly influenced the supramolecular polymerization of a perylenediimide building block bearing a perfluoroalkyl ligand and a PEG chain (Fig. 12).199 The building block monomers were assembled into very long nanofibers via non-covalent binding, while this phenomenon was not observed for the non-fluorinated amphiphile. The binding strength of the fluorous building blocks was improved by three orders of magnitude compared to the control amphiphile. The distinct behavior of the fluoroamphiphile in supramolecular polymerization is attributed to the large surface area and high conformation rigidity of the fluorocarbon chain.
 Fig. 11  Co-assembly of fluorinated and hydrogenated Janus dendrimers. (a) Chemical structures of the fluorinated, hydrogenated and hybrid Janus dendrimers. (b) Assembled nanostructures by the Janus dendrimers in (a). (c) Dumbbell-shaped dendrimersomes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. 
 Fig. 12  Supramolecular polymerization of the perylenediimide building block bearing a perfluoroalkyl ligand and a PEG chain. (a) Chemical structures of the fluorinated perylenediimide and the non-fluorinated control. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed aggregation mechanism for the fluorinated perylenediimide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Though the solution self-assembly approach was widely used to prepare polymer nanostructures, it has several disadvantages such as low polymer concentration and complicated synthesis and purification processes. In comparison, polymerization-induced self-assembly (PISA) allows facile and efficient preparation of polymer assemblies of different morphologies at a high concentration.
PISA has been widely used to prepare fluoropolymer assemblies by controlled/living polymerization techniques such as RAFT and ATRP (Fig. 13).219,228–231 For example, RAFT polymerization of electron-rich styrene and electron-deficient pentafluorostyrene using a macro-CTA yields various morphologies including spherical micelles, worm-like micelles, jellyfish, nanovesicles, as well as inverse mesophases like large compound vesicles, sponges and cubosomes.228 The assembled morphology could be controlled by tailoring the polymerization degree, solvent and polymer concentration. The assembled fluoropolymers in aqueous solution have been widely used in biomedical applications such as nanocapsules for oxygenation, drug delivery, carriers for gene and protein delivery, and responsive MRI probes, and oxygen carriers for enhanced photodynamic therapy. The benefits of assembled nanostructures for specific applications will be discussed in related sections.
 Fig. 13  Fluoropolymer assemblies by PISA. (a) Synthesis of the block fluorocopolymer PDMA-b-P(St-alt-PFS). (b) Morphologies of PDMA-b-P(St-alt-PFS) assemblies with increasing content of the P(St-alt-PFS) block. PDMA, St, and PFS are the abbreviations of poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide), styrene, and pentafluorostyrene, respectively. Packing parameter p reflects the geometry of the particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228, Copyright 2019, the author, Creative Commons CC BY. 
3 Biomedical applications of fluoropolymers
3.1 Fluoropolymers in gene delivery
Gene therapy has shown great promise in the treatment of various diseases, especially hereditary diseases. However, the clinical translation of genetic therapeutics is hindered by the lack of efficient and safe gene carriers.232–237 During the past few decades, carriers including viruses, lipids, nanomaterials and polymers were proposed as candidates for transferring gene materials into target cells, but each of them has fatal weaknesses in gene delivery.238–240 The challenges facing polymeric gene delivery systems are their inevitable cytotoxicity, poor serum tolerance and relatively low transfection efficiency.

Fluorination decreases the polymer dose required for gene transfection. 
Most polymers used for gene delivery are cationic polymers.241–244 These polymers condense negatively charged gene materials into nanoscale complexes (usually termed polyplexes) via electrostatic interactions.240,245–247 Since the polyplexes are easily destabilized by salts, polyanions and serum proteins abundant in the physiological environment, an excess amount of cationic polymers are required to stabilize the polyplexes.248 Therefore, the optimal gene transfection for cationic polymers is usually achieved at a relatively high polymer dose or nitrogen to phosphorus ratio (N/P, N represents the number of cationic amines on the polymer and P represents the number of phosphate groups on the genetic material). Excessive cationic polymers in the formulation will destroy cell membranes and induce inflammatory responses and cell death. A fluorination strategy on cationic polymers was proposed to overcome this limitation.148,151 Fluoropolymers possess unique self-assembly behaviors in aqueous solutions with low critical aggregation concentrations, and the strong association affinity between fluorous segments on the polymer significantly improves polyplex stability. A generation 5 (G5) PAMAM dendrimer modified with heptafluorobutyl chains at a fluorination degree of ∼50% achieved high gene transfection efficiency at a N/P ratio around 1.5:1, which is dramatically lower than that required for most cationic polymers (Fig. 14).148 It is found that the required N/P ratio of fluoropolymers for efficient gene delivery depends much on the fluorination degree, i.e. the higher the fluorination degree, the lower the N/P ratio required.152
 Fig. 14  Fluorinated G5 PAMAM dendrimer achieved high EGFP transfection efficiency in HEK293 cells at low N/P ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved. 


Fluorination improves serum tolerance of cationic polymers in gene delivery. 
Cationic polymers may interact with serum proteins especially those negatively charged ones during gene delivery, and the serum will significantly reduce the transfection efficiency of most polymers. This problem becomes more remarkable when polymer-based formulations are administered in vivo.151 Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop polymeric carriers with good serum tolerance.153,188 The conjugation of hydrophilic moieties such as PEG and zwitterionic polymers could improve the serum stability of the carrier, but at the cost of decreasing transfection efficiency due to reduced positive charges.
For fluoropolymers, the fluoroalkyl chains are bio-inert and may reduce the interactions of polyplexes with serum proteins, and the hydrophobic fluoroalkyl moieties are beneficial for polyplex internalization. Therefore, fluoropolymers could achieve both high transfection efficiency and good serum stability. A fluorinated G2 PAMAM dendrimer achieved nearly 90% transfection efficiency even in the presence of 50% serum (Fig. 15).152 The high serum tolerance of fluoropolymers in gene delivery is confirmed by several research groups.135,150,153,156,188,249 The increased serum tolerance is recognized as one of the major benefits of fluoropolymers in gene delivery (Fig. 16),188 which greatly motivates the application of fluoropolymers for gene therapy.169,175,250
 Fig. 15  Fluorinated G2 PAMAM dendrimer achieved high EGFP transfection efficiency in HEK293 cells in the presence of serum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 16  Fluorinated oligoethylenimines achieved efficient intracellular siRNA delivery in serum-containing media (a). The assembled fluoropolymer reduced the adsorption of serum proteins on the polyplex surface due to its antifouling properties (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 188, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


Fluorination of polymers shows robust gene transfection efficiency. 
It is well known that the grafting of hydrophobic ligands on cationic polymers facilitates the cellular uptake and endosomal escape of polyplexes. The hydrophobic and lipophobic fluoroalkyl chains on fluoropolymers are also beneficial for these processes. As expected, fluorination of cationic polymers promotes multiple steps during gene delivery and thus augments transfection efficiency (Fig. 17). The hydrophobicity of fluoroalkyls does not seem to be the predominant reason for this enhancement because polymers grafted with fluorous-free alkyls of similar hydrophobicity (1 CF2 ≈ 1.5 CH2) exhibited poor efficiency.188
 Fig. 17  Fluorination of cationic polymers improved serum stability, cellular uptake, endosomal escape and intracellular DNA release of the polyplexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2017, the author. 
The distinct behaviors of fluoropolymers and non-fluorinated controls in gene delivery should be attributed to a “fluorine effect”.151 The changes of free energy of adsorption ΔG for the transport of CF2 and CH2 groups from water to the air/water interface are −5.1 and −2.6 kJ mol−1, respectively. This difference implies that fluoropolymers have a stronger surface activity than non-fluorinated ones with similar hydrophobicity. Strong surface activity is beneficial for cell surface adhesion, which is a predominant factor for endocytosis.251 The incorporation of perfluorinated ligands into amphiphilic block copolymers efficiently increased their interactions with lipid monolayers.252 On the other hand, the fluoroalkyls are lipophobic, and this property may avoid the fusion and long-term retention of lipidated polymers with phospholipids. That is why fluoropolymers showed much faster cell internalization kinetics than hydrogenated controls.186 Due to these reasons, fluoropolymers showed robust efficiencies in the delivery of various types of nucleic acids such as plasmid DNA, siRNA, miRNA and shRNA.148,158,164,173,253–255 Polymers such as PAMAM,148,152,173,174,194 poly(propyleneimine) (PPI),149 polyethylenimine (PEI),159,161,180–182,186,192,256 poly(β-amino ester)s,119,155 pDMAEMA,116 peptide dendrimers,150 chitosan,257 pAsp(DET),28 peptoids,143 and polypeptides195,196,258,259 were reported with high transfection performances after fluorination. The topological structure of the polymers ranged from linear polymers to branched, hyperbranched and dendritic polymers, dendronized polymers and dendritic peptide bolaamphiphiles.133,167,170,197,260–262 Besides, fluorination was combined with other chemistries such as phenylboronic acid,263 cholesterol,157 reversible disulfide/diselenide crosslinking,150,154,155,164,168,170,171,194,195 pH-responsive acetal linkage,187 ROS-responsive thioacetal linkage,122 organosilica,191 and perfluoropentane28,176,264 to prepare efficient gene carriers. Besides fluoroalkyls, polymers grafted with fluoroaromatics also showed dramatically improved gene transfection efficiency.190 Fluoropolymers showed high capability in the condensation and delivery of large plasmids, and this characteristic could be used to deliver Cas9/sgRNA plasmids for CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing (Fig. 18).153,167,187,265
 Fig. 18  Fluorinated PEI in the delivery of the Cas9 and sgRNA encoding plasmid for CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The fluorination strategy was even reported to improve the membrane permeability of inorganic nanomaterials such as carbon dots, tungsten diselenide nanosheets, quantum dots, and gold nanoparticles for gene delivery and microRNA detection.184,266–268


Fluorination of polymers improves tissue penetration and in vivo gene therapy. 
Fluoropolymers have good serum stability and thus may achieve high transfection efficiency in vivo. The bio-inert and anti-fouling properties of fluoroalkyl ligands protect the polyplexes from destabilization by polyanions and serum proteins during blood circulation. The increased polyplex stability in vivo may optimize the biodistribution of gene drugs and improve tissue penetration of the nanoparticles. For example, PEI-based polyplexes were mainly accumulated in the lung after intravenous administration due to their relatively large particle size; however, the polyplexes formed by fluorinated PEI were mainly observed in the liver.179 This implies the potential use of fluoropolymers for liver-targeted gene therapy. Fluorinated polymers also showed high penetration capability in 3D cell spheres,149 mucus tissues,196,269 and solid tumors.172,189 Polypeptides tagged with fluoroalkyls showed high mucus penetration capability when delivering siRNA intratracheally (Fig. 19).196 The control polypeptide without fluorine was mainly entrapped in the mucus layer, while the fluorinated ones efficiently delivered siRNA across the barrier. The fluoropolymer down-regulated (96%) tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) in vivo and efficiently inhibited acute lung injury in an animal model. For systematic administration, the polyplexes should be further modified to avoid rapid clearance from the blood circulating system. Fluorine-containing polymers were conjugated with PEG for in vivo siRNA delivery.154 The presence of PEG greatly improved polyplex stability and tumor accumulation. In a separate study, the PEGylated fluoropolymer was used to deliver siRNA targeting programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) to modulate the tumor microenvironment. The nanoformulation decreased tumor fibrosis, facilitated T-cell infiltration and improved the response rate of anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy.164 The fluoropolymers could also be co-assembled with the fluoroalkyl-PEG conjugate or 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-methoxy(polyethylene glycol) (DSPE-PEG) to fabricate PEGylated hybrid nanoparticles with a neutral surface for in vivo gene therapy.135,183 Besides PEGylation, polyplexes could be coated with anionic polymers such as hyaluronic acid (HA) and poly(glutamic acid) (PGA) to shield the positive charges on fluoropolymers, yielding core–shell structured or ternary complexes for gene therapy.28,165,169,175,270 The coating materials could be conjugated with cell penetrant peptides (CPP) or targeting peptides for cell-specific gene therapy. The developed nanoformulation showed potent activity in the delivery of plasmids for CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing.153
 Fig. 19  Transmucus delivery of siRNA by fluorinated α-helical polypeptides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 

3.2 Fluoropolymers in cytosolic protein and peptide delivery
Protein and peptide drugs have revolutionized the pharmaceutical industry in recent years, but all the current protein drugs are developed based on extracellular targets due to the membrane-impermeability of most proteins. The development of efficient materials that are capable of delivering proteins inside living cells is of great importance to expand the family of protein therapeutics.271,272 The direct delivery of therapeutic proteins into cells could avoid disadvantages of gene therapy such as the risk of gene recombination and the limited transfection efficiency in primary cells.273 In addition, the currently developed biotechniques such as genome editing and immunotherapy also call for methods for intracellular delivery of proteins such as Cas9 ribonucleoprotein and tumor antigens.274,275 Therefore, the rational design of materials for cytosolic protein delivery has attracted interesting attention in recent years.276–281

Fluorination of polymers promotes cytosolic protein and peptide delivery. 
Cationic polymers have been widely used as gene carriers based on the mechanism of ionic interaction-driven polyplex formation and cell internalization. The negative charges on proteins are much less than those on nucleic acids, and therefore it is challenging to prepare stable polymer/protein complexes for intracellular delivery. Since fluoropolymers exhibited excellent self-assembly behaviors in aqueous solutions, they were proposed to co-assemble with cargo proteins via ionic and fluorophilic interactions. A library of PEI-based fluoropolymers was used as the screening pool to discover efficient materials for cytosolic protein delivery (Fig. 20).185 Generally, polymers with longer fluorous tags and higher fluorination degrees possess higher transfection efficiency in gene delivery,182 but this rule is incorrect for cytosolic protein delivery. For example, the protein delivery efficiency dramatically decreases in reverse proportion to the fluorination degree for PEIs modified with a ligand containing 13 fluorine atoms. Longer fluorous chains and higher fluorination degrees of the polymers are beneficial for better membrane permeability, but may lead to decreased protein loading due to the pre-assembly of fluoropolymers into large vesicles before protein attachment.
 Fig. 20  Fluoropolymers for cytosolic protein delivery. (a) Co-assembly of fluoropolymers and cargo proteins to prepare nanoparticles. (b) Hydrophobic ligands modified on PEI. (c) Intracellular protein delivery efficiencies of PEIs modified with the hydrophobic ligands in the library. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, The author, Creative Commons CC BY. 
The lead fluoropolymer F4-1 in the library showed robust efficiency in the delivery of both cationic and anionic proteins into cytosols. In addition, the cargo proteins showed a high level of bioactivity after intracellular release, i.e. more than 90% enzyme activity of the β-galactosidase delivered by F4-1 could be recovered in the transfected cells. Saporin, a membrane-impermeable toxin protein, was successfully delivered into cancer cells by F4-1.185 The protein exerted potent anticancer activity in the presence of F4-1 at extremely low protein doses. Besides proteins, F4-1 could efficiently deliver membrane-impermeable peptides into various cell lines.185,269 The polymer was co-assembled with the peptide polybia-mastoparan I (MPI, IDWKKLLDAAKQIL) to form uniform and positively charged nanoparticles for the treatment of bladder cancer (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Fluorinated PEI delivered the peptide MPI into the bladder for cancer treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The presence of F4-1 decreased the IC50 value of the MPI peptide by an order of magnitude in several bladder cancer cells due to increased cell internalization.269 Interestingly, direct decoration of fluoroalkyl tags on peptides via a disulfide linker also augments their cytosolic delivery and the simplified formulation may be used to fabricate peptide nanoparticles acting on intracellular targets.50


Fluorine effect of fluoropolymers in cytosolic protein delivery. 
Fluoropolymers also showed a “fluorine effect” in cytosolic protein delivery. The lead fluoropolymer F4-1 showed much superior efficiency to non-fluorinated polymer A4-1 (Fig. 22a and b). The two polymers were then compared in aspects of nanoparticle formation, protein denaturation, cellular uptake and cytotoxicity. First, F4-1 and the cargo protein formed small-sized nanoparticles with a PDI value below 0.1, while A4-1 failed to co-assemble into uniform nanoparticles with the protein. This is due to the excellent self-assembly behaviors of fluoropolymers in aqueous solutions, and this property is beneficial for complex formation and protein loading. Second, the alkyl chains on A4-1 could interact with proteins via hydrophobic interactions, while the fluoroalkyl chains on F4-1 are generally bio-inert and lipophobic. As a result, fewer proteins were denatured in the nanocomplex formed by F4-1. Third, F4-1 itself showed fast cell internalization kinetics due to the low surface energy and lipophobic property of fluoroalkyl chains, while A4-1 exhibited long-term cell membrane retention due to the fusion of lipid chains with phospholipids (Fig. 22c). Finally, the fusion of lipids on A4-1 with the cell membrane will cause cytotoxicity. As a result, F4-1 showed much lower toxicity than A4-1 on the treated cells. Taken together, the fluoropolymer has advantages in several aspects including improved protein encapsulation, avoiding of protein denaturation, facilitated cellular uptake, and limited material toxicity in comparison with non-fluorinated control polymers.
 Fig. 22  Fluorine effect of fluoropolymers in cytosolic protein delivery. (a) Fluoropolymers F4-1 and F3-3 exhibited much higher efficiencies in cytosolic protein delivery than non-fluorinated analogs A4-1 and A3-3. (b) The proteins delivered by fluoropolymers were mainly located inside cells, while those delivered by non-fluorinated controls were mainly on the cell surface. (c) Mechanisms of fluoropolymers and non-fluorinated materials in cytosolic protein delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, The author, Creative Commons CC BY. 


Fluoropolymer-mediated protein and peptide delivery in vivo. 
Fluoropolymers possess high protein delivery efficiency and tissue penetration capability, and these features could be used for delivering protein drugs in vivo for the treatment of diseases such as cancer.282 For example, F4-1 carrying the MPI peptide efficiently penetrated across the bladder mucosa, which is the major barrier for bladder cancer therapy (Fig. 21). The fluoropolymer formulation showed a selective anti-proliferative effect on bladder cancer cells, and sufficiently inhibited tumor growth in an orthotopic bladder cancer model. Superior therapeutic efficiency and reduced adverse effects were achieved compared to the first-line drug mitomycin C in the treatment of bladder cancer. Another lead material A6-2 identified from a library of dendrimer-based fluoropolymers was co-assembled with saporin and further coated by HA on the particle surface for targeted protein delivery.283 HA coating on the nanoformulation further reduced the IC50 value of saporin by 3-fold in breast cancer cells, and increased saporin tumor accumulation. As a result, significant reduction of tumor growth was achieved by intravenous administration of the HA-coated nanoformulation.
Cancer vaccine kills cancer cells by activation of specific anticancer immune responses, and thus avoids the side effects in traditional cancer therapy. The development of cancer vaccine usually requires a carrier to effectively deliver tumor antigens into dendritic cells (DCs) for antigen cross-presentation.284 Fluoropolymers could efficiently deliver a model antigen ovalbumin (OVA) into DCs, activate the maturation of DCs and elicit T cell response both in vitro and in vivo.285 More importantly, the fluoropolymer itself could agonize toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and thus could induce high immune stimulation when delivering OVA without the need for an immunological adjuvant such as CpG. The fluoropolymer-based nanovaccines achieved high anticancer activity in several tumor models and allowed personalized immunotherapy when the fluoropolymer was co-formulated with tumor cell membranes. The anticancer activity of fluoropolymer-based nanovaccine could be further augmented by the use of checkpoint blockade such as PD-1 antibody. These examples confirmed the great promise of fluoropolymers in the delivery of protein therapeutics in vivo.

3.3 
          19F MRI

19F MRI is an emerging and convenient diagnostic technique. It provides hot-spot images without invasion and tissue depth limit.144 The 19F nucleus has comparable MR sensitivity to protons (83% relative to 1H), but lacks background interference due to the absence of fluorine elements in the tissues.286 Therefore, fluorine-containing chemicals could be used as quantitative probes for in vitro and in vivo cell tracking,287–289 assembled nanostructure monitoring,290 and disease diagnostics.291,292 There have been several excellent review articles on the principles and application of 19F MRI,22,293–298 and we will focus on the most recent advances in this topic.
For MRI imaging, a short spin–lattice relaxation time (T1) and a long spin–spin relaxation time (T2) are required for high MRI sensitivity. Since 19F MRI usually requires the summation of multiple acquisitions to obtain a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), high T1 will lead to a decreased acquisition rate and SNR at a fixed time. On the other hand, short T2 may lead to line broadening of the 19F signals and compromised SNR when T2 is comparable to the echo time. Generally, the 19F MRI signal intensity increases in proportion to fluorine concentration, and thus a high concentration of magnetically equivalent fluorine atoms is required in the imaging region. Fluorine-rich perfluorocarbons (PFCs) such as perfluorononane (PFN), perfluorooctyl bromide (PFOB), perfluorodecalin (PFD), and perfluoro-15-crown-5-ether (PFCE) were widely developed as 19F MRI probes.299–304 PFCs were usually fabricated into nanoemulsions using different surfactants for 19F MRI; however, the PFC-based nanoemulsions have several disadvantages including poor stability in physiological conditions, heterogeneity, split 19F NMR signals and long-term body accumulation.136 The development of fluoropolymer-based 19F MRI reagents is a way to solve these problems.

PFPE-based nanoemulsions. 
PFPEs are widely used for 19F MRI imaging due to their high fluorine content (over 40 fluorine atoms per molecule) and relatively short T1 and long T2 relaxation times.305,306 Both terminal groups of PFPEs could be reacted to endow the fluoropolymer with new functions. For example, PFPE was conjugated with fluorescent dyes and then co-emulsified in water with PFPE oxide, a nonionic surfactant pluronic F-68 and PEI to obtain a stable and non-toxic nanoemulsion (Fig. 23a).307 This formulation is now considered as a standard for in vivo cell tracking by 19F MRI (CellSense). It allows quantitative measurement of cell numbers at a local site, which is termed “in vivo cytometry”. Moreover, the formulation was approved by the FDA for clinical use, i.e. the labelling of DC-based cancer vaccines.308 In spite of these promising achievements, there is still a lot of room for improving the MR sensitivity of PFPE-based nanoemulsions. A recent study reported a strategy to boost the MR sensitivity of PFPE-based nanoemulsions by significantly decreasing T1 (Fig. 23b).287 A decrease in T1 could accelerate acquisitions and thereby the detection of labelled cell populations in vivo. The presence of paramagnetic species will greatly affect the T1 of a nucleus by a well-known paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) effect. The PRE effect is augmented when decreasing the distance between the paramagnetic species and the interested nucleus. Therefore, paramagnetic metal ions such as Fe3+ and Gd3+ were introduced into the PFPE-based nanoemulsions to decrease T1. To ensure the metal ions are adjacent to the fluoropolymers, PFPEs were conjugated with two diketonate moieties at both ends for metal ion binding. The T1 of PFPE-based nanoemulsions could be tailored by changing the dose of paramagnetic metal ions, and a minimum dose of Fe3+ complexation to the PFPEs caused dramatically decreased T1 by an order of magnitude. Such an improved formulation achieved at least 8-fold enhancement compared to conventional PFPE nanoemulsions in MRI sensitivity under a clinical field strength of 3 T. These PFPE-based nanoemulsions with ultra-fast T1 are promising for highly sensitive cell tracking by 19F MRI.
 Fig. 23  PFPE-based nanoemulsions for 19F MRI imaging. (a) Standard nanoemulsion formed by fluorescent dye conjugated PFPE, PFPE oxide, F-68 and PEI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) Introduction of paramagnetic metal ions into PFPE-based nanoemulsions to enhance their 19F MRI sensitivity by decreasing T1.287 


Water soluble fluoropolymers for 19F MRI. 
Besides PFPEs, other fluoropolymers with versatile chemical structures were developed as 19F MRI contrast agents.22,118,231 Most of the fluoropolymers showed poor MRI sensitivity due to low fluorine content. However, increasing the fluorine content in the polymer may decrease its aqueous solubility, which limits the mobility of fluorine segments, broadens the 19F signals and decreases T2 and SNR via polymer self-assembly. Therefore, the fluorine contents in fluoropolymer-based 19F MRI contrasts are usually less than 5 wt%, which are much lower than those in PFC- and PFPE-based nanoemulsions.
To solve this problem, a type of non-ionic fluoropolymer PFSAM with high fluorine content up to 25 wt% was designed.106 The presence of polar sulfoxide and amide groups in the side chains allows high water solubility. PFSAMs exhibited comparable T1 to previously reported fluoropolymers, but a much longer T2 up to 431 ms, which is unusual for high fluorine-content polymers. In addition, PFSAMs displayed negligible cytotoxicity at concentrations up to 5 mg mL−1 and relatively weak association with white blood cells, which all support that PFSAMs are highly sensitive and biocompatible MRI contrasts. When the fluoropolymer was tagged to a protein, the biodistribution and clearance of the conjugate could be quantitatively determined for a long period. Similarly, copolymers of TFEA and MSEA with high fluorine contents (5.8–19.3 wt%) and aqueous solubility were synthesized by RAFT polymerization.113 The fluoropolymers showed the maximum SNR at a fluorine content of 15.3 wt%. A further increase in fluorine content led to significantly decreased T2 relaxation time and SNR, suggesting the importance of suitable fluorine content in the polymer.
Another method to construct soluble fluoropolymers with high fluorine contents was achieved by using PFPE as the macro-CTA to polymerize OEGMEA.123 The PFPE-based fluoropolymer possesses a fluorine weight ratio up to 28.5 wt%, and a T2 relaxation time around 80 ms. The SNR increases in proportion to fluorine content in the polymer and the T2 value is scarcely changed within the fluorine content range, suggesting the good dispersion of the fluoropolymers in solutions. In a separate study, PFPE-OH was conjugated with methacryloyl chloride, which was used as a fluorous monomer to copolymerize with OEGMEA to obtain soluble fluoropolymers with fluorine contents up to 21.4%.112 The fluoropolymer was successfully used as a 19F MRI tracer for monitoring non-phagocytic cells such as mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vivo.
A recent study reported the synthesis of zwitterionic fluoropolymers for 19F MRI.101 The zwitterionic side chains on the polymers enable high water solubility and excellent serum resistance in vivo. Such highly soluble polymers showed constant T1 and T2 at various polymerization degrees and polymer concentrations. The T2 value around 55 ms enables high MR sensitivity. Moreover, the zwitterionic fluoropolymers could be fabricated into nanogels by using a polymerizable crosslinker. According to 19F MRI, the nanogel was observed in various organs including liver, lung and kidney with high MR intensity, and the signals were maintained within 48 h post-injection. The result indicates that this zwitterionic fluoropolymer based nanogel could be used for long-term 19F MRI. Though the nanogel has a relatively large size around 80 nm, renal clearance was observed and 19F signals were clearly observed in the bladder.


Dendrimer and hyperbranched polymer-based 19F MRI contrasts. 
Dendrimers are hyperbranched polymers with tunable size and surface functionality, and thus are excellent scaffolds to construct fluoropolymers for 19F MRI.220,309,310 Fluorodendrimers with up to 540 fluorine atoms were synthesized in a step-wise manner.134,288,311 These dendrimers possess a high density of trifluoromethyl groups (CF3) on the surface and thus must be fabricated into nanoemulsions for MRI due to their poor aqueous solubility. To ensure aqueous solubility, amphiphilic dendrimers bearing both CF3 and oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) surface functionalities were constructed.136,140,142 An amphiphilic dendrimer containing 54 fluorine atoms and three OEG segments was conjugated to a boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) molecule, and further was coated on PFCs to prepare “all-in-one” nanoparticles for multimodal imaging including 19F MR, fluorescence, ultrasound and photoacoustic imaging.141
Dendrimer synthesis is very time-consuming, while hyperbranched or star fluoropolymers could be synthesized via a one-pot approach.114,127,312 For example, hyperbranched copolymers were synthesized by RAFT polymerization of several methacrylate monomers and a cross-linker bearing two methacrylate moieties such as EGDMA and BAC.124,313–315 Alternatively, a polymerizable CTA was used to synthesize hyperbranched polymers consisting of OEGMEA and TFEA.129 Increasing the branching degree may lead to self-assembly of the fluoropolymers and decreased T2 compared to linear polymers.129 Though fluorodendrimers and hyperbranched fluoropolymers may possess a high fluorine density, the MR sensitivity of these polymers is far from satisfactory.


Responsive fluoropolymers for 19F MRI imaging. 
Materials with switchable MR signal intensities are highly desirable for diagnosis of various diseases.315–318 Ionizable monomers such as DMAEMA were incorporated into fluoropolymers or nanogels via different polymerization strategies.103,313,314 These DMAEMA segments were protonated at a lower pH, and thus increase the polymer hydrophilicity and cause the swelling of polymer assemblies or nanogels. In this case, an increased T2 could be achieved at acidic pH. To improve the responsive sensitivity, 2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DPA) with a pKa value of 6.1 was used to design ultrasensitive fluoropolymers for 19F MRI (Fig. 24a).315 The polymer was synthesized by ATRP polymerization of TFE and DPA using a PEG-based macro-initiator. The synthesized polymer was assembled into polymersomes at pH 7.4 due to the hydrophobicity of TFE and DPA segments. After protonation, the increased hydrophilicity of protonated DPA led to dis-assembly of the fluoropolymers, which dramatically increased the mobility of fluorous segments and the MRI intensity. As a result, a 27-fold increase in SNR was achieved when the pH was decreased from 7.4 to 5.0, and the increase of MR signal intensity from 10% to 90% could be achieved within 0.25 pH units. In a separate study, a pH-sensitive 19F MRI nanoprobe was prepared by coating fluoropolymers on manganese-layered double hydroxide (Mn-LDH) nanoparticles.125 Mn2+ in the nanoparticles was acted as a paramagnetic relaxation agent to quench the 19F signals at physiological pH. Under lower pH conditions such as 6.5, Mn2+ is gradually released from LDH and this turns on the MR signals from the fluoropolymer. In vivo results confirmed that only the tumor was observed with MR signals. These sensitive fluoropolymers and nanoprobes with “off–on” properties could be used to image tumor microenvironments by 19F MRI.
 Fig. 24  Fluoropolymers for responsive 19F MRI. (a) pH-Sensitive 19F MRI nanoprobes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 315, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Reduction-responsive fluoropolymer nanoprobes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, reduction-sensitive fluoropolymers were designed for 19F MRI. Fluoropolymer assemblies or nanogels with disulfide containing crosslinkers were synthesized.128 The polymers exhibited a moderate response in a reducing microenvironment (i.e. T2 increased from 26 ms to 46 ms). A highly reduction-responsive fluoropolymer was synthesized by polymerization of OEGEMA and 2-((2,4-dinitro-N-(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-phenyl)sulfonamido)ethyl methacrylate (Fig. 24b).319 The presence of reducing thiols triggers the de-shielding of dinitrobenzenesulfonyl groups and the disassembly of polymer micelles. Upon activation, the T2 was significantly increased to 296 ms within 2 h, and the MR signal was turned on (15-fold at 30 min and 27-fold at 2 h). Besides, thermoresponsive fluoropolymers such as OEG-based peptoids,144–146 poly-[N-(2,2-difluoroethyl)acrylamide]-co-poly(2-methyl-2-oxazoline) (PDFEA-co-PMeOx),117 and PFPE-based poly(2-oxazoline)s115 were designed for switchable 19F MRI. The peptoids consisting of OEG and fluorous-tagged amino acids have well-defined molecular structures, good monodispersity, and relatively high T2.144–146 The sensitivity of these polymers upon temperature variation should be improved before practical applications.


Targeted fluoropolymers for 19F MRI imaging. 
The development of targeted fluoropolymers may increase the fluorine concentration in the imaging volume and thus improve the MRI sensitivity.291 The polymers could be easily tagged with folate,114 aptamers,124 galactose,178 mannose127 and glucose128via facile chemistries for targeted MRI. For example, a PFPE-based hyperbranched fluoropolymer was conjugated with a peptide aptamer (SPWPRPTY) for cancer targeting. The aptamer could target heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) overexpressed in various cancer cells.124 The accumulation of the aptamer-conjugated fluoropolymer in breast cancer was 2.8-fold higher than that of the non-targeted polymer determined by 19F NMR. In addition, a high T2 relaxation time (107.3 ms) of the targeted fluoropolymer was determined in the excised tumors, suggesting high mobility of the fluorous chains in tumor tissues. Similarly, a folate-targeted fluoropolymer (T1 420 ms and T2 54 ms) was synthesized to specifically bind folate receptors overexpressed on multiple tumor cells.11419F MRI provides high-resolution images of the fluoropolymer distribution in specific organs. The non-targeted polymers were mainly localized in the kidney and bladder, while the targeted ones were observed in tumors, liver, kidney and bladder. These results clearly proved the tumor targeting capability of folate-modified fluoropolymers and that the synthesized fluoropolymers can be cleared via kidney excretion.


MR imageable implant materials. 
The commonly used fluoropolymers such as PTFE and PVDF are not applicable for 19F MRI because of their high crystallinity. These polymers showed ultrashort echo times and fast signal decay. A fluorinated thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) with an amorphous structure was proposed to solve this issue.320 Fluorinated TPU has a high density of magnetically equivalent fluorine atoms on the polymer, and the amorphous structure ensures high fluorine mobility, and thereby a relatively long T2 relaxation time and efficient MRI acquisition. The fluorinated TPU could be fabricated as polymeric fibers to develop MRI traceable vascular scaffold materials (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  TPU-based vascular scaffold for 19F MRI. (a) Photographic image of the vascular scaffold structure. Scale bar: 2 mm. (b) 19F MRI of the scaffold in sagittal and coronal planes (top) and upon 3D rendering (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 320, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

3.4 Fluoropolymers for drug delivery

Fluoropolymers as nanocapsules for drug delivery. 
Fluoropolymers have excellent self-assembly behaviors in aqueous solutions, and the assembled nanostructures could be tailored for the encapsulation of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules.102,146,221,321–329 For example, tobacco mosaic virus coat protein (TMVCP) was modified with a fluoroalkyl tag to prepare amphiphilic proteins, which further assembled into nanovesicles for drug encapsulation (Fig. 26a).322 Besides self-assembly, the fluoroalkyl chains modified on polymers could overcome the barriers existing in drug delivery, i.e. improved tumor accumulation and cell internalization.330,331 The fluoropolymers loaded with doxorubicin (DOX) showed greatly improved therapeutic efficacy compared to non-fluorinated polymers.
 Fig. 26  Fluoropolymers for drug delivery. (a) Fluorinated tobacco mosaic virus coat protein self-assembled into spherical nanoparticles for drug delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fluorinated dendrimer for fluorinated drug and therapeutic gene co-delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Amphiphilic fluoropolymer conjugated with DOX via an acid-labile hydrazone bond for cancer therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 334, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
It is known that nearly 25% of the marketed drugs contain fluorine atoms, and the fluorine-containing drugs usually possess poor aqueous solubility. These drugs could be encapsulated in the assembled fluoropolymers via a combination of the fluorophilic effect and hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 26b).174 Sorafenib, an anticancer drug with low aqueous solubility, was efficiently loaded into polymersomes assembled by fluorodendrimers. The release of encapsulated sorafenib was prolonged due to the fluorine–fluorine interactions between the cargoes and the fluorous tags. In addition, the sorafenib-loaded fluorodendrimers maintained high gene transfection efficiency and allowed the co-delivery of both anticancer drugs and therapeutic genes for cancer therapy. Besides hydrophobic sorafenib, the assembled poly(L-lactic acid) (PLA) bearing a fluoroalkyl tail was synthesized and fabricated into microcapsules for the encapsulation of lipophilic drugs.332 The fluoroalkylated PLA could be used to stabilize perfluorohexane (PFH) nanoparticles for ultrasonic imaging.29 When ultrasound was applied, PFH in the nanocapsules was partially vaporized and this could be used to design ultrasound-activatable delivery systems. Anticancer drugs loaded in fluoropolymer-stabilized perfluoropentane (PFP) nanoparticles could be activated by ultrasound treatment.327 Fluoropolymers could be in situ generated on porous silica nanoparticles by plasma treatment of perfluorooctane.333 These polymers have Teflon-like properties and thus can act as gate-keepers to control the release of encapsulated drugs in the porous materials.


Fluoropolymer–drug conjugates. 
Since fluoropolymers have the benefits of improved cellular uptake and tissue penetration, drug molecules covalently conjugated to these polymers may also exhibit beneficial effects in drug delivery.334,335 Based on this rationale, a series of fluoropolymers consisting of PFPE and POEGMEA were designed to improve the therapeutic efficacy of DOX (Fig. 26c).334 DOX was conjugated to the polymer end via an acid-labile hydrazone bond. The fluoropolymers with high fluorine contents were assembled into polymer micelles and they showed limited cell membrane interactions, while the ones with a lower fluorine content existed as unimers with higher PFPE exposure to the cell membranes, and therefore exhibited higher cell internalization. The DOX-conjugated fluoropolymer with a lower fluorine content showed higher cytotoxicity, deeper tumor penetration and better therapeutic efficacy than those with higher fluorine contents. The results proved that the fluorine contents in fluoropolymers should be carefully selected to achieve high therapeutic performance in chemotherapy.

3.5 Fluoropolymers for enhanced PDT
PDT is a promising therapeutic option for cancer treatment based on light irradiation of a photosensitizer, which converts oxygen into ROS such as singlet oxygen (1O2). It allows spatiotemporal control of the therapy and thus avoids systematic toxicity of traditional chemotherapeutic drugs. Though several photosensitizers have been approved for the treatment of several cancers, the wide applications of PDT in clinical trials are limited due to several challenges. One of the major challenges is that PDT is oxygen-dependent and thus the therapeutic efficacy is limited by the hypoxic microenvironment of solid tumors. Various strategies were developed to ameliorate the tumor hypoxia for enhanced PDT.26,336–339 Fluorocarbons were widely used as carriers for oxygen delivery due to the high electronegativity of fluorine atoms and the low intermolecular attractive forces. Several fluorocarbons or their emulsions were approved to prevent tissue hypoxia or ischemia during surgery or treat acute respiratory failure.25 Besides fluorocarbons, fluoropolymers were widely developed as artificial oxygen carriers.340–343 Therefore, fluoropolymers could be used to enhance PDT by carrying oxygen in the photosensitizer-containing nanoparticles. Several amphiphilic fluoropolymers were fabricated into nanocapsules or nanomicelles and loaded/conjugated with photosensitizers such as chlorin e6 (Ce6), IR780, and boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) for improved cancer PDT (Fig. 27a).120,344–351 These fluoropolymer-based nanocapsules exhibited a much higher oxygen loading and prolonged oxygen retention than non-fluorinated polymers. For example, perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) grafted PEI micelles possessed nearly 6-fold higher oxygen loading capacity than non-fluorinated micelles, and therefore showed much higher therapeutic efficacy during PDT cancer therapy.344 Covalent organic framework (COF) nanoparticles consisting of 20-tetra(4-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin (THPP) and perfluorosebacic acid (PFSEA) were loaded with PFCE and saturated with oxygen for enhanced cancer PDT (Fig. 27b).352 Dextran-based fluoropolymers with pH-responsive properties could be decorated with targeting ligands such as tumor-homing peptide iRGD for cancer targeted PDT.345 After tumor accumulation, the fluoropolymer nanocapsules exhibit a disassembly process triggered by tumor acidity and release the encapsulated photosensitizers for PDT. Similarly, fluorous-tagged HA allows oxygen-enhanced and targeted PDT by the tumor targeting capability of HA.348 Fluoropolymers such as fluorinated poly(β-amino ester)s could be co-loaded with Ce6 and an indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitor, and thus enhance PDT via the activation of immune response (Fig. 27c).120
 Fig. 27  Fluoropolymers for PDT. (a) Synthesis of fluorinated polymer–photosensitizer conjugates to potentiate cell-death by improving the generation of ROS during PDT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 346, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis of a fluorinaed COF for PFCE and oxygen loading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 352, Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) PEGylated and fluorinated poly(β-amino ester)s (PF-PEG) coencapsulated with Ce6 and IDO inhibitor for enhancing the therapeutic effect of PDT by activating immune suppression.120 
Besides carrying oxygen, fluoropolymers could deliver oxygen-generating enzymes such as catalase into tumor cells where ROS levels are much higher than that in normal tissues. Fluorinated PEI (F-PEI) successfully delivered the catalase (CAT)–photosensitizer (Ce6) conjugate across the bladder mucosal barrier into solid bladder tumors, which further relieved tumor hypoxia by in situ oxygenation (Fig. 28).353 As a result, bladder intravesical instillation with CAT-Ce6/F-PEI nanoparticles offered remarkably improved PDT efficiency with reduced systemic toxicity compared to hematoporphyrin. Besides PDT, fluoropolymers could be used as a carrier for enhanced sonodynamic therapy, which is a novel therapeutic option using ultrasound instead of light to trigger the production of ROS in tumor cells.189 A chitosan-based fluoropolymer was proposed to deliver sonosensitizer-modified CAT into bladder tumors via a similar mechanism to that described above, and the nanoformulation showed much increased oxygen generation in the bladder tumor, which efficiently promoted bladder tumor sonodynamic therapy under ultrasound treatment.
 Fig. 28  CAT-Ce6/F-PEI nanoparticles relieve the tumor hypoxia for enhanced PDT cancer therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353, Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Besides cancer therapy, the fluoropolymers could be used to treat bacterial infection via PDT.166,354 An amphiphilic and fluorinated peptide dendrimer was assembled into micelles and loaded with Ce6 and a CO precursor.166 CO is an endogenous signaling molecule which plays an important role in various biological processes. It could promote phagocytosis and thus acts as an antibacterial agent. PDT could trigger the release of CO from the fluoropolymer micelles, enhance PDT killing of bacteria and eradicate biofilm infections.
3.6 Fluoropolymers for anti-fouling and anti-bacterial applications
Bio-foulings initiated by nonspecific adsorption of proteins and microorganisms on substrates are annoying problems for medical implants, marine ships and sensors.355 Hydrophilic polymers such as PEG and zwitterionic polymers with high wettability were usually grafted on surfaces for anti-fouling applications.356 These hydrophilic polymers could resist protein adsorption, and prevent bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on the surface. In contrast, superhydrophobic surfaces (contact angle above 150°) with micro- or nano-structures inspired from the surface of lotus leaves were reported with excellent anti-fouling properties.66,357,358 Fluoropolymers are both hydrophobic and oleophobic, and have extremely low surface energies. The van der Waals interaction of fluoropolymers with other species is extremely small, and this is usually considered as one of the major reasons for the antifouling and antibacterial properties of fluoropolymers. Fluoropolymers could inhibit non-specific protein adsorption, and prevent immune response and blood coagulation, and thus are widely coated on implants, lab-on-chip devices and sensors to provide anti-fouling properties, a phenomenon called fluoropassivation.354,359–375 For example, PTFE with low platelet adhesion and low thrombogenic properties was widely used for vascular grafts, catheters, cardiovascular valves, scaffolds for ligament and tendon repair, and surgical meshes.60,376,377 PVDF-HFP is now commercially used as a coating for drug eluting stents.378–380 The fluoropolymer surface was proposed as an alternative to siliconized surfaces widely used in medical materials such as viral stoppers and syringe plungers.381 The fluoropolymer surface reduced protein adsorption and aggregation during the agitation of protein therapeutics, and provided solid-phase lubrication for syringe plungers, avoiding the use of silicone oil lubricants. Besides fluoropolymers such as PFTE and PVDF, superhydrophobic and antifouling surfaces can be prepared by silanization of fluorosilanes.382–385 For example, trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)silane (TPFS) and 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) were functionalized on the substrate surface via chemical vapor deposition.386 APTES was further functionalized with antibodies for the capture of target cells, while TPFS prevented non-specific adsorption of biomolecules. This strategy can be used to fabricate micropatterned interfaces for localized cell adhesion and patterning.387 For superhydrophobic surfaces, damage may introduce polar groups to the surface and reduce the anti-fouling performance. However, the anti-fouling property of the fluoropolymer surface could be recovered by an aging process such as heat treatment.355,368–370 When the temperature is above the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the fluoropolymer, the polymer mobility increases, and the interior fluorous chains would expose to the interface to exert anti-fouling property due to their extremely low surface energy (Fig. 29a).388
 Fig. 29  Fluoropolymers for anti-fouling applications. (a) Nanostructured silicon grafted with fluoropolymers for anti-fouling properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Copolymer FPEG-FA coated on a microfluidic device for anti-fouling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 389, Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Fluorinated copolymers containing different fluorine contents for the prevention of protein adsorption. Reproduced with permission from ref. 404, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

Amphiphilic fluoropolymers for anti-fouling applications. 
Though both hydrophilic polymers such as PEG and superhydrophobic fluoropolymers have anti-fouling properties, the biospecies such as proteins, extracellular matrix and cell membranes are generally amphiphilic. These species attach to surfaces via different mechanisms, and therefore solely hydrophilic or hydrophobic surface is not always efficient in anti-fouling applications. In this case, amphiphilic polymers were proposed to solve this issue by introducing both fouling resistance and release effects. For example, an amphiphilic copolymer consisting of fluorinated PEG (FPEG) and perfluorinated methacrylate (FA) was coated on a lab-on-a-chip device for anti-fouling. Such a copolymer coating significantly reduced non-specific protein adsorption and increased the life-time of the device by up to 5.5-fold compared to Teflon coating (Fig. 29b).389 PEG cross-linked hyperbranched fluoropolymers were synthesized to prepare high performance anti-fouling materials.390–393 The hydrophilic PEG segments and hydrophobic fluoropolymers exhibited phase segregation and led to topological surface roughness. These PEG cross-linked fluoropolymers showed much enhanced anti-fouling activities against proteins and microorganisms than surfaces consisting of PEG or fluoropolymers alone. Amphiphilic fluoropolymers such as fluorinated polybetaines, poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA), polyglycerols, polyanhydride and alginate were reported with excellent ability in reducing protein adsorption.394–403 The balance of hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity in amphiphilic fluoropolymers is critical for anti-fouling.400 For example, amphiphilic alginate with a moderate fluorination degree (25%) was the most resistant polymer against proteins and marine foulings such as U. linza spores among the investigated polymers. Similarly, the incorporation of a small amount of fluorine into poly(2-methoxyethyl acrylate) (PMEA) was found to produce higher anti-fouling performance compared to free PMEA or PMEA copolymers with high fluorine contents.404 The copolymer with a low fluorine content could easily expose hydrophilic PMEA to water after hydration, while the one with a high fluorine content failed to do this due to the limited mobility of the fluorous segments in a solid state (Fig. 29c).
PEGylation of proteins was proven to be an effective strategy to improve the blood circulation time and stability of protein-based therapeutics. Considering that fluoropolymers also have anti-fouling properties, a recent study synthesized fluoropolymer PFSAM conjugated BSA and investigated its pharmacokinetic and biodistribution behaviors. The conjugation of PFSAM efficiently prolonged the elimination half-life of the protein in the bloodstream and reduced kidney secretion after intravenous injection. The effect of PFSAM modification on the pharmacokinetic behavior of BSA is similar to PEGylation.106 In addition, PFSAM-conjugated BSA showed decreased binding with cellular components in blood compared to PEGylated BSA. This result indicates that fluoropolymers might be used as PEG alternatives for protein conjugation to improve its bioavailability.


Fluoropolymers against bacterial infection. 
Fluorination of polymers could also improve their antibacterial activities.405–407 Quaternary ammonium materials bearing long hydrophobic tails were widely designed to treat bacterial infection via a contact killing mechanism.408 These amphiphilic materials have high binding affinity with bacterial membranes via a combination of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. When the long hydrophobic alkyl chains were replaced by fluoroalkyl chains, a significant enhancement of the antibacterial activity was achieved.409 The superior antibacterial activity of fluorinated materials is attributed to the low surface energy of fluoroalkyl chains, which enables surface enrichment of quaternary ammonium moieties. Spray coating of cotton fabrics with amphiphilic polymers bearing quaternary ammonium produced antibacterial fabrics. The incorporation of fluoroalkyl chains into the polymer efficiently improved the antibacterial and anti-adhesion effects.410 It is known that biofilm-associated infections are difficult to treat because the bacteria embedded in the biofilm are usually resistant to antibiotics.411,412 The inhibition of biofilm formation is critical for preventing bacterial infections in the clinic. For fluoropolymers, the fluoroalkyl chains are beneficial for preventing the attachment of dead bacterial cells and biofilm formation.


Slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces (SLIPS) for anti-fouling applications. 
SLIPS are inspired by the pitcher plant Nepenthes. They were prepared by infiltration of lubricants into porous surfaces with low surface energies, i.e. a nanostructured Teflon surface (Fig. 30a).30,32,413,414 Perfluorinated fluids such as perfluoroperhydrophenanthrene (Vitreon) and PFPEs (Krytox series) are widely used lubricants in SLIPS and have been approved by the FDA for clinical applications. The SLIPS exhibit superomniphobicity and create a liquid/liquid interface between the fluorous lubricants and the immiscible liquids to be repelled.415 Therefore, SLIPS were reported with exceptional self-cleaning and self-repairing properties, and anti-fouling activities against bacteria and biofilms416–420 and marine fouling organisms.421 For example, SLIPS prevented biofilm adhesion by 99% for P. aeruginosa, 97% for S. aureus, and 96% for E. coli for a period of 7 days.416 In comparison, PEGylated surfaces only reduced biofilm attachment by 86% at the first 5 hours incubation. The anti-fouling performance of SLIPS is over 30-fold more efficient compared to that of the PEGylated surface. Recently, the SLIPS strategy was expanded from a 2D substrate to 3D microparticles for in vivo applications (Fig. 30b).31 Spiky microparticles were fluorinated and infused with fluorous lubricants such as FDA-approved perfluorodecalin. The SLIPS microparticles could be persistently dispersed in water, and efficiently prevented the attachment of proteins, mammalian cells and bacteria both in vitro and in vivo. It should be noticed that the antifouling performance of SLIPS is still far from satisfactory in real application scenarios. 99% reduction in bacterial colonies on SLIPS is not high enough, and the remaining 1% bacteria may allow the formation of colonies and biofilms on the substrates.
 Fig. 30  SLIPS for anti-fouling applications. (a) Scheme of SLIPS preparation. A flat substrate (I) is nano-patterned or roughened (II), chemically functionalized (III), and infused with a lubricant (IV), and the excess lubricant is removed (V). The “slippery” surface is highly immiscible to bacteria. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences. (b) Fluorous lubricant-coated spiky microparticles with anti-fouling properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

3.7 Fluoropolymers for cell culture and tissue engineering
Fluoropolymers also showed promising features in cell culture and tissue engineering.422–425 Fluorinated methacrylamide chitosan hydrogels were prepared as scaffolds for cell culture and tissue engineering.340,341,426 Owing to the high oxygen loading capability of perfluorocarbons, these hydrogels showed enhanced oxygen loading and extended release, and high metabolic activities for cultured cells.341 Even without oxygenation, the fluorinated hydrogels facilitated oxygen transportation from the culture medium. As a result, fluorinated hydrogel dressing under oxygenation efficiently promoted wound healing via accelerated hydroxyproline and collagen synthesis.341 In addition, the fluorinated chitosan hydrogels could relieve oxidative stress in cultured cells by down-regulation of ROS343 and promote the neuronal differentiation of cultured neural stem cells.427
PVDF and copolymers are piezoelectric materials and could produce electricity when subjected to an external mechanical force. This property of PVDF could mimic the function of sinoatrial node cells for cardiac pacemaking. PVDF-TrFE microfibers were deposited on poly(caprolactone) (PCL) magnetic nanofilms and used as a scaffold for the culture of cardiac cells.428 The scaffold created a suitable condition for cell attachment, alignment, and communication as well as electrical stimulation of the cultured cells. The cultured cardiac cells on the scaffold preserved cardiomyocyte contractility during a period of twelve days. In a separate study, PVDF-HFP was complexed with graphene to form a piezoelectric–dielectric flexible film, followed by coating the film with multilayers of polymers via a layer-by-layer (LBL) strategy.79 The nanofilm well supported cell culture with nearly 100% viability. An external mechanical force could efficiently trigger the release of loaded drugs from the nanofilm both in vitro and in vivo. Up to now, PVDF and copolymers have been intensively used as scaffolds for the regeneration of bone, muscle, cardiovascular and skin tissues.75–78,429–433 These piezoelectric polymers could also stimulate the neural differentiation of stem cells without using an external electrical stimulus.72–74,434
Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) has strong mechanical strength like bone tissues but poor osseointegration activity. Fluorination of PEEK was found to significantly increase osseointegration via enhanced cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity.405 Fluorinated PEEK stimulated much more newly formed bone tissues than control materials when implanted in vivo, and the formed bone is tightly anchored to the surface of fluorinated PEEK, indicating successful osseointegration by fluorinated PEEK. Besides, the materials possessed high antibacterial activities against P. gingivalis, one of the major periodontal pathogens. These fluorinated materials showed potent applications as orthopedic and dental implant materials. Besides PEEK, fluorinated graphene was reported to promote the adhesion and proliferation of bone marrow derived MSCs.435 The presence of fluorine significantly influenced the morphology, cytoskeletal and nuclear elongation of the MSCs. In addition, fluorinated graphene also promoted neurogenesis of the MSCs through channel confined cell elongation without chemical stimulation. The exact mechanisms of fluorination behind these interesting phenomena need in-depth investigations in the future.
4 Summary and perspectives
In summary, fluoropolymers have been widely used in biomedical applications ranging from gene, protein and drug delivery to MRI, anti-fouling/anti-bacterial as well as tissue engineering. Various methods such as radical polymerization, RAFT, ATRP, and polymer post-modification were proposed to synthesize water-soluble fluoropolymers for these applications. The fluoropolymers could be assembled into spherical micelles, worm-like micelles, vesicles, and more complicated assemblies by thin-film hydration or PISA. The assembled fluoropolymer nanostructures are stable in aqueous and buffer solutions, thus allowing efficient loading of drugs, proteins and nucleic acids like DNA, siRNA and miRNA. The hydrophobicity of fluorous tags on the polymer ensures high membrane binding affinity, which is beneficial for efficient endocytosis. Moreover, the fluorous ligands on fluoropolymers are lipophobic and anti-fouling, endowing the polymer with good serum resistance and tissue penetration capability. These properties make fluoropolymers promising candidates as carriers for intracellular delivery of biomolecules. Fluoropolymers also have high oxygen loading capability, and this property could be used to relieve the hypoxia of the tumor microenvironment and enhance PDT cancer therapy, or to promote cell growth during tissue regeneration. The fluorine atom with a high gyromagnetic ratio renders fluoropolymers as ideal contrasts for background-free MRI imaging. Moreover, the bio-inert and low surface energy properties of fluoropolymers are beneficial for anti-fouling and antibacterial applications.
Though noticeable progress has been achieved for fluoropolymers in these applications, there are still several challenges that need to be addressed. First, we should pay more attention to the toxicity and environmental issues of fluoropolymers. PFCs such as PFOA and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) are an emerging class of environmental pollutants. There are lots of studies reporting the immunotoxicity and adverse effects of PFOA and PFOS both in vitro and in vivo.436–442 Though there is no evidence to conclude that fluoropolymers will be of high concern for environmental and human health like PFOA and PFOS, the extreme persistence of fluoropolymers as well as the emissions associated with their synthesis, use and disposal aggravates the risk of human exposure to perfluoroalkyl substances.443 An extensive analysis by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) has established a tolerable weekly intake (TWI) of 4.4 ng kg−1 bw per week of perfluoroalkyl substances to reduce their body accumulation and protect against potential adverse effects in humans.444 The fate and safety concern of fluoropolymers in vivo should be figured out and need in-depth investigations. Fluoropolymers are generally non-degradable under physiological conditions and hardly metabolized by enzymes. To address this issue, fluoropolymers with a degradable backbone or side chains should be designed for biomedical applications. For example, polypeptides,445 poly(ε-caprolactone)s,446 and PLA447 were used as a scaffold to fabricate fluoropolymers. Besides, fluorous ligands containing an amine group could be used to synthesize biodegradable poly(aminoesters) using a responsive diacrylate crosslinker. Alternatively, fluorous ligands could be conjugated to biodegradable polymers using bioreducible disulfide linkers, ROS-responsive thioketal linkers, and acid-labile linkers such as imine/hydrozone, acetal/ketal, and maleic acid amide. Besides polymer degradability, the molecular weight and fluoroalkyl chain length are essential for body clearance. Our recent study by 18F positron emission tomography (PET) imaging demonstrated that fluorinated polylysine with a molecular weight below 10000 Da can be efficiently cleared from the liver within several hours.445 These fluorinated polylysine could be degraded into peptides and short fluorous chains such as HFA, which are low toxic and could be rapidly cleared. We can design fluoropolymers based on short fluorous chains like HFA, and these fluoropolymers can meet the requirements for efficient gene and protein delivery. Second, the blood circulation time for most fluoropolymers is short and should be prolonged to improve their performance when administered in vivo. To address this issue, fluoropolymers could be co-assembled with PEGylated lipids such as DSPE-PEG and cholesterol to formulate stealth lipid–polymer hybrid nanoparticles. Of course, the PEGylated lipids in the hybrid nanoparticles could be replaced by PEGylated fluoroalkyls to enhance the nanoparticle stability. Responsive linkers could be incorporated between PEG and the fluoroalkyl for site-specific drug delivery. Alternatively, the fluoropolymer assemblies could be coated with anionic polymers or cell membranes to shield the positive charges and prolong the blood circulation time. Third, though fluoropolymers are widely used as carriers for intracellular gene and protein delivery, the exact mechanisms of fluoropolymers and fluorocarbons in promoting the endocytosis and endolysosomal escape processes are still unknown. In-depth physicochemical investigations of the interactions of fluorocarbon-tagged species, fluoropolymers and assemblies with cell membranes and acidic compartments such as endosomes and lysosomes are required. In addition, the intracellular trafficking, localization and fate of fluoropolymers should be investigated in detail to better understand the fluorine effect of fluoropolymers during intracellular delivery. Similarly, fluorinated biomaterials have shown various beneficial effects in cell culture and tissue engineering, but the exact mechanism of fluorination behind the interesting phenomenon needs in-depth investigations. Finally, the performance of fluoropolymers in biomedical applications is highly dependent on their assembled nanostructures. Though lots of studies have investigated the structure–activity relationships of fluoropolymers in these applications, most of the attention was focused on the polymer chemistry rather than assembled structures. This issue should be paid more attention in future studies. We can expect that there will be a more prosperous future for fluoropolymers in biomedical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China, Synthetic Biology Research (No. 2019YFA0904500), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21725402 and 22005101), the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Functional and Intelligent Hybrid Materials and Devices (No. 2019B121203003), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M672609).
References
A. Vitale, R. Bongiovanni and B. Ameduri, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8835–8866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, H. Wu, S. I. Allec, B. M. Wong, D. S. Nguyen and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804602 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ojima, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 6358–6383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Miller and E. M. Sletten, ChemBioChem, 2020, 21, 3451–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pengo and L. Pasquato, J. Fluorine Chem., 2015, 177, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Yoder, D. Yüksel, L. Dafik and K. Kumar, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2006, 10, 576–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Muller, C. Faeh and F. Diederich, Science, 2007, 317, 1881–1886 CrossRef PubMed .
X. G. Hu, D. S. Thomas, R. Griffith and L. Hunter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6176–6179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. M. Gerling, M. Salwiczek, C. D. Cadicamo, H. Erdbrink, C. Czekelius, S. L. Grage, P. Wadhwani, A. S. Ulrich, M. Behrends, G. Haufe and B. Koksch, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 819–830 RSC .
J. J. Barchi, R. G. Karki, M. C. Nicklaus, M. A. Siddiqui, C. George, I. A. Mikhailopulo and V. E. Marquez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9048–9057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bucher, C. Sparr, W. B. Schweizer and R. Gilmour, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7637–7647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verhoork, P. M. Killoran and C. R. Coxon, Biochemistry, 2018, 57, 6132–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. N. Marsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2878–2886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, G. Ghirlanda, W. A. Petka, T. Nakajima, W. F. DeGrado and D. A. Tirrell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1494–1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kwon, T. H. Yoo, C. M. Othon, A. V. D. James, D. A. Tirrell and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17101–17106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Buer, J. L. Meagher, J. A. Stuckey and E. N. G. E. N. G. Marsh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4810–4815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsunemi, S. J. Bernardino, A. Mendoza, C. G. Jones and P. G. Harran, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 674–678 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Wolfe, C. M. Fadzen, R. L. Holden, M. Yao, G. J. Hanson and B. L. Pentelute, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4756–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuvienco, H. T. More, J. S. Haghpanah, R. S. Tu and J. K. Montclare, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 2273–2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Loureiro, R. Crespo, H. Borner, P. M. Martins, F. A. Rocha, M. Coelho, M. C. Pereira and S. Rocha, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2259–2264 RSC .
F. Guo, Q. Li and C. Zhou, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 9552–9565 RSC .
I. Tirotta, V. Dichiarante, C. Pigliacelli, G. Cavallo, G. Terraneo, F. B. Bombelli, P. Metrangolo and G. Resnati, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 1106–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Kasper, J. E. Hitro, S. R. Fitzgerald, J. M. Schnitter, J. J. Rutowski, J. A. Heck and J. L. Steinbacher, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 8095–8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Tian, J. Xing, W. Guo and X. Liang, MRS Commun., 2018, 8, 303–313 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Riess and M. P. Krafft, Biomaterials, 1998, 19, 1529–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, H. Cheng, C. Jiang, X. Qiu, K. Wang, W. Huan, A. Yuan, J. Wu and Y. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Houvenagel, L. Moine, G. Picheth, C. Dejean, A. Brulet, A. Chenneviere, V. Faugeras, N. Huang, O. Couture and N. Tsapis, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 3244–3256 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, M. Xu, Z. Cao, J. Gao, Y. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Xie, Q. Jiang, W. Wang and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13524–13537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Picheth, S. Houvenagel, C. Dejean, O. Couture, D. F. R. Alves, L. Moine and N. Tsapis, Acta Biomater., 2017, 64, 313–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Epstein, T. Wong, R. A. Belisle, E. M. Boggs and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, G. He, A. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Zhou, T. Hang, D. Liu, S. Xiao, H. J. Chen, F. Liu, L. Li, J. Wang and X. Xie, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 250–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, W. Megone, K. D. Q. Nguyen, S. Di Cio, M. Ramstedt and J. E. Gautrot, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1946–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bharatwaj, L. Wu, J. A. Whittum-Hudson and R. S. Da, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7376–7385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Conti, B. Bharatwaj, D. Brewer and R. S. Da, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 157, 406–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. L. Hong, B. Xu, Y. Nishiyama, W. Jiang, J. Zhu, G. Zhang, S. Kitagawa and S. Horike, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 14357–14364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cametti, B. Crousse, P. Metrangolo, R. Milani and G. Resnati, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 31–42 RSC .
H. Sawada, J. Fluorine Chem., 2003, 121, 111–130 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Tetrahedron, 2003, 59, 4475–4489 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang and D. P. Curran, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 11837–11865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, Y. Ling, A. Alsbaiee, C. Li, D. E. Helbling and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7689–7692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima and M. Sawamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15742–15748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kumarasamy, I. M. Manning, L. B. Collins, O. Coronell and F. A. Leibfarth, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 487–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima, M. Takenaka and M. Sawamoto, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 377–380 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Quan, H. Wen, S. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Shao and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24319–24327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Jiao, Y. Cai, Y. Zhang and H. Lu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5125–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Brittain, S. B. Ficarro, A. Brock and E. C. Peters, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 463–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Go, W. Uritboonthai, J. V. Apon, S. A. Trauger, A. Nordstrom, G. O'Maille, S. M. Brittain, E. C. Peters and G. Siuzdak, J. Proteome Res., 2007, 6, 1492–1499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Kim, J. R. Lee, J. W. Kang, S. J. Lee, G. C. Shin, W. S. Yeo, K. H. Kim, H. S. Park and K. P. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 157–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rong, C. Wang, L. Chen, Y. Yan and Y. Cheng, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, z1774 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Friesen and B. Améduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 81, 238–280 CrossRef CAS .
T. Soulestin, V. Ladmiral, F. D. Dos Santos and B. Améduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2017, 72, 16–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Mohammad, S. Shingdilwar, S. Banerjee and B. Ameduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 106, 101255 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, Polym. Rev., 2019, 59, 739–757 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jin, G. Lu, Y. Li and X. Huang, Acta Chim. Sin., 2018, 76, 739–748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Améduri, B. Boutevin and G. Kostov, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 105–187 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, L. Qian, X. Yuan, C. Zhou, Z. Li, J. Cheng, S. Xu, S. Wang, P. Pi and X. Wen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 760–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Li and Z. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18857–18868 RSC .
E. T. Kang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1481–1494 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Puts, P. Crouse and B. M. Ameduri, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1763–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2818–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Zhong, Y. Su, Y. Zhou, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 680–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kotz, P. Risch, D. Helmer and B. E. Rapp, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805982 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, C. J. Ruud, J. S. Price, H. Kim and N. C. Giebink, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 787–792 CrossRef PubMed .
A. F. Chandler-Temple, E. Wentrup-Byrne, H. J. Griesser, M. Jasieniak, A. K. Whittaker and L. Grondahl, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 15409–15417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, S. S. Dunn, P. Kim, M. Duffy, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4418–4422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Kim, J. Y. Kim, J. C. Lee, S. Park, H. R. Moon and D. P. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4385–4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Helmer, N. Keller, F. Kotz, F. Stolz, C. Greiner, T. M. Nargang, K. Sachsenheimer and B. E. Rapp, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15078 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Lee, R. Hinchet, T. Y. Kim, H. Ryu, W. Seung, H. J. Yoon and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5553–5558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zapsas, Y. Patil, Y. Gnanou, B. Ameduri and N. Hadjichristidis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 104, 101231 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Bouharras, M. Raihane and B. Ameduri, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 113, 100670 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Fine, R. F. Valentini, R. Bellamkonda and P. Aebischer, Biomaterials, 1991, 12, 775–780 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Valentini, T. G. Vargo, J. J. Gardella and P. Aebischer, Biomaterials, 1992, 13, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
N. Royo-Gascon, M. Wininger, J. I. Scheinbeim, B. L. Firestein and W. Craelius, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2013, 41, 112–122 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Cardoso, D. Correia, C. Ribeiro, M. Fernandes and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Polymers, 2018, 10, 161 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Rajabi, M. Jaffe and T. L. Arinzeh, Acta Biomater., 2015, 24, 12–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Lee, G. Collins and T. L. Arinzeh, Acta Biomater., 2011, 7, 3877–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hitscherich, S. Wu, R. Gordan, L. H. Xie, T. Arinzeh and E. J. Lee, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2016, 113, 1577–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. An, W. Tong, H. Li, Z. Ma, Y. Zhou, T. Huang and Y. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802136 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. M. Dang, J. K. Yuan, S. H. Yao and R. J. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6334–6365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Prateek, V. K. Thakur and R. K. Gupta, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4260–4317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. La, S. Qiu, D. K. Scott, R. Bakhtiari, J. W. P. Kuziek, K. E. Mathewson, J. Rieger and H. Chung, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1801033 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, M. A. Kelly, N. Bauer and W. You, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2401–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meyer, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 47, 70–91 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, U. A. Méndez Romero, X. Guo, E. Wang, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3085–3095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, E. Zhou and Z. Wei, Acta Phys. Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 1239–1249 CAS .
F. Karlicky, R. Kumara, M. Otyepka and R. Zboril, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6434–6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Liao, F. Shi, T. Lei, G. Chen, A. Pei, J. Sun, K. Yan, G. Zhou, J. Xie, C. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Liang, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11550–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, J. W. Suk, H. Chou, J. Lee, Y. Hao, Y. Wu, R. Piner, D. Akinwande, K. S. Kim and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2374–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, A. Masuda, R. Kawakami, K. Yarinome, R. Saito, Y. Nagase, T. Nemoto and Y. Okamura, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703139 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ji, P. Zhou, L. Zhong, A. Xu, A. Tsang and P. Chan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1701053 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, D. H. Lien, M. Amani, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5179–5185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, W. Zhao, Z. Ding, I. Verzhbitskiy, L. Li, J. Lu, J. Chen, G. Eda and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6457–6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ameduri, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18830–18841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Patil and B. Ameduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 703–739 CrossRef CAS .
R. Souzy, B. Ameduri and B. Boutevin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 75–106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hirao, K. Sugiyama and H. Yokoyama, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1393–1438 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Reisinger and M. A. Hillmyer, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 971–1005 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, J. Y. Kelly, G. W. Roberts and J. M. DeSimone, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2009, 47, 447–457 CrossRef CAS .
W. James Feast and E. Khosravi, J. Fluorine Chem., 1999, 100, 117–125 CrossRef .
Z. Feng, Q. Li, W. Wang, Q. Ni, Y. Wang, H. Song, C. Zhang, D. Kong, X. Liang and P. Huang, Biomaterials, 2020, 256, 120184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Li, G. Liu, Z. Deng, S. Wu, P. Li, Z. Xu, H. Xu and P. K. Chu, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 3013–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Oishi, S. Sumitani and Y. Nagasaki, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 1379–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, Y. Zhao, X. Shen, J. Lin and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, Y. Gu, Y. Zhao, Q. Quan, S. Han and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 919–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, B. Demir, S. Alcantara, V. Kumar, F. Han, H. G. Kelly, X. Tan, Y. Yu, W. Xu, J. Zhao, C. Zhang, H. Peng, C. Boyer, T. M. Woodruff, S. J. Kent, D. J. Searles and A. K. Whittaker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4729–4735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wallat, A. E. Czapar, C. Wang, A. M. Wen, K. S. Wek, X. Yu, N. F. Steinmetz and J. K. Pokorski, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 103–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Peng, I. Blakey, B. Dargaville, F. Rasoul, S. Rose and A. K. Whittaker, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 374–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anastasaki, B. Oschmann, J. Willenbacher, A. Melker, M. H. C. Van Son, N. P. Truong, M. W. Schulze, E. H. Discekici, A. J. McGrath, T. P. Davis, C. M. Bates and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 14675–14679 CrossRef .
E. H. Discekici, A. Anastasaki, R. Kaminker, J. Willenbacher, N. P. Truong, C. Fleischmann, B. Oschmann, D. J. Lunn, D. A. J. Read, T. P. Davis, C. M. Bates and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5939–5945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Jaye and E. M. Sletten, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 982–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Moonshi, C. Zhang, H. Peng, S. Puttick, S. Rose, N. M. Fisk, K. Bhakoo, B. W. Stringer, G. G. Qiao, P. A. Gurr and A. K. Whittaker, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8226–8239 RSC .
C. Fu, C. Zhang, H. Peng, F. Han, C. Baker, Y. Wu, H. Ta and A. K. Whittaker, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 5875–5882 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Rolfe, I. Blakey, O. Squires, H. Peng, N. R. Boase, C. Alexander, P. G. Parsons, G. M. Boyle, A. K. Whittaker and K. J. Thurecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2413–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Sanchez, C. Fu, R. Clayden-Zabik, H. Peng, K. Kempe and A. K. Whittaker, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 365–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tan, J. Lv, J. Hu, W. Shen, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 7230–7238 RSC .
K. Kolouchova, O. Sedlacek, D. Jirak, D. Babuka, J. Blahut, J. Kotek, M. Vit, J. Trousil, R. Konefal, O. Janouskova, B. Podhorska, M. Slouf and M. Hruby, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 3515–3524 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Wallat, A. E. Czapar, C. Wang, A. M. Wen, K. S. Wek, X. Yu, N. F. Steinmetz and J. K. Pokorski, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 103–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Gong, Y. Wang, L. Xing, P. F. Cui, J. B. Qiao, Y. J. He and H. L. Jiang, Int. J. Pharm., 2018, 535, 180–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xing, J. H. Gong, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. J. Huang, J. Zhao, F. Li, J. H. Wang, H. Wen and H. L. Jiang, Biomaterials, 2019, 206, 170–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. He, Y. Xiao, J. Zhang, X. Wu and X. Yu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 3526–3534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liu and X. Yu, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 182, 111666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. S. Moonshi, Y. Han, S. Puttick, H. Peng, B. J. A. Magoling, J. C. Reid, S. Bernardi, D. J. Searles, P. Král and A. K. Whittaker, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5953–5963 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. S. Moonshi, W. Wang, H. T. Ta, Y. Han, F. Y. Han, H. Peng, P. Král, B. E. Rolfe, J. J. Gooding, K. Gaus and A. K. Whittaker, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9162–9176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, L. Li, F. Y. Han, X. Yu, X. Tan, C. Fu, Z. P. Xu and A. K. Whittaker, Small, 2019, 15, 1902309 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Ko, T. Terashima, M. Sawamoto and H. D. Maynard, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 9222–9232 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Thurecht, I. Blakey, H. Peng, O. Squires, S. Hsu, C. Alexander and A. K. Whittaker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5336–5337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, J. Tang, A. Pye, T. Liu, C. Zhang, X. Tan, F. Han, H. Peng and A. K. Whittaker, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2043–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Peng, K. J. Thurecht, S. Puttick and A. K. Whittaker, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2827–2839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Percec, M. R. Imam, M. Peterca and P. Leowanawat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4408–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, Q. Wu, Y. Cheng, J. Zhang, J. Wu and T. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13182–13184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, T. Xu and Y. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3856–3891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, M. E. Johnson, N. J. Oldenhuis, T. N. Tiambeng and Z. Guan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 303–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, Y. Yang, S. Bo, Y. Li, S. Chen, Z. Yang, X. Zheng, Z. X. Jiang and X. Zhou, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 4443–4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Eldredge, M. E. Johnson, Y. Cao, L. Zhang, C. Zhao, Z. Liu, Q. Yang and Z. Guan, Biomaterials, 2018, 178, 458–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Jiang, X. Liu, E. K. Jeong and Y. B. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4755–4758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiao, S. E. Sherman, S. E. Wilner, X. Zhou, C. Dazen, T. Baumgart, E. H. Reed, D. A. Hammer, W. Shinoda, M. L. Klein and V. Percec, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, E7045–E7053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Torre, Q. Xiao, I. Buzzacchera, S. E. Sherman, K. Rahimi, N. Y. Kostina, C. Rodriguez-Emmenegger, M. Moller, C. J. Wilson, M. L. Klein, M. C. Good and V. Percec, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 15378–15385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiao, J. D. Rubien, Z. Wang, E. H. Reed, D. A. Hammer, D. Sahoo, P. A. Heiney, S. S. Yadavalli, M. Goulian, S. E. Wilner, T. Baumgart, S. A. Vinogradov, M. L. Klein and V. Percec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12655–12663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Jiang and Y. B. Yu, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Bo, T. Feng, X. Qin, Y. Wan, S. Jiang, C. Li, J. Lin, T. Wang, X. Zhou, Z. X. Jiang and P. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806444 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bo, Y. Yuan, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, S. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. X. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3875–3878 RSC .
Y. Song, M. Wang, S. Li, H. Jin, X. Cai, D. Du, H. Li, C. Chen and Y. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1803544 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, Z. Yang, S. Chen, X. Zheng, X. Zhou and Z. X. Jiang, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 1281–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Yang and Z. X. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1895–1898 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Wu, Z. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. X. Jiang, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 725–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, H. Wang, D. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Han, R. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Yang, C. J. Jafta, D. Clemens and U. Keiderling, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 827–833 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, H. Liu, L. Li and Y. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3053 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Wang, J. Xiao and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 5407–5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, R. Jin, J. Wang, D. Yue, Q. Jiang, Y. Wu and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5821–5832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, Acta Polym. Sin., 2017, 8, 1234–1245 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Hu, T. Li, H. Liu, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11647–11651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Song, X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Li, T. He, N. Wang, S. Yang, C. Yu, T. Yin, Y. Wen, Z. He, X. Wei, W. Su, Q. Wu, S. Yao, C. Gong and Y. Wei, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 95–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Zhou, F. Yu, C. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Hang, K. Wang, J. Li, M. Sun and D. Oupicky, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6620–6636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Wang, A. Ullah, Y. Huai and Y. Xu, Eur, J. Pharm. Sci., 2020, 152, 105433 CAS .
G. Chen, K. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Wu, M. Sun and D. Oupický, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700978 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wu, X. Luo, H. Wu, Q. Zhang, K. Wang, M. Sun and D. Oupicky, Bioconjugate Chem., 2020, 31, 698–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, Z. Yuan, Y. Xu, M. Wei, Z. Fang and W. E. Yuan, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2129–2142 RSC .
G. J. Lee and T. I. Kim, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2019, 107, 2468–2478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, Y. Yang, W. Xue and Z. Liu, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 644–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Xu, P. Wu and K. Wang, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2020, 55, 101403 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kretzmann, C. W. Evans, L. Feng, N. B. Lawler, M. Norret, M. J. Higgins and K. S. Iyer, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 9074–9080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Viola, A. A. Shah, J. A. Kretzmann, C. W. Evans, M. Norret, K. S. Iyer and L. C. Hool, Nanomedicine, 2020, 29, 102264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Shen, C. Qian, D. Oupicky and M. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, z9240 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, C. Ou, L. Wang, X. Liu, J. Yang, X. Wang, M. Wang, M. Shen, Q. Wu and C. Gong, J. Controlled Release, 2020, 320, 253–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, X. Chen, L. Fu, J. Zhu, M. Fan, J. Chen, C. Yang, G. Yang, L. Wu, G. Mao, X. Yang, X. Mou, Z. Gu and X. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22479–22491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Kretzmann, D. Ho, C. W. Evans, J. Plani-Lam, B. Garcia-Bloj, A. E. Mohamed, M. L. O'Mara, E. Ford, D. Tan, R. Lister, P. Blancafort, M. Norret and K. S. Iyer, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2923–2930 RSC .
Q. Deng, X. Li, L. Zhu, H. He, D. Chen, Y. Chen and L. Yin, Biomater. Sci., 2017, 5, 1174–1182 RSC .
L. Li, X. Li, Y. Wu, L. Song, X. Yang, T. He, N. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Zeng, Q. Wu, Z. Qian, Y. Wei and C. Gong, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 1633–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, K. Wang, Q. Hu, L. Ding, F. Yu, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Li, M. Sun and D. Oupicky, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4457–4466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, H. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9402–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Wang, H. Chen, H. Liu, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1354–1360 RSC .
M. Wang and Y. Cheng, Acta Biomater., 2016, 46, 204–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Hu, X. Cai, J. Xiao and Y. Cheng, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2319–2322 RSC .
L. Li, L. Song, X. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wu, T. He, N. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Zeng, L. Yang, Q. Wu, Y. Wei and C. Gong, Biomaterials, 2016, 111, 124–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Shen, Y. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Zhu, C. Qian, M. Sun and D. Oupicky, Adv. Ther., 2019, 2, 1900039 CrossRef .
Z. Yuan, X. Guo, M. Wei, Y. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Feng and W. Yuan, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 34 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, M. Gao, M. Song, Y. Li, D. Zhang, D. Xu, L. You, L. Wang, R. Zhuang, X. Su, T. Liu, J. Du and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5898–5906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xue, Y. Yan, P. Kos, X. Chen and D. J. Siegwart, Drug Delivery Transl. Res., 2020, 11, 255–260 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lv, H. Chang, Y. Wang, M. Wang, J. Xiao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 642–650 RSC .
M. E. Johnson, J. Shon, B. M. Guan, J. P. Patterson, N. J. Oldenhuis, A. C. Eldredge, N. C. Gianneschi and Z. Guan, Bioconjugate Chem., 2016, 27, 1784–1788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shen, H. Wang, Y. Ling-Hu, J. Lv, H. Chang and Y. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 6468–6474 RSC .
Q. Xiong, Y. Li, K. Zhou, P. Chen, H. Guo, L. Chen, J. Ding, T. Song and J. Shi, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 758–762 RSC .
T. Luo, X. He, J. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Wang and X. Yu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 6053–6062 RSC .
Z. Zhang, W. Shen, J. Ling, Y. Yan, J. Hu and Y. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1377 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. H. Liu, Z. Huang, B. Wang, Y. M. Zhang and X. Q. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8542–8553 RSC .
Y. Qi, H. Song, H. Xiao, G. Cheng, B. Yu and F. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1803061 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Ma, N. Gong, X. Liu, L. Liu, X. Ye, B. Hu, C. Li, J. H. Tian, A. Magrini, J. Zhang, W. Guo, J. F. Xing, M. Bottini and X. J. Liang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6301–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Wang, D. Deng, Z. Xiao, Z. Dong, Z. Wang, Q. Lei, S. Gao, G. Huang, E. Zhang, G. Zeng, Z. Wen, S. Wu and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1586–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 6603–6613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zeng, L. Ma, W. Yang, S. Lei, M. Wang, Y. You, Y. Zhao and X. Ge, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 2483–2494 RSC .
Y. P. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. H. Liu, J. H. Zhang, Q. Y. Yu, Z. Huang and X. Q. Yu, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2019, 162, 602–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, Y. Wang, N. Shao, H. Chang and Y. Cheng, Acta Biomater., 2015, 22, 111–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Wang, D. C. Wu, H. X. Xu and Y. Z. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, L. Wang, S. Ding and Y. You, Macromol. Biosci., 2017, 17, 1700114 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ge, J. Yang, S. Duan, Y. Liu, F. Meng and L. Yin, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1738–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zha, Y. Hu, J. F. Mukerabigwi, W. Chen, Y. Wang, C. He and Z. Ge, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Thuronyi, T. M. Privalsky and M. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13637–13640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Krieg, H. Weissman, E. Shimoni, O. U. A. Bar and B. Rybtchinski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9443–9452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Lin, Y. C. Ou, A. G. Cheetham and H. Cui, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 1088–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mukerjee and A. Y. S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem., 1976, 80, 1388–1390 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Yoder, V. Kalsani, S. Schuy, R. Vogel, A. Janshoff and K. Kumar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9037–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elbert, T. Folda and H. Ringsdorf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 7687–7692 CrossRef CAS .
C. Singh, A. M. Jackson, F. Stellacci and S. C. Glotzer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16377–16379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gentilini, F. Evangelista, P. Rudolf, P. Franchi, M. Lucarini and L. Pasquato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15678–15682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Şologan, M. Boccalon, S. Bidoggia, C. Gentilini, L. Pasquato and P. Pengo, Supramol. Chem., 2017, 29, 808–822 CrossRef .
P. Posocco, C. Gentilini, S. Bidoggia, A. Pace, P. Franchi, M. Lucarini, M. Fermeglia, S. Pricl and L. Pasquato, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7243–7253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gentilini, P. Franchi, E. Mileo, S. Polizzi, M. Lucarini and L. Pasquato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3060–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bilgicer and K. Kumar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 15324–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hsu, X. H. Dong, Z. Lin, B. Ni, P. Lu, Z. Jiang, D. Tian, A. C. Shi, E. L. Thomas and S. Z. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 919–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Kaberov, B. Verbraeken, A. Riabtseva, J. Brus, A. Radulescu, Y. Talmon, P. Stepanek, R. Hoogenboom and S. K. Filippov, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6047–6056 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima and M. Sawamoto, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2901–2908 CrossRef CAS .
D. de Rochambeau, M. Barłóg, T. G. W. Edwardson, J. J. Fakhoury, R. S. Stein, H. S. Bazzi and H. F. Sleiman, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 4998–5003 RSC .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima, M. Sawamoto and H. D. Maynard, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 240–247 RSC .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima, H. D. Maynard and M. Sawamoto, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6694–6698 RSC .
X. Li, X. Huo, H. Han and S. Lin, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2017, 35, 1363–1372 CrossRef CAS .
L. Latxague, M. A. Ramin, A. Appavoo, P. Berto, M. Maisani, C. Ehret, O. Chassande and P. Barthelemy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4517–4521 CrossRef CAS .
V. Percec, M. Glodde, M. Peterca, A. Rapp, I. Schnell, H. W. Spiess, T. K. Bera, Y. Miura, V. S. K. Balagurusamy, E. Aqad and P. A. Heiney, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 6298–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, H. Guo, J. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. An, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Criscione, B. L. Le, E. Stern, M. Brennan, C. Rahner, X. Papademetris and T. M. Fahmy, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 3946–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tae, J. A. Kornfield and J. A. Hubbell, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 5259–5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, E. Kesselman, Y. Talmon, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, Science, 2004, 306, 98–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Babinot, E. Renard, B. Le Droumaguet, J. M. Guigner, S. Mura, J. Nicolas, P. Couvreur and V. Langlois, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 362–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fang, A. Walther, A. Wolf, Y. Xu, J. Yuan and A. H. Muller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2877–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Liu, H. Hu, T. Y. Li, A. M. Johri, X. Li and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14291–14294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koda, T. Terashima and M. Sawamoto, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4534–4543 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sadeghi, J. Kronenberg and A. Asatekin, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 95–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lv, Z. An and P. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1397 CrossRef .
M. Huo, D. Li, G. Song, J. Zhang, D. Wu, Y. Wei and J. Yuan, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, e1700840 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, H. Yao and R. He, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2018, 37, 3804–3812 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, H. T. Ta, C. Zhang and A. K. Whittaker, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1145–1156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lostalé-Seijo and J. Montenegro, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 258–277 CrossRef .
D. W. Pack, A. S. Hoffman, S. Pun and P. S. Stayton, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2005, 4, 581–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Lächelt and E. Wagner, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11043–11078 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shen, Q. Wang, Y. Shen, X. Gao, L. Li, Y. Yan, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1326–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, K. Hu and Y. Cheng, Acta Biomater., 2016, 35, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Huang, H. Chang, J. Xiao and Y. Cheng, Biomater. Sci., 2016, 4, 375–390 RSC .
J. Yang, Q. Zhang, H. Chang and Y. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5274–5300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Tian, Y. Wu, F. Yu, R. Wang, H. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Zhou and Z. Li, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 156–165 CAS .
H. Chang, J. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Lv and Y. Cheng, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 2371–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Chen, A. Tintaru, Y. Cao, J. Liu, F. Ziarelli, J. Tang, H. Guo, R. Rosas, S. Giorgio, L. Charles, P. Rocchi and L. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8594–8603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, K. Hu and Y. Cheng, Acta Biomater., 2016, 35, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shen, R. Wang, Q. Fan, X. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. Li and Y. Cheng, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 146–157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, N. Shao, Y. Wang and Y. Cheng, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 584–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Wang, W. Yang and Y. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17680–17687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, N. Shao, Y. Chen and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9187–9198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Miao, F. Wang and Y. Cheng, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2194–2201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mastrobattista and W. E. Hennink, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 10–12 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Zhou, F. Yu, C. Zhu, Z. Li, Y. Hang, K. Wang, J. Li, M. Sun and D. Oupicky, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6620–6636 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, H. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9402–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guan, L. Wang and J. Lin, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 797–807 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schwieger, J. Blaffert, Z. Li, J. Kressler and A. Blume, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 8102–8115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, H. Chang, J. Lv, C. Jiang, Z. Li, F. Wang, H. Wang, M. Wang, C. Liu, X. Wang, N. Shao, B. He, W. Shen, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oztuna and H. Nazir, J. Turk. Chem. Soc., Sect. A, 2018, 5, 1295–1302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Öztuna and H. Nazır, Eur. Res. J., 2018, 4, 92–100 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, H. Xue, M. Gao, Q. Wang and H. Yang, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2019, 107, 2132–2139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Gok, J. Natural Appl. Sci., 2019, 23, 885–891 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. H. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. P. Xiao, R. M. Zhao and X. Q. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 2860–2868 RSC .
V. Metelev, S. Zhang, S. Zheng, A. T. N. Kumar and J. A. Bogdanov, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 3354–3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Paiuk, N. Y. Mitina, O. S. Myagkota, K. A. Volianiuk, N. Musat, G. Z. Stryganyuk, O. V. Reshetnyak, N. I. Kinash, O. I. Hevus, Y. G. Shermolovich and A. S. Zaichenko, Biopolym. Cell, 2018, 34, 207–217 Search PubMed .
H. Chang, H. Wang, N. Shao, M. Wang, X. Wang and Y. Cheng, Bioconjugate Chem., 2014, 25, 342–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Paiuk, N. Mitina, M. Slouf, E. Pavlova, N. Finiuk, N. Kinash, A. Karkhut, N. Manko, T. Gromovoy, O. Hevus, Y. Shermolovich, R. Stoika and A. Zaichenko, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 174, 393–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, S. Yin, T. Liu, D. Ding and K. Wang, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 241–251 CAS .
G. Chen, G. Chen, K. Wang, K. Wang, P. Wu, P. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhou, L. Yin, L. Yin, M. Sun, M. Sun, D. Oupický and D. Oupický, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3746–3761 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kretzmann, C. W. Evans, C. Moses, A. Sorolla, A. L. Kretzmann, E. Wang, D. Ho, M. J. Hackett, B. F. Dessauvagie, N. M. Smith, A. D. Redfern, C. Waryah, M. Norret, K. S. Iyer and P. Blancafort, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7718–7727 RSC .
G. Zuo, A. Xie, X. Pan, T. Su, J. Li and W. Dong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2376–2385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, X. Yan, G. Ostermeyer, S. Li, L. Qu, D. Du, Z. Li and Y. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 10369–10376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Carrillo-Carrion, M. Atabakhshi-Kashi, M. Carril, K. Khajeh and W. J. Parak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5033–5036 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Q. Lei, F. Wang, D. Deng, S. Wang, L. Tian, W. Shen, Y. Cheng, Z. Liu and S. Wu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900936 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, R. Deng, Y. Su and C. Yang, Oncotarget, 2017, 8, 89837–89847 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ren, J. Lv, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4711–4719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, J. Lv, X. Gao, X. Wang, H. Wang, H. Chen, X. He, L. Li and Y. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1678–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, Q. Fan, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2019, 218, 119358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, T. Wan, H. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Ping and Y. Cheng, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, w8922 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, J. Shen, D. Li and Y. Cheng, Theranostics, 2021, 11, 614–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, E. Tan, Y. Wang, Q. Fan, J. Yu and Y. Cheng, J. Controlled Release, 2020, 320, 412–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Shen, B. Li, T. Li, H. Chang and Y. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1956–1965 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, E. Tan, Y. Xu, J. Lv and Y. Cheng, Bioconjugate Chem., 2019, 30, 413–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, C. Liu, K. Lv, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 620–628 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 3741–3750 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Y. Yan, L. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2019, 203, 63–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, C. Wang, H. Li, Z. Li, Q. Fan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8600–8607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, B. He, J. Yu, Y. Wang, C. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Hu, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2018, 182, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. Wang, L. Xu, Y. Chao, C. Wang, X. Han, Z. Dong, H. Chang, R. Peng, Y. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2019, 207, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Lv, Q. Zhuang, Z. Yang, Z. Cao, L. Xu, P. Pei, C. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Dong, Y. Chao, C. Wang, K. Yang, R. Peng, Y. Cheng and Z. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 1043–1052 CrossRef .
Y. Takaoka, T. Sakamoto, S. Tsukiji, M. Narazaki, T. Matsuda, H. Tochio, M. Shirakawa and I. Hamachi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 557–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Kislukhin, H. Xu, S. R. Adams, K. H. Narsinh, R. Y. Tsien and E. T. Ahrens, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 662–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tirotta, A. Mastropietro, C. Cordiglieri, L. Gazzera, F. Baggi, G. Baselli, M. G. Bruzzone, I. Zucca, G. Cavallo, G. Terraneo, B. F. Baldelli, P. Metrangolo and G. Resnati, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8524–8527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Ahrens and J. W. Bulte, Nat. Rev. Immunol., 2013, 13, 755–763 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Preslar, F. Tantakitti, K. Park, S. Zhang, S. I. Stupp and T. J. Meade, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7376–7384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Temme, C. Grapentin, C. Quast, C. Jacoby, M. Grandoch, Z. Ding, C. Owenier, F. Mayenfels, J. W. Fischer, R. Schubert, J. Schrader and U. Flogel, Circulation, 2015, 131, 1405–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, R. Jiang, C. Guo, X. Bai, S. Xu and L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5890–5894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srinivas, P. Boehm-Sturm, C. G. Figdor, I. J. de Vries and M. Hoehn, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 8830–8840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jirak, A. Galisova, K. Kolouchova, D. Babuka and M. Hruby, MAGMA, 2019, 32, 173–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bartusik and B. Tomanek, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 1056–1064 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bartusik and D. Aebisher, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2014, 68, 813–817 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hequet, C. Henoumont, R. N. Muller and S. Laurent, Future Med. Chem., 2019, 11, 1157–1175 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bouvain, S. Temme and U. Flogel, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2020, 7, e1639 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, M. Song, J. Tang, G. Hu, S. Xu, Z. Guo, N. Li, J. Cui, X. Zhang, X. Chen and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1355–1362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rho, E. Stares, S. R. Adams, D. Lister, B. Leach and E. T. Ahrens, Mol. Imaging Biol., 2020, 22, 665–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srinivas, L. J. Cruz, F. Bonetto, A. Heerschap, C. G. Figdor and I. J. de Vries, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7070–7077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mastrogiacomo, W. Dou, O. Koshkina, O. C. Boerman, J. A. Jansen, A. Heerschap, M. Srinivas and X. F. Walboomers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22149–22159 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Janjic, P. Shao, S. Zhang, X. Yang, S. K. Patel and M. Bai, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 4958–4968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Diaz-Lopez, N. Tsapis and E. Fattal, Pharm. Res., 2010, 27, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srinivas, P. A. Morel, L. A. Ernst, D. H. Laidlaw and E. T. Ahrens, Magn. Reson. Med., 2007, 58, 725–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Srinivas, M. S. Turner, J. M. Janjic, P. A. Morel, D. H. Laidlaw and E. T. Ahrens, Magn. Reson. Med., 2009, 62, 747–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Janjic, M. Srinivas, D. K. Kadayakkara and E. T. Ahrens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2832–2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Ahrens, B. M. Helfer, C. F. O'Hanlon and C. Schirda, Magn. Reson. Med., 2014, 72, 1696–1701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Yu, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2013, 5, 646–661 CAS .
M. T. McMahon and J. W. M. Bulte, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 10, e1496 Search PubMed .
X. Yue, M. B. Taraban, L. L. Hyland, Y. B. Yu and A. I. U. S. Argonne National Lab. ANL, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 8879–8887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, A. M. Nyström, L. Zhang, K. T. Powell, Y. Li, C. Cheng, S. A. Wickline and K. L. Wooley, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2826–2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Peng, K. J. Thurecht, S. Puttick and A. K. Whittaker, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 4480 RSC .
K. Wang, H. Peng, K. J. Thurecht, S. Puttick and A. K. Whittaker, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 1760–1771 RSC .
X. Huang, G. Huang, S. Zhang, K. Sagiyama, O. Togao, X. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Li, T. C. Soesbe, B. D. Sumer, M. Takahashi, A. D. Sherry and J. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8074–8078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Langereis, J. Keupp, J. L. van Velthoven, I. H. de Roos, D. Burdinski, J. A. Pikkemaat and H. Grull, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1380–1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. S. Moonshi, H. Peng, S. Puttick, J. Reid, S. Bernardi, D. J. Searles and A. K. Whittaker, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
O. Munkhbat, M. Canakci, S. Zheng, W. Hu, B. Osborne, A. A. Bogdanov and S. Thayumanavan, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 790–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, W. Guo, G. Yang, H. Song, Y. Wang, C. Wang, D. Kong and W. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18532–18542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lammers, M. E. Mertens, P. Schuster, K. Rahimi, Y. Shi, V. Schulz, A. J. C. Kuehne, S. Jockenhoevel and F. Kiessling, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2669–2671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. He, Q. Jiang, D. Yue, X. Xu and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28468–28479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Jiang, M. Wu, Y. Tian and Z. Niu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11732–11736 RSC .
S. Ma, J. Zhou, A. R. M. Wali, Y. He, X. Xu, J. Z. Tang and Z. Gu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2015, 26, 219 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Du, Z. Xu, A. M. Nystrom, K. Zhang, J. R. Leonard and K. L. Wooley, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 2492–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Belabassi, J. Moreau, V. Gheran, C. Henoumont, A. Robert, M. Callewaert, G. Rigaux, C. Cadiou, E. L. Vander, S. Laurent, R. N. Muller, A. Dinischiotu, S. N. Voicu and F. Chuburu, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 2756–2766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, J. Yu, B. Zhang and L. Wu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2017, 218, 1700090 CrossRef .
J. Gao, B. Yu, C. Li, M. Xu, Z. Cao, X. Xie, W. Wang and J. Liu, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 174, 416–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, W. Guo, S. W. Chu and C. S. Ha, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7498–7500 RSC .
G. O. Brown, C. Bergquist, P. Ferm and K. L. Wooley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11238–11239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, X. Zeng, Y. Zheng, X. Wang and R. Tang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 208, 59–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yan, J. Wang, P. Zhang, L. Hu, X. Wang, G. Yang, S. Fu, X. Cheng and R. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 2063–2073 RSC .
K. Kooiman, M. R. Bohmer, M. Emmer, H. J. Vos, C. Chlon, W. T. Shi, C. S. Hall, S. H. de Winter, K. Schroen, M. Versluis, N. de Jong and A. van Wamel, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 133, 109–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. McInnes, T. D. Michl, B. Delalat, S. A. Al-Bataineh, B. R. Coad, K. Vasilev, H. J. Griesser and N. H. Voelcker, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4467–4476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, T. Liu, W. Wang, C. A. Bell, Y. Han, C. Fu, H. Peng, X. Tan, P. Kral, K. Gaus, J. J. Gooding and A. K. Whittaker, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7425–7434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wallat, J. K. Harrison and J. K. Pokorski, Mol. Pharm., 2018, 15, 2954–2962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, L. Feng, C. Liang, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6145–6153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, Z. Yang, S. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Song, G. Yu, W. Fan, Y. Dai, J. Wang, L. Shan, G. Niu, Q. Fan and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2610–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Day, D. A. Estabrook, J. K. Logan and E. M. Sletten, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 13043–13046 RSC .
D. Hu, M. Pan, Y. Yu, A. Sun, K. Shi, Y. Qu and Z. Qian, View, 2020, 1, e6 Search PubMed .
P. S. Patil, N. Fountas-Davis, H. Huang, M. Michelle Evancho-Chapman, J. A. Fulton, L. P. Shriver and N. D. Leipzig, Acta Biomater., 2016, 36, 164–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wijekoon, N. Fountas-Davis and N. D. Leipzig, Acta Biomater., 2013, 9, 5653–5664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mandracchia, A. P. Piccionello, G. Pitarresi, A. Pace, S. Buscemi and G. Giammona, Macromol. Biosci., 2007, 7, 836–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Patil and N. D. Leipzig, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2017, 105, 2368–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. M. Li, H. Yu, K. Deng, W. Zhou, C. X. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. H. Li, R. X. Zhuo and S. W. Huang, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 3096–3107 RSC .
S. Ma, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. He, C. Tian, X. Xu and Z. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7731–7742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wallat, K. S. Wek, P. L. Chariou, B. L. Carpenter, R. A. Ghiladi, N. F. Steinmetz and J. K. Pokorski, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 3195–3202 RSC .
Z. Liu, Y. Xue, M. Wu, G. Yang, M. Lan and W. Zhang, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 4563–4573 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Xue, J. Tian, Z. Liu, A. Zhuang, P. Gu, H. Zhou, W. Zhang and X. Fan, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 237, 116119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Yu, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Zhou, S. Chen and Z. X. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3617–3620 RSC .
Z. Liu, M. Wu, Y. Xue, C. Chen, F. R. Wurm, M. Lan and W. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2415–2418 RSC .
P. Yuan, Z. Ruan, W. Jiang, L. Liu, J. Dou, T. Li and L. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 2323–2331 RSC .
D. Tao, L. Feng, Y. Chao, C. Liang, X. Song, H. Wang, K. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804901 CrossRef .
G. Li, S. Yuan, D. Deng, T. Ou, Y. Li, R. Sun, Q. Lei, X. Wang, W. Shen, Y. Cheng, Z. Liu and S. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901932 CrossRef .
S. Pushalkar, G. Ghosh, Q. Xu, Y. Liu, A. A. Ghogare, C. Atem, A. Greer, D. Saxena and A. M. Lyons, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25819–25829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu and W. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800596 CrossRef .
W. J. Yang, K. Neoh, E. Kang, S. L. Teo and D. Rittschof, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1017–1042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bertani, P. Metrangolo, A. Moiana, E. Perez, T. Pilati, G. Resnati, I. Rico Lattes and A. Sassi, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1197–1201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torii, Q. Cheng, H. Mori, M. J. Lipinski, E. Acampado, L. Perkins, S. F. Hossainy, S. D. Pacetti, F. D. Kolodgie, R. Virmani and A. V. Finn, Eurointervention, 2019, 14, 1685–1693 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, J. Park, H. Koo, M. S. Kim and S. D. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43420–43428 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ghogare, J. M. Miller, B. Mondal, A. M. Lyons, K. A. Cengel, T. M. Busch and A. Greer, Photochem. Photobiol., 2016, 92, 166–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Teh, A. Bansal, C. Chai, T. B. Toh, R. Tucker, G. Gammad, Y. Yeo, Z. Lei, X. Zheng, F. Yang, J. S. Ho, N. Bolem, B. C. Wu, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, L. Hooi, G. S. Dawe, C. Libedinsky, W. Y. Ong, B. Halliwell, E. K. Chow, K. L. Lim, Y. Zhang and B. K. Kennedy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2001459 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, P. Kwong and M. Gupta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12701–12707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Massa, M. L. Yang, J. Y. Ho, J. L. Brash and J. P. Santerre, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 7367–7376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Khalifehzadeh, W. Ciridon and B. D. Ratner, Acta Biomater., 2018, 78, 23–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Katayama, T. Kubo, T. Akasaka, Y. Ino, K. Kimura, H. Okura, T. Shinke, K. Igarashi, K. Kadota, K. Kozuma, K. Tanabe, Y. Nakagawa, T. Muramatsu, Y. Morino and T. Kimura, J. Cardiol., 2017, 70, 530–536 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Machairioti, P. Petrou, H. T. Oh, J. K. Lee, S. Kakabakos, P. Argitis and M. Chatzichristidi, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 178, 208–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and H. Zuilhof, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2408–2412 RSC .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1664–1670 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, Y. Zhao, Z. Xu and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604261 CrossRef .
A. A. Thorpe, V. Peters, J. R. Smith, T. G. Nevell and J. Tsibouklis, J. Fluorine Chem., 2000, 104, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martinez-Campos, T. Elzein, A. Bejjani, M. J. Garcia-Granda, A. Santos-Coquillat, V. Ramos, A. Munoz-Bonilla and J. Rodriguez-Hernandez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6344–6353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li and J. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4070–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, B. Ma, T. Pan, S. Chen and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ernsting, G. C. Bonin, M. Yang, R. S. Labow and J. P. Santerre, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 6536–6546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Crombez, P. Chevallier, R. C. Gaudreault, E. Petitclerc, D. Mantovani and G. Laroche, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 7402–7409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ogino, K. Naemura, S. Sasaki, J. Minami, T. Kano, N. Ito, R. Kasai, F. Kamijyo, N. Kusumoto, K. Akimoto, K. Tanaka, K. Shinohara and K. Yokoyama, J. Artif. Organs, 2019, 22, 300–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Chin-Quee, S. H. Hsu, K. L. Nguyen-Ehrenreich, J. T. Tai, G. M. Abraham, S. D. Pacetti, Y. F. Chan, G. Nakazawa, F. D. Kolodgie, R. Virmani, N. N. Ding and L. A. Coleman, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 648–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kamberi, D. Pinson, S. Pacetti, L. Perkins, S. Hossainy, H. Mori, R. J. Rapoza, F. Kolodgie and R. Virmani, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2018, 106, 1721–1729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Guex, L. Weidenbacher, K. Maniura-Weber, R. M. Rossi and G. Fortunato, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1700081 CrossRef .
B. M. Teska, J. M. Brake, G. S. Tronto and J. F. Carpenter, J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 105, 2053–2065 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, R. Guo, M. Björnmalm, J. Richardson, L. Li, C. Peng, N. Bertleff-Zieschang, W. Xu, J. Jiang and F. Caruso, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1040–1047 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Boinovich, A. G. Domantovskiy, A. M. Emelyanenko, A. S. Pashinin, A. A. Ionin, S. I. Kudryashov and P. N. Saltuganov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2080–2085 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Daniels, E. B. Iezzi, P. A. Fulmer and J. H. Wynne, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 95, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Reid, M. A. Freire, H. Yao, H. Sue and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Badv, S. M. Imani, J. I. Weitz and T. F. Didar, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10890–10902 CrossRef .
S. M. Imani, M. Badv, A. Shakeri, H. Yousefi, D. Yip, C. Fine and T. F. Didar, Lab Chip, 2019, 19, 3228–3237 RSC .
Z. Wang and H. Zuilhof, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 6310–6318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Sarvothaman, K. S. Kim, B. Seale, P. M. Brodersen, G. C. Walker and A. R. Wheeler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 506–515 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gan, A. Mueller and K. L. Wooley, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Chem., 2003, 41, 3531–3540 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Bartels, C. Cheng, K. T. Powell, J. Xu and K. L. Wooley, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2007, 208, 1676–1687 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Gudipati, J. A. Finlay, J. A. Callow, M. E. Callow and K. L. Wooley, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3044–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Imbesi, N. V. Gohad, M. J. Eller, B. Orihuela, D. Rittschof, E. A. Schweikert, A. S. Mount and K. L. Wooley, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colak and G. N. Tew, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 1233–1239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Wu, X. H. Zhang, L. Huang, L. F. Ma and C. J. Liu, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 11101–11109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, C. Wu, J. Hu, X. Huang, G. Lu and C. Feng, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 1235–1241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Wagner, J. Thiele, M. Weinhart, L. Mazutis, D. A. Weitz, W. T. Huck and R. Haag, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 65–69 RSC .
K. K. Goli, O. J. Rojas and J. Genzer, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 3769–3779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, S. Guo, D. Janczewski, F. J. Velandia, S. L. Teo and G. J. Vancso, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 288–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jakobi, J. Schwarze, J. A. Finlay, K. A. Nolte, S. Spollmann, H. W. Becker, A. S. Clare and A. Rosenhahn, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 402–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Martinelli, S. Agostini, G. Galli, E. Chiellini, A. Glisenti, M. E. Pettitt, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow, K. Graf and F. W. Bartels, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 13138–13147 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Weinman, J. A. Finlay, D. Park, M. Y. Paik, S. Krishnan, H. S. Sundaram, M. Dimitriou, K. E. Sohn, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow, D. L. Handlin, C. L. Willis, E. J. Kramer and C. K. Ober, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12266–12274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Park, C. J. Weinman, J. A. Finlay, B. R. Fletcher, M. Y. Paik, H. S. Sundaram, M. D. Dimitriou, K. E. Sohn, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow, D. L. Handlin, C. L. Willis, D. A. Fischer, E. J. Kramer and C. K. Ober, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9772–9781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Koguchi, K. Jankova, N. Tanabe, Y. Amino, Y. Hayasaka, D. Kobayashi, T. Miyajima, K. Yamamoto and M. Tanaka, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 2265–2275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, L. Ouyang, T. Lu, H. Wang, F. Meng, Y. Yang, C. Ning, J. Ma and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16824–16833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Bao, N. Nishimura, H. Kamata, K. Furue, Y. Ono, M. Hosomi and A. Terada, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 151, 363–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Lv and Y. Cheng, Chemistry, 2020, 83, 360–368 Search PubMed .
P. Li, Y. F. Poon, W. Li, H. Y. Zhu, S. H. Yeap, Y. Cao, X. Qi, C. Zhou, M. Lamrani, R. W. Beuerman, E. T. Kang, Y. Mu, C. M. Li, M. W. Chang, S. S. Leong and M. B. Chan-Park, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, W. Millians, S. Tang, T. Wu, L. Zhu and W. Ming, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18467–18472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, X. Chen, C. Chen, J. Hu, C. Zhou, X. Cai, W. Wang, C. Zheng, P. Zhang, J. Cheng, Z. Guo and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6124–6136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, M. Li, H. Wang and Y. Cheng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 869–874 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Zhou, Q. Hu, Y. Kong, D. Song, Y. Cheng and A. Y. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1007/s40843-020-1480-3 .
S. Amini, S. Kolle, L. Petrone, O. Ahanotu, S. Sunny, C. N. Sutanto, S. Hoon, L. Cohen, J. C. Weaver, J. Aizenberg, N. Vogel and A. Miserez, Science, 2017, 357, 668–673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sunny, G. Cheng, D. Daniel, P. Lo, S. Ochoa, C. Howell, N. Vogel, A. Majid and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11676–11681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Tesler, P. Kim, S. Kolle, C. Howell, O. Ahanotu and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Epstein, T. S. Wong, R. A. Belisle, E. M. Boggs and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bruchmann, I. Pini, T. S. Gill, T. Schwartz and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601082 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Y. Lee, K. Chong and C. He, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 440–448 RSC .
J. Li, T. Kleintschek, A. Rieder, Y. Cheng, T. Baumbach, U. Obst, T. Schwartz and P. A. Levkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6704–6711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Keller, J. Bruchmann, T. Sollich, C. Richter, R. Thelen, F. Kotz, T. Schwartz, D. Helmer and B. E. Rapp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4480–4487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Li, S. Mieszkin, A. Di Fino, A. S. Clare, M. E. Callow, J. A. Callow, M. Grunze, A. Rosenhahn and P. A. Levkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10074–10080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Leclair, S. S. G. Ferguson and F. Lagugné-Labarthet, Biomaterials, 2010, 32, 1351–1360 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, Biomaterials, 2001, 22, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peterkova, S. Rimpelova, P. Slepicka, I. Krizova, N. S. Kasalkova, V. Svorcik and T. Ruml, Tissue Cell, 2019, 58, 121–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Campoccia, C. R. Arciola, M. Cervellati, M. C. Maltarello and L. Montanaro, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 587–596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akula, I. K. Brosch and N. D. Leipzig, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 45, 2693–2702 CrossRef .
H. Li, A. Wijekoon and N. D. Leipzig, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2014, 42, 1456–1469 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Gouveia, S. Rosa, L. Ricotti, B. Abecasis, H. V. Almeida, L. Monteiro, J. Nunes, F. S. Carvalho, M. Serra, S. Luchkin, A. L. Kholkin, P. M. Alves, P. J. Oliveira, R. Carvalho, A. Menciassi, N. R. Das and L. S. Ferreira, Biomaterials, 2017, 139, 213–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. McCarthy, D. C. Ahrens, D. Joda, T. E. Curtis, P. K. Bowen, R. N. Guillory, S. Q. Liu, F. Zhao, M. C. Frost and J. Goldman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16202–16212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Augustine, P. Dan, A. Sosnik, N. Kalarikkal, N. Tran, B. Vincent, S. Thomas, P. Menu and D. Rouxel, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3358–3376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee and T. L. Arinzeh, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2012, 18, 2063–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Guo, Z. S. Li, S. W. Dong, W. J. Chen, L. Deng, Y. F. Wang and D. J. Ying, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 96, 29–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ribeiro, D. M. Correia, I. Rodrigues, L. Guardão, S. Guimarães, R. Soares and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoop, X. Z. Chen, A. Ferrari, F. Mushtaq, G. Ghazaryan, T. Tervoort, D. Poulikakos, B. Nelson and S. Pane, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4028 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. C. Lee, K. K. Manga, P. K. Ang, J. Lu, Y. P. Liu, C. T. Lim and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4285–4290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Dewitt, C. B. Copeland, M. J. Strynar and R. W. Luebke, Environ. Health Perspect., 2008, 116, 644–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Corsini, A. Avogadro, V. Galbiati, M. dell'Agli, M. Marinovich, C. L. Galli and D. R. Germolec, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2011, 250, 108–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Corsini, E. Sangiovanni, A. Avogadro, V. Galbiati, B. Viviani, M. Marinovich, C. L. Galli, M. Dell'Agli and D. R. Germolec, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2012, 258, 248–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, Y. Zhang, L. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Jin and Q. He, Arch. Toxicol., 2009, 83, 805–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Elcombe, B. M. Elcombe, J. R. Foster, S. Chang, D. J. Ehresman, P. E. Noker and J. L. Butenhoff, Toxicology, 2012, 293, 30–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, Y. Feng, J. Wang and J. Dai, Toxicology, 2010, 267, 54–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Elcombe, B. M. Elcombe, J. R. Foster, S. Chang, D. J. Ehresman and J. L. Butenhoff, Toxicology, 2012, 293, 16–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lohmann, I. T. Cousins, J. C. DeWitt, J. Glüge, G. Goldenman, D. Herzke, A. B. Lindstrom, M. F. Miller, C. A. Ng, S. Patton, M. Scheringer, X. Trier and Z. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 12820–12828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schrenk, M. Bignami, L. Bodin, J. K. Chipman, J. Mazo, B. Grasl-Kraupp, C. Hogstrand, L. Hoogenboom, J. Leblanc, C. S. Nebbia, E. Nielsen, E. Ntzani, A. Petersen, S. Sand, C. Vleminckx, H. Wallace, L. Barregard, S. Ceccatelli, J. Cravedi, T. I. Halldorsson, L. S. Haug, N. Johansson, H. K. Knutsen, M. Rose, A. Roudot, H. V. Loveren, G. Vollmer, K. Mackay, F. Riolo and T. Schwerdtle, EFSA J., 2020, 18, e06223 CAS .
X. Wang, G. Rong, J. Yan, D. Pan, L. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Yang and Y. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 45763–45771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Acik, Express Polym. Lett., 2020, 14, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, F. Chen, Y. Pan, C. Chen, L. Jiang and Y. Dan, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 97, 308–318 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jia Lv
	Jia Lv received her PhD degree from the East China Normal University in 2018. She is currently working as a postdoctoral fellow at the South China University of Technology. Her research interests mainly focus on the intracellular delivery of biomacromolecules such as proteins and peptides.

Yiyun Cheng
	Yiyun Cheng is a full professor of biomedical engineering at School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University. He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China and was a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis, MO. His research interests focus on the rational design of polymers for the delivery of biomacromolecules such as DNA, RNA, proteins and peptides.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of well-known fluoropolymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of water-soluble fluorocopolymers by RAFT polymerization113 (a), ATRP118 (b), and Michael addition119,120 (c), respectively. PF-PEG was synthesized by Michael addition reactions between bisphenol A glycerolate diacrylate (BG) and 1H,1H-undecafluorohexylamine (UFA) to yield fluorinated poly(β-amino ester)s, and further terminated with mPEG-NH2.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis of water-soluble fluoropolymers by using a protein-based CTA to polymerize fluorous monomers via RAFT106 (a), using a PFPE containing macro-CTA to polymerize hydrophilic monomers via RAFT123 (b), and using a fluorous compound as the initiator for NCA-ROP28 (c).	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of water-soluble fluoropolymers by RAFT polymerization106 (a) and radical polymerization101 (b) of water-soluble fluorous monomers. (c) Synthesis of degradable fluorine-containing copolymers via metal-catalyzed living radical polymerization of OEGMEMA, perfluoroalkyl methacrylates and BMDO.126	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of branched fluoropolymers by copolymerization of fluorous monomers and hydrophilic monomers with crosslinking monomers.114,129	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis of asymmetric and amphiphilic dendrimers bearing both OEG and fluorous surface functionalities by multiple synthetic steps.136	 

 	Fig. 7  Fluorination reagents used to synthesize fluoropolymers by surface modification.	 

 	Fig. 8  Synthesis of fluoropolymers by alkyne–azide click chemistry196 (a) or thiolactone chemistry197 (b).	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis of a fluorinated and biodegradable polyester in bacteria. (a) Synthesis of poly(FHB-co-HB) in bacteria. (b) Plasmid design for the synthetic organofluorine pathways. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  Assembly of random fluorocopolymers by self-folding. (a) Fluorocopolymers form nanomicelles with a fluorous core in water, or PEG-core micelles in fluorous solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Fluoropolymers were assembled into nanomicelles and further packed into membranes with nanochannels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Co-assembly of fluorinated and hydrogenated Janus dendrimers. (a) Chemical structures of the fluorinated, hydrogenated and hybrid Janus dendrimers. (b) Assembled nanostructures by the Janus dendrimers in (a). (c) Dumbbell-shaped dendrimersomes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 12  Supramolecular polymerization of the perylenediimide building block bearing a perfluoroalkyl ligand and a PEG chain. (a) Chemical structures of the fluorinated perylenediimide and the non-fluorinated control. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed aggregation mechanism for the fluorinated perylenediimide. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Fluoropolymer assemblies by PISA. (a) Synthesis of the block fluorocopolymer PDMA-b-P(St-alt-PFS). (b) Morphologies of PDMA-b-P(St-alt-PFS) assemblies with increasing content of the P(St-alt-PFS) block. PDMA, St, and PFS are the abbreviations of poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide), styrene, and pentafluorostyrene, respectively. Packing parameter p reflects the geometry of the particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228, Copyright 2019, the author, Creative Commons CC BY.	 

 	Fig. 14  Fluorinated G5 PAMAM dendrimer achieved high EGFP transfection efficiency in HEK293 cells at low N/P ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148, Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved.	 

 	Fig. 15  Fluorinated G2 PAMAM dendrimer achieved high EGFP transfection efficiency in HEK293 cells in the presence of serum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152, Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Fluorinated oligoethylenimines achieved efficient intracellular siRNA delivery in serum-containing media (a). The assembled fluoropolymer reduced the adsorption of serum proteins on the polyplex surface due to its antifouling properties (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 188, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Fluorination of cationic polymers improved serum stability, cellular uptake, endosomal escape and intracellular DNA release of the polyplexes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2017, the author.	 

 	Fig. 18  Fluorinated PEI in the delivery of the Cas9 and sgRNA encoding plasmid for CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Transmucus delivery of siRNA by fluorinated α-helical polypeptides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Fluoropolymers for cytosolic protein delivery. (a) Co-assembly of fluoropolymers and cargo proteins to prepare nanoparticles. (b) Hydrophobic ligands modified on PEI. (c) Intracellular protein delivery efficiencies of PEIs modified with the hydrophobic ligands in the library. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, The author, Creative Commons CC BY.	 

 	Fig. 21  Fluorinated PEI delivered the peptide MPI into the bladder for cancer treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  Fluorine effect of fluoropolymers in cytosolic protein delivery. (a) Fluoropolymers F4-1 and F3-3 exhibited much higher efficiencies in cytosolic protein delivery than non-fluorinated analogs A4-1 and A3-3. (b) The proteins delivered by fluoropolymers were mainly located inside cells, while those delivered by non-fluorinated controls were mainly on the cell surface. (c) Mechanisms of fluoropolymers and non-fluorinated materials in cytosolic protein delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185, Copyright 2018, The author, Creative Commons CC BY.	 

 	Fig. 23  PFPE-based nanoemulsions for 19F MRI imaging. (a) Standard nanoemulsion formed by fluorescent dye conjugated PFPE, PFPE oxide, F-68 and PEI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 307, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (b) Introduction of paramagnetic metal ions into PFPE-based nanoemulsions to enhance their 19F MRI sensitivity by decreasing T1.287	 

 	Fig. 24  Fluoropolymers for responsive 19F MRI. (a) pH-Sensitive 19F MRI nanoprobes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 315, Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Reduction-responsive fluoropolymer nanoprobes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  TPU-based vascular scaffold for 19F MRI. (a) Photographic image of the vascular scaffold structure. Scale bar: 2 mm. (b) 19F MRI of the scaffold in sagittal and coronal planes (top) and upon 3D rendering (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 320, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Fluoropolymers for drug delivery. (a) Fluorinated tobacco mosaic virus coat protein self-assembled into spherical nanoparticles for drug delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 322, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fluorinated dendrimer for fluorinated drug and therapeutic gene co-delivery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Amphiphilic fluoropolymer conjugated with DOX via an acid-labile hydrazone bond for cancer therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 334, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Fluoropolymers for PDT. (a) Synthesis of fluorinated polymer–photosensitizer conjugates to potentiate cell-death by improving the generation of ROS during PDT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 346, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Synthesis of a fluorinaed COF for PFCE and oxygen loading. Reproduced with permission from ref. 352, Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) PEGylated and fluorinated poly(β-amino ester)s (PF-PEG) coencapsulated with Ce6 and IDO inhibitor for enhancing the therapeutic effect of PDT by activating immune suppression.120	 

 	Fig. 28  CAT-Ce6/F-PEI nanoparticles relieve the tumor hypoxia for enhanced PDT cancer therapy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 353, Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 29  Fluoropolymers for anti-fouling applications. (a) Nanostructured silicon grafted with fluoropolymers for anti-fouling properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 388, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Copolymer FPEG-FA coated on a microfluidic device for anti-fouling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 389, Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Fluorinated copolymers containing different fluorine contents for the prevention of protein adsorption. Reproduced with permission from ref. 404, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  SLIPS for anti-fouling applications. (a) Scheme of SLIPS preparation. A flat substrate (I) is nano-patterned or roughened (II), chemically functionalized (III), and infused with a lubricant (IV), and the excess lubricant is removed (V). The “slippery” surface is highly immiscible to bacteria. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences. (b) Fluorous lubricant-coated spiky microparticles with anti-fouling properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
