All-inorganic large-area low-cost and durable flexible perovskite solar cells using copper foil as a substrate   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC07573H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC07573H
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 747-750All-inorganic large-area low-cost and durable flexible perovskite solar cells using copper foil as a substrate†

        
          
            B. 
            Abdollahi Nejand
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Nazari
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Gharibzadeh
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Ahmadi
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            A. 
            Moshaii
          
        
      c
aNanomaterials Group, Dept. of Materials Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: b.abdollahi@modares.ac.ir
bSchool of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: v_ahmadi@modares.ac.ir;  Fax: +98-21-82883368;   Tel: +98-21-82883368
cDept. of Physics, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
Received 
      20th September 2016
    , Accepted 8th December 2016First published on 8th December 2016AbstractHere, a low-cost perovskite solar cell using CuI and ZnO as the respective inorganic hole and electron transport layers is introduced. Copper foil is chosen as a cheap and low-weight conductive substrate which has a similar work function to ITO. Besides, copper foil is an interesting copper atom source for the growth of the upper cuprous iodide layer on copper foil. A spray coating of a transparent silver nanowire electrode is used as a top contact. The prepared device shows a maximum power conversion efficiency of 12.80% and long-term durability providing an environmentally and market friendly perovskite solar cell.
In the last 5 years, organometal halide perovskite has been introduced as an interesting photovoltaic material. Despite the reported 20.8% efficiency1 for common perovskite solar cells, a 15.07% power conversion efficiency has been reported for flexible perovskite solar cells.2 Material selection and engineering for the electron transport material (ETM) and the hole transport material (HTM) for extracting electrons and holes, respectively, from the organometal trihalide perovskite absorber has a high impact on perovskite solar cell efficiency. To date, despite the large number of valuable studies conducted on improving perovskite solar cell performance and resolving some challenges such as durability against moisture, the production cost of these devices is still high due to the use of some expensive materials in the normal and inverted structures. Materials such as carbon,3,4 NiO,5–7 CuI,8 Cu2O,9 and CuSCN10 were found as potential candidates for replacing expensive HTMs. Copper based hole transport materials such as CuI,11 Cu2O,9 and CuSCN12–14 have attracted much attention in the fabrication of perovskite solar cells because of their high hole mobility and low-cost fabrication methods and materials.
Cuprous iodide is a low-cost copper based inorganic hole transport material which shows a higher hole mobility of 9.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 15 and 16) in comparison to organic hole transport materials like spiro-OMeTAD (5.3 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, ref. 17). To date, in rigid perovskite solar cells, including inverted and normal architectures, CuI shows strong potential in the fabrication of perovskite solar cells, showing high current density and stability.8,10,11 Different methods have been reported for deposition of the CuI layer on the substrate which are mostly conducted by chemical deposition from dissolved CuI in acetonitrile or a di-n-propylsulfide–chlorobenzene mixture8,10,11,18 and thermal evaporation.19,20
In this work, we fabricate a low-cost perovskite solar cell on copper foil. Copper has the same work function as ITO, making it suitable for collecting the extracted holes from the CuI layer. Cuprous iodide is derived from a copper substrate by iodination, showing strong hole extraction behavior and a wide band gap for preventing charge recombination in the case of direct contact with the ETM layer. In this work we use a compact ZnO nanostructure layer for the inorganic ETM sandwiching layer. A final silver nanowire network is chosen as the potential transparent electrode.

Fig. 1 shows the energy level diagram of the Cu/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO/Ag devices incorporating copper foil as a back contact, a cuprous iodide precursor provider, and device substrate. The device configuration consists of a 10-micron thin copper foil, 200 nm CuI thin foil, 300 nm perovskite layer, 50 nm ZnO thin film, and 150 nm Ag nanowire electrode (Fig. 1a). As is shown in the band diagram, a generated electron can easily transfer to the ZnO layer because of the high electron affinity of ZnO at the interface of ZnO and the perovskite layer, therefore the generated hole can preferably diffuse into the CuI layer (Fig. 1b). The valence band level diagram adjustment of 5 eV for both the perovskite and CuI layers causes transfer of the generated hole into the CuI layer and transportation through inorganic CuI to reach the metal contact of the copper substrate. Silver nanowires as a transparent electrode can easily collect the electrons transported through the ZnO thin film (Fig. 1b). The device fabrication is described in the ESI† and illustrated in Fig. S1. Fabrication of inverted perovskite solar cells mostly starts by deposition of prepared hole transport materials which previously have been synthesized by an ex situ process. While in this work, deposition of the CuI layer on the copper foil substrate is conducted very differently; a CuI thin film is grown on copper foil by in situ transformation of the copper surface into a CuI thin film. Fig. S2, ESI† shows XRD patterns of grown CuI on Cu foil, the deposited perovskite layer on the CuI layer by a two-step deposition, and a deposited ZnO nanocrystalline thin film on the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the device architecture (a) and energy level diagram of Cu/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO/Ag (b). 
As shown in Fig. S2, ESI†, CuI layer was grown in zinc blend structure which exhibits high hole conductivity in optoelectronic materials. In the fabrication of perovskite solar cells, deposition of the ETM and HTM as well as the perovskite layer should be noted when they are deposited as multi layers. This means that deposition of the ETM or HTM on the perovskite layer or vice versa, may affect the sublayer by chemical reaction or thermal decomposition. Hence, the chosen method for the deposition of the multilayers should be carefully designed and considered. According to the fact that deposition of a perovskite solution on a CuI thin film by a one-step method that employs a mixture of PbI2 and CH3NH3I in DMF intensively dissolves the CuI layer, a two-step deposition of perovskite on CuI is chosen (as described in ESI†).
On the other hand, to study the deposition possibility of a ZnO nanocrystalline layer on the perovskite layer, XRD analysis was conducted which suggests high stability of the perovskite and good crystallinity of the ZnO layer on the perovskite layer (Fig. S2, ESI†). As illustrated in the figure, deposition of the perovskite layer on the CuI layer as well as deposition of ZnO on the perovskite, does not affect the sublayer, showing a promising approach in the fabrication of the present perovskite solar cell. Copper foils may contain some scratches which appear during the production process making the surface of the copper rough and scratched (Fig. S3a, ESI†). According to the fact that the growth of CuI is conducted by providing copper atoms from the surface of the copper foil and iodine from the vapor phase, the growth of CuI takes place uniformly on the copper surface, covering all surface areas including the smooth and scratched areas of the copper foil (Fig. S3b, ESI†). Hence, the present method for the deposition of CuI resolves the issue of removing the scratches on the surface of the copper foil, making it an easy and reliable method for deposition of CuI on copper-based substrates.
In comparison to NiO as an another HTM layer and TiO2 as an ETM layer, the CuI layer is highly hydrophilic to DMF solutions resulting in it being quite appropriate for the uniform deposition of dissolved PbI2 in DMF on the CuI layer (Fig. S4, ESI†). This uniform PbI2 layer is an appropriate transformation layer for reaching the final pinhole-free perovskite layer. Deposition of 40 mg mL−1 MAI in 2-propanol produces a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite layer (Fig. S3c, ESI†) with a 1.52 eV band gap (Fig. S5, ESI†). Subsequently, a ZnO thin film was deposited on the perovskite layer by spin coating of 40 mg mL−1 of ZnO nanocrystals, and ensures a uniform and well-covering layer of ZnO on the perovskite layer. As shown in Fig. S3d, ESI†, the surface of perovskite is uniformly coated by the ZnO thin film. The compact and crack-free ZnO layer on the perovskite layer would protect the perovskite from direct exposure to atmospheric moisture. The silver nanowire network, in addition to good transparency in around 150 nm thickness, provides low sheet resistance of 21 Ω sq−1 which is quite appropriate in this architecture (Fig. S6 and S7, ESI†). Deposition of Ag NWs by spray coating shows high uniformity and adhesion to the ZnO layer which possesses high charge collection properties and excellent transparency (Fig. S3e, ESI†). As shown in the figure, a network like arrangement of Ag NWs covers the whole surface of the active area, and reaches a low sheet resistance of 21 Ω sq−1 by the subsequent roll pressing and heating. Roll pressing and heating allow the silver NWs to come into better contact with the ZnO layer and other silver NWs by melting away the remaining PVP molecules on the surface of the Ag NWs. The growth of CuI from the copper foil substrate provides a uniform and compact layer which is appropriate for a pinhole-free CuI compact layer on the copper foil. According to the fact that the lattice constant of FCC copper is 3.59 Å and the lattice constant of the zinc blend γ-CuI is 6.082 Å, in the growth of the CuI layer from the copper foil, an expansion appears in the CuI thin film presenting a dense and uniform CuI microstructure (Fig. S3f, ESI†). The photovoltaic properties of the prepared perovskite solar cells were analyzed by AM1.5 illumination of one sun by a sun-simulator at 25 ± 2 °C and 28% moisture. Fig. 2a shows the J-V analysis of the prepared device in two scanning directions of forward bias to short circuit density (FB-SC) and short circuit density to forward bias (SC-FB) with 0.1 cm2 active area. As shown in Fig. 2a, a high current density of 22.5 mA cm−2 suggests good carrier photogeneration and transportation of the carriers through the low series resistant contacts, which is in good agreement with the calculated photocurrent generation, 21.8 mA cm−2, measured by IPCE analysis (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  
J–V curves and a table of the prepared device properties for the scan direction of forward bias to short circuit (FB-SC) and short circuit to forward bias (SC-FB) (a) and an EQE curve of the present device (b). 
Almost negligible differences are shown in the two scan directions of FB-SC and SC-FB, which may come from the low possible defects in the perovskite layer and the interfaces. Besides, the wide band gap of CuI (Fig. S8, ESI†) could benefit the architecture alignment in the case of direct contact of CuI and the deposited ZnO thin film while the perovskite layer contains some pinholes. However, the low open circuit voltage and fill factor may come from carrier recombination at the interface of ZnO and CuI, which may be observed in the case of some pinholes being present in the perovskite layer. In this regard, because of the higher mobility of holes in cuprous iodide (9.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, ref. 15 and 16) in comparison to organic hole transport materials like spiro-OMeTAD (5.3 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, ref. 17), in the fabrication of conventional perovskite solar cells the carrier recombination rate at the interface of ZnO and CuI would be more considerable in comparison to the carrier recombination rate at the interface of ZnO and spiro-OMeTAD. Replacing the moisture sensitive layers would eliminate the decomposition possibility of the device in the moisture affected area. Besides, using inorganic electron and hole transport layers would increase the cell performance due to its robust characteristics and UV protection behavior in comparison to organic based electron and hole transport materials. Hence, fabrication of all-inorganic based perovskite solar cells would introduce durable and high-performance devices. To study the durability of the fabricated Cu/CuI/Perovskite/ZnO/Ag devices, the PCE of the cells was traced by keeping the fabricated cells at 25 °C and 28 ± 2% moisture under dark conditions and analyzing the J–V curves at different periods of working under one sun (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) illumination by a sun-simulator. As shown in Fig. S9 and Table S1 (ESI†), the traced cell shows good durability over 60 days. The decrease in current density is much considerable than the open circuit voltage and fill factor decreases, possibly because of the slight decomposition of the perovskite structure and interface defect generation. According to the fact that the low-cost compact layers of CuI and ZnO are used as inorganic hole and electron transport materials, respectively, this device could protect the perovskite layer from UV light illumination and water molecule diffusion (Fig. S7, ESI†). Hence, these kinds of architectures may be appropriate for fabrication of low cost and long-term durable perovskite solar cells (Fig. S9, ESI†). Copper foil is not a transparent substrate, so the perovskite layer should absorb the light from the top side. In this architecture, the silver nanowire network as a transparent top contact is used to collect the electrons transported through the ZnO layer. Silver nanowires show good flexibility to cover the flexible surface and show visible light transparency to transmit a wide range of visible light wavelengths.
The J–V analysis of the all-inorganic structure of the Cu/CuI/perovskite/ZnO/Ag device for different bending times was studied. Fig. S10a, ESI† and Table S2 (ESI†) show the normalized photovoltaic parameters of the device during different bending cycles with a 180° bending angle (Fig. S10b, ESI†). As shown in the figure, the decrease in the PCE of the cells mostly comes from a drop in the current density at higher bending cycles, which may result in the peeling off of silver nanowires from the ZnO surface.
Unlike metal thin films, FTO, and ITO back contacts, which suffer from cracking and shut down the cell’s performance at higher bending cycles, silver nanowires provide higher flexibility during high bending cycles even in the case of some cracks appearing on the ZnO layer. The connection of the silver nanowires with the ZnO layer and other silver nanowires are shown in Fig. S10c–e, ESI†. At bending cycles of 500, some cracks appear in the ZnO layer while silver nanowires still show a good connection with the ZnO layer and other silver nanowires (Fig. S10d, ESI†). At a higher bending cycle of 1000, the silver nanowires begin peeling off from the surface due to deeper cracks, damaging the silver nanowire contacts (Fig. S10e, ESI†). The flaking off of the silver nanowires from the surface considerably affects the contact with the ZnO layer and collection of the transported carriers through it, and therefore a lower current density at higher bending cycles is observed. According to the fact that deposition of the silver nanowires as a network top contact is conducted after synthesizing the silver nanowires in an ex situ process, followed by deposition on the top layer as a metal network, there is almost no possibility of direct contact of the silver nanowires and the copper substrate, and therefore fabrication of the device with a large area could be conducted with high assurance.

Fig. 3 shows the 0.8 cm2 large area perovskite solar cell which could be interesting for high current devices. A 7.07 mW power was reached by the reported large area device (Fig. 3b). The lower current density of the device may come from current loss due to contact series resistance and inhomogeneous pressing in attempting to achieve better contact of the silver nanowires and the ZnO sub-layer. Continuous spray coating of the silver nanowire and pressing through the roll-press may enhance the performance in reaching a higher efficiency of the prepared devices.
 Fig. 3  The I–V curve of the large area device with a 0.8 cm2 active area (a) and a photograph of the prepared device in providing the power of a small portable electronic device (b). 

Fig. 4a shows the stability of the prepared Cu/CuI/Perovskite/ZnO/Ag device under continuous one sun illumination (AM1.5). An interesting PCE stability was reached for the device before and after bending for 450 seconds. Selecting the sandwiching materials for extracting the generated carriers from the perovskite layer plays an important role in achieving higher efficiency. To study the charge extraction properties of the ZnO and CuI layers, PL analysis was conducted separately and compared to conventional spiro-OMeTAD as a hole transport layer. As shown in Fig. 4b, CuI presents a great potential in almost completely extracting the holes from the perovskite layer through which the PL is completely quenched by contact of the CuI and perovskite layers. On the other hand, ZnO could potentially extract the generated electrons from perovskite to transport the carriers to the silver nanowire top contacts.
 Fig. 4  The stability of the device working for 450 seconds (a) and PL of a single perovskite layer and double layers of perovskite with ZnO, CuI, and spiro-OMeTAD (b). 
In summary, all-inorganic electron and hole transport materials based perovskite solar cells were introduced in this work. Copper foil was chosen as a conductive flexible substrate and cuprous iodide precursor source to achieve low-cost back contact/HTM layers. A spray coated silver nanowire network was applied as a transparent flexible top contact. An inorganic based CuI/perovskite/ZnO sandwiching layer resulted in high efficiency, good cell durability over 60 days, bending stability up to 1000 cycles, and illumination stability for more than 450 seconds.
The authors acknowledge financial support from Tarbiat Modares University and equipment services from the NOPL laboratory. The authors also acknowledge the Iran nanotechnology initiative council (INIC) for the partial support of this project.
Notes and references
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e150117 Search PubMed .
D. Yang, R. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 CAS .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, A. Mei and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9165–9170 CAS .
K.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Jeng, P.-S. Shen, Y.-C. Chang, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-H. Tsai, T.-Y. Chao, H.-C. Hsu, P.-Y. Lin, P. Chen, T.-F. Guo and T.-C. Wen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4756 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Hsu, C.-Y. Wang, A. Fathi, J.-W. Shiu, C.-C. Chung, P.-S. Shen, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen, Y.-P. Lee and E. W.-G. Diau, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 9493–9496 CrossRef .
B. Abdollahi Nejand, V. Ahmadi and H. R. Shahverdi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21807–21818 CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Abdollahi Nejand, S. Gharibzadeh, V. Ahmadi and H. R. Shahverdi, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 302–313 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
G. A. Sepalage, S. Meyer, A. Pascoe, A. D. Scully, F. Huang, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5650–5661 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chavhan, O. Miguel, H.-J. Grande, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Seró and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12754–12760 CAS .
J. W. Jung, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500486 CrossRef .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. M. Fuge, N. A. Fox, D. J. Riley and M. N. R. Ashfold, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2477–2481 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, K. Keis, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4395–4398 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11299–11305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Amalina and M. Rusop, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 108, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Gopal Reddy, F. Yan, Y. Zhang and T. Vo-Dinh, Anal. Methods, 2010, 2, 458–460 RSC .
M. Grundmann, F.-L. Schein, M. Lorenz, T. Böntgen, J. Lenzner and H. von Wenckstern, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 1665–1952 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc07573hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the device architecture (a) and energy level diagram of Cu/CuI/CH3NH3PbI3/ZnO/Ag (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  
J–V curves and a table of the prepared device properties for the scan direction of forward bias to short circuit (FB-SC) and short circuit to forward bias (SC-FB) (a) and an EQE curve of the present device (b).	 

 	Fig. 3  The I–V curve of the large area device with a 0.8 cm2 active area (a) and a photograph of the prepared device in providing the power of a small portable electronic device (b).	 

 	Fig. 4  The stability of the device working for 450 seconds (a) and PL of a single perovskite layer and double layers of perovskite with ZnO, CuI, and spiro-OMeTAD (b).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc07573h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
