Gel-emulsion templated polymeric aerogels for solar-driven interfacial evaporation and electricity generation   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00793E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00793E
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1953-1961Gel-emulsion templated polymeric aerogels for solar-driven interfacial evaporation and electricity generation†

        
          
            Jianfei 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangli 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rong 
            Miao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kaiqiang 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yu 
            Fang
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an 710062, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yfang@snnu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Chemical Additives for China National Light Industry, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Chemical Additives for Industry, College of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi University of Science & Technology, Xi’an, 710021, China
Received 
      10th October 2020
    , Accepted 22nd December 2020First published on 24th December 2020AbstractThe efficiency of a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system is highly dependent on the materials used for light absorption, heat localization and water supply. Here, we report a new kind of porous polymeric monolith, and the relevant carbonized aerogels, which embrace desirable optical, thermal, and wetting properties for efficient solar-driven interfacial evaporation. With the utilization of an aerogel-based solar-driven evaporation system, a high-water production efficiency of 2.1 kg h−1 m−2 under 1 sun illumination with no convective flow was achieved. Meanwhile, electricity was also efficiently produced via coupling the solar-driven evaporation system with a home-made thermoelectric conversion device. The output power of the system is ∼66 W m−2 under 4 kW m−2 solar illumination. Owing to convenience in preparation and high performance in solar conversion and water transportation, the reported materials could provide new opportunities for solar energy utilization as they could be used to build efficient solar-driven systems to produce both clean water and electricity.
Introduction
The energy shortage and clean water scarcity are two key challenges for sustainable development of human civilization.1,2 To tackle this problem, tremendous efforts have been made to search for solutions.3 Solar-driven interfacial evaporation has emerged as one of the most promising technologies under development as it utilizes solar energy, the only sustainable and clean energy resource available for human beings.4 In addition, the technique is applicable not only for the well-known water heating,5 water purification,6,7 and seawater desalination,8–11 but also for the generation of electricity.12–18 However, traditional solar-driven vaporization approaches generally deliver a low efficiency of photothermal conversion mainly because of poor solar absorption and large heat losses, which in turn hinders the practical applications of the technique.
The recently reported solar-driven interfacial evaporation system can effectively increase solar-thermal conversion by heat localization, where only water at the air–liquid interface is heated which suppresses heat loss to the bulk water.19–22 To be efficient, the properties of the materials used in the systems for solar absorption, heat localization and water transportation must be optimized. As an example, Yu and co-workers reported a new kind of highly-efficient vapor generator, which was built using hierarchically nanostructured materials based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polypyrrole (PPy).23 In other words, the efficiency of the system is highly determined by the properties of the materials employed. Specifically, (1) a broadband and efficient solar absorption material is needed, which directly improves the solar energy input; (2) a material with low thermal conductivity is also needed as it could reduce heat losses via suppressing thermal conduction, heat convection and heat irradiation; (3) a material with good wettability is another necessity as it could provide an expressway for water transportation and at the same time for vapor escape.24 Therefore, great efforts have been made to improve the photothermal efficiency of the system via innovation of the materials.25–28
As is well-known, aerogels possess several intrinsic advantages ideal for solar-driven interfacial water evaporation.29–31 First, the unique porous and rough structures of aerogels not only reduce light reflection but also enhance light scattering inside the aerogels, resulting in improvement of absorption of solar energy. Second, highly porous characteristics reduce thermal conductivity, and thereby aerogels can be used to confine the solar-generated heat in the air–water interface, which promotes water evaporation and inhibits heat losses. Third, the porous structures of the materials could compartmentalize air and vapor inside, which suppresses heat losses via reduction of macroscopic heat convection.32 Lastly, the interconnected pores inside aerogels could offer rich pathways for water transportation and channels for vapor escape, enabling continuous water transportation from the underlying reservoir to the upper evaporative layer.33
Herein, we report a personalized aerogel-based efficient solar energy utilization system, which produces not only clean water but also electricity. The key point of the innovative contribution is the utilization of a unique home-made aerogel, which is hydrophobic and has a density of only 0.038 g cm−3, displaying a porosity greater than 96.8%. Moreover, the aerogel is compressible but mechanically strong with a compressive strength of ∼0.54 MPa. Interestingly, carbonization of the as-prepared aerogel could result in a new hydrophilic porous black material, which shows more than 93% light absorption within the range from 200 to 2500 nm. Using the carbonized aerogels, a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system was built. The system exhibited good durability, and high water production rate (2.1 kg h−1 m−2) under 1 sun radiation with no convective flow. With further efforts, electricity generation from the system was also realized. The power output of the device under 4 kW m−2 solar illumination is ∼66 W m−2. The convenience of the preparation of the carbonized aerogels lays the foundation for the construction of efficient integrated solar-driven systems, which provide both clean water and electricity. This paper reports the details.
Results and discussion
Preparation of the porous polymeric monoliths is schematically depicted in Fig. 1a. As shown, Span 80, IA and DVB were used as stabilizer, monomer, and cross-linker, respectively. As revealed in our previous work,34 water content plays a crucial role not only for the formation of gel emulsions, but also for the alteration of their internal structures, such as the size, size-distribution, and inter-connections of the domains of their dispersed phases,35,36 which in turn determines the internal structures of the porous polymeric monoliths as prepared from the templates.37–39 Optimization studies revealed that the oil–water systems could be only gelled when the volume fraction of water in the liquid mixtures was kept in between 56.2% and 97%, suggesting that the internal structures of the gel emulsions could be largely tuned via simple variation of the water content (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 1  The preparation and internal structures of the porous polymeric monoliths. (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of the gel-emulsions and the relevant porous polymeric monoliths. (b) SEM images of the monoliths (M2, M4, M6, and M8) prepared via polymerization of the continuous phase of the gel-emulsions depicted in Table S1 (ESI†). 
Surprisingly, only 1 wt% of the surfactant in the oil phase could result in stable gel emulsions with such a broad range of compositions, which is obviously out of the scope of 74%, the criterial volume fraction of surfactant-based conventional gel-emulsions.40 No doubt, this breakthrough must be beneficial for reducing the production cost of the gel emulsion-based porous polymeric monoliths. To determine the suitability of the gel emulsions for template preparation of porous polymeric monoliths, their rheological properties were examined. It was found that the storage modulus (G′) of the gel emulsions was largely determined by the water content (Fig. S1, ESI†). Specifically, the systems with water volume fractions in the range between 92.7% and 96.2% are more stable than others even though they are also in the gel state. These results suggest that all the as-generated gel emulsions have the potential to be used for template preparation of porous polymeric materials, including aerogels provided the water content is extremely high and earnest operation is applied.41–43
To examine the internal structures of the gel-emulsions, a fluorescence imaging technique was adopted, where an oil-soluble perylene bisimide derivative (Scheme S1, ESI†) was employed as a probe. As expected, the red fluorescence of the probe formed a continuous and networked structure, suggesting that the continuous phase is composed of the organics owing to the hydrophobic nature of the probe (Fig. S2, ESI†). In other words, the as-generated gel emulsions are of the water in oil type, laying the foundation for template preparation of porous polymeric monoliths. Accordingly, M1–M8 were prepared via polymerization of the as-generated gel emulsions.44,45
The as-produced M8 is compressible, and its compression strength is ∼0.54 MPa at a strain of 70%. Further tests revealed that 1000 successive cycles of compression with 70% strain displayed little change in the stress–strain curves (Fig. S3, ESI†), and no fracture or collapse of the monolith was observed after the tests. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies revealed that all the prepared monoliths own porous internal structures as expected (Fig. 1b). Moreover, with increasing water content in the gel-emulsions, the pores of the monoliths changed from closed cells to interpenetrated ones, which could be a result of thickness change of the continuous phase layer owing to increase of the dispersed phase volume fraction. This is because with thinning of the continuous phase layer, the layer will have more chance to break, which is the origin of the throats between the neighboring pores in the polymerized monoliths.
As mentioned, the performance of a solar-driven evaporation system is highly dependent on the materials used for solar absorption, heat insulation and water supply. The highly porous structures of the as-generated polymeric monoliths should guarantee their usability as thermal insulators, but the white color is unfavorable for solar absorption, and the hydrophobicity is not good for water transportation. Thus, the pristine materials (M1–M8) were carbonized and as a result, black, porous and highly hydrophilic materials of CM1–CM8 were prepared, which are believed to be suitable for constructing the solar-driven systems.
As an example, Fig. 2a shows the carbonization of M8. The obtained CM8 was characterized by FTIR. As depicted in Fig. S4 (ESI†), compared with that of the pristine aerogel, the FTIR spectrum of the carbonized aerogel shows an obvious feature of a sulfonic group (∼1190 cm−1). Carbonization was also confirmed by the appearance of the XRD pattern feature of carbon (Fig. S5, ESI†). The Raman spectrum of the carbonized aerogel is also in support of the successful carbonization as both the D band (1335 cm−1) and G band (1587 cm−1) features were observed (Fig. 2b), which could be, respectively, assigned to defect C atoms and sp2-hybridized graphitic C atoms. As expected, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) trace depicted in Fig. 2c reveals that carbon, oxygen, and sulfur are the main components of the carbonized aerogels. Furthermore, the presence of the structures of C–O, CO and CSOx in the carbonized aerogels (Fig. S6, ESI†) should be beneficial for continuous water supply. The excellent hydrophilicity of the materials is strongly confirmed by rapid water infiltration observed in contact angle measurements (Fig. 2d). As supposed, blackening greatly enhances the light absorption efficiency of the aerogels as more than 93% of the emissions within the global standard sunlight spectrum range of AM 1.5 G could be absorbed by the carbonized aerogels (Fig. 2e). Interestingly, carbonization demonstrated little effect upon the internal morphological structures of the aerogels (Fig. 1b and 2f), laying the foundation for fast mass transfer, a pre-requirement for efficient vaporization as aforeindicated.
 Fig. 2  Fabrication and characterizations of the carbonized aerogels (CM8). (a) Preparation of the carbonized aerogel. (b) Raman spectrum. (c) XPS spectrum. (d) Water contact property of the carbonized aerogels. (e) The optical absorption spectrum of the carbonized aerogel and the spectrum of solar irradiation. (f) The internal structures of the carbonized aerogel. 

Fig. 3a schematically shows the functions of the key component, evaporator, of a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system, which could be a porous monolith. The functions of the evaporator include mainly solar energy absorption, water vaporization, water transportation, and heat isolation. To be efficient, the evaporator must satisfy all the requirements needed for constructing highly efficient solar-driven evaporation systems (vide supra). In addition, all the pores within the materials must be interconnected to allow effective vapor diffusion via convective flow (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  Schematics of water evaporation and vapor diffusion in conventional porous materials and three dimensional (3D) interconnected porous monoliths. (a) A 3D interconnected porous monolith for realizing high evaporation rates, where the unique 3D architectures provide ample evaporative surface for effective evaporation, excellent hydrophilicity for efficient water supply, and rough and black material surfaces for high sunlight absorption. (b) A cartoon showing the interconnected porous structure, which ensures effective vapor diffusion with a natural convective flow. (c) A schematic of water evaporation in conventional porous materials, which is limited by weak diffusion of vapor within closed pores. This is because vapor generated from the evaporative surface stagnates within the closed pores, resulting in ineffective diffusion and evaporation. (d) Schematic representation of effective evaporation enabled by interconnected pores. The interconnected porous structure allows effective diffusion of vapor with a convective flow. 
In a solar-driven water evaporation process, the evaporation is composed of two sequential steps, of which one is liquid to vapor phase transition, and the other is vapor diffusion.46,47 In the first step, water molecules come out of the hydration layer on the top of the evaporator to become vapor. In the second step, the generated vapor diffuses out of the porous structures and enters the atmospheric environment. Therefore, to be efficient, solar-driven water evaporation must be maximized, but water transportation within the vapor generator must be managed to achieve sustainable low water content at the evaporating surface as too much water transportation will result in thermal losses.48 However, previous efforts have mainly focused on increasing the evaporative surface of the evaporator to maximize the efficiency of the phase transition, but minor attention has been paid to the efficiency of vapor diffusion, which is in fact severely limited by the efficiency of a solar-driven evaporation system. This is because less interconnected porous structure will inevitably encounter vapor stagnation problems due to confinement of the evaporated vapor (Fig. 3c). Therefore, it is essential to tailor the porous structures for both effective phase transition and vapor diffusion (Fig. 3d).
Considering the importance of porosity and interconnections, the properties of the carbonized materials of CM2, CM4, CM6 and CM8 were examined by employing an automatic mercury injection apparatus. The results are presented in Fig. S7 (ESI†). As observed, the corresponding pore diameters are around 0.5, 10, 30 and 60 μm, respectively. Further calculations revealed that the porosities of the monoliths under tests are about 62.1%, 84.0%, 94.2% and 96.5%, respectively, which agree well with the template compositions (Table S1, ESI†).
To investigate the effect of pore size upon the water evaporation rate, the solar steam generation performance of the four carbonized porous materials were examined. Evaporation was quantified using an electronic balance during solar light illumination (Fig. S8, ESI†). As shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†), the porous monoliths with different pore sizes demonstrated similar evaporation rates of about 0.3 kg m−2 h−1 when the convective flow is zero in the dark. Strikingly, the evaporation rates of the monoliths with average pore sizes of 0.5 μm and 10 μm increased to ∼2.1 kg m−2 h−1and ∼2.6 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, with the convective flow increased to ∼3.5 m s−1. Under the same convective flow, the evaporation rates of the other two monoliths with pore sizes of ∼30 and ∼60 μm increased to ∼2.9 and ∼3.1 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, indicating larger pore size enabling more effective vapor diffusion via convective flow. These results demonstrated that to be highly efficient in water evaporation, one needs to tailor the structures of the porous monoliths comprehensively so that the rate of phase transition and that of diffusion could be more properly matched rather than to infinitely pursue a larger evaporative surface. This argument is further confirmed by the results from evaporative behavior studies of the porous monoliths under sunlight illumination.
As presented in Fig. 4a, the porous monoliths with different pore sizes initially showed akin performance without convective flow. With the enhancement of 1 sun illumination, they realized an evaporation rate of ∼2.1 kg m−2 h−1, which is significantly larger than 0.3 kg m−2 h−1, a result obtained under the dark condition. For the monolith with an average pore size of 60 μm, coupling 1 sun illumination with convective flows of 1.5 and 3.5 m s−1 resulted in evaporation rates of ∼3.2 and ∼6.9 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The infrared images of the vapor generator under the illumination of light intensities of 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100 mW cm−2, respectively, are presented in Fig. S10a–e (ESI†). Clearly, water evaporated from the top of the monolith, and blue color is an indication that water flows through the body of the materials. As an example, Fig. 4b depicts infrared images of the evaporator in the dark, and under sunlight illumination. Fig. 4c shows the average top surface and the average side surface temperatures of the evaporator under different intensities of sunlight illumination. As seen, the temperature of the top surface is always higher than that of the side surface, and moreover, the difference between the two temperatures gets larger and larger with increasing sunlight intensity. The results indicate that the top surface of the evaporator absorbs most of the incident solar energy, resulting in a higher temperature, which leads to evaporation of water. The blue color of the surroundings (Fig. 4b) and lower temperatures of the side surfaces of the evaporator are indications of little energy losses to the environment. Further comparison of the infrared images depicted in Fig. 4c reveals that the side surfaces of the evaporator could harvest energy from the environment during the solar-driven evaporation process since the color of the nearby environment changed from yellow to blue. The reason behind this might be that evaporation of water at the top surface must enhance the water supply from the reservoir, making the side surface temperature of the evaporator lower than that of the environment. As shown in Fig. 4d, the mass of evaporated water dramatically changes with increasing illuminating light intensity. Specifically, the evaporation rate of the solar-driven evaporation system is 0.47, 0.94, 1.45 and 2.1 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, for illumination of 25, 50, 75, and 100 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 4  Solar steam generation performance of the carbonized monoliths. (a) Dependence of evaporation rates of the carbonized aerogel evaporators on pore size with various convection flows. (b) Photograph and infrared image of the environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapor generator. (c) Temperatures of the top and side surfaces of the environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapor generator under different light intensities. The average surface temperatures of the vapor generator were calculated by weighing the area proportions of the top and side surfaces. (d) Weight of evaporated water from the carbonized aerogel system and blank water under different light intensities. (e) The contaminated water can be purified to the level to meet the standard for discharge (the red dashed lines). (f) After purification, the dyes in the water become undetectable. 
With such a high evaporation rate, the system may have the potential for wastewater treatment. As an example, the solar-driven evaporation system was used to purify wastewater contaminated by heavy metal ions or organic dyes. The results are shown in Fig. 4e. As seen, after the treatment, the artificial wastewater containing 5 g L−1 of each of four commonly found heavy metal ions (Cu2+, Zn2+, Pb2+, and Cd2+) can be reduced to 0.3, 0.8, 0.006, and 0.06 mg L−1, respectively, which could meet the drinking water standard of the World Health Organization (WHO) (Cu2+: 0.5 mg L−1; Zn2+: 2 mg L−1; Pb2+: 0.01 mg L−1; Cd2+: 0.1 mg L−1).49 Similarly, organic dyes such as Brilliant Blue G (BBG) and Orange G (OG) could also be removed. Stability studies revealed that the evaporation efficiency of the carbonized aerogels remains unchanged during 40 hours of continuous use, indicating the durability of the materials (Fig. S11 in the ESI†). Moreover, the system can be used to desalinate artificial sea water of different salinities. The results are depicted in Fig. S12 (ESI†).
In conventional solar-driven interfacial evaporation systems, steam condenses to form pure water with enthalpy lost to the environment. To maximize solar energy utilization, recently considerable attention has been paid to the harvesting of the “waste energy” by converting it into electricity. Thus, a system based on the carbonized porous monoliths was built, which produces both clean water and electricity under the drive of solar energy (Fig. 5a and Fig. S13, ESI†). As seen, hot water and steam from the solar-driven evaporation system are guided to a copper chamber, which was wrapped with thermal insulating materials such as aerogels and bubble wraps (Fig. S13d, ESI†). The heat of the steam and hot water was released to the chamber mainly via condensation. In this way, a temperature gradient was built between the chamber, one end of the thermoelectric module, and the cooling fin of the electricity generation module.
 Fig. 5  Electricity generation of the carbonized aerogel-based solar-driven system. (a) Schematics of the solar-driven system for simultaneous generation of clean water and electricity. (b) Open-circuit voltage over time under different solar irradiation. (c) Short-circuit current over time under different solar irradiation. (d) Maximum output power of the thermoelectric device under different solar irradiation. 
As depicted in Fig. 5b and c, once the light source was turned on, both the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current started to increase until equilibrium. As seen, the maximum open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current are ∼3.2 V and ∼0.23 A, respectively, under 9 kW m−2 sunlight illumination. The output powers of the system under different solar irradiation are 180, 312, 477 and 748 mW under 4, 5, 6 and 9 kW m−2 solar illumination, respectively, corresponding to output power densities of 66, 110, 168.8 and 264.7 W m−2, respectively (Fig. 5d). Fig. S14 (ESI†) provides the detailed temperatures of the chamber and the cool end of the module at different solar illumination intensities and times. The results as presented are not difficult to understand as with increasing solar power illumination, more steam will be generated and condensed in the chamber. The heat released from the condensation will drive the thermoelectric module to work. To have a direct impression of the performance of the carbonized aerogel-based solar-driven evaporation and electricity generation system, a short movie is provided in the ESI† (Movie S1).
Conclusions
In summary, a series of porous polymeric monoliths was prepared using a gel-emulsion template method. The internal structures of the materials could be largely tuned from closed pores to interconnected three-dimensional porous structures. Carbonization of the monoliths resulted in black and hydrophilic aerogels possessing all the desirable properties required for building highly efficient solar-driven evaporation systems. Based upon the unique carbonized aerogel, a highly efficient solar-driven integrated system for both clean water and electricity generation was built. Performance studies revealed that an evaporation efficiency of 2.1 kg m−2 h−1 could be reached with no convective flow under 1 sun, and ∼66 W m−2 power could be generated under 4 kW m−2 solar illumination. Considering the scalability of the preparation and the outstanding properties of the as introduced carbonized aerogels, the integrated solar-driven system provides an attractive solution to produce both electricity and clean water, in an individualized manner, for people living in off-grid areas.
Experimental section
Materials
Span 80, isodecyl acrylate (IA) and divinylbenzene (DVB) were of chemically pure grade and purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. The IA and DVB were purified to remove the pre-added inhibitor by passing through a basic alumina column before use. 2,2′-Azobis (isobutyronitrile) (AIBN, 97%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and used without further purification. All solvents used in the studies were purified in the way as described in solvent handbooks. Water used throughout was doubly distilled. Other reagents, except those specially indicated, were used directly.
Sample preparation

Preparation of gel-emulsion. 
All the gel-emulsions under study were prepared in a similar way. Typically, the oil or continuous phase was prepared in a test tube, which consists of initiator AIBN, monomer IA, and cross-linker DVB. To the tube, a certain amount of Span 80 was added, and then, a suitable amount of water was charged. Finally, the mixture was shaken vigorously. Formation of a gel-emulsion was confirmed by inverting the test tube to observe whether the mixture inside could flow. The compositions of the gel-emulsions are listed in Table S1 (ESI†).


Preparation of porous polymeric monoliths. 
Gel-emulsions as obtained were thoroughly degassed, then heated to 50 °C and maintained at the temperature for 4 h to start pre-polymerization. Then the temperature was raised to 75 °C and maintained for another 4 h to complete the reaction. The resulting monolith was taken out from the test tube, then washed with ethanol (5 mL) four times, and then with dichloromethane (5 mL) three times. Finally, it was dried at 50 °C for 8 h. In this way, the porous polymeric monoliths were generated.

Fabrication of the solar-driven interfacial evaporation system and its performance
Before fabrication, the as-prepared porous polymeric monoliths were carbonized in concentrated sulfuric acid at 120 °C for 4 h. The treated monoliths were then washed with ethanol four times, and then dried in air at 60 °C for 5 h. The as-obtained carbonized aerogels are believed to possess all the aforementioned properties required for constructing efficient solar-driven systems. Based on the as-prepared materials, a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system was built, where the length of the evaporator is 25 mm long and a solar simulator (PLS-SXE300, Perfect light) was employed as the light source. To simulate the standard AM 1.5 G spectrum of solar illumination, an optical filter was inserted in-between the light source and the porous monolith. The temperatures of steam and the surfaces of the materials were measured using an IR camera. Weight change was monitored by an electronic balance connected to a computer. The convective flow was provided by an electric fan. Its intensity was monitored by a digital anemometer (AS8336, SMART SRENSOR). The average intensity of convective flow was monitored 5 cm away from the electric fan, which is the position of the evaporator. All evaporation tests were conducted at ∼25 °C and at a humidity of ∼60%.
Electricity generation setup
As shown in the supporting information, a commercial thermoelectric module (Bi2Te3, length 8 cm, width 4 cm, and height 3.4 mm) was selected to generate power. The cool side was connected to a cooling fin, which was placed in an ice-water mixture (4 °C), and the hot side was connected to a two-end open thermal insulation chamber. The open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current of the device were recorded by a multimeter. All the data were collected after the system reached equilibrium, which generally took about 90 min. To validate the stability of the system, the data were further monitored for another 1 hour.
Characterization
The experimental details and the specific characterization methods are provided in the ESI.†
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding from the Natural Science Foundation of China (21527802, 21673133, 21703130, 21872091 and 21820102005), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (GK202002004), the Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province (No. 2018JQ2036), the 111 project (B14041), Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-14R33) and Research Funds of Shaanxi Normal University (2019CBLZ003).
Notes and references
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, P. D. Straub, T. Tong, M. D. Warsingerab and M. Elimelech, Membrane distillation at the water-energy nexus: Limits, opportunities, and challenges, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
A. H. Cavusoglu, X. Chen, P. Gentine and O. Sahin, Potential for natural evaporation as a reliable renewable energy resource, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 617 CrossRef .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Steam generation under one sun enabled by a floating structure with thermal concentration, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kashyap and H. Ghasemi, Solar heat localization: Concept and emerging applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7035–7065 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Architecting highly hydratable polymer networks to tune the water state for solar water purification, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Passive solar high-yield seawater desalination by modular and low-cost distillation, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Passive solar high-yield seawater desalination by modular and low-cost distillation, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, Challenges and opportunities for solar evaporation, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Vertically aligned graphene sheets membrane for highly efficient solar thermal generation of clean water, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef .
S. Cheng, Z. Yu, Z. Lin, L. Li, Y. Li and Z. Mao, A lotus leaf like vertical hierarchical solar vapor generator for stable and efficient evaporation of high-salinity brine, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 401, 126108 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, D. Yin, L. Xu, H. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Du, High-quality ultralong copper sulphide nanowires for promising applications in high efficiency solar water evaporation, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 394–398 RSC .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Solar driven simultaneous steam production and electricity generation from salinity, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Storage and recycling of interfacial solar steam enthalpy, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
R. Chen, K. Zhu, Q. Gan, Y. Yu, T. Zhang, X. Liu, M. Ye and Y. Yin, Interfacial solar heating by self-assembled Fe3O4@C film for steam generation, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2620–2626 RSC .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, High rate production of clean water based on the combined photo-electro-thermal effect of graphene architecture, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef .
F. Meng, M. Gao, T. Ding, G. Yilmaz, W. Ong and G. W. Ho, Modular deformable steam electricity cogeneration system with photothermal, water, and electrochemical tunable multilayers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, C. Tan, W. Lu, K. Zeng and G. W. Ho, Spectrum tailored defective 2D semiconductor nanosheets aerogel for full-spectrum-driven photothermal water evaporation and photochemical degradation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004460 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Self-contained monolithic carbon sponges for solar-driven interfacial water evaporation distillation and electricity generation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
M. Gao, K. C. Peh, T. H. Phan, L. Zhu and G. W. Ho, Solar absorber gel: localized macro-nano heat channeling for efficient plasmonic Au nanoflowers photothermic vaporization and triboelectric generation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800711 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Yang, K. Liu, R. Miao and Y. Fang, Gel-emulsion templated polymeric aerogels for water treatment through organic liquid removing and solar vapor generation, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 749–755 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. Ajayan, G. Shi and Y. Chen, Graphene-based standalone solar energy converter for water desalination and purification, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, J. Sun, Q. Peng, Q. Sun, G. Wang, Y. Cai, X. Gu, Z. Shuai and B. Tang, Biradical-featured stable organic-small-molecule photothermal materials for highly efficient solar-driven water evaporation, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1908537 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Highly efficient solar vapour generation via hierarchically nanostructured gels, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, Q. Shen, J. Zhang, S. An, S. Ma, P. Tao, C. Song, B. Fu, J. Wang, T. Deng and W. Shang, Bioinspired temperature regulation in interfacial evaporation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1910481 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, X. Li, G. Ni, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, The revival of thermal utilization from the sun: Interfacial solar vapor generation, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 562–578 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, T. Li, J. Chao, S. Wu, T. Yan, W. Li, B. Cao and R. Wang, Efficient solar-driven water harvesting from arid air with metal-organic frameworks modified by hygroscopic salt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5202–5210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Xie, J. Wang, J. W. Elam, W. Li and S. B. Darling, Chinese ink: A powerful photothermal material for solar steam generation, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 1801252 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Mu, J. He, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, H. Wei, W. Liang and A. Li, Facile and scalable fabrication of surface-modified sponge for efficient solar steam generation, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, H. Gao, X. Wang, K. Qian, Y. Yang, T. He, C. He, Y. Lu and S. Yu, Bioinspired unidirectional silk fibroin-silver compound nanowire composite scaffold via interface-mediated in situ synthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14152–14156 CrossRef CAS .
N. Husing and U. Schubert, Aerogels-airy materials: chemistry, structure, and properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 22–45 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Pierre and G. M. Pajonk, Chemistry of aerogels and their applications, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4243–4266 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu and J. Zhu, Tailoring aerogels and related 3D macroporous monoliths for interfacial solar vapor generation, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1907234 Search PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Li, W. Wang, J. Huang, D. Xia, J. Liao, M. Wu and D. Papavassiliou, Scalable, eco-friendly and ultrafast solar steam generators based on one-step melamine-derived carbon sponges toward water purification, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Wang, Y. He, K. Liu, R. Miao and Y. Fang, Polymerizable nonconventional gel-emulsions and their utilization in the template preparation of low-density, high-strength polymeric monoliths and 3D printing, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 2456–2463 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barbetta and N. R. Cameron, Morphology and surface area of emulsion-derived (PolyHIPE) solid foams prepared with oil-phase soluble porogenic solvents: Span 80 as surfactant, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3188–3201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Li, P. Wang, K. Liu and Y. Fang, Gel-emulsion templated polymeric monoliths for efficient removal of particulate matters, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and Q. Guo, Continuous preparation of polyHIPE monoliths from ionomer-stabilized high internal phase emulsions (HIPEs) for efficient recovery of spilled oils, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 812–819 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qian, Z. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Xu, Aerogels derived from polymer nanofibers and their applications, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700724 CrossRef .
M. S. Silverstein, Emulsion-templated porous polymers: A retrospective perspective, Polymer, 2014, 55, 304–320 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Princen, Highly concentrated emulsions. cylindrical systems, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1979, 71, 55–66 CrossRef .
X. Wu, T. Gao, C. Han, J. Xu, G. Owens and H. Xu, A photothermal reservoir for highly efficient solar steam generation without bulk water, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1625–1633 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Kimmins and N. R. Cameron, Functional porous polymers by emulsion templating: Recent advances, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 211–225 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, R. Miao, H. Peng, J. Liu, L. Ding and Y. Fang, Adlayer chemistry on film-based fluorescent gas sensors, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2020, 36, 1908025 Search PubMed .
C. Song, L. Hao, B. Zhang, Z. Dong, Q. Tang, J. Min, Q. Zhao, R. Niu, J. Gong and T. Tang, High-performance solar vapor generation of Ni/carbon nanomaterials by controlled carbonization of waste polypropylene, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 779–793 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jing, J. Yan, X. Cai, J. Liu, B. Hu and Y. Fang, Solvent-induced molecular gel formation at room temperature and the preparation of related gel-emulsions, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 982–991 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Yiotis, I. N. Tsimpanogiannis, A. K. Stubos and Y. C. Yortsos, Coupling between external and internal mass transfer during drying of a porous medium, Water Resour. Res., 2007, 43, W06403 CrossRef .
E. Shahraeeni, P. Lehmann and D. Or, Coupling of evaporative fluxes from drying porous surfaces with air boundary layer: Characteristics of evaporation from discrete pores, Water Resour. Res., 2012, 48, W09525 Search PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Materials for solar-powered water evaporation, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
World Health Organization, (2011), Safe Drinking Water from Desalination (WHO).

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00793eThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The preparation and internal structures of the porous polymeric monoliths. (a) Schematic representation of the preparation of the gel-emulsions and the relevant porous polymeric monoliths. (b) SEM images of the monoliths (M2, M4, M6, and M8) prepared via polymerization of the continuous phase of the gel-emulsions depicted in Table S1 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 2  Fabrication and characterizations of the carbonized aerogels (CM8). (a) Preparation of the carbonized aerogel. (b) Raman spectrum. (c) XPS spectrum. (d) Water contact property of the carbonized aerogels. (e) The optical absorption spectrum of the carbonized aerogel and the spectrum of solar irradiation. (f) The internal structures of the carbonized aerogel.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of water evaporation and vapor diffusion in conventional porous materials and three dimensional (3D) interconnected porous monoliths. (a) A 3D interconnected porous monolith for realizing high evaporation rates, where the unique 3D architectures provide ample evaporative surface for effective evaporation, excellent hydrophilicity for efficient water supply, and rough and black material surfaces for high sunlight absorption. (b) A cartoon showing the interconnected porous structure, which ensures effective vapor diffusion with a natural convective flow. (c) A schematic of water evaporation in conventional porous materials, which is limited by weak diffusion of vapor within closed pores. This is because vapor generated from the evaporative surface stagnates within the closed pores, resulting in ineffective diffusion and evaporation. (d) Schematic representation of effective evaporation enabled by interconnected pores. The interconnected porous structure allows effective diffusion of vapor with a convective flow.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solar steam generation performance of the carbonized monoliths. (a) Dependence of evaporation rates of the carbonized aerogel evaporators on pore size with various convection flows. (b) Photograph and infrared image of the environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapor generator. (c) Temperatures of the top and side surfaces of the environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapor generator under different light intensities. The average surface temperatures of the vapor generator were calculated by weighing the area proportions of the top and side surfaces. (d) Weight of evaporated water from the carbonized aerogel system and blank water under different light intensities. (e) The contaminated water can be purified to the level to meet the standard for discharge (the red dashed lines). (f) After purification, the dyes in the water become undetectable.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electricity generation of the carbonized aerogel-based solar-driven system. (a) Schematics of the solar-driven system for simultaneous generation of clean water and electricity. (b) Open-circuit voltage over time under different solar irradiation. (c) Short-circuit current over time under different solar irradiation. (d) Maximum output power of the thermoelectric device under different solar irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0qm00793e

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
