Polaron hopping barriers and rates in semiconducting polymers   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP06039A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP06039A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 4032-4042Polaron hopping barriers and rates in semiconducting polymers†

        
          
            Joel H. 
            Bombile
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shreya 
            Shetty
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael J. 
            Janik
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Scott T. 
            Milner
          
        
      *
      Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: stm9@psu.edu;  Fax: +1 (814) 865-7846;   Tel: +1 (814) 863-9355
Received 
      6th November 2019
    , Accepted 7th January 2020First published on 7th January 2020AbstractConjugated polymers are potential next-generation materials for organic electronic devices. The ability of these materials to transport charges is a key factor limiting their performance. Charge carriers in conjugated polymers are localized by disorder and polaronic effects. Charge transport in these materials is often described by thermally activated hopping, with a rate given by Marcus theory. The polaron hopping activation energy determines the temperature dependence of the Marcus rate. This energy barrier is dictated by the transition state, in which the charge carrier is equally divided between the initial and final locations. The prefactor for the polaron hopping rate is set by the charge tunneling rate between the initial and final locations. We use a tight-binding polaron model, in which charge carriers are stabilized by both nuclear reorganization and polarization of the surrounding dielectric, to compute the activation energy, charge tunneling rate and overall rate constant for intrachain and interchain charge hopping processes in poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) crystalline lamellae and amorphous melts. Charge transport in these two environments is limited by interchain hopping processes. Both hopping barriers and rates predicted by the model are in good agreement with experiments on a variety of crystalline and amorphous P3HT materials. Qualitatively, the barriers largely depend on how well the transition state is stabilized by polarization effects, and on the hopping integral between the initial and final locations, both of which penalize hopping over longer distances.
1 Introduction
Semiconducting polymers are potential next-generation materials for a number of organic electronic devices, including light emitting diodes, field effect transistors and solar cells.1–3 They are also promising candidates for hole transporting layers in perovskite solar cells.4 These materials have unique mechanical properties, such as flexibility and stretchability. They are also solution processable, affording a low manufacturing cost to these electronic devices.5,6
Although tremendous progress has been made in recent years, organic electronic devices still suffer from low performance relative to their inorganic counterparts. For example, the best performing single-junction solar cell based on organic polymers has a power conversion efficiency of 17.4 percent, still lagging behind perovskite and silicon-based cells, with 25 and 26 percent efficiency, respectively.7 Among other factors, the performance of these organic electronic devices critically depends on the ability of the active layer to transport charges. Thus, charge transport within conjugated polymers remains a subject of intense investigations.
There are well established transport theories for perfectly ordered and ideally disordered materials, developed for inorganic materials. Such theories include band transport for materials exhibiting extended electronic states, and hopping transport for materials with localized states.8 However, most high mobility conjugated polymers are semi-crystalline, with a morphology consisting of ordered crystalline aggregates surrounded by disordered amorphous regions, with tie-chains connecting the aggregates.9 The coexistence of order and disorder within these materials makes the description of transport particularly challenging. This challenge is illustrated in the wide range of charge carrier mobility observed. Mobilities as low as 10− 6 cm2 V−1 s−1, typical of hopping transport, and as high as 101 cm2 V−1 s−1,10 in the range attributed to band-like transport,11 have been measured.
Quenched structural disorder within the material can lead to localization of the extended valence and conduction states involved in transport,12 by Anderson localization.12,13 Transport involving states that are strongly localized by disorder is described as a non-adiabatic electron transfer from one state to another, as opposed to an adiabatic process in which the transported electron remains in the same group of eigenstates during transport.8,11 The associated rate of electron transfer or hopping follows the Fermi golden rule, and is given in the simplest case of no interaction between the carrier and the lattice by the Miller–Abrahams formula.14
However, the low dimensionality of polymer materials (1D for chains in the amorphous melt, and 2D for chains in crystalline lamellae), with a weak electronic coupling between the molecular units, makes these materials prone to polaron formation. Polarons are another mechanism of charge localization, which occurs when a charge carrier is stabilized by its interaction with the surrounding medium, with some associated binding energy.15 We have shown in our previous work16 that polarons in conjugated polymers are strongly localized and bound, as a result of their interaction with the surrounding dielectric medium and reorganizing nuclei. These effects can not be ignored in describing the rate of electron transfer.
When polaronic effects are considered, the electron transfer rate in a non-adiabatic process is better described by Marcus theory,17 though more elaborate and general rate expressions have been derived.18 The Marcus rate is given by (1)which, at a given temperature T, depends on three parameters: the electronic coupling JAB between the initial (a) and final (b) states; the energy difference ΔEAB between the two states; and the reorganization energy λ of the environment from equilibrium about the reactant state to the equilibrium about the product state.19
Note that Ea = (ΔEAB + λ)2/4λ represents the activation energy or the energy barrier for the electron transfer from localized state (a) to localized state (b). This barrier to polaron motion is given by the transition state, in which the polaron is equally divided between the initial and final molecular units or segments.11 Although barriers alone are not sufficient to determine the rate, they are useful because they control the temperature dependence of activated motion, and can provide insight into the governing transport mechanism.
In addition to the activation energy, the description of polaron hopping rates requires knowledge of the charge carrier tunneling rate between the initial and final locations, given by . The electronic coupling JAB can be reasonably determined by careful first-principles calculations using density functional theory (DFT).
In this work, we use the tight-binding model of polarons developed in our previous work16 to compute various hopping rates for polaron motion in P3HT thin films, i.e., both the ordered lamellae and the amorphous regions. This involves determining the barrier and tunneling rate for the polaron hopping events in each of these regions. We evaluate the barrier by computing the binding energy of the transition state (i.e., polaron equally divided between the initial and final segments) relative to the degenerate starting and ending configurations. The polaron binding energy in our model includes both nuclear and dielectric reorganization effects, so these effects (often called inner-sphere and outer-sphere reorganization) are naturally accounted for in the computed hopping rates.
In ordered lamellae, chains are tightly packed and large dihedral distortions are unlikely. Hence for ordered regions, we focus on polaron motion along undistorted chains, and between well aligned chains. In amorphous regions, dihedrals between successive monomers are more free to rotate, leading sometimes to large deviations from planarity. Amorphous chains are also randomly oriented relative to each other, such that the moieties on different chains are only weakly electronically coupled, except for a few spots where the interchain distance is short and monomers are well aligned. Hence in amorphous regions, we focus on the barrier and rate of polaron hopping between two segments across a dihedral distortion along a chain, and between nearby monomers on two obliquely oriented chain segments.
This paper is organized as follows: first we briefly review our tight binding polaron model, and present our method for computing polaron hopping barriers and rates. After a brief description of polarons in ordered P3HT lamellae, we compute the barrier and rate for polaron motion along chains and between chains. We then present our barrier and rate calculations for the amorphous phase, first for hopping across a distorted dihedral on a single chain, followed by hopping from a monomer on one chain to a nearby monomer on another chain.
2 Tight-binding polaron model
We describe charge carriers in single polymer chains or two-dimensional (2D) crystalline lamellae using the tight-binding approximation. Within this formalism, the polymer is modeled as an array of sites corresponding to monomer units. Charge carriers occupy sites with an onsite energy ε, and couple to immediate neighboring sites with some coupling matrix elements t. For a 2D lamella, the electronic Hamiltonian is (2)where  and cj,k are the creation and annihilation operators for a carrier on site j, k; tintra and tinter are the hopping matrix elements along and between chains (perpendicular to chain axis); and j and k are indices for intrachain sites and for chains respectively.
We consider polarons that form when the nuclei reorganize and the surrounding dielectric medium is polarized in response to a charge carrier. The polaron binding energy, with respect to the extended state of the carrier in an infinite lattice, is given by the sum of the kinetic energy of the carrier, the reorganization energy of nuclei, and the polarization energy of the surrounding dielectric. A detail derivation of these terms can be found in our previous work.16 In brief, the kinetic energy is given by the wavefunction square gradient terms of the tight-binding Hamiltonian (3)where aj,k is the amplitude of the charge carrier wavefunction on site j, k. The reorganization energy of nuclei is given by (4)where U0 is the reorganization energy per site. Δ〈Hnuc〉 is obtained by minimizing the Hamiltonian of a charge carrier coupled to the shape distortion of charge-bearing moieties, with respect to the distortion amplitude. The polarization energy of the surrounding polarizable medium with dielectric constant εr is given by (5)where EC(l,l′) is the Coulomb integral of two smeared local charge distributions located at sites l and l′, given by , when the charges are represented as 3D Gaussians of radius σ.
We add these relative energy terms to obtain the polaron binding energy with respect to the extended state of the carrier, Δ〈E〉p = Δ〈K〉2d + Δ〈Hnuc〉 + Δ〈Hpol〉, given by (6)We use this expression below to compute the barriers to polaron motion in P3HT crystalline lamellae and in the amorphous melt. For the amorphous melt where polarons reside on single chains, the expression will be accordingly altered. Unless otherwise noted, the parameters entering 〈ΔE〉p, as determined in our previous works,12,16,20 are: tintra = 0.98 eV, tinter = 0.02 eV, U0 = 0.66 eV, εr = 2, and σ = 2 Å.
3 Hopping barrier and rate calculation
We want to know the activation energy Ea and the rate constant kAB for a polaron transfer from initial location A to final location B. Here we describe our approach in computing these quantities.
The activation energy is given by the energy difference between the transition state and the initial state. The initial state consists of the initial and final segments, with the charge carrier localized on the initial segment, and the transition state consists of the initial and final segment, with the carrier equally divided between the two molecular units. Since polarons are the charge carriers, the relevant energy is the polaron binding energy 〈ΔE〉p. The activation energy is (7)where the superscripts * and 0 denote the transition and initial states respectively. Note that the initial and final states are degenerate in all the hopping events we consider, i.e., ΔEAB = 0 (see eqn (1)), so that the reorganization energy λ is given by λ = Ea/4.
Having determined Ea and λ, we use the Marcus rate eqn (1) to compute the polaron hopping rate. We expect the polaron to be delocalized over a number of sites, so the electronic coupling JAB that modulates the tunneling rate is given by . We can re-write Marcus rate constant as (8)Here aA is the onsite amplitude of the polaron for the initial location; α is the site index for the initial location; and t is the hopping matrix element entering our tight binding polaron model, which can be for either intra- or inter-chain hopping.
Below we use eqn (7) and (8) to determine the identified important polaron hopping barriers and rate constants in P3HT crystals and amorphous melts.
4 Hopping in ordered lamellea
To compute the barriers and rates of polaron motion in a crystalline lamellae, we first determine the optimal configuration of the isolated polaron in this environment, as in our previous work.16 The optimal configuration is obtained by minimizing 〈ΔE〉p with respect to the charge carrier wavefunction. The minimization can be done in two ways. First, we can impose a variational trial wavefunction and minimize with respect to its parameters. A Gaussian is a sensible choice, since the polaron is expected to be localized. The wavefunction amplitudes on each site in the lamella are given by (9)which is a 2D Gaussian centered at (k0, j0), with σx and σy the longitudinal and transverse size parameters that are optimized. j, k are site and chain counters respectively. Second, we can minimize 〈ΔE〉p with respect to the full set of {ajk}, subject to the constraint . This approach does not impose a Gaussian shape to the probability density.
We adopt the first minimizing strategy in the lamella. The resulting polaron is depicted in Fig. 1, which shows a charge carrier localized mostly to a single chain, with a longitudinal width  of two sites. The polaron binding energy with respect to a fully delocalized carrier 〈ΔE〉p is 0.55 eV.
 Fig. 1  Polaron in a P3HT crystalline lamella. Charge carrier reside mostly on a single chain. 
Because the lamella is well ordered, we expect the shape of the polaron to remain the same as the polaron moves from one segment to another. The transition state is attained when the polaron center of charge is located halfway between the initial and final molecular units. We use this approach to find the barrier to polaron motion along and between ordered chains. If the energy barrier is well in excess of kT, a hopping description of transport is applicable, and we proceed to determine the hopping rate constant.
4.1 Transport along a chain
In considering a polaron moving along a P3HT polymer chain in a 2D lamella. we neglect the effects of any disorder, expected to be small in this environment. We compute the energy barrier for polaron motion to ascertain whether transport along chains is thermally activated. Fig. 1 shows that the optimal configuration of the polaron has the carrier probability distribution mostly on a single chain, with the center of charge located on a site. As the polaron center of charge moves from this minimum-energy position along the chain, the polaron formation energy increases slightly.
We map out the polaron binding energy as a function of the center of charge position between two successive sites. To do this, we compute 〈ΔE〉p given the optimal shape of the polaron obtained when the carrier is centered on a site, but with the center of charge constrained to reside at different points between two sites through its coordinate k0 (see eqn (9)). The result are shown is Fig. 2, where the computed polaron binding energies, referenced to the polaron centered on a single site, are shown in (a) along with representative carrier charge distributions in (b). As anticipated, the binding energy peaks for the state in which the polaron is at the midpoint between two sites, with equal probability distribution on either sides of this point. This state is the transition state, and determines the barrier for polaron motion along the chain. This activation energy Ea = ΔEmax is negligibly small – only 0.25 × 10−5 eV, four orders of magnitude smaller than thermal energy at 300 K.
 Fig. 2  (a) Polaron binding energy versus position of center of charge between two sites along an ordered chain in a lamella. Energy is referenced to polaron centered on a site. (b) Polaron density projected unto a single chain, showing the initial state (centered at 0, triangles), the transition state (centered at 0.5, squares) and the final state (centered at 1, circles). 
Thus polaron motion along ordered chains is not thermally activated, and may be better described by treating polarons as quasiparticles moving semi-classically. Indeed, this is consistent with the experimental observation of Sher et al.,21 who performed time resolved THz spectroscopy (TRTS) measurements of charge mobility along P3HT chains with high regio-regularity of side chains in a P3HT film. They found that the mobility was constant around 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at different temperatures (between 4 and 50 °C), suggesting that transport along well ordered chains is not thermally activated.
4.2 Interchain hopping
We now consider polarons moving between P3HT chains in a perfectly ordered 2D lamella. We compute the activation energy for interchain polaron motion to confirm that hopping transport is the governing mechanism in this case, and then calculate the corresponding hopping rate.

Activation energy. 
We again expect the transition state for polaron hopping from one chain to its neighbor corresponds to the polaron center of charge halfway between the two chains. We map out the corresponding potential energy curve (see Fig. 3a), as in the previous section. The potential is obtained by computing 〈ΔE〉p given the optimal shape of the charge carrier wavefunction obtained with the polaron centered on a single chain, but with the center of charge constrained to reside at a location between two chains. The polaron charge distributions for the initial and the final states of this process are shown in Fig. 3b. The potential energy surface reveals an activation energy for interchain hopping of about 0.09 eV, more than three times thermal energy at 300 K. This is a significant barrier, for which hopping charge transport is an appropriate description.
 Fig. 3  (a) Relative polaron binding energy versus center of charge location between two chains in P3HT lamella. Reference is polaron centered on a single chain. (b) Transition state for polaron hopping between two chains (chains 5 and 6). (c) Interchain polaron hopping barrier versus interchain hopping matrix element tinter. (d) Polaron size (number of sites with significant amplitude) and 〈ΔE〉pversus tinter, for the initial state. 
The computed activation energy depends somewhat on the interchain hopping matrix element tinter (see Fig. 3c). In computing the barriers in this figure, the polaron wavefunction was re-optimized by minimizing 〈ΔE〉p with respect to the width parameters, with different tinter values. The energy barrier for interchain hopping is finite even at a vanishing hopping matrix element (although the prefactor for hopping would vanish in this limit), with larger tinter values leading to smaller barriers. Large tinter values spread out the polaron transversely in the initial, final and transition states, leading to reduced binding energy and larger size (see Fig. 3d). This is because the carrier kinetic energy, represented by the hopping matrix elements, competes with nuclear reorganization and polarization in forming the polaron (see eqn (6)). Because the transition state has the polaron sitting exactly between two chains, it has overall smaller wavefunction gradients in the interchain direction compared to the initial or final states. Hence it is less destabilized by larger tinter values than these two states, resulting in a smaller energy barrier for polaron hopping.
The negligible barrier to polaron motion along chains compared to the value of several kT for hopping between chains, and the much smaller electronic coupling between moieties on adjacent chains than between moieties along a chain (tintra ≫ tinter), implies charge carriers move readily along chains in organic electronic devices. This conclusion is in agreement with the experimentally observed correlation between mobility and paracrystallinity order along the π-stacking interchain direction in P3HT thin films of sufficiently high molecular weight.22 This correlation suggests interchain charge motion in P3HT lamellae governs the average carrier mobility in such P3HT films. Indeed, P3HT films with high molar mass chains have sufficient intercrystallite connectivity through tie-chains that charge mobility within the film is limited by intracrystallite features, as recently shown by Gu et al.23
The activation energies for charge transport in P3HT films as described above, obtained from temperature-dependent field-effect mobility measurements, agree well with our predicted barrier for interchain hopping in P3HT crystalline lamellae. The barrier predicted by our model is 0.09 eV, very close to the activation energies of 84 meV, measured by Sirrighaus et al.24 for P3HT, and 72 ± 0.24 meV for thiophene-based semicrystalline polymers, as summarized by Noriega et al.9


Rate constant. 
To compute the hopping rate, we use the Marcus result, eqn (8). The value of the interchain hopping matrix element tinter strongly affects the hopping rate, because both the activation barrier and the tunneling rate (front factor) are strong functions of tinter. To explore this dependence, we compute the hopping rate constant for a range of tinter values. These results are shown in Fig. 4 for tinter between 0.01 and 1.0 eV. The result corresponding to a P3HT crystalline lamella is indicated by the arrow, kij = 0.4 × 1012 s−1 for tinter = 0.02 eV, where the tinter value was previously determined by matching tight-binding band structure to DFT calculation.20
 Fig. 4  Interchain polaron hopping rate and associated diffusion constant for P3HT crystalline lamellae. Up arrow shows result from this work, while dashed line indicates experiments from ref. 23, 25 and 26. 
To compare our predictions to experiment, note that charge transport measurements are traditionally reported as a mobility μ [cm2 V−1 s−1], which can be converted to a diffusion constant D using the Einstein relation D = kTμ. At 300 K, a mobility of 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 corresponds to a diffusion constant of 0.025 cm2 s−1, and a diffusion constant of 1 cm2 s−1 corresponds to a mobility of 40 cm2 V−1 s−1. We use our predicted hopping rate to determine the corresponding effective diffusion constant, using an appropriate distance traveled by the charge carrier between hops.
For the ordered phase, we take the separation between chains as the distance traveled by the carrier between hops. The computed diffusion constants versus hopping integrals can be read on the secondary axis in Fig. 4, where the dashed line represents two sets of experiments on crystalline nanofibers25,26 and a set of experiments on thin films of high-molecular-weight chains with sufficient intercrystallite connectivity.23 Our predictions show excellent agreement with these experiments, which all report a field-effect mobility μ = 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1, corresponding to a diffusion constant D = 0.5 × 10−3 cm2 s−1.
The agreement between our result and experiments on crystalline nanofibers suggests transport for these samples is primarily along the fiber, in the π–π-stacking direction. We can verify that transport along the chain does not alter this simple picture, as follows. The experimental single-chain mobility of the charge carrier in this environment is about 1 cm2 V−1 s−1,21 which corresponds to a diffusion length of less than seven thiophene rings during the time it takes for the carrier to hop from one chain to another. This diffusion length is small compared to the typical fiber width in these experiments, about 40–60 rings.25,26 Therefore, during the characteristic time of interchain hopping events, intrachain motion would not be effective in moving the carrier transversely beyond the limits of the nanofiber (perhaps to another such fiber, connected by tie chains).
Our mobility prediction for hopping between chains in ordered lamellae is also in good agreement with experiments on thin films with well-connected crystallites,23 consistent with the established view that charge transport in P3HT thin films with ample tie chains is limited by interchain hopping. We note that a charge mobility of as much as an order magnitude larger than 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 has been observed for P3HT thin films made from a blend of regio-regular and regio-random chains, and aligned with ultraviolet (UV) irradiation.27 The combination of the blend and UV irradiation led to the formation of large nanofibrils, with good alignment and chain packing. Indeed, optimal packing of chains in the lamella can lead to a several-fold increase in the interchain hopping integral, which is highly sensitive to changes in the interchain distance and the longitudinal shift between adjacent chains (see Fig. S1 and S2, ESI†). The enhancement of the hopping integral may explain the large charge mobility in ref. 27.

5 Hopping in amorphous melt
In the amorphous melt as in a crystalline lamella, a polaron can move between chains and along chains. However, amorphous chains are randomly situated relative to each other, resulting in larger and varying distances between moieties on different chains, with only few places where moieties on different chains are close and well aligned. These larger distances imply smaller electronic couplings. Thus, we focus on interchain hopping between rings on nearby chains with the smallest separations (see Fig. 5). For intrachain motion, in contrast to the lamella where dihedral rotation is restricted by steric effects arising from the close packing of chains, dihedrals in the melt are more free to rotate, and large deviations from planarity are more frequent. The persistence length of a P3HT chain in the melt is only six rings.28 Dihedral distortions are well known to be associated with reduced electronic coupling (reduced hopping matrix elements) between successive rings.12 We thus focus on intrachain hopping across “bad dihedrals” (see Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Illustration of a P3HT amorphous melt (side chains not included), showing charge carrier hopping across bad dihedral and across two chains. 
In both these hopping processes in the melt, the shape of the carrier probability distribution distorts during the hopping process. Here, we represent the transition state as a state in which the carrier is equally likely to be found on either side of the bad dihedral, with the carrier probability distribution fully optimized rather than assumed to be Gaussian.
5.1 Intrachain hopping across a distorted dihedral

Activation energy. 
We have shown that in ordered P3HT crystalline lamellae, the energy barrier to intrachain polaron motion is almost insignificant. Here, we consider hopping across a distorted “bad dihedral”' along a chain in the melt. We seek the barrier associated with this hopping process, and its dependence on dihedral angle. Because the polaron width is smaller than the persistence length of a polymer chain, we assume distorted dihedrals are isolated along the chain, so we need only consider one bad dihedral at a time.
To compute the potential energy curve for hopping across a bad dihedral, we minimize Δ〈E〉p with respect to the set of wavefunction expansion coefficients {ak} along the chain, while constraining the carrier probability on the two sides of the dihedral (which we call the “split fraction”). We minimize with respect to the entire set of {ak}, because the rotated dihedral disrupts the polaron wavefunction such that a Gaussian shape can no longer be assumed. The potential is shown in Fig. 6a for t = 0 eV at the disrupted bond corresponding to a 90° dihedral, and representative polaron probability distributions for five points along the curve are shown in Fig. 6b.
 Fig. 6  (a) Relative polaron binding energy versus carrier “split fraction” across two sides of a bad bond. (b) Representative carrier charge distribution for some split fractions in (a). (c) Intrachain polaron hopping barrier versus hopping integral across bad bond. (d) Same as (a), but as a function of bad dihedral angle. 
A rather large energy barrier of 0.3 eV is observed in the worst-case scenario of no electronic coupling across the distorted dihedral. The large barrier can be explained by how poorly the transition state (see diamond shape in Fig. 6b) is stabilized by its interaction with the surrounding dielectric medium, because of the large spatial separation between the two “halves” of the transition state.

Fig. 6c and d display the barrier as a function of hopping integral across the dihedral, and as a function of the dihedral angle, respectively. (The hopping integrals as a function of dihedral angles was determined from DFT calculations in our previous work.12) As expected, the barrier increases with dihedral distortion from planarity, which destroys the electronic coupling between the two rings across the dihedral. The most frequent dihedral angles along chains in a P3HT melt are around 30°, as determined from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in our previous work.12 For these dihedrals, the barrier is about 0.09 eV, or about 4kT at 300 K.
The large barriers to hop across distorted dihedrals suggest that intrachain polaron transport in the melt should be strongly temperature dependent.


Rate constant. 
We compute the rate of hopping across distorted dihedrals on melt chains again using Marcus theory, eqn (8). Dihedral distortions greatly affect the hopping integral between rings across the distorted dihedral, which governs the prefactor in Marcus theory. Fig. 7 shows our predicted rate constants versus dihedral distortion (see left axis and circles). In the worst-case scenario of a 90° distortion, electronic coupling is zero and no hopping occurs. For a dihedral distortion of 89° the rate is 105 s−1, and increases continuously by nine orders of magnitude as the distortion is reduced to 30°. Transport across these more favorable dihedral angles is rapid, occurring in less than 1 fs.
 Fig. 7  Rate constant for polaron hopping across distorted dihedral (left axis, circles) and for dihedral decay (right axis, squares) along amorphous P3HT chains. 
Dihedrals along a given chain are not fixed; they relax to more favorable geometries with an associated rate. It is conceivable that for some large dihedral distortions, charge transport across the unfavorable dihedral may be determined by the rate at which this dihedral relaxes to a more favorable geometry, rather than by the hopping rate across the fixed dihedral. To see this, we used MD simulations to determine the dihedral decay rate along P3HT chains in the amorphous state. Simulations were performed at 600 K and 1 bar pressure within GROMACS,29 using OPLS forcefield parameters,30 except for dihedral potentials obtained from Huang and co-workers.31,32 We shift the dihedral decay rates obtained at 600 K to 300 K using an activation energy for monomer relaxation from P3HT rheology data,33 and compare these rates with the charge hopping rates computed at 300 K. The procedure used to obtain distortion decay rates is described in more details in the Appendix.

Fig. 7 shows the dihedral decay rates (secondary axis, squares) along side the charge hopping rates. The dihedral decay rate is 1012 s−1 for a dihedral distortion of 89°, and decreases continuously to reach only 107 s−1 for a 60° distortion. As indicated above, the hopping rate does the opposite and increases from 106 s−1 at 89° to 1014 s−1 at 30°. For distortions of less than 75°, hopping is faster than dihedral readjustment, whereas for dihedral distortions between 75 and 90°, hopping takes place after the dihedral readjusts to a more favorable geometry for transport. After all, the worst-case scenario is not a 90° dihedral distortion, but rather any distortion above 75°. For these distortions the rate at which the charge carrier can move passed the dihedral does not go below the charge hopping rate associated with a 75° dihedral.
A detailed estimate of the diffusion constant of charge carriers along P3HT chains in the amorphous state would require a more complex approach than what was used above for interchain hopping in the lamella. The contribution of hopping events across the different dihedrals along the chain as well as how often these dihedrals occur must be taken into account. Moreover, short-time TRTS measurements performed on RRa P3HT films reveal an intrachain charge mobility of around 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is several orders of magnitude higher than the mobility measured across the whole film.21 This suggests polaron hopping between chains is the rate-limiting step for transport in amorphous films. As such we do not further discuss intrachain hopping, but we turn our attention below to interchain polaron hopping in the amorphous state.

5.2 Interchain hopping in the melt
Now we turn to the activation energy and rate for hopping between chains in the melt, mediated by electronic coupling between nearby rings. Evidently, the shortest distance between rings on the two chain segments strongly affects the hopping rate. This distance governs the hopping integral between the rings, and also affects the activation barrier. To find the distribution of shortest interchain ring-to-ring distances, we use MD simulations of a P3HT melt. Fig. 8 displays a histogram of the distance from a given ring to the nearest ring on another chain, suggesting a typical shortest ring-to-ring distance of 6 Å.
 Fig. 8  Histogram of shortest interchain ring-to-ring distances in a P3HT amorphous melt. The typical shortest distance is about 6 Å. 
The intrachain hopping barrier and rate evidently depend on the angle between the two chain segments. To start with, we assume the worst-case scenario, i.e., an angle θ of 90° between the chains, in the plane perpendicular to the vector connecting the two closest rings (see Fig. 5). With this assumption, no interchain coupling is included between any rings other than the single rings of closest approach on the chains. We also assume that the initial and final chain segments have no dihedral disorder, which is reasonable since the polaron size is only 2.5 rings wide. To obtain the interchain ring-to-ring hopping matrix element for distances around 6 Å, we extrapolate our tinterversus Δch DFT data (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†) using an exponential decay function tinter,0exp(− 2αΔch). A very small value of 0.06 meV is obtained. The DFT results used here were obtained using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) on a periodic unit cell containing two chains modeled by their two-ring repeat units, with shift along the backbone of 1.25 Å between the two chains.

Activation energy. 
To compute the activation energy for interchain hopping, we once again obtain the potential energy associated with the hopping process. Fig. 9a displays the potential energy as a function of the charge carrier fraction on the initial chain, relative to the polaron formation energy on a single chain. Corresponding representative carrier charge distributions on the two chains are shown in Fig. 9b.
 Fig. 9  (a) Polaron binding energy versus polaron fraction on the initial chains, relative to a polaron on a single chain. Chains have relative angle of 90°; hopping only allowed between the two nearest moieties. (b) Representative polaron probability distributions; chain 1 (filled shape) and chain 2 (open shape). Three split fractions shown: 0 (circle), 1/4 (square), and 1/2 (diamond). (c) Hopping barrier versus hopping matrix element tinter. Shortest interchain distance kept at 6 Å. (d) Hopping barrier (circle) and tinter (square) versus shortest interchain distance. 
As expected, the transition state corresponds to a polaron split fraction of 0.5 (i.e., to the polaron equally divided between the initial and final chains). An activation energy of 0.16 eV can be read from Fig. 9a. This large barrier to polaron hopping, about 6kT at 300 K, suggests a strong temperature dependence for intrachain hopping in the melt. The large barrier results from the large spatial separation of the two obliquely oriented halves of the transition state, which results in weaker stabilization by the polarization of the surrounding material.

Fig. 9c shows that the barrier decreases roughly linearly with increasing hopping integral tinter values at fixed shortest interchain distance. This same behavior was observed for interchain hopping in the lamella, for the same reason; larger hopping integrals destabilize the initial and final states more than the transition state, which lowers the activation energy. However, even with an interchain hopping integral of 0.2 eV, which is as large as can be achieved for hole carriers in P3HT lamellae with optimum interchain alignment, the hopping barrier is still about 4kT at 300 K. The barriers in this case are larger than for interchain hopping in ordered lamellae (Fig. 3c), because the interchain distance is larger and the chains are oriented obliquely.

Fig. 9d presents computed barriers versus distance between nearest monomers on neighboring chains, together with the corresponding interchain hopping integrals. The hopping integral tinter is small, and decreases strongly with increasing distance (see Fig. S1, ESI†). The barrier evidently increases with interchain distance; when the two halves of the polaron in the transition state are far apart, the medium polarization is less effective in stabilizing a more delocalized charge density.
This same phenomenon governs the dependence of the barrier on the relative angle between the two chains. Larger interchain angles lead to more sites of the initial and final polarons being further apart. The medium polarization is less able to stabilize a more spread-out charge distribution, which leads to a higher energy for the transition state and thus larger hopping barriers. Fig. 10 displays the barrier versus interchain angle for two different interchain distances (barriers computed in the limit of vanishing hopping integral).
 Fig. 10  Interchain hopping barrier versus angle between chain segments for P3HT amorphous melt. Two separation distances shown: 3.75 Å (square) and 6 Å (circle). 
Our predicted interchain hopping barriers are consistent with measured activation energies for charge transport in amorphous regio-random P3HT films. Our model predicts a barrier of 0.16 ± 0.05 eV, depending on the interchain angle, in good agreement with the value measured by Noriega et al.9 (0.16 eV, from temperature-dependent field effect mobility data). This agreement between predictions for interchain hopping and experimental results for amorphous films further supports the view that charge transport in P3HT melts is limited by interchain polaron hopping.


Rate constant. 
We compute the rate for hopping between amorphous chains using Marcus theory, eqn (8). For this geometry, the sum  corresponds to the occupation of the single ring at which hopping occurs. We compute hopping rates for a range of values of the interchain ring-to-ring distance, since the rate depends sensitively on this distance. Fig. 11 displays hopping rates versus interchain ring-to-ring distances Δch ranging from 4 to 7.5 Å (see primary axis). The rate for the typical shortest distance Δch = 6 Å, indicated by the arrow, is 0.4 × 105 s−1.
 Fig. 11  Interchain hopping rate and diffusion constants for P3HT melt chains versus shortest interchain ring-to-ring distance Δch. Arrow indicates result for average Δch; dashed line is experiment for amorphous thin films of ref. 21. 
To compare our predicted hopping rates to experimental mobilities, we must determine the typical distance a polaron travels along a chain between interchain hops. We have discussed above that motion along chains in the melt is rapid, with a measured mobility of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. This corresponds to a polaron diffusing along a chain an arclength of 6 × 103 rings during the time for one hopping event to occur. This distance is about 10 times the contour length of the chains used in the experiments (60 kg mol−1). Hence these polarons explore the full length of a given chain multiple times before hopping to the next chain. Therefore, in estimating the polaron diffusivity, we take the typical distance traveled between interchain hops to be the radius of gyration (Rg = 37 rings or 150 Å, for chains of 60 kg mol−1).

Fig. 11 displays the estimated diffusion constants, plotted on the secondary axis. The value that best represents a P3HT melt, marked by the arrow, is 1 × 10−7 cm2 s−1. This value is in good agreement with experiment 3 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 indicated by the dashed line, obtained using the Einstein relation from the measured charge mobility 1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 of RRa-P3HT thin films.21 Consistent with our activation energy results, our predicted hopping rates support the view that charge transport in amorphous P3HT films is limited by interchain polaron hopping.

6. Conclusions
Charge carriers in conjugated polymers are localized by disorder and polaronic effects. As a result, charge transport in these materials is often described as a non-adiabatic process, in which carriers hop from one localized state to another with a rate given by Marcus theory. The Marcus hopping rate depends on two quantities: the energy barrier, and the hopping matrix element. We predict polaron hopping barriers and rate constants for P3HT chains in both crystalline and amorphous phases. Our predictions rely on a tight-binding model of polaron formation, in which charge carriers are stabilized by nuclear reorganization and by polarization of the surrounding dielectric. Our model predictions are in excellent agreement with experiment.
In ordered crystalline lamellae, we find that charge transport along P3HT chains is not temperature activated, with a negligible activation barrier to polaron motion of only 10−5 eV. We conclude this type of polaron motion is better described by adiabatic transport. In contrast, charge transport between chains in ordered lamellae is predicted to be activated, with an energy barrier of 0.09 eV and a rate constant of about 0.5 × 1012 s−1, in good agreement with experiment on crystalline nanofibrils and P3HT thin films with well connected crystallites.
In amorphous melts, we consider polaron hopping across distorted dihedrals along a single chain, and between chains at points where monomers on two chains come close together. For motion along chains, we find that large dihedral distortions are associated with large activation barriers for hopping across and small hopping rates. We also find that dihedral readjustment to smaller angles can assist the transport of charge carriers along the chain. For dihedral distortions of less than 75°, the hopping rate is greater than the dihedral decay rate; and the opposite is true for angles between 75 and 90°. Charge transport is assisted by dihedral decay for these large dihedrals, such that hopping occurs at a rate that does not go below that expected for an angle around 75°.
For interchain motion, we predict a strong temperature dependence for transport, with an activation energy of 0.16 eV and hopping rate constant of about 0.5 × 105 s−1, in good agreement with experiments on amorphous P3HT films. We show that in P3HT amorphous melts, polarons can typically diffuse over the entire length of a given chain before hopping to another. Thus for both amorphous and crystalline P3HT, we predict that barriers arising from dihedral disorder along a given chain are not the rate-limiting step for charge transport.
The activation barrier for polaron hopping between chains depends primarily on the distance between the initial and final locations. The surrounding polarizable medium more effectively stabilizes the compact polaron before and after the hop relative to the transition state, which is increasingly spread out when the initial and final locations are farther apart. The hopping integral is likewise a strongly decreasing function of the distance between the initial and final locations of the polaron, which also favors polaron transport between well aligned chain segments in ordered phases as compared to amorphous melts.
The approach presented in this work for P3HT, can also be applied to other semiconducting polymers. The parameters entering our model, namely the hopping matrix elements, the characteristic nuclear reorganization energy, the effective dielectric constant and the typical interchain distance, can all be determined for other conjugated polymers, including push–pull copolymers.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Appendix
We use MD simulations to determine the rate of dihedral readjustment along P3HT chains in the amorphous state. Simulations of regio-regular P3HT at 600 K and 1 bar pressure were performed. From the simulation trajectories, we obtain dihedral time series for all the dihedrals present along the chain backbones. The simulated melt contained 64 chains with 20 monomers each, amounting to 1088 dihedral time series. From the dihedral time series, we calculate characteristic function χ(t,ϕ), which equals to 1 when dihedral angle θ is within 90 ± ϕ and 0 otherwise. Then we calculate the correlation function 〈χ(0,ϕ)·χ(t,ϕ)〉, which is averaged over 1088 dihedral angles. At t = 0, 〈χ(0,ϕ)·χ(t,ϕ)〉 averages to p, probability of dihedral angle θ to be within 90 ± ϕ. And at long times, 〈χ(0,ϕ)·χ(t,ϕ)〉 averages to p2. Hence we determine the dihedral decay rate constant as the inverse of the time required for the correlation function  to decay to 1/e2, i.e. close to 0.
The dihedral decay rates for different distortions are obtained at 600 K as described above. To compare with the hopping rates, we need the decay rates at 300 K. The monomer relaxation has Arrhenius dependence on temperature and associated activation energy is 65 ± 3 kJ mol−1.33 Using the Arrhenius relation and dihedral decay rates at 600 K, we calculate dihedral decay rates at 300 K as shown in Fig. 7.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Wenlin Zhang for his helpful input in determining the electronic contribution to the dielectric constant of P3HT. J. Bombile acknowledges training provided by the Computational Materials Education and Training (CoMET) NSF Research Traineeship (grant number DGE-1449785).
References
F. Garnier, R. Hajlaoui, A. Yassar and P. Srivastava, Science, 1994, 265, 1684–1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Synth. Met., 1993, 59, 333–352 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, G. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kwon, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7821–7861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
Best Research Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20191106.pdf, accessed: 2019-12-12.

          H. Bässler and A. Köhler, Topics in current chemistry,  2011, vol. 312, pp. 1–65 Search PubMed .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P. V. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Zhao, H. S. Tan, Y. Guo, C.-A. Di, G. Yu, Y. Liu, M. Lin, S. H. Lim, Y. Zhou, H. Su and B. S. Ong, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–9 CAS .
S. Stafström, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2484 RSC .
J. H. Bombile, M. J. Janik and S. T. Milner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12521–12533 RSC .
P. W. Anderson, Phys. Rev., 1958, 109, 1492–1505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miller and E. Abrahams, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120, 745–755 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Landau, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion, 1933, 3, 664 CAS .
J. H. Bombile, M. J. Janik and S. T. Milner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 317–331 RSC .
R. A. Marcus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 1111–1121 CrossRef .
R. P. Fornari, J. Aragó and A. Troisi, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 184105 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Taylor and I. Kassal, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2942–2951 RSC .
W. Zhang, J. H. Bombile, A. R. Weisen, R. Xie, R. H. Colby, M. J. Janik, S. T. Milner and E. D. Gomez, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 1900134 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-J. Sher, J. A. Bartelt, T. M. Burke, A. Salleo, M. D. McGehee and A. M. Lindenberg, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500351 CrossRef .
R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gu, C. R. Snyder, J. Onorato, C. K. Luscombe, A. W. Bosse and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 1333–1338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, Y. Jang, Y. D. Park and K. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15763–15768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19169–19179 CrossRef CAS .
P.-H. Chu, G. Wang, B. Fu, D. Choi, J. O. Park, M. Srinivasarao and E. Reichmanis, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500384 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, E. D. Gomez and S. T. Milner, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6453–6461 CrossRef CAS .
D. Van Der Spoel, E. Lindahl, B. Hess, G. Groenhof, A. E. Mark and H. J. C. Berendsen, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1701–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Jorgensen, J. D. Madura and C. J. Swenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 6638–6646 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Huang, R. Faller, K. Do and A. J. Moule, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 526–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Schwarz, T. W. Kee and D. M. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2017 RSC .
R. Xie, Y. Lee, M. P. Aplan, N. J. Caggiano, C. Müller, R. H. Colby and E. D. Gomez, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5146–5154 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp06039aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 1  Polaron in a P3HT crystalline lamella. Charge carrier reside mostly on a single chain.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Polaron binding energy versus position of center of charge between two sites along an ordered chain in a lamella. Energy is referenced to polaron centered on a site. (b) Polaron density projected unto a single chain, showing the initial state (centered at 0, triangles), the transition state (centered at 0.5, squares) and the final state (centered at 1, circles).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Relative polaron binding energy versus center of charge location between two chains in P3HT lamella. Reference is polaron centered on a single chain. (b) Transition state for polaron hopping between two chains (chains 5 and 6). (c) Interchain polaron hopping barrier versus interchain hopping matrix element tinter. (d) Polaron size (number of sites with significant amplitude) and 〈ΔE〉pversus tinter, for the initial state.	 

 	Fig. 4  Interchain polaron hopping rate and associated diffusion constant for P3HT crystalline lamellae. Up arrow shows result from this work, while dashed line indicates experiments from ref. 23, 25 and 26.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of a P3HT amorphous melt (side chains not included), showing charge carrier hopping across bad dihedral and across two chains.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Relative polaron binding energy versus carrier “split fraction” across two sides of a bad bond. (b) Representative carrier charge distribution for some split fractions in (a). (c) Intrachain polaron hopping barrier versus hopping integral across bad bond. (d) Same as (a), but as a function of bad dihedral angle.	 

 	Fig. 7  Rate constant for polaron hopping across distorted dihedral (left axis, circles) and for dihedral decay (right axis, squares) along amorphous P3HT chains.	 

 	Fig. 8  Histogram of shortest interchain ring-to-ring distances in a P3HT amorphous melt. The typical shortest distance is about 6 Å.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Polaron binding energy versus polaron fraction on the initial chains, relative to a polaron on a single chain. Chains have relative angle of 90°; hopping only allowed between the two nearest moieties. (b) Representative polaron probability distributions; chain 1 (filled shape) and chain 2 (open shape). Three split fractions shown: 0 (circle), 1/4 (square), and 1/2 (diamond). (c) Hopping barrier versus hopping matrix element tinter. Shortest interchain distance kept at 6 Å. (d) Hopping barrier (circle) and tinter (square) versus shortest interchain distance.	 

 	Fig. 10  Interchain hopping barrier versus angle between chain segments for P3HT amorphous melt. Two separation distances shown: 3.75 Å (square) and 6 Å (circle).	 

 	Fig. 11  Interchain hopping rate and diffusion constants for P3HT melt chains versus shortest interchain ring-to-ring distance Δch. Arrow indicates result for average Δch; dashed line is experiment for amorphous thin films of ref. 21.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp06039a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
