Bulk heterojunction-induced ion transport in nanochannel arrays for light-enhanced osmotic energy conversion   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA06432D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA06432D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 23823-23830Bulk heterojunction-induced ion transport in nanochannel arrays for light-enhanced osmotic energy conversion†

        
          
            Youfeng 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liangqian 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Guo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yutong 
            Geng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Ren
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            You 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xia 
            Fan
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Weimin 
            Liu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Zhai
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Pengfei 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Lei 
            Jiang
          
        
      a
aSchool of Chemistry, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: fanxia@buaa.edu.cn; zhaijin@buaa.edu.cn
bTechnical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: wmliu@mail.ipc.ac.cn
Received 
      15th August 2022
    , Accepted 14th October 2022First published on 15th October 2022AbstractBioinspired nanochannel systems exhibiting analogous energy conversion characteristics have attracted great interest. Here, we develop a nanochannel array by modifying bilayer light-responsive molecules onto specific segments of alumina nanochannels. Based on the energy level difference between positively charged poly(3-thiophene-phenyl-tridecyl ammonium bromide) (PT2) and negatively charged cis-bis-(4,4-dicarboxy-2,2-bipyridine)dithiocyanato ruthenium(II) (N3), a bulk heterojunction is established that induces the transfer of excited electrons from donor PT2 to acceptor N3 following a “Z-scheme”, which is conducive to improving ion selective transport and total transmembrane ion flux. The nanochannel array shows excellent cation selectivity and diode-like ion rectification behavior. Incorporating the enhancement of surface charge density, a record light-induced ion current change (PICC) ratio of 128% is achieved in the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel array. Owing to the synergistic effect of salinity gradient energy and light irradiation, the ion current induced by the bulk heterojunction significantly increases the output power density. The maximum improvement of power density is 79% at a load resistance of 0.7 kΩ. This work provides a new route to develop high-performance photoelectric conversion systems and integrated osmotic power generation.
1. Introduction
In nature, certain organisms can implement a series of energy conversion reactions relying on their own somatic cell structure and function. For example, plant chloroplasts can proceed with the conversion of solar to chemical energy via multiple steps, including charge separation,1 electron transfer,2 and chemical reaction,3 which makes the energy conversion efficiency of the original reaction as high as 90%. Another representative example is the electric eel, which is able to accomplish the conversion of salinity gradient energy into electrical power with an action potential of up to 600 V.4 In these systems, biological ion channels in the plasma membrane play irreplaceable role owing to their specific functions, such as ionic selective transportation and ionic gating in response to external stimuli. However, biological ion channels need to rely on a particular lipid environment to perform their functions. A series of biomimetic nanochannel membranes have been constructed,5 which exhibit diverse performance, satisfactory hardness and stability.6 Ionic transmembrane transportation behavior can be regulated by modulating the geometry,7 surface charge,8 or chemical composition of these nanochannels.9,10
Researchers use light-responsive materials to simulate plant photosynthesis, endowing biomimetic nanochannels with high light sensitivity and excellent photoelectric conversion performance. By introducing light-responsive molecules into heterogeneous materials, complex, intelligent and efficient response systems can be realized. Azobenzene,11 spiropyran and other molecules modify the inner surface of the nanochannel, and light-regulated logic gating can be realized based on the change in molecular structure. In addition, the enhancement of the surface charge density of the functionalized channels of light-responsive molecules12 under light stimulation is accompanied by the generation of ionic currents, which promote the development of artificial light-capture systems. Bakker et al.13 assembled spiropyran molecules into a supported liquid membrane with ultraviolet and visible light irradiation on alternating opposite segments, realizing a light-driven proton pump. Taking advantage of the high surface area and hydrophobicity of the lettuce-shaped CuxS particles, Bo et al.14 constructed light-regulated nanochannels with good response and stability by spin-coating the particles effectively loaded with spiropyran. Liu et al.15 reported a light-powered ion pump in a polystyrene sulfonate anion (PSS) doped polypyrrole (PPy) membrane. Previous research demonstrated an enhanced photoelectric conversion based on N3/PTE-BS asymmetrical modified nanochannels.16 However, the separation of light-induced electron–hole pairs (excitons) is suppressed to a certain extent due to the limited diffusion length of excitons,17 by which the electrons cannot be efficiently transferred and a weak light-induced nanofluid current is observed.
In this work, we ingeniously designed a nanochannel array characterized by bulk heterojunction by patterning two light-responsive molecules with opposite charges onto nanochannels, in which excited electrons can be efficiently separated and transferred. Based on a reasonable energy level difference between two light-sensitive molecules, the excited electrons can be transferred from the donor molecule to the acceptor molecule upon light radiation. The unique bulk heterojunction-induced ion transport bestows the nanochannel array with preferable photoelectric conversion performance with a record PICC ratio of 128%, placing it as one of the advancing electrical energy collectors. Moreover, this nanochannel array shows excellent cation selectivity and high ionic flux. By simulating artificial seawater and river water, the nanochannel array produces a promising output power density of 13.7 W m−2 under light stimulation. Bulk heterojunction-induced ionic current greatly increases the total transmembrane ion flux, and the maximum increase ratio of light stimulation to output power density is as high as 79%. The promising photoelectric membrane provides methodological guidance for designing sustainable nanofluidic energy conversion systems.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Preparation of funnel-shaped porous alumina nanochannel array
The asymmetric funnel-shaped porous alumina nanochannel array was prepared by a three-step anodic oxidation process and phosphoric acid reaming procedure. First, a flat aluminum foil was polished in a mixture of oxalate and ethanol for 7 min at 17 V voltage. Then, the first anodic oxidation was carried out in 0.3 M oxalic acid solution for 2 h, and the oxidation temperature was maintained at 5 °C. The obtained alumina pores were poorly ordered, so the first oxide layer was corroded with a mixture of phosphoric acid and chromium trioxide. Next is the second oxidation, the base segment of the alumina nanochannel was formed after an 8 h oxidation. Then, the pore expansion process is carried out in phosphoric acid solution. Then, the sample was subjected to the third anodic oxidation under the same conditions, and the tip segment of the alumina nanochannel was obtained after a 4 h oxidation. After three oxidation steps, a barrier layer with a certain thickness was also formed on the back of the aluminum foil. The barrier layer was removed by immersing the obtained porous alumina in phosphoric acid solution, and the funnel-shaped porous alumina nanochannel array was successfully prepared.
2.2. Fabrication of bulk heterojunction-characterized nanochannel array
N3 and PT2 were patterned onto the specific segments of funnel-shaped Al2O3 nanochannel by a facile DLP method. Firstly, the as-prepared Al2O3 membrane was boiled in 30 wt% hydrogen peroxide (pH = 2.84) for 1 h to activate the hydroxyl groups on the surface of the nanochannel. Next, the covalent modification of PT2 molecules in the channel was realized by a 10 h chemical reaction in a thermostatic metal bath driven by the gravity and capillary force of the solution. Then, the Al2O3 membrane was placed in a home-made cell, where one chamber was filled with N3 solution (2 mM), while the other chamber was filled with ethanol solution. After 2 h of electrostatic interaction, N3 patterned into the T segment of funnel-shaped channel successfully. The PT2/N3(T) bulk heterojunction nanochannel was obtained.
2.3. Characterization
The morphology of the funnel-shaped nanochannel membrane was characterized by SEM (Hitachi, S4300). UV-vis absorption spectra were collected on the UV-3600i Plus (Shimadzu) with a wavelength range was 300–800 nm. A visible light and fluorescence microscope (OLYMPUS BX53) was used to investigate the chemical modification of N3 and/or PT2 in the nanochannel.
2.4. Measurements of ionic transportation and energy conversion
All electrochemical tests were performed with a Picoammeter (Keithley 6487, Cleveland, OH) by connecting a pair of Ag/AgCl electrodes and a two-chamber electrochemical cell. Bulk heterojunction characterized Al2O3 membrane (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) was mounted between two chambers of electrolyte cells. The ion transport properties of the membrane were tested in isocratic KCl electrolyte with a scanning voltage that varied from −1.0 V to +1.0 V. The anode was oriented towards the B segment of the channel. Electrolytes with different cation species and concentration gradients were employed to evaluate the performance of osmotic energy conversion. The scanning voltage varied from −0.25 V to +0.25 V. The effective testing area was about 3 × 104 μm2. Xenon lamp (CMH-250, Aodite Photoelectronic Technology Ltd, Beijing) was used as incident light to simulate sunlight. All tests were performed at room temperature.
3. Results and discussion
Herein, funnel-shaped nanochannel that contains a conical segment and a cylindrical segment is chosen as one of the prospective candidates18 for building bulk heterojunction, which will transmit an interfacial-potential-gradient in biomimetic nanochannels under light stimulation. We employ two light-responsive molecules, positively charged 3-phenylthiophene bearing quaternary ammonium (PT2) and negatively charged N3, acting as electron donor and acceptor molecules, respectively. Light-induced electron transfer leads to an addition in positive charges of the PT2 molecule by virtue of the π-conjugated five-membered-thiophene backbones and peripheral flexible segment chains (Fig. 1a).19 Under light irradiation, the excited electron of the N3 molecule is transferred from the ruthenium(II) center to the ligand, contributing to increasing negative charge intensity (Fig. 1b).20 Due to the different energy levels between PT2 and N3, the interfacial-potential-gradient is established, and the excitons at the bulk heterojunction can be efficiently separated. This process is known as the “Z-scheme” similar to that in plant photosynthesis (Fig. 1c).21 When PT2 was firstly modified onto the whole primordial alumina channels, N3 was coated onto the tip (T) segment by electrostatic interaction. The functionalized nanochannels can be named as PT2/N3(T) (Fig. 1d). The detailed fabrication schedule of the functionalized nanochannels is demonstrated in Fig. S1.†22 The obtained nanochannel array show opposite polarity and abundant charges, which is conducive to ion selective transmembrane transport, as shown in Fig. 1e. Moreover, bulk heterojunction between PT2 and N3 bilayers significantly improves the efficiency of light-induced electron generation.23
 Fig. 1  (a) Light-induced electron transfer along the molecular backbones and peripheral flexible segment chains enable increased positive charges of the PT2 molecule. (b) Light-induced electron transfer from the ruthenium(II) center to the ligand of the N3 molecule results in increased negative charges. (c) Excited transfer between the PT2 and N3 reaction centers following a “Z-scheme” based on different energy levels, which is conducive to increasing transmembrane ion flux. (d) Schematics of a single PT2/N3(T) bulk heterojunction nanochannel. The PT2 molecule was first patterned to the inner wall of the entire nanochannel, then an N3 molecule was grafted onto the T segment of the funnel-shaped nanochannel, leading to the formation of a bulk heterojunction by the bilayer molecules at the T segment. (e) Experimental diagram of ion selective transport across the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel array. 
The funnel-shaped alumina nanochannels were fabricated by an asymmetric three-step anodization process and phosphoric pore broadening procedure, as reported.24Fig. 2a shows the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the funnel-shaped alumina nanochannel membrane with a thickness of 80 μm, which is composed of the base (B) conical segment of about 53 μm and the tip (T) cylindrical segment of about 27 μm. The magnified image of funnel-shaped nanochannel demonstrated the large and small openings of the nanochannel (Fig. 2b), which is conducive to improving the overall ion selectivity after modification by two light-responsive molecules. According to the SEM images, the diameters of the base nanochannels were about 65 nm (Fig. 2c), whereas the tip nanochannels have an average diameter of 30 nm (Fig. 2d). Fig. S2 and S3† show representative optical and fluorescence microscope images of nanochannel surfaces and cross-sectional viewing before and after modification with PT2 or/and N3. As Majumdar et al. demonstrated, the inner wall of the channel can attach to reactants by the diffusion-limited patterning (DLP) method.22 The strong color contrast against a dark background demonstrates the successful grafting of N3 and PT2 molecules on the inner wall of funnel-shaped channels. We measured the UV-vis absorption spectrum of Al2O3 nanochannel membrane that was coated with PT2 and N3 molecules (Fig. 2e). The characteristic absorption peaks of N3 appear at ≈380 nm and ≈510 nm,25 and the PT2 absorption peak appears at 440 nm.26 In comparison to the individual modification using N3 or PT2, the bilayer light-responsive molecule patterning membrane displays a wide absorption band in the range of 380–510 nm, which shows a strong absorption ability in UV and visible light range and demonstrates the possibility of surface charge enhancement under light illumination.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of the bulk heterojunction nanochannel array. SEM images of the (a) cross-section, (b) magnified image of the tip region, (c) base openings and (d) tip openings. The pore diameter of the base openings is ≈65 nm and the pore diameter of tip openings is ≈30 nm, demonstrating the ion rectifying property in asymmetric geometry. (e) UV-vis absorption spectra of the alumina nanochannel membrane before and after modification. 
In nanochannel array, ion transportation behavior can be regulated by surface charge polarity and distribution of light-responsive molecules in inner walls. The conductivity versus KCl concentration curve reveals that the transmembrane conductivities evidently deviated from the bulk value when the KCl concentration is lower than 10 mM, indicating that the surface charge-governed the ion transport behavior (Fig. S4†). Current–voltage (I–V) curves are demonstrated to characterize the light-driven ion transportation properties in 1 mM KCl at pH 3.89. Considering the polar surface can effectively improve the ion rectification property, we show two kinds of asymmetric modified Al2O3 nanochannels (for the preparation process, see ESI†). When PT2 was modified onto base (B) segment of alumina channels and N3 was modified onto the tip (T) segment asymmetrically, the functionalized nanochannels can be named as PT2(B)/N3(T) (the inset of Fig. 3a). If reversing the modification position of PT2 and N3, the functionalized nanochannels refer to PT2(T)/N3(B) (the inset of Fig. 3b). For asymmetrically modified nanochannels, no effective bulk heterojunction formed but only the tip junction. In this case, for PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannels, the transmembrane ionic current increases from 1.32 to 1.80 μA under light irradiation, showing a 0.48 μA light-responsive current under a voltage of −1.0 V. At the opposite voltage, the current changes from 1.27 to 1.53 μA in the presence of light, resulting in a light-responsive current of 0.26 μA (Fig. 3a). N3(B)/PT2(T) nanochannels show a light-responsive current of 0.39 and 0.31 μA under a voltage of +1.0 V and −1.0 V, respectively (Fig. 3b). It can be seen that the nanochannel arrays with both tip junctions exhibit approximately linear I–V curves before and after light stimulation. For bulk heterojunction PT2/N3(T) nanochannels (Fig. 3c), the ionic current value at the negative voltage increases dramatically from −3.88 μA to −8.8 μA with an obvious light-induced ion current of 4.92 μA, far more than the value of about 1.7 μA at positive voltage. Compared to asymmetrically patterned nanochannels, the PT2/N3(T) nanochannels act out nonlinear ion transport properties like a diode in the dark state, and the nonlinear behavior becomes more evident upon light illumination. We ascribe the above difference to the weak nano-confinement effect in asymmetrically modified nanochannels due to the size of T segment openings being larger than the Debye screening length, even if the nanochannel is asymmetric upon geometry and surface charge. In other words, the surface charge has an inferior effect on the transport of ions across the membrane in the presence or absence of light and resulting in poor selectivity for transmembrane transport ions. However, the size of T segment openings becomes comparable to the Debye screening length after modifying the bilayer molecules, which significantly enhances the interaction between the ions and the channel surface.27 Thus, dominated by the electric double layer, the PT2/N3(T) nanochannels display excellent cation selectivity, further resulting in greater ion flux in the dark state. Furthermore, the magnitude of the light-induced ionic current of PT2/N3(T) nanochannels far exceeds those of asymmetrically patterned nanochannels, which can be attributed to the bulk heterojunction-induced separation of electron–hole pairs28 and the electron transfer through a “Z-scheme” route21,29 in short distances. In this way, the probability of electron and hole recombination is reduced, which further emphasizes asymmetric surface charge density and ion selectivity,30 and the magnitude of photo-induced ionic current is further increased. It can be seen that bulk heterojunction formed by the specific bilayer molecules has an obvious advantage in improving photoelectric conversion performance.
 Fig. 3  Ion transport behavior of the nanochannel array systems. Experimental I–V curves of (a) PT2(B)/N3(T), (b) N3(B)/PT2(T), and (c) PT2/N3 (T) before (black curve) and after light irradiation (red curve) in 1 mM KCl. The insets of (a and b) illustrate the PT2 and N3 asymmetric modified nanochannel and the insets of (c) show the nanochannel characterized by a bulk heterojunction. Therein, the bulk heterojunction has notable advantages in improving the ion rectification properties and photoelectric energy conversion performance. (d) The ionic current rectification ratios in the dark and light states. (e) The corresponding PICC ratios at +1.0 V and −1.0 V. The PICC ratio of PT2/N3(T) reaches 128% at −1.0 V, showing the superior photoelectric conversion performance of bulk heterojunction nanochannels. (f) The current–time (I–t) trace of the bulk heterojunction nanochannels by switching the “on” and “off” states alternately at a constant voltage of +1.0 V (orange) and −1.0 V (dark cyan). 
The light-driven asymmetric ion transport property was further illustrated by calculating the ion current rectification (ICR) ratio. The ICR was defined as the ratio between the absolute values of ionic currents at −1.0 V and +1.0 V.31 As shown in Fig. 3d, the rectification ratios of PT2(B)/N3(T) and N3(B)/PT2(T) nanochannels are close to 1 with and without light irradiation, meaning the conductance is almost equal at opposite polarity voltage and the weak rectification effect.32 The difference is that light irradiation makes the rectification ratio of PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannels become larger, while the rectification ratio of PT2(T)/N3(B) nanochannels decreases after illumination, indicating that surface charge plays a non-negligible role in controlling the preferential transport direction of ions. In contrast, the PT2/N3(T) nanochannels show sharply upward ICR ratios with light illumination, meaning that bulk heterojunction significantly promotes the ion flux at a negative voltage. In order to quantitatively reveal the enhancement of light-induced ion current, the PICC ratio16 was determined by the following equation of PICC ratio = [(Ilight − Idark)/Idark]±1V. As a result (Fig. 3e), the asymmetrically modified nanochannels show a relatively lower PICC ratio that is consistent with the poor light-responsive ionic current. However, the PICC ratio of PT2/N3(T) is up to 128% at −1.0 V, which is the state-of-the-art result reported in the field of nanofluidic light-responsive systems. Because the light-induced excitons are transferred from PT2 to N3, the negative charge density of the N3 layer is significantly enhanced in a confined T segment, which is beneficial to attract more K+ migration, leading to a larger light-responsive ionic current. It is not difficult to find that the PT2(B)/N3(T) and PT2/N3(T) nanochannels both exhibit a larger PICC ratio under negative voltage than that under positive voltage, indicating that patterning N3 onto T segment is an advantageous configuration. The PT2/N3(T) nanochannel membrane with a record PICC ratio provides an operable strategy for designing high-performance photoelectric conversion systems.
Stability, as one of the most important characteristics of a photoelectric system, was evaluated as shown in Fig. 3f.33 The fluctuation of ionic current can be observed distinctly from the ionic current–time (I–t) curves measured by switching “on” and “off” states alternately at constant voltages of ±1.0 V. When the incident light in situ is in “on” state, the ionic current at positive voltage increases immediately under light irradiation with a light-induced current around 1.83 μA, and then it returns to the original value when the incident light is shut down. In contrast, when derived by a negative voltage, the responsive trend of the ionic current is observed with a fluctuating value of 4.5 μA, revealing a considerable light-responsive current. This obvious light-induced ion current can be explained by the enhanced charge density of the PT2/N3(T) channel, namely electron transfer from donor PT2 to acceptor N3, such that an appropriate charge accumulation is produced. It should be noted that the system shows asymmetric ion transport behavior, which is reflected by the unequal light-induced currents of about 4.85 μA and 9.0 μA under a constant voltage of +1.0 V and −1.0 V, respectively. No damping of ionic current is observed, indicating that the light-induced ionic gate has excellent stability and reversibility in regulating the conduction of PT2/N3(T) channel after several cycles. PT2/N3(T) nanochannels act as an efficient and sensitive light switching system, like the case in biological ion channels, where the gating proteins operate rapidly and cooperatively in a confined region.
We further use schematic diagrams to simulate the dynamic process of the ion transportation mechanism to make clear how the bulk heterojunction nanochannels modulate ionic current. The B segment channel always faces the negative electrode during the test. Generally, asymmetric surface charge plays an important role in controlling the direction of ion migration.34 PT2 and N3 asymmetrically modified PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel have similar charge distributions with PT2/N3(T) bulk heterojunction nanochannel, which ensures that the surface charge-induced ion transport direction is consistent. In the dark state, driven by voltage, the cation (K+) selective transport from the electrolyte to T segment (green arrows) and the equal anion (Cl−) transport in the opposite direction (blue arrows), as shown in Fig. 4a. For the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel (Fig. 4c), by forming a bulk heterojunction in the T segment of the nanochannels, the bilayer modification can reduce the size of the T-terminal channels, further highlighting the asymmetry of the geometric structure. Thus, more K+ accumulates in the T segment due to the excellent cation selectivity and Cl− transport from the electrolyte to the B segment of the channel so that the nanochannel is in an ion-rich state at a negative voltage.35
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the ion transport mechanism in the simulated single PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel and PT2/N3(T) nanochannel under dark and light states. (a and c) Surface charges induce the cation (K+) selective transport from the electrolyte to the T segment (green arrows) under the dark state, and the anion (Cl−) transport in the opposite direction (blue arrows). Upon light irradiation, the light-induced separation of electron–hole pairs increases the surface charge density of the modified layer, which motivates K+ transport in the same direction as the dark state. (b) In the PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel, exciton transfer merely occurs at the connected interface (selected part) based on the energy level difference of PT2 and N3, leading to a low light-induced K+ flux (cyan arrows). (d) For the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel, the bulk heterojunction induces exciton transfer, significantly increasing the charge density of the N3 modified layer and resulting in a high light-induced K+ flux (cyan arrows). 
Under light irradiation, the excited electrons in the PT2 molecule are transferred along the thiophene skeleton and the conjugated chain such that more positive charges accumulate in the cavity.19 Similarly, the transfer of excited electrons in the N3 molecule from the central metal atom ruthenium to the peripheral ligands makes the molecular surface carry more negative charges.20 This electronic transfer within the molecule is conducive to increasing the surface charge density of the corresponding modified layer. Moreover, the opening diameter and length of the T segment are obviously smaller than those of the B segment in the funnel-shaped nanochannels, which is beneficial for the separation of light-induced electron–hole pairs and exciton transferring based on the energy level difference of PT2 and N3. The result is that the positively charged holes remain on the PT2 molecule, and the negatively charged electrons are transferred to the N3 molecule, and thereby, the surface charge is further boosted. For the PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel (Fig. 4b), light-improved charge density of N3-modified layers induces K+ migration from T segment to B segment, which is consistent with the K+ transport direction in the dark state. Besides, exciton transfer mainly occurs at the connected interface of PT2 and N3, which has little effect on the overall channel charge density. Therefore, only weak light-induced ionic current is observed (cyan arrows). For the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel (Fig. 4d), bulk heterojunction-induced excitons transfer from donor PT2 to acceptor N3, which significantly increases the charge density of the N3 modified layer. This K+ preferential transport direction is similar to the surface charge-induced K+ flow direction and the light-induced K+ flow direction. Hence, abundant K+ transport from the T segment to the B segment (cyan arrows) led to notably improved ion rectification transport and photoelectric conversion performance.
Nanofluidic channels are regarded as promising candidates for harvesting osmotic energy due to their unique ion transport properties. High ion selectivity and permeability of nanochannels are synchronously required for developing efficient salinity gradient energy conversion devices.36 Recently, constructing a bipolar nanochannel surface has become an available strategy for improving the ion selectivity of membranes. In addition, the energy conversion efficiency can be further improved by applying external fields, such as light37 and temperature.38 Here, the osmotic energy conversion performance of PT2/N3(T) nanochannels was investigated. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PT2/N3(T) membrane was placed between two-chamber electrochemical cells filled with solutions of different concentrations for constructing light and osmotic energy integrated electricity generation device. Benefiting from the excellent ionic selectivity, the counter-ions diffuse spontaneously through the membrane from high concentration to low concentration, which leads to the ionic diffusion current (Idiff). Moreover, bilateral light stimulation generates the additional light-induced ion current (Ilight). Two opposite concentration configurations (3 M/10 mM) were measured to optimize output performance (Fig. S5†). It is noted that the open-circuit voltage (Voc) maintains a relatively stable value before and after irradiation, whereas external light stimulation further enhances the short-circuit current (Isc).39
 Fig. 5  Osmotic energy conversion of the bulk heterojunction nanochannel array. (a) Schematic illustration of the energy conversion device under a concentration gradient. Driven by concentration difference, a diffusion ionic flow (Idiff, flesh color arrow) is generated, and the transmembrane ionic current increases due to the added Ilight (yellow arrow) under light irradiation. (b) I–V curves of the PT2/N3(T) membrane before and after light irradiation with two opposite concentration arrangements. (c) The output current density as a function of external load resistance upon mixing artificial seawater (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (10 mM NaCl). (d) The output power density with different external resistances in the dark and light states. The maximum improvement of power density is 79% at a load resistance of 0.7 kΩ.. 
We further calculate the power density for evaluating the performance of osmotic power generation directly. Fig. 5b presents a typical I–V curve of PT2/N3(T) nanochannels by mixing artificial seawater (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (10 mM NaCl). When the high concentration of NaCl solution is facing the T segment, the absolute values of Voc and Isc are 118 mV and 35 μA, respectively. Compared to other heterogeneous membranes,40–43 the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel membrane achieves an outstanding Isc, which is attributed to the excellent ion selectivity of bipolar nanochannel surface and the moderately opening size of the channel as well as low internal resistance. The Isc and Voc are contributed by ion diffusion and redox reaction at the electrode and solution interface (Fig. S6†). Accordingly, the osmotic power device offers a theoretical output power density of up to 34.4 W m−2 and net diffusion power density is calculated to be 12.5 W m−2 (see ESI Note 1†), which outperforms most membrane-based nanofluidic energy generation systems to our knowledge, such as GO/CNFs membrane,44 mesoporous silica/macroporous alumina45 and ANF/gel heterogeneous membrane.46 The generated osmotic power can be exported when it is connected to an external load resistor. As shown in Fig. 5c, the current density declines gradually with the increasing load resistance, while the value of current density after illumination is better than that in the dark state obviously. When the load resistance is equivalent to the resistance of membranes,47 the generated power density appears to peak by the equation Pmax = I2 × RL. Here, I is the current, and RL is the connected external resistance. The corresponding power density reaches the peak value of about 11.1 W m−2 at the external resistance of 7 kΩ, and the value increases to 13.7 W m−2 after illumination (Fig. 5d). Notably, the output power density under light stimulation is significantly higher than that under dark state. The yellow part in Fig. 5d means that after light stimulation, the power density increases from 4.38 to 7.85 W m−2 at 0.7 kΩ, and the maximum improvement in power density is 79%, demonstrating a light-enhanced osmotic energy converter is constructed successfully.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate a facile strategy for exploiting a high-performance bionic integrated nanofluidic power generation system based on light-responsive molecule modified nanochannel membrane. A specific bulk heterojunction formed by bilayer light-responsive molecules induces effective electron transfer along the “Z-scheme”. The PT2/N3(T) nanochannel array shows excellent cation selectivity and diode-like ion rectification behavior due to the opposite surface charges of PT2 and N3. Besides, the nanochannel system achieves a record PICC ratio of up to 128%, which is the state-of-the-art result reported in the field of nanofluid photoelectric systems. Making use of the synergy effect of diffusion current and bulk heterojunction-induced ionic current, the nanochannel array produces a promising output power density of 13.7 W m−2 under light stimulation. The maximum increase in the ratio of light stimulation to output power density is as high as 79%. This light-enhanced osmotic energy power generation provides a universal strategy for developing high-performance energy conversion devices.
Author contributions
Y. F. H. wrote, reviewed and edited the manuscript. L. Q. Z. wrote the original manuscript. G. L. synthesized the experimental materials. Y. T. G. contributed to data analysis. Y. R. designed and operated the experiments. L. Y. performed theoretical calculations. X. F. conceived research plan and supervised the project. W. M. L., J. Z., P. F. W. and L. J. supervised experimental and writing. Y. F. H. and L. Q. Z. contributed equally to this work. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206902, 2017YFA0206900), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22175008, 21771016, 21471012), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
References
A. Capretti, A. K. Ringsmuth, J. F. Van Velzen, A. Rosnik, R. Croce and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nanophotonics of higher-plant photosynthetic membranes, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. Messant, A. Krieger-Liszkay and G. Shimakawa, Dynamic Changes in Protein-Membrane Association for Regulating Lightsynthetic Electron Transport, Cells, 2021, 10, 1216 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Nilsson, A. Pěnčík, O. N. Johansson, D. Bånkestad, R. Fristedt, M. Suorsa, A. Trotta, O. Novák, F. Mamedov, E. Aro and B. L. Burmeister, PSB33 protein sustains photosystem II in plant chloroplasts under UV-A light, J. Exp. Bot., 2020, 71, 7210–7223 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu and D. A. Lavan, Designing artificial cells to harness the biological ion concentration gradient, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 666–670 CrossRef .
S. Negin, M. M. Daschbach, O. V. Kulikov, N. Rath and G. W. Gokel, Pore Formation in Phospholipid Bilayers by Branched-Chain Pyrogallol[4]arenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3234–3237 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hou, Smart Gating Multi-Scale Pore/Channel-Based Membranes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7049–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Nguyen, M. Ali, S. Nasir and W. Ensinger, Transport properties of track-etched membranes having variable effective pore-lengths, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 485502 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xiao, G. H. Xie, Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, Q. Liu, P. Li, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Enhanced Stability and Controllability of an Ionic Diode Based on Funnel-Shaped Nanochannels with an Extended Critical Region, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3345–3350 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Zhu, D. Y. Wang, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Ion/Molecule Transportation in Nanopores and Nanochannels: From Critical Principles to Diverse Functions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8658–8669 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karnik, C. H. Duan, K. Castelino, H. Daiguji and A. Majumdar, Rectification of Ionic Current in a Nanofluidic Diode, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 547–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Xie, P. Li, Z. J. Zhao, Z. P. Zhu, X. Y. Kong, Z. Zhang, K. Xiao, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Light- and Electric-Field-Controlled Wetting Behavior in Nanochannels for Regulating Nanoconfined Mass Transport, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4552–4559 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, Q. Wen, P. Jia, M. J. Jia, D. N. Lu, X. M. Sun, L. Jiang and W. Guo, Light-Driven Active Proton Transport through Lightacid- and Lightbase-Doped Janus Graphene Oxide Membranes, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903029 CrossRef .
X. J. Xie, G. A. Crespo, G. Mistlberger and E. Bakker, Lightcurrent generation based on a light-driven proton pump in an artificial liquid membrane, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 202–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Liu, W. H. Li, L. P. Wen, D. Zheng, Z. S. Bo and L. Jiang, Colloidal Synthesis of Lettuce-like Copper Sulfide for Light-Gating Heterogeneous Nanochannels, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Nie, Z. Y. Hu, T. L. Xiao, L. Li, J. Jin, K. S. Liu and Z. Y. Liu, Light-Powered Ion Pumping in a Cation-Selective Conducting Polymer Membrane, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201138 CAS .
Y. Ren, Y. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, X. Fan, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Interfacial-Potential-Gradient Induced a Significant Enhancement of Photoelectric Conversion: Thiophene Polyelectrolyte (PTE-BS) and Bipyridine Ruthenium (N3) Cooperative Regulated Biomimetic Nanochannels, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003340 CrossRef .
O. V. Mikhnenko, P. W. Blom and T. Q. Nguyen, Exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1867–1888 RSC .
B. Niu, K. Xiao, X. D. Huang, Z. Zhang, X. Y. Kong, Z. Q. Wang, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, High-Sensitivity Detection of Iron(III) by Dopamine-Modified Funnel-Shaped Nanochannels, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22632–22639 CrossRef .
L. Guo, J. C. Ge, W. M. Liu, G. L. Niu, Q. Y. Jia, H. Wang and P. F. Wang, Tunable multicolor carbon dots prepared from well-defined polythiophene derivatives and their emission mechanism, Nanoscale, 2018, 8, 729–734 RSC .
S. R. Jang, R. Vittal, J. Lee, N. Jeong and K. J. Kim, Linkage of N3 dye to N3 dye on nanocrystalline TiO2 through trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene for enhancement of photocurrent of dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2006, 103–105 RSC .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Artificial photosynthesis for solar water-splitting, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karnik, K. Castelino, C. H. Duan and A. Majumdar, Diffusion-Limited Patterning of Molecules in Nanofluidic Channels, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1735–1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, L. Chen, Z. Zhang, G. H. Xie, P. Li, X. Y. Kong, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, A Tunable Ionic Diode Based on a Biomimetic Structure-Tailorable Nanochannel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Wang, S. N. Hou, Q. Q. Wang, Z. W. Wang, X. Fan and J. Zhai, Dual-response for Hg2+ and Ag+ ions based on biomimetic funnel-shaped alumina nanochannels, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 1699–1705 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Solar Energy Conversion by Dye-Sensitized Photovoltaic Cells, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef .
M. H. Lan, J. S. Wu, W. M. Liu, W. J. Zhang, J. C. Ge, H. Y. Zhang, J. Y. Sun, W. W. Zhao and P. F. Wang, Copolythiophene-Derived Colorimetric and Fluorometric Sensor for Visually Supersensitive Determination of Lipopolysaccharide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6685–6694 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sparreboom, A. van den Berg and J. C. Eijkel, Principles and applications of nanofluidic transport, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 713–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Huang, L. J. Liu, L. Chen, L. F. Gao, J. J. Zhu and H. B. Fu, Unique insights into photocatalytic VOCs oxidation over WO3/carbon dots nanohybrids assisted by water activation and electron transfer at interfaces, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 423, 127134 CrossRef .
X. Guo, Y. D. Liu, Y. Yang, Z. Y. Mu, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. F. Hu and Z. H. Liu, Effective visible-light excited charge separation in all-solid-state Ag bridged BiVO4/ZnIn2S4 core–shell structure Z-scheme nanocomposites for boosting lightcatalytic organics degradation, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 887, 161389 CrossRef .
S. Nasir, M. Ali, J. Cervera, V. Gomez, M. H. A. Haider, W. Ensinger, S. Mafe and P. Ramirez, J. Ionic transport characteristics of negatively and positively charged conical nanopores in 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, 2:2, 1:2, and 1:3 electrolytes, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 639–646 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hou, H. C. Zhang and L. Jiang, Building Bio-Inspired Artificial Functional Nanochannels: From Symmetric to Asymmetric Modification, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5296–5307 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Wang, Y. M. Feng, Y. Zhou, M. J. Jia, G. J. Wang, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Photo-switchable two-dimensional nanofluidic ionic diodes, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4381–4386 RSC .
D. Zhang, S. Q. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. Fan, M. L. Zhang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Self-Assembled Porphyrin Nanofiber Membrane-Decorated Alumina Channels for Enhanced Photoelectric Response, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11169–11177 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Lin, P. Liu, W. W. Xin, Y. F. Teng, J. J. Chen, Y. D. Wu, Y. F. Zhao, X. Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. P. Wen, Heterogeneous MXene/PS-b-P2VP Nanofluidic Membranes with Controllable Ion Transport for Osmotic Energy Conversion, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105013 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Yang, P. Liu, C. C. Zhu, Y. Y. Zhao, M. M. Yuan, X. Y. Kong, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Ion transport regulation through triblock copolymer/PET asymmetric nanochannel membrane: model system establishment and rectification mapping, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 822–825 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Yang, B. Tu, G. J. Zhang, P. C. Liu, K. Hu, J. R. Wang, Z. Yan, Z. W. Huang, M. N. Fang, J. J. Hou, Q. J. Fang, X. H. Qiu, L. S. Li and Z. Y. Tang, Advancing osmotic power generation by covalent organic framework monolayer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 622–628 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. L. Zhu, R. J. Mo, M. Y. Wu, X. L. Ding, L. Q. Huang, Z. Q. Wu and X. H. Xia, Light-Enhanced Osmotic Energy Harvester Using Lightactive Porphyrin Metal-Organic Framework Membranes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202202698 CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Z. Q. Wu, X. L. Ding, M. Y. Wu and X. H. Xia, A Solar Thermoelectric Nanofluidic Device for Solar Thermal Energy Harvesting, CCS Chem., 2020, 3, 2174–2182 CrossRef .
P. Liu, T. Zhou, Y. F. Teng, L. Fu, Y. H. Hu, X. B. Lin, X. Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. P. Wen, Light-Induced Heat Driving Active Ion Transport Based on 2D MXene Nanofluids for Enhancing Osmotic Energy Conversion, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 1325–1335 Search PubMed .
S. F. Chen, C. J. Zhu, W. P. Xian, X. Y. Liu, X. L. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, S. Q. Ma and Q. Sun, Imparting Ion Selectivity to Covalent Organic Framework Membranes Using de Novo Assembly for Blue Energy Harvesting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9415–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Li, J. Q. Jiang, Q. Q. Liu, Z. Q. Xie and J. Zhai, Hybrid nanochannel membrane based on polymer/MOF for high-performance salinity gradient power generation, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 643–649 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhu, J. R. Hao, B. Bao, Y. H. Zhou, H. B. Zhang, J. H. Pang, Z. H. Jiang and L. Jiang, Unique ion rectification in hypersaline environment: a high-performance and sustainable power generator system, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau1665 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. X. Luo, P. Liu, L. Fu, Y. J. Hu, L. S. Yang, W. W. Wu, X. Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. P. Wen, Engineered Cellulose Nanofiber Membranes with Ultrathin Low Dimensional Carbon Material Layers for Photothermal-Enhanced Osmotic Energy Conversion, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 13223–13230 CrossRef .
Y. D. Wu, W. W. Xin, X. Y. Kong, J. J. Chen, Y. H. Qian, Y. Sun, X. L. Zhao, W. P. Chen, L. Jiang and L. P. Wen, Enhanced
ion transport by graphene oxide/cellulose nanofibers assembled membranes for high-performance osmotic energy harvesting, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2702–2709 RSC .
S. Zhou, L. Xie, L. P. Zhang, L. P. Wen, J. Y. Tang, J. Zeng, T. Y. Liu, D. N. Peng, M. Yan, B. L. Qiu, Q. R. Liang, K. Liang, L. Jiang and B. Kong, Interfacial Super-Assembly of Ordered Mesoporous Silica-Alumina Heterostructure Membranes with pH-Sensitive Properties for Osmotic Energy Harvesting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8782 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. He, C. C. Zhu, Y. H. Qian, L. P. Wen and L. Jiang, Improved osmotic energy conversion in heterogeneous membrane boosted by three-dimensional hydrogel interface, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 875 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Yang, P. P. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. B. Chen and X. L. Feng, Mechanically strong MXene/Kevlar nanofiber composite membranes as high-performance nanofluidic osmotic power generators, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 292 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06432dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Light-induced electron transfer along the molecular backbones and peripheral flexible segment chains enable increased positive charges of the PT2 molecule. (b) Light-induced electron transfer from the ruthenium(II) center to the ligand of the N3 molecule results in increased negative charges. (c) Excited transfer between the PT2 and N3 reaction centers following a “Z-scheme” based on different energy levels, which is conducive to increasing transmembrane ion flux. (d) Schematics of a single PT2/N3(T) bulk heterojunction nanochannel. The PT2 molecule was first patterned to the inner wall of the entire nanochannel, then an N3 molecule was grafted onto the T segment of the funnel-shaped nanochannel, leading to the formation of a bulk heterojunction by the bilayer molecules at the T segment. (e) Experimental diagram of ion selective transport across the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel array.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of the bulk heterojunction nanochannel array. SEM images of the (a) cross-section, (b) magnified image of the tip region, (c) base openings and (d) tip openings. The pore diameter of the base openings is ≈65 nm and the pore diameter of tip openings is ≈30 nm, demonstrating the ion rectifying property in asymmetric geometry. (e) UV-vis absorption spectra of the alumina nanochannel membrane before and after modification.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ion transport behavior of the nanochannel array systems. Experimental I–V curves of (a) PT2(B)/N3(T), (b) N3(B)/PT2(T), and (c) PT2/N3 (T) before (black curve) and after light irradiation (red curve) in 1 mM KCl. The insets of (a and b) illustrate the PT2 and N3 asymmetric modified nanochannel and the insets of (c) show the nanochannel characterized by a bulk heterojunction. Therein, the bulk heterojunction has notable advantages in improving the ion rectification properties and photoelectric energy conversion performance. (d) The ionic current rectification ratios in the dark and light states. (e) The corresponding PICC ratios at +1.0 V and −1.0 V. The PICC ratio of PT2/N3(T) reaches 128% at −1.0 V, showing the superior photoelectric conversion performance of bulk heterojunction nanochannels. (f) The current–time (I–t) trace of the bulk heterojunction nanochannels by switching the “on” and “off” states alternately at a constant voltage of +1.0 V (orange) and −1.0 V (dark cyan).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the ion transport mechanism in the simulated single PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel and PT2/N3(T) nanochannel under dark and light states. (a and c) Surface charges induce the cation (K+) selective transport from the electrolyte to the T segment (green arrows) under the dark state, and the anion (Cl−) transport in the opposite direction (blue arrows). Upon light irradiation, the light-induced separation of electron–hole pairs increases the surface charge density of the modified layer, which motivates K+ transport in the same direction as the dark state. (b) In the PT2(B)/N3(T) nanochannel, exciton transfer merely occurs at the connected interface (selected part) based on the energy level difference of PT2 and N3, leading to a low light-induced K+ flux (cyan arrows). (d) For the PT2/N3(T) nanochannel, the bulk heterojunction induces exciton transfer, significantly increasing the charge density of the N3 modified layer and resulting in a high light-induced K+ flux (cyan arrows).	 

 	Fig. 5  Osmotic energy conversion of the bulk heterojunction nanochannel array. (a) Schematic illustration of the energy conversion device under a concentration gradient. Driven by concentration difference, a diffusion ionic flow (Idiff, flesh color arrow) is generated, and the transmembrane ionic current increases due to the added Ilight (yellow arrow) under light irradiation. (b) I–V curves of the PT2/N3(T) membrane before and after light irradiation with two opposite concentration arrangements. (c) The output current density as a function of external load resistance upon mixing artificial seawater (0.5 M NaCl) and river water (10 mM NaCl). (d) The output power density with different external resistances in the dark and light states. The maximum improvement of power density is 79% at a load resistance of 0.7 kΩ..	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06432d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
