Efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00524B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00524B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2345-2374Efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes†

        
          
            Jianyun 
            Zheng‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Huaijuan 
            Zhou‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Yuqin 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ruilun 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanhong 
            Lyu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            San Ping 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Shuangyin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ad
aState Key Laboratory of Chem/Bio-Sensing and Chemometrics College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, Hunan, China. E-mail: yuqin_zou@hnu.edu.cn; lvyanhong603@163.com; shuangyinwang@hnu.edu.cn
bWestern Australian School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering and Energy Technology Institute, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia. E-mail: s.jiang@curtin.edu.au
cCentre for Translational Bone, Joint and Soft Tissue Research, University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Fetscherstraβe 74, Dresden 01307, Germany
dShenzhen Research Institute of Hunan University, Shenzhen, 518057, P. R. China
Received 
      15th February 2019
    , Accepted 2nd May 2019First published on 2nd May 2019AbstractThe conversion of solar energy into fuels is an attractive prospect for storing renewable energy, and photoelectrochemical technology represents a pathway by which solar fuels might be realized. Ideally, cost-effective photoelectrodes efficiently and stably drive anodic and/or cathodic half-reactions. However, no photoelectrode satisfies all the harsh requirements of practical applications, mainly involving high conversion efficiency and good stability. Narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes have recently generated a great deal of interest because of their high conversion efficiency. The possible modification of the efficiency and stability using various structural engineering strategies has been largely responsible for the rapid growth of interest in these photoelectrodes. In this review, we aim to present the advances in the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes on three levels: fundamental bottlenecks, existing solution strategies, and applications.
Jianyun Zheng
Jianyun Zheng received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. He currently works in Hunan University and Curtin University as a united postdoctoral researcher. His main interests focus on the preparation of semiconductor materials, the design and assembly of photoelectrodes, and their performance in photo(electro)catalysis.
Huaijuan Zhou
Huaijuan Zhou received her PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. Her main research interests include synthesis and characterization of functional nanomaterials, 3D printing and melt electrospinning writing of polymer-based scaffolds, and their applications in energy and biomedical fields.
Yuqin Zou
Yuqin Zou received her BS and MS degree in 2012 from Shanghai University and her PhD in 2016 from the University of Manchester, UK. She is currently a lecturer of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. Her research interests are in novel nanomaterials – such as graphene, transition metal compounds and black phosphorus – and their application in energy storage devices and electrocatalysis.
Yanhong Lyu
Yanhong Lyu received her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. She currently works at Hunan University as a postdoctoral researcher. Her research mainly focuses on nanoscale electrocatalysts, surface engineering of materials for water splitting, and their performance in (photo)electrocatalysis.
San Ping Jiang
San Ping Jiang is a John Curtin Distinguished Professor at the Western Australian School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering and Deputy Director of Fuels and Energy Technology Institute, Curtin University, Australia. Dr Jiang obtained his PhD from The City University, London in 1988. Before 2010, Dr Jiang worked at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His research interests encompass fuel cells, water electrolysis, supercapacitors, carbon dioxide reduction, single atom catalysts and nano-structured functional materials.
Shuangyin Wang
Shuangyin Wang received his PhD in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He was a postdoctoral fellow working with Prof. L. Dai (2010–11) and Prof. A. Manthiram (2011–12). He was a Marie Curie Fellow at the University of Manchester with Prof. K. Novoselov (2012–13). He is currently a Professor of the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are in novel catalysts, defects in various crystals and their application in electrocatalysis.
1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of the global population and modern industry gives rise to accelerating the consumption of energy and increasing the anthropocentric emission of CO2.1 Fuels, which are unrivalled for energy storage, have been used throughout most of human history since nearly two million years ago. Now enormous infrastructure has been built to handle fuels for transportation, heating, electric power and product manufacturing.2 The fuels that we rely on in modern society are mainly from the fossil feedstock. This motivates the development of sustainable processes to yield chemical fuels and feedstocks from earth-abundant resources (like water, CO2 and N2) using renewable energy.3 From the pool of available energy resources, solar energy is abundant, cheap and clean, but its intermittency and unbalanced availability is the “Achilles heel”.4 As such, utilizing solar energy to generate chemical fuel from water, CO2 or N2 is stated as “one of the Holy Grails of modern science”.5,6 There are large scientific and technical challenges involved in performing the conversion of solar-to-fuel, even the simplest fuel, H2. Among various technologies, photoelectrochemical (PEC) devices are an economically viable solution by combining the catalyst and the solar absorber into a fully integrated system.
In the PEC device configurations, semiconductor materials that absorb the sunlight and provide the driving force for PEC reactions are a core part as the “brain and heart” of PEC devices.7 Since TiO2 as the first photoelectrode in a PEC cell,8 a large number of inorganic semiconductors have been explored as photoelectrodes, including metal oxides, the IV group, III–V compounds and metal chalcogenides.9 In comparison to most of the metal oxides, III–V compounds, metal chalcogenides and the IV group show narrow band gaps, large optical absorption coefficients and broad-spectrum light collection (Fig. 1),10,11 and are called narrow-gap semiconductors. The band gap of these semiconductors is usually less than 2.3 eV, which could allow light absorption at wavelengths more than 540 nm (at least gray + orange in Fig. 1b). Upon harvesting light, these semiconductors are expected to efficiently couple the solar energy into chemical reactions through various PEC behaviors. Nevertheless, these photoelectrodes with relatively high photocurrent are prone to be corroded and oxidized quickly in an aqueous electrolyte under illumination.12–14 To achieve steady operation in the electrolyte solution, extensive effort has been directed towards the development of complex photoelectrode architectures that can integrate narrow-gap semiconductors with a cocatalyst layer, a protection layer, or/and a tunneling layer.15–17 However, despite some breakthroughs and advances, no narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrode has yet been built that simultaneously satisfies the efficient and stable aspects required for the widespread commercialization of PEC technology.18
 Fig. 1  (a) Calculated oxidation potential φox (red bars) and reduction potential φre (black bars) relative to the NHE and vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, ambient temperature 298.15 K, and pressure 1 bar. The figure is mainly reprinted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society (Copyright 2012). (b) Solar AM 1.5G solar spectrum (black curve, data from National Renewable Energy Laboratory) and calculated maximum photocurrent density (red curve, data from ref. 10). The band structure and light absorption area of several commonly studied photoactive semiconductors are highlighted by the shaded areas. 
The ultimate goal of photoelectrochemical research is to assemble photoelectrodes into complex devices to realize industrial solar-to-fuel conversion. There are three main issues that should be taken into account during pursuing the goal: efficiency, stability, and production. (i) As the foundation of application prospects, the photoelectrodes must possess good solar-to-fuel conversion, involving high light harvesting, fast charge separation and transfer, and efficient surface reaction.19–21 All the narrow-gap semiconductor photoelectrodes exhibit high light harvesting, but they almost all have one or more challenges, like high recombination of holes and electrons, sluggish surface reaction kinetics, and mismatched band edges.22 To improve their performance, the photoelectrodes require an integrated multi-junction absorber architecture with cocatalysts or/and charge transfer channels. For instance, a directed assembly of Au3Cu nanoparticles (NPs) on vertical silicon (Si) nanowires (NWs) serves as an effective carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction photoelectrode, exhibiting high CO2-to-CO selectivity close to 80% at −0.20 V versus (vs.) reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE).23 (ii) The narrow band gap not only makes the photoelectrodes light-harvesting but also makes their stability strongly potential-dependent. When the quasi Fermi energy of the photogenerated electrons (holes) is higher (lower) than the thermodynamic reduction (oxidation) potential of the semiconductor, the semiconductor will be corroded.11 As a consequence, decreasing the band gap leads to degrading the stability against reduction/oxidation, such as the transformation of cuprous oxide (Cu2O) to copper oxide (CuO) and copper (Cu) under illumination.24 Actually, the integrated architecture with wide-gap materials (stable materials) can prevent the photocorrosion and maintain high reactivity during practical applications.13,25–27 On the basis of these architectures, the photoelectrodes can be anticipated to better meet the requirements of practical applications, e.g. long lifetime and high energy conversion. (iii) Producing a certain chemical fuel is the ultimate goal of the PEC application. Processing the photoelectrodes into complicated reaction devices to realize certain fuels is a task at the boundary of chemistry, materials science, physics, and engineering.
From a chemical perspective, semiconductors with narrow band gaps show a dual nature in PEC fields: high theoretical solar energy conversion efficiency and inherent instability by oxidation or corrosion, namely high efficiency and poor stability. The past 40 years have witnessed the development of the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes with varying architectures (Fig. 2).28–42 From the earliest study in 1975 to now, narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes have been constructed from different semiconductor materials to form semiconductor-based multi-layered structures. Due to complementary effects, photoelectrodes with well-defined structural features have gained some achievements in weakening the trade-off between their efficiency and stability, meaning good efficiency and stability. The cooperative complementary strategy can be regarded as a universal principle to solve problems in all fields in the universe and in nature.43 This behavior is similar to the concept of the Complementary of “Yin” and “Yang” from Chinese culture. Therefore, the complementary principle can provide an opportunity for simultaneously designing efficient and stable narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 2  Timeline showing key developments in the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes (data from ref. 28–42). η denotes the conversion efficiency for PEC reactions, and t denotes the lifetime of the photoelectrodes. 
In this review, we systematically display the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes on three levels: the fundamental bottlenecks, existing solution strategies, and applications. First, we briefly introduce the foundation of the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes, including hole–electron recombination, surface oxidation/dissolution, and reaction kinetics. Second, the existing strategies for solving the low efficiency and poor stability of the photoelectrodes are presented in depth from four perspectives in the past 8 years: surface modification, two-layered structure, three-layered structure, and multi-layered (n > 3) structure. Next, the issues of the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes during applications are synoptically discussed, especially regarding the photoelectrodes that are used in water splitting, the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), and other reactions. Finally, on the basis of the current progress, we conclude with some personal insights into the challenges and outlook in this promising field.
2. Fundamental bottlenecks
In PEC device systems, the Fermi level (EF) of the photoelectrode needs to equilibrate with the redox potential of the electrolyte solution, which results in the formation of a space charge layer and band bending at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte.44 Upon light illumination, the semiconductor materials absorb photons and generate electron–hole pairs. The electrons are excited into the conduction band, and the holes remain in the valence band. The EF of the semiconductor splits into separate quasi-Fermi levels of electrons and holes, which form a photovoltage (Vph) in PEC devices.45 When the photoelectrodes produce enough driving force via solar light with/without an external applied bias, the PEC reaction will proceed. Generally, PEC reactions on a solid-state surface are determined primarily by three basic steps: the light absorption and charge separation, the charge transport from the bulk to the surface, and the surface chemical reaction to products.46 In realistic conditions, there exist challenges that affect the efficiencies of these steps, principally consisting of hole–electron recombination in the bulk and layer/layer interface, surface oxidation/dissolution at the electrode/electrolyte interface, and sluggish reaction kinetics.47 As a result, understating the fundamentals of these restriction factors is advantageous in terms of improving the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes.
There are several common performance metrics for PEC devices that are used to assess the conversion efficiency and stability. The most common method (Fig. 3a) is to measure the photocurrent density (J) produced by a photoelectrode as a function of the potential (E).48 The onset potential (Eon) can be defined from the plot of J, and the applied-bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPCE) is calculated by the applied potential (Eapp) with corresponding J.49 Assuming a photocathode for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (1)where Pi is the incident illumination power density. It should be noted that the chemical products are not directly measured. Furthermore, the quantum efficiency, such as the incident/absorbed photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE/APCE), is also one of the common methods to determine which photon energies contribute to J (Fig. 3b). The IPCE is obtained as follows:17 (2)where Jλ is the photocurrent density at wavelength λ, Pi,λ is the respective incident power density, and  is equal to 1240 V nm. The APCE can be estimated by simply dividing the IPCE by the fraction of photons absorbed by the photoelectrode at each wavelength. In addition, the onset wavelength (λon) is closely related to the semiconductor band gap, and the IPCE at wavelength λ multiplied by the spectral distribution of standard solar illumination (AM 1.5G) can be integrated to give an estimate of the expected J.48 In a two-electrode configuration, the overall solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency (ηSTF) is calculated as (3)where r is the amount of fuel production per unit time and per unit area, ΔG is the Gibbs free energy of the chemical reaction, Vst is the standard potential for the chemical reaction, and F is the faradaic efficiency determined by the ratio of the total amount of product evolved and total charge passed (Fig. 3c). The stability of the photoelectrodes is reliably measured by operating a J (or a Vph) with an ammeter (or a voltmeter) as a function of time (Fig. 3d).
 Fig. 3  The conversion efficiency and stability as PEC device performance metrics. (a) Photocurrent density (J) and onset potential (Von). (b) Quantum-efficiency metrics. (c) The ratio of the total amount of product evolved and total charge passed to give the faradaic efficiency (ηF). (d) PEC stability. 
2.1 Hole–electron recombination
When the photoelectrode is illuminated with photons whose energy is equal to or greater than the band gap of the semiconductor, an electron is promoted from the valence band into the conduction band, leaving a hole behind.50 Ideally, the photoexcited charge carriers can smoothly migrate to the photoelectrode surface and completely react with the reactants to generate the products. However, during these processes the electrons and holes tend to recombine in the bulk, at the layer/layer interface, or on the surface of photoelectrodes.51 This is one of the major losses of solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency, and much attention has been devoted to improving charge separation.52,53
As proposed by Voznyy et al., the carrier mobility and the exciton binding energy are important electronic properties of semiconductors and influence the efficiency of optoelectronic devices by the occurrence of carrier recombination (Fig. 4).54 The carrier recombination in semiconductor materials and devices is classified into two types: non-radiative and radiative recombination. All the types of recombination should be suppressed in PEC devices to reduce the useless loss of free carriers. Firstly, defects are inevitably present in the bulk and surface of any material and the layer/layer interface of the device, part of which can form electronic traps via inducing localized energetic states.14 When the traps are present, free carriers are captured in traps fast, and then recombine non-radiatively with the carriers of the opposite charge (Fig. 4a). The total amount of loss from such recombination depends on the density of the defects and carrier concentration.55 The process of radiative recombination happens in the absence of traps and the carriers meet eventually leading to the relaxation of electrons from the conduction band to the valence band with the emission of light56 (Fig. 4b). The radiative recombination rate is proportional to the overlap of the electron and hole wavefunctions.54 In the case of strong binding energy, the excitons produced by strongly interacting electrons and holes possess a co-localization property, resulting in a higher probability of light emission (Fig. 4c). On the other hand, due to lack of binding energy, the recombination of the carriers increases with the increase of the carrier concentration, which brings in a quadratic dependence of the radiative recombination efficiency on carrier concentration54 (Fig. 4d). A pathway for suppressing or avoiding recombination can be found by tuning basic material properties such as the trap density, carrier mobility and exciton binding energy.
 Fig. 4  Recombination mechanisms of electrons and holes via the interplay between the exciton binding energy and the charge carrier mobility. (a) Traps as recombination centers for electrons and holes. (b) When the binding is weak, the free carriers can meet again. (c) In the case of strong binding, excitons can diffuse a short distance before recombining radiatively. (d) When the mobility is lower, radiative recombination is more probable. Adapted from Voznyy et al.54 with permission from Springer Nature (Copyright 2017). 
In PEC applications, efficient charge extraction is desired and indispensable. There are many strategies toward improving charge separation and transfer, mainly focusing on decreasing the trap sites, shortening the migration distance, accelerating the carrier mobility and establishing a built-in electric field.57–60 First, high crystallinity, few grain boundaries and surface passivation can usually minimize the trapping states and recombination sites, resulting in an increased efficiency of the usage of the photogenerated carriers for desired PEC reactions.61 Second, the diffusion length (LD) is the average length that photoinduced carriers travel in the bulk of the semiconductor before their recombination, which is calculated by the average lifetime (τ)62 (4)where D is the diffusion coefficient, μ is the carrier mobility, T is the temperature, k is the Planck constant, and e is the electron charge. The recombination possibility of charge carriers in a semiconductor is closely related to LD. Table 1 gives a summary of the LD of several classic semiconductors.63–69 It is clear that the wide-gap semiconductors have a much shorter LD than the narrow-gap semiconductors. However, the thinner the material, the less the recombination of charge carriers. Apart from the reduction of the charge-migration distance, the increase of the carrier mobility by introducing cocatalysts or sacrificial agents is another strategy to prolong the carrier-diffusion length and suppress charge recombination. In addition, the built-in electric field constructed by heterojunctions is widely employed to provide an extra driving force for charge separation.70 The heterojunctions are coupled by two or more materials with suitable band edges: semiconductor–semiconductor, semiconductor–metal, and multicomponent heterojunctions.
Table 1 The diffusion length of some classic semiconductors




Semiconductor
Diffusion length (nm)
Ref.


Hole
Electron




TiO2
120–1000



63



Fe2O3
2–4



64



Ta3N5
18000



65



Cu2ZnSnSe4


2000

66



Si
168000
220000

67 and 68



InP
1400–1800



69





2.2 Surface oxidation/dissolution
To the best of our knowledge, all of the narrow-gap semiconducting materials are unstable for PEC reactions in aqueous electrolytes. When the photoelectrode is illuminated, photo-corrosion happens on the surface by the thermodynamically feasible parasitic reactions of self-oxidation and self-reduction from photogenerated holes and electrodes.71 In the case of Si, which is one of the most frequently used light-harvesting materials of photoelectrodes, a Si surface exposed to an electrolyte of high ionic strength is prone to be corroded quickly by either an oxidation reaction or a reduction reaction.72,73 Generally, Si-based photocathodes gradually deactivate with the increase of the thickness of the SiO2 or H2SiO3 layer by prolonging the reaction time in an acidic electrolyte, whereas Si-based photoanodes in alkaline conditions suffer from surface oxidation first and then dissolution into the electrolyte (Fig. 5a and b). Therefore, the chemical and PEC instabilities of narrow-gap semiconductors severely limit the durability of the photoelectrodes and their practical applications in PEC devices.
 Fig. 5  Schematic plots of the photo-corrosion process and mechanism of the photoelectrodes. (a) Surface oxidation of a Si photocathode in acid solution under illumination. (b) Surface oxidation and dissolution of a Si photoanode in basic solution under illumination. (c) The instability mechanism of the photocathode from the relationship between the band alignment and reduction reaction. VBM is the valence band maximum, Ere is the reduction potential of the photocathode, and E(A+/A) is the reduction potential of reactant A. (d) The instability mechanism of the photoanode from the relationship between the band alignment and oxidation reaction. CBM is the conduction band minimum, Eox is the reduction potential of the photoanode, and E(B−/B) is the reduction potential of reactant B. 
As described in previous work,11,13,74 the stability of the semiconductors primarily depends on the alignment of their self-reduction (Ere) and -oxidation (Eox) potential relative to E(A+/A) and E(B−/B) for the photocathode and the photoanode (as shown in Fig. 5c and d), respectively. When a semiconductor as a p-type photocathode has a Ere higher than E(A+/A), the photoinduced electrons (e−) can reduce the semiconductor first, rather than the reactants, making the semiconductor inactivate and decompose (Fig. 5c).24 Similar self-oxidation behavior also happens in an n-type photoanode that shows a Eox lower than E(B−/B) (Fig. 5d).75 Generally speaking, narrow-gap semiconductors including metal oxides, III–V compounds, metal chalcogenides and the IV group (Fig. 1a) are unstable due to the electron reduction (or hole oxidation) with E(A+/A) < Ere < conduction band minimum (CBM) (or valence band maximum (VBM) < Eox < E(B−/B)). Experimentally, a few groups have applied the Pourbaix diagram to obtain the Eox and Ere of some simple semiconductors.76–78 Meanwhile, the theoretical calculation of Eox and Ere has recently been developed through using ab initio methods with density functional theory.79 As pointed out by Chen,11Ere (Eox) of a stable semiconductor as the photocathode (photoanode) should be placed over either E(A+/A) or its CBM (below either E(B−/B) or its VBM).
Some commonly used strategies to reduce the photo-corrosion of the narrow-gap semiconductor in PEC devices include: (1) improving the charge transfer kinetics or reducing the accumulated charges at the solid/liquid interface via the use of relevant catalysts or the modification of surface morphology;80,81 (2) passivating the material surface by implementing post-processing or decorating the inactive functional groups;82 (3) changing the catalytic pathway or environment to suppress the occurrence of self-reduction and -oxidation reactions;83 and (4) depositing a protective layer to separate the semiconductor from the electrolyte solution.84,85 Among these, providing one or more protective layers on the narrow-gap semiconductors is the most effective way to prolong their lifetime. These protective layers should ideally isolate the permeation of the electrolyte solution, create a good-quality junction with a large barrier height, and facilitate charge separation and transfer.14,47 The magnetron sputtering (MS) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques are frequently employed to deposit protective layers on narrow-gap semiconductors for PEC devices.
2.3 Reaction kinetics
PEC reactions take place at the electrode/electrolyte interface, involving the photogenerated charge carriers on the surface and the reactants adsorbed on the surface. The reaction kinetics of the reactants are normally multielectron processes, even in the simplest HER (2 electron), and are typically sluggish on semiconductor surfaces.16,86 In addition, except for the requirement of a fundamental thermodynamic voltage (e.g., 1.229 V for water splitting), a kinetic overpotential (ηk) of the PEC reaction should also be considered for increasing the minimal voltage requirement to drive the realistic reaction.87,88 Therefore, the kinetically difficult fuel-forming reactions on the semiconductor surface are one of the enormous challenges in PEC devices.
In a PEC system, the potential drop at the electrode/electrolyte interface is contributed by three parts: the space charge region, the Helmholtz layer, and the Gouy layer.89 The electrolyte with high ionic strength shows a small potential drop, while a large potential drop happens in the semiconductor due to its low density of surface states (generally < 1012 cm−2).90 As such, the extent of band bending in the space charge region can rely on the existing potential, further leading to the change of EF and the carrier density on the surface (Fig. 6). Using a photocathode as an example, EF of a p-type semiconductor equilibrates with Ere in the electrolyte under dark and open-circuit conditions, leading to downward band bending and a built-in field (Fig. 6a). The theoretical maximum photovoltage (Vmax) is formed at the semiconductor–electrolyte junction. Under illumination, the quasi-Fermi level of holes (EF,p) is close to the flat-band potential (Efb), and the quasi-Fermi level of electrons (EF,n) shifts upward, generating an open-circuit photovoltage (Vop) (Fig. 6b).45,91 Due to the presence of Fermi level pinning from the Helmholtz layer, the realistic Vph is smaller than the band gap of the semiconductor as well as Vmax.87 Experimentally, Vph is calculated by the difference between Vop in the dark and under irradiation (eqn (5)).13 Besides, Vph is also estimated by the Eon shift of the cathodic current in the dark and under irradiation or Ere and ηk (eqn (5)). Likewise, a similar situation in a photoanode is also shown in Fig. 6c and d, and its Vph is expressed in eqn (6).13 Vph = Vop,light − Vop,dark = Eon,light − Eon,dark = Eon,light − Ere + ηk(5) Vph = Vop,dark − Vop,light = Eon,dark − Eon,light = Eox + ηk − Eon,light(6)
 Fig. 6  Electronic energy profile of semiconductors in equilibrium with the electrolyte under different conditions. (a) A p-type semiconductor in the dark. (b) A p-type semiconductor under illumination. (c) An n-type semiconductor in the dark. (d) An n-type semiconductor under illumination. Vmax is the theoretical maximum Vph, EF,p is the quasi-Fermi level of holes under illumination, and EF,n is the quasi-Fermi level of electrons under illumination. 
With respect to the charge-transfer kinetics of semiconductor electrochemistry, there are some significant models that have been applied both in the dark and under irradiation, as well as under equilibrium or nonequilibrium steady state. These models include the conventional statistical Gerischer–Marcus model92 and the irreversible Williams–Nozik model.93 In addition, based on extensive comparisons of these two models, Shreve and Lewis pointed out that the conventional PEC model is in agreement with most of the available experimental data, as reported in their exhaustive review.94,95 Therefore, a simplified introduction here on the quasi-Fermi levels will be conducted based on these two models. A concept widely used to describe nonequilibrium semiconductor conditions is the nonequilibrium quasi-Fermi level for electrons (EF,n) and holes (EF,p). Operationally the quasi-Fermi level is defined as96 (7) (8)where EV is the value of the VBM, EC is the value of the CBM, NV is the effective local density of states at the VBM, NC is the effective local density of states at the CBM, p*(x) is the local excess population of valence band holes under illumination, and n*(x) is the local excess population of conduction band electrons under illumination. In addition, the quasi-Fermi formalism can also describe the occupational probability of photogenerated electrons and holes among their respective bands and defect states under nonequilibrium conditions.93 Nevertheless, both interpretations agree that n*(x) p*(x) > ni2 (the population of charge carriers), so that the mass action law is no longer satisfied away from equilibrium. From a kinetic point of view both interpretations are equally valid when dealing with interfacial transfer of thermalized, photogenerated charge carriers between semiconductor bands and electrolyte energy levels.96
Developing effective catalysts to facilitate the bond-making and bond-breaking reactions that occur at the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface is a key criterion for improving the reaction kinetic of the photoelectrode surface and enhancing the efficiency of PEC devices.97,98 Passivating the semiconductor surface or using a suitable passivation layer can increase the photovoltage, resulting in an anodic or cathodic shift of Eon in the case of a photocathode or photoanode.99,100
3. Existing solution strategies
To date, large quantities of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes have been designed and prepared to pursue efficient and stable PEC operation by various strategies. Even though the composition and crystal structures are different in these strategies, they all can be grouped into four different categories for tuning the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes: surface modification, two-layered structure, three-layered structure, and multi-layered (n > 3) structure. The discussion of strategies in the first category covers the modification of the narrow-gap semiconductor surface, and emphasizes the effect of the concrete modification methods on the efficiency and stability aspects.101,102 In the second category, two-layered structure narrow-gap semiconductor-based systems are systematically summarized, focusing more on the diversity and versatility of the surface layer. According to the conductivity properties of the surface layer, this part is further categorized into two configurations to evaluate the function of the surface layer: conductor/semiconductor and semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor. The third part of this section focuses on three-layered structure photoelectrodes, including conductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor configurations. Different from some efforts in the synthesis and application of metal/insulator/semiconductor (MIS),103,104 the literature currently lacks such a systematic review about the relationship between efficiency and stability for three-layered structure photoelectrodes. Narrow-gap semiconductor-based systems with multi-layered (n > 3) structure are discussed in the final part of this section. The main objective of this section is to review the construction protocols of efficient and stable narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes. In addition, it should be made clear that the photocurrent at 0 and 1.23 V vs. RHE is used as a model to evaluate the efficiency of photocathodes and photoanodes, respectively. Besides, when the reported references did not involve a photoelectrode covered by a self-oxidation layer, this kind of oxidation layer cannot be categorized as a protection layer.
3.1 Surface modification
Surface modification engineering that tunes the composition and structure of the material surface is expected to improve the PEC performances of narrow-gap semiconductors. There are some common strategies (Fig. 7a): (1) tuning the surface composition by doping an impurity element or changing the ratio of elements;101,105 (2) passivating the surface of the semiconductor by bonding passivation molecules (like triflate) or eliminating surface defects;106,107 (3) building three-dimensional (3D) structures;102,108 and (4) controlling the crystal facet by using different synthetic conditions or post-treatment process.109 After finishing the first two strategies, a new interface usually appears at the surface of narrow-gap semiconductors, of which the properties and behaviors essentially determine the overall effect of surface modification. Nevertheless, the last two strategies only engineer the morphology of the semiconductor for increasing the reaction sites and light absorption. To better understand the status of these strategies, we summarized the performance comparison of the reported photoelectrodes via surface modifications, as shown in Fig. 7 and 8.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagrams and performance comparison of photocathodes with surface modification. (a) Schematic diagrams of photocathodes modified by various strategies, including tuning the composition (panel i), building a 3D structure (panel ii), controlling the crystal facet (panel iii) and passivating the surface (panel iv). (b) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for various photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (c) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The methods of surface modification are classified as tuning the composition (purple spheres), building a 3D structure (green stars), controlling the crystal facet (pink hexagons) and passivating the surface (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. In (c), Jin is the initial photocurrent (mA cm−2) at the beginning of the stability test, and the degradation rates are evaluated using the ratio of the degraded photocurrent during testing (Jde) to Jin (Jde/Jin). 
 Fig. 8  Performance comparison of photoanodes with surface modification. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The methods of surface modification are classified as tuning the composition (purple spheres), building a 3D structure (green stars) and controlling the crystal facet (pink hexagons). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S2 (ESI†). 

Fig. 7b and c show recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE and the stability for various photocathodes versus tested pH conditions.82,101,107–120 Note that the composition and structure of the surface for the modified photocathodes cannot be specified. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data in Fig. 7b and c can be found in Table S1 in the ESI.† As displayed in Fig. 7b and c, most of the studies on PEC reduction reactions of the photocathodes are done under acidic electrolytes, particularly near pH = 0. Firstly, fast reaction kinetics for a PEC reduction reaction like the HER occurs under such conditions. Additionally, many narrow-gap semiconductors are relatively stable in acidic aqueous solution. In terms of the efficiency, the photocathodes treated by the strategies of passivating the surface and building 3D structures can obtain higher photocurrent output at 0 V vs. RHE than by other strategies. The reason is the increase of light absorption and reaction sites to increase the photocurrent and the decrease of defects to reduce the recombination of charge carriers. However, due to the sluggish reaction kinetics and low photovoltage, the photocurrent output of these photocathodes like Si (∼15 mA cm−2)111 is far below the theoretical limiting photocurrent as well as experimentally obtained values from commercial PV cells (∼40 mA cm−2).17,121 On the other hand, some photocathodes by tuning the composition can allow a stable PEC reaction over 10 h because of the formation of a stable interface.110,116 Nevertheless, the highest long-term operation (∼408 h) achieved for a modified CuGa3Se5 photocathode is still inferior to the requirement of application as a commercial electrode.116
Different from the photocathode case, only a few efforts have been made for narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoanodes via surface modification, as shown in Fig. 8.102,105,117,122–125 While there are several modified photocathodes with acceptable PEC performance, in contrast there has been a serious struggle to find an effective strategy for improving the PEC performance of the photoanodes. It is easily observed that the photocurrents of all the modified photoanodes at 1.23 V vs. RHE are less than 10 mA cm−2, which is the rock-bottom photocurrent output for industrial production. Accordingly, single surface modification is very difficult to use to ensure the long-term stability (<50 h) of photoanodes, even in the middle pH region. In fact, narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoanodes in aqueous electrolytes under an applied voltage suffer from deleterious degradation side reactions, particularly in the low or high pH region.
On basis of these performance comparisons, the effect of surface modification on enhancing the efficiency and stability of photoelectrodes is limited, especially for photoanodes. Thus, to efficiently enhance the PEC behaviors of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes, significant attention has been devoted to developing photoelectrodes with multilayer structure, like adding a protection layer and cocatalyst layer.
3.2 Two-layered structure

3.2.1 Conductor/semiconductor. 
Considerable efforts have been underway for application of a two-layered structure in photoelectrodes. The overarching goal is to take already efficient absorber materials, like narrow-gap semiconductors, and make them stable and efficient in corrosive environments. According to the conductivity properties of the surface layer, two-layered structures can be classified as conductor/semiconductor and semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor. In the conductor/semiconductor configuration, the conductor materials on the surface primarily include sulfides or phosphides (sulfides/phosphides), metals or alloys (metals/alloys), carbon materials and organic molecules. It should be pointed out that the sulfide/phosphide in this configuration is as a half-metal with conductive properties. To better understand the effect of the conductor/semiconductor structure, we summarized the performance comparison of the reported photoelectrodes, as shown in Fig. 9 and 10.
 Fig. 9  Performance comparison of conductor/semiconductor photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide/phosphide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), carbon materials (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S3 (ESI†). 
 Fig. 10  Performance comparison of conductor/semiconductor photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide (purple spheres), metal (green stars), carbon materials (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S4 (ESI†). 

Fig. 9 reports recent advances in the efficiency and stability of photocathodes with conductor/semiconductor structure plotted versus the pH level during the measurements.23,98,126–153 Note that n+p Si is regarded as a modified single layer semiconductor. All of these photocathodes are still used in the region of pH ≤ 10 to test their PEC behaviors. Compared with in the neutral solution, the conductor/semiconductor-based photocathodes have higher photocurrent (∼35 mA cm−2 for Si) at 0 V vs. RHE and longer stable operation (∼48 h) in the acid solution, as shown in the highlighted area of Fig. 9. From the perspective of conductor materials, a majority of sulfides/phosphides coated on the surface of photocathodes can significantly increase the photocurrent output and provide a relatively stable reaction owing to the acceleration of the surface reaction and the decrease of accumulated charge on the surface.140 When a metal/alloy is employed on the surface, the factor that the metal/alloy limits the light transmission should be considered. To achieve high photocurrent output, metal/alloy NPs or porous layers can be usually deposited on the surface of semiconductors to minimize the loss of light absorption, but the photoelectrodes with scattered NPs or porous layers have short-term operation in aqueous electrolytes because part of the surface of the semiconductor is directly exposed to the solution. Otherwise, conformal metal/alloy layers can isolate the photo-absorber effectively from the solution, and at the same time they also suppress the light harvesting of the semiconductor. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 9, few photocathodes with metals/alloys as conductor materials simultaneously achieve high efficiency and good stability. In addition, thin carbon materials like graphene as conductor layers only have an advantage in improving the efficiency of the photocathodes,139 and organic molecules (e.g. Ni(TEDA)2Cl2) could prolong the lifetime of the photocathode.140 However, the limited investigations on the two kinds of materials make it difficult to precisely give an opinion.
Recent advances in the PEC performances of photoanodes with conductor/semiconductor structure as a function of the tested pH condition are shown in Fig. 10.154–163 It is obviously found that little effort is devoted to exploring conductor/semiconductor photoanodes. For photoanodes, conductor/semiconductor can make a few contributions to producing high photocurrent output at 1.23 V vs. RHE and hardly prolong the lifetime of the photoanodes over 20 h. The conductor materials are prone to be degraded and oxidized under the corrosive electrolyte when a positive applied bias is used.
From these reported PEC performances, conductor materials coupling narrow-gap semiconductors can significantly enhance the efficiency and offer a satisfactory photocurrent output close to the theoretical value for either photocathodes or photoanodes. Unfortunately, although the conductor/semiconductor structure can extract the charges into the reactants and accelerate the reaction kinetics for avoiding the accumulation of charges on the interface between the photoelectrode and electrolyte, the appearance of deleterious degradation for narrow-gap semiconductors is still a high probability event due to the intrinsic properties and the shape of the conductor layer. As such, conductor materials can be mainly considered as a strong candidate for improving the efficiency of photocathodes.


3.2.2 Semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor. 
Many researchers are interested in the design and use of semiconductor/semiconductor photoelectrodes. In the semiconductor/semiconductor configuration, the semiconductor materials on the surface primarily include oxides, sulfides, nitrides, titanates, arsenides and organic molecules. In addition, the insulator/semiconductor photoelectrode is also included in this section, because research on the configuration is scarce in recent years and the band gap of an insulator (such as Al2O3) is similar to the band gap of an oxide semiconductor (such as TiO2). Thus, merging insulator/semiconductor into the section of semiconductor/semiconductor can give a better investigation and parallel to expound the effect of the non-conductive layer on the efficiency and stability of photoelectrodes.

Fig. 11 displays the recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for photocathodes versus tested pH conditions.39,164–182 Firstly, compared with the conductor/semiconductor configuration (Fig. 9), Cu2O178,179 as the solar absorber is widely applied in semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photocathodes (Fig. 11). This is ascribed to the fast photocorrosion and failure as Cu2O contacts aqueous solution.24 Moreover, semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photocathodes are studied in a wide pH range from 0 to 14. The semiconductor or insulator layer like TiO2 and SrTiO3 on the surface usually possesses good acid and alkali resistance. Before discussing the efficiency and stability of the photocathodes, it should be clear that these semiconductor or insulator materials with wide band gaps have shorter LD (<10 nm) and worse conductivity for transfer of electrons than narrow-band gap semiconductors, especially oxides.183 As a result, the probabilities of the electron transfer decay exponentially with increasing the thickness of the semiconductor or insulator layer, thus an ultrathin layer (<4 nm) favors a high photocurrent.17,184 However, the photocathode can achieve long-term stability when the thickness of the anti-corrosion layer is over 50 nm, otherwise stability may be problematic over extended periods of time, particularly for an ultrathin layer.185 In this situation, there can be a trade-off between efficiency and stability for semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photocathodes. In Fig. 11, using Ni12P5 nanoparticles on the surface of p-Si reported by Huang et al. shows a high photocurrent density (∼21 mA cm−2) at 0 V vs. RHE, but the durability of the photocathode is just 1 h at 13 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte.173 On the other hand, NiFeOOH (NiFe-LDH) overlayers on Cu2O photocathodes obtain a long stability (∼40 h) in neutral electrolyte, while the photocurrent density of the photocathode is 2.4 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE.168
 Fig. 11  Performance comparison of semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor (insulator) materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), sulfide or nitride (green stars), titanate (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most narrow-gap semiconductors with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S5 (ESI†). 
Compared to the infrequent studies on conductor/semiconductor photoanodes, a tremendous amount of effort has been devoted to researching semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes. Fig. 12 summarizes the recent advances in the efficiency and stability of semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes plotted vs. tested pH conditions.12,73,186–208 As shown in Fig. 12, most semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes are employed to implement the measurements of PEC oxidation reactions in neutral or alkaline media. In addition, these photoanodes have a higher photocurrent output in alkaline conditions than in neutral conditions. From the point of view of surface materials, more attention has been focused on the use of oxides for enhancing the PEC behaviors of photoanodes. Actually, some transition metal oxides like NiOx not only are excellent oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts209 and have a long LD for the transfer of holes,14 but also afford long-term stable protection in bases (though are unstable in acids).203 Meanwhile, these oxides have high optical transmittance above 90% in the visible light region when their layer thickness is tens of nanometers due to the wide band gap (≥3.2 eV).14 In this case, a few semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes concurrently achieve a high photocurrent density at 1.23 V vs. RHE and a long operation lifetime. In 2015, Sun et al. demonstrated that NiOx/n-Si-based photoanodes produce a photocurrent density of ∼30 mA cm−2 at the equilibrium potential for the OER and possess outstanding stability for over 1200 h of continuous light-driven evolution of O2 in 1.0 M KOH solution.203 And then, 50 nm-thickness CoOx-coated n-Si photoanodes reported by Zhou et al. further exhibit better stability for operating continuously over 100 days (∼2500 h) and an accredited photocurrent density of ∼20.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH solution.186
 Fig. 12  Performance comparison of semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor (insulator) materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), sulfide (green stars), arsenide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most narrow-gap semiconductors with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S6 (ESI†). 
In general, semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoelectrodes have attracted much attention of researchers owing to their unique properties and functions. The semiconductor or insulator on the surface of the narrow-gap semiconductor plays an important role for guaranteeing the normal operation of photoelectrodes and accelerating the catalytic reactions, particularly for photoanodes. The chemical and physical properties of these semiconductor or insulator materials including the band gap, ability of charge transfer, chemical stability, surface shape and layer thickness prominently influence the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes. In photocathodes, a semiconductor or insulator on the surface cannot act as a protection layer and HER catalyst simultaneously, resulting in the existence of a trade-off between efficiency and stability.

3.3 Three-layered structure

3.3.1 Conductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor (CSS). 
In general, moving from a two-layered structure to a three-layered structure significantly increases the complexity of fabrication and the number of components, but it is also desired to utilize the features of the various physical elements and allow for more degrees of freedom in their optimization. According to the conductivity properties of the surface layer, three-layered structure photoelectrodes can be divided into two types: conductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor and semiconductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor. Concerning the classification, three conditions should be noticed. Firstly, the majority of recent research employs semiconductor and insulator materials as the middle layer, and an insulator usually has a similar role in the three-layered structure to a wide band-gap semiconductor, as mentioned in Section 3.2.2. In this section, we cannot subdivide the part of the middle layer into different sub sections. In addition, different from the middle layer, the layer on the surface not only visibly falls into the conductor group and semiconductor group, but also closely contacts with the electrolyte and plays the role of the reactive sites for the PEC behaviors. Furthermore, in previous reviews or references, the metal layer in the MIS structure has been substantially studied, however, alloys, metal-like sulfides and phosphides, and organic conductors have also been explored in great detail at present. Thus, we use the comprehensive conductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor (CSS) structure to displace the MIS structure in this review. As mentioned above, the materials on the surface of CSS can involve sulfides/phosphides, metals/alloys and organic molecules.

Fig. 13 sums up the performance comparison of CSS photocathodes under different pH testing conditions.17,41,72,81,210–238 Although a semiconductor (insulator or conductor) layer as a protection layer is created between the narrow-gap semiconductor and conductor, most CSS photocathodes are still used in the low or middle pH region, especially in acid conditions. However, currently, several studies have tried to design and construct relatively efficient and stable CSS photocathodes for use under alkaline electrolytes,17,223,225 because at the device level, the photocathode and photoanode are commonly placed in alkaline electrolytes, where earth-abundant, efficient OER catalysts operate sustainably.239 For CSS photocathodes, the study of the materials of the middle layer basically focus on the investigation of oxide semiconductors or insulators including TiO2 and SiO2, but few other materials like metals, sulfides and graphene are also introduced as the middle layer for protecting the narrow-gap semiconductor. Compared with other materials, an oxide layer as the middle layer has a higher photocurrent output at 0 V vs. RHE and more stable operation in acidic or alkaline solution (in Fig. 13). Meanwhile, a metal layer like Mo222 can provide good stability (>100 h) in the low pH region, but it limits the efficiency. On the other hand, metal/alloy materials on the surface of CSS photocathodes are more popular than sulfides/phosphides and organic molecules (in Fig. 13). As discussed in Section 3.2.1, both metals/alloys and sulfides/phosphides on the surface of CSS photocathodes efficiently increase the photocurrent output and boost the reaction kinetics in acidic electrolytes. Besides, some noble metal materials on the surface play a catalytic role in PEC reduction reactions in alkaline environments. Based on the synergistic effect of each layer, CSS photocathodes can simultaneously show a high efficiency (>25 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) and a long lifetime (>100 h) in acids,213 and achieve an acceptable PEC behavior in bases, like a photocurrent density of ∼17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and 24 h.225
 Fig. 13  Performance comparison of CSS photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide/phosphide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S7 (ESI†). 
Recent advances in the efficiency and stability of CSS photoanodes as a function of tested pH conditions are exhibited in Fig. 14.238,240–253 As discussed in the preceding section, CSS photoanodes are mainly studied in alkaline aqueous solution, especially near or at a pH of 14. Additionally, alkali-proof oxide semiconductor or insulator materials are used as the middle layer in CSS photoanodes under alkaline electrolytes for improving the stability. When graphene is used as the middle layer, the PEC performance of the CSS photoanode is tested in acid.249 As shown in Fig. 14, metals/alloys have been solely chosen as the materials on the surface of CSS photoanodes for the past few years. In the CSS configuration, Chen et al. indicate that NiFe/NiCo2O4/n-Si photoanodes have a current density of 26 mA cm−2 at the reversible potential for water splitting and stable operation over 72 h at 31 mA cm−2 in strong alkaline conditions.251
 Fig. 14  Performance comparison of CSS photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor material on the surface is only metal/alloy (green stars). Most semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S8 (ESI†). 
In this fashion, the semiconductor (insulator or conductor) layer between the narrow-gap semiconductor and conductor can chiefly function both as a corrosion protection layer and for selective charge transfer. Among these materials, the conductor layer is impermeable to offer sufficient protection, but it weakens the light transmission and decreases the generation of excited electron–hole pairs. On the contrary, light transmission is usually not a problem for the semiconductor and insulator layers, while a trade-off between the corrosion resistance and charge transfer is formed, particularly in strong alkaline electrolytes. To conquer the drawback, some strategies like introducing defects have attempted to change the mechanism of charge transport from single tunneling to trap-assisted tunneling.17 Based on the current research and results, semiconductor and insulator layers as the middle layer can have more opportunities to realize efficient and stable PEC devices. On the other hand, a conductor on the surface of CSS photoelectrodes essentially plays the role of a cocatalyst, accelerating the charge transfer into the reactants and reducing the activation energy barriers and thermodynamics. In addition, different from the other conductors, a metal/alloy on the surface can form an Ohmic contact for bridging the band edge positions of the narrow-gap semiconductor and the redox energy levels in the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 13 and 14, the CSS photoelectrodes with optimized metal/alloy materials can yield a high photocurrent output at 0 V or 1.23 V vs. RHE approximating the theoretical photocurrent output calculated for the corresponding narrow-gap semiconductor.226,246 Though some little success has been obtained, CSS photoelectrodes have still a severe stability–efficiency trade-off and it is difficult for them to satisfy practical applications.


3.3.2 Semiconductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor (SSS). 
The research attention of photoelectrodes of the semiconductor/semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor structure is less than the CSS structure, especially for photocathodes. In SSS photoelectrodes, the semiconductor materials on the surface can mainly comprise oxides, carbides, hydrogenases and organic molecules. Besides, as mentioned in the CSS structure, similar materials for the middle layer are used in SSS photoelectrodes. To clearly state the advantages and disadvantages of SSS structures, we collected the PEC performance of the reported photoelectrodes at present, as shown in Fig. 15 and 16.
 Fig. 15  Performance comparison of SSS photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), carbide (pink hexagons) and hydrogenase (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S9 (ESI†). 
 Fig. 16  Performance comparison of SSS photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S10 (ESI†). 

Fig. 15 summarizes the recent advances in the photocurrent density at 0 V vs. RHE and the operation time of SSS photocathodes versus tested pH conditions.239,254–263 Just several studies are devoted to developing SSS photocathodes for PEC reduction reactions. These photocathodes are measured in a wide pH range to assess their PEC performance. The materials of the middle layer in SSS photocathodes also mainly focus on metals and oxides. Furthermore, oxide materials have the dominant status for using on the surface of SSS photocathodes. It is easily found in Fig. 15 that few SSS photocathodes show an acceptable photocurrent >10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE, and none of the photocathodes have good stability. Taking the TiO2/Pt/n+p-Si photocathode as an example, using Pt NPs as cocatalysts and an amorphous TiO2 thin layer as a protection layer enhances the efficiency, but the construction reduces the impermeability even in acidic electrolytes.254
Compared with the photocathodes, SSS photoanodes have attracted more attention and interest due to some oxide semiconductors being excellent oxidation catalysts like for the OER. Recent advances in the PEC performance of SSS photoanodes under different pH conditions are displayed in Fig. 16.12,14,25,40,42,81,85,264–273 Similarly to CSS photoanodes, the PEC behaviors of most SSS photoanodes are investigated in the high pH region. In SSS photoanodes, the materials of the middle layer include metals, transparent conducting oxides, oxide semiconductors and oxide insulators. On basis of the numbers of subjects, there is a slight shift toward oxide semiconductors and oxide insulators for the studies of the middle layer. As shown in Fig. 16, the materials of the surface for SSS photoanodes are almost all transition metal oxides in recently published work, except one study using organic molecules on the surface.12 Some SSS photoanodes with optimized structure and materials have outstanding PEC oxidation reactions by coupling high photocurrent output and long-term stable operation. In this case, Zhou et al. have demonstrated that the NiOx/CoOx (2 nm)/n-Si photoanode shows a current density of ∼28 mA cm−2 at the equilibrium potential for water oxidation and a long lifetime of ∼1700 h without degradation when in contact with 1.0 M KOH under 1 sun of simulated solar illumination.42
The SSS configuration can be a promising structure for fabricating a highly efficient and stable photoanode. In the configuration, an oxide semiconductor or insulator as the middle layer can offer good alkali resistance and fast hole transport via tuning the composition and structure.14 At the same time, an earth-abundant transition metal oxide on the surface not only is an excellent cocatalyst for PEC oxidation reactions, but also can change the band edge positions of the photoanode to match the energy level of the oxidization reaction.40 Despite this progress, there are still many challenges like an operation time of over 6 months for further achieving large-area application of SSS photoanodes.

3.4 Multi-layered (n > 3) structure
As is well known, successive added layers not only increase the total bill of materials and device complexity but also can introduce electrical series resistance and interfacial recombination processes. In this fashion, four-layered structures are dominant in all multi-layered (n > 3) structure photoelectrodes. Due to the limited number of related references, this section cannot be separated into subsections. First of all, the secondary layer near the narrow-gap semiconductor usually serves a function as a thin semiconductor homo- or heterojunction to enhance the photovoltaic efficiency or a protection layer to stabilize the photoelectrode. In addition, the third layer on the secondary layer is primarily employed to further suppress the presence of corrosion and degradation and promote charge separation and transport. Finally, the main aim of the fourth layer on the surface of the photoelectrode is reducing the activation energy barriers and accelerating the PEC reaction. This multi-layered (n > 3) configuration is desired to combine the advantages of each layer for resolving the stability–efficiency trade-off.
In recent years, a certain amount of published papers have reported the construction and utilization of multi-layered (n > 3) structures for controlling the efficiency and stability of photocathodes, as shown in Fig. 17.184,274–313 In comparison to the photocathodes mentioned previously, the investigation of PEC behaviors for multi-layered (n > 3) structure photocathodes is dispersed in a wide pH range from 0 to 14. However, these photocathodes under acidic conditions are more likely to obtain good PEC performances than under neutral or alkaline conditions, particularly in the aspect of stability (Fig. 17). Regardless of a conductor, semiconductor or insulator as the materials of the secondary and third layer, a suitable layer thickness and band structure can be beneficial for the increase of the photovoltage, the acceleration of charge separation and transfer, and the enhancement of the impermeability. Additionally, the materials on the surface of photocathodes focus on metals/alloys and sulfides/phosphides, which can provide a fast PEC reduction reaction. Considering the stability and efficiency, an optimized photocathode with a multi-layered (n > 3) structure shows a photocurrent density of ∼20 mA cm−2 at the equilibrium potential for water reduction and a durability of 300 h at ∼17 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4.
 Fig. 17  Performance comparison of photocathodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), sulfide/phosphide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most of the materials on other layers with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S11 (ESI†). 
Currently, photoanodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure are less studied than photocathodes. Fig. 18 shows a performance comparison of photoanodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure under various tested pH conditions.184,314–335 Most of these photoanodes are used in the high pH region to conduct the PEC oxidation reaction. Different from the multi-layered (n > 3) structure photocathodes, for photoanodes one tends to choose an oxide like SiO2 as the material of the secondary layer, which is responsible for the hole extraction and transport.319 Except the surface layer, a conductor, semiconductor or insulator like Ni323 as the other layer of the photoanode can play the role of transferring the charges and stabilizing the operation. Finally, an oxide/hydroxide or metal/alloy on the surface of photoanodes can yield a higher photocurrent output than a phosphide or organic molecule. Consequently, Digdaya et al. have designed and prepared a Ni/Pt/Al2O3/SiOx/n-Si photoanode with a photocurrent of ∼19 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and operational stability of over 200 h.306
 Fig. 18  Performance comparison of photoanodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The materials on the surface are classified as oxide/hydroxide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), phosphide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most of the materials on other layers with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S12 (ESI†). 
On the basis of recent advances, the PEC performance of current multi-layered (n > 3) structure photoelectrodes is still far from the application requirements of commercial production. As mentioned above, introducing an additional layer can be a great burden to the resistance and charge transport of the whole of the photoelectrode; meanwhile, a trade-off between efficiency and stability induced by the layer thickness severely exist in these photoelectrodes. Apparently, it is highly desirable to develop a new design concept or improvement strategy to achieve a highly efficient and stable multi-layered photoelectrode for making a contribution in the new energy industry.
4. Applications
In this section, we synoptically discuss the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes during their applications from three perspectives: water splitting, CO2RR, and other reactions. To date, water splitting is still the most commonly investigated and applied in all of the PEC reactions. The performance retention of PEC devices for water splitting is greatly dependent on the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes, such as the photocurrent density (production yield) and stable operation time (lifetime). In the application of CO2RR, most of the photoelectrodes directly work in the reactions as cathodes to realize solar-to-fuel conversion, however, a few researchers have commenced to employ the photoanode in indirectly supporting the reduction reaction.332 Due to the CO2 solubility and dissociation, the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes during the CO2RR are usually measured in the moderate pH range from 4.5 to 10, unlike using rigorous pH conditions during water splitting. With respect to the other reactions, the PEC performances of the photoelectrodes are briefly introduced to point to a potential application, such as the nitrogen reduction reaction, ethanol oxidation reaction, and degradation of organic pollutants.
4.1 Water splitting
Solar-driven water splitting, which captures sunlight and stores its electromagnetic energy for forming new chemical bonds like H2, has been considered as a promising candidate for fulfilling future energy demands.336–338 PEC water splitting, which combines the catalytic reaction and sunlight harvesting into a fully integrated system, is an economically viable solution for solar-driven hydrogen production.339 Since Fujishima and Honda first demonstrated water splitting through a PEC device,8 intensive efforts have been conducted on available PEC devices for higher energy conversion, particular in the efficiency and stability of photoelectrodes. As mentioned above, narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes are worthy of an indelible position in the development of PEC water splitting due to large optical absorption coefficients and broad-spectrum light collection. For PEC water splitting, the functions of capturing sunlight and water electrolysis are integrated in a single reaction system, which is favorable in terms of packaging and overall system costs.340 PEC water splitting devices are usually divided into monolithic systems and separated electrode systems.341 In addition, based on the number of light absorbers, these PEC devices comprise multiple and single photo-system arrangements, as shown in Fig. 19a. Still, even the best-performing narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes in a PEC water splitting device in the laboratory are far from the essential requirements of practical applications, such as low efficiency and poor stability. Thus, when novel PEC water splitting devices are designed, both the PEC performance of the photoelectrodes and their stability should be considered.
 Fig. 19  Short overview of PEC cells and the efficiency and stability of optimized narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes during water splitting. (a) PEC configurations for water splitting, including (i) multiple photo-system, (ii) single photo-system (photocathode), and (iii) single photo-system (photoanode). (b) Photocurrent density as a function of potential in a multiple photo-system with (i) a Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p-Si photocathode and (ii) a WO3/FTO/p+n-Si photoanode via 120 h of cyclic voltammetry scans under 1.0 M HClO4 electrolyte and 1 sun illumination. Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons (Copyright 2015). (c) Efficiency and stability of photocathodes with a single light absorber under 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution, (i) linear sweep voltammograms and (ii) current density–time curves. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from John Wiley and Sons (Copyright 2018). (d) PEC performances of the photoanodes in a single photo-system with a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination: (i) representative current-density vs. potential behaviors and (ii) chronoamperometry held at 1.63 V vs. RHE. Panels were reproduced with permission from ref. 186, The Royal Society of Chemistry (Copyright 2016). 
In recent years, some laboratory research has focused on the study of the intrinsic properties of PEC assemblies in a multiple photo-system.81,342,343 The construct is desired to be a deployable and scalable PEC system, ideally including a chassis to synergistically integrate the photocathode, photoanode, electrocatalytic and electrolyte components, and maintain their optimal and safe operation. The operational conditions and constraints for PEC water splitting devices have been investigated by prior simulation studies,344–346 involving the combination of the composition and structure of the photoelectrodes, the pH requirements for the solution electrolyte, and the geometric parameters of various cell designs. With respect to optimizing the PEC performance, strong acidic or alkaline electrolytes are required to minimize the transport loss through the membrane separator (as shown in Fig. 7–18), because of the very small transference number for the active species passing through ion exchange membranes under neutral pH solutions. Meanwhile, significant voltage losses occur at the surface of the photoelectrodes by the pH gradients when a near-neutral pH solution is the electrolyte.347 On the other hand, the requirements of high efficiency in harsh pH conditions limit the stability of all the system components. In particular, narrow-gap semiconductor photoabsorbers that would dissolve and corrode quickly in strong acidic or alkaline solutions need to be protected by surface treatments13 or multilayer structure.348 Under this principle, Walczak et al. have designed and assembled a fully integrated PEC water splitting system comprised of Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p-Si as the photocathode and WO3/FTO/p+n-Si as the photoanode.81 As shown in Fig. 19b, the photocathode had an open-circuit voltage of 490 mV, a current density of ∼19.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE and stable operation of 120 h, whereas the photoanode performed with a low current density (∼1.2 mA cm−2) at the formal potential for O2 evolution even with a high photovoltage and good durability due to the thick WO3 layer with a large band gap.81 Thus the whole configuration provided a limited overall solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency. Obviously, once a narrow-gap semiconductor-based photocathode and photoanode are simultaneously incorporated into a PEC water splitting device, many aspects, such as the assembly, band gap and layer thickness, can influence their efficiency and stability.
Compared with the complicated multiple photo-system, PEC water splitting with a single photo-system has been substantially studied and explored over the last four decades. Most of these investigations have focused on the effect of the composition and structure of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes on the PEC behaviors of the half-cell configuration.47,103,349 For the same reason, efficient photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting systems can be constructed in strongly acidic or alkaline electrolytes. Besides, to further enhance the STH conversion, the formation of a buried rectifying junction, a combination of tandem semiconductors, the use of HER or OER cocatalysts and the construction of a nanostructure have been commonly demonstrated in PEC devices.17,97,286,326 In addition, there are several available strategies, such as building a protection layer, to stabilize technologically important narrow-gap semiconductors for serving as hydrogen-evolving photocathodes or oxygen-evolving photoanodes, even in an electrolyte solution near pH 0 or 14.14,162 On the basis of these efforts, significant progress in the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes has been achieved. Up to now, optimized narrow-gap semiconductor-based photocathodes in a single photo-system simultaneously had a high efficiency (>25 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE) and a long lifetime (>100 h) in acidic solution as reported by Andoshe et al. (Fig. 19c),213 while a better durability of ∼2500 h with a ratio of the degraded photocurrent of 14% and a photocurrent density of ∼20.8 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE were found in 50 nm-thickness CoOx-coated n-Si photoanodes under 1.0 M KOH aqueous solution (Fig. 19d).186 However, there is a large gap between the existing PEC performances and the requirement of industrial application, especially the stability aspect. As discussed in Section 3, a trade-off between the efficiency and stability occurs in narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes and greatly impedes their commercialization. Generally, the trade-off of the photoelectrodes can be related to some factors like the pH value of the electrolyte, layer thickness, architecture, and interface.184
4.2 CO2RR
The development of the PEC CO2RR with H2O holds the promise to not only convert renewable solar energy into storable value-added fuels but also mitigate CO2 emission into the atmosphere.350,351 Compared to the research efforts carried out for PEC water splitting, comparatively few efforts have so far appeared in the literature on the PEC CO2RR, although a lively debate for and against water splitting versus CO2 reduction is currently ongoing.352 The reasons for this are several: the products of the CO2RR are complex and diverse due to multiple proton–electron transfer processes, they have similar free energies and compete with the production of H2, and there is a lack of excellent CO2RR catalysts, especially for the generation of two-carbon products, like ethanol.353 To date, various narrow-gap semiconductors as photocathodes or photoanodes, such as Si,23,138 ZnTe,354 GaAs,332 and Cu2O,282 have been applied in the PEC CO2RR for various products. However, these semiconductors have poor catalytic activity of the CO2RR and thus integrating catalytic components on their surface are necessary for assembling an efficient PEC CO2RR system.355 Among these cocatalysts, metal materials including Au, Ag, Cu and Sn are selected to promote the CO2RR preferentially at low overpotential in an aqueous solution.138,356,357 In addition, as mentioned above, the PEC CO2RR involves very different optimal electrolyte conditions (near-neutral pH) from PEC water splitting. The low concentration of dissolved CO2 for the photocathode in alkaline conditions imposes severe mass-transport limitations on the electroactive reagent, whereas the HER is dominant in acidic conditions due to the high proton concentration.332 Nowadays, the PEC CO2RR with two-protons to produce CO can be achieved efficiently and selectively with a photocurrent density of 10 mA cm−2 at a relatively low overpotential.358
In general, PEC CO2RR devices can be also classified into multiple and single photo-system configurations, including a unit of the photocathode and photoanode, a photocathode coupling with an electrocatalytic anode, and a photoanode coupling with an electrocatalytic cathode. Currently, the multiple photo-system is an ideal model, in which a photocathode conducts the reduction of CO2 and a photoanode completes the water oxidation.359 However, owing to the enormous challenge of the selection of the materials as the photocathode and photoanode, like the band structure and catalytic performance, the research progress on this multiple photon-system is extremely slow, particularly for narrow-gap semiconductors. To date, Son et al. have only demonstrated a multiple photon-system with hydrogen-terminated silicon nanowires as the photocathode and cobalt phosphate/indium tin oxide/triple junction silicon as the photoanode to convert CO2 to formate using a formate dehydrogenase from Thiobacillus sp. and an applied bias.360 Unlike multiple photo-systems, single photo-systems are making substantial progress in enhancing the PEC CO2RR. Much attention has been paid to the configuration of a photocathode coupled with an OER anode electrocatalyst because the CO2RR is directly realized on the surface of the photocathode.351,361 Since Halmann first applied a p-GaP photocathode for the PEC CO2RR in 1978,362 a series of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photocathodes have been developed and constructed to efficiently and stably convert CO2 and H2O into various carbon compounds.23,138,282,354,355 In the photocathode coupled with an OER anode, the research mainly concentrates on not only the choice of narrow-gap semiconductors but also the development of a protection layer and cocatalyst to further enhance the efficiency and stability of the photocathode for the PEC CO2RR. For instance, Chu et al. have utilized a Pt-TiO2/GaN/n+p-Si photocathode to achieve a benchmark solar-to-syngas efficiency of 0.87% and an acceptable stability of 10 h in 0.5 M KHCO3 solution under ∼8 suns (Fig. 20a).300 In another single photo-system, a photoanode for the PEC CO2RR has been researched and developed, similar to that for PEC water splitting. Therefore, just some laboratory demonstrations of solar-driven CO2RR devices have used a photoanode coupled with an electrocatalyst of the CO2RR.332,363,364 Among these demonstrations, a tandem Ni/TiO2/InGaP/GaAs photoanode combined with a Pd/C NP-coated Ti mesh cathode has shown an operational current density of 8.5 mA cm−2, a faradaic efficiency of >94% for the reduction of 1 atm of CO2(g) to formate, and a durability of 180 h in a two-electrode electrochemical configuration under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 20b).332 According to these results, the existing photoelectrodes still show very low efficiency and short lifetime even in neutral electrolytes.
 Fig. 20  Efficiency and stability of classical narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes during the CO2RR. (a) The use of Si-based photocathodes in the PEC CO2RR, containing (i) a schematic illustration of the structure, (ii) photocurrent density–potential curves and (iii) chronoamperometry data and faradaic efficiency for the CO2RR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (b) The use of InGaP/GaAs-based photoanodes in the PEC CO2RR, including (i) a schematic illustration of a two-electrode electrochemical setup and (ii) current density as a function of operational time. Panels reprinted with permission from ref. 332 (Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
4.3 Other reactions
In the past decades, PEC devices have been involved in other applications of the energy and environmental field, such as the nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), the ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR), and degradation of organic pollutants. Although the NRR, the EOR and degradation of organic pollutants are widely studied by other methods, like electrocatalysts and photocatalysts, their PEC reactions are still in their infancy.
Recently, to achieve the production of ammonia (NH3) via renewable energy at room temperature and low pressure, the PEC NRR has attracted considerable attention. For instance, Ali et al. have exhibited an conversion of atmospheric N2 to NH3 with a yield rate of 13.3 mg m−2 h−1 by using a gold (Au) plasmon-enhanced black Si photoelectrode under 2 sun illumination.365 But, there is no information on the efficiency and stability of the Si-based photoelectrode in this system, e.g. photocurrent density and stable operation time, which is similar to photocatalytic behaviors. To further improve the NH3 yield rate and faradaic efficiency, Zheng et al. have constructed a unique aerophilic–hydrophilic hetero-structured Si-based photocathode coupled with a Pt wire anode for the PEC NRR in an acid electrolyte under mild conditions (Fig. 21a).366 The Si-based photocathode is composed of p-Si as the light absorber, a Ti thin layer as the protection layer, a poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) porous framework as the gas-diffusion layer and Au NPs as the active sites. Due to the attractive properties of the aerophilic–hydrophilic hetero-structure, such as enriching the nitrogen molecular concentration, manipulating the proton activity and suppressing the HER, a high ammonia yield rate of ∼18.9 μg cm−2 h−1 and an excellent faradaic efficiency of 37.8% at −0.2 V vs. RHE have been achieved (as shown in Fig. 21a).366 Moreover, the photocathode can stably operate over 11 h in 0.05 M H2SO4 aqueous solution.366 However, in this work, the efficiency and stability of the photocathode for the PEC NRR are still inferior to those required for practical applications. It is anticipated that more efforts would be contributed on addressing the challenges of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes in the research field of the PEC NRR.
 Fig. 21  Other usual applications of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes. (a) The PEC NRR of Si-based photocathodes, consisting of (i) a schematic diagram of the PEC NRR and (ii) the yield rate of NH3 and faradaic efficiency on the photocathodes for 4 h. Reproduced from ref. 366 with permission from Elsevier B.V. (Copyright 2019). (b) The PEC EOR of Si-based photoanodes, including (i) a schematic of a possible mechanism for the PEC EOR and (ii) cyclic voltammetry curves of the photoanodes under 1 sun illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (c) PEC degradation of phenol via a PEC device including (i) a schematic of the degradation mechanism of phenol and (ii) the phenol degradation efficiency with various electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier B.V. (Copyright 2019). 
Several PEC systems have been developed for the EOR.367,368 However, compared to wide-gap semiconductor-based photoanodes, the application of a narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoanode in the EOR is rare. To date, Cai et al. have reported a high-performance NiFe/ZrO2/n-Si photoanode with high EOR activity, which showed a higher current density of 34.4 mA cm−2 under illumination than that in the dark (13.6 mA cm−2) (Fig. 21b).246 In addition, with respect to the degradation of organic contaminants, earlier PEC systems mainly consisted of TiO2 photoanodes and Pt cathodes.369 Gradually, TiO2 photoanodes and Pt cathodes were displaced by visible light-responsive semiconductor-based photoanodes and photocathodes, respectively. For example, a PEC system with a BiVO4 photoanode and CuO/Cu2O photocathode has shown highly efficient degradation of phenol and a short circuit photocurrent density of 0.3 mA cm−2 (Fig. 21c).178 As mentioned above, the application of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes in these fields is still at the early stage and the stability of the photoelectrodes has been neglected.
5. Summary and outlook
In summary, the narrow band gap of semiconductors as photoelectrodes causes them to absorb a broad solar spectrum and be easily oxidized or corroded in aqueous solution, thus bestowing on them a dual nature of high efficiency and poor stability for PEC reactions. The high efficiency of narrow-gap semiconductor photoelectrodes makes them commodiously convert renewable solar energy into chemical fuels, while their poor stability gives rise to fast degradation of their performance during PEC reactions. The ultimate aim of the development of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes is to assemble them into PEC devices to realize practical application in the conversion and storage of solar energy that can meet the energy requirements for our daily life and industrial production. Thus, a key issue arises of how to maintain efficient narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes for a long PEC operation period.
To address the key issue, ongoing efforts have been carried out in both aspects to advance the state-of-the-art of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes, especially the strategy of integrating the semiconductor with various functional layers. On one hand, from the viewpoint of stability, a major concern is how to keep narrow-gap semiconductor photoelectrodes relatively stable in aqueous electrolytes, and there are two aspects that have been considered: the surface energy level and isolation of active substances. A stable chemical surface for the semiconductor is achieved at E(A+/A) < CBM < Ere (or Eox < VBM < E(B−/B)) under illumination. Thus, tuning a suitable surface energy level is attempted to keep a photoelectrode/solution stable; examples of this are doping other elements into the semiconductor surface or passivating the surface with suitable treatments to change the surface energy level. Compared to tuning the surface energy level, a more effective method to maintain the stability of narrow-gap semiconductor photoelectrodes is to isolate the semiconductor from the aqueous solution, like adding a protection layer. So far, various types of protection layers have been evaluated, such as oxide layers (e.g. TiO2), metal layers (Ni), and organic molecule layers. In fact, the thickness of the protection layer is a very important factor, which not only determines the lifetime of the photoelectrodes but also controls the resistance and light-harvesting to affect the efficiency of the photoelectrodes. Note that all the protection layers that stabilize the photoelectrodes should be compatible with their efficiency. In some cases, stabilizing procedures through a thick protection layer (>50 nm) that effectively provide a long operation period can actually render the photoelectrodes inefficient or inactive. For common protection layers, the carrier tunnelling probabilities of metal oxides or the transmittance of metals can reduce fast with increasing their layer thickness (>4 nm). Thus, for the protection layer one should keep on developing new materials and structures, and optimizing their thickness. We envisage that a protection layer with selective permeability or a graded composition and structure can be a better choice for improving the stability of photoelectrodes in different PEC applications, which can avoid undesired reactions or low charge transport to maintain the stability of the photoelectrodes, while allowing target reactions to occur on the surface and then producing the expected results.
On the other hand, as mentioned above, the introduction of the protection layer can lead to the increase of the resistance, the reduction of the light transmittance, or the formation of a consumption layer for photogenerated charge carriers, which performs with poor efficiency for photoelectrodes. However, in some cases, the protection layer can also play a role of a cocatalyst for specified PEC reactions, for example a CoOx protection layer for the OER. Furthermore, other various functionalized materials or layers are integrated into the protection layer/narrow-gap semiconductor photoelectrodes to increase their photocurrent and photovoltage. Firstly, the junction type, like a p–n or n–p junction, can produce a high efficiency photoelectrode with CSS structure because the degenerate oxide layer screens the effect of high work function surface catalyst layers and thereby eliminates the built-in field in CSS structures. Another motivation for creating the junction is associated with the band edge to maximize the photovoltage. In addition, adding cocatalysts, such as metals/alloys, sulfides and oxides, is regard as the most efficient way to lower the reaction barrier and promote charge injection to the reactants. In photoelectrodes with multilayer structure, these cocatalysts directly contact with the reactants to finish the PEC reactions, and thereby they should also possess good durability in aqueous solution under illumination. Moreover, an interface or interlayer between functionalized layers, like a protection layer/cocatalyst layer, is critical for promoting charge separation and transfer, which can indirectly influence the efficiency of photoelectrodes.
Once these layers are assembled in the photoelectrodes, the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes are far from the desired performance, because there are many interactions in these layers including chemical or physical behaviors. While a layer can improve one or multiple properties, it may worsen other properties simultaneously or influence the properties of other layers. Hence, the design of photoelectrodes for improving their efficiency and stability involves not only the function of each layer but also their organized structure and corresponding interfaces. The effect of the organized structure and layer/layer interfaces requires the consideration and understanding of the properties of each layer from a holistic perspective: the layers in the photoelectrode are no longer isolated units, but each layer is closely related with the performance of the whole photoelectrode. Before a new structure or strategy to maintain the good performance and long operation of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes is adopted, work is needed to move beyond descriptive models and to elucidate the underlying mechanisms that control the arrangement and properties of each layer and their interface behavior. On the basis of the reported data and current analysis, a three-layered configuration including a cocatalyst layer, protection layer and light-harvesting layer can be a more promising structure for fabricating a highly efficient and stable narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrode. In the configuration, the protection layer and cocatalyst layer have offered good corrosion resistance (operation time more than 1000 h) and excellent solar-to-fuel conversion (photocurrent at thermodynamic potential more than 10 mA cm−2). At the same time, the configuration has the optimum number of functional layers and avoids the introduction of extra layers, which can bring in the issue of resistance and charge transport in the photoelectrode and increase the complexity and cost of the whole PEC device.
Overall, although research of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes has increased markedly from early 2010, the review work has focused on the composition (like the semiconductor), structure (like MIS), and individual function (improving the efficiency or stability) of the photoelectrodes, whereas the relationship of the photoelectrode efficiency and stability has been somewhat overlooked. Photoelectrodes in PEC devices remain useless if they only run for a long time with poor efficiency or maintain their good performance for a short time. Therefore, for practical applications, the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes must be simultaneously excellent in any case. To better understand the relationship of efficiency and stability to design new narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes, the following points should be seriously taken into account. (i) The intrinsic features of each layer like the thickness, composition and microstructure play important roles in determining the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes. An in-depth understanding and optimization of the properties of each layer will lay a solid foundation for constructing an efficient and stable photoelectrode. (ii) The organized structure and layer/layer interfaces of the photoelectrodes to some extent influence how the charge carrier transfer from the bulk to the surface and the corrosion occurs in the surface. Thus, the organized structure and layer/layer interfaces also greatly affect the efficiency and stability of the photoelectrodes. (iii) In situ and quantitative characterization can clearly and reasonably analyze the PEC reaction of the photoelectrodes, which can be helpful for achieving a quantitative and objective evaluation and understanding a degradation mechanism for a narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrode. (iv) When a photoelectrode is used in practical PEC reactions, its efficiency and stability not only rely on itself but also are strongly related to the pH value, the whole PEC device, and the other testing factors (e.g. light intensity).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51402100, 21573066, 21825201 and 21805080), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation, the Provincial Natural Science Foundation of Hunan (2016JJ1006 and 2016TP1009), Foundation of Shenzhen City (JCYJ20170306141659388), and Australian Research Council (DP180100568 and DP180100731).
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, L. C. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 70–81 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hammarström and S. Hammes-Schiffer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1859–1860 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Hale and M. R. Querry, Appl. Opt., 1973, 12, 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and L. W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, C. Xie, R. Wang, L. Tao, H. Wu, H. Zhou, S. Jiang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801773 CrossRef PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sun, S. Shen, Y. Liang, P. E. Burrows, S. S. Mao and D. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8662–8719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, R. Wang, C. Xie, H. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3572 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
N. Q. Wu, J. Wang, D. Tafen, H. Wang, J. G. Zheng, J. P. Lewis, X. G. Liu, S. S. Leonard and A. Manivannan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6679–6685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jian, G. Jiang, R. van de Krol, B. Wei and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 457–480 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kong, D. Kim, C. Liu, Y. Yu, Y. Su, Y. Li and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5675–5680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Altermatt and S. E. Manahan, Inorg. Nucl. Chem. Lett., 1968, 4, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Scheuermann and P. C. McIntyre, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2867–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, K. Sun, S. Hu, X. Zhou, M. T. McDowell, M. R. Shaner, M. H. Richter, E. J. Crumlin, A. I. Carim, F. H. Saadi, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 11–23 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Bookbinder, N. S. Lewis, M. G. Bradley, A. B. Bocarsly and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 7721–7723 CrossRef .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lieber, C. M. Gronet and N. S. Lewis, Nature, 1984, 307, 533 CrossRef CAS .
A. Q. Contractor and J. O. M. Bockris, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
O. Savadogo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 52, 361–388 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Maier, M. Specht and G. Bilger, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 859–864 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Badawy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 281–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takabayashi, R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 166, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. Vesborg, M. E. Bjorketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mei, A. A. Permyakova, R. Frydendal, D. Bae, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, O. Hansen, I. E. Stephens, P. C. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS .
W. Vijselaar, P. Westerik, J. Veerbeek, R. M. Tiggelaar, E. Berenschot, N. R. Tas, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 RSC .
L. Jiang, R. Wang, B. Yang, T. J. Li, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and D. B. Zhu, Pure Appl.
Chem., 2000, 72, 73 CAS .
L. M. Peter, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 753–769 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, S. Bao, X. Zhang, H. Wu, R. Chen and P. Jin, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2017, 1, 290–305 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula and R. van de Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 3–16 CrossRef .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Nguyen, N. N. Vu and T.-O. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18345–18359 RSC .
B. J. Trześniewski, I. A. Digdaya, T. Nagaki, S. Ravishankar, I. Herraiz-Cardona, D. A. Vermaas, A. Longo, S. Gimenez and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1517–1529 RSC .
B. Mei, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, D. Bae, R. Frydendal, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15019–15027 CrossRef CAS .
O. Voznyy, B. R. Sutherland, A. H. Ip, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17026 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and W. T. Read, Phys. Rev., 1952, 87, 835–842 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jafari, E. Moharreri, A. S. Amin, R. Miao, W. Song and S. L. Suib, Molecules, 2016, 21, 900 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421–2440 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K. S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 1914–1920 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salvador, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 2977–2985 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 013701 CrossRef .
M. de Respinis, M. Fravventura, F. F. Abdi, H. Schreuders, T. J. Savenije, W. A. Smith, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7091–7099 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lee, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, T. Gokmen, Y. Virgus and S. Guha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401372 CrossRef .
R. A. Pala, A. J. Leenheer, M. Lichterman, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3424–3430 RSC .
V. T. Quat, W. Eichhammer and P. Siffert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 1928–1930 CrossRef .
S. S. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 126–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thaweesak, M. Lyu, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, B. Luo, H. Chen and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13613–13617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, N. Park, Z. Sun, J. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Pang, S. Shen, S. Y. Noh, Y. Jing, S. Jin, P. K. L. Yu and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7872–7877 RSC .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1978, 15, 1422–1428 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 82, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Park and M. E. Barber, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1979, 99, 67–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and M. S. Wrighton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1706–1710 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stevanović, S. Lany, X. Zhang and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115104 CrossRef .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West, J. Jin, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goryachev, L. Gao, R. P. J. van Veldhoven, J. E. M. Haverkort, J. P. Hofmann and E. J. M. Hensen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 14242–14250 RSC .
J. A. Seabold and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1105–1112 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Q. Cao, F. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, J. J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981–5037 RSC .
Q. Cheng, M. K. Benipal, Q. Liu, X. Wang, P. A. Crozier, C. K. Chan and R. J. Nemanich, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16138–16147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Wrighton, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 57–68 CAS .
X. G. Yang, C. Du, R. Liu, J. Xie and D. W. Wang, J. Catal., 2013, 304, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wrighton, Acc. Chem. Res., 1979, 12, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, J. Shi, Z. Wang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 675–688 CrossRef .
G. Gulyamov and N. U. Sharibaev, Semiconductors, 2011, 45, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Trzesniewski and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2919–2926 RSC .
H. Gerischer, Surf. Sci., 1969, 18, 97–122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Williams and A. J. Nozik, Nature, 1978, 271, 137 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Shreve and N. S. Lewis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1991, 42, 543–580 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6128–6141 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nurlaela, H. Wang, T. Shinagawa, S. Flanagan, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Qureshi, Z. Mics, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers, E. Cánovas, M. Bonn and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4117–4126 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Thorne, Y. Zhao, D. He, S. Fan, S. Vanka, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29653–29659 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. A. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653–9661 RSC .
B. Kim, G. S. Park, S. Y. Chae, M. K. Kim, H. S. Oh, Y. J. Hwang, W. Kim and B. K. Min, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5182 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Gu, Y. Zhao, M. Wei, C. Huang and Y. Qiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu and M. N. Chong, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 347–373 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lin and C. W. Liu, Sensors, 2010, 10, 8797–8826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. Huang, Y. Yu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 236–243 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Pekarek, H. Celio and M. J. Rose, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 6328–6337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Patel, M. Kumar, J. Kim and Y. K. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6099–6105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Thalluri, J. Borme, D. Xiong, J. Xu, W. Li, I. Amorim, P. Alpuim, J. Gaspar, H. Fonseca, L. Qiao and L. Liu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 978–982 RSC .
C. Liu, Y. H. Chang, J. Chen and S. P. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39027–39033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Frick, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4422–4431 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Esposito, Y. Lee, H. Yoon, P. M. Haney, N. Y. Labrador, T. P. Moffat, A. A. Talin and V. A. Szalai, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 154–173 RSC .
X. Yu, N. Guijarro, M. Johnson and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shyamal, P. Hajra, H. Mandal, A. Bera, D. Sariket, A. K. Satpati, M. V. Malashchonak, A. V. Mazanik, O. V. Korolik, A. I. Kulak, E. V. Skorb, A. Maity, E. A. Streltsov and C. Bhattacharya, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 335, 676–684 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, J. Chen, Y. Wang, K. Sun, F. Liu and Y. Lai, Mater. Lett., 2018, 224, 109–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. I. Salehmin, L. Jeffery Minggu, W. F. Mark-Lee, M. A. Mohamed, K. Arifin, M. H. H. Jumali and M. B. Kassim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 182, 237–245 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Muzzillo, W. E. Klein, Z. Li, A. D. DeAngelis, K. Horsley, K. Zhu and N. Gaillard, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19573–19579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, R. Li, M. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11180–11188 RSC .
A. D. DeAngelis, K. Horsley and N. Gaillard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14304–14312 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, Z. Guo, Y. Shan, S. Wu, J. Zhang, K. Yan, L. Liu, P. K. Chu and X. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shearer, W. Li, J. G. Foster, M. J. Stolt, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 905–913 Search PubMed .
T. He, L. Zu, Y. Zhang, C. Mao, X. Xu, J. Yang and S. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7882–7891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-W. Cheng and S.-W. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22130–22142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. DiMeglio and B. M. Bartlett, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7579–7586 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Liang, J. Lin, Y. Yu, R. Li, F. Gao and G. Li, J. Power Sources, 2019, 419, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oh, J. B. Kim, J. T. Song, J. Oh and S.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3304–3310 RSC .
S. M. Thalluri, J. Borme, K. Yu, J. Xu, I. Amorim, J. Gaspar, L. Qiao, P. Ferreira, P. Alpuim and L. Liu, Nano
Res., 2018, 11, 4823–4835 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. An, K. Jin, U. Sim and K. T. Nam, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2018, 39, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Momeni, Y. Ghayeb and M. Menati, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 4136–4146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Basu, Z. W. Zhang, C. J. Chen, P. T. Chen, K. C. Yang, C. G. Ma, C. C. Lin, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6211–6216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Choi, G. Piao, W. Choi and H. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 615–621 CrossRef CAS .
V. Veeramani, H. C. Yu, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17280–17286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Kempler, M. A. Gonzalez, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 612–617 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Dominey, N. S. Lewis, J. A. Bruce, D. C. Bookbinder and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 467–482 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Song, H. Ryoo, M. Cho, J. Kim, J. G. Kim, S. Y. Chung and J. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601103 CrossRef .
U. Sim, J. Moon, J. An, J. H. Kang, S. E. Jerng, J. Moon, S. P. Cho, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1329–1338 RSC .
W. Zhou, F. Niu, S. S. Mao and S. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hu, J. Xiang, Q. Zhou, S. Su, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Jin, L. Nian, R. Nözel, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3518–3525 RSC .
R. R. Prabhakar, W. Septina, S. Siol, T. Moehl, R. Wick-Joliat and S. D. Tilley, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23139–23145 RSC .
A. F. Halima, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 651–657 CrossRef CAS .
E. Szaniawska, I. A. Rutkowska, M. Frik, A. Wadas, E. Seta, A. Krogul-Sobczak, K. Rajeshwar and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 400–410 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ghosh, N. Saha, A. Sarkar, A. K. Dutta, J. Satra and B. Adhikary, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 1071–1081 RSC .
P. S. Shinde, P. R. Fontenot, J. P. Donahue, J. L. Waters, P. Kung, L. E. McNamara, N. I. Hammer, A. Gupta and S. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9569–9582 RSC .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, C.-S. Kim, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701589 CrossRef PubMed .
L. X. Liu, G. C. Fan, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1027, 33–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, Y. S. Shim, D. H. Kim, T. Kim, W. Sohn, J. M. Jeon, C. H. Lee, K. T. Nam, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2240–2248 RSC .
M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. L. Stone, J. R. Schmidt, J. G. Thomas, Q. Ding, H. C. Chang, M. L. Tsai, J. H. He and S. Jin, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1245 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ding, Y. Hu, J. Deng, J. Chen, C. Zha, H. Yang, N. Han, Q. Gong, L. Li, T. Wang, X. Zhao and Y. Li, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 11, 80–85 CrossRef .
W. Huang, Q. Zhou, S. Su, J. Li, X. Lu, X. Gao, X. Wang, M. Jin, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801663 CrossRef .
L. Lu, W. Vakki, J. A. Aguiar, C. Xiao, K. Hurst, M. Fairchild, X. Chen, F. Yang, J. Gu and Z. J. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1088–1099 RSC .
S. Vanka, Y. Wang, P. Ghamari, S. Chu, A. Pandey, P. Bhattacharya, I. Shih and Z. Mi, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800113 CrossRef .
H. Wang, S. B. Naghadeh, C. Li, L. Ying, A. L. Allen and J. Z. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 839–850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pareek, P. Paik, J. Joardar, K. Murugan and P. H. Borse, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 661, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. L. Laskowski, M. R. Nellist, R. Venkatkarthick and S. W. Boettcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 570–579 RSC .
A. C. Nielander, M. J. Bierman, N. Petrone, N. C. Strandwitz, S. Ardo, F. Yang, J. Hone and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17246–17249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Lu, W. Dong, Q. Chen, D. Wu, W. Zhou and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5257–5261 RSC .
W. Cui, S. Wu, F. Chen, Z. Xia, Y. Li, X. H. Zhang, T. Song, S. T. Lee and B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9411–9419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zheng, J. P. Song, T. Ling, Z. P. Hu, P.-F. Yin, K. Davey, X. W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4935–4942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Zhao, K. He, J. Luo, G. Li, R. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Cao, P. Jing and Y. Ding, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2046–2057 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zuo, Y. Liu, J. Li, R. Du, X. Yu, C. Xing, T. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Arbiol, J. Llorca, K. Sivula, N. Guijarro and A. Cabot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6918–6926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wu, Q. Xu and G. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25450–25459 RSC .
J. Liang, H. Tan, M. Liu, B. Liu, N. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16841–16848 RSC .
J. Gu, H. Yu, X. Quan and S. Chen, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2017, 11, 13 CrossRef .
K. Lee, S. Lee, H. Cho, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 264–270 CrossRef .
H. Qi, J. Wolfe, D. Fichou and Z. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, C. H. Lee, J. Y. Cheong, S. Lee, I. D. Kim, H. I. Joh and D. C. Lee, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2017, 34, 3214–3219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, Y. C. Chang and Y. K. Hsu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 729, 507–512 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, X. Kan, L. Y. Gan and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10303–10312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, Z. Dai, X. Xu, J. Pan and J. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23074–23080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, H. Meng and C. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8121–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krawicz, J. Yang, E. Anzenberg, J. Yano, I. D. Sharp and G. F. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11861–11868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, W. Fan, Y. He, P. Ma, S. Vanka, S. Fan, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700312 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kornblum, D. P. Fenning, J. Faucher, J. Hwang, A. Boni, M. G. Han, M. D. Morales-Acosta, Y. Zhu, E. I. Altman, M. L. Lee, C. H. Ahn, F. J. Walker and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 377–382 RSC .
E. Pastor, F. Le Formal, M. T. Mayer, S. D. Tilley, L. Francàs, C. A. Mesa, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Liu, D. Cao, R. Mao and X. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1530–1540 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, F. Ren, H. Wu, L. Wu, X. Wang, J. Wang, D. Wan, G. Zhang and C. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Park, J. Y. Jung, Y. H. Nam, J. W. Song, C. Jeong and J. H. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 616, 550–554 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shyamal, A. Maity, A. K. Satpati and C. Bhattacharya, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, Z. Wang, M. Lyu, B. Luo, S. Wang, G. Liu, H. M. Cheng and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801369 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ji, H. Y. Hsu, X. Li, K. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. C. Lee, A. J. Bard and E. T. Yu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 127–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Shan, X. Hou and K. L. Choy, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2008, 202, 2399–2402 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 892–897 RSC .
M. Li, X. Tu, Y. Su, J. Lu, J. Hu, B. Cai, Z. Zhou, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1153–1161 RSC .
R. Ma, S. Wu, H. Yu, S. Chen, A. Sinha and X. Quan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 12700–12706 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Chem, 2018, 4, 162–173 CAS .
L. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Yao, X. Zhao, H. Shi, M. Cao and Y. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11652–11662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Adhikari, K. Basu, Y. Zhou, F. Vetrone, D. Ma, S. Sun, F. Vidal, H. Zhao and F. Rosei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6822–6829 RSC .
K. Jun, Y. S. Lee, T. Buonassisi and J. M. Jacobson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 423–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, X. Tu, Y. Wang, Y. Su, J. Hu, B. Cai, J. Lu, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 45 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Niu, W. Gu, X. Cai, B. Mao, D. Li and W. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, Y. Zhang, D. Wei, X. Wang, T. Yan, B. Du and Q. Wei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 256, 812–819 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, X. Pang, S. Shen, X. Qian, J. S. Cheung and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2064–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, F. Cao, F. Wu, Z. Diao, J. Chen, S. Shen and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706785 CrossRef .
N. C. Strandwitz, D. J. Comstock, R. L. Grimm, A. C. Nichols-Nielander, J. Elam and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4931–4936 CrossRef CAS .
L. Santinacci, M. W. Diouf, M. K. Barr, B. Fabre, L. Joanny, F. Gouttefangeas and G. Loget, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24810–24818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shaoyang, S. Guangwei, L. Shengyang, M. Lixuan and S. Wensheng, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 035601 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, S. Vanka, Y. Wang, J. Gim, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Ra, R. Hovden, H. Guo, I. Shih and Z. Mi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 307–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Cheng, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 87, 182–195 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, M. T. McDowell, A. C. Nielander, S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, F. Yang, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 592–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, J. Wang, S. Mo, F. Wang, F. Long and Z. Zou, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800015 CrossRef .
C. S. Jung, D. Kim, S. Cha, Y. Myung, F. Shojaei, H. G. Abbas, J. A. Lee, E. H. Cha, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9089–9098 RSC .
Y. Zang, Y. Ju, X. Hu, H. Zhou, Z. Yang, J. Jiang and H. Xue, Analyst, 2018, 143, 2895–2900 RSC .
X. Liang, P. Wang, B. Huang, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zheng, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1647–1657 RSC .
T. Higashi, H. Nishiyama, Y. Suzuki, Y. Sasaki, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, K. Seki, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2300–2304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, H. C. Kwon, J. Kim, W. Jo, J. Kim and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702888 CrossRef .
N. P. Dasgupta, C. Liu, S. Andrews, F. B. Prinz and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12932–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tan, W. Yang, Y. Oh, H. Lee, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10898–10908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Andoshe, G. Jin, C. S. Lee, C. Kim, K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, W. Sohn, C. W. Moon, S. H. Lee, J. M. Suh, S. Kang, J. Park, H. Heo, J. K. Kim, S. Han, M. H. Jo and H. W. Jang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700142 CrossRef .
S. Y. Chae, S. J. Park, S. G. Han, H. Jung, C. W. Kim, C. Jeong, O. S. Joo, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15673–15681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Szaniawska, K. Bienkowski, I. A. Rutkowska, P. J. Kulesza and R. Solarska, Catal. Today, 2018, 300, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartori, M. Orlandi, S. Berardi, A. Mazzi, N. Bazzanella, S. Caramori, R. Boaretto, M. Natali, R. Fernandes, N. Patel, C. A. Bignozzi and A. Miotello, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 271, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kornienko, N. A. Gibson, H. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, S. Aloni, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5525–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, Y. Liu, S. Lin, W. Qarony, L. Tao, Y. Chai, X. Zhang, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, Y. R. Kim, K. Ha, J. K. Lee, J. G. Lee, W. Jang, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Bae and T. D. Chung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3654–3662 RSC .
M. J. Choi, J. Y. Jung, M. J. Park, J. W. Song, J. H. Lee and J. H. Bang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2928–2933 RSC .
A. B. Laursen, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, B. Seger, O. Hansen, P. C. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20000–20004 RSC .
J. Feng, M. Gong, M. J. Kenney, J. Z. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1577–1583 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhetri and C. N. R. Rao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 15300–15306 RSC .
D. Bae, S. Shayestehaminzadeh, E. B. Thorsteinsson, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, S. Ólafsson and I. Chorkendorff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 758–765 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y. L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dai, J. Xie, M. T. Mayer, X. Yang, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11119–11123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Li, C. Li, R. Zhang, J. J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8480–8484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wedege, D. Bae, E. Dražević, A. Mendes, P. C. K. Vesborg and A. Bentien, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 6331–6340 RSC .
S. Hwang, S. H. Porter, A. B. Laursen, H. Yang, M. Li, V. Manichev, K. U. D. Calvinho, V. Amarasinghe, M. Greenblatt, E. Garfunkel and G. C. Dismukes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2400–2411 RSC .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, H. Kaneko, G. Ma, M. Zhong, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 470–473 RSC .
Y. Qu, F. Li, P. Zhang, L. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Song and L. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 528–536 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Q. Jia, H. Zhang, W. Liu, X. Yu and X. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 527–532 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, C. Ren, H. Gao and G. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9093–9101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Wang, B. Liu, M. Chen, A. Li, G. Zhang, M. Du, H. Wang, S. F. Liu and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 923–928 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, K. Ha, H. Ha, S. Y. Lee, M. S. Jang, M. Choi and T. D. Chung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 4184–4192 RSC .
R. Fan, S. Cheng, G. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Vanka, G. A. Botton, Z. Mi and M. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2200–2209 RSC .
J. Zhao, L. Cai, H. Li, X. Shi and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1939–1946 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cai, W. Hong, J. Li, C. Jian and W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 21809–21814 RSC .
S. Oh, H. Song and J. Oh, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5416–5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, Z. Xia, S. Wu, F. Chen, Y. Li and B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25601–25607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Loget, B. Fabre, S. Fryars, C. Mériadec and S. Ababou-Girard, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, T. M. Gill and X. Zheng, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3499–3508 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, Q. Cai, R. Ban, X. He, C. Jian, J. Li, J. Li and W. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6262–6268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cai, W. Hong, C. Jian, J. Li and W. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4231–4238 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cai, W. Hong, C. Jian, J. Li and W. Liu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3277–3283 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Q. Li, H. Chen, S. Hayase and T. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700064 CrossRef .
A. C. Nielander, A. C. Thompson, C. W. Roske, J. A. Maslyn, Y. Hao, N. T. Plymale, J. Hone and N. S. Lewis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4082–4086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, P. Yang, S. Chen, M. Zhang and G. Shi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601805 CrossRef .
L. Chen, J. Yang, S. Klaus, L. J. Lee, R. Woods-Robinson, J. Ma, Y. Lum, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, L. W. Wang, I. D. Sharp, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9595–9603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, R. Liu, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15189–15199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tung, Y. Chuang, H. C. Chen, T. S. Chan, J. Y. Li and H. M. Chen, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700321 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, R. Fan, G. Huang and M. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 543–546 RSC .
J.-Y. Jung, J.-Y. Yu and J.-H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7955–7962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Perez-Rodriguez, D. Cardenas-Morcoso, I. A. Digdaya, A. M. Raventos, P. Procel, O. Isabella, S. Gimenez, M. Zeman, W. A. Smith and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1797–1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, P. Zhang, X. Song and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18560–18565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, K. Thorwarth, B. Niesen, L. Liardet, J. Patscheider, C. Ballif and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7035–7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater, I. Zebger, S. Hofmann, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, C. B. Park and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10595–10599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Higashi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and K. Domen, Small, Methods, 2018, 2, 1800018 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Jung, J. Y. Yu, R. B. Wehrspohn and J. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 1660–1668 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jia, C. Yu, W. Liu, G. Zheng, C. Lei, L. Lei and X. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 30, 101–107 CrossRef .
F. N. I. Sari, C. Lin and J. M. Ting, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 368, 784–794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, K. A. Walczak, M. Favaro, J. W. Beeman, L. H. Hess, C. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Gul, J. Yano, C. Kisielowski, A. Schwartzberg and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 335 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kulmas, L. Paterson, K. Höflich, M. Y. Bashouti, Y. Wu, M. Göbelt, J. Ristein, J. Bachmann, B. Meyer and S. Christiansen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4882–4889 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, M. Liu, J. Liang, T. Li, H. Tan, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. Wei, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 5608–5613 RSC .
Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tang, S. Zhou, Z. Yuan and L. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701102 CrossRef .
M. J. Park, J. Y. Jung, S. M. Shin, J. W. Song, Y. H. Nam, D. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 599, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mei, B. Seger, T. Pedersen, M. Malizia, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. Vesborg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1948–1952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Nguyen, I. Hwang and P. Schmuki, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2432–2438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, R. Fan, X. Zhou, Z. Xu, W. Zhou, W. Dong and M. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 377–380 RSC .
M.-K. Son, L. Steier, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 912–918 RSC .
J. Gu, J. A. Aguiar, S. Ferrere, K. X. Steirer, Y. Yan, C. Xiao, J. L. Young, M. Al-Jassim, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, X. Chang, T. Wang, C. Li and J. Gong, Small, 2017, 13, 1702007 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Kuang, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4570–4577 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goto, T. Minegishi, Y. Kageshima, T. Higashi, H. Kaneko, Y. Kuang, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, H. Ishihara, T. Hayashi, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21242–21248 RSC .
H. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, H. Wang, W. Ma, X. Zong and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800795 CrossRef .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 84 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ros, T. Andreu, M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, G. Penelas-Perez, J. Arbiol and J. R. Morante, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17932–17941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schreier, J. Luo, P. Gao, T. Moehl, M. T. Mayer and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, S. C. Lee, K. D. Fong, J. Kibsgaard, R. Sinclair and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400739 CrossRef .
W. Cheng, N. Singh, W. Elliott, J. Lee, A. Rassoolkhani, X. Jin, E. W. McFarland and S. Mubeen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700362 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. May, H. J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, P. P. Rodriguez, M. Ma, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Garnett, A. H. M. Smets and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6842–6852 RSC .
N. Y. Labrador, X. Li, Y. Liu, H. Tan, R. Wang, J. T. Koberstein, T. P. Moffat and D. V. Esposito, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6452–6459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bouabadi, M. Aggour, H. J. Lewerenz and M. Lublow, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2017, 47, 457–466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, L. Zhang, M. Zhong, Gunawan, M. Nakabayashi, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, S. Ikeda, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11808–11812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, B. AlOtaibi, S. Y. Woo, Y. Wang, G. A. Botton and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2721–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. King, T. R. Hellstern, J. Park, R. Sinclair and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36792–36798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Gratzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, G. Nam, M. G. Kim, T. Zhang, K. Liu, X. Zhuang, J. Cho, C. Yuan and X. Feng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4202–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Crespo-Quesada, L. M. Pazos-Outon, J. Warnan, M. F. Kuehnel, R. H. Friend and E. Reisner, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yichen, L. Zirui, N. Wenzhe, Y. Zhizhen and Z. Liping, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 145402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J. J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 RSC .
S. Chu, P. Ou, P. Ghamari, S. Vanka, B. Zhou, I. Shih, J. Song and Z. Mi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7869–7877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. Liardet, M. T. Mayer, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 664–667 CAS .
D. Kang, J. L. Young, H. Lim, W. E. Klein, H. Chen, Y. Xi, B. Gai, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, S. Byun, S. W. Nam, S. Y. Moon, S. Kim, J. Y. Park, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705136 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Li, Q. Chen, Z. Zhen, X. Jiang, M. Zhong, F. Zhang and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12753–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830–22837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Yu, L. Pan, M. K. Son, M. T. Mayer, W. D. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, S. K. Karuturi, C. Samundsett, J. Bullock, M. Hettick, D. Yan, J. Peng, P. R. Narangari, S. Mokkapati, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, A. Javey and A. Cuevas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. Li, J. Luo, B. Liu, J. Liang, N. Wang, X. Kong, B. Li, C. Wei, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 811–816 RSC .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 RSC .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, Y. Yan, J. L. Young, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Neale and J. A. Turner, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 456 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. S. Chang, C. W. Tsao, M. J. Fang, Y. J. Hsu and K. L. Choy, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2465–2468 RSC .
T. R. Hellstern, D. W. Palm, J. Carter, A. D. DeAngelis, K. Horsley, L. Weinhardt, W. Yang, M. Blum, N. Gaillard, C. Heske and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1060–1066 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers and J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duhnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, T. Minegishi, Y. Kageshima, H. Kobayashi, T. Hisatomi, T. Higashi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5712–5717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chakthranont, T. R. Hellstern, J. M. McEnaney and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701515 CrossRef .
S. Yoon, J.-H. Lim and B. Yoo, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 237, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, K. W. Kemp, T. Ito, A. Walsh, C. E. D. Chidsey, P. K. Hurley and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 99 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sun, R. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600379 CrossRef .
G. Liu, S. Ye, P. Yan, F. Xiong, P. Fu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Shi and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1327–1334 RSC .
P. F. Satterthwaite, A. G. Scheuermann, P. K. Hurley, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13140–13149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guo, A. Batool, G. Xie, R. Boddula, L. Tian, S. U. Jan and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1516–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, B. J. Trześniewski, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5462–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Da, M. Cha, L. Sun, Y. Wu, Z.-S. Wang and G. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3452–3457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, B. J. Trześniewski, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Hendricks, A. G. Scheuermann, M. Schmidt, P. K. Hurley, P. C. McIntyre and C. E. D. Chidsey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23763–23773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, J. Kang, J. Kang, M. J. Moody, M. C. Hersam and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7370–7375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Matheu, I. A. Moreno-Hernandez, X. Sala, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig, A. Llobet and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11345–11348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, S. Shen, J. S. Cheung, X. Pang, N. Park, J. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Sun, S. Y. Noh, C. T. Riley, P. K. L. Yu, S. Jin and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4612–4625 RSC .
G. Xu, Z. Xu, Z. Shi, L. Pei, S. Yan, Z. Gu and Z. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2897–2903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, A. C. Meng, K. Tang, O. L. Hendricks, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14596–14603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Yin, Z. Kang, P. Wu, J. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, J. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2745–2749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, M. Huang, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, Y. Xiao and H. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Saraswat, D. D. Rodene and R. B. Gupta, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 89, 228–248 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Huang, Z. Ye and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15824–15837 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vilanova, T. Lopes, C. Spenke, M. Wullenkord and A. Mendes, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 175–188 CrossRef .
R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vasudevan, Z. Thanawala, L. Han, T. Buijs, H. Tan, D. Deligiannis, P. Perez-Rodriguez, I. A. Digdaya, W. A. Smith, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 150, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605–3618 RSC .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 RSC .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 RSC .
J. Jin, K. Walczak, M. R. Singh, C. Karp, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3371–3380 RSC .
D. Bae, B. Seger, P. C. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933–1954 RSC .
S. Shen, S. A. Lindley, X. Chen and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2744–2775 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, S. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wu and L. Wang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700371 CrossRef .
P. C. K. Vesborg and B. Seger, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8844–8850 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parkinson, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1057–1059 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, I. Jeong, J. Lee, J. Lee, M. J. Ko and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6980–6987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Choi, U. Kang, S. Lee, D. J. Ham, S. M. Ji and H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301614 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J.-X. Liu, B. Zijlstra, I. A. W. Filot, Z. Zhou, S. Sun and E. J. M. Hensen, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Král, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, S. Sato, T. Kajino and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1274–1282 RSC .
E. J. Son, J. W. Ko, S. K. Kuk, H. Choe, S. Lee, J. H. Kim, D. H. Nam, G. M. Ryu, Y. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9723–9726 RSC .
S. Ho-Kimura, S. J. A. Moniz, J. Tang and I. P. Parkin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 710–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arai, S. Sato and T. Morikawa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1998–2002 RSC .
H. S. Jeon, J. H. Koh, S. J. Park, M. S. Jee, D. H. Ko, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5835–5842 RSC .
M. Ali, F. Zhou, K. Chen, C. Kotzur, C. Xiao, L. Bourgeois, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Lyu, M. Qiao, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Li, C. Chen, Y. Li, H. Zhou, S. P. Jiang and S. Wang, Chem, 2019, 5, 1–17 Search PubMed .
A. Leelavathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14445–14455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Tang, S. Wu, X. Fan and J. He, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 510–516 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaneko, J. Nemoto, H. Ueno, N. Gokan, K. Ohnuki, M. Horikawa, R. Saito and T. Shibata, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 336–340 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed information on the reported photoelectrochemical performances of the photoelectrodes and their working conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00524b‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Jianyun Zheng
	Jianyun Zheng received his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. He currently works in Hunan University and Curtin University as a united postdoctoral researcher. His main interests focus on the preparation of semiconductor materials, the design and assembly of photoelectrodes, and their performance in photo(electro)catalysis.

Huaijuan Zhou
	Huaijuan Zhou received her PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. Her main research interests include synthesis and characterization of functional nanomaterials, 3D printing and melt electrospinning writing of polymer-based scaffolds, and their applications in energy and biomedical fields.

Yuqin Zou
	Yuqin Zou received her BS and MS degree in 2012 from Shanghai University and her PhD in 2016 from the University of Manchester, UK. She is currently a lecturer of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. Her research interests are in novel nanomaterials – such as graphene, transition metal compounds and black phosphorus – and their application in energy storage devices and electrocatalysis.

Yanhong Lyu
	Yanhong Lyu received her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. She currently works at Hunan University as a postdoctoral researcher. Her research mainly focuses on nanoscale electrocatalysts, surface engineering of materials for water splitting, and their performance in (photo)electrocatalysis.

San Ping Jiang
	San Ping Jiang is a John Curtin Distinguished Professor at the Western Australian School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering and Deputy Director of Fuels and Energy Technology Institute, Curtin University, Australia. Dr Jiang obtained his PhD from The City University, London in 1988. Before 2010, Dr Jiang worked at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His research interests encompass fuel cells, water electrolysis, supercapacitors, carbon dioxide reduction, single atom catalysts and nano-structured functional materials.

Shuangyin Wang
	Shuangyin Wang received his PhD in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He was a postdoctoral fellow working with Prof. L. Dai (2010–11) and Prof. A. Manthiram (2011–12). He was a Marie Curie Fellow at the University of Manchester with Prof. K. Novoselov (2012–13). He is currently a Professor of the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are in novel catalysts, defects in various crystals and their application in electrocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Calculated oxidation potential φox (red bars) and reduction potential φre (black bars) relative to the NHE and vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, ambient temperature 298.15 K, and pressure 1 bar. The figure is mainly reprinted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society (Copyright 2012). (b) Solar AM 1.5G solar spectrum (black curve, data from National Renewable Energy Laboratory) and calculated maximum photocurrent density (red curve, data from ref. 10). The band structure and light absorption area of several commonly studied photoactive semiconductors are highlighted by the shaded areas.	 

 	Fig. 2  Timeline showing key developments in the efficiency and stability of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes (data from ref. 28–42). η denotes the conversion efficiency for PEC reactions, and t denotes the lifetime of the photoelectrodes.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  The conversion efficiency and stability as PEC device performance metrics. (a) Photocurrent density (J) and onset potential (Von). (b) Quantum-efficiency metrics. (c) The ratio of the total amount of product evolved and total charge passed to give the faradaic efficiency (ηF). (d) PEC stability.	 

 	Fig. 4  Recombination mechanisms of electrons and holes via the interplay between the exciton binding energy and the charge carrier mobility. (a) Traps as recombination centers for electrons and holes. (b) When the binding is weak, the free carriers can meet again. (c) In the case of strong binding, excitons can diffuse a short distance before recombining radiatively. (d) When the mobility is lower, radiative recombination is more probable. Adapted from Voznyy et al.54 with permission from Springer Nature (Copyright 2017).	 
	(4)


TiO2	120–1000	
	
63

Fe2O3	2–4	
	
64

Ta3N5	18000	
	
65

Cu2ZnSnSe4	
	2000	
66

Si	168000	220000	
67 and 68

InP	1400–1800	
	
69


 	Fig. 5  Schematic plots of the photo-corrosion process and mechanism of the photoelectrodes. (a) Surface oxidation of a Si photocathode in acid solution under illumination. (b) Surface oxidation and dissolution of a Si photoanode in basic solution under illumination. (c) The instability mechanism of the photocathode from the relationship between the band alignment and reduction reaction. VBM is the valence band maximum, Ere is the reduction potential of the photocathode, and E(A+/A) is the reduction potential of reactant A. (d) The instability mechanism of the photoanode from the relationship between the band alignment and oxidation reaction. CBM is the conduction band minimum, Eox is the reduction potential of the photoanode, and E(B−/B) is the reduction potential of reactant B.	 
Vph = Vop,light − Vop,dark = Eon,light − Eon,dark = Eon,light − Ere + ηk	(5)
Vph = Vop,dark − Vop,light = Eon,dark − Eon,light = Eox + ηk − Eon,light	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Electronic energy profile of semiconductors in equilibrium with the electrolyte under different conditions. (a) A p-type semiconductor in the dark. (b) A p-type semiconductor under illumination. (c) An n-type semiconductor in the dark. (d) An n-type semiconductor under illumination. Vmax is the theoretical maximum Vph, EF,p is the quasi-Fermi level of holes under illumination, and EF,n is the quasi-Fermi level of electrons under illumination.	 
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagrams and performance comparison of photocathodes with surface modification. (a) Schematic diagrams of photocathodes modified by various strategies, including tuning the composition (panel i), building a 3D structure (panel ii), controlling the crystal facet (panel iii) and passivating the surface (panel iv). (b) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for various photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (c) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The methods of surface modification are classified as tuning the composition (purple spheres), building a 3D structure (green stars), controlling the crystal facet (pink hexagons) and passivating the surface (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. In (c), Jin is the initial photocurrent (mA cm−2) at the beginning of the stability test, and the degradation rates are evaluated using the ratio of the degraded photocurrent during testing (Jde) to Jin (Jde/Jin).	 

 	Fig. 8  Performance comparison of photoanodes with surface modification. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The methods of surface modification are classified as tuning the composition (purple spheres), building a 3D structure (green stars) and controlling the crystal facet (pink hexagons). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S2 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 9  Performance comparison of conductor/semiconductor photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide/phosphide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), carbon materials (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S3 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 10  Performance comparison of conductor/semiconductor photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide (purple spheres), metal (green stars), carbon materials (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S4 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 11  Performance comparison of semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor (insulator) materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), sulfide or nitride (green stars), titanate (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most narrow-gap semiconductors with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S5 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 12  Performance comparison of semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor (insulator) materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), sulfide (green stars), arsenide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most narrow-gap semiconductors with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S6 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 13  Performance comparison of CSS photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor materials on the surface are classified as sulfide/phosphide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S7 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 14  Performance comparison of CSS photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The conductor material on the surface is only metal/alloy (green stars). Most semiconductor (insulator)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S8 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 15  Performance comparison of SSS photocathodes. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), carbide (pink hexagons) and hydrogenase (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S9 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 16  Performance comparison of SSS photoanodes. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The semiconductor materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most semiconductor (insulator or conductor)/semiconductor materials with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S10 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 17  Performance comparison of photocathodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure. (a) Recent advances in the absolute values of photocurrent at 0 V vs. RHE for the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photocathodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The materials on the surface are classified as oxide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), sulfide/phosphide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most of the materials on other layers with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S11 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 18  Performance comparison of photoanodes with multi-layered (n > 3) structure. (a) Recent advances in the photocurrent at 1.23 V vs. RHE for the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions. (b) Reported stabilities of the photoanodes versus tested pH conditions, with the initial photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. The materials on the surface are classified as oxide/hydroxide (purple spheres), metal/alloy (green stars), phosphide (pink hexagons) and organic molecules (dark green diamonds). Most of the materials on other layers with reported PEC performance are noted. Experimental details and device structures for the collected data are listed in Table S12 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 19  Short overview of PEC cells and the efficiency and stability of optimized narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes during water splitting. (a) PEC configurations for water splitting, including (i) multiple photo-system, (ii) single photo-system (photocathode), and (iii) single photo-system (photoanode). (b) Photocurrent density as a function of potential in a multiple photo-system with (i) a Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p-Si photocathode and (ii) a WO3/FTO/p+n-Si photoanode via 120 h of cyclic voltammetry scans under 1.0 M HClO4 electrolyte and 1 sun illumination. Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from John Wiley and Sons (Copyright 2015). (c) Efficiency and stability of photocathodes with a single light absorber under 0.5 M H2SO4 aqueous solution, (i) linear sweep voltammograms and (ii) current density–time curves. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from John Wiley and Sons (Copyright 2018). (d) PEC performances of the photoanodes in a single photo-system with a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination: (i) representative current-density vs. potential behaviors and (ii) chronoamperometry held at 1.63 V vs. RHE. Panels were reproduced with permission from ref. 186, The Royal Society of Chemistry (Copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 20  Efficiency and stability of classical narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes during the CO2RR. (a) The use of Si-based photocathodes in the PEC CO2RR, containing (i) a schematic illustration of the structure, (ii) photocurrent density–potential curves and (iii) chronoamperometry data and faradaic efficiency for the CO2RR. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (b) The use of InGaP/GaAs-based photoanodes in the PEC CO2RR, including (i) a schematic illustration of a two-electrode electrochemical setup and (ii) current density as a function of operational time. Panels reprinted with permission from ref. 332 (Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  Other usual applications of narrow-gap semiconductor-based photoelectrodes. (a) The PEC NRR of Si-based photocathodes, consisting of (i) a schematic diagram of the PEC NRR and (ii) the yield rate of NH3 and faradaic efficiency on the photocathodes for 4 h. Reproduced from ref. 366 with permission from Elsevier B.V. (Copyright 2019). (b) The PEC EOR of Si-based photoanodes, including (i) a schematic of a possible mechanism for the PEC EOR and (ii) cyclic voltammetry curves of the photoanodes under 1 sun illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246 (Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (c) PEC degradation of phenol via a PEC device including (i) a schematic of the degradation mechanism of phenol and (ii) the phenol degradation efficiency with various electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier B.V. (Copyright 2019).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed information on the reported photoelectrochemical performances of the photoelectrodes and their working conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00524b
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
