Green synthesis of nano-Al 2 O 3 , recent functionalization, and fabrication of synthetic or natural polymer nanocomposites: various technological app ...  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NJ05578F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NJ05578F
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 4885-4920Green synthesis of nano-Al2O3, recent functionalization, and fabrication of synthetic or natural polymer nanocomposites: various technological applications

        
          
            Shadpour 
            Mallakpour
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Fariba 
            Sirous
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chaudhery Mustansar 
            Hussain
          
          
        
      b
aOrganic Polymer Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, 84156-83111, Islamic Republic of Iran. E-mail: mallak@iut.ac.ir; mallak777@yahoo.com;  Fax: +98-31-3391-2350;   Tel: +98-31-3391-3267
bDepartment of Chemistry and Environmental Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
Received 
      15th November 2020
    , Accepted 20th January 2021First published on 29th January 2021AbstractAlumina nanoparticles (Al2O3 NPs) are one of the most extensively used nano-metallic oxides and nanofillers due to their fascinating properties in everyday applications. Furthermore, polymeric nanocomposites (PNCs) containing Al2O3 NPs as a filler have promising properties such as excellent thermal, mechanical, electrical and optical properties, and so on. Owing to the importance of this field, in the first section of this review, green synthesis, dispersion, and functionalization of Al2O3 NPs are studied since 2015. In the second section, the properties and utilization of different man-made or natural polymer matrixes containing Al2O3 NPs are studied, and then the effects of this extraordinary nanofiller on some prevalent PNCs are highlighted. It is followed by the perusal of the special uses of Al2O3 NPs in the dispersion of NPs in diverse media, elimination of pollutants, for instance, heavy metal ions and organic compounds, biomedicine, and also miscellaneous applications.
Shadpour Mallakpour
Professor Shadpour Mallakpour, an organic polymer chemist, graduated from the chemistry department, University of Florida (UF), Gainesville, Florida, USA, in 1984. He spent two years as a post-doc at UF. He joined the department of chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Iran, in 1986. He held several positions such as the chairman of the department of chemistry and deputy of research, department of chemistry, at IUT. From 1994–1995 he worked as a visiting professor, University of Mainz, Germany, and from 2003–2004 as a visiting professor, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. He has published more than 850 journal papers and more than 400 conference papers and has got more than 30 awards. The most important award to him was given for the selection of the first laureate on fundamental research at the 21st Khwarizmi International award in 2008. He was listed in the Top 1% Scientists in Chemistry in ISI Essential Science Indicators in 2003. He was also listed in the Top 2% Scientists in Polymers in 2020. He was selected as an academic guest of the 59th Meeting of Nobel Prize Winners in Chemistry, 2009, at Lindau, Germany. He presented many lectures as an invited or keynote speaker at different national and international conferences or universities. He was a member of organizing and scientific committees for many national and international conferences. He was also the chairperson of many national and international meetings. In recent years, he has focused on preparation and characterization of polymer-based nanocomposites to be used as bioactive materials as well as adsorbents and photocatalysts in remediation technology.
Fariba Sirous
Fariba Sirous received a BSc in the chemistry field in 2012 and also an MSc in organic polymer chemistry in 2015 from chemistry department, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran. Currently, she is a PhD student in organic polymer chemistry at IUT. Her research interests include novel bio-materials, sustainable chemistry, nanotechnology for high-performance polymer–inorganic nanocomposites, metal oxide NPs and removal of hazardous materials.
Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain
Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain, PhD, is an Adjunct Professor, Academic Advisor and Director of Chemistry & EVSc Labs in the Department of Chemistry & Environmental Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, New Jersey, USA. His research is focused on the applications of Nanotechnology & Advanced Materials, Environmental Management, Analytical Chemistry and Various Industries. Dr Hussain is the author of numerous papers in peer-reviewed journals as well as a prolific author and editor of several scientific monographs and handbooks in his research areas published with ELSEVIER, Royal Society of Chemistry, John Wiley & sons, CRC, Springer etc.
1. Introduction
Nanocomposites (NCs) are materials consisting of a hybrid of matrix and filler parts, at least one phase in the nanoscale range (<100 nm), that play a critical role in various industrial and technological fields and consequently in our daily life.1 NCs are sorted into three groups based on their host matrix (metal, ceramic, and polymer).2 All of them could be applied in many applications and areas. For example, Wang et al. designed and fabricated ZrO2–Al2O3/graphene oxide (GO) ceramic NCs for the defluoridation of water.3 Hakimi et al. synthesized Bi2O3–Al2O3 NCs and considered their photocatalytic activity for the degradation of dyes.4 A kind of metal matrix NCs with superior corrosion and mechanical properties was prepared by Munir et al.5 To this end, diverse concentrations of graphene nanoplatelets were incorporated into the magnesium matrix. These NCs could be introduced as a biodegradable implant. Among the mentioned types of NCs, due to the inherent features, polymer-based NCs (PNCs) are widely used composite materials.6 Polymers can be applied as lightweight, flexible, and elastomeric matrixes with unique properties, for instance, flexibility, high elasticity, and so on.7 Thus, PNCs are a significant category of NCs and one of the fast-developing parts of current studies in research and development centers and exploration groups.8,9 The remarkable thermal, mechanical, electrical, magnetic, and optical features10 make PNCs a valuable option in antimicrobial materials, sporting goods, triboelectric materials, photonic devices, automobiles, aerospace components, etc.8,9,11,12 Hence, they present ever-increasing global enthusiasm for using these types of materials.
Metallic oxides (MOs) are considered as another interesting subject with several applications in scientific activities.13 Because of the notable features of nanometer-scale MOs, there is a great appetite to apply MO nanoparticles (NPs) as appropriate additive fillers, especially in PNCs. After incorporation of MO NPs into the host matrix, the advantages of both of them are combined14 and this synergism causes an increment in the properties of the parent materials.15 TiO2, SiO2, CuO, ZnO, Fe3O4, and alumina (Al2O3) NPs are many worthwhile types of MO NPs for PNC preparation.16 The fillers can be one, two, or three dimensional.17 Meanwhile, Al2O3 NPs are very noticeable with desirable characteristics and have been widely investigated in several synthetic or natural polymer matrixes.18 For example, Dass et al. considered the effect of various NPs (Al2O3, ZnO, and SiC) on the tribological and mechanical features of epoxy NCs. As a main result, the lowest coefficient of friction was observed with Al2O3 NPs as a filler.19 Based on a study by Gua et al., Al2O3 NPs enhanced the tribological properties of MXene reinforced epoxy resin.20 With consideration of the effect of diverse NPs like TiO2, Al2O3, and ZnO on the corrosion protection of polypyrrole NCs, Babaei-Sati et al. found that polypyrrole/Al2O3 NCs had the best corrosion protection performance for mild steel.21 Riyadh et al. applied a catalyst based on poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/Al2O3 NCs to synthesize thiazoles with an excellent yield.22 Li et al. removed chrysoidin and estradiol from aqueous solution using chitosan/Al2O3–hydroxyapatite.23
Surface treatment is a beneficial strategy to improve the characteristics of the surface and increase the effectiveness of NPs in various media and special applications. MOs on the nanoscale size have a large surface to volume ratio, and thus tend to accumulate and consequently show poor dispersion.24,25 Due to the poor dispersion, it is better to use a dispersing agent; thus, MO NPs can be dispersed well in organic solvents, an organic matrix, and water with the aid of diverse modifiers and functionalization processes.26,27
As mentioned and according to the literature, many authors from all of the world focused on the synthesis and characterization of diverse PNCs with Al2O3 nanoscale fillers. The importance of this topic is sensed with the chart (Fig. 1) based on the Scopus database using the “polymer nanocomposites with alumina nanoparticles” keyword from the past until now.
 Fig. 1  Search results in the Scopus database using the “polymer nanocomposites with alumina nanoparticles” keyword from the past until now (obtained in Dec 2020). 
2. Aims and scope
Owing to the clear importance of Al2O3 NPs, surface modification and application, and also their usage in the preparation of PNCs, several subjects have been followed in this review. In the first part, an introduction to Al2O3 NPs and their features and also some of the green routes for their synthesis are presented. In the next parts, surface modification and the hybridization of Al2O3 NPs with different man-made or natural polymer matrixes are described in some detail. Eventually, this is followed by the perusal of the special uses of Al2O3 NPs, and modified Al2O3 NPs for dispersion in various matrixes and organic solvents, water remediation, biomedicine, and miscellaneous applications from 2015 until now, as well as Al2O3 PNCs.
3. Al2O3 NPs
3.1. Properties and their facile and green synthesis
Al2O3 NPs are cost-effective and widely used MO NPs28 which are well recognized for their outstanding properties such as high hardness, being extremely strong with the highest stiffness among other ceramic oxides, dielectric properties, and high thermal and chemical stability. Al2O3 has several metastable phases including γ, δ, θ, η, κ, χ, and β (cubic spinel, tetragonal, monoclinic, cubic spinel, orthorhombic, cubic spinel, and hexagonal phases, respectively). The hexagonal α phase is the thermodynamically stable form of Al2O3;29,30 the metastable phases are converted to the α phase with appropriate thermal treatment (Fig. 2).31,32
 Fig. 2  The transfer of metastable phases to the α phase by heat treatment and the corundum structure of α-Al2O3. 
There are different methods for the synthesis of Al2O3 NPs, including the sol–gel process, the hydrothermal method, mechanical milling, the co-precipitation process, the combustion method, laser ablation, and vapor phase reactions, which have been described in detail in previous work.33–36 In recent years, some facile and green synthesis methods have been considered and some of them are mentioned in the following:
A green synthesis is an eco-friendly approach that can be utilized for the synthesis of numerous NPs. It involves three indicator steps: (i) selection of a suitable solvent, (ii) selection of an environmentally friendly reducing agent, and (iii) selection of an appropriate stabilizing agent.37 Various green sources can be utilized in a route for the production of Al2O3 NPs.38 One of the abundant green sources is plants (Fig. 3) as a bio-reducing agent containing phenolic compounds.37,39,40
 Fig. 3  The diverse herbal plants for the green synthesis of α-Al2O3 NPs. 
In a study, spherical Al2O3 NPs were synthesized from herbal plants and metal salt with a 4:1 ratio by Sutradhar et al.39 For this purpose, coffee, tea, and Triphala were applied as eco-friendly, green, and non-toxic reducing agents full of polyol components. In this approach, powders of plants were dissolved and boiled in water and then the samples were centrifuged and filtered. In the fabrication process, a microwave irradiation technique was used at a power of 540 W. Al2O3 NPs with a size range of 200–400 nm were obtained using Triphala as a reducing agent and 50–200 nm through the utilization of coffee and tea. These obtained NPs have the potential to be used for biomedical applications. In 2017, this technique was used by others40 to synthesize Al2O3 NPs using five plant extracts, including Origanum majorana, Syzygium aromaticum, Theobroma cacao, Origanum vulgare, and Cichorium intybus. Based on analyzing the results, the Al2O3 NPs were in the size range of 60–300 nm and individual NPs were approximately less than 10 nm. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) presented a semi-crystalline structure for the obtained Al2O3 NPs with Syzygium aromaticum and an amorphous structure for the other kinds of plants.
The hydrothermal method is a helpful method for the fabrication of NPs with a good shape at low temperatures. Duraisamy used Terminalia chebula and Aerva lanta to prepare Al2O3 NPs in a safe, easy, and stable hydrothermal manner with an average size of 70 nm.41Avera lanta, known as Sirupeelai, is a medicinal plant with exceptional lithontriptic and diuretic properties. In addition, Terminalia chebula (the mother of herbs), known as kadukkai, is a strange and useful medicinal plant. The achieved Al2O3 NPs were spherical and indicated a rhombohedral (hexagonal) structure.
Spherical α-Al2O3 NPs were fabricated without hard agglomeration and in a size range of 20–40 nm by Gao and co-workers.42 In this green route, natural starch was used as an efficient dispersant using two techniques: mechanochemical and wet-chemical. It was mentioned that the mechanochemical technique was better than wet-chemical for commercial production.
In the world, manufacturers produce secondary aluminum dross, as a kind of dangerous inorganic waste, in an amount of approximately more than one million tons of by-product per year.43 Based on the production source, aluminum dross may contain oxide compounds such as Al2O3.44 Therefore, in a promising environmental procedure,45 high purity Al2O3 NPs were prepared from secondary aluminum dross. This process followed five steps: (i) hydrochloric acid leaching, (ii) co-precipitation, (iii) purification (separation and filtration), (iv) re-precipitation, and (v) calcination. The acid concentration, temperature and time of leaching, liquid/solid ratio, and particle size were optimized. The results have shown the gamma phase and a purity of the produced Al2O3 NPs of more than 97%. These NPs can be useful for catalytic and adsorption applications.
Production and consumption of aluminum are increasing in the world, and recycling is essential for the environment. Therefore, in another study, γ-Al2O3 NPs were synthesized from aluminum foil waste as a common Al waste source in a facile and green path.46 The obtained γ-Al2O3 NPs were more catalytically active than the commercial γ-Al2O3 NPs. These NPs with excellent characteristics can be used in acid-catalyzed reactions as a valuable catalyst/support option in industrial applications.
Waste cans as a source of Al2O3 NPs can be recycled and converted for the preparation of γ-Al2O3 NPs under mild conditions.47 There is about more than 98% Al2O3 in the waste can structure. In a recycling process by Ahmedzeki and coworkers, in the first step, the waste cans were completely washed with sulfuric acid (50%). After removing the paint films, the cans were reacted in a batch reactor with a sodium hydroxide solution (40%), and a sodium aluminate solution was produced. Then, the solution was filtered and adjusted to pH = 7. Next, the sample was kept at 80 °C for 6 hours. Then, the gel was washed several times, filtered, and dried at 80 °C. Eventually, the sample was calcined under suitable conditions at 550 °C. The influence of some parameters was considered for getting a good yield, for instance, the sodium hydroxide concentration, weight of aluminum cans, and reactant mole ratios. Different analyses illustrated the good crystallinity, a particle size of 69 nm, a pore size of 5 nm, a surface area of 311 m2 g−1, and a pore volume of 0.36 cm3 g−1.
Tragacanth gum, as a useful biopolymer, is obtained from the bark of Astragalus gummifer, a native tree of western Asia, and commercially is produced in Turkey and Iran. It is extremely acid-resistant and has stability to heat. This biopolymer contains two fractions, bassorin (water-swellable) and tragacanthin (water-soluble). Tragacanth has many applications in different fields, for example, laxatives, textiles, cosmetics, leather, the pharmaceutical industry, emulsifiers, stabilizers and biotemplates in the production of NPs.48–51 In 2018, tragacanth gel was used as a biotemplate for the synthesis of gamma and amorphous Al2O3 NPs (Fig. 4) by a new sol–gel process without any toxic materials.52 The required amount of tragacanth was dissolved in deionized water at 75 °C. The obtained gel was added to Al(NO3)3·9H2O and placed in a sand bath at 75 °C. It was stirred for 12 h and calcined at 500 and 900 °C. The amorphous Al2O3 NPs and gamma Al2O3 NPs were prepared at 500 and 900 °C, respectively. The photocatalytic activity of these NPs was considered and compared for reactive yellow 145 and direct black 122, two organic dyes. As a general result, the photocatalytic activity of α-Al2O3 NPs was better than γ-Al2O3 NPs.
 Fig. 4  FESEM images of (a) amorphous and (b) gamma Al2O3 NPs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2018. 

Sargassum ilicifolium (brown algae) is a subtropical and tropical macroalga, which is found in Lakshadweep, Goa, Maharashtra, etc.53 It is a source of biologically active compounds with biomedical and pharmaceutical applications.54 Also, this alga has antibacterial, immunomodulatory, anticancer, anxiolytic, and antidepressant activity.53 In 2018, a new green marine method38 (Fig. 5) was applied for the one-pot biosynthesis of ceramic α-Al2O3 NPs with S. ilicifolium brown algae as a bio-stabilizer and reducing agent for bioreduction of aluminum ions (Al3+). It was gathered from an area in Iran and could cap the surface of Al2O3 NPs to exclude the agglomeration phenomenon. This synthesis consists of three steps: activation, growth, and termination steps. In the first stage, S. ilicifolium was washed several times in deionized water and then dried. It was powdered using a mixer grinder, a sufficient amount of powder was soaked in water, and it was centrifuged at the end. After the aqueous extraction of algae, aluminum sulfate was homogeneously combined with liquid S. ilicifolium extract and heated at 80 °C for 25 min. XRD ascertained the alpha phase, rhombohedral structure, and average size of 35 nm for the NPs. According to energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis, the achieved Al2O3 NPs were synthesized in high purity comprising oxygen (53.69%) and aluminum (46.31%). The spherical shape was revealed in transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with an average size of 20 ± 2.1 nm. Investigation of the ultraviolet-visible (UV/vis) spectra exhibited the optical energy band gap of 5.46 eV as evidence of the existence of phytochemicals in the algae extract.
 Fig. 5  One-pot green synthesis of α-Al2O3 NPs using aqueous algae extract. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Ansari et al. reported another green synthesis method using leaf extract of lemon grass as a reducing agent.55 The synthesized Al2O3 NPs, as eco-friendly and cost-effective NPs, displayed antibacterial activity. In this study, the bactericidal effect on multi-drug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa was considered. The Al2O3 NPs were attached (Fig. 6) to the bacterial cell wall and prevented cell growth. It could be an optimistic path for developing antimicrobial drugs. In addition, Al2O3 NPs showed antibacterial activity against Gram-negative (G−) and Gram-positive (G+) bacteria.56
 Fig. 6  HR-TEM images of P. aeruginosa cells. The panels depict representative HR-TEM images of ultrathin sections of the cells. (A) Untreated cells and (B) cells treated with Al2O3-NPs at a magnification of ×7000. The blue arrow indicates NP attachment on the membrane, and the red arrow shows partially damaged membranes at various sites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015. 
In another investigation, the antibacterial effect of α-Al2O3 NPs against four bacterial pathogens was studied by Prashanth et al.57 In the first stage, α-Al2O3 NPs were produced in a low temperature, new, and cost-effective combustion manner. Then, Pseudomonas desmolyticum, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella aerogenes, and Staphylococcus aureus bacteria were selected to examine the antibacterial behavior of α-Al2O3 NPs in the diffusion method. The antibacterial activity of α-Al2O3 NPs is shown in Fig. 7. Based on the observed results, there was not any inhibition zone without NP loading, but after loading α-Al2O3 NPs at two different amounts of 500 and 1000 mg antibacterial activity was observed. As a general result, α-Al2O3 NPs indicated the highest antibacterial activity for Staphylococcus aureus with an inhibition zone of 3.7 mm and also there was not any significant difference in the inhibition zone with an increase in the amount of α-Al2O3 NPs.
 Fig. 7  Zone of inhibition tests for α-Al2O3 NPs against: (a) Klebsiella aerogenes; (b) Escherichia coli; (c) Pseudomonas desmolyticum; and (d) Staphylococcus aureus.57 
The spread of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) is a universal and environmental anxiety. In this case, Al2O3 NPs could potentially be used for increasing uptake of ARGs. As a result, the Al2O3 NPs could promote plasmid-mediated ARG transformation into G+Staphylococcus aureus and G−Escherichia coli. This effect was not perceived for bulk Al2O3.58
Because of the biocompatibility property, Al2O3 NPs can be used in drug delivery, dental implants, and orthopedics for therapeutic coatings. Therefore, in a study, Al2O3 NPs by means of a lemongrass leaf extract of Cymbopogon citratus, as a non-toxic stabilizing and coupling agent, were synthesized in an economical and green route. In this approach, Al2O3 NPs were attached to the cells, penetrated inside the target cells, disrupted the morphology, and eventually led to cell death. The antifungal potential of these NPs was studied against several Candida spp isolated from the oropharyngeal mucosa of HIV+ patients. After using a high concentration of Al2O3 NPs (for example 1500 μg ml−1), Candida spp did not grow.59
3.2. Surface modification and functionalization of Al2O3 NPs
As mentioned, because of the large surface to volume ratio, nano-sized MOs, such as Al2O3, silica, and titanium dioxide, tend to agglomerate. This problem can reduce the resultant properties of the materials. On the other side, these NPs are hydrophilic in nature and display limited adsorption affinities for hydrophobic compounds.60,61
For the first time, the term of “coupling agent” was utilized for explaining how a world made up of four elements (earth, air, fire, and water) by Plato. Modification of NPs with different types of coupling agents can solve the problems mentioned above, reduce the particle surface energy, and decrease their tendency to accumulate. Stable and suitable dispersions of NPs are essential factors for the performance of the final product. Coupling agents hold together two dissimilar materials and can increase the interaction between them.62–64 In addition, functionalization of the NPs can give special properties and make them appropriate for various applications such as dyes and heavy metal ion adsorption on the surface.60
Hitherto, different coupling agents were used for the modification of Al2O3 NPs. According to the chart based on the Scopus database (Fig. 8), by 2015, lots of searches have been done, and some papers were thoroughly written on this subject.65 Therefore, in this perspective, the focus is on the modification of Al2O3 NPs with other modifiers and their applications from 2015 onwards.
 Fig. 8  Search results in the Scopus database using the “surface modification of Al2O3 nanoparticles” keyword from the past until 2015 (obtained in Dec 2020). 
Some of the utilized modifiers for this purpose include: humic acid,66,67 sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),60,68 amino trimethylene phosphonic acid and phosphorous species,69,70 bi-functional carboxylic acids,71 imidazolium ionic liquids,72 organosilanes,73 hexadecyltrimethoxysilane,74 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxy (KH570),75 and so on.
4. Al2O3 NCs based on different polymeric matrixes
While elastomeric composites with nanoscale reinforcement have been used from 1959, the basic investigation in the PNC field was started by Toyota Motors in 1990 to intercalate clay nanofillers within nylon 6 as a host matrix and enhance the mechanical characteristics.76 Researchers used diverse fabrication techniques to achieve PNCs with potential features. These methods are summarized in Fig. 9.77
 Fig. 9  The diverse fabrication techniques for the synthesis of PNCs. 
As stated, many studies have been done on the synthesis techniques of numerous PNCs containing Al2O3 NPs as an appropriate filler in current decades. Moreover, the effects of this filler on various properties of NCs and their particular applications were explored. Among two kinds of PNCs based on polymer sources (natural and man-made), due to some disadvantages of natural PNCs like lower mechanical strength and rigidity, the blending process of polymers with various materials and fillers has a more prominent role. Therefore, for the modulation of the final performance, some adjustments or modifications are necessary during the process. Besides, using eco-friendly and cost-effective solvents and materials with lesser environmental impact is another important difference in conditions and blending processes to prepare natural or man-made PNCs.78,79
4.1. Al2O3 PNCs based on natural polymer host matrixes

4.1.1. Al2O3 PNCs based on a chitosan matrix. 
Chitosan is a modified natural random copolymer of D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine units with 1,4-glycosidic linkages that are formed from partial deacetylation of chitin (a renewable, biocompatible, environmentally friendly, and biodegradable organic compound).80,81 Chitosan is an unusable product of the shrimp, crabbing and squid canning industry, an important exoskeleton constituent of insects, crustaceans, and mollusks, and found in a few species of fungi.81–83 Chitosan has different molecular weights, and it is insoluble in water. With dissolving in aqueous acidic media, a positive charge is formed, which can interact with the negatively charged cell membranes of microorganisms and demonstrate antimicrobial and anticancer activity.84,85 Chitosan has various uses in different fields, for example, scaffold materials in tissue engineering and also favorable non-viral vectors for gene therapy, biodegradable substrates for the growth of human skin cells,86,87 cosmetology, agriculture, packaging materials,88 textiles, enzyme immobilization,89 adsorption of heavy metal pollution, radionuclides and dye removal,90–92 as a precursor in the synthesis of α-Al2O3 NPs for suitable size distribution93 and other applications.
Prakash et al. prepared a biocompatible chitosan/Al2O3 NC by utilization of the ultrasonication method.94 The XRD pattern and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analyses confirmed the presence of Al2O3 NPs in chitosan as a biopolymeric host matrix. According to the outcomes, the NP size was estimated to be 24 nm. The scrutiny of the absorbance and transmittance of samples showed the enhancement of the optical transmittance of the samples with an increase in the sonication time. Also, the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curve of the chitosan/Al2O3 NC revealed that the dehydration temperature value for chitosan was slightly increased with the increase in the sonication time.
In another study, the electrical behavior and structure of electrolyte films based on chitosan were explored by Aziz and Abidin.95 For this investigation, a chitosan–sodium triflate (90:10) polymer was filled with Al2O3 NPs and a homogeneous distribution obtained with proportions less than 6 wt% of the Al2O3 NP filler; eventually, a relationship between the dielectric and electrical parameters was observed for these chitosan NCs.
Calcium silicate NPs are a group of silica-based NPs which are commonly utilized to solidify biomolecules with their high conductivity, biocompatibility, inexpensive properties, and so on. Abou Hammad et al. prepared a kind of NC based on chitosan and calcium aluminosilicate NPs with the incorporation of diverse amounts of Al2O3 NPs (3, 5, and 7 mol%).96 Herein, a strong chelate was formed between metal ions and the hydroxyl and also amine functional groups in the chitosan structure through covalent bonds. This combination could improve the sensing and electrical features of the achieved NC and made it perfect as a support for a CO2 gas sensor with excellent reproducibility and sensing response.
Tanhaei et al. developed a chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide NC (CANF NC) adsorbent (Fig. 10) by embedding Al2O3 and magnetic iron oxide NPs to remove methyl orange from aqueous solution.97 For this route, the iron oxide–Al2O3 core–shell and chitosan solution were mixed and dispersed by ultrasonic irradiation. After adding the glutaraldehyde solution, the sample was dried in an oven. The remaining chitosan was washed with 2 wt% acetic acid solution. For this adsorption, the best pH range was reported as 4–10 and adsorbent amount 0.4 g L−1. The best isotherm for the description of this exothermic removal was the Langmuir model, and its rate-limiting step was the adsorption step. It was specified that the adsorption capacities for the chitosan NCs remained above 99% after repeating the cycle 5 times. Both Al2O3 NPs and chitosan had a positive role in the adsorption capacity, so the adsorption capacity of the CANF NCs was 4 and 46 times more than Al2O3/iron oxide and iron oxide NPs, respectively. The probable mechanisms for this adsorption were mentioned as film diffusion and intra-particle diffusion.
 Fig. 10  CANF preparation procedure schematic. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
Bozorgpour et al. removed phosphate and nitrate anions using chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide composite nanofibers.98 These composite nanofibers were compared with chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide beads. The prepared beads had an average particle size of 60 nm, and the nanofibers had an average fiber diameter of 170 nm. According to the observed results, the chitosan nanofibers showed higher removal than the chitosan beads. The best adsorption was obtained at pH = 3, an Al2O3/iron oxide amount of 2%, and contact times of 60 and 120 min. This cycle was repeated 5 times without any significant reduction in the adsorption capacity.
Zeng and co-workers announced another new Cu–chitosan/Al2O3 NC as an effective absorbent for the selective removal of Cu2+.99 Glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (KH-560) was used as a cross-linking agent and tetraethyl ortho-silicate for activation of the Al2O3 NP surface. Chitosan and KH-560 were copolymerized in a prevailing ion-imprinting technique and also the presence of Cu2+. The thermodynamic study demonstrated that this way is spontaneous and endothermic, and it was fitted with the Langmuir isotherm. A mixed solution of Zn2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+ was tested for this adsorption, and Cu2+ was selectively separated from the others. Some of the outstanding reported properties of these chitosan NCs were fast removal kinetics, high selectivity, stability, and high removal capacity. In another study, this type of chitosan NC showed valuable application for successful and selective removal of aromatic amines from water in nature due to its more specific surface area and also more porous surface morphology.100 With this modification of chitosan, the adsorption capacity was better than both pure chitosan and chitosan/Al2O3 NCs. Besides that, Cu–chitosan/Al2O3 NCs demonstrated unique potential for the elimination of As3+ from groundwater.101 The Cu–chitosan/Al2O3 NCs displayed antimicrobial activity higher than the chitosan/Al2O3 NCs and pure chitosan.
In 2018, a research group introduced a novel hybrid (functionalized chitosan–Al2O3@SiO2 NC) (FCAS) (Fig. 11) to improve the adsorption of Cr6+.102 This hybrid consisted of core–shell γ-Al2O3@SiO2-NH2 microspheres and functionalized chitosan with xanthate. It was an endothermic process and was fitted with the Freundlich model. The results showed that the synthesized NCs can be excellent adsorbents for both cationic and anionic compounds due to the existence of plentiful functional groups. This process was controlled by multiple mechanisms like the interaction between active sites of FCAS and adsorbed molecules, boundary layer diffusion, and the rate of intra-particle diffusion as well.
 Fig. 11  The synthetic route of FCAS. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 


4.1.2. Al2O3 PNCs based on a cellulose matrix. 
Cellulose is known as an abundant, renewable, and biodegradable available polymer with numerous applications.103 Meanwhile, cellulose acetate, as a cellulose derivative, displays better processability than pure cellulose. Deshmukh et al. synthesized cellulose acetate-based-NCs by the incorporation of Al2O3 NPs.104 The onset degradation temperatures of the NCs were shifted to higher temperatures, compared with the post-curing cellulose acetate. The dielectric loss and dielectric constant were enhanced with the incorporation of 25 wt% NPs. This form of NCs can be used in electronic devices. Owing to the outstanding properties, utilization of Al2O3 NPs in power cable insulation, and also the biodegradability of cellulose, cellulose insulation paper was modified with Al2O3 NPs and compared with an unmodified cellulose paper model by Tang and coworkers.105 For the preparation of this sheet, at first, Al2O3 NPs were modified with the KH-570 coupling agent. Here, Al2O3 NPs could form numerous hydrogen bonds with cellulose and displayed a positive effect on the AC breakdown voltage and also aging performance of the insulation paper. So, based on the simulation results, the modified cellulose paper demonstrated a larger elastic modulus and higher thermal stability than the unmodified paper due to an increase in the number of hydrogen bonds.


4.1.3. Al2O3 PNCs based on a guar gum matrix. 
Gums are a group of natural polysaccharides including sugar units with various remarkable properties and applications. In this group, guar gum is derived from the cyamopsistetragonoloba guar bean and consists of galactomannan (80%), water (12%), protein (5%), etc.106,107 This high molecular weight polysaccharide is known as a sustainable, non-toxic, inexpensive, hydrophilic, biocompatible, and biodegradable polymer. It is commonly applied in textiles, food, healthcare, pharmaceutics, petroleum, and so on.108,109 As pointed out by Savvashe et al., guar gum was reinforced with Al2O3 NPs to improve its performance, barrier properties, and mechanical features.110 By embedding Al2O3 NPs as reinforcing agents into the guar gum matrix, the tensile and puncture strength and Young's modulus of the prepared NC films intensified, but the elongation at break and also the water vapor transmission rate decreased. Moreover, by consideration of the outcomes, 5 parts per hundred parts of resin was reported as the optimized concentration of NPs for this polymer NC. In a study by Pathania et al., guar gum/Al2O3 NCs were synthesized in an inexpensive and simple sol–gel method to degrade malachite green dye.111 For this purpose, Al2O3 NPs were first prepared electrochemically, and then they were added to the guar gum solution. This mixture was stirred, filtered, washed, and finally dried in an oven at 50 °C. Preparation of these NCs was confirmed by FTIR analysis, and TEM images showed an average particle size of about 20–45 nm. In this process, with simultaneous adsorption of malachite green onto the photocatalyst surface and generation of electron–hole pairs, free radicals degraded the dye. Besides, binding of guar gum/Al2O3 NCs with the outer membrane of the cell wall prevented nutrient transport to the cell. Therefore, these NCs illustrated good performance for the photocatalytic degradation of malachite green, and also excellent antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus bacteria.


4.1.4. Al2O3 PNCs based on a kefiran matrix. 
Kefiran, as a water-soluble and microbial polysaccharide, is usually produced by a lactic acid bacterium from kefir grains. This biopolymer consists of glucose and galactose units.112,113 Kefiran demonstrates various bioactive properties, for instance, antibacterial, antitumor, and antioxidant properties, etc.114 Because of the diverse utilization of kefiran in the food industry, in 2018, NCs of kefiran and starch, as a blended matrix, were introduced for the preparation of packaging films.115 In another study, in 2019, Moradi et al. prepared biodegradable kefiran NC films using Al2O3 nanofillers with fascinating properties via a casting technique.116 By considering the obtained results, it was clearly confirmed that the existence of Al2O3 nanofillers with different amounts (1, 3, and 5% w/w) could improve the properties of the prepared films. Based on the XRD patterns, Al2O3 nanofillers showed an effect on the semi-crystalline structure of kefiran films. In comparison with the XRD patterns of 1% and 3% kefiran NCs, the kefiran NC with 5% nanofiller displayed the related Al2O3 NPs peaks again. This matter proved that the Al2O3 nanofillers were not uniformly dispersed into the matrix. After the incorporation of NPs, the thermal stability, elastic modulus, and tensile strength of the films improved. In addition, the prepared NC films showed a decrease in the moisture content, moisture absorption, water vapor permeability, and water solubility compared to the neat kefiran. These bio-based NC films can be suitable options for food packaging technology.


4.1.5. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(lactic acid) (PLA) matrix. 
PLA is a commercial bio-based important polymer because of its biodegradability, biocompatibility, and interesting applications with zero toxicity. Some of its desirable properties are suitable thermal plasticity and mechanical strength. The raw material for this polymer could be achieved from renewable resources.117,118 According to an investigation, the Al2O3 NP volume fraction could affect the properties of PLA with polyethylene glycol as a plasticizer.119 The used spheres of Al2O3 particles were in the size range from 600 nm to 30 μm. The interaction between the fillers and PLA with a hydrophobic nature was improved through a maleic acid (MA) modifier. With the presence of Al2O3 particles, the voids were omitted, so it led to an improvement in the interfacial interactions between the polymer and particles. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) observations have proved this matter. The thermal conductivity and stiffness of PLA increased to about 137% and 41.6%, respectively, by loading 30% MA–Al2O3.
Today, using nanoscale materials for tooth-restoration is a significant challenge in dentistry. In this regard, Ranjbar et al. fabricated PLA-based nanoscaffolds using Al2O3 NPs.120 This synthesis was done under a micelle-assisted hydrothermal procedure, and the prepared scaffolds were tested under diverse conditions like pH, temperature, concentration, microwave power, and time. For this purpose, PLA nanofibers were first prepared via an electrospinning process at 25 °C, and then Al2O3 NPs were synthesized on the PLA. Various concentrations (from 0 wt% to 100 wt% ppm) of nanoscaffolds were added to a Heliomolar Flow composite, placed in an oven for 24 h, and kept in the refrigerator at 4 °C. Based on the outcomes, the particle size of the nanoscaffold composites was about 98–250 nm. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis exhibited a uniform distribution of NPs in PLA, and atomic force microscopy images confirmed the formation of regular diameter PLA nanofibers without any rupture. In addition, the intermolecular crosslinking between NPs and PLA enhanced the mechanical features of the composites and made them appropriate dental NCs.

4.2. Al2O3 PNCs based on man-made polymer host matrixes

4.2.1. Al2O3 PNCs based on an epoxy matrix. 
Epoxy resins are categorized as a thermoset polymer with 4,4′-(propane-2,2-diyl)diphenol (bisphenol A) and epichlorohydrin (2-(chloromethyl)oxirane), two common pre-polymers.121 The reaction of epoxy monomers with a hardener as a co-monomer or/and initiators leads to the preparation of cross-linked or linear epoxy resins. Chain polymerization, step polymerization, or both of them can be applied in the preparation process of epoxy.122 Acids, alcohols, amines, thiols, and anhydrides are some of the hardeners.123 Because of the harmful effect of bisphenol A on the environment and humans, bisphenol A-free epoxy polymers have attracted lots of attention. Recently, the usage of renewable materials has been developed to produce this thermoset polymer. These sources could be lignin, vegetable oils, cardanol, polysaccharides, natural rubbers, and so on.124 As a proper candidate to fabricate a non-toxic and sustainable epoxy thermoset, soybean oils with more than two epoxy groups in their structure can be applied.123 Epoxy resins with high chemical resistance, good adhesion to substrates, and excellent rigidity and mechanical and electrical insulating properties can be a candidate with high performance for the adhesive industry, electronics, and coatings, and as a matrix for composite compounds.125,126 Despite various advantages, the unfavorable brittleness has restricted its usage in structural engineering.127 Due to the great cross-linked networks, epoxy usually breaks before yielding.125 So, much effort has been made to reinforce epoxy.
In 2018, Nayak et al. studied the role of inorganic nanofillers such as Al2O3 and TiO2 NPs in mechanical features such as the flexural strength and the interlaminar shear strength (ILSS) and thermal features of glass fiber-reinforced polymer (GFRP) composites.128 For this purpose, different proportions of Al2O3 and TiO2 NPs were embedded into the epoxy host matrix, and the following results were observed:
• Among various concentrations of NPs, 0.1 wt% Al2O3 NPs and 0.1 wt% TiO2 NPs in the epoxy host matrix diminished the water diffusion coefficient (about 12%), and also amended the flexural residue strength, in comparison with the neat composites.
• The interface/phase bond between the polymeric host matrix and glass fiber was enhanced with the utilization of NPs. The ILSS displayed this issue, and, in this work, the ILSS was amended by about 16% under dry conditions and 21% under hydrothermal conditions with the addition of 0.1 wt% Al2O3 NPs and 0.1 wt% TiO2 NPs into the epoxy host matrix.
• Using 0.7 wt% Al2O3 NPs and 0.7 wt% TiO2 NPs improved the glass transition temperature (Tg) by 10 °C under dry conditions.
In another similar study by Nayak, Al2O3 NPs were embedded into the GFRP host matrix to consider the effect of seawater aging on the thermal and mechanical features of NCs.129 Based on the outcomes, the water diffusion coefficient was reduced by 17% using 0.1 wt% Al2O3 NPs; also, the ILSS and flexural strength were improved by 11% and 12%, respectively.
Opelt and co-workers modified an epoxy matrix with two different NPs in two various geometries and investigated the effect of Al2O3 NPs or carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on this matrix.130 Three various concentrations of NPs (0.15%, 0.5%, and 1.5%) have been utilized. In the tensile test, all of the prepared NCs showed an increase, especially for 0.5% CNTs with 22% and 17% increases of the ultimate stress and elastic modulus, respectively. For the stiffness of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, a gradual increase occurred for the volume fraction with increasing concentrations. Also, in the epoxy/CNT NCs, augmented stiffness was obtained with a concentration of 0.5% CNTs. According to the TEM micrographs, a three-dimensional network created using Al2O3 NPs reduced the mobility of epoxy chains; also, the homogeneous dispersion of CNTs increased the surface area and the elastic modulus. Besides that, SEM images and fracture toughness tests have proved the cavitation-shear yielding mechanism for NCs based on Al2O3 NPs, and also the crack bridging-pull-out mechanism for NCs based on CNTs. By in situ polymerization, another category of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs in 0.5%, 1%, and 1.5% weight fractions of Al2O3 nanorod particles and two sizes was fabricated by Shukla et al.131 The smaller size of Al2O3 nanorods at 1.5 wt% increased the fracture toughness to 34%, whereas the Al2O3 nanorods of higher ratio in the same weight fraction improved the fracture toughness to 56%.
Epoxy NCs are introduced as insulating materials for electrical usage, so the dielectric behaviors of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were studied by Zhang et al.132 In this study, the conductivity and permittivity of 0.5 and 1 wt% epoxy/Al2O3 NCs indicated a lower value in comparison with the pristine epoxy, along with a suppression in the space charge amplitude and an enrichment in the breakdown strength. The dielectric characteristics improved at low filler proportions due to the deep traps in the NP–polymer host matrix interfaces.
The effect of Al2O3 NPs as an additive was studied on the performance and behavior of carbon fiber reinforced epoxy NCs (CF–epoxy/Al2O3 NCs) (Fig. 12).133 Different weight percentages of Al2O3 NPs from 1 to 5 wt% were embedded into the resin. Herein, crack path deflection and crack pinning occurred as toughening mechanisms, so this additive improved the interlaminar and fiber/matrix adhesion. The biggest improvement was observed for 2 wt% CF–epoxy/Al2O3 NCs. This type of PNCs can be applied as structural materials.
 Fig. 12  Schematic showing the epoxy matrix modification.133 
In addition, Garner et al. indicated that the incorporation of various proportions of Al2O3 NPs into the carbon fiber-reinforced epoxy (CF–epoxy) host matrix affected the off-axis stress-relaxation and the stiffness features of the epoxy NCs.134 2.0 wt% Al2O3 NPs reduced the off-axis stiffness by about 30% and increased the stress-relaxation about 10%. Mohanty and Srivastava prepared this type of NC material in an open molding route using micro-size to nano-size reinforced particles.135 For the fabrication of this epoxy based-resin, an epoxy resin with the trade name of Bondtite PL-411 was applied as a polymeric host matrix with an amine as a hardener. This embedding of Al2O3 NPs indicated a positive impact on the strength, flexural strength, and flexural modulus in comparison with the CF–epoxy and pure epoxy composites. In 2016, the effect of the Al2O3 NP morphology on the flexural and viscoelastic features of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs was studied by Hiremath et al.136 Herein, rod and spherical morphologies of Al2O3 NPs with the same range of specific surface area were applied and two types of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were synthesized through in situ polymerization by means of ultrasonication. Ultrasonication can cause better dispersion of Al2O3 NPs into the epoxy matrix. According to the result of the dynamic mechanical analyzer and three-point bending test, epoxy/Al2O3 NCs with nanorod Al2O3 NPs demonstrated a higher increase in the storage modulus and also in flexural features, compared to the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs with spherical Al2O3 NPs. The storage and flexural modulus for the epoxy/nanorod Al2O3 NCs were 37 and 18%, respectively, at 1 wt%, and 16 and 17%, respectively, at 1 wt% for epoxy/spherical Al2O3 NCs. Besides that, the transition temperature of the epoxy/nanorod Al2O3 NCs was lower than the epoxy/spherical Al2O3 NCs. The modeling of both NCs is displayed in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Modelling of composites having spherical Al2O3 NPs (a) and Al2O3 nanorods (b). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Taylor & Francis, copyright 2016. 
In an experiment performed by El-meniawi and co-workers, three types of epoxy NCs with Al2O3, carbon black, and silica (SiO2) NPs as fillers were synthesized.137 They applied positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy for determination of filler–matrix interactions and the free-volume nanoholes in the prepared epoxy NCs with 0.5, 1.5, and 3 wt% of each nanofiller. The obtained results showed that the mechanical features were dependent on the free volume. The tensile test result showed an increase in the tensile strength and tensile modulus amended by 15.9%, 30.4%, and 37.7% with the addition of SiO2, Al2O3, and carbon black into the neat epoxy, respectively. Compared with the pure epoxy, the hardness of the NCs was increased. SEM and EDX have revealed agglomeration, poor dispersion, and diminution of the tensile strength for 3 wt% NCs. The correlation of the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and hardness with the fractional free volume (Fv) is depicted in Fig. 14. As shown, there was an inverse relationship between the UTS and hardness and Fv for epoxy NCs with Al2O3 and SiO2 NPs.
 Fig. 14  The plot of hardness and Fv as a function of filler content, wt%, of SiO2, Al2O3 and carbon NPs (a) and plot of UTS as a function of filler content, wt%, of SiO2, Al2O3 and carbon NPs (b). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016. 
In a survey by Mandhakini et al., epoxy resins were synthesized with two different chain lengths of ether-linked bismaleimide (e-BMI), which were named C4 e-BMI and C8 e-BMI.138 After that, the surface of Al2O3 NPs was functionalized with 3-glycidoxypropylmethoxysilane (GPS), and the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were synthesized with embedding 1, 3, 5, and 10 wt% Al2O3 NPs. This survey showed good interpenetration and compatibility between the epoxy host matrix and 15 wt% C4 e-BMI, which led to improving the properties of epoxy such as toughness without compromising the modulus, compared to epoxy-C8 e-BMI. Also, the results displayed an increase in the elastic modulus and hardness of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs after embedding the Al2O3 NPs. In other work, Mandhakini and coworkers synthesized C4 e-BMI epoxy/Al2O3 NCs and considered the impact of using Al2O3 NPs as a filler on the tribology performance of these NCs.139 As previously mentioned, modification of Al2O3 NPs with a coupling agent can cause covalent interactions between the NPs and epoxy matrix, better dispersion, and improvement of the properties; therefore, Al2O3 NPs were modified with GPS. By loading GPS–Al2O3 NPs up to 5 wt%, the hardness and storage modulus of C4 e-BMI-epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were enhanced to 0.22 GPa and 70%, respectively, but there was a decrease for the 10 wt% C4 e-BMI-epoxy/Al2O3 NCs. Based on the wear profile of the samples, the wear track deformation was diminished, and an increase was observed for the 10 wt% C4 e-BMI-epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, which symbolized the poor wear performance. The 5 wt% C4 e-BMI-epoxy/Al2O3 NCs exhibited the best thermal and wear-resistant features. The foremost wear mechanism of the C4 e-BMI-epoxy/Al2O3 NCs changed with increasing amount of filler.
The epoxy resin based on diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) has diverse applications.140 Zhao et al. reported the impact of water absorption on the dielectric and mechanical features of a kind of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs including a DGEBA epoxy resin matrix and spherical Al2O3 nanofillers.141 The use of Al2O3 NPs indicated an effect on the water adsorption. It changed the path length for the diffusion of moisture and diminished the water adsorption. Also, Al2O3 NPs ameliorated the stiffness of epoxy resin and increased the dielectric constant with the total interfacial area. The TEM images proved the spherical shape of Al2O3 NPs with an average size of about 20–40 nm. In addition, aggregation was observed with the utilization of high Al2O3 NP concentration. With water absorption, the flexibility, dielectric loss, and dielectric constant of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs improved but the mechanical properties dwindled. A reduction in Tg was observed after the water adsorption. So, with T > Tg, the coefficient of thermal expansion for the wet samples was lower than the dry samples and there was a reverse outcome at T < Tg. In the work of Souza et al., an epoxy resin based on DGEBA was employed to consider the thermomechanical features of epoxy NCs.142 The epoxy resin was polymerized in the presence of an aliphatic amine hardener and subsequently NCs were synthesized with α-Al2O3 NPs in average diameters of 35, 150, and 200 nm. In this investigation, DSC, dynamic mechanical analysis, and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) were used for the neat epoxy resin, and 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, and 10.0 wt% epoxy/Al2O3 NCs. With the loading of Al2O3 NPs into the matrix, Tg of the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs was augmented and the thermal and mechanical features of the samples improved because of the electrostatic and van der Waals forces between the Al2O3 NPs and the polymeric matrix. Also, the specific surface area was introduced as a principal factor in the adhesion and interaction between the organic and inorganic phase. Based on the results, the size of the NPs had a major effect on the thermomechanical features, and the thermal resistance was enhanced with this incorporation.
In another investigation, Lakshmikandhan et al. functionalized the surface of Al2O3 NPs with 3-glycidyloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS) to achieve GPTMS–Al2O3 NPs.140 After that, organic–inorganic hybrid NCs were prepared by loading different weight percentages of GPTMS–Al2O3 NPs (5, 10, 15, and 20 wt%) into a blend diaminophenoxydimethylsilane–epoxy (20/80 wt%) matrix. Owing to the presence of thermally stable Al2O3 NPs as well as siloxane units in the structure, the prepared NCs had greater thermal stability than the pure epoxy. Among the synthesized NCs, the 20 wt% epoxy/GPTMS–Al2O3 NCs exhibited higher thermal stability (24.3% char yield at 750 °C), dielectric constant (6.6) and ultraviolet (UV) radiation-resistance (86% shielding in the UV region) properties. All of the results were confirmed by nuclear magnetic resonance, FTIR, XRD, SEM, high resolution-TEM (HR-TEM), TGA, and other analyses. According to the dielectric investigation, the dielectric constant increased after the utilization of GPTMS–Al2O3 NPs. Consequently, these materials as dielectric materials and also UV resistant substances could be used in diverse applications with good performance and better longevity.
Hiremath et al. explored the effect of the post-curing temperature (Tp) on some traits of a type of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, such as flexural and viscoelastic traits.143 The in situ polymerization method was used for the synthesis of epoxy (bisphenol-A) NCs containing 0.5, 1, and 1.5 wt% rod shape Al2O3 NPs. The curing reaction was followed by DSC in the range of temperature from 25 to 200 °C. Based on the DSC results, the temperature of curing reduced with the enhancement of the loading amount of Al2O3 NPs, due to the catalytic impact of the rod shape Al2O3 NPs. With the increase in the post-curing temperature, Tg increased for all of the samples. Thus, the flexural and the viscoelastic properties of the samples improved at Tp < Tg and an adverse effect was observed at Tg < Tp.
In a study, partial discharge (PD) resistance features for a kind of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were investigated by Preetha et al.144 The epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were prepared by mixing 0.1, 1, 5, 10, and 15 wt% Al2O3 NPs and bisphenol-A epoxy resin in a mechanical mixer. The PD was measured using IEC (b) type electrodes at a 10 kV voltage. With good dispersion and an increase in the proportion of Al2O3 NPs as the filler, the discharge resistance was amplified. The degradation resistance improved even with a low amount of filler loading and also the interparticle distance showed an important influence on the surface discharge induced degradation because of the interactions between the matrix and Al2O3 NPs. A reduction in the interparticle distance could reduce the mobility and cause resistance to degradation. A dual-layer physical model was recommended to describe the degradation resistance of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs.
Rong et al. considered the effect of modification and good dispersion of several NPs with high hardness, corrosion resistance, and strength such as Al2O3 NPs on epoxy NCs.145 In this work, the surface of the NPs was grafted with polyacrylamide (PAAM). The results have demonstrated that the covalent interaction of PAAM on the Al2O3 NP surface improved the tribological features of the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs. The amide functional groups in PAAM might react with the epoxy functional groups. Forming three-dimensional networks with epoxy groups reduced agglomeration with the improvement of the interactions between the filler and host matrix, and also made the highest wear resistance and also the lowest friction feature, compared with the pure epoxy/Al2O3 NCs.
Shen et al. applied a side-chain liquid crystalline epoxy polymer (SLCEP) interfacial binder to prevent the agglomeration of Al2O3 NPs.146 SLCEP-grafted Al2O3 NPs were uniformly dispersed into the epoxy host matrix through covalent bonds between functional groups to form Al2O3–SLCEP/epoxy NCs. These NCs exhibited superior features with excellent performance in comparison with the neat matrix. The flexural strength, flexural modulus, and impact strength of the Al2O3–SLCEP/epoxy NCs increased by 44.6%, 22.3%, and 228.9%, respectively. Therefore, as a general result, surface modification of NPs with SLCEP could be effective for the preparation of epoxy or other polymeric NC materials with high performance.
Gupta and co-workers reported the preparation and characterization of a flexible type of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, which can be utilized as a suitable encapsulant for the encapsulation and protection of materials.147 For this purpose, firstly the Al2O3 NPs were functionalized with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) to make the Al2O3 NPs compatible with the epoxy resin. After that, different amounts of functionalized-Al2O3 NPs (0.0238, 0.11, 0.18, 0.265, and 0.4 wt%) were dispersed into the epoxy matrix to synthesize the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs. The results of Raman, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and FTIR analyses proved the presence of APTMS over the surface of the Al2O3 NPs. Therefore, the TGA analysis specified the quantification of the grafting density of N–H groups, and the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller isotherms determined the reduction in the specific surface area. The amine group as a curing agent could make steady NCs by forming H-bonding with the matrix. The prepared epoxy/Al2O3 NCs presented good flexibility and thermal stability, especially for 0.18 wt% epoxy/Al2O3 NCs with the optimal properties. Because of the good resistance, this epoxy/Al2O3 NC is an appropriate candidate as an insulator. The interfacial binding in the epoxy matrix was obvious in the SEM images, and these epoxy/Al2O3 NCs can be potentially used for encapsulation.
The effect of the interface structure of Al2O3 NPs on the dielectric properties of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs was inspected by Yu et al.148 The epoxy matrix was reinforced by three types of interface structure fillers: pure Al2O3 NPs, modified Al2O3 NPs with γ aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APS) (APS–Al2O3 NPs), and grafted Al2O3 NPs with hyperbranched aromatic polyamide (HBP) (HBP–Al2O3 NPs). Good dispersion of Al2O3 NPs and also good adhesion between the NPs and epoxy resin with the utilization of APS and HBP were observed in the SEM and TEM images. Thus, it led to the enhancement of Tg, the dielectric properties, and the resistivity of epoxy/APS–Al2O3 NCs and epoxy/HBP–Al2O3 NCs, compared to the epoxy/pure-Al2O3 NCs. The epoxy/pure-Al2O3 displayed a lower dielectric constant than the epoxy/APS–Al2O3 NCs and epoxy/HBP–Al2O3 NCs. For all of the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, the effective dielectric constant was augmented by different loading levels of the Al2O3 NPs and various interface structures. Salimi et al. also applied APS–Al2O3 NPs and modified Al2O3 NPs with KH-560 (KH-560–Al2O3 NPs) for the fabrication of another kind of epoxy NCs.149 Due to the widespread applications, tetraglycidyl-4,4′-diaminodiphenylmethane (TGDDM) resin was presented as a host epoxy matrix. Based on SEM, the APS and KH-560 coupling agents improved the interfacial interactions between the TGDDM resin and APS- or KH-560–Al2O3 NPs and also made more deflected crack paths on the fractured surface of the NCs. To improve the interfacial interactions in epoxy/Al2O3 NCs, polystyrene was grafted covalently on the surface of silane-modified Al2O3 NPs (KH570–Al2O3 NPs) by another research group.75 The produced epoxy/Al2O3 NCs indicated a growth in the dielectric constant and moreover the highest dielectric breakdown strength was observed for 3 wt% epoxy/Al2O3 NCs.
Duraibabu et al. explored some features of prepared sulphone ether-linked tetraglycidyl epoxy NCs with functionalized Al2O3 NPs as a reinforcement.150 The required epoxy matrix was synthesized using 1,4′-bis(4-amine-phenoxy) sulphone benzene and epichlorohydrin. In the next step, the obtained epoxy host matrix was reinforced by the functionalized Al2O3 NPs using 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) as a modifier via the sol–gel method. Three kinds of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs were synthesized with different loading amounts of functionalized Al2O3 NPs. According to the XRD analysis, the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs showed a mixed exfoliated and intercalated structure. The SEM, TEM, and atomic force microscopy images displayed aggregation of the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs when loading 5 wt% functionalized Al2O3 NPs and mono-dispersion for the epoxy/Al2O3 NCs when loading 1 wt% and 3 wt% functionalized Al2O3 NPs. With this reinforcement, the mechanical properties, insulation, and thermal stability were improved. Therefore, these epoxy NCs are a good nominee for industrial and high-performance applications, better than the pure epoxy.
In an investigation reported by Yu and co-workers, the role of surface modification of Al2O3 NPs for improvement of the mechanical and thermal features of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs was studied.151 In this work, the Al2O3 NPs were modified with APS by chemical bonds that formed between the Al2O3 NPs and the modifier. After that, these NPs were blended physically with the epoxy host matrix to prepare the epoxy/APS–Al2O3 NCs. On the other hand, some epoxy NCs were synthesized with the neat Al2O3 NPs (epoxy/neat-Al2O3 NCs) and the two kinds of epoxy NCs were compared to each other. The epoxy/APS–Al2O3 NCs revealed better dispersion, heat resistance, and mechanical properties than the epoxy/neat-Al2O3 NCs. The modified NPs were dispersed uniformly into the matrix, reducing the gel time, and demonstrated good compatibility and a higher curing degree. Among the synthesised epoxy NCs, the 3 wt% epoxy/APS–Al2O3 NCs showed higher Tg, flexural modulus, and flexural strength than the others. Consequently, via the modification of Al2O3 NPs, the compatibility with epoxy resin increased and the properties of the NCs improved.
The dielectric properties of a group of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs with modified and unmodified Al2O3 nanofillers were examined by Jiang et al.152 Significant dispersion was perceived with this treatment. The obtained results indicated that the surface treatment didn’t have any effect on the dielectric constant but there was an influence on the dielectric loss of epoxy/Al2O3 NCs.
Recently, it has been proven that coating the surface of multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) with metal oxide NPs can improve the electrical and thermal properties of the polymeric NCs. Therefore, Im and Kim prepared Al2O3 NP (approximately 15 nm and 10 μm) doped MWCNTs to synthesize PNCs with excellent thermal conductivity.153 In this research, the Al2O3 NPs were used for doping and epoxy terminated poly(dimethylsiloxane) (ETDS) as a matrix because of their unique properties. The steps below were followed for the preparation of Al2O3 NP doped MWCNTs: MWCNTs were dispersed in SOCl2via ultrasound and this provided chlorinated MWCNTs. Al2O3 NPs were functionalized with aminopropyltrietoxy silane, and then the functionalized Al2O3 NPs with NH2 groups and chlorinated MWCNTs were mixed and sonicated together. After covalent bonding of the Al2O3 NPs to the MWCNTs, this conducting filler entered into the ETDS/Al2O3. By scrutiny of the FESEM images, agglomeration was observed for the ETDS/Al2O3 NCs containing MWCNTs compared with the ETDS/Al2O3 NCs containing Al2O3 NP doped MWCNTs. It may be due to the Coulomb attraction and van der Waals forces between the micro-filler and Al2O3 NPs on the surface of the MWCNTs. The thermal conductivity increased with the improvement of the interconnectivity between the conducting particles forming conducting networks. This factor was considered by the Hashin–Shtrikman boundaries model.


4.2.2. Al2O3 PNCs based on a low-density polyethylene (LDPE) matrix. 
Polyethylene (PE) is known as a common material in daily life. PE is sorted into different classes: high density PE, LDPE, linear low density PE, and cross-linked PE.154,155 LDPE is an omnipresent and nonbiodegradable thermoplastic made from petroleum. For the first time, LDPE was manufactured in 1933 by Imperial Chemical Industries Limited, accounting for almost half of the global PE production. The original ICI process is mostly used for compressing and polymerizing ethylene at very high temperatures and pressures (200–250 °C, and 1400–2400 bar, respectively) using Ziegler–Natta catalysts.156,157 This synthetic polymer is degraded into low molecular mass fragments that can be assimilated by microbes at a very slow rate like Pseudomonas sp.158,159 LDPE is strong, light-weight, and durable with a good balance of properties such as burst strength, tensile strength, tear strength, and impact resistance. It also has good mechanical and optical properties. For these reasons, it is commonly used for the fabrication of diverse bottles, containers, plastic bags, laboratory ware, piping in the construction of fuel storage tanks, and cables for high voltage direct current (HVDC) power transmission.160–162
Liu et al. studied the effect of a variety of silanes with diverse lengths on the interfacial strength between the LDPE host matrix and Al2O3 NPs in the prepared composites.163 For this purpose, methyltrimethoxysilane, octyltriethoxysilane, and octadecyltrimethoxysilane (C1, C8, and C18, respectively) were applied as coatings for modification of Al2O3 NPs, and a core–shell structure was observed in TEM images (Fig. 15) for the coated NPs. The C1-coated Al2O3 NPs and also C8- and C18-coated Al2O3 NPs displayed multi-layer and monolayer coatings, respectively. It may be ascribed to the presence of larger alkyl groups in the C8- and C18-coating and greater steric hindrance of them, in comparison with the small methyl groups in the C1-coating. The lack of the Si–O–Si stretching band in the IR spectra of C8- and C18-coated Al2O3 NPs confirmed the monolayer coating. After the incorporation of coated Al2O3 NPs into the LDPE host matrix, a good dispersion of Al2O3 NPs was observed. According to the inter-particle distance parameter, the PNCs based on C8-coated Al2O3 NPs exhibited the best dispersion. With the addition of coated Al2O3 NPs to the LDPE host matrix, no change was observed in the crystallinity of the PNCs. In comparison to the coated Al2O3 NPs, the C18-coated Al2O3 NPs indicated the best adhesion between the LDPE and Al2O3 NPs.
 Fig. 15  TEM of different Al2O3 NPs: (a) pristine, (b) C1-coated, (c) C8-coated, and (d) C18-coated. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
Chee et al. prepared NCs with the LDPE matrix, containing 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 5 wt% Al2O3 NPs.30 They ameliorated the interaction between Al2O3 NPs and the LDPE matrix with silanes. According to the analyses, they got the following results:
• With the blending of the LDPE matrix and the modified Al2O3 NPs, there wasn’t any novel bonding formed or chemical reaction between them.
• The tensile strength of the LDPE/Al2O3 NCs was effectively increased with an increasing amount of the modified Al2O3 NP loading up to 1 wt%. Also, the stress–strain curves (Fig. 16) showed that there was an important increase in the elongation at break values of LDPE in the LDPE/Al2O3 NCs. It can be explained by the good incorporation of the modified Al2O3 NPs into the polymeric host matrix, trapped inside entanglements, and restricting the polymer chain mobility.
 Fig. 16  Typical stress–strain curves of neat LDPE and LDPE/Al2O3 NCs.30 
• The addition of the modified Al2O3 NPs increased the stiffness of the LDPE matrix and Young's modulus of LDPE/Al2O3 NCs.
As a result, this study showed that the modified Al2O3 NPs had a good dispersion at a lower loading amount of NPs (0.5 to 1 wt%) with a larger total interface area for reinforcement efficiency. The higher amount of modified Al2O3 NPs caused poor dispersion and accumulation of the modified Al2O3 NPs, which decreased the reinforcing effect and properties of the LDPE/Al2O3 NCs.
In an investigation by Wang et al., the modified Al2O3 NPs as an additive were embedded into the LDPE matrix to prepare a group of LDPE/Al2O3 NCs.164 The used NPs were synthesized in a melting blend process and were modified with vinyl trimethoxy silane. This incorporation could successfully increase the breakdown strength, volume resistivity, and interfacial adhesion between the LDPE and the modified Al2O3 NPs for HVDC insulation. Sánchez and coworkers described a kind of novel LDPE NCs by grafting poly(lauryl methacrylate) (PLMA), as an appropriate compatibilizer, on the surface of Al2O3 NPs.165 As a first step, pure Al2O3 NPs were functionalized with amino-silanes, and then PLMA was grafted to the amino groups on the NPs by the surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization technique and 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide as an initiator. The interphase between the fillers and LDPE host matrix was enhanced with this functionalization process; thus, the tanδ values in the NCs including PLMA–Al2O3 NPs were less than the NCs including ungrafted-Al2O3 NPs.


4.2.3. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) matrix. 
PTFE with the brand name of Teflon is a non-polar, environment-friendly, low-cost, and hydrophobic synthetic fluoropolymer. PTFE consists of carbon and fluorine with high molecular weight, a high melting point, and high-temperature stability and exhibits exceptional chemical, physicochemical, and dielectric properties.166,167 Despite the poor wear resistance, PTFE is an efficient internal polymer solid lubricant, because of the coefficient of friction (0.05–0.08, static), easy shear of lamellae, and the smooth profile of PTFE molecules.168–170 PTFE contains strong C–F bonds because of the high electronegativity of fluorine atoms and the small atomic radius, and thus shows low surface free energy, along with oil and water resistance.171 PTFE has numerous applications in various fields such as aerospace, computing, bearings and seals, industrial applications, lubricant components, tribological applications, and surgical intervention applications.166 For sliding usages, modified PTFE makes a friction film with the sliding partner to reduce adhesion.169 Extended PTFE graft fistulas are generally applied for patients receiving long-term hemodialysis as second vascular access.172 It also was used for the preparation of expanded membranes as a stable and chemically and biologically inert polymer, with the ability to resist enzymatic and microbiological attack. Expanded membranes have been applied commonly in periodontal and bone regeneration.173 PTFE has been used as an aqueous-based binder for the fabrication of LiFePO4/C electrodes.174 For the first time, Wang's group developed triboelectric nanogenerators. Due to the thermal and chemical resistance properties, most of the research was focused on the utilization of PTFE thin films without any surface treatment. In 2018, PTFE with a helical chain confirmation was broadly utilized as triboelectric negative materials.175 In addition, PTFE NCs are one of the most prevalent used self-lubricating materials because of the exceptional self-lubrication features. In this process, when PTFE NCs rub against metallic engineering surfaces, a part of the NCs is transmitted to the counterface and forms a transfer film.176 Besides that, in PTFE-based NCs, the presence of fillers enhanced the wear rate by 1–2 orders of magnitude and therefore the study of these NCs has been very much considered for decades.177
As we know, a good interaction between the polymeric matrix and filler improves the toughness, strength, tribological features, and ultimately the performance of NCs. For this reason, Niu et al. grafted the surface of Al2O3 NPs with poly(butyl acrylate) (PBA) and prepared PTFE/PBA–Al2O3 NCs of 0, 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 wt%.178 According to Fig. 18, the wear rate and the friction coefficient of PTFE/PBA–Al2O3 NCs slightly increased, the surface energy of the NPs decreased, and the wear resistance of the NCs improved. After surface coating, the PBA–Al2O3 NPs acted as cross-linking sites, and finally the destructive delamination was stopped and the debris size reduced.
In 2013, Pitenis and coworkers studied the role of vacuum environments on the wear of pure PTFE and PTFE/Al2O3 NC samples.179 In previous studies, the pure PTFE didn’t show any clear dependence of wear on vacuum conditions; however, the coefficient of friction of this pure matrix displayed some dependence at high sliding speeds. In this investigation, it was found that the wear of the PTFE/Al2O3 NCs was highly sensitive to the vacuum level.
Previous work indicated that the wear resistance had 600× improvements over the unfilled PTFE with the addition of Al2O3 NPs. Burris et al. used irregularly shaped Al2O3 NPs and ameliorated the wear resistance of PTFE/Al2O3 NCs 3000× over unfilled PTFE with 1 wt% NPs.180 The difference between this work and other studies is the irregular shapes of Al2O3 NPs, as opposed to the spherical shape of previous NCs. In Fig. 17, TEM micrographs of two types of Al2O3 NPs are displayed. The results have shown that the irregular shape NPs not only had an effective role in reducing the wear of PTFE but also led to increasing the friction. For the 5 wt% PTFE/Al2O3 NCs, the friction coefficient was approximately 30% lower than the other NCs. Therefore, constant values of the friction and wear were not predominantly sensitive to the amount of nanofiller.
 Fig. 17  TEM images of the two Al2O3 NPs evaluated. The manufacturer reported mean particle size is indicated on the upper left of each image. The crystal phase of the spherical 44 nm particles is reported to be 70% delta and 30% gamma; the more irregular 80 nm particles are reported to be 99% alpha. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2006. 


4.2.4. Al2O3 PNCs based on a PVA matrix. 
In 1928, Herrman and Haehnel discovered a commonly used promising synthetic polymer named PVA. PVA is a tasteless, odorless, water-soluble, semi-crystalline, cost-effective, and bio-safe thermoplastic polymer that is classified in the biodegradable and biocompatible polymer category.181 This polymer contains plentiful hydroxyl groups on the surface with the ability to form intra and inter-molecular hydrogen bonding.182 PVA and its fabricated composites exhibited vast applications in food packaging,183,184 biodegradable plastics,185 optical holography,186 tissue engineering,187 surgical devices,188 adhesives,189 wound dressings, biomedicine and drug delivery,190,191 synthesis of NCs as a host matrix or advantageous coupling agents,192,193 and so on. The fabricated PVA films have some notable properties such as water resistance and permeability.194 Various factors affect the degree of solubility in this hydrophilic polymer; for instance, the degree of hydrolysis and molecular weight.185 PVA is synthesized using the polymerization of vinyl acetate monomers to poly(vinyl acetate) and then hydrolysis to PVA in the presence of ethanol and potassium hydroxide.195,196
Mallakpour and Dinari used the ultrasonication method to produce a series of PVA NC films with Al2O3 nanofillers.197 For this purpose, different amounts of inorganic nanofillers were added to the PVA host matrix (5, 10, and 15 wt% Al2O3 NPs). Based on the results, the crystal structure of Al2O3 NPs illustrated no change after the addition of NPs into the PVA host matrix. The enhancement of the thermal stability may be ascribed to strong hydrogen bonding between OH groups in the structure of the Al2O3 NPs and PVA.
In 2017, this research group also ameliorated the performance of PVA/Al2O3 NCs with surface modification.198 Thiamine (known as vitamin B1) as a green and inexpensive modifier was grafted to the surface of Al2O3 NPs and could help to increase the hydrophilicity of the NPs, give a homogeneous dispersion, and reduce the accumulation of the nanofiller in the PVA host matrix. The obtained results showed the positive effect of surface modification on the properties of PVA NCs such as the optical properties, strain, etc. In another study, surface modification of Al2O3 NPs was done with two bio-safe and biodegradable citric acid (CA) and ascorbic acid (AA) molecules.199 It led to almost uniform PVA NCs. In a simple process for the production of PVA NCs, firstly, PVA powder was dissolved in deionized water under stirring. Then, 4, 8, and 12 wt% AA–CA–Al2O3 NPs were dispersed in deionized water under ultrasonic irradiation. They were added to the achieved homogeneous solution in the first step and sonicated. Finally, the dispersion was dried in a Petri dish. The UV/vis graph showed an increase in absorption for the PVA NCs by increasing the percentage loading amount of nanofiller. In addition, this functionalization had a positive effect on the other characteristics of the PVA NCs.
Despite the excellent features of PVA, the high hydrophilicity limits its usage in the presence of water or moisture.200 Therefore, blending can be a good strategy to solve this weakness. A blend of PVA with high hydrophilicity and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) with less hydrophilicity was introduced as an appropriate host matrix for the preparation of PNCs in a ratio of 50/50.201 Surface functionalization of α-Al2O3 NPs was accomplished with the CA and AA coupling agents and the functionalized α-Al2O3 NPs were incorporated into the PVA@PVP matrix with a proper dispersion. In the XRD patterns of the PVA@PVP NCs, both semicrystalline and amorphous structures for PVA and PVP were observed. FTIR analysis displayed the incorporation of modified nanofillers into the blended PVA@PVP and the thermal stability was enhanced (Fig. 18) compared with the neat host matrix. Also, Choudhary reported the fabrication of PVA@PVP NC films (50/50 wt%) with pure Al2O3 NPs.202 These miscible blend NCs were fabricated with 1, 3, and 5 wt% filler. The effect of loading pure Al2O3 NPs on the features of PVA@PVP NCs was investigated and, according to the obtained results, the electrical feature of the fabricated films decreased after loading 1 wt% NPs. Thus, these NCs could be applied in microelectronic devices and low-permittivity nanodielectrics due to the low electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 18  TGA graphs of the PVA@PVP blend and different contents of NCs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 


4.2.5. Al2O3 PNCs based on a polyaniline (PANI) matrix. 
Conductive polymers are unique kinds of organic materials with outstanding optical and photothermal, electrical, and biocompatibility properties.203,204 In this class, PANI is a noteworthy polymer with conductivity similar to metals and versatile important applications; it is p-conjugated to an excessive extent.205,206 The discovery of PANI was made 180 years ago.207 There are three altered forms for PANI: fully reduced, partially oxidized, and fully oxidized forms.208 Some of the exceptional features of PANI include environmental stability, semi-flexibility, low-cost, and compatibility with cells or molecules.209,210 It can display great performance for technological and commercial applications.211 PANI was used in biomaterials, rechargeable batteries, antistatic coatings,204 light-emitting diodes, photovoltaic cells,210 anti-corrosion coating materials,212 solar cells, electron field emitters, metallization, microwaves, harmonic generators, catalysts, electrorheological fluids, Schottky diodes, membranes, electromagnetic interference shielding, radar-absorbing materials, bio/chemical sensors, asymmetric films, supercapacitors, fuels, digital memory devices207 and many other applications. PANI is successfully synthesized by electrochemical and chemical methods in different media and is thermally stable to 250 °C. Despite many advantages, PANI showed some disadvantages, for example limited electrochemical stability, reduced solubility, cracks, shrinkage, etc.213
Benykhlef et al. presented PANI-derived polymer/Al2O3 NCs (PANI–Al2O3 NCs) in two steps: using hydrochloric acid to activate the surface of Al2O3 NPs and then polymerization of different PANI.214 PANI is a beneficial conducting polymer, and PANI–Al2O3 NCs demonstrated a good voltammetric response. Parvin et al. successfully prepared a mediated biosensor on gold electrodes by electropolymerization and modification with PANI using γ-Al2O3 NPs (Au/PANI/γ-Al2O3).215 This biosensor was used to detect vitamin E and could be useful for urea, food, and other biological tests. In this process, γ-Al2O3 NPs as a catalyst accelerated the synthesis of PANI, and the prepared NCs ameliorated the performance of the sensor. A PANI–graphene composite is a worthy option for supercapacitors as an electrode material. In an exploration by Nemade and others, α-Al2O3 NPs were dispersed into the PANI–GO matrix to prepare PANI–GO–α-Al2O3 NCs.216 It was suitable to raise the supercapacitivity and photovoltaic properties. The PANI–GO–α-Al2O3 NCs displayed a power conversion efficiency higher than pure PANI–GO with ameliorated properties. The cycling stability of the PANI–GO–α-Al2O3 NCs was 95.83% after 7000 cycles.


4.2.6. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(amide-imide) (PAI) matrix. 
PAIs are a class of thermoplastic polymers including both amide and imide parts in their main chain. High thermal resistance, good mechanical properties and processability are some of the outstanding features of these polymers.8,217,218 In Mallakpour's research group, PAIs based on different amino acids219 were used as a biocompatible and non-toxic host matrix to synthesize numerous PNCs with several nano-additive fillers, for instance, CNTs,220 ZnO NPs,221,222 ZrO2 NPs,223 TiO2 NPs,224 layered double hydroxide nanoclays,225 and so on. To prevent accumulation and improve some features of bioactive PAI NCs, surface coating of Al2O3 NPs was done with PVA, a biocompatible synthetic polymer, and CA, a biocompatible tri-carboxylic acid.193,226 The used PAI consisted of 1,5-naphthalenediamine and an optically active bio-safe dicarboxylic acid. Both of these NCs were prepared by loading 5, 10, and 15 wt% amounts of PVA–Al2O3 NPs and CA–Al2O3 NPs as fillers. The FESEM and TEM techniques as suitable and valid methods for measurement of the dispersity of particles have demonstrated good dispersion of the modified NPs. The micrographs of PVA–Al2O3 NPs, pristine PAI, and PAI NCs (PAPNCs) (with 5, 10, and 15 wt% PVA–Al2O3 NPs) and also their histograms are exhibited in Fig. 19. With comparison, it seems that embedded PAI NCs with PVA–Al2O3 NPs as fillers have exhibited superior properties to embedded PAI NCs with CA–Al2O3 NPs. The smaller particle size based on the histograms, good dispersion from the morphology study, and thermal stability obtained from TGA or utilization of PVA–Al2O3 NPs may be reasons for this claim.
 Fig. 19  The FESEM micrographs of the α-Al2O3–PVA NPs (a and b), PAI (c and d), PAPNC 5 wt% (e and f), PAPNC 10 wt% (g and h), and PAPNC 15 wt% (i and j) and their histograms. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 


4.2.7. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) matrix. 
PVC is known as a thermoplastic and the third-most widely used synthetic polymer after polyethylene and polypropylene with two forms: rigid PVC and flexible PVC. Some features of this valuable polymer include flexibility, transparency, biological stability, biocompatibility, and also compatibility with various additives.227,228 Mallakpour et al. synthesized a kind of PNC films (Fig. 20A) efficaciously in the presence of PVC as a polymeric matrix.229 Al2O3 nanofillers were adapted with CA and AA as two biocompatible and environmentally friendly coupling molecules for better performance, dispersion, and adhesion within the PVC. The modified nanofillers inclusive of hydroxyl and carbonyl functional groups and possible hydrogen bonds were immobilized into PVC with different loading amounts (4, 8, and 12 wt%). Observation of the results proved the successful embedding of modified Al2O3 NPs into the PVC matrix. Besides that, loading 3, 5 and 7 wt% modified Al2O3 NPs with vitamin B1 as another biosafe modifier agent into PVC was considered by this group.230 TGA investigation showed that the thermal stability of the PVC NCs was better than the pure PVC, despite a decrease in T5 and T10 in PVC NC 12 wt%, due to the accumulation of modified Al2O3 NPs. FESEM and TEM micrographs didn’t show high accumulation of particles in the host matrix. In both groups of PVC NC films the mechanical properties improved compared to the neat PVC film. UV/vis transmittance spectra of 4, 8, and 12 wt% PVC NCs are depicted in Fig. 20B. It shows that with the addition of modified NPs into the PVC matrix, the transition intensity was reduced. Thus, these NCs were reported as a good option in packaging uses.
 Fig. 20  (A) Photographs of neat PVC (a) and PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 4 wt% (b), PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 8 wt% (c), and PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 12 wt% (d) and (B): UV-vis transmittance spectra of PVC (a) and different NC films: 4 wt% (b), 8 wt% (c), and 12 wt% (c). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. 
By adding diverse NPs to PVC, the optical features of this polymer can be altered. Therefore, in a study by Taha, PVC NC films were synthesized using diverse amounts of Al2O3 NPs (0, 2, 4, and 6 wt%) as nanofillers with an average particle size of 10 nm.231 These NPs displayed a good dispersion in the PVC host matrix, which was confirmed via SEM analysis. According to the outcomes, the optical parameters of the prepared NC films, for example, refractive index, optical energy gap, optical conductivity, Urbach energy, etc. depended on the amount of Al2O3 NPs and increased with the increasing amount of them. It was reported that these NC films may be useful in laser pulse broadening.


4.2.8. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(caprolactone) (PCL) matrix. 
PCL is another biodegradable polyester host matrix and Sownthari et al. embedded Al2O3 NPs into the host matrix containing a 75:25 wt% ratio of PCL and zinc trifluoromethanesulfonate, respectively.232 The decomposition voltage increased using Al2O3 nanofillers. Also, the PCL NCs with 5 wt% Al2O3 nanofiller showed the highest ionic conductivity, and can be utilized in primary or secondary batteries. PCL NCs with Al2O3 NPs (PCL/Al2O3 NCs) were also used for packaging materials.233 In a study, paperboard was coated with PCL/Al2O3 NCs to prevent water permeability. Utilization of Al2O3 NPs ameliorated the water vapor barrier, mechanical features, and polarity of the coating. Also, the UV stability was significantly improved, and it could be an important factor in the paperboard packaging application.


4.2.9. Al2O3 PNCs based on a polypropylene (PP) matrix. 
PP, as a noteworthy polymer, was discovered in the early 1950s.234 PP is recognized as a useful polymer in engineering applications, the automotive industry for bumpers and batteries, flexible packaging, etc.235 In research by Jiang et al. the behavior of PP NCs in the presence of modified Al2O3 NPs as a reinforcement was studied.236 This modification was done with benzoic acid (BA), and the flexural modulus, toughness, and tensile strength were enhanced significantly with the addition of 0.2 wt% BA–Al2O3 NPs. In addition, for preparation and improvement of the performance of thermally conductive PP/Al2O3 NCs, two strategies were applied.237 Here, silane coupling agents were used as interfacial modifiers. Khare et al. also offered a sort of PP NC films with Al2O3 NP-activated carbon microfiber/carbon nanofiber fillers.238 PP was modified with maleic anhydride and polyethylene glycol cross-linkers. These fabricated films may be a considerable option in structural materials and battery separators.


4.2.10. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) matrix. 
PMMA is an optically active, non-biodegradable, and amorphous polymer that can be applied in orthopedic and medical science due to its biocompatibility, as binders, optical fibers, and additives, and in some other usages.239–242 Mohammadi and coworkers considered the impact of unmodified and modified Al2O3 NPs on Tg of PMMA NCs.243 Embedding the modified NPs into PMMA reduced the mobility of the polymer chains, and it led to increasing the Tg of the NCs. By comparing the outcomes, it was obtained that PMMA NCs with the modified Al2O3 NPs exhibited a Tg higher than PMMA NCs with the unmodified NPs. In research work, PMMA NCs including Al2O3 NPs (PMMA/Al2O3 NCs) were prepared and characterized by Aghajani and Simchi.244 By examination, an improvement in hardness and flexural and tensile strength was observed for the PMMA/Al2O3 NCs. The PMMA/Al2O3 NC with 20% Al2O3 NPs demonstrated a hardness of 101 Shore D and tensile strength of 78 MPa. The weight loss and friction coefficient were reduced by increasing the amount of reinforcement. In a study, the French Research Agency supported the novel flame retardant systems fabricated with PMMA and polyamide-6 matrixes and also alumina, silica, and CNT nanofillers with a silane-based modifier or without that.245 Nanofillers had a momentous impact on the rate of particle emission. In another strategy, Al2O3 NPs and some other NPs were uniformly incorporated in PMMA and PS matrixes.246 Anionic and cationic ligands as dispersion agents and emulsifiers helped in the dispersion of NPs. In comparison with neat PS, the PS NCs with Al2O3 NPs showed an enhancement in the thermal decomposition temperature. A blend of PMMA with poly(ethylene oxide) was used to prepare electrolyte NCs by Choudhary et al.247 In this way, lithium perchlorate (20 wt%) acted as a dopant salt and Al2O3 NPs or other MOs (3 wt%) were applied as fillers. The NPs caused an interruption in the matrix chain motion of NC films, and the films prepared by loading Al2O3 NPs showed an amorphous structure. Ash et al. investigated the mechanical features of PMMA NCs and perceived an increase (about 600%) in the strain-to-failure of PMMA NCs.248 The thermal behavior also indicated a decrease with less than 0.5 wt% Al2O3 NPs.249 Due to the chemical incompatibility with PMMA as an organic host matrix, Mahmoudian and coworkers modified Al2O3 NPs with in situ polymerization of methyl methacrylate on the surface of NPs.250 This modification improved the interaction of Al2O3 NPs with PMMA. With increasing the compatibility, the mechanical features of PMMA NCs were enhanced and it could be introduced as a useful option for biomedical utilization.


4.2.11. Al2O3 PNCs based on a polyimide (PI) matrix. 
PIs are a class of engineering plastic films with radiation resistance, good dielectric characteristics, and high-temperature resistance.251 Due to the great properties, for instance, the thermal, optical, and mechanical features, colorless PI films can be a substantial option in the electronics field, especially in high electric fields, automobiles, aerospace, and fabrication of hybrid materials.252–254 PIs are introduced as non-biodegradable materials, and also their safety in biological systems has not been appraised.255,256 In an in situ polymerization method, PI based-NC films were made with 2, 3, and 4 wt% Al2O3 NPs (PI/Al2O3 NCs).257 The presence of Al2O3 NPs diminished the threshold field of PI/Al2O3 NCs and also increased the conduction current density. The PI/Al2O3 NCs showed a trap energy level density higher than pristine PI. Another category of PI/Al2O3 NCs based on 4,4′-oxydianiline and pyromellitic dianhydride was reported by Hui et al.258 Based on the results, Al2O3 NPs were uniformly dispersed into the PI host matrix and presented improved thermal stability, electrical features, and also corona resistance to the PI/Al2O3 NCs. Liu and coworkers investigated the effect of different coupling agents on PI/Al2O3 NCs films.259,260 The obtained data proved that the PI/Al2O3 NCs with the APS modifier had the paramount mechanical and thermal features. On the other hand, PI/Al2O3 NCs with the 3-(N-styrylmethyl-2-aminoethylamino)-propyltrimethoxysilane hydrochloride modifier had the maximum electric breakdown strength.


4.2.12. Al2O3 PNCs based on a poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) matrix. 
PVDF, as the second-largest fluoropolymer in the world, is a semi-crystalline thermoplastic polymer with interesting technological and scientific properties.261,262 Some of the extraordinary properties of PVDF include remarkable chemical and physical resistance, thermal stability, easily controllable morphology, and piezoelectric and pyroelectric properties.263,264 Based on the diverse processing techniques, PVDF demonstrates five distinct crystalline polymorphs.265 PVDF is useful for biomedical applications such as smart scaffolds, biosensors, mechanical sensors, transducers, non-volatile memory devices, actuators, the membrane industry, and so on.265–269 Based on research, loading NPs into PVDF as a host matrix could improve the conductive performance and properties of the matrix.263 Due to the high dielectric strength and the large energy band gap of Al2O3 compared with ZnO or TiO2, He et al. designed and used a core–shell structure of BaTiO3@Al2O3 NPs in the PVDF host matrix to obtain high-k PNCs.270 For this purpose, BaTiO3 particles were capsulated by the Al2O3 shell layer in a facile and effective nucleation technique. The preparation routes of BaTiO3@Al2O3 core–shell NPs and also PVDF NCs are illustrated in Fig. 21A. According to the SEM micrograph of the pristine PVDF film and also the prepared NC films (Fig. 21B), the pristine film was dense without pores. There was good compatibility between the host PVDF matrix and fillers for below 10% BaTiO3@Al2O3 NPs, but there was an obvious accumulation of fillers for a high amount of NPs (for example with 15% and 20% filler). Here, the Al2O3 shell layer could effectively reduce the electric conduction, interfacial polarization, and electric-field concentration of the NC film. As a general result, it improved the dielectric breakdown strength and also diminished the energy storage loss. These types of materials can be valuable for high power systems.
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of (a) the chemical reaction process and the formation of BaTiO3@Al2O3 core–shell NPs, and (b) formation of BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NCs; and (B) cross-sectional SEM images of NC films: (a) pure PVDF, and (b) 5 vol%, (c) 10 vol%, (d) 15 vol%, and (e) 20 vol% BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NCs, and (f) a photo of the 10 vol% BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NC film. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
In an exploration, Zhang et al. applied the PVDF polymer and Al2O3 NPs to obtain Al2O3/PVDF NC membranes.271 For this purpose, Al2O3 NPs were first modified with the (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane coupling agent, and then diverse proportions of these NPs were incorporated into the PVDF host matrix. Based on the outcomes, the Al2O3 NPs had an effective role to improve the Al2O3/PVDF NC membrane performance, and they could be used as an ideal filter membrane for water remediation. Due to the hydrophobicity and low permeability of PVDF, its utilization for the membrane industry has been limited. To solve this problem, Razmgar et al. blended PVDF with PVA as a hydrophilic additive.272 They embedded Al2O3 NPs into the PVDF/PVA blended matrix to achieve PVDF/PVA/Al2O3 NC membranes, which could be useful for the removal of arsenic (As5+) from wastewater. Using PVA and also the presence of Al2O3 NPs in these NC membranes improved the porosity, hydrophilicity, permeability, and mechanical features. The obtained results indicated that the PVDF/PVA/Al2O3 NC membrane with 5 wt% Al2O3 NPs and a mass ratio of 96:4 had the best performance for removal of As5+ from aqueous solutions.


4.2.13. Al2O3 PNCs based on a hydrogel matrix. 
Hydrogels are a group of three-dimensional polymeric networks with the ability to absorb and keep water in their cross-linked networks.273,274 Based on the route of synthesis, hydrogels are classified into three categories: (i) homopolymers consisting of one kind of monomer, (ii) copolymers consisting of two kinds of monomer, and (iii) multipolymer hydrogels consisting of three or more kinds of monomer.273 Hydrogels are a group of biocompatible polymers, although some of them suffer from poor biocompatibility.275 Hydrogels are commonly utilized in diverse applications, especially for biomedical applications and drug delivery,276,277 wastewater treatment,278 agriculture,279 the food industry, and so on.280 In 2018, Xu et al. synthesized transparent and high strength NC hydrogels (AD gels) with Al2O3 NPs as cross-linking agents.281 In this process, a polymer host matrix was prepared in the copolymerization of N,N-dimethylacrylamide and acrylic acid monomers. In Fig. 22, the preparation route, SEM image, and an image of the prepared hydrogel under different deformations are illustrated.
 Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the preparation of AD gels; (b) typical SEM image of AD gels; and (c) digital photos of AD gels under different deformations. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Due to the strong chelation reactions between the NPs and the matrix, these NCs displayed excellent mechanical properties and could endure different deformations without breaking. Therefore, they may be utilized in diverse load-bearing systems.

5. Applications of Al2O3 NPs
As mentioned before, due to the unique properties of Al2O3 NPs, they have many different applications in various areas like water remediation,52,282,283 biomedical applications,55,58,59 catalysts,46 and so on. Some of these significant uses are summarized in Table 1:
Table 1 A brief summary of diverse applications of Al2O3 NPs




Materials
Synthesis method
Applications
More explanation
Ref.




γ-Al2O3 NPs
Green synthesis using aluminum foil waste
Acid-catalyzed reactions
Stronger acidity, larger pore volume, and higher surface area in comparison with commercially prepared γ-Al2O3

46



α-Al2O3 and γ-Al2O3 NPs
Sol–gel process without toxic materials
Photodegradation of reactive yellow 145 and direct black 122
Photocatalytic activity of α-Al2O3 NPs better than γ-Al2O3 NPs

52



Al2O3 NPs
Microwave-assisted green synthesis using leaf extract of lemon grass
Antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Cost-effective, non-toxic, eco-friendly, and strong antibacterial activity

55



α-Al2O3 NPs
Low temperature, and cost-effective solution combustion method
Antibacterial agent
Highest antibacterial activity for Staphylococcus aureus

57



Al2O3 NPs
—
Increasing uptake of ARGs
Plasmid-mediated transformation of ARGs

58



Al2O3 NPs
Green synthesis using lemongrass leaf extract of Cymbopogon citratus
Anticandidal agents for sustained controlled drug delivery in medical implants
Stopping Candida spp growth at a high concentration of Al2O3 NPs (1500 μg ml−1)

59





Al2O3 NPs with high surface energies, large surface area, and accessibility of the functional groups for binding can be utilized for the adsorption of several kinds of pollutants and purification of water.284 Ni2+ is known as a nonbiodegradable, toxic, and environmental pollutant; therefore, Srivastava et al. considered the removal of Ni2+ using Al2O3 NPs.282 In this study, Al2O3 NPs were synthesized in a sol–gel process with a porosity of 0.51 and a surface area of 79 m2 g−1. The kinetic data of this adsorption was fitted with a pseudo-second-order model and the suitability of nano-adsorbent Al2O3 for the removal of Ni2+ was verified by different kinds of isotherms such as Freundlich, Langmuir, Temkin and Pyzhev, and Dubinin–Radushkevich. In another study, single and binary adsorption of Cu2+ and Ni2+ was done using γ-Al2O3 NPs, which was fitted with the Freundlich isotherm.283 The maximum adsorption of Cu2+ and Ni2+ was shown at pH = 5 and 6, respectively.
Fluoride is a necessary element for advancing growth and preserving healthy teeth and bones and plays an important role in biological and chemical processes.285,286 The optimal range of fluoride is between 0.5 and 1.0 mg L−1; however, a higher range is a major inorganic pollutant in water.287 Tangsir et al. synthesized Al2O3 NPs through the flame spray pyrolysis process for the defluoridation of aqueous solutions.285 The best pH for this removal was 5.56 and followed the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Also, the data for defluoridation with the obtained Al2O3 NPs were consistent with the Sips isotherm model. These NPs showed a maximum removal capacity of fluoride of about 10 mg g−1. As a result, the presence of nitrate and chloride ions did not have a noteworthy effect on adsorption, although there was a reduction of adsorption in the presence of phosphate ions.
Cr6+ is one of the beneficial elements in the industry for mining, pigments, fertilizers, tanning, metallurgy, and electroplating. On the other side, Cr6+ is a serious and highly toxic contaminant that is 500 times more poisonous and carcinogenic than Cr3+. According to the US Environmental Protection Agency, the maximum level of Cr6+ is 0.05 mg L−1 in wastewater.288–292 Sharma et al. used Al2O3 NPs achieved by the sol–gel technique in a low-cost procedure for the removal of Cr6+ from aqueous solutions.293 This adsorption process was exothermic in nature and higher removal occurred in the acidic range (pH = 2.0). Due to the low activation energy, this adsorption was physical adsorption and was fitted with the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. As a general result, Al2O3 NPs can act as a good absorbent material to absorb Cr6+ from aqueous solutions.
Cd2+ and Pb2+ are other groups of hazardous environmental pollutants. These heavy metal ions have toxic effects on human health and easily penetrate organisms via the food chain.294 In 2018, Al2O3 NPs were synthesized in a modified sol–gel process by means of CA and triethanolamine as a surfactant and chelating agent, respectively.295 The optimum pH was 5.0 with the maximum adsorption. The optimum contact times for the removal of Cd2+ and Pb2+ were 30 and 20 min, respectively. The appropriate isotherm model for this process was the Freundlich isotherm and the adsorption capacity for Cd2+ and Pb2+ was 17 and 48 mg g−1, respectively. This material can be effectively reused with a high level of adsorption three times.
For the first time, γ-Al2O3 nanostructures with different morphologies were fabricated in a simple template-free hydrothermal process using aluminum sources like AlCl3, Al2(SO4)3, and Al(NO3)3.296 The obtained morphologies were hollow core–shell, melon-like nanoflake assemblies, hollow microspheres, irregular nanoflake assemblies, and flower-like ellipsoids. The adsorption of these nanostructures was tested toward CO2 and phenol. The highest adsorption capacity of phenol (28 mg g−1) was achieved for the fabricated γ-Al2O3 hollow core–shell using the Al2(SO4)3 source, although the synthesized γ-Al2O3 from Al(NO3)3 and AlCl3 with smaller pore sizes was very effective for CO2 adsorption.
In another investigation, the application of Al2O3 NPs with a size of 25 nm was studied in azo dye decolorization and the maximum amount of decolorization was about 36% for 30 mg of Al2O3 NPs and 25 mg of dye.297
Rashad investigated the effect of Al2O3 NPs and some other nanomaterials on the properties of cementitious materials for the civil engineering field.298 Incorporation of Al2O3 NPs into the cementitious matrix improved the abrasion resistance and diminished the water absorption. Also, incorporation of 0.5–3% Al2O3 NPs into the concrete matrix amplified the elastic modulus, compressive strength, flexural strength, and splitting tensile strength. In 2017, the impact of Al2O3 NPs on some characteristics of bauxite self-flowing low-cement castables was considered.299 Also, in other research, Al2O3 and some other NPs were used as antibacterial cement admixtures in the fabrication of cement-based composites for construction of materials (Fig. 23).300
 Fig. 23  Schematic process of the nanomaterial dispersing method commonly used in cement-based composite preparation.300 
Recently, solar energy, as a renewable source of energy, has attracted a lot of considerations and also nanofluids have massive applications in this field.301 Hu et al. examined the role of Al2O3 NP dispersion in the specific heat capacity of molten salts, as thermal storage materials or heat transfer fluids, for solar power plants.302 Also, these NPs are advantageous in flat plate PV/T collectors for the development of the performance.303 Because of the higher heat storage capacity and some other characteristics, Li's group paid attention to CaCl2·6H2O/γ-Al2O3 NC phase-change materials in energy storage technology.304
Nanofluids are a suspension of NPs in different fluids, for example, water, motor oils, ethylene glycol, etc.305 In this field, Al2O3 nanofluid as an absorbing medium ameliorated the flat plate solar collector efficiency and the thermal properties of the working fluid.306 Bhattad et al. proposed that brine-based Al2O3 hybrid nanofluids can be good candidates as secondary refrigerants for low-temperature applications.307 In addition, CNT/Al2O3 hybrid nanofluids could be applied for heat transfer applications.308
Due to the potential for application in the environmental remediation of porous micro- and nanomaterials, Zhou and co-workers prepared new rattle type carbon–Al2O3 core–shell spheres.309 These spheres were synthesized in a one-pot hydrothermal method using metal salt and glucose. With a changeable space between the core and shell, the thickness of the Al2O3 shell and diameter of the carbon core were about 80 and 200 nm, respectively. The XRD patterns illustrated a decrease in Al2O3 peak intensity with enhancing the amount of carbon and also inhibiting the crystallization of Al2O3 using a high amount of glucose. The EDX analysis showed that the most abundant element of these structures was carbon. The obtained structures with a high surface area displayed a powerful performance in many applications, especially for the adsorption and separation of Orange-II dye from water with a maximum capacity of approximately 210 mg g−1. This anionic dye was adsorbed on the carbon–Al2O3 core–shell via the electrostatic attraction between Al2O3 as a shell and sulfonic acid groups of the dye. The adsorption kinetic data obeyed the pseudo-second-order model. In another study, Basu and co-workers introduced Ag–Al2O3@Fe2O3 core–shell NPs, an effective heterogeneous catalyst, for the preparation of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles in a click reaction.310
In addition to the mentioned applications, Al2O3 NPs are useful in a wide range of usages, such as varnishes, cosmetics, textile impregnation, the automotive, electrical, and ceramic industry, abrasive materials, heterogeneous catalysis, absorbents, biomaterials, as an intermediate in pharmaceutical production, etc.18,305,311–314 Welding filler containing Al2O3 NPs with a size of 30 nm was very beneficial in the welding zone.315 Al2O3 NPs were used for the modification of glassy-carbon electrode surfaces and the electrocatalytic oxidation of some phenolic compounds.312 Pal and Ghosh used Al2O3 NPs in the fabrication of a kind of plasticized solid polymer electrolyte for enhancing the ionic conductivity.316 Al2O3 with ZrO2 NPs could be used for improving the toughness of soda-lime glass, a glass container.317 Sintered γ-Al2O3 NPs could be an adsorbent for the removal of organic chlorides from the naphtha fraction of contaminated crude oil.318 Al2O3 and ZrO2 NPs have been used in altering dolomite rock wettability.319 The corrosion resistance of steel coated by an alkyd resin could be improved using Al2O3 NPs as a reinforcement.320 Doped Bi1.65Pb0.35Sr2Ca2Cu3Oy ceramic superconductors illustrated the best transport characteristic after doping α-Al2O3 NPs.321 Also, Al2O3 NPs effectively entered into the YBa2Cu3O7−δ superconductor in an auto-combustion reaction.322 It was proposed that Fe-doped Al2O3 NPs with good conductivity and optical characteristics can be an appropriate ceramic nanopigment.323 A research group reported Al2O3 NPs as a new kind of saturable absorber for the preparation of passively Q-switched erbium-doped fiber lasers.324 Kim et al. improved the mechanical or/and chemical stability of DNA nanostructure templates by a nanometer-thin layer of Al2O3.325 It was for lithography patterning and also showed resistance to UV/O3 oxidation. Amist et al. studied the role of Al3+ and Al2O3 NPs in the biochemical parameters and growth of cabbage seedlings.326 Despite the toxicity of Al2O3 NPs for plants and the environment, their low concentration could stimulate plant growth. There was not any cytotoxic effect for Al2O3 NPs at a concentration up to 0.5 mM.327 Wang et al. fabricated and applied a type of modified sensitive sensor.328 This sensor was modified with MWNT/Al2O3/poly-L-lysine NCs for determination of clinical 17β-estradiol in the blood of pregnant women. In this research, Al2O3 NPs were applied as a favorable catalyst for the oxidation of compounds. In addition, using Al2O3 NPs has been offered as an appropriate technique for the betterment of the performance in a methyl ester of neem oil-fuel for diesel engines.329 Due to the importance of providing fresh water for human life, Setiawan et al. presented inorganic ceramic membranes prepared from rod structures γ-Al2O3 and zeolite NPs for desalination with a total pore volume of 0.10 and 0.80 cm3 g−1, respectively.330 The effect of Al2O3 NPs on some features of Ni/Al2O3 NC coatings331 and ultrafine-grain Al-based composites332 was studied by Góral et al. and Ivanov et al., respectively. Chitosan as a bio-template was used in a route of synthesis of Al2O3 NPs as a catalyst for CO2 reforming of methane.333 Despite all of the important applications, Al2O3 NPs have attracted a lot of attention as a major class of functional particulate fillers to improve the properties of various materials,334 especially polymer matrixes, due to the high refractive index, high thermal conductivity, no light absorption in the visible range and other properties.335
5.1. Applications of modified Al2O3 NPs

5.1.1. Dispersion in organic solvents and polymeric matrixes. 
Surface modification with chemical treatments such as the absorption of coupling agents is a suitable way to improve the dispersion stability of various NPs in liquid media or a polymeric matrix and NCs.336 The behavior of modified Al2O3 NPs is very different within organic solvents and polymer or biopolymer matrixes, compared to the unmodified Al2O3 NPs. The modified Al2O3 NPs relatively display better dispersion in both media.337 The mechanical and other properties of polymeric composites can be enhanced by the incorporation of well-dispersed Al2O3 NPs. In addition, good dispersion can enhance the compatibility in polymeric matrixes.335
As mentioned, surface treatment and consequently the appropriate interaction of NPs with the matrix are a critical aspect of polymeric NCs. Kockmann et al. introduced a two-step modification approach for different NPs, for instance, Al2O3 NPs.338 In the first step APTES was covalently attached (Fig. 24) to the surface of Al2O3 NPs, and then amide bonds were formed between the amino functional groups in the APTES and different carboxylic acids. According to the results, for a small ratio of APTES/Al2O3 NPs, the nitrogen and carbon contents of the modified NPs increased approximately linearly with the APTES content and the slope dwindled for higher ratios of APTES/Al2O3 NPs. At a high content of the modifier, the surface was completely covered with silane, and no coupling exceeding monomolecular coverage happened. This modification could improve the properties of PNCs with the interaction between the NPs and their vicinity (polymeric matrix).
 Fig. 24  Scheme of the two-step modification strategy.338 
In an investigation by Roy and Potiyaraj, Al2O3 NPs were modified with three kinds of silane modifiers: APTES, bis[3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl]tetrasulfide (TESPT), and triethoxy(octyl)silane (OCTEOS).339 These NPs were embedded into natural rubber NCs, and then the effect of these modifiers with diverse functional groups was examined. Based on the outcomes, after surface modification, the agglomeration of NPs reduced. It also improved the mechanical and thermal properties and cross-link density of the NCs.
Pauly and others enhanced the stability, compatibility, and interaction of Al2O3 NPs through modification with alkylphosphonic acids.340,341 For this study, five different kinds of alkylphosphonic acids were grafted onto Al2O3-coated silica NPs. The hydrophobicity of alkylphosphonic acids had an impact on the accumulation of NPs, and higher hydrophobicity reduced the tendency of accumulation of NPs. These modified Al2O3-coated silica NPs were embedded into the poly(ethylacrylate) matrix for the fabrication of poly(ethylacrylate) NCs.
Poly(dopamine) (PDA) is another excellent modifier with potential for strong adhesion to all kinds of substances.342 It could functionalize the surface of Al2O3 NPs (Al2O3–PDA NPs) (Fig. 25) and greatly improved some important features of the nitrile rubber (NBR) matrix such as the thermal conductivity, and mechanical and dielectric properties. NBR is a good choice as a polymeric matrix because of its good processability, high dielectric constant, and some other features. The strong interface bonding force (hydrogen bond) between hydroxyl groups on Al2O3–PDA NPs and –CN groups on nitrile rubber chains could reduce the interfacial thermal resistance and improved the thermal conductivity of the prepared composites. With the better interfacial interaction between acrylonitrile groups in the NBR and catechol groups in the Al2O3–PDA NPs, the dispersion of functionalized NPs was better than neat Al2O3 NPs in the NBR matrix. Al2O3–PDA/NBR NCs with these properties could be an excellent choice in the thermal conductivity field.
 Fig. 25  Schematic diagram illustrating of preparation process of the Al2O3–PDA/NBR composite. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 342 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Liu and coworkers revealed a green and easy approach to prevent the accumulation of Al2O3 NPs in organic matrixes.343 They used the oleic acid (OA) modifier for treatment of the surface. The results showed an increase in the modification efficiency with increasing the chain length of the fatty acid. The modifier largely reduced the accumulation, without any changes in the crystallinity of the NPs. This method was performed only in water and displayed a modification efficiency higher than the water–ethanol way. This method can be used for other MO NPs, containing ZrO2, TiO2 and many more. In other work, OA (10.5%) and trimethoxyvinylsilane (TMVS) (8.0%) were grafted onto Al2O3 NPs.344 The impact of the two modifiers was determined in butyl acrylate, methyl methacrylate, and styrene media and also acetone, hexane, and ethanol solvents. Surface modification with OA and TMVS demonstrated the highest dispersion of NPs in n-hexane and acetone, respectively. Also, a stable dispersion of modified Al2O3 NPs was formed in methyl methacrylate and butyl acrylate media by the OA modifier and in styrene media by TMVS.
Ghaemi et al. indicated the consequence of coating or decoration of Al2O3 NPs for the fabrication of a polysulfone membrane.345 In this novel way, Al2O3 NPs were decorated with hydrophilic poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) (Fig. 26a) via the thermal polymerization technique. According to Fig. 26b, the decorated-Al2O3 exhibited a stable dispersion in water solvent even after a day, compared to the undecorated Al2O3 NPs. It had a positive effect on some of the membrane characteristics and embedding 0.25 wt% decorated-Al2O3 NPs exhibited noteworthy reusability and permanency during filtration.
 Fig. 26  Scheme of PAA conjugation with the Al2O3 surface (a) and status of the sonicated NPs in water during different times (b); (A) PAA decorated Al2O3, and (B) raw Al2O3. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 345 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 


5.1.2. Removal of heavy metal ions, organic compounds, and dyes. 
Today, water pollution by toxic heavy metals and finding an appropriate way to solve this problem is a global dilemma. NPs have well-defined pore sizes, high pore volume, high adsorption capacity, and high surface areas.346 Therefore, they are a good candidate and can be applied for the elimination of metal ions. The functionalization of NPs can raise their affinity to diverse metal ions and also ameliorate their selectivity for the elimination of the target metal ions.347 For example, the treatment of nano-sized MOs with surfactants can enhance their adsorptive tendency toward numerous organic pollutants. In this category, the functionalization of Al2O3 NPs with certain functional groups improves the sorption of heavy metal ions onto the Al2O3 NPs. With the modification of Al2O3 NPs, the mechanism of removal is changed, and the target metals are removed by adsorption onto the Al2O3 NPs and also with a surface attraction/chemical bonding interaction on the added chemicals.348
In this field, Hassanpoor et al. described an efficient technique for the removal and determination of trace amounts of arsenic.349 Because γ-Al2O3 NPs are more active in adsorption than α-Al2O3 NPs, the surface of γ-Al2O3 NPs was functionalized with 3,3′-bis-(3-triethoxysilylpropyl)-2,2′-dithioxo [5,5′] bithiazolidinylidene-4,4′-dione as a ligand. The XRD pattern of the NPs showed a nanocrystalline nature, and the cubic structure of the γ-Al2O3 NPs and the results of FTIR proved the grafting of the ligand onto the NPs. By SEM and TEM analyses, the average sizes of the pure NPs and functionalized NPs were estimated to be about 23 and 35 nm, respectively. The pH and some other parameters were optimized, and it indicated that the selectivity of As species was related to choosing specific conditions.
In a study, humic acid, 1,5-diphenyl cabazon (organic chemical compound), and extract of green walnut shell were used for the modification of Al2O3 NPs as natural organic matter. These modifiers have many functional groups like aromatic and aliphatic units and show a high complex capacity with diverse metal ions. In this investigation, it was indicated that the metal adsorption capacity of Al2O3 NPs with 1,5-diphenyl cabazon as a modifier was higher than the others.350 Khan et al. applied surface modification with humic acid as a promising way to remove Cu2+ and Ni2+ from aqueous solution.351 In other work, APTES as another modifier was used for the elimination of Cu2+ from water by polyethersulfone (PES) membranes.352 Different amounts of modified Al2O3 NPs (APTES–Al2O3 NPs) were embedded into the PES to prepare M0 (0 wt%), M3 (3 wt%), M4 (4 wt%), and M5 (5 wt%) membranes. This embedding caused an increase in the hydrophilicity, porosity, water permeation, thermal stability, and Tg of the PES membranes. In this process, the modified NPs acted as active sites and adsorbed Cu2+. The adsorption of Cu2+ was fitted with the Freundlich model and the highest rejection of Cu2+ was for a membrane with 4 wt% APTES–Al2O3 NPs as an additive. Based on the higher magnification SEM micrograph (Fig. 27a), appropriate dispersion of Al2O3 NPs into the membrane was proved and it could increase the adsorption of Cu2+. However, with an increasing amount of loading of Al2O3 NPs, the accumulation of NPs was observed (Fig. 27b), some pores in the structure of the membrane were blocked, and the available surface area was reduced.
 Fig. 27  Higher magnification SEM cross-sectional image of (a) the M4 membrane showing incorporation of the nanoparticles in the polymer matrix, and (b) M5 showing the agglomeration of nanoparticles.352 
In research by Zolgharnein et al., SDS as an anionic surfactant has modified γ-Al2O3 NPs to remove two cationic dyes.60 The modified γ-Al2O3 NPs removed Crystal Violet and Brilliant Green from aqueous single and binary mixtures. The adsorption kinetics obeyed the pseudo-second-order isotherm, and optimum conditions were acquired as follows: the initial concentration of Crystal Violet = 170 mg L−1, the initial concentration of Brilliant Green = 215 mg L−1, sorbent amount = 0.036 g, and contact time = 50 min. Chu et al. examined SDS-modified Al2O3 NPs to remove Rhodamine B through the adsorption process.353 With this adsorbent, a high removal efficiency of Rhodamine B as a cationic dye was obtained of about 100%, and it was also higher than 86% after four regeneration cycles. In other research, 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine (DNPH) modified the surface of SDS coated-γ-Al2O3 NPs (DNPH-SDS-γ-Al2O3 NPs).354 It was used to remove the Alizarin Yellow R anionic dye and Methylene Blue cationic dye with electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. The adsorption was about 95.6% and 65.6% for the anionic and cationic dye, respectively, with 0.05 g of the DNPH-SDS-γ-Al2O3 NPs in 60 min. The behavior of this removal was described by the Langmuir isotherm with second-order kinetics.
Nowadays, there is a great concern in wastewater treatment about phenol and its derivatives due to the unpleasant odor, toxicity in the environment, and irreparable effects on human health.355,356 So, the elimination of this pollutant from the environment is necessary. Aazza et al. modified γ-Al2O3 NPs with hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (HDTMA) to prepare HDTMA+/Al2O3 NPs.357 The pure γ-Al2O3 NPs and HDTMA+/Al2O3 NPs were tested to remove metha-nitrophenol from aqueous solutions. The removal efficiency of this pollutant was improved with HDTMA+/Al2O3 NPs compared to the pure γ-Al2O3 NPs. According to the thermodynamic study, this process was endothermic in nature.
Nitro-compounds are known as another serious concern for researchers.358 In 2017, Mahmoud and co-workers modified the surface of γ-Al2O3 NPs with N-cetyl-N,N,N-trimethyl ammonium bromide as a cationic surfactant.359 These modified NPs were used to eliminate nitro-compounds such as 2-nitrobenzoic acid and 4-nitrobenzoic acid from water solution and other samples. γ-Al2O3 NPs are hydrophilic in nature and also display less affinity and low adsorption capacity for hydrophobic compounds. Thus, in this investigation, the attachment of the modifier onto the γ-Al2O3 NPs increased the hydrocarbon phase and the affinity of the sorbent by hydrophobic interactions of the micelles with the organic pollutants.


5.1.3. Biomedical applications. 
Like other MOs such as TiO2, ZnO, Fe3O4, Ag, and so on, Al2O3 NPs are of great interest in biomedical and biotechnology applications. Due to the toxic effects on cancer cells, Al2O3 NPs could be a useful choice in cancer therapy. For example, Rajan et al. used poly(γ-glutamic acid) (γ-PGA) to functionalize Al2O3 NPs (PGA–Al2O3 NPs).360 The required Al2O3 NPs were synthesized by precipitation of aluminum sulfate and sonicated with deionized water for 30 min. A solution of PGA was added to the prepared sample in the previous step. It was stirred, heated, centrifuged, and washed. According to Scherrer's equation, the particle size was estimated at about 4.5 nm for PGA–Al2O3 NPs. On the other hand, the histogram chart of TEM images illustrated a particle size of PGA–Al2O3 NPs of about 6.7 nm. The PGA–Al2O3 NPs could use for appraisal of the cytotoxicity toward human prostate cancer cells and protein adsorption capacity applying lysozyme and bovine serum albumin proteins. The PGA–Al2O3 NPs showed effective adsorption to positively-charged lysozyme, but the pure Al2O3 NPs displayed adsorption to negatively-charged bovine serum albumin. Therefore, they have been introduced as a favorable antibacterial agent.
Gao et al. applied hyaluronic acid (HA) for the functionalization of mesoporous hollow Al2O3 NPs as carrier materials for liver cancer therapy.361 For this purpose, they first prepared mesoporous carbon hollow nanospheres and then achieved Al2O3 NPs. These NPs were coated with HA, and the paclitaxel drug was loaded into the obtained carriers. Based on in vitro assays, the HA-functionalized NPs illustrated a high cellular uptake and a better antitumor effect than the unfunctionalized NPs.
In a successful strategy, ubiquitinated proteins from tumor cells were augmented with functionalized α-Al2O3 NPs.362 The α-Al2O3 NPs could covalently link to the ubiquitin binding protein (Vx3) and indicated potential for this purpose. Herein, the α-Al2O3 NPs acted as the only licensed helper in clinical uses and a carrier and also Vx3 acted as a linker. It seems to be a promising way for advances in therapeutic cancer vaccines.


5.1.4. Miscellaneous applications. 
In heat transfer procedures, thermal oils have potential application as cooling media, so Ilyas et al. ameliorated the thermal properties of oil-based nanofluids by utilization of a suitable dispersion of functionalized Al2O3 NPs.363 In this work, Al2O3 NPs were functionalized and stabilized with OA as a surfactant, which could help to diminish the attractive forces among Al2O3 NPs. Also, Al2O3 nanofluids were prepared in a two-step process and weight range of 0.5–3 wt%. The samples were sonicated using an ultrasonic homogenizer for 25 min with 70% power to make a better dispersion. The XRD pattern did not show any obvious alteration in the crystallinity of the Al2O3 NPs and the EDX test proved the high purity of the Al2O3 NPs and the carboxylic group as a functional agent on the surface of the NPs. Due to the non-polar behavior of functionalized Al2O3 NPs, these NPs were dispersed with high stability in non-polar oil and showed good thermal conductivity.
The surface of Al2O3 NPs was functionalized with silane groups for utilization in hybrid electrolytes by Dordevic et al.364 It could be a suggestion to enhance the battery safety and electrochemical performances in high-voltage lithium-ion batteries. Here, 5 and 10 wt% functionalized Al2O3 NPs were incorporated into the liquid electrolyte, and an improvement was observed in their flame retardancy. The durable interaction between the functionalized Al2O3 NPs and the anions has led to fast transportation of lithium ions and amended the rated capacity and cycling stability of lithium-ion batteries.
In the organic electronics field, organic field-effect transistors are known as cornerstones and platforms for semiconducting materials. In this regard, silane-terminated polystyrene (PS) was grafted to the Al2O3 NP surface for the preparation of a dielectric layer (Al2O3–PS).365 Herein, Kim et al. prepared Al2O3–PS core–shell NPs from organic solvents with a PS-grafting density of about 0.13 molecules nm−2. By blending these NPs with the polymer, the dielectric constant of the films could be obtained from 2.59 to 7.79.
A novel superhydrophobic surface was presented with hydrophilic Al2O3 NPs and two siloxane monomers by Yu et al.366 The surface of the NPs was treated with diethoxydimethylsilane and methyltriethoxysilane and then compared with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane treated-Al2O3 NPs. The advantage of this system was to avoid using hazardous fluorine-containing compounds only with simple CH3 chains. It was also reported that this surface showed the potential for the separation of oil/water mixtures.

5.2. Applications of Al2O3 PNCs
As mentioned in detail in previous sections, after the incorporation of Al2O3 NPs into natural or man-made polymers, synergetic effects were observed and Al2O3 PNCs indicated various applications. Some of these uses are listed in Table 2.
Table 2 A brief summary of diverse applications of Al2O3 PNCs




Materials
Synthesis method
Applications
Ref.




Al2O3 NP-doped chitosan/calcium aluminosilicate
Sol gel synthesis
Support for CO2 sensor

96



Chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide NCs
—
Methyl orange removal

97



Chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide composite nanofibers
Electrospinning process
Removal of phosphate and nitrate anions

98



Cu–chitosan/Al2O3 NCs
Grafting a Cu(II)-imprinted polymer onto the surface of Al2O3 NPs
Selective removal of Cu2+, As3+, and aromatic amines

99–101



Xanthated chitosan–Al2O3@SiO2 NC
—
Removal of Cr6+

102



Guar gum/Al2O3 NCs
Sol–gel method
Photocatalytic degradation of malachite green dye

111



Cellulose acetate/KH-570–Al2O3 NCs
—
Insulation paper

105



Kefiran/Al2O3 NC films
Casting technique
Food packaging technology

116



PLA/Al2O3 NC
Hydrothermal procedure
Nanoscaffolds as dental resins

120



Au/PANI/γ-Al2O3

In situ electropolymerization
Mediated biosensor to detect vitamin E

215



PVDF/BaTiO3@Al2O3 NCs
Solution casting method
Dielectric materials

270



Al2O3/PVDF NCs
Electrospinning process
Filter membrane for water remediation

271



PVDF/PVA/Al2O3 NC
Casting solution
Filter membrane for As5+ removal

272





6. Conclusions
Nanotechnology and subsequently NCs opened up a new perspective for researchers’ work. Among diverse nanoscale materials (nanoclays, nanotubes, MO NPs, etc.), Al2O3 NPs are one of the useful categories of NPs with electrical insulation, thermal conductivity, strength, stiffness, etc. On the other side, numerous green fabrication routes and biosafe materials were announced for the preparation of this valuable NP, because of the environmental issues. Surface modification is an effective method for increasing the effectiveness of Al2O3 NPs in various media and special applications. Moreover, the presence of NPs alongside polymers or biopolymers offers unique features and outstanding applications. The widespread usages and the importance of this topic led us to study in this area. In this overview, it has been endeavored to briefly investigate (i) a history of Al2O3 NPs including their properties and green synthesis methods, (ii) modification and functionalization, (iii) their hybridization with chitosan, cellulose, guar gum, kefiran, and PLA as natural host matrixes and epoxy, LDPE, PVA, PAI, PANI, PCL, PVC, PMMA, PI, and so on as common man-made polymer host matrixes, and (iv) diverse applications. It is noteworthy that it has not been possible here to cover all of the previous studies on this subject.
Abbreviations

Al2O3Alumina
ARGsAntibiotic resistance genes
AAAscorbic acid
APTES3-Aminopropyltriethoxysilane
APTMS3-Aminopropyltrimethoxysilane
APSγ Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane
Bisphenol ABis(4-hydroxy phenylene)-2,2 propane
BABenzoic acid
CACitric acid
CNTCarbon nanotube
DSCDifferential scanning calorimetry
DGEBADiglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DNPH2,4-Dinitrophenyl hydrazine
EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray
e-BMIEther-linked bismaleimide
ETDSEpoxy terminated poly(dimethylsiloxane)
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FESEMField emission scanning electron microscopy

F
v
Free volume

T
g
Glass transition temperature
KH-560Glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane
GFRPGlass fiber-reinforced polymer
GPS3-Glycidoxypropylmethoxysilane
GPTMS3-Glycidyloxypropyltrimethoxysilane
HBPHyperbranched aromatic polyamide
HDTMAHexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide
HVDCHigh voltage direct current
HR-TEMHigh resolution-TEM
LDPELow-density polyethylene
ILSSLaminar shear strength
MOsMetallic oxides
C1Methyltrimethoxysilane
MWCNTMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
MAMaleic acid
KH5703-Methacryloxypropyltrimethoxy
NCsNanocomposites
NPsNanoparticles
NBRNitrile rubber
C8Octyltriethoxysilane
C18Octadecyltrimethoxysilane
OAOleic acid
PNCsPolymer-based NCs
PDAPoly(dopamine)
PAAPoly(acrylic acid)
PESPolyethersulfone
γ-PGAPoly(γ-glutamic acid)
PVAPoly(vinyl alcohol)
PVPPoly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
PANIPolyaniline
PANI–GOPANI–graphene oxide
PEPolyethylene
PLMAPoly(lauryl methacrylate)
PTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PBAPoly(butyl acrylate)
PDPartial discharge
PAAMPolyacrylamide
PSPolystyrene
PCLPoly(caprolactone)
PLAPoly(lactic acid)
PAIPoly(amide-imide)
PPPolypropylene
PVCPoly(vinyl chloride)
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PIPolyimide
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
SDSSodium dodecyl sulfate
SEMScanning electron microscopy
TGDDMTetraglycidyl-4,4′-diaminodiphenylmethane
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TMVSTrimethoxyvinylsilane
UV/VisUltraviolet-visible
Vx3Ubiquitin binding protein
UTSUltimate tensile strength
UVUltraviolet
XRDX-ray diffraction

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
In this research, we acknowledge the financial support of the Research Affairs Division Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, I. R. Iran, and the National Elite Foundation (NEF), Tehran, I. R. Iran. We are grateful to the Center of Excellence in Sensors and Green Chemistry Research (IUT), Isfahan, I. R. Iran. In addition, we sincerely extend our appreciation to Dr V. Behranvand, Dr M. Hatami, Dr F. Tabesh, Dr E. Khadem, Ms E. Azadi, Ms M. Naghdi, and Dr F. Azimi for their valuable experiences and their help.
References

          S. Mallakpour and L. Khodadadzadeh, in Biodegradable and Biocompatible Polymer Composites, ed. N. Shimpi, Elsevier, Woodhead Publishing, Duxford, United Kingdom,  2018, pp. 187–221 Search PubMed.
P. H. C. Camargo, K. G. Satyanarayana and F. Wypych, Mater. Res., 2009, 12, 1–39 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, P. Chen, X. Zeng, H. Jiang, F. Meng, X. Li, T. Wang, G. Zeng, L. Liu, H. Shu and X. Luo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 381, 120954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hakimi, M. Morvaridi, H. A. Hosseini and P. Alimard, Polyhedron, 2019, 170, 523–529 CrossRef CAS .
K. Munir, C. Wen and Y. Li, J. Magnesium Alloys, 2020, 8, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
E. Omanović-Mikličanin, A. Badnjevi, A. Kazlagi and M. Hajlovac, Health Technol., 2019, 10, 51–59 CrossRef .
K. Hu, D. D. Kulkarni, I. Choi and V. V. Tsukruk, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1934–1972 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and F. Zeraatpisheh, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2014, 9, 1035–1050 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Y. Godovsky, Biopolymers·PVA Hydrogels, in Anionic Polymerisation Nanocomposites,  2000, vol. 153, pp. 163–205 Search PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and M. Hatami, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 90, 273–300 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pavoski, R. Kalikoski, G. Souza, L. F. W. Brum, C. dos Santos, A. Abo Markeb, J. H. Z. dos Santos, X. Font, I. Dell’Erba and G. B. Galland, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 106, 92–101 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, Y. Liu, J. Wang, H. Niu, Z. Yuan, S. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. Cao, Y. Yin, N. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Xing, W. Xu and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25683–25688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 302, 344–367 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, S. Wu and J. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3893–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. George and H. Ishida, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 86, 1–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and E. Nikkhoo, Adv. Powder Technol., 2014, 25, 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mittal, V. Dhand, K. Y. Rhee, S. J. Park and W. R. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 21, 11–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 51, 74–93 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dass, S. R. Chauhan and B. Gaur, Part. Sci. Technol., 2017, 35, 589–606 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, Q. Wang and T. Wang, Tribol. Int., 2021, 153, 106588 CrossRef CAS .
R. Babaei-Sati, J. Basiri Parsa and M. Vakili-Azghandi, Synth. Met., 2019, 247, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Riyadh, K. D. Khalil and A. H. Bashal, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Iqbal, Y. Zhu, F. Wang, F. Zhang, W. Chen, T. Wu and Y. Du, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 145, 686–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Zhu, Y. Liu, S. Sweeney and S. Chen, Reference Module in Chemistry, Molecular Sciences and Chemical Engineering, Elsevier,  2017, vol. 1, pp. 711–724 Search PubMed .

          K. Mosnáčková, J. Kollár, Y.-S. Huang, C.-F. Huang and J. Mosnáček, in Polymer Composites with Functionalized Nanoparticles, ed. K. Pielichowski and T. M. Majka, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2019, pp. 1–46 Search PubMed.

          S. Mallakpour and N. Nouruzi, in Biodegradable and Biocompatible Polymer Composites, Elsevier, Woodhead Publishing, Duxford, United Kingdom,  2018, pp. 223–263 Search PubMed .

          S. Mallakpour and V. Behranvand, in Green polymer composites technology: properties and applications, ed. Inamuddin, Taylor & Francis, London, New York,  2017, pp. 381–396 Search PubMed.
A. Amirsalari and S. Farjami Shayesteh, Superlattices Microstruct., 2015, 82, 507–524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, R. K. Gautam, A. Jaiswal, M. C. Chattopadhyaya and Y. C. Sharma, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14425–14440 RSC .
C. Y. Chee, N. L. Song, L. C. Abdllah, T. S. Y. Choong, A. Ibrahim and T. R. Chantara, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 215978 CrossRef .
C. Aktas, J. Lee, M. M. Míro, A. Barnoush and M. Veith, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 278, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shirai, H. Watanabe, M. Fuji and M. Takahashi, Annu. Rep. Ceram. Res. Lab., Nagoya Inst. Technol., 2009, 9, 23–31 Search PubMed .
V. Piriyawong, V. Thongpool, P. Asanithi and P. Limsuwan, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 1–7 CrossRef .
M. T. Swihart, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
G. da Costa Cunha, L. P. C. Romão and Z. S. Macedo, Powder Technol., 2014, 254, 344–351 CrossRef .
K. Laishram, R. Mann and N. Malhan, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 1703–1706 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Sharma, M. Sharma, O. Verma and V. Sharma, Int. J. Pharma Bio Sci., 2015, 6, 555–567 CAS .
H. Koopi and F. Buazar, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 8940–8945 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sutradhar, N. Debnath and M. Saha, Adv. Manuf., 2013, 1, 357–361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hasanpoor, H. F. Nabavi and M. Aliofkhazraei, J. Nanostruct., 2017, 7, 40–46 CAS .
P. Duraisamy, Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2018, 6, 428–433 CrossRef .
H. Gao, Z. Li and P. Zhao, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2018, 32, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Hwang, X. Huang and Z. Xu, J. Miner. Mater. Charact. Eng., 2006, 5, 47–62 CrossRef .
H. Jian-Ping, W. Jun and C. Hai-Yan, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2010, 20, 2155–2161 CrossRef .
M. Mahinroosta and A. Allahverdi, J. Clean. Prod., 2018, 179, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Osman, J. K. Abu-dahrieh, M. Mclaren, F. Laffir, P. Nockemann and D. Rooney, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sadoon, S. Jalil and W. Abdulwahid, J. Chem. Pet. Eng., 2018, 19, 45–49 Search PubMed .
M. Darroudi, Z. Sabouri, R. Kazemi, A. Khorsand and M. H. N. A. Hamid, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 9195–9199 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fattahi, P. Petrini, F. Munarin, Y. Shokoohinia, M. A. Golozar, J. Varshosaz and M. C. Tanzi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 2092–2102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chauhan, A. Verma, A. Hazarika and K. Ojha, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2017, 0, 1–11 Search PubMed .
M. Nur, L. Ramchandran and T. Vasiljevic, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 143, 223–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Atrak, A. Ramazani and S. Taghavi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 8347–8353 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yende, U. N. Harle, S. K. Arora and V. B. Pande, J. Phytopharm., 2018, 7, 25–28 Search PubMed .
M. Sumithra, V. Chitra and R. Ramasamy, Marmara Pharm. J., 2017, 21/2, 269–277 CrossRef .
M. A. Ansari and H. M. Khan, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 31, 153–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Oquendo-Cruz and O. P.-P. Ana Vega-Avila, MRS Adv., 2017, 2, 1605–1610 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Prashanth, R. S. Raveendra, R. Hari Krishna, S. Ananda, N. P. Bhagya, B. M. Nagabhushana, K. Lingaraju and H. Raja Naika, J. Asian Ceram. Soc., 2015, 3, 345–351 CrossRef .
C. Ding, J. Pan, M. Jin, D. Yang, Z. Shen, J. Wang, W. Liu, J. Fu, X. Guo, D. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Yin and J. Li, Nanotoxicology, 2016, 10, 1051–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jalal, M. A. Ansari, A. K. Shukla, S. G. Ali, H. M. Khan, R. Pal, J. Alam and S. S. Cameotra, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107577–107590 RSC .
J. Zolgharnein, M. Bagtash and T. Shariatmanesh, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 137, 1016–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arun, S. Kantheti, R. R. Gaddam, R. Narayan and K. V. S. N. Raju, J. Polym. Res., 2014, 21, 1–11 CAS .
B. Faure, G. Salazar-Alvarez, A. Ahniyaz, I. Villaluenga, G. Berriozabal, Y. R. De Miguel and L. Bergström, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2013, 14, 1–23 CrossRef .
S. Mallakpour and M. Madani, Prog. Org. Coatings, 2015, 86, 194–207 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, W. Min, D. Hui, L. Yun and X. An, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 5184–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, J. Mol. Struct., 2014, 1075, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahdavi, A. Afkhami and M. Jalali, Environ. Earth Sci., 2015, 73, 4347–4371 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Cervantes, R. Gómez, L. H. Alvarez, C. M. Martinez and V. Hernandez-Montoya, Biodegradation, 2015, 26, 289–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mohammadifar, F. Shemirani, B. Majidi and M. Ezoddin, Desalin. Water Treat., 2015, 54, 758–768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jalili, M. Rostami and B. Ramezanzadeh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 95–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Park, J. M. Cho, C. Il Ahn, Y. J. Lee, K. W. Jun, B. G. Cho and J. W. Bae, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2017, 426, 177–189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alexander, L. Morrow, A. M. Lord, C. W. Dunnill and A. R. Barron, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10052–10059 RSC .
L. Foppa, L. Luza, A. Gual, D. E. Weibel, D. Eberhardt, S. R. Teixeira and J. Dupont, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 2827–2834 RSC .
H. Yoon, H. Kim, S. S. Latthe, M. W. Kim, S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11403–11410 RSC .
M. Shaker, E. Salahinejad and F. Ashtari-Mahini, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 428, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Shao, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Cheng and X. Fan, IEEE International Conference on Dielectrics (ICD),  2016, pp. 3–6 Search PubMed .

          E. I. Akpan, X. Shen, B. Wetzel and K. Friedrich, Design and Synthesis of Polymer Nanocomposites, Elsevier Inc.,  2019 Search PubMed .

          A. V. Rane, K. Kanny, V. K. Abitha and S. Thomas, Methods for Synthesis of Nanoparticles and Fabrication of Nanocomposites, Elsevier Ltd.,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Girdhar, A. Mohan and A. Sharma, Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs, 2016, 30, 61–76 Search PubMed .
F. Luzi, L. Torre, J. M. Kenny and D. Puglia, Materials, 2019, 12, 471–520 CrossRef CAS .
I. Younes, S. Sellimi, M. Rinaudo, K. Jellouli and M. Nasri, Int. J. Food Microbiol., 2014, 185, 57–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Zargar, M. Asghari and A. Dashti, ChemBioEng Rev., 2015, 2, 204–226 CrossRef .
B. Ben Seghir and M. H. Benhamza, J. Food Meas. Charact., 2017, 11, 1137–1147 CrossRef .
D. Sahoo, S. Sahoo, P. Mohanty, S. Sasmal, P. L. Nayak, D. Sahoo, S. Sahoo, P. Mohanty and S. Sasmal, Des. Monomers Polym., 2009, 12, 377–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muxika, A. Etxabide, J. Uranga, P. Guerrero and K. De Caba, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 105, 1358–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hajji, I. Younes, C. De Biotechnologie, M. Rinaudo and M. Nasri, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2015, 177, 18–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. S. Pillai, W. Paul and C. P. Sharma, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 641–678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, J.-P. Nam and J.-W. Nah, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 33, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. M. Van Den Broek, R. J. I. Knoop, F. H. J. Kappen and C. G. Boeriu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 116, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hamed, F. Özogul and J. M. Regenstein, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 48, 40–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vakili, M. Rafatullah, B. Salamatinia, A. Zuhairi, M. Hakimi, K. Bing, Z. Gholami and P. Amouzgar, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 113, 115–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and C. Chen, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 160, 129–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Thakur and M. K. Thakur, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2637–2652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hariharan, N. Varghese and A. B. Cherian, Int. J. Chem. Eng. Appl., 2014, 5, 126–131 Search PubMed .
B. Prakash, M. A. Jothirajan, S. Umapathy and V. Amala, Phys. Procedia, 2013, 49, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Aziz and Z. H. Z. Abidin, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 1–10 CrossRef .
A. B. Abou Hammad, A. M. Elnahrawy, A. M. Youssef and A. M. Youssef, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 125, 503–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tanhaei, A. Ayati, M. Lahtinen and M. Sillanpää, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 259, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozorgpour, H. Fasih, P. Jafari, S. Samadi, S. Sharif and M. Aliabadi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 93, 557–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zeng, H. Chen, X. Yuan, Q. Guo and X. Yu, Desalin. Water Treat., 2015, 55, 37–41 Search PubMed .
S. Zavareh and A. Avanes, Adsorpt. Sci. Technol., 2017, 35, 1–23 Search PubMed .
S. Zavareh, M. Zarei, F. Darvishi and H. Azizi, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 273, 610–621 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Wang, M. Wang, Q. He and J. Song, Chemosphere, 2018, 188–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumbhar, S. Jadhav, S. Kamble, G. Rashinkar and R. Salunkhe, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 1331–1337 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deshmukh, M. B. Ahamed, R. R. Deshmukh, S. K. K. Pasha, K. K. Sadasivuni, A. R. Polu, D. Ponnamma, M. A. A. AlMaadeed and K. Chidambaram, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 973–986 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, S. Zhang, J. Xie and C. Lv, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2017, 24, 1018–1026 CAS .
A. George, P. A. Shah and P. S. Shrivastav, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 112, 722–735 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Jana, S. Maiti, S. Jana, K. K. Sen and A. K. Nayak, Natural Polysaccharides in Drug Delivery and Biomedical Applications, Elsevier Inc.,  2019, pp. 187–201 Search PubMed .
T. El Assimi, R. Blažic, A. El Kadib, M. Raihane, R. Beniazza, G. A. Luinstra, E. Vidović and M. Lahcini, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 220, 95–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Palem, K. Madhusudana Rao and T. J. Kang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 223, 115074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Savvashe, P. Kadam and S. Mhaske, J. Food Sci. Technol., 2016, 53, 1948–1956 CrossRef .
D. Pathania, R. Katwal, G. Sharma, M. Naushad, M. R. Khan and A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2016, 87, 366–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Exarhopoulos, S. N. Raphaelides and M. G. Kontominas, Food Hydrocolloids, 2018, 77, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piermaría, C. Bengoechea, A. G. Abraham and A. Guerrero, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 152, 97–104 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Blandón, M. D. Noseda, G. A. Islan, G. R. Castro, G. V. de Melo Pereira, V. Thomaz-Soccol and C. R. Soccol, Bioact. Carbohydr. Diet. Fibre, 2018, 16, 14–21 CrossRef .
A. Babaei-Ghazvini, I. Shahabi-Ghahfarrokhi and V. Goudarzi, Food Packag. Shelf Life, 2018, 16, 103–111 CrossRef .
Z. Moradi, M. Esmaiili and H. Almasi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 122, 603–609 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karamanlioglu, R. Preziosi and G. D. Robson, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2017, 137, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Samsudin, R. Auras, D. Mishra, K. Dolan, G. Burgess, M. Rubino, S. Selke and H. Soto-Valdez, Migration of antioxidants from polylactic acid films: A parameter estimation approach and an overview of the current mass transfer models, Elsevier Ltd,  2018, vol. 103 Search PubMed .
Z. Lule, H. Ju and J. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 22767–22776 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ranjbar, G. Dehghan Noudeh, M. A. Hashemipour and I. Mohamadzadeh, Artif. Cells, Nanomed. Biotechnol., 2019, 47, 201–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gómez-Del Río, A. Salazar, R. A. Pearson and J. Rodríguez, Composites, Part B, 2016, 87, 343–349 CrossRef .

          A. Schiraldi and P. Baldini, Epoxy polym: New Materials and Innovations, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Yuan, M. S. Ganewatta, M. E. Lamm, M. A. Rahman, J. Wang, S. Liu and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1–6 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Gao, X. Liu, Z. Wang and J. Yan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52549–52555 RSC .
M. Sharifi, C. W. Jang, C. F. Abrams and G. R. Palmese, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16071–16082 RSC .
T. H. Hsieh, A. J. Kinloch, K. Masania, A. C. Taylor and S. Sprenger, Polymer, 2010, 51, 6284–6294 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, W. W. Wang and Z. Q. Shao, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 2529–2538 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Nayak and B. C. Ray, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2018, 57, 1676–1686 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Nayak, Constr. Build. Mater., 2019, 221, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Opelt, D. Becker, C. M. Lepienski and L. A. F. Coelho, Composites, Part B, 2015, 75, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Shukla, P. Sonia and V. Verma, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2013, 390, 557–561 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, W. Gao, P. Chu, Z. Zhang and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 1964–1974 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Kaybal, H. Ulus, O. Demir, Ö. S. Şahin and A. Avcı, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J, 2018, 21, 399–407 Search PubMed .
A. Garner, M. Genedy, U. Kandil and M. R. Taha, J. Compos. Mater., 2018, 52, 2483–2491 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohanty and V. K. Srivastava, Fibers Polym., 2015, 16, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hiremath and D. K. Shukla, Plast., Rubber Compos., 2016, 45, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. H. El-meniawi, K. R. Mahmoud and M. Megahed, J. Polym. Res., 2016, 23, 181–193 CrossRef .
M. Mohandas, C. Ayyavu and A. Muthukaruppan, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2014, 53, 975–989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mandhakini, T. Lakshmikandhan, A. Chandramohan and M. Alagar, Tribol. Lett., 2014, 54, 67–79 CrossRef CAS .
L. Thatchanamurthy, S. Krishnamoorthy, C. Ayyavu and A. Muthukaruppan, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2016, 55, 1211–1219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao and R. K. Y. Li, Composites, Part A, 2008, 39, 602–611 CrossRef .
J. P. B. de Souza and J. M. L. dos Reis, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2015, 5, 1–7 CrossRef .
V. Hiremath, M. Singh and D. K. Shukla, Procedia Eng., 2014, 97, 479–487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Preetha and M. J. Thomas, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2011, 18, 264–274 CAS .
M. Z. Rong, M. Q. Zhang, G. Shi, Q. L. Ji, B. Wetzel and K. Friedrich, Tribol. Int., 2003, 36, 697–707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Y. Cong, B. Zhang and Q. Lang, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 8104–8111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, P. C. Ramamurthy and G. Madras, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 221 RSC .
J. Yu, R. Huo, C. Wu, X. Wu, G. Wang and P. Jiang, Macromol. Res., 2012, 20, 816–826 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salimi, S. Maghsoudian and M. Mirzataheri, Polym. Bull., 2017, 74, 1283–1298 CrossRef CAS .
D. Duraibabu, M. Alagar and S. A. Kumar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40132–40140 RSC .
Z.-Q. Yu, S.-L. You, Z.-G. Yang and H. Baier, Adv. Compos. Mater., 2011, 20, 487–502 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Jiang, J. Yu and X. Huang, 2015 IEEE Electrical Insulation Conference (EIC),  2015, pp. 621–624 Search PubMed .
H. Im and J. Kim, Carbon N. Y., 2011, 49, 3503–3511 CrossRef CAS .
G. Scalet, F. Auricchio, E. Bonetti, L. Castellani, D. Ferri, M. Pachera and F. Scavello, Int. J. Plast., 2015, 67, 127–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Restrepo-Flórez, A. Bassi and M. R. Thompson, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2014, 88, 83–90 CrossRef .
Y. Hong, S. J. Coombs, J. J. Cooper-White, M. E. MacKay, C. J. Hawker, E. Malmström and N. Rehnberg, Polymer, 2000, 41, 7705–7713 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Dilara and D. Briassoulis, J. Agric. Eng. Res., 2000, 76, 309–321 CrossRef .
M. P. Das and S. Kumar, 3 Biotech, 2015, 5, 81–86 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tribedi and A. K. Sil, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 4146–4153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pramila and K. V. Ramesh, Afr. J. Microbiol. Res., 2011, 1, 131–136 CAS .
S. Ju, H. Zhang, M. Chen, C. Zhang, X. Chen and Z. Zhang, Composites, Part A, 2014, 66, 183–192 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borgani, L. K. H. Pallon, M. S. Hedenqvist, U. W. Gedde and D. B. Haviland, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5934–5937 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, A. M. Pourrahimi, R. T. Olsson, M. S. Hedenqvist and U. W. Gedde, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 66, 67–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, J. W. Zha, Y. H. Wu, L. Ren, Z. M. Dang and J. Wu, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2015, 22, 3350–3356 CAS .
C. Cobo Sánchez, M. Wåhlander, N. Taylor, L. Fogelström and E. Malmström, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25669–25678 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Magiati, C. I. Kyriakopoulou and D. P. Kalogianni, Anal. Lett., 2018, 51, 2050–2061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, Q. Ge, L. L. Yang, X. J. Shi, J. J. Li, D. Q. Yang and E. Sacher, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 339, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Shen, M. Top, Y. T. Pei and J. T. M. De Hosson, Wear, 2015, 322–323, 171–180 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hunke, N. Soin, T. Shah, E. Kramer, K. Witan and E. Siores, Wear, 2015, 328–329, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiang, K. Li, W. Shu and Z. Xu, J. Reinf. Plast. Compos., 2007, 26, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Barshilia and N. Gupta, Vacuum, 2014, 99, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
R. Munda, M. R. First, J. W. Alexander, C. C. Linnemann, J. P. Fidler and D. Kittur, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 1983, 249, 219–222 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Carbonell, I. S. Martín, A. Santos, A. Pujol, J. D. Sanz-Moliner and J. Nart, Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg., 2014, 43, 75–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Su, L. Bao, N. Li, L. Chen, Y. Zheng, J. Tian, J. Li, S. Chen and F. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, N. Soin, K. Prashanthi, J. Chen, S. Dong, E. Zhou, Z. Zhu, A. A. Narasimulu, C. D. Montemagno, L. Yu and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5880–5891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Li, Z. W. Yin, D. Jiang, L. Y. Jin and Y. Q. Cui, Wear, 2015, 328–329, 17–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Harris, A. A. Pitenis, W. G. Sawyer, B. A. Krick, G. S. Blackman, D. J. Kasprzak and C. P. Junk, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3739–3745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Niu, X. Y. Li, J. K. Zhang, M. Han and Y. Z. Zhang, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2012, 184–185, 1380–1383 CAS .
A. A. Pitenis, J. J. Ewin, K. L. Harris, W. G. Sawyer and B. A. Krick, Tribol. Lett., 2014, 53, 189–197 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Burris and W. G. Sawyer, Wear, 2006, 260, 915–918 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mallakpour and S. Rashidimoghadam, Poly(vinyl alcohol)/carbon nanotube nanocomposites, Elsevier Ltd,  2018 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Liang, C. Liu, Y. Li, W. Xing and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Bonilla, E. Fortunati, L. Atarés, A. Chiralt and J. M. Kenny, Food Hydrocolloids, 2014, 35, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Pereira, I. N. Q. de Arruda and R. Stefani, Food Hydrocolloids, 2015, 43, 180–188 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Green Polymer Composites Technology; Properties and Applications,  2016, pp. 261–278 Search PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2013, 52, 1651–1661 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, Y. Lee, D. Kim, K. M. Rao, J. Kim, S. Park, A. Haider, D. H. Lee and S. S. Han, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 95, 962–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. W. Guirguis and M. T. H. Moselhey, Nat. Sci., 2012, 04, 57–67 CAS .
S. Mallakpour, M. Khani, F. Mallakpour and M. Fathi, Int. J. Polym. Anal. Charact., 2017, 22, 237–246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Naghdi, Int. J. Polym. Anal. Charact., 2016, 21, 29–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdel-Mohsen, A. S. Aly, R. Hrdina, A. S. Montaser and A. Hebeish, J. Polym. Environ., 2011, 19, 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, Prog. Org. Coatings, 2013, 76, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and F. Sirous, Prog. Org. Coatings, 2015, 85, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 39, 430–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and M. Adnany Sadaty, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2016, 294, 2099–2107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2014, 53, 880–889 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, J. Reinf. Plast. Compos., 2013, 32, 217–224 CrossRef .
S. Mallakpour and Z. Reisi, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2018, 57, 1035–1044 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and R. Sadeghzadeh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 1–9 Search PubMed .

          S. Mallakpour and V. Behranvand, Hybrid Polymer Composite Materials: Structure and Chemistry, Elsevier Ltd,  2017, pp. 263–289 Search PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and R. Sadeghzadeh, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2017, 28, 1719–1729 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choudhary, Polym. Compos., 2018, 39, 1788–1799 CrossRef .
T. Nezakati, A. Seifalian, A. Tan and A. M. Seifalian, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6766–6843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kawashima, R. Okatani, H. Mayama, Y. Nakamura and S. Fujii, Polym., 2018, 148, 217–227 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sharifi, M. Zabihzadeh and M. Ghorbani, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 194, 384–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Khan, H. J. An, D. K. Yoo and S. H. Jhung, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 360, 163–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ciric-Marjanovic, Synth. Met., 2013, 177, 1–47 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Gomes and M. A. S. Oliveira, Am. J. Polym. Sci., 2012, 2, 5–13 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Huang and H. Bai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1280–1286 RSC .
T. H. Qazi, R. Rai and A. R. Boccaccini, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9068–9086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Jaymand, Recent progress in chemical modification of polyaniline, Elsevier Ltd,  2013, vol. 38 Search PubMed .
V. Janaki, B. T. Oh, K. Shanthi, K. J. Lee, A. K. Ramasamy and S. Kamala-Kannan, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 974–980 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rose, K. Guru Prasad, T. Sakthivel, V. Gunasekaran, T. Maiyalagan and T. Vijayakumar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 551–557 CrossRef CAS .
S. Benykhlef, A. Bekhoukh, R. Berenguer, A. Benyoucef and E. Morallon, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2016, 294, 1877–1885 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hadi, J. Arjomandi and J. Yong, Catal. Commun., 2018, 110, 59–63 CrossRef .
K. Nemade, P. Tekade and P. Dudhe, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 706, 647–651 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Hybrid Polymer Composite Materials: Properties and Characterisation, Elsevier Ltd,  2017, pp. 379–406 Search PubMed .

          S. Mallakpour and M. Javadpour, Green Polymer Composites Technology,  2016, pp. 495–517 Search PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and M. Khani, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2014, 53, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and A. Zadehnazari, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 211, 136–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour, M. Madani and S. Roshandel, Des. Monomers Polym., 2014, 17, 364–371 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Madani, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2014, 53, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and L. Mani, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2014, 53, 1574–1582 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and F. Derakhshan, Int. J. Polym. Anal. Charact., 2014, 19, 750–764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour, M. Dinari and M. Hatami, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42114–42121 RSC .
S. Mallakpour and F. Sirous, Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng., 2015, 54, 532–540 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mallakpour and S. Rashidimoghadam, Hybrid Polymer Composite Materials: Properties and Characterisation, Elsevier Ltd,  2017, pp. 343–377 Search PubMed .
A. M. A. Dias, S. Marceneiro, M. E. M. Braga, J. F. J. Coelho, A. G. M. Ferreira, P. N. Simões, H. I. M. Veiga, L. C. Tomé, I. M. Marrucho, J. M. S. S. Esperança, A. A. Matias, C. M. M. Duarte, L. P. N. Rebelo and H. C. De Sousa, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 1366–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and R. Sadeghzadeh, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2017, 36, 409–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and Z. Reisi, Polym. Bull., 2018, 75, 1895–1914 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Taha, Polym. Bull., 2019, 76, 903–918 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sownthari and S. Austin Suthanthiraraj, Polym. Bull., 2014, 72, 61–73 CrossRef .
J. Bota, L. Kratofil Krehula, Z. Katančić, M. Brozović and Z. Hrnjak-Murgić, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2017, 31, 466–486 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Karger-Kocsis, Polypropylene Structure, blends and Composites,  1995 Search PubMed .
K. Hamad, M. Kaseem and F. Deri, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 1799–1806 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, W. Zhang, S. Zhao, S. Zhou, Y. Shi and Z. Xin, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 20790–20800 RSC .
B. Maira, K. Takeuchi, P. Chammingkwan, M. Terano and T. Taniike, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 165, 259–265 CrossRef CAS .
P. Khare and N. Verma, Polym. Compos., 2017, 38, 359–370 CrossRef .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim, K. Y. Rhee and J. H. Lee, Composites, Part A, 2011, 42, 1856–1861 CrossRef .
E. Logakis, C. H. Pandis, P. Pissis, J. Pionteck and P. Pötschke, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2011, 71, 854–862 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, E. Abdullayev, A. Hollister, D. Mills and Y. M. Lvov, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 645–653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Z. Gui, Y. Hu, Y. Wu and S. Jiang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 209–210, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mohammadi, J. Davoodi, M. Javanbakht and H. Rezaei, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 35309 CrossRef .
H. Aghajani Derazkola and A. Simchi, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2018, 79, 246–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Motzkus, C. Chivas-Joly, E. Guillaume, S. Ducourtieux, L. Saragoza, D. Lesenechal, T. MacÉ, J. M. Lopez-Cuesta and C. Longuet, J. Nanoparticle Res., 2012, 14, 687–704 CrossRef .
Y. Ding, Y. Chen and J. Zheng, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 156, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choudhary and R. J. Sengwa, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 924–941 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Ash, D. F. Rogers, C. J. Wiegand, L. S. Schadler, R. W. Siegel, B. C. Benicewicz and T. Apple, Polym. Compos., 2002, 23, 1014–1025 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Ash, R. W. Siegel and L. S. Schadler, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 4371–4383 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahmoudian, A. Poursattar Marjani, R. Hasanzadeh, M. Moradian and S. Mamaghani Shishavan, Polym. Bull., 2019, 1–18 CAS .
Y. Luo, G. Wu, J. Liu, J. Peng, G. Zhu and G. Gao, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2014, 21, 1824–1835 CAS .
I. Tseng, M. Tsai and C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(15), 13098–13105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, Prog. Org. Coatings, 2012, 75, 373–378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mallakpour and M. Dinari, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 2336–2343 CrossRef CAS .
P. Starr, C. M. Agrawal and S. Bailey, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2016, 104, 406–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirashima, K. Ohta, M. Hagihara, M. Shimizu, T. Kanazawa and K.-I. Nakamura, J. Hard Tissue Biol., 2018, 27, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, J. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Xiong and X. Liu, Surf. Coatings Technol., 2017, 320, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hui, L. Lizhu, W. Ling, C. Weiwei and Z. Xingsong, Polym. Compos., 2016, 37, 763–770 CrossRef .
L. Z. Liu, L. Weng, Y. X. Song, L. Gao, H. Zhao and Q. Q. Lei, Pigm. Resin Technol., 2011, 40, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Weng, Y. Song, L. Gao and Q. Lei, J. Nanomater., 2010, 2010, 1–6 Search PubMed .
V. S. D. Voet, G. Ten Brinke and K. Loos, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 2861–2877 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ruan, X. Yao, Y. Chang, L. Zhou, G. Qin and X. Zhang, Polymers, 2018, 10, 1–27 CrossRef .
C. Tsonos, C. Pandis, N. Soin, D. Sakellari, E. Myrovali, S. Kripotou, A. Kanapitsas and E. Siores, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2015, 9, 1104–1118 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, J. Zhang, M. Shan, Y. Li, B. Li, J. Niu, B. Zhou and X. Qian, J. Memb. Sci., 2014, 458, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nunes-Pereira, S. Ribeiro, C. Ribeiro, C. J. Gombek, F. M. Gama, A. C. Gomes, D. A. Patterson and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Polym. Test., 2015, 44, 234–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Suresh, S. Jatav, P. M. Geethu, Y. Rephung, M. S. R. Rao and D. K. Satapathy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 1–17 CrossRef .
L. Shen, S. Feng, J. Li, J. Chen, F. Li, H. Lin and G. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bhadra, M. G. Masud, S. K. De and B. K. Chaudhuri, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 485002 CrossRef .
J. Parssinen, H. Hammarén, R. Rahikainen, V. Sencadas, C. Ribeiro, S. Vanhatupa, S. Miettinen, S. Lanceros-Méndez and V. P. Hytönen, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2015, 103, 919–928 CrossRef PubMed .
D. He, Y. Wang, X. Chen and Y. Deng, Composites, Part A, 2017, 93, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Cai, X. Zhu, Q. Han, Y. Li, Y. Liu, A. Wang and G. Lan, J. Plast. Film Sheeting, 2019, 0, 1–21 Search PubMed .
K. Razmgar, E. Saljoughi and S. M. Mousavi, Polym. Compos., 2019, 40, 2452–2461 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Conte, A. De Luise, A. Valentino, F. Di Cristo, O. Petillo, F. Riccitiello, A. Di Salle and A. Calarco, Nanocarriers for Drug Delivery, Elsevier Inc.,  2019, pp. 319–349 Search PubMed .
X. Su and B. Chen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 197, 497–507 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naahidi, M. Jafari, M. Logan, Y. Wang, Y. Yuan, H. Bae, B. Dixon and P. Chen, Biotechnol. Adv., 2017, 35, 530–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Javanbakht and H. Namazi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 87, 50–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, X. Xie, A. A. Kadi and Y. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Pakdel and S. J. Peighambardoust, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 201, 264–279 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Głowińska, A. W. Trochimczuk and A. Jakubiak-Marcinkowska, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 110, 202–210 CrossRef .
M. Mahinroosta, Z. Jomeh, A. Allahverdi and Z. Shakoori, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 8, 42–55 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Zhu and Q. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 228, 104–107 CrossRef CAS .
V. Srivastava, C. H. Weng, V. K. Singh and Y. C. Sharma, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2011, 56, 1414–1422 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fouladgar, M. Beheshti and H. Sabzyan, J. Mol. Liq., 2015, 211, 1060–1073 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ravindhranath and M. Ramamoorty, Rasayan J. Chem., 2017, 10, 716–722 CAS .
A. Hooshmand, A. A. Naseri, H. Moazed and J. Jokiniemi, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 288, 198–206 CrossRef .

          Y. Zhou, J. F. Zhang and J. Yoon, Chem. Rev.,  20141145511–5571 Search PubMed.
R. C. Maheshwari, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 137, 456–463 CrossRef PubMed .
F. N. Acar and E. Malkoc, Bioresour. Technol., 2004, 94, 13–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, Y. Wang, D. Sun, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, B. L. Weeks, R. O. Connor, X. Huang, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9817–9825 RSC .
H. Jabeen, V. Chandra, S. Jung, J. W. Lee, K. S. Kim and S. Bin Kim, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3583–3585 RSC .
L.-L. Li, X.-Q. Feng, R.-P. Han, S.-Q. Zang and G. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 321, 622–628 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Qian, W. Zhang, J. Yan, L. Han, Y. Chen, D. Ouyang and M. Chen, Environ. Pollut., 2017, 223, 153–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Sharma, V. Srivastava and A. K. Mukherjee, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2010, 55, 2390–2398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. He, Y. Li, X. Cai, K. Zhang, T. Liu, D. Lin, L. Kong, J. Liu, J. He, Y. Li, X. Cai, K. Zhang, T. Liu, Y. Hu, D. Lin, L. Kong and J. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 494, 307–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tabesh, F. Davar and M. R. Loghman-estarki, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 730, 441–449 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, Y. Hu, J. Yu, W. Wang, J. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, RSC Adv., 2014, 5, 7066–7073 RSC .
V. P. Dhawale, V. Khobragade and S. D. Kulkarni, Int. J. Environ. Chem., 2018, 2, 10–17 CrossRef .
A. M. Rashad, Mater. Des., 2013, 52, 143–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghasemi-kahrizsangi, H. Gheisari and S. V. Hosseini, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 8813–8818 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sikora, A. Augustyniak, K. Cendrowski, P. Nawrotek and E. Mijowska, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 1–15 Search PubMed .
V. Bhalla, V. Khullar and H. Tyagi, Renewable Energy, 2018, 123, 616–626 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. He, Z. Zhang and D. Wen, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 142, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bianco, F. Scarpa and L. A. Taglia, Renewable Energy, 2018, 116, 9–21 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhou, H. Nian and X. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 6560–6567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asadi, M. Asadi, A. Rezaniakolaei, L. Aistrup and M. Afrand, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2018, 117, 474–486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mirzaei, S. Mohammad, S. Hosseini, A. Mansour and M. Kashkooli, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 134, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattad, J. Sarkar and P. Ghosh, Int. J. Exergy, 2017, 24, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Devarajan, N. P. Krishnamurthy, M. Balasubramanian, B. Ramani, S. Wongwises, K. A. El-naby and R. Sathyamurthy, Micro Nano Lett., 2018, 13, 617–621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, C. Tang, B. Cheng, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2174–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Basu, P. Bhanja, N. Salam, T. Kanto, A. Bhaumik, D. Das and S. Manirul, Mol. Catal., 2017, 439, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. Farahmandjou and N. Golabiyan, Int. J. Bio-Inorg. Hybr. Nanomater., 2016, 5, 73–77 Search PubMed .
A. P. Lima, R. C. Souza, M. N. T. Silva, R. F. Gonc, E. M. Richter, R. C. Lima and R. A. A. Munoz, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 646–654 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Roudini, A. R. Ghahfarokhi and A. Behzadmehr, Materials Science and Engineering PAPER,  2017, vol. 201 Search PubMed .
M. Rahmati and M. Mozafari, J. Cell. Physiol., 2019, 234, 3321–3335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kianezhad and A. Honarbakhsh Raouf, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2019, 263, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pal and A. Ghosh, AIP
Conf. Proc., 2017, 1832, 110010 CrossRef .
C. C. Garay, A. M. Guzmán, A. Torres-Castro, H. G. Alejo, A. J. Moreno and D. I. Martínez, Mater. Charact., 2017, 128, 30–36 CrossRef .
S. Arjang, K. Motahari and M. Saidi, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 4025–4039 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Moslan, W. R. W. Sulaiman and M. Z. Jaafar, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2017, 56, 1339–1344 Search PubMed .
S. Kordzangeneh and S. Naghibi, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2017, 27, 219–227 CrossRef .
E. G.-A. A. P. M. M. H. Andez-Wolpez, E. Govea-Alcaide and R. F. Jardim, Res. Rev. Mex. Fisica, 2018, 64, 127–131 CrossRef .
M. S. M. Suan and M. R. Johan, Phys. B, 2017, 506, 178–182 CrossRef .
Z. K. Heiba, M. B. Mohamed, A. M. Wahba and N. G. Imam, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 47, 711–720 CrossRef .
S. K. M. Al-Hayali, D. Z. Mohammed, W. A. Khaleel and A. A. H. Al-Janabi, Appl. Opt., 2017, 56, 4720–4726 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, K. Arbutina, A. Xu and H. Liu, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2017, 8, 2363–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Amist, N. B. Singh, K. Yadav, S. C. Singh and J. K. Pandey, J. Biotechnol., 2017, 254, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sliwinska, D. Kwiatkowski, P. Czarny, J. Milczarek, M. Toma, A. Korycinska, J. Szemraj and T. Sliwinski, Toxicol. Mech. Methods, 2015, 25, 176–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Xiong, H. Tian, S. Wang, Q. Zhang, M. Zhang and H. Ding, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 147–158 CrossRef CAS .
G. Balaji and M. Cheralathan, Therm. Sci., 2017, 21, 499–510 CrossRef .
H. Setiawan, R. Khairani, M. A. Rahman and R. Septawendar, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 53, 531–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. Góral and J. Skrzypek, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 456, 147–155 CrossRef .
K. V. Ivanov, S. V. Fortuna, T. A. Kalashnikova and E. A. Glazkova, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 1701135, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. V. Fajardo, A. O. Martins, R. M. De Almeida, K. Noda, L. F. D. Probst and L. V. Carren, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59, 3963–3967 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Sumesh and K. Kanthavel, J. Polym. Environ., 2019, 27, 2189–2200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khabibullin, K. Bhangaonkar, C. Mahoney, Z. Lu, M. Schmitt, A. K. Sekizkardes, M. R. Bockstaller and K. Matyjaszewski, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5458–5465 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nourani, N. Hamdami and J. Keramat, J. Dispers. Sci. Technol., 2018, 39, 1385–1393 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kango, S. Kalia, A. Celli, J. Njuguna, Y. Habibi and R. Kumar, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1232–1261 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kockmann, J. Hesselbach, S. Zellmer, A. Kwade and G. Garnweitner, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60993–60999 RSC .
K. Roy and P. Potiyaraj, Polym. Bull., 2019, 76, 883–902 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Pauly, A. C. Genix, J. G. Alauzun, M. Sztucki, J. Oberdisse and P. Hubert Mutin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 19173–19182 RSC .
C. Schmitt Pauly, A. C. Genix, J. G. Alauzun, J. Jestin, M. Sztucki, P. H. Mutin and J. Oberdisse, Polym., 2016, 97, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruan, D. Yang, W. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Shang, Y. Wu, M. Zhang and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 439, 186–195 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Yao, X. Pan, Q. Liu and H. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 447, 664–672 CrossRef CAS .
E. Soleimani and N. Zamani, Acta Chim. Slov., 2017, 64, 644–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ghaemi, P. Daraei and S. Palani, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2018, 41, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ge, M. M. Li, H. Ye and B. X. Zhao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 366–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Zhao and G. Jiang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 6949–6954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hua, S. Zhang, B. Pan, W. Zhang, L. Lv and Q. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 317–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hassanpoor, G. Khayatian and A. R. J. Azar, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1957–1965 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahdavi, M. Jalali and A. Afkhami, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2015, 17, 85–102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khan, Z. Dan, Y. Mengling, Y. Yang and H. Haiyan, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2018, 26, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gohari and N. Abu-Zahra, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10154–10162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. M. Chu, N. T. Nguyen, T. L. Vu, T. H. Dao, L. C. Dinh, H. L. Nguyen, T. H. Hoang, T. S. Le and T. D. Pham, Materials, 2019, 12, 1–15 Search PubMed .
W. T. Al-Rubayee, O. F. Abdul-Rasheed and N. M. Ali, J. Chem., 2016, 2016, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. H. Lin and R. S. Juang, J. Environ. Manage., 2009, 90, 1336–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Benosmane, B. Boutemeur, S. M. Hamdi and M. Hamdi, Appl. Water Sci., 2018, 8, 17 CrossRef .
M. Aazza, H. Ahlafi, H. Moussout and H. Maghat, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 268, 587–597 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nasrollahzadeh, Z. Issaabadi and S. M. Sajadi, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3723–3735 RSC .
M. E. Mahmoud, A. E. H. Abou, A. K. Shehata, H. M. Header and E. A. Hamed, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 242, 1248–1262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Rajan, B. S. Inbaraj and B. H. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15126–15139 RSC .
Y. Gao, L. Hu, Y. Liu, X. Xu and C. Wu, BioMed Res. Int., 2019, 2019, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, N. Pan, F. Huang, M. Aldarouish, Z. Wen, R. Gao, Y. Zhang, H. M. Hu, Y. Shen and L. X. Wang, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 786–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. Ilyas, R. Pendyala, M. Narahari and L. Susin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 142, 215–229 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, J. Shi, G. Hu, Y. He, Y. Xia, S. Yin and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 391, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, M. S. Park, Y. Na, J. Choi, S. A. Jenekhe and F. S. Kim, Org. Electron. Phys., Mater. Appl., 2019, 65, 305–310 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Z. Cui, F. Ge, H. Tian and X. Wang, Prog. Org. Coatings, 2018, 125, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
Table Content:

Shadpour Mallakpour
	Professor Shadpour Mallakpour, an organic polymer chemist, graduated from the chemistry department, University of Florida (UF), Gainesville, Florida, USA, in 1984. He spent two years as a post-doc at UF. He joined the department of chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Iran, in 1986. He held several positions such as the chairman of the department of chemistry and deputy of research, department of chemistry, at IUT. From 1994–1995 he worked as a visiting professor, University of Mainz, Germany, and from 2003–2004 as a visiting professor, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. He has published more than 850 journal papers and more than 400 conference papers and has got more than 30 awards. The most important award to him was given for the selection of the first laureate on fundamental research at the 21st Khwarizmi International award in 2008. He was listed in the Top 1% Scientists in Chemistry in ISI Essential Science Indicators in 2003. He was also listed in the Top 2% Scientists in Polymers in 2020. He was selected as an academic guest of the 59th Meeting of Nobel Prize Winners in Chemistry, 2009, at Lindau, Germany. He presented many lectures as an invited or keynote speaker at different national and international conferences or universities. He was a member of organizing and scientific committees for many national and international conferences. He was also the chairperson of many national and international meetings. In recent years, he has focused on preparation and characterization of polymer-based nanocomposites to be used as bioactive materials as well as adsorbents and photocatalysts in remediation technology.

Fariba Sirous
	Fariba Sirous received a BSc in the chemistry field in 2012 and also an MSc in organic polymer chemistry in 2015 from chemistry department, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran. Currently, she is a PhD student in organic polymer chemistry at IUT. Her research interests include novel bio-materials, sustainable chemistry, nanotechnology for high-performance polymer–inorganic nanocomposites, metal oxide NPs and removal of hazardous materials.

Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain
	Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain, PhD, is an Adjunct Professor, Academic Advisor and Director of Chemistry & EVSc Labs in the Department of Chemistry & Environmental Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, New Jersey, USA. His research is focused on the applications of Nanotechnology & Advanced Materials, Environmental Management, Analytical Chemistry and Various Industries. Dr Hussain is the author of numerous papers in peer-reviewed journals as well as a prolific author and editor of several scientific monographs and handbooks in his research areas published with ELSEVIER, Royal Society of Chemistry, John Wiley & sons, CRC, Springer etc.

 	Fig. 1  Search results in the Scopus database using the “polymer nanocomposites with alumina nanoparticles” keyword from the past until now (obtained in Dec 2020).	 

 	Fig. 2  The transfer of metastable phases to the α phase by heat treatment and the corundum structure of α-Al2O3.	 

 	Fig. 3  The diverse herbal plants for the green synthesis of α-Al2O3 NPs.	 

 	Fig. 4  FESEM images of (a) amorphous and (b) gamma Al2O3 NPs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  One-pot green synthesis of α-Al2O3 NPs using aqueous algae extract. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  HR-TEM images of P. aeruginosa cells. The panels depict representative HR-TEM images of ultrathin sections of the cells. (A) Untreated cells and (B) cells treated with Al2O3-NPs at a magnification of ×7000. The blue arrow indicates NP attachment on the membrane, and the red arrow shows partially damaged membranes at various sites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  Zone of inhibition tests for α-Al2O3 NPs against: (a) Klebsiella aerogenes; (b) Escherichia coli; (c) Pseudomonas desmolyticum; and (d) Staphylococcus aureus.57	 

 	Fig. 8  Search results in the Scopus database using the “surface modification of Al2O3 nanoparticles” keyword from the past until 2015 (obtained in Dec 2020).	 

 	Fig. 9  The diverse fabrication techniques for the synthesis of PNCs.	 

 	Fig. 10  CANF preparation procedure schematic. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 11  The synthetic route of FCAS. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic showing the epoxy matrix modification.133	 

 	Fig. 13  Modelling of composites having spherical Al2O3 NPs (a) and Al2O3 nanorods (b). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Taylor & Francis, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  The plot of hardness and Fv as a function of filler content, wt%, of SiO2, Al2O3 and carbon NPs (a) and plot of UTS as a function of filler content, wt%, of SiO2, Al2O3 and carbon NPs (b). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Springer, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM of different Al2O3 NPs: (a) pristine, (b) C1-coated, (c) C8-coated, and (d) C18-coated. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 16  Typical stress–strain curves of neat LDPE and LDPE/Al2O3 NCs.30	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM images of the two Al2O3 NPs evaluated. The manufacturer reported mean particle size is indicated on the upper left of each image. The crystal phase of the spherical 44 nm particles is reported to be 70% delta and 30% gamma; the more irregular 80 nm particles are reported to be 99% alpha. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2006.	 

 	Fig. 18  TGA graphs of the PVA@PVP blend and different contents of NCs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 19  The FESEM micrographs of the α-Al2O3–PVA NPs (a and b), PAI (c and d), PAPNC 5 wt% (e and f), PAPNC 10 wt% (g and h), and PAPNC 15 wt% (i and j) and their histograms. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Photographs of neat PVC (a) and PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 4 wt% (b), PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 8 wt% (c), and PVC/Al2O3–CA–AA 12 wt% (d) and (B): UV-vis transmittance spectra of PVC (a) and different NC films: 4 wt% (b), 8 wt% (c), and 12 wt% (c). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of (a) the chemical reaction process and the formation of BaTiO3@Al2O3 core–shell NPs, and (b) formation of BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NCs; and (B) cross-sectional SEM images of NC films: (a) pure PVDF, and (b) 5 vol%, (c) 10 vol%, (d) 15 vol%, and (e) 20 vol% BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NCs, and (f) a photo of the 10 vol% BaTiO3@Al2O3/PVDF NC film. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Illustration of the preparation of AD gels; (b) typical SEM image of AD gels; and (c) digital photos of AD gels under different deformations. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

γ-Al2O3 NPs	Green synthesis using aluminum foil waste	Acid-catalyzed reactions	Stronger acidity, larger pore volume, and higher surface area in comparison with commercially prepared γ-Al2O3	
46

α-Al2O3 and γ-Al2O3 NPs	Sol–gel process without toxic materials	Photodegradation of reactive yellow 145 and direct black 122	Photocatalytic activity of α-Al2O3 NPs better than γ-Al2O3 NPs	
52

Al2O3 NPs	Microwave-assisted green synthesis using leaf extract of lemon grass	Antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa	Cost-effective, non-toxic, eco-friendly, and strong antibacterial activity	
55

α-Al2O3 NPs	Low temperature, and cost-effective solution combustion method	Antibacterial agent	Highest antibacterial activity for Staphylococcus aureus	
57

Al2O3 NPs	—	Increasing uptake of ARGs	Plasmid-mediated transformation of ARGs	
58

Al2O3 NPs	Green synthesis using lemongrass leaf extract of Cymbopogon citratus	Anticandidal agents for sustained controlled drug delivery in medical implants	Stopping Candida spp growth at a high concentration of Al2O3 NPs (1500 μg ml−1)	
59


 	Fig. 23  Schematic process of the nanomaterial dispersing method commonly used in cement-based composite preparation.300	 

 	Fig. 24  Scheme of the two-step modification strategy.338	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic diagram illustrating of preparation process of the Al2O3–PDA/NBR composite. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 342 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 26  Scheme of PAA conjugation with the Al2O3 surface (a) and status of the sonicated NPs in water during different times (b); (A) PAA decorated Al2O3, and (B) raw Al2O3. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 345 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 27  Higher magnification SEM cross-sectional image of (a) the M4 membrane showing incorporation of the nanoparticles in the polymer matrix, and (b) M5 showing the agglomeration of nanoparticles.352	 

Al2O3 NP-doped chitosan/calcium aluminosilicate	Sol gel synthesis	Support for CO2 sensor	
96

Chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide NCs	—	Methyl orange removal	
97

Chitosan/Al2O3/iron oxide composite nanofibers	Electrospinning process	Removal of phosphate and nitrate anions	
98

Cu–chitosan/Al2O3 NCs	Grafting a Cu(II)-imprinted polymer onto the surface of Al2O3 NPs	Selective removal of Cu2+, As3+, and aromatic amines	
99–101

Xanthated chitosan–Al2O3@SiO2 NC	—	Removal of Cr6+	
102

Guar gum/Al2O3 NCs	Sol–gel method	Photocatalytic degradation of malachite green dye	
111

Cellulose acetate/KH-570–Al2O3 NCs	—	Insulation paper	
105

Kefiran/Al2O3 NC films	Casting technique	Food packaging technology	
116

PLA/Al2O3 NC	Hydrothermal procedure	Nanoscaffolds as dental resins	
120

Au/PANI/γ-Al2O3	
In situ electropolymerization	Mediated biosensor to detect vitamin E	
215

PVDF/BaTiO3@Al2O3 NCs	Solution casting method	Dielectric materials	
270

Al2O3/PVDF NCs	Electrospinning process	Filter membrane for water remediation	
271

PVDF/PVA/Al2O3 NC	Casting solution	Filter membrane for As5+ removal	
272

Al2O3	Alumina
ARGs	Antibiotic resistance genes
AA	Ascorbic acid
APTES	3-Aminopropyltriethoxysilane
APTMS	3-Aminopropyltrimethoxysilane
APS	γ Aminopropyl-triethoxysilane
Bisphenol A	Bis(4-hydroxy phenylene)-2,2 propane
BA	Benzoic acid
CA	Citric acid
CNT	Carbon nanotube
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
DGEBA	Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A
DNPH	2,4-Dinitrophenyl hydrazine
EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray
e-BMI	Ether-linked bismaleimide
ETDS	Epoxy terminated poly(dimethylsiloxane)
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
FESEM	Field emission scanning electron microscopy

F
v
	Free volume

T
g
	Glass transition temperature
KH-560	Glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane
GFRP	Glass fiber-reinforced polymer
GPS	3-Glycidoxypropylmethoxysilane
GPTMS	3-Glycidyloxypropyltrimethoxysilane
HBP	Hyperbranched aromatic polyamide
HDTMA	Hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide
HVDC	High voltage direct current
HR-TEM	High resolution-TEM
LDPE	Low-density polyethylene
ILSS	Laminar shear strength
MOs	Metallic oxides
C1	Methyltrimethoxysilane
MWCNT	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
MA	Maleic acid
KH570	3-Methacryloxypropyltrimethoxy
NCs	Nanocomposites
NPs	Nanoparticles
NBR	Nitrile rubber
C8	Octyltriethoxysilane
C18	Octadecyltrimethoxysilane
OA	Oleic acid
PNCs	Polymer-based NCs
PDA	Poly(dopamine)
PAA	Poly(acrylic acid)
PES	Polyethersulfone
γ-PGA	Poly(γ-glutamic acid)
PVA	Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PVP	Poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
PANI	Polyaniline
PANI–GO	PANI–graphene oxide
PE	Polyethylene
PLMA	Poly(lauryl methacrylate)
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PBA	Poly(butyl acrylate)
PD	Partial discharge
PAAM	Polyacrylamide
PS	Polystyrene
PCL	Poly(caprolactone)
PLA	Poly(lactic acid)
PAI	Poly(amide-imide)
PP	Polypropylene
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PI	Polyimide
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
SDS	Sodium dodecyl sulfate
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
TGDDM	Tetraglycidyl-4,4′-diaminodiphenylmethane
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TMVS	Trimethoxyvinylsilane
UV/Vis	Ultraviolet-visible
Vx3	Ubiquitin binding protein
UTS	Ultimate tensile strength
UV	Ultraviolet
XRD	X-ray diffraction

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
