Enhancing Ag-alloyed Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 solar cell performance by interfacial modification via In and Al   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA07928J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA07928J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25196-25207Enhancing Ag-alloyed Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cell performance by interfacial modification via In and Al†

        
          
            Ping 
            Fan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            He
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guangxing 
            Liang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhigao 
            Xie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zixuan 
            Yu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jinhong 
            Lin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuo 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhuanghao 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jingting 
            Luo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhenghua 
            Su
          
        
      *
      Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Thin Films and Applications, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, PR China. E-mail: zhsu@szu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th September 2021
    , Accepted 25th October 2021First published on 25th October 2021AbstractAg-alloyed Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 kesterite semiconductors have been attracting considerable attention recently because doping with Ag can suppress the CuZn related anti-site defects, which is the main factor that limits the efficiency of kesterite solar cells. Although the performance of the thin film and the device is enhanced (for example, better crystallinity, fewer deep level defects and longer lifetime of the minority carrier) by doping a small amount of Ag in the CZTS thin film, the density of the defects remains high, and the band alignment of CdS/CZTS is not fully optimized, and the interface carrier concentration is greatly decreased. These phenomena will limit any further improvement in efficiency. In this work, to further increase the performance of the device, the interface of CdS/CZTS for an Ag-alloyed CZTS thin film solar cell was doped with In or Al. Then the properties of the thin film, interface band structure and device performance were investigated. After doping the interface with In or Al, the concentrations of the n-type and p-type carriers at the CdS/CAZTS heterojunction were boosted, and the interface band alignment was optimized, resulting in over 11% efficiency for an Ag-alloyed CZTS (with Al interface doping) thin film solar cell. Moreover, low-cost Al-doped ZnO (AZO) was used to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) as the front electrode after optimization, and more than 10% efficiency of CAZTS device without In was obtained. This study demonstrates the feasibility of controlling the doping of the interface to improve the interface performance of a heterojunction by using a simple spin coating process, and also provided a suitable experimental basis for future low-cost thin film solar cells.
1. Introduction
With earth-abundant and environment-friendly elements, kesterite-based Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS or CZTSSe) semiconductor materials have recently attracted great interest for use in thin film solar cells. The Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin film has a high light absorption coefficient of 104 cm−1 and a direct bandgap of 1.0–1.5 eV with a theoretical Shockley–Queisser conversion efficiency above 33%.1,2 To date, the world record efficiencies of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells are ∼11% (CZTS) and 12.6% (CZTSSe).3,4 However, these values are still not competitive enough for CZTSSe solar cells to replace the highly efficient Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) solar cells. In CZTS thin-film solar cells, the cation disorder of the absorber layer and related band tailing, un-passivated interface defects, and undesirable band alignment are generally perceived to result in a low open circuit voltage (VOC) and a low fill factor (FF), which are the main reasons for the stagnation in the efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells.2 In the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 crystal structure, due to the similar ionic radius and chemical properties of Cu and Zn, the formation energies of substitutional and point defects (and other possible antisite exchange defects) are low. These characteristics facilitate the cation disorder in CZTSSe, resulting in a serious band tail and a low VOC. To reduce the cation disorder of CZTSSe, relatively large elements, such as Ag, Cd (or Ba, Sr), and Ge, can be used to replace Cu, Zn, and Sn, respectively, in the lattice. Among these elements, the radius of Ag+ (1.14 Å) is remarkably larger than those of Cu+ (0.74 Å) and Zn2+ (0.74 Å). Therefore, the substitution of Ag for Cu in the CZTSSe system is expected to effectively suppress the cation disorder and the associated band tailing.5,6 Hence, many reported CZTSSe (or CZTS) devices with high efficiencies are based on Ag doping.7–12
Nevertheless, with the increase in the concentration of the Ag dopant, the concentration of p-type carriers in CZTSSe will decrease or even be transformed into n-type semiconductors.7 Even at a relatively low concentration of Ag dopant (optimal doping concentration) in CZTS, the valence band maximum (VBM, ∼0.5 eV) of CZTS is significantly larger than that of pure CZTS (∼0.1 eV), and the low concentration of the interface carrier is able to reduce the degree of band bending, and the built-in electric field. In addition, the band gap of Ag-alloyed CZTS increases from 1.5 eV (Cu2ZnSnS4, CZTS) to 2.1 eV (Ag2ZnSnS4, AZTS) and the band alignment of the heterojunction, especially the value of the conduction band offset (CBO), will be changed, which is the key factor that affects the interface recombination.13,14 To further improve the performance of Ag-alloyed CZTSSe thin-film solar cells, the doping with alkali metal and divalent ions, such as Na, Li, K, Cd, and Mn, has been explored to reduce the band tailing and bandgap fluctuations, and to increase the carrier concentration, and passivating interface and the grain boundary.13–20 Furthermore, given that the kesterite (CZTSSe) structure comes from the chalcopyrite (CuInS2) structure, doping trivalent In into CZTSSe (replacing Sn to form p-type doping) is also an effective method to improve the carrier concentration, mobility, and the performance of the Ag-alloyed CZTSSe devices.21–23 However, an inappropriate concentration of the In dopant will cause the performance of the CZTSSe devices to deteriorate.24 Therefore, to minimize the doping concentration of In, interface diffusion doping can be applied by annealing a multilayer structure with In (such as the In2S3/CdS/CZTSSe structure) to control the doping concentration of In. Another advantage of interface doping is that when the In ions diffuse into the CZTSSe surface layer through the CdS layer, n-type and p-type doping can be achieved simultaneously.25 Jeehwan et al. heated double buffer layers (In2S3/CdS) to diffuse In3+ into the CdS and CZTSSe layers to control the electron and hole doping concentration, and a conversion efficiency of 12.7% was achieved.26 Furthermore, post-annealing of the CZTS heterojunction or device has recently been proven to effectively improve the performance of the CZTS thin film solar cells.27 Heating the interface of the CZTS device can promote the diffusion of elements between the layers and modify the surface compositions and the band alignment of the CdS/CZTS junction. Recently the Cd-alloyed Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZCTS) device was post annealed, which excluded i-ZnO (ITO/CdS/CZCTS), to facilitate the interdiffusion of Cu, Zn, In, and Sn, and demonstrated an efficiency of 12.6% for the CZTS device with improved interfacial electron and hole densities, and gave appropriate band alignment of the CdS/CZCTS heterojunction for carrier transport.28
In this work, firstly, the influence of different Ag contents on the performance of CZTS thin-film solar cells was systematically studied. The best efficiency of 7.6% was recorded for the CZTS device with 3% Ag (CAZTS). Secondly, to simultaneously improve the concentrations of the p-type and n-type carriers at the interface of the CAZTS heterojunction, a layer of InCl3 solution was deposited directly onto the CdS/CAZTS by using spin-coating for heat treatment to promote the interdiffusion of the elements, such as In, Cd, Zn, Cu, and Sn, between the interface layers. After the optimization of the conditions for In doping, such as annealing temperature and time, the efficiency of the CAZTS thin-film solar cell was enhanced to 10.6%. Thirdly, to reduce the usage of In, AlCl3 solution was chosen to replace the InCl3, and this was implemented using a similar interface doping process. The best efficiency to date, of 11.2%, was obtained for a pure sulfide CAZTS thin-film solar cell. Finally, to eliminate the use of rare-metal In, the ITO thin-film was replaced by AZO as the front electrode in the CAZTS device with Al interface doping, and an efficiency of 10.7% was achieved for the CAZTS thin-film solar cell without In. The main experimental process is illustrated in Scheme 1 and the detailed methods are shown in the ESI.†
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the fabrication of the Ag-alloyed CZTS devices by interface doping via a solution method. 
2. Experimental section
2.1 CZTS sample preparation
The CZTS precursor thin films were deposited on a molybdenum (Mo) glass substrate by a spin coating process.29 The precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CuCl (0.37 mol L−1), Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O (0.24 mol L−1), SnCl4·5H2O (0.2 mol L−1), and SC(NH2)2 (1.6 mol L−1) in 2-methoxyethanol, and then stirring the solution at 60 °C for 1 h to obtain a yellow-colored solution. The ratios of Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn in the solution were 0.84 and 1.2. For the Ag-alloyed CZTS thin film, the ratio of Ag/(Ag + Cu) was adjusted from 1% to 7% by dissolving AgCl in the CZTS solution. To obtain the CZTS (and Ag-alloyed CZTS) precursor thin film, the spin coating was repeated 12 times at 3000 rpm for 20 s followed by preheating at 280 °C for 2 min on a hot plate in air. The precursor thin films were then sulfurized at 610 °C under a sulfur atmosphere. The sulfurization process was carried out in a single-zone tube furnace (60 mm diameter), in which the sulfur, the SnS powder and the sample were put together in a sealed graphite box. The ramping time was 50 min, and the hold duration was 20 min, and then the cooling down occurred naturally in the furnace.
2.2 Interface doping and device preparation
A CdS buffer layer (about 60 nm) was deposited on the sulfurized CZTS thin films using chemical bath deposition (CBD). The CBD bath contained CdSO4 (0.015 M, 20 ml), thiourea (0.75 M, 20 ml), ammonia (14.8 M, 20 ml) and deionized water (140 ml). The CBD process was left for 8 min at 80 °C. For interface doping, a solution containing In3+ or Al3+ (made by dissolving 0.1 M InCl3·4H2O or AlCl3·6H2O powders in 2-methoxyethanol) was spin coated on top of the CdS/CZTS and then these solutions were heated at 250–340 °C for 1–10 min on a hot plate in air. Next, the ITO (or AZO) thin films were directly sputtered onto the CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass by direct current (DC; ITO) or radio frequency (RF; AZO) magnetron sputtering under a suitable O2/Ar ratio (2%) atmosphere at room temperature. The optimized AZO thin film was sputtered under 200 W of RF power, with a 15 sccm of Ar flow, 0.4 Pa of working pressure, and 60 min duration at room temperature. It was found that the performance of the device with an intrinsic zinc oxide (i-ZnO) layer was almost same as the device without an i-ZnO layer if CdS layer is deposited well enough, so the i-ZnO layer was abandoned, which simplified the process. Finally, silver was evaporated onto ITO as the top contact electrode in cells of an area of 0.16 cm2, determined by mechanically scribing all the layers. The MgF2 anti-reflection thin films (∼100 nm) were deposited on the superior devices.
2.3 Materials and device characterizations
The morphology and cross-sectional images of the CZTS films and devices were obtained using SEM (Zeiss, SUPRA 55), and the chemical composition of the samples was determined by EDS (Bruker, QUANTAX 200). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the absorber films were collected on an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Ultima IV). The Raman spectrum was characterized by using a Raman confocal microscope (Renishaw, inVia) with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The illuminated JV characteristics of the CZTS devices were measured using a source meter (Keithley, 2400 SourceMeter), and a solar simulator (Zolix, SS150) with an AM 1.5 filter, calibrated with a standard Si reference cell. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were obtained using a solar cell quantum efficiency/incident photon to converted electron (QE/IPCE) measurement system (Zolix, SolarCellScan 100) with calibrated Si and InGaAs photodiodes as references. The capacitance–voltage (CV) and drive level capacitance profiling (DLCP) were measured using a parameter analyzer (Keithley, 4200A-SCS) with a cryogenic platform (JANIS). The CV profiling measurement was performed at 30 mV, with a 5 kHz AC excitation source at a DC bias from 0 to −0.25 V at room temperature. The DLCP measurements were performed with a DC bias from −0.25 to 0 V at a frequency of 1 kHz and AC amplitude from 0.015 V to 0.14 V. The low frequency of 1 kHz was used for the DLCP because the low, low-frequency capacitance reflects both carrier and defect density. The admittance spectroscopy (AS) measurement (Victor, Digital LCR meter) was carried out within the frequency range of 100–1 MHz at a temperature range of 110–300 K (Lake Shore, 325 cryogenic temperature controller). The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were carried out using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, ESCALAB 250Xi), and the XPS measurements were carried out using an instrument equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ESCALAB XI+). The elemental depth profiling was obtained by mildly sputtering the structure of the CdS/CZTS with 1 keV Ar+ ions over an etching area of 2.5 × 2.5 mm. The TEM lamellas, with a thickness of about 100 nm, were made using a focused ion beam (FIB) with a micro-sampling system (FEI, Scios DualBeam). A low beam current of 0.3 nA was used for thicknesses below 1 μm. In the final polishing step, the surface of the lamella was polished with a gallium ion beam of 50 pA to obtain the target thickness of about 100 nm. The cross-sectional TEM images and elemental distribution for the CZTS devices were measured using an instrument (FEI/Thermo Fisher, Titan3 Cubed Themis G2) equipped with an EDS system. The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) characterization was performed on a device using time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) (PicoQuant, FluoTime 300), with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm and power of 50 mW. The evolution of lifetime was fitted using a double exponential function I(t) = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2), and the average lifetime 〈τ〉 = (A1τ1 + A2τ2)/(A1 + A2) can be obtained. For measuring the bare CZTS thin film to determine the effect of interface doping, the CZTS thin film was obtained by etching the CdS layer with HCl from the structure of CdS/CZTS with interface doping with In or Al. Three samples with the same CdS/CZTS structure all had the CdS layer etched, one was not doped, and the others were doped with In and Al on CdS. After etching the CdS layer, the remaining CZTS layers were almost the same except for different types of doping. In addition, to avoid the impact of etching as much as possible, the concentration of HCl used was 30% firstly for etching for about 5 s, and then the concentration of HCl was reduced to 5% for etching for about 60 s.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Ag-alloyed CZTS thin film solar cells
An advantage of using the solution method is the ease of doping desired concentrations of the ions. According to the majority of reports, the best device efficiency can be obtained with ∼5% Ag dopant in the CZTS thin film.10,11,17 Thus, spin coating was performed first to prepare CZTS films alloyed with 1–7% of Ag. Fig. S1 and S2 (ESI†) show the SEM images, XRD, and Raman spectra of the CZTS thin films with different concentrations of Ag dopant. The results showed that as the Ag concentration increased, the grain size of the CZTS was enhanced, and in the small range of Ag concentrations, the CZTS thin films maintained their kesterite phase without any secondary phase. Then, a structure of glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/ITO/Ag was used to prepare a complete CZTS device, and the best device performance was obtained with a 3% Ag dopant (Table S1, ESI†). Compared with the unalloyed device, the enhancement of VOC and FF were the main factors for the improved efficiency after Ag doping, which was attributed to larger grains and a thinner MoS2 layer for the Ag-doped device based on the cross-sectional SEM images (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC, (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CZTS devices without and with 3% Ag doping. 
At present, most experimental studies have indicated that the improvement in the efficiency of the CZTS device with Ag doping is mainly due to better crystallinity, reduced cation-related disorder and substitution defects, decreased holes in the CZTS thin film, and improved lifetime of the minority carrier.9,11,30 Therefore, to confirm the reasons for the improved efficiency, the properties of CAZTS film and device were further investigated. Firstly, the VB edges of the Fermi-level position of the CZTS films were analyzed by using UPS, and the results are shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). For doping concentrations of 1–7%, the corresponding distances between the Fermi energy and VBM were extrapolated to be 0.11, 0.23, 0.41, 0.49, and 0.61 eV. These results indicated that direct doping with Ag reduced the concentration of the p-type carrier (including the contributions of the shallow defects). Then, TRPL was conducted to measure the lifetimes of the minority carriers for the CZTS thin films with and without Ag doping, and the results are shown in Fig. 2a. For the CZTS film with 3% Ag, the lifetime of the minority carrier increased remarkably from 3.1 ns to 6.5 ns.9 This result indicated that the nonradiative recombination caused by deep defects were significantly reduced after doping with Ag. To obtain more information about the carrier concentration, deep level defects, and heterojunction interface states, CV profiling and DLCP analyses were carried out for the CZTS devices with and without 3% Ag doping. Generally, the DLCP signal contained the response of deep defects and free carriers, whereas the difference between CV and DLCP reflected the response of the interface states.31 As shown in Fig. 2b, the width of the depletion layer increased from 170 nm to 212 nm after doping with 3% Ag. The width of the depletion layer is a particularly important parameter in thin-film solar cells, especially for the absorption layer materials with a short diffusion length for minority carriers, such as CIGS, CdTe, and CZTS. The separation of photogenerated carriers mainly depended on the drift via the built-in electric field. Thus, highly efficient devices usually need to be a sufficient width for the depletion layer.32 The ratio of the depletion layer width (w) to the absorption layer width (d) can be defined by w/d. The ratio w/d of the 3% CAZTS device reached ∼0.23, which is considered to be one of the main reasons for the increased device efficiency.33,34 In addition, as shown in Fig. 2b, for the alloyed and unalloyed devices, the interface state changed a little (from 4.4 × 1015 to 1.6 × 1015, relative values) whereas the charge density (NDL, including carriers and deep defects) of the DLCP decreased from 3.37 × 1016 cm−3 to 1.98 × 1016 cm−3.
 Fig. 2  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay at a wavelength of 532 nm excitation for CZTS thin films with and without Ag doping. (b) CV and DLCP profiles, (c) and (d) defects and carrier density spectra derived from AS using Gaussian fitting for CZTS devices without and with 3% Ag doping. 
To obtain the relative quantitative information about the carriers and the deep level defect concentrations, the AS of the CZTS devices with and without Ag doping were analyzed and the details are shown in the ESI.† The temperature-dependent capacity frequency (CF-T) spectrum (AS) of two CZTS solar cells in the temperature range of 110–300 K are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†), and the corresponding Arrhenius plot for the inflection points in the AS is shown in Fig. S6a (ESI†).35–37 As shown in Fig. S6a (ESI†), the activation energy Ea (the energy depth of the average defect relative to the VBM) of the device with Ag doping was reduced from 198 meV to 172 meV after doping. The bigger Ea (150–200 meV) could be assigned to the dominant intrinsic point defects (such as the CuZn related defects), whereas the smaller one (∼50 meV) was derived from the defects of the Cu vacancy (or Ag vacancy), which were the main source for the free hole carriers in CZTS (or CAZTS).38–40 The defect and carrier density spectra (only shown at 250 K and 130 K, respectively) derived from AS using Gaussian fitting for two CZTS devices (with and without Ag doping) are shown in Fig. 2c and d. After doping with Ag, the integrated defect (N1) and carrier density (α) were reduced from 3.64 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.48 × 1016 cm−3 to 1.73 × 1016 cm−3 and 5.5 × 1015 cm−3, respectively. Given the higher formation energy of AgZn and VAg, compared with CuZn and VCu, respectively, appropriate Ag doping can reduce the CuZn related defects (Ea of about 150–200 meV) and the acceptor defect concentration (corresponding to the VCu and VAg shallow level defects).5
Another key factor that affects the device performance is the band alignment (specifically, the CBO) at the CZTS/CdS heterointerface. A favorable CBO is regarded to be 0–0.3 eV with a spike-like alignment, whereas most reported CBO values of CZTS/CdS were of cliff-like type (∼−0.3 eV),41–44 which contribute significantly to the interface recombination.45 To investigate the band alignment at the CZTS/CdS heterojunction interface, XPS measurement, including core-level spectroscopy and XPS VB spectroscopy, were implemented carefully on the CZTS/CdS heterojunction with and without Ag dopant. The CBO of the CdS/CZTS interface could be calculated from the band bending (Vbb) from the core-level of each element at the interface, and in the bulk CZTS and CdS. The details are given in the ESI.†43,44Fig. 3a and b show the VB data of the bulk CdS and CZTS, from which the valence edge was determined by the linear extrapolation of the valence edge to zero intensity. After doping with Ag, the VBM position (relative Fermi energy EF) for CdS remained almost unchanged, whereas the VBM for CZTS changed from −0.15 eV to −0.41 eV, suggesting that the carrier concentration of the CAZTS decreased, which was consistent with the results of the UPS measurements (Fig. S3, ESI†). Based on the calculated Vbb (Fig. S7, ESI†), Fig. 3c and d shows the schema of the band alignment at the CZTS/CdS interface without and with Ag doping. After doping with Ag, the calculated CBO improved from −0.17 eV to −0.08 eV, indicating a more favorable band alignment. When compared with pure CZTS, the CZTS doped with an appropriate amount of Ag could lower the VBM and CBM of CZTS. Thus, the CBO could be reduced to a shallower cliff-like type, which may effectively alleviate the hetero-interface recombination.5,14,46
 Fig. 3  (a and b) XPS valence band data and the linear extrapolation lines for XPS data close to the VBM for bulk CdS/CZTS without and with Ag doping. (c and d) Schema of the band alignment at the CdS/CZTS interfaces without and with Ag doping. Values of the CBO, VBM and Eg are indicated. 
To sum up, the crystallinity and lifetime of the minority carrier of the CAZTS film were significantly improved, and the CBO of the heterojunction interface was reduced. Moreover, the width of the depletion layer was also increased, and the deep defects also decreased. These phenomena were the main reasons for the increased device efficiency from 6.4% to 7.6% after doping with Ag. However, the carrier concentration of the CAZTS thin film was obviously reduced, and therefore, the built-in field decreased severely, leading to a low VOC. Thus, the subsequent study was designed to use interface-doping, with trivalent In and Al, within the heterojunction to improve the carrier concentration at the p-type (CZTS) and n-type (CdS) interfaces, and to simultaneously optimize the interface band alignment.
3.2 Interface doping with In and Al
The schematic diagram of the interface element doping is shown in the fourth step of Scheme 1. Using the optimized Ag dopant in CZTS (the following CZTS-Ag refers to the alloyed CZTS with 3% Ag, or CAZTS), the solution containing In or Al was spin-coated on the top of the CdS/CAZTS, and the product was heat treated at different temperatures and for different durations to determine the appropriate diffusion of In and Al into the CAZTS layer through CdS. Compared with the double-buffer layer process (usually using CBD to deposit In2S3/CdS), the interface element doping by spin coating simplified the process and saved the cost of the materials used in the CBD process. Firstly, In ions (InCl3 solution) were used as doping ions and diffused into the interface of CdS/CAZTS at different temperatures (with a constant annealing time of 8 min). The corresponding device performance is shown in Table S3 (ESI†). Compared with the undoped device, the best efficiency of the CAZTS device (doped at 280 °C) was increased from 7.6% to 9.2%. The heat treatment temperature is a key factor in the heat treatment of a heterojunction. Previous reports on the annealing of the heterojunction or device have shown that the optimal annealing temperature was 270–300 °C.3,27,28 A low annealing temperature led to insufficient element diffusion at the interface of the heterojunction, but an excessively high annealing temperature resulted in serious element diffusion and even damaged the heterojunction. Based on the optimum temperature of 280 °C, the holding time was changed, and the corresponding device performance is shown in Table S4 (ESI†). Similarly, the optimum annealing time was ∼5 min and the best efficiency was 10.6%.
Although the efficiency of the CAZTS device with an interface doped with In was obviously improved, given that In is a rare metal, the earth-abundant and low-cost trivalent element Al was tested to see if it could replace In in the doping of the interface. Doping with Al was also found to improve the performance of the CAZTS device. Compared with In, the optimal heat treatment time for Al doping was ∼10 min, and the corresponding device efficiency was 10.4% (Tables S5 and S6, ESI†). Fig. 4 shows the JV curves and EQE spectra for the CAZTS devices with different types of interface doping. The VOC, JSC, FF, and EQE of the devices were significantly improved after doping with the interface elements. The device efficiency was improved from 7.6% (without interface doping) to 10.6% (with In dopant) and 10.4% (with Al dopant), as summarized in Table S8 (ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Current density–voltage (JV) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC, (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CAZTS devices with In and Al interface doping. 
To investigate the inter diffusion of elements between CdS/CAZTS with In and Al doping, EDS line-scanning by TEM (TEM-EDS) was adopted because of the better interface resolution obtained with a thin slice of the sample (∼100 nm).28Fig. 5 shows the TEM-EDS and high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) characterization for the two CAZTS devices with In and Al dopants. Based on the device structure (ITO/CdS/CAZTS, without i-ZnO), and to avoid the influence of In from the ITO on the doping concentration of In at the CdS/CAZTS interface when executing EDS line-scanning, the EDS line-scanning was only carried out on AZO based devices (AZO/CdS/CAZTS). Firstly, the heterojunction annealing promoted the interdiffusion of elements between the CdS/CAZTS interfaces, which indicated that within the heterojunction region, Cu, Zn, and Sn were slightly increased in the CdS layer, whereas Cd was also found in the CZTS layer.3,28 The phenomenon was different for the diffusion of In and Al elements. Only a small amount of Al could be found in the CAZTS (∼1%) and CdS (4%) layers. In contrast, the amount of In was significantly increased in the CAZTS (∼4%) and CdS (∼12%) layers, indicating that there was a bigger diffusion coefficient for In than for Al.
 Fig. 5  EDS elemental line scanning of CAZTS devices with In-doping (a), and Al-doping (b), HAADF images and EDS mapping for the CAZTS devices with In-doping (c), and Al-doping (d). The EDS line scan data were collected along the direction of the yellow arrow in the HAADF images. The post doping was carried out at 280 °C for 5 min and 10 min for In and Al, respectively. 
As mentioned, previously, doping the CZTS with Ag could change the CBO between the CdS/CZTS heterojunction. To further analyze the band alignment of CdS/CAZTS after doping the interface with In or Al, XPS depth measurements were performed again for the CdS/CAZTS with doped interfaces, as described in Section 3.2. Fig. 6a and b shows the VB data of bulk CdS and CAZTS with the interface doped with In or Al, respectively. After doping with In, the VBM of CAZTS decreased from 0.41 eV (without In-doping, in Fig. 4b) to 0.37 eV, and the VBM of CdS increased from 1.48 eV (without doping, in Fig. 4b) to 1.62 eV. These results indicated that doping with In could simultaneously improve the concentrations of the p-type and n-type carriers. For doping with Al, the concentrations of the p-type and n-type carriers also increased, but the increase was relatively weaker than that when the doping was with In. Based on the calculated Vbb (Fig. S7, ESI†), the estimated CBO values of the CdS/CZTS interface for doping with In and Al were −0.13 eV and −0.05 eV, respectively (Fig. 6c and d). Compared with the CBO without interface dopant (−0.08 eV in Fig. 4d), doping with In decreased the CBO to a more cliff-like type, and this was mainly because of the enhancement of the carrier concentrations in CdS and CAZTS, whereas the CBO with Al dopant remained at ∼−0.05 eV, which was almost the same as that of the CBO without interface doping.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) XPS valence band data and linear extrapolation lines for XPS data close to the VBM for bulk CdS/CAZTS with In and Al doping. (c and d) Schema of the band alignment at the CdS/CAZTS interfaces with In and Al doping. Values of the CBO, VBM and Eg are indicated. 
To confirm the influence of doping In or Al on the lifetime of the minority carrier of CAZTS, TRPL was used to test the CAZTS devices with or without In or Al interface doping, and the results are shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†). For the three devices, the lifetimes of the minority carriers were almost the same, i.e., 1.9 ns, 2.2 ns and 2.4 ns for the devices with Ag, In, and Al, respectively. Given that the charge-separation effect caused by the heterojunction in a complete device can greatly affect the lifetime of the minority carrier, the lifetimes obtained from a bare thin film and a completed device were different.47,48 Therefore, a single absorber layer film was measured with TRPL by etching the CdS layer from the CdS/CAZTS heterojunction (after interface doping) via HCl, and the results are shown in Fig. 7a. For the CAZTS films with an interface doped with In or Al, the lifetimes of the minority carrier (4.3 ns for In and 6.1 ns for Al) decreased unexpectedly when compared with the CAZTS film without interface doping (7.6 ns). One possible reason for this was that the carrier concentration of the CAZTS thin film increased after doping with In or Al, and the higher carrier concentration may have increased the probability of Shockley–Read–Hall (S–R–H) recombination, thus reducing the lifetime of the minority carrier.49,50 Doping with In increased the carrier concentration more than the doping with Al did, resulting in a shorter lifetime of the minority carrier.
 Fig. 7  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay at 532 nm excitation for CAZTS thin films with In and with Al doping. (b) The CV and DLCP profiles, (c) and (d) the defects and the carriers' density spectra derived from AS using Gaussian fitting for CAZTS devices with In and with Al interface doping. 
The CV and DLCP measurements were also conducted for the CAZTS devices with the interface doped with In or Al, and the results are shown in Fig. 7b. The depletion layer width decreased from 210 nm to 165 nm and 185 nm after doping the interface with In and Al, respectively. In addition, compared with the undoped CAZTS device, the interface state density increased after doping with In (4.5 × 1015), whereas the effect of doping with Al on the interface state was relatively small (1.7 × 1015). Compared with the CBO of the undoped device (−0.08 eV), the CBO of the In-doped interface was ∼−0.13 eV, which belonged to the cliff-like type, indicating a relatively large interface recombination. After doping with Al, the carrier concentration of the interface was changed appropriately, and the CBO of the interface became ∼−0.05 eV. Thus, the problem with the interface recombination was alleviated. In addition, the NDL increased from 1.98 × 1016 cm−3 to 2.69 × 1016 cm−3 (Al) and 2.98 × 1016 cm−3 (In), respectively. Given that the NDL included the contribution of deep defects and the concentration of the free carrier, the AS was performed to determine the relative value of the deep defect and the concentration of the free carrier.
For devices with interfaces doped with In and Al, temperature-dependent capacitance frequency (CF-T, AS) from 110 K to 300 K are shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The corresponding Arrhenius plot for the inflection points in the AS and the defect density spectra derived from the AS by using Gaussian fitting for two devices are shown in Fig. S6b (ESI†), and Fig. 7c and d, respectively. The fitted position of the activation energy (Ea) after doping with In was 193 meV, which should correspond to the energy level position of the CuZn defect. The corresponding defect concentration was 2.98 × 1016 cm−3, which had changed slightly when compared with that of the undoped device. However, after doping with Al, although the defect concentration remained almost the same, the activation energy decreased to ∼179 meV. Moreover, after doping with In and Al, the concentration of the shallow defects (α, which can be considered as the carrier concentration) increased from 5.5 × 1015 cm−3 (undoped) to 2.62 × 1016 cm−3 and 1.34 × 1016 cm−3 after doping with In and Al, respectively. This result indicated that the In or Al ions had diffused into the CAZTS layer through the CdS layer after heat treatment, forming a certain concentration of substitutional defects, such as InSn or AlSn. Thus, the concentration of the p-type carrier increased. The specific formation energy of InSn or AlSn and the energy level position of the substitutional defects may need further study and theoretical calculation. In fact, due to the strong diffusion ability of In, In can diffuse from the CdS interface to the deep position of CAZTS during post annealing, replacing more Cu, Zn or Sn to form possible defects with deep levels, resulting in a greater activation energy (193 eV) after In doping compared with those obtained with no doping or Al doping; therefore the defect density had also increased. Nevertheless, as shown in Table S7 (ESI†), after In doping, the defect density did not increase much (from 1.73 × 1016 to 2.11 × 1016 cm−3), but the interface carrier concentration showed an obvious improvement, from 5.5 × 1015 to 2.62 × 1016 cm−3. At the same time, the doping concentration of CdS also increased (this can be deduced from the increase of VBM after In doping shown in Table S2, ESI†); therefore the n-type and p-type carrier concentrations had improved together, which should be the main reason for the improvement of device performance after In doping.
To understand the effect of interface doping with In and Al on the recombination mechanism, temperature-dependent current–voltage (IVT) measurements were conducted to obtain the activation energy (Ea) of the main recombination process by extrapolating the VOC to a temperature of 0 K.51 As shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†), the CAZTS devices with different doping showed a lower EA compared to Eg, which indicates that the main recombination mechanism was still the interface recombination at the buffer/absorber interface. The devices without and with In doping (CZTS–Ag and CZTS–Ag–In) had almost the same EA values (1.19 and 1.20 eV) whereas the device with Al doping (CZTS–Ag–Al) had a higher EA value (1.27 eV), which was closer to that of the absorber band gap, suggesting that the interface recombination had been reduced due to a smaller CBO value.
Although doping with In at the interface can improve the concentrations of the n-type and p-type carriers for the CAZTS thin film, the excessive diffusion of In would reduce the CBO of the CdS/CAZTS heterojunction to a more cliff-like type, and the lifetime of the minority carriers, and the density of the deep defects would also be affected by doping with In. In contrast, due to the lower diffusion coefficient, Al doping at the interface could alleviate the band mismatch and reduced lifetime caused by the excessive diffusion generated by doping with In, thus enhancing the device performance.
3.3 Substitution of ITO with AZO and superior device
As an excellent transparent conductive oxide (TCO), ITO is always used as the electrode in thin-film solar cells because of its high conductivity, good stability, and suitable work function. However, the use of rare-metal In in ITO is bound to affect the future large-scale commercial application for thin-film solar cells. In this work, one of the purposes of using Al instead of In as the interface dopant was to reduce the use of In. The efficiency of the CAZTS device also showed that interface doping with Al, instead of In, had a good effect. However, ITO was still used as the front electrode in the device, so another inexpensive TCO (AZO) was used to replace ITO as the front electrode. The preliminary experimental results showed that the efficiency of the device was relatively low after using AZO, mainly because of the lower FF (∼60%) caused by the high resistance of the AZO thin film. Therefore, by adjusting the sputtering power, pressure, Ar flow, and time when sputtering the AZO thin film, the efficiency was enhanced to 10.7%. The detailed deposition process, and the optical and electrical properties for the AZO thin film are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†). Fig. 8c and d shows the cross-sectional SEM images of the devices with AZO. The thickness of the AZO thin film reached ∼700 nm, which was obviously thicker than that of the ITO film. Fig. 8a and b show a comparison of the JV and EQE curves for the CZTS devices with ITO or AZO. The JV parameters for the best device with different conditions are summarized in Table S8 (ESI†) and the corresponding statistical data are also shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†). Although a certain gap still existed for the efficiency when compared with the highest efficiency of the device with ITO (it should be noted that in this work, antireflection MgF2 had a positive effect on the device with ITO, but no effect on the device with AZO), the device with AZO had a reduced requirement for the use of In. This result provided a foundation for the future commercial application of low-cost thin-film devices.
 Fig. 8  (a) Current density–voltage (JV) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC for the CAZTS devices with ITO and MgF2 anti-reflection (CAZTS–In–MgF2, In doping with MgF2, CAZTS–Al–MgF2, Al doping with MgF2) and CAZTS devices with AZO (CAZTS–In–ZAO, In doping, CAZTS–Al–ZAO, Al doping). (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CAZTS devices with AZO, and In and Al interface doping. 
4. Conclusion
Appropriate alloying with Ag in the CZTS could significantly improve the crystallinity of the film, thus reducing the CuZn-related defects. Thus, the lifetime of the minority carrier was increased. In addition, alloying with Ag lowered the CBM, so the CBO of the CdS/CAZTS heterojunction was reduced to a more favorable band alignment. This phenomenon indicated a reduction in the interface recombination, improving the efficiency of CZTS after alloying with Ag. Nevertheless, alloying with Ag also reduced the concentration of the acceptor carrier. This event decreased the built-in electric field of the device, leading to a lower VOC of the device. To further enhance the performance of the CAZTS thin-film solar cell, a simple spin coating process was applied to achieve the interfacial diffusion of In and Al at the CdS/CAZTS heterojunction which improved the concentrations of the interface n-type and p-type carriers. Moreover, doping with Al alleviated the band mismatch and the reduced lifetime of the minority carrier caused by the excessive diffusion which occurred with In doping. Finally, an efficiency of more than 11% for the CAZTS thin-film solar cell was obtained. Doping the interface with ions via spin coating provides an alternative approach for promoting the diffusion of elements at the interface of the thin-film heterojunction, improving the property of the interface layer, and optimizing the interface band structure. Finally, the interfacial doping with Al, which was used to improve the CAZTS device performance, and the use of inexpensive AZO to replace ITO, provided experimental support for a low-cost commercial application of In-free CZTS thin-film solar cells in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFE0203400), the Science and Technology Plan Project of Shenzhen (JCYJ20190808120001755), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62074102) and the Key Project of Department of Education of Guangdong Province, China (No. 2018KZDXM059). The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance with FIB and TEM given to them by staff of the Electron Microscope Center of Shenzhen University.
References
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shin, B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602366 CrossRef .
C. Yan, J. L. Huang, K. W. Sun, S. Johnston, Y. F. Zhang, H. Sun, A. B. Pu, M. R. He, F. Y. Liu, K. Eder, L. M. Yang, J. M. Cairney, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, Z. Hameiri, J. A. Stride, S. Y. Chen, M. A. Green and X. J. Hao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 764–772 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Son, S. H. Kim, S. Y. Kim, Y. I. Kim, J. H. Sim, S. N. Park, D. H. Jeon, D. K. Hwang, S. J. Sung, J. K. Kang, K. J. Yang and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25279–25289 RSC .
Z.-K. Yuan, S. Chen, H. Xiang, X.-G. Gong, A. Walsh, J.-S. Park, I. Repins and S.-H. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6733–6743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zeng and Y. Zhang, Adv Sci., 2018, 5, 1700744 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gershon, Y. S. Lee, P. Antunez, R. Mankad, S. Singh, D. Bishop, O. Gunawan, M. Hopstaken and R. Haight, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502468 CrossRef .
A. Guchhait, Z. Su, Y. F. Tay, S. Shukla, W. Li, S. W. Leow, J. M. R. Tan, S. Lie, O. Gunawan and L. H. Wong, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1256–1261 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hages, M. J. Koeper and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Qi, D.-X. Kou, W.-H. Zhou, Z.-J. Zhou, Q.-W. Tian, Y.-N. Meng, X.-S. Liu, Z.-L. Du and S.-X. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2401–2410 RSC .
Y. Gong, R. Qiu, C. Niu, J. Fu, E. Jedlicka, R. Giridharagopal, Q. Zhu, Y. Zhou, W. Yan, S. Yu, J. Jiang, S. Wu, D. S. Ginger, W. Huang and H. Xin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101927 CrossRef CAS .
U. Saha and M. K. Alam, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 4905–4913 RSC .
W.-C. Huang, S.-Y. Wei, C.-H. Cai, W.-H. Ho and C.-H. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15170–15181 RSC .
Y. Cui, K. Zhao, C. Liu, H. Xiang, H. Liang and Y. Jia, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Chang, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, S. Yuan, Y. Qi and S. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 9–15 CrossRef .
G. Sai Gautam, T. P. Senftle and E. A. Carter, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4543–4555 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hadke, S. Levcenko, S. Lie, C. J. Hages, J. A. Marquez, T. Unold and L. H. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802540 CrossRef .
A. Ibrahim, A. Guchhait, S. Hadke, H. L. Seng and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10402–10407 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Qi, X. Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, D. X. Kou, W. H. Zhou, Z. J. Zhou, S. J. Yuan, Y. N. Meng and S. X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2292–2300 RSC .
J. Fu, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, S. Yuan, Y. Qi and S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22292–22301 RSC .
D.-H. Kuo and M. Tsega, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 035801 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, C. Ozaki, Gunawan, T. Harada, Z. Tang, T. Minemoto, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pei, J. Guo, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, Y. Meng and S. Wu, Sol. Energy, 2017, 148, 157–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giraldo, C. M. Ruiz, M. Espíndola-Rodríguez, Y. Sánchez, M. Placidi, D. Cozza, D. Barakel, L. Escoubas, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and E. Saucedo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 151, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Jiang, Z. Shen, Y. Sun, H. Guo, L. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Ao, H. Wang and Y. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 64, 288–295 CrossRef .
J. Kim, H. Hiroi, T. K. Todorov, O. Gunawan, M. Kuwahara, T. Gokmen, D. Nair, M. Hopstaken, B. Shin, Y. S. Lee, W. Wang, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7427–7431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, C. Yan, J. Li, M. P. Suryawanshi, J. Kim, M. A. Green and X. Hao, Adv Sci., 2021, 8, 2004313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, G. Liang, P. Fan, J. Luo, Z. Zheng, Z. Xie, W. Wang, S. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Wei, C. Yan, J. Huang, X. Hao and F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000121 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Su, K. Sun, Z. Han, H. Cui, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li, X. Hao, Y. Liu and M. A. Green, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 500 RSC .
W. Li, X. Liu, H. Cui, S. Huang and X. Hao, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 625, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Heath, J. D. Cohen and W. N. Shafarman, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 1000–1010 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kirchartz and U. Rau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703385 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Wang, M. Luo, J. Tang, C. Chen, W. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Han and Y. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fan, Z. Xie, G. Liang, M. Ishaq, S. Chen, Z. Zheng, C. Yan, J. Huang, X. Hao, Y. Zhang and Z. Su, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 61, 186–194 CrossRef .
G. Brammertz, M. Buffiere, S. Oueslati, H. ElAnzeery, K. Ben Messaoud, S. Sahayaraj, C. Koble, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 163904 CrossRef .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Müller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, W. Yang, B. Bob, C.-J. Hsu, B. Lei and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, A. Walsh, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1522–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J.-H. Yang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245204 CrossRef .
O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, C. W. Warren, J. D. Cohen, T. K. Todorov, D. A. R. Barkhouse, S. Bag, J. Tang, B. Shin and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 253905 CrossRef .
C. Yan, F. Liu, N. Song, B. K. Ng, J. A. Stride, A. Tadich and X. Hao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 173901 CrossRef .
A. Crovetto and O. Hansen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 169, 177–194 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santoni, F. Biccari, C. Malerba, M. Valentini, R. Chierchia and A. Mittiga, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 175101 CrossRef .
K. Sun, C. Yan, F. Liu, J. Huang, F. Zhou, J. A. Stride, M. Green and X. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600046 CrossRef .
N. Nisika, K. Kaur and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21547–21584 RSC .
M. Gansukh, Z. Li, M. E. Rodriguez, S. Engberg, F. M. A. Martinho, S. L. Marino, E. Stamate, J. Schou, O. Hansen and S. Canulescu, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 18388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Repins, B. J. Stanbery, D. L. Young, S. S. Li, W. K. Metzger, C. L. Perkins, W. N. Shafarman, M. E. Beck, L. Chen, V. K. Kapur, D. Tarrant, M. D. Gonzalez, D. G. Jensen, T. J. Anderson, X. Wang, L. L. Kerr, B. Keyes, S. Asher, A. Delahoy and B. Von Roedern, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 25–43 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hages, A. Redinger, S. Levcenko, H. Hempel, M. J. Koeper, R. Agrawal, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann and T. Unold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700167 CrossRef .
V. C. Lopes, A. J. Syllaios and M. C. Chen, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1993, 8, 824–841 CrossRef CAS .

          M. F. M. Fathil, M. K. M. Arshad, U. Hashim, A. R. Ruslinda, R. M. Ayub, A. H. Azman, M. Nurfaiz, M. Z. M. Kamarudin, M. Aminuddin and A. R. Munir, 2014 IEEE International Conference on Semiconductor Electronics (ICSE2014), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,  2014 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta07928jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the fabrication of the Ag-alloyed CZTS devices by interface doping via a solution method.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC, (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CZTS devices without and with 3% Ag doping.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay at a wavelength of 532 nm excitation for CZTS thin films with and without Ag doping. (b) CV and DLCP profiles, (c) and (d) defects and carrier density spectra derived from AS using Gaussian fitting for CZTS devices without and with 3% Ag doping.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) XPS valence band data and the linear extrapolation lines for XPS data close to the VBM for bulk CdS/CZTS without and with Ag doping. (c and d) Schema of the band alignment at the CdS/CZTS interfaces without and with Ag doping. Values of the CBO, VBM and Eg are indicated.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current density–voltage (JV) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC, (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CAZTS devices with In and Al interface doping.	 

 	Fig. 5  EDS elemental line scanning of CAZTS devices with In-doping (a), and Al-doping (b), HAADF images and EDS mapping for the CAZTS devices with In-doping (c), and Al-doping (d). The EDS line scan data were collected along the direction of the yellow arrow in the HAADF images. The post doping was carried out at 280 °C for 5 min and 10 min for In and Al, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) XPS valence band data and linear extrapolation lines for XPS data close to the VBM for bulk CdS/CAZTS with In and Al doping. (c and d) Schema of the band alignment at the CdS/CAZTS interfaces with In and Al doping. Values of the CBO, VBM and Eg are indicated.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence decay at 532 nm excitation for CAZTS thin films with In and with Al doping. (b) The CV and DLCP profiles, (c) and (d) the defects and the carriers' density spectra derived from AS using Gaussian fitting for CAZTS devices with In and with Al interface doping.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Current density–voltage (JV) curves, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra and corresponding integrated JSC for the CAZTS devices with ITO and MgF2 anti-reflection (CAZTS–In–MgF2, In doping with MgF2, CAZTS–Al–MgF2, Al doping with MgF2) and CAZTS devices with AZO (CAZTS–In–ZAO, In doping, CAZTS–Al–ZAO, Al doping). (c) and (d) cross-sectional SEM images for CAZTS devices with AZO, and In and Al interface doping.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta07928j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
