Vibrational solvatochromism in organic photovoltaic materials: method to distinguish molecules at donor/acceptor interfaces  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CP00971G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CP00971G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14144-14152Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsVibrational solvatochromism in organic photovoltaic materials: method to distinguish molecules at donor/acceptor interfaces

        
          
            Ryan D. 
            Pensack
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyle M. 
            Banyas
          
        
       and 

        
          
            John B. 
            Asbury
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: jasbury@psu.edu
Received 
      23rd June 2010
    , Accepted 26th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      27th September 2010
    AbstractWe report the observation of vibrational solvatochromism in organic photovoltaic materials. The frequency of the carbonyl (CO) stretch of the methyl ester group of the functionalized fullerene, PCBM, is sensitive to the local phase separated morphology of polymer blends and bilayers incorporating the fullerene. In particular, PCBM molecules at interfaces with conjugated polymers exhibit higher frequency carbonyl stretch vibrations in comparison to molecules imbedded in the interiors of PCBM clusters/layers. The resulting frequency gradient was recently used to examine the dynamics of charge photogeneration in a blend of the conjugated polymer, CN-MEH-PPV, with PCBM. In this contribution, we explore the origin of the frequency shift and show that it arises from variations in the inhomogeneous solvent environments experienced by PCBM molecules as a result of phase separation in the polymer blend.
Introduction
Growing evidence in the literature indicates the formation of charge transfer (CT) excitons at interfaces in organic photovoltaic (OPV) polymer blends.1–11 CT excitons form in OPV materials when primary photo-excitations diffuse to electron donor/acceptor interfaces where electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor can occur. In Fig. 1A, the primary photo-excitation is represented as a Frenkel exciton on the donor (D) that then transfers an electron to the acceptor (A) forming a CT exciton (D+–A−). Other pathways of CT exciton formation include photo-excitation of the acceptor or Forster resonant energy transfer followed by electron transfer. Bound polaron pairs12 may also form in the place of Frenkel excitons1,13 as the primary photo-excitations in organic semiconductors. Electrons and holes in CT excitons are expected to be coulombically bound by several tenths of an electron-volt (eV).3,14–17 Dissociation of CT excitons to form charge separated states (D+⋯A−) has been implicated in the charge photogeneration mechanism in organic solar cells,1,2 and the quantum yield of their dissociation appears to limit the photon to electron conversion efficiency in certain OPV materials.4,17–19
 Fig. 1  (A) Photophysical events leading to charge photogeneration in organic solar cells. Step 1: primary photo-excitations form CT excitons at donor/acceptor interfaces. Step 2: CT excitons dissociate to form separated electrons and holes. (B) Comparison of LUMO and HOMO energy levels of an ideal electron donor relative to P3HT and PCBM. Decreasing the energy difference between the donating and accepting states reduces energy losses in the charge photogeneration process but also reduces the driving force for charge separation. (C) Molecular structures of a selection of electron donors and acceptors. 
Recent efforts to increase the efficiency of organic solar cells have sought to extend their absorption characteristics to longer wavelengths and to decrease the energy differences between electron donating and accepting states to minimize energy losses in the charge photogeneration process.20–31Fig. 1B, which is inspired by Fig. 2 from ref. 20, illustrates the energy levels of the lowest unoccupied and highest occupied molecular orbitals (LUMO and HOMO, respectively) of an ideal electron donor compared to a common electron acceptor, PCBM. The energy values are referenced to the vacuum state. Molecular structures of a selection of electron donors and acceptors are represented in Fig. 1C. While decreasing the energy differences between electron donating and accepting states minimizes energy losses, it also decreases the driving force for electron–hole pairs to overcome their mutual coulombic attraction. Indeed, the efficiency of charge photogeneration in numerous OPV materials has been linked to energy differences between the electron donating and accepting states.3,14,17,18
 Fig. 2  (A) CT exciton dissociation was examined with ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy by following the frequency evolution of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM during the charge separation reaction (see ref. 36). The frequency evolution of the carbonyl group reveals the charge separation dynamics because the vibrational frequency of the vibrational mode is sensitive to the position of PCBM molecules relative to the polymer/PCBM interfaces (B). 
Although certain OPV materials such as P3HT blended with PCBM appear to require substantial energy differences between electron donating and accepting states to efficiently separate electron–hole pairs,17 other champion materials such as PCPDTBT blended with PCBM do not exhibit this requirement.18 Champion materials such as these have led to dramatic increases in organic solar cell power conversion efficiency with state of the art values approaching 7%.32–34 While these results are certainly encouraging, they underscore limitations of our current understanding of the mechanism of charge photogeneration in OPV materials.
An important pathway toward advancing our current understanding of charge photogeneration is the development of new experimental approaches to observe the process with molecular sensitivity. Toward this end, we recently demonstrated the use of ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy to examine the dynamics of CT exciton dissociation in a blend of the conjugated polymer, CN-MEH-PPV, with PCBM.35–39 In these experiments, an ultrafast visible pump pulse is used to photo-excite the conjugated polymer that then transfers an electron to a PCBM molecule (Fig. 2A). As illustrated in Fig. 1A, CT excitons and charge separated states consist of nearly identical electronic species (positively charged electron donors and negatively charged electron acceptors) that differ primarily by the spatial separation of the charges.40 Consequently, it has proven challenging to distinguish these electronic states41–44 which has hindered the detailed examination of CT exciton dissociation. However, we demonstrated that CT excitonic states can be distinguished from charge separated states on the basis of their vibrational spectra.35,36 The frequencies of the carbonyl groups of PCBM molecules are sensitive to the local phase separated morphology of the polymer blend (Fig. 2B) such that the dynamics of CT exciton dissociation can be examined directly through the time-dependent evolution of the vibrational features of the carbonyl groups (Fig. 2A).35
In this contribution, we report the origin of the sensitivity of the carbonyl stretch frequency of PCBM to the local phase separated morphology. In particular, the effective solvent environment surrounding the carbonyl group of a PCBM molecule differs significantly depending on whether the molecule resides near a PCBM/polymer interface or in the interior of a PCBM cluster. In this context, the solvent consists of surrounding PCBM molecules and/or polymer segments. The variation in the solvent environment between interfacial versus interior regions causes a gradient in the vibrational frequency of the carbonyl stretch mode (Fig. 2B) through a combination of solvatochromism45 and a vibrational Stark shift.46,47 We find that the solvatochromic shift is significantly larger in comparison to the vibrational Stark shift in the PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blend. Solvatochromism occurs in a variety of vibrational modes. Thus, we anticipate that this approach will be broadly applicable to the study of charge photogeneration in a range of OPV materials.
Experimental
The instrumentation utilized in the current investigation includes the following. Scanning electron microscopy was performed on a JEOL 6700F field emission SEM instrument equipped with secondary electron and backscatter electron detectors at an accelerating voltage of 8 kV. Polymer blend films were deposited onto thin glass microscope cover slips using the same procedures as those used to deposit films for the spectroscopic investigations (see below). This practice ensured that the blend morphology observed with SEM imaging matched the morphology examined spectroscopically. After deposition of the polymer blends, the samples were cryo-cleaved by immersing them in liquid nitrogen and fracturing them with forceps. Select shards were coated on both sides with gold. Silver paint was used to adhere the shards to mounting stubs, and cross sections of samples were coated with iridium to prevent charging distortions during SEM imaging. All measurements were conducted at room temperature. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy measurements were conducted on a Thermo Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer under nitrogen purged atmosphere. The spectral resolution of the instrument was 1.0 cm−1. Samples for FTIR measurements were either deposited onto NaCl optical flats (polymer blend films) or held in a liquid sample cell between CaF2 optical flats (liquid samples). Polymer blend film thicknesses ranged from 20 to 40 μm depending on the blend composition such that the optical density of the carbonyl absorption of PCBM was near unity. Optical spacers used for the liquid measurements were 500 μm thick. All measurements were conducted at room temperature.
The samples utilized in the current investigation were prepared in the following manner. Films of PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blend films were prepared by first co-dissolving requisite quantities of PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV in chlorobenzene. The polymer blend ratios are all reported according to the relative masses of PCBM and the polymer. The solutions were heated and sonicated as needed to completely dissolve both materials. The solution containing both PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV was drop cast onto CaF2 optical flats and spun at 80 rpm to ensure the film dried uniformly. Typical drying times were about 20 min such that the PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV samples should be considered fully solvent annealed. In fact, we observe no change in spectroscopic characteristics upon subsequent solvent or thermal annealing of these polymer blends. We found that PCBM and RR-P3HT polymer blends undergo macroscale phase separation when drop cast from chlorobenzene solution to form thick films. Thus, the PCBM spectrum in drop cast blends closely resembles the pure PCBM spectrum (lower carbonyl frequency). To measure PCBM in contact with RR-P3HT, we used a bilayer geometry. RR-P3HT from Reike Metals was purified by Soxlet extraction with methanol and then dichloromethane to remove the low molecular weight fraction from the as received material. The residual high molecular weight fraction is insoluble in dichloromethane. A film of pure RR-P3HT was deposited onto a CaF2 optical flat by spray coating a 2 weight% solution in chlorobenzene using an air-brush.48 Then, a layer of PCBM was spin coated at 1000 rpm from a 1 weight% solution in dichloromethane. The resulting bilayer film had an optical density of 0.05 for the carbonyl stretch of PCBM. The same procedure was used to prepare bilayer films of PDI on a layer of pure RR-P3HT for which the optical densities of the symmetric and asymmetric carbonyl stretch modes are about 0.125. Linear IR spectra of the bilayer samples and the pure PCBM or PDI films to which they are compared are displayed in Fig. 3B and C.
 Fig. 3  (A) Concentration dependent linear IR spectra of PCBM blended with CN-MEH-PPV. (B) Comparison of linear IR spectra of a PCBM/RR-P3HT bilayer with a spectrum of pure PCBM. (C) Comparison of linear IR spectra of PDI/RR-P3HT bilayer with a spectrum of pure PDI. All spectra display a shift of the carbonyl absorption of PCBM (PDI) to higher frequencies when in contact with the polymers. The frequency shift arises from a solvatochromic shift due to differing solvent environments at PCBM (PDI)/polymer interfaces versus the interiors of PCBM (PDI) clusters (layers). 
The following describes procedures to prepare samples for the solvatochromic studies. For the samples of benzophenone dispersed in PCBM or CN-MEH-PPV, both materials were co-dissolved in chlorobenzene, and the solutions were drop cast onto NaCl optical flats in the same manner as the PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blends. Composition ratios of 1∶0.005–1∶0.02 for PCBM∶benzophenone and CN-MEH-PPV∶benzophenone were utilized to examine the potential influence of aggregation of benzophenone molecules on the linear IR spectra. Solutions of 0.020 molar methyl stearate and PCBM were prepared in various solvents for the solvatochromic studies of their methyl ester groups. Liquid samples were held in a sealed sample cell utilizing CaF2 optical flats as window materials. PCBM and PDI were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. RR-P3HT was obtained from Reike Metals and purified by Soxlet extraction (see above). Methyl stearate, benzophenone, hexanes, diethyl ether, benzene, tetrachloromethane, 1,2-dichloroethane, acetonitrile, dichloromethane, and trichloromethane were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received.
Results and discussion
Evidence for frequency–morphology correlations

Fig. 3A displays the influence of blending PCBM with CN-MEH-PPV on the frequency of the carbonyl stretch vibration of the methyl ester group of PCBM. Four linear IR spectra are represented at blend ratios varying from pure PCBM to dilute PCBM in CN-MEH-PPV (PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV = 1∶0, 4∶1, 1∶1, 0.1∶1). A film of pure PCBM with spectrum labeled ‘1∶0’ exhibits the lowest frequency carbonyl stretch vibration in the set. The density of pure PCBM is 1.5 g cm−3 corresponding to 1.0 molecules nm−3.49 The average distance between methyl ester groups in PCBM clusters is thus 1 nm indicating that the mean interaction between carbonyl groups is weak. Because no hydrogen bonding or other polar groups are present, the carbonyl stretch modes of PCBM are well described as dilute, weakly coupled local oscillators. Thus, the spectrum of the pure PCBM film represents the spectrum of isolated methyl ester groups that are ‘solvated’ by molecules closely resembling buckminsterfullerene (C60).
Consecutively larger quantities of CN-MEH-PPV were added to PCBM to obtain polymer blend films with blend ratios of 4∶1, 1∶1, and 0.1∶1. The other linear IR spectra of the carbonyl stretch absorption of the blends in Fig. 3A were obtained by subtracting a linear IR spectrum of pure CN-MEH-PPV from the spectra of the blends. The linear IR spectra resulting from this subtraction procedure are normalized to their absorption maxima and labeled according to the corresponding blend ratios. The comparison of the spectra reveals a monotonic shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequency by 3–4 cm−1 with added CN-MEH-PPV.35,36 The shift occurs by a broadening of the distribution preferentially on the higher frequency side of the transition. The linear IR spectra of blends with PCBM content lower than the 0.1∶1 blend ratio exhibit negligible further shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequency. For comparison, a spectrum of a film of pure CN-MEH-PPV in the same spectral region is included in Fig. 3A. The amplitude of the spectrum is scaled to match the amplitude of the CN-MEH-PPV spectrum that was subtracted from the linear IR spectrum of the 1∶1 polymer blend film. Comparison of the spectra of the blends versus pure CN-MEH-PPV reveals that the frequency shift results from perturbation of the vibrational potential of the carbonyl stretch rather than spectral interference from the polymer absorption.
The progressive shift in frequency observed with increasing CN-MEH-PPV content is interpreted in terms of increased interfacial area between the PCBM and polymer phases as a result of smaller average PCBM clusters. We previously reported a phase separated morphology of the 1∶1 polymer blend with approximately 50 nm diameter PCBM clusters.35Fig. 4 represents SEM cross-sectional images of PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blends of varying composition. The SEM images were obtained from polymer blend films deposited under identical conditions to those used to deposit films for the IR spectroscopic study. The SEM images indicate that the average PCBM cluster size (roughly spherical objects in the images)35 decreases as the polymer content increases. We selected the 1∶1–0.3∶1 range of blend compositions for display in Fig. 4 because the changes in blend morphology are particularly notable. The decrease in PCBM cluster size results in an increase of the average surface area to volume ratio with more fullerenes in close contact with CN-MEH-PPV. Because an increase in surface area to volume ratio is associated with a shift of the carbonyl absorption to higher frequency, we conclude that PCBM molecules in close contact with CN-MEH-PPV have higher frequency carbonyl stretch vibrations in comparison to molecules further removed from the polymer. The correlation of frequency and position is illustrated in Fig. 2B.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of SEM cross-sectional images of the phase separated morphology of PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blends. The images show a gradual decrease of the average PCBM cluster size (roughly spherical objects in the SEM images) with increased polymer content. The corresponding increase in surface area to volume ratio of the PCBM clusters results in the shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequencies in the blends (see Fig. 3A). 
The lower panels of Fig. 3 compare linear IR spectra of the carbonyl stretch vibrations in bilayer films of PCBM or PDI spin cast on top of layers of RR-P3HT versus linear IR spectra of films of pure PCBM or PDI. The spectra in Fig. 3B have been normalized to their absorbance maxima. PDI like PCBM is a small molecule electron acceptor (see Fig. 1C). The comparisons reveal that the shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequency occurs in other donor/acceptor systems—indicating that the effect is not specific to PCBM or CN-MEH-PPV.
The shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequency results from a perturbation of the vibrational potential of the carbonyl group.35 We recently proposed that the perturbation arose from constructive interference of interfacial dipoles at PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV interfaces.36 The idea is that electric fields arising from interfacial dipoles at electron donor/acceptor interfaces50–59 may perturb the vibrational potential of the carbonyl group through the vibrational Stark effect,46,47 thus giving rise to a frequency shift. To our knowledge, no measurement has been made to date of an interfacial dipole at PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV interfaces. Thus, we adopted an upper estimate of the magnitude of the interfacial dipole from measurements reported by Bässler and coworkers on the p-bis[(p-styryl)styryl]benzene/C60 system.50 A simple electrostatic model was used to estimate the magnitude of the electric field arising from the interfacial dipoles36 yielding an estimate on the order of 107 V m−1 at the interfaces. This estimate should be viewed as an upper limit because it is unclear whether interfacial dipoles actually form at PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV interfaces. Despite the potentially large electric field, the maximum frequency shift arising from the interfacial dipolar field was estimated to be only 0.2 cm−1 because the Stark tuning rate for carbonyl groups is approximately 1 cm−1/(108 V m−1).46 Thus, it was concluded that the frequency shift that might arise from interfacial dipoles must be a small fraction of the total shift of the carbonyl frequency that is observed when PCBM is blended with CN-MEH-PPV.36 The analysis described above considers only the electric field arising from interface dipoles. Local electric fields of significantly larger magnitude have been calculated in certain condensed phase systems such as proteins or water.60–62 Following Cho,45 we term the influence of these local fields on vibrational frequencies of molecules as vibrational solvatochromism. Below, we demonstrate that the shift of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM to higher frequency at CN-MEH-PPV interfaces arises from solvatochromism.
To explore the origin of the perturbation of the carbonyl vibrational potential, we examined the variation of the vibrational spectrum of PCBM dissolved in a variety of solvents. Five linear IR spectra of PCBM dissolved in a range of solvents are displayed in Fig. 5 in the region of the carbonyl stretch vibration. Each spectrum has been normalized to the maximum absorbance. The spectra reveal that the center frequency of the carbonyl stretch shifts 12 cm−1 to lower frequency within the solvent series: benzene, tetrachloromethane, 1,2-dichloroethane, dichloromethane, and trichloromethane. The concentration of PCBM in the solvents (0.020 M) was sufficiently low to prevent aggregation of the molecules. The solvent dependence observed in the carbonyl stretch vibration is characteristic of solvatochromism. The solvatochromic shift of the carbonyl frequency of PCBM observed in Fig. 5 is of the correct order of magnitude to describe the frequency shift reported in Fig. 3A. This result suggests that the shift of the carbonyl frequency in the polymer blends has the same origin—solvatochromism.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of linear IR spectra of PCBM in various solvents in the region of the carbonyl stretch. The solvatochromic shift is of the same magnitude as the frequency shift of the carbonyl stretch mode of PCBM when the molecule is blended with conjugated polymers. 
Assignment of solvatochromism
To explore the possibility that the frequency shift of the carbonyl group arises from solvatochromism, we examined a variety of empirical models that have been used to describe the influence of solvent on vibrational transitions of molecules.63 Numerous empirical models of solvatochromic effects have been introduced.64–68 We found one model in particular by Mayer and Gutmann69,70 to be well correlated with the variation of the carbonyl vibrational frequency in different solvents. Gutmann recognized that nucleophilic–electrophilic interactions underlie a wide variety of chemical reaction mechanisms in organic chemistry. Given the importance of these interactions for chemical processes leading to chemical bond breaking and formation, it was deemed reasonable to view solute–solvent chemical interactions that do not lead to bond breaking within a similar framework. Thus, Gutmann sought to develop parameters to describe the nucleophilicity and electrophilicity of solvents—leading to development of the Donor Number (DN) and, in collaboration with Mayer, the Acceptor Number (AN) parameters. These parameters are related to the nucleophilicity (DN) and electrophilicity (AN) of the solvent. The electrophilicity of a solvent can also be expressed as its Lewis acidity. Numerical values of the DN and AN of solvents are derived from measurements of interactions that the solvents have with strongly electrophilic and nucleophilic materials. In particular, the DN of a solvent, S, is derived from measurements of the enthalpy of reaction of the solvent with SbCl5 in a solution of 1,2-dichloroethane:71 S + SbCl5 ⇌ S·SbCl5 (−ΔHS·SbCl5)DN(1)Numerical values of the AN of solvents are derived from 31P NMR spectroscopy of triethylphosphineoxide (Et3PO, lower left corner of Fig. 6) dissolved in the solvents of interest. The phosphineoxide bond is quite polarizable such that dissolving the molecule in a more Lewis acidic solvent (such as trichloromethane) shifts electron density away from the phosphorous nucleus resulting in a larger chemical shift.69 Conversely, less Lewis acidic solvents (such as hexanes) result in more electron density around the phosphorous nucleus with corresponding smaller chemical shifts. This parameterization of solvents has proven quite versatile because the probe nucleus (phosphorous) is insulated from the actual site of interaction with the solvent and thus less sensitive to complex formation with the solvent. The AN of a given solvent is calculated by assigning an AN of zero for hexanes, and a value of 100 for Et3PO·SbCl5 coordination complexes dissolved in 1,2-dichloroethane. The 31P chemical shift of Et3PO dissolved in the solvent of interest is then compared to the corresponding values of Et3PO in hexanes and in complexes with SbCl5. A linear interpolation is used to find the specific AN of the solvent under consideration.
 Fig. 6  Plot of the carbonyl center frequency of methyl ester group of PCBM and methyl stearate versus the acceptor number (AN) of the corresponding solvents. Values for the AN of solvents are obtained from ref. 63. 
The main panel of Fig. 6 depicts a correlation of the observed vibrational frequencies of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM and methyl stearate (another methyl ester) with the AN of the corresponding solvent into which the molecules are dissolved. The AN of the solvents in the series are obtained from ref. 63 and range from 0 (hexanes) to 23.1 (trichloromethane). The line in the plot is a linear regression of the data with a variance, R2 = 0.96. The plot reveals a linear correlation between the vibrational frequency and the solvent AN. The experimental uncertainty in the measurement of the center frequencies is ±1 cm−1. The error bars are the same size as the symbols used to represent the data in Fig. 6.
If solvatochromism is indeed a plausible explanation for the sensitivity of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM to the local phase separated morphology in polymer blends, then we should be able to observe similar solvatochromic shifts of other vibrational modes. To test this hypothesis, we introduced benzophenone as a probe molecule to sample the solvent environments present in pure PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV phases. The structure of benzophenone is depicted in the lower left corner of Fig. 7. The main panel of Fig. 7 represents the center frequency of the carbonyl stretch vibration of the carbonyl group of benzophenone dissolved in a variety of solvents with varying AN.72 The center frequencies of benzophenone in various solvents are adapted from ref. 72, and the corresponding AN of the solvents are obtained from ref. 63. The line in the graph is a linear regression fit to the data with a variance, R2 = 0.89. Superimposed on these data are measurements of the center frequencies of the carbonyl group of benzophenone dispersed at low concentration in films of pure PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV. Center frequencies of 1659 cm−1 and 1661 cm−1 are measured for benzophenone in PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV, respectively. The line shape and frequency of the carbonyl absorption is independent of concentration in the spectra analyzed to obtain these center frequencies. The carbonyl center frequencies of benzophenone dispersed in PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV are plotted on the linear regression line in Fig. 7. The data reveal that on average benzophenone molecules sample more Lewis acidic environments in PCBM films (AN ≈ 22) in comparison to CN-MEH-PPV films (AN ≈ 17.5).
 Fig. 7  Plot of the center frequency of the carbonyl group of benzophenone versus the acceptor number (AN) of the corresponding solvent. The center frequency data are adapted from ref. 72. The carbonyl absorption frequencies of benzophenone in films of pure PCBM (filled circle) and CN-MEH-PPV (filled triangle) are overlaid on the data. The comparison reveals that the carbonyl frequency is higher in CN-MEH-PPV because the conjugated polymer presents a solvent environment that is on average less Lewis acidic than PCBM. 
The use of benzophenone as a probe molecule in PCBM and CN-MEH-PPV permits the solvent environments of these materials to be examined through solvatochromic shifts of a vibrational mode that is spectrally distinct and independent of the methyl ester group of PCBM. The lower carbonyl frequency of benzophenone in PCBM reported in Fig. 7 is consistent with the tendency of this molecule to be an electron acceptor (more Lewis acidic, larger AN). Similarly, the higher carbonyl frequency of benzophenone in CN-MEH-PPV is consistent with this material serving as the electron donor in PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blends. The solvatochromic behavior of the carbonyl group of benzophenone mirrors the behavior of the methyl ester group of PCBM. We conclude that PCBM molecules at PCBM/polymer interfaces have higher frequency carbonyl stretch modes in comparison to the interior regions of PCBM clusters primarily because of differences in the corresponding solvent environments.
Theoretical approaches have been developed to describe vibrational solvatochromic effects at a molecular level in an effort to provide fundamental understanding of solute–solvent interactions and their influence on vibrational transitions examined in ultrafast infrared spectroscopy. Particular attention has been paid to the amide I vibration of proteins or their model systems60,61,73–79 and to the hydroxyl stretch vibration of water.60,62,80–83 One theoretical framework describes the transition frequency of a molecule dissolved in a given solvent as ω(ϕs) = ω(ϕ = 0) − Δω(ϕs), where ω(ϕ = 0) is the frequency of the transition in the isolated gas phase and Δω(ϕs) is the perturbation of the transition frequency by the local electrostatic potential, ϕs, created by the solvent.60,73–78 Another theoretical description parameterizes the local electrostatic potential by the solvent electric field, Es, evaluated at the sites of the atoms undergoing the vibrational motion and adopts a linear correlation between the local field and the instantaneous vibrational frequency.60–62,78–83 In this approach, the perturbation of the transition frequency is given by Δω(Es) = αEs, where the parameter, α, is the proportionality constant which is not necessarily the Stark tuning rate of the vibrational transition as other interactions such as hydrogen bonding significantly influence the vibrational frequencies in these systems. In other work, a quadratic relationship better described the relationship between the local electric field due to the solvent and the OH or OD stretch frequency of water.84 Despite these differences, the approaches described above are unified by a common underlying origin of solvatochromism, variation of the local electrostatic potential (or its parameterized equivalent) surrounding a vibrational normal mode giving rise to changes in frequency of the mode.
Several empirical solvent scales in addition to Gutmann's DN and AN method have been developed.64–68 In this contribution, we will consider two others: namely the solvent solvatochromic polarity, ETn, of Dimroth and Reichardt et al.85 and the linear solvation energy relationship (LSER) of Kamlet et al.86 While these approaches applied to vibrational spectroscopy do not provide as much physical insight as the theoretical approaches mentioned above, they can be readily applied to complex systems such as nanoscale phase separated polymer blends. The solvatochromic polarity of a solvent, ETn, is derived from ultraviolet-visible solvatochromic shifts of various electronic transitions of molecules dissolved in a range of solvents. Numerous solute–solvent combinations have been examined as summarized in a review by Reichardt.65 The LSER method incorporates the solvent polarity and polarizability in a parameter, π*. The method incorporates other electrostatic and coordinative interactions by considering the hydrogen bond donor, αHB, and acceptor, βHB, strength of the solvent as measured by solvatochromic shifts of probe molecules capable of accepting and donating hydrogen bonds, respectively. Finally, the LSER method takes into account the solvent/solvent interactions that are interrupted in creating cavities for solute molecules by including the Hildebrand solubility parameter, δH2. This parameter is obtained from measurements of the enthalpy of vaporization and molar volume of the solvent.
Structure–property correlation equations corresponding to Reichardt's, Gutmann's, and LSER approaches are given in eqn (2)–(4), respectively. The correlation equations are applicable to a variety of optical transitions but are written below with specific application to the carbonyl stretch frequency, ω(CO). ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aETn(2) ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aAN(3) ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aπ* + bαHB(4)It should be noted that Gutmann's model includes the DN describing the nucleophilicity of the solvent. This parameter has been shown to be statistically insignificant in structure–property correlations describing vibrational frequencies of a number of molecules.63 Consequently, we exclude this parameter from eqn (3). Similarly, the full LSER method includes parameters describing the hydrogen bond accepting ability of the solvent, βHB, and the Hildebrand solubility parameter, δH2. These parameters are not statistically significant for describing vibrational frequencies of vibrational modes similar to the carbonyl stretch considered here and so are excluded in our analysis as well.63 The parameters, ω(CO)0, a and b, in eqn (2)–(4) are specific to the molecular vibration of the solute under study. These solute parameters have been reported for a variety of functional groups such as ketones and amides.63,87 To our knowledge, these parameters have not been reported for the carbonyl stretch of methyl ester groups.

Fig. 8 displays correlations of measured center frequencies of the carbonyl stretch of methyl stearate dissolved in a variety of solvents plotted versus the calculated vibrational frequencies. Panels A–C correspond to the three empirical models represented in eqn (2)–(4), respectively. The solvent parameters, ETn, AN, π* and αHB, used to calculate the vibrational frequencies, ω(CO), are obtained from ref. 63 and listed in Table 1. The solute parameters, ω(CO)0, a and b, were adjusted independently for each empirical model to obtain the best linear correlation defined by the largest correlation coefficient (R2 closest to unity). The straight lines in each plot correspond to the ideal diagonal where the measured and calculated frequencies are equal. Table 2 lists the solute parameters for each empirical model obtained from the best linear correlation fit to the data.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of the experimentally measured center frequencies of the carbonyl stretch mode of methyl stearate in various solvents versus the predicted center frequencies from several empirical models of solvatochromism: (A) Reichardt's solvatochromic polarity, ETn; (B) Gutmann's Acceptor Number, AN; and (C) Kamlet's, Abboud's and Taft's LSER parameters. The corresponding solute parameters for the methyl ester group are indicated in Table 2. 
Table 1 Solvent parameters describing properties of solvents used in the solvatochromic study




Solvent
Reichardt
Gutmann
LSER



E
Tn

AN

π*

α





The definitions of the parameters are described in the text. Values of the parameters are obtained from ref. 63.




Hexanes
0.009
0.0
−0.08
0


Diethyl ether
0.117
3.9
0.27
0


Benzene
0.111
8.2
0.59
0


Tetrachloromethane
0.052
8.6
0.28
0


1,2-Dichloroethane
0.327
16.7
0.81
0


Acetonitrile
0.46
19.3
0.75
0.19


Dichloromethane
0.269
20.4
0.82
0.185


Trichloromethane
0.256
23.1
0.58
0.44




Table 2 Parameters for carbonyl stretch of methyl stearate corresponding to empirical models of solvatochromism




Model

ω
(C|O)0


a


b


R

2






n/a: not applicable.




Reichardt
1748.0
−45
n/a
0.52


Gutmann
1749.0
−0.805
n/a
0.96


LSER
1748.5
−14
−24
0.93




The best correlation of measured and calculated frequencies is provided by Gutmann's model. The correlation provided by the LSER model is of similar fidelity. Interestingly, the solvent polarity characterized by Reichardt's parameter, ETn, is not well correlated with the observed carbonyl frequency. It is useful to recognize that molecular-level descriptions of solute–solvent interactions60–62,73–83 seek to use a bottom-up approach to characterize the local electrostatic potential (or the local electric field) around a solute molecule in order to understand the influence the solvent has on the solute vibrational transitions. Similarly, the solvatochromic models described above seek to empirically characterize the electrostatic potentials in order to predict the corresponding influences on the solute. The observation that Gutmann's AN method provides the best single parameter correlation with the solvatochromic shift of the carbonyl group suggests that electronic and nuclear polarization arising from the nucleophilic/electrophilic interactions that are characterized by this parameter are the dominant origin of the variation of the electrostatic potential within the solvent series considered.
We conclude the discussion by acknowledging the limitations of the data and analysis reported here-in and suggesting a potential pathway to more clearly define the mechanism underlying solvatochromism in this system. We have assigned the origin of the frequency shift of PCBM at electron donor interfaces to solvatochromism, observed that the effect is common among a number of donors and acceptors (Fig. 3), and established by comparison of empirical scales that electronic and nuclear polarization arising from nucleophilic/electrophilic interactions at these interfaces provides a good framework with which to consider the origin of the solvatochromism. We have not defined the precise underlying physical interactions giving rise to the solvatochromism at a level comparable to what has been achieved in protein and water systems.60–62,73–83 To achieve a similar level of description in this system, it will be necessary to account for polarization of the electronic and nuclear coordinates at donor/acceptor interfaces using quantum chemical calculations and possibly molecular dynamics simulations.
Conclusions
The frequency of the carbonyl stretch mode of the methyl ester group of the electron accepting functionalized fullerene, PCBM, is sensitive to the nanoscale phase separated morphology of polymer blends containing the fullerene. We previously used this sensitivity to examine the dynamics of charge transfer exciton dissociation at electron donor/acceptor interfaces in an organic photovoltaic polymer blend. In this contribution, it is demonstrated that the sensitivity of the carbonyl group to morphology arises primarily from solvatochromism. The carbonyl groups of PCBM molecules at interfaces with conjugated polymers experience solvent environments that are on average less electrophilic than molecules residing in the interiors of PCBM clusters. The less electrophilic interfacial environments cause the carbonyl frequency of PCBM molecules to be higher in comparison to the interior regions. It is this variation in vibrational frequency with proximity to the interfaces that permits the dynamics of charge transfer exciton dissociation to be measured using ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy. Solvatochromism occurs in a variety of vibrational modes and chemical systems (see Fig. 3). Thus, we anticipate that ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy will be broadly applicable to the study of charge photogeneration in a range of organic photovoltaic materials.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0846241, the Henry Dreyfus New Faculty Awards Program, and the 3M Corporation Non-Tenured Faculty Award Program.
References
J.-L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110 DOI:10.1021/cr900271s .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 398, 27 CrossRef CAS .
D. Veldman, O. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, S. Toffanin, M. Muccini, M. Forster, U. Scherf and M. Scharber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2111 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Morteani, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 247402 CrossRef .
K. Tvingstedt, K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, F. Zhang, J. Manca and O. Inganas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11819 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Bertho, F. Banishoeib, I. van Severen, L. Lutsen, T. J. Cleij, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hallermann, S. Haneder and E. Da Como, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 053307 CrossRef .
L. Goris, A. Poruba, L. Hodakova, M. Vanecek, K. Haenen, M. Nesladek, P. Wagner, D. Vanderzande, L. De Schepper and J. V. Manca, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052113 CrossRef .
T. Drori, C.-X. Sheng, A. Ndobe, S. Singh, J. Holt and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 037401 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Rothberg, Photophysics of Conjugated Polymers, in Semiconducting Polymers, ed. G. Hadziioannou, G. G. Malliaras, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2007, vol. 1, p. 179 Search PubMed .
B. A. Gregg, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 20 CAS .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muntwiler, Q. Yang, W. A. Tisdale and X.-Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 196403 CrossRef .
B. A. Gregg, S.-G. Chen and R. A. Cormier, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030 CrossRef CAS .
T. Clarke, A. Ballantyne, F. Jamieson, C. Brabec, J. Nelson and J. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2009, 89 RSC .
M. M. Mandoc, W. Veurman, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 073518 CrossRef .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .
C. Soci, I.-W. Hwang, C. Yang, D. Moses, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Heeger, Proc. SPIE, 2006, 6334, 63340D .
D. Muhlbacher, M. Scharber, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .
S. K. Lee, N. S. Cho, J. H. Kwak, K. S. Lim, H.-K. Shim, D.-H. Hwang and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511, 157 CrossRef .
C. A. Thomas, K. Zong, K. A. Abboud, P. J. Steel and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16440 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Kim, B. C. Thompson, N. Ananthakrishan, G. Padmanaban, S. Ramakrishnan and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3188 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson, Y.-G. Kim, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12714 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Campos, A. Tontcheva, S. Gunes, G. Sonmez, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and F. Wudl, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4031 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kroon, M. Lenes, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and B. de Boer, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 531 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Bijleveld, E. Perzon, K. Tvingstedt, S. Barrau, O. Inganas and M. R. Andersson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5468 RSC .
Y. Liang, D. Feng, J. Guo, J. M. Szarko, C. Ray, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1091 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 Search PubMed .
J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, R. I. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Wu and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 Search PubMed .
L. W. Barbour, M. Hegadorn and J. B. Asbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15884 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, K. M. Banyas, L. W. Barbour, M. Hegadorn and J. B. Asbury, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2575 RSC .
R. D. Pensack and J. B. Asbury, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15986 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, K. M. Banyas and J. B. Asbury, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010 DOI:10.1109/jstqe.2010.2041751 .
R. D. Pensack and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2255–2263 Search PubMed .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
V. Gulbinas, D. Hertel, A. Yartsev and V. Sundstrom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 235203 CrossRef .
J. G. Muller, J. M. Lupton, J. Feldmann, U. Lemmer, M. C. Scharber, N. S. Sariciftci, C. J. Brabec and U. Scherf, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2005, 72, 195208 CrossRef .
S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piris, T. E. Dykstra, A. A. Bakulin, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, W. Knulst, M. T. Trinh, J. M. Schins and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cho, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 094505 CrossRef .
E. S. Park and S. G. Boxer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5800 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Boxer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 2972 CrossRef CAS .
R. Green, A. Morfa, A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles and S. E. Shaheen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 033301 CrossRef .
C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, W. J. H. van Gennip, J. K. J. van Duren, P. Jonkheijm, R. A. J. Jannsen and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203, 547 CrossRef .
V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bässler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, C. I. Wu and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2649 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 5583 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 4515 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Hill, D. Milliron, J. Schwartz and A. Kahn, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 166, 354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vazquez, W. Gao, F. Flores and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 041306 CrossRef .
R. Schlaf, B. A. Parkinson, P. A. Lee, K. W. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2984 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schlettwein, K. Hesse, N. E. Gruhn, P. A. Lee, K. W. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4791 CrossRef CAS .
W. Osikowicz, M. P. de Jong and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Schmidt, S. A. Corcelli and J. L. Skinner, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 8887 CrossRef CAS .
T. la Cour Jansen and J. Knoester, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 044502 CrossRef .
S. A. Corcelli, C. P. Lawrence and J. L. Skinner, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 8107 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. F. N. Engberts, G. R. Famini, A. Perjessy and L. Y. Wilson, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 1998, 11, 261 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reichardt, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 105 Search PubMed .
C. Reichardt, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 2319 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. El Seoud, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Marcus, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2005, 18, 373 CrossRef .
S. Nigam and S. Rutan, Appl. Phys. A: Solid Surf., 2001, 55, 362 .

          V. Gutmann, The Donor–Acceptor Approach to Molecular Interactions, Plenum Press, New York,  1978 Search PubMed .
U. Mayer, V. Gutmann and W. Gerger, Monatsh. Chem., 1975, 106, 1235 CAS .
V. Gutmann and E. Wychera, Rev. Chim. Miner., 1966, 3, 941 CAS .
L. J. Bellamy and R. L. Williams, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1959, 55, 14 RSC .
S. Ham, J.-H. Kim, H. Lee and M. Cho, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 3491 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kwac and M. Cho, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2247 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, S. Hahn and M. Cho, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2005, 104, 616 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, S. Ham and M. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9132 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. DeCamp, L. P. Deflores, J. M. McCracken, A. Tokmakoff, K. Kwac and M. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11016 CrossRef CAS .
T. la Cour Jansen, A. Dijkstra, T. M. Watson, J. D. Hirst and J. Knoester, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 044312 CrossRef .
T. Hayashi, W. Zhuang and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 9747 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, T. Steinel, C. Stromberg, S. A. Corcelli, C. P. Lawrence, J. L. Skinner and M. D. Fayer, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 12431 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, T. Steinel, C. Stromberg, S. A. Corcelli, C. P. Lawrence, J. L. Skinner and M. D. Fayer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Fecko, J. D. Eaves, J. J. Loparo, A. Tokmakoff and P. L. Geissler, Science, 2003, 301, 1698 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hayashi, T. l. C. Jansen, W. Zhuang and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 64 CrossRef CAS .
B. Auer, R. Kumar, J. R. Schmidt and J. L. Skinner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 14215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dimroth, C. Reichardt, T. Seipmann and F. Bohlmann, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1963, 661, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kamlet, J.-L. M. Abboud, M. H. Abraham and R. W. Taft, J. Org. Chem., 1983, 48, 2877 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Vdovenko, I. I. Gerus and V. P. Kuhmar, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 72, 229 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Photophysical events leading to charge photogeneration in organic solar cells. Step 1: primary photo-excitations form CT excitons at donor/acceptor interfaces. Step 2: CT excitons dissociate to form separated electrons and holes. (B) Comparison of LUMO and HOMO energy levels of an ideal electron donor relative to P3HT and PCBM. Decreasing the energy difference between the donating and accepting states reduces energy losses in the charge photogeneration process but also reduces the driving force for charge separation. (C) Molecular structures of a selection of electron donors and acceptors.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) CT exciton dissociation was examined with ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy by following the frequency evolution of the carbonyl stretch of PCBM during the charge separation reaction (see ref. 36). The frequency evolution of the carbonyl group reveals the charge separation dynamics because the vibrational frequency of the vibrational mode is sensitive to the position of PCBM molecules relative to the polymer/PCBM interfaces (B).	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Concentration dependent linear IR spectra of PCBM blended with CN-MEH-PPV. (B) Comparison of linear IR spectra of a PCBM/RR-P3HT bilayer with a spectrum of pure PCBM. (C) Comparison of linear IR spectra of PDI/RR-P3HT bilayer with a spectrum of pure PDI. All spectra display a shift of the carbonyl absorption of PCBM (PDI) to higher frequencies when in contact with the polymers. The frequency shift arises from a solvatochromic shift due to differing solvent environments at PCBM (PDI)/polymer interfaces versus the interiors of PCBM (PDI) clusters (layers).	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of SEM cross-sectional images of the phase separated morphology of PCBM∶CN-MEH-PPV polymer blends. The images show a gradual decrease of the average PCBM cluster size (roughly spherical objects in the SEM images) with increased polymer content. The corresponding increase in surface area to volume ratio of the PCBM clusters results in the shift of the carbonyl stretch to higher frequencies in the blends (see Fig. 3A).	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of linear IR spectra of PCBM in various solvents in the region of the carbonyl stretch. The solvatochromic shift is of the same magnitude as the frequency shift of the carbonyl stretch mode of PCBM when the molecule is blended with conjugated polymers.	 
S + SbCl5 ⇌ S·SbCl5 (−ΔHS·SbCl5)DN	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Plot of the carbonyl center frequency of methyl ester group of PCBM and methyl stearate versus the acceptor number (AN) of the corresponding solvents. Values for the AN of solvents are obtained from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 7  Plot of the center frequency of the carbonyl group of benzophenone versus the acceptor number (AN) of the corresponding solvent. The center frequency data are adapted from ref. 72. The carbonyl absorption frequencies of benzophenone in films of pure PCBM (filled circle) and CN-MEH-PPV (filled triangle) are overlaid on the data. The comparison reveals that the carbonyl frequency is higher in CN-MEH-PPV because the conjugated polymer presents a solvent environment that is on average less Lewis acidic than PCBM.	 
ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aETn	(2)
ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aAN	(3)
ω(CO) = ω(CO)0 + aπ* + bαHB	(4)

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of the experimentally measured center frequencies of the carbonyl stretch mode of methyl stearate in various solvents versus the predicted center frequencies from several empirical models of solvatochromism: (A) Reichardt's solvatochromic polarity, ETn; (B) Gutmann's Acceptor Number, AN; and (C) Kamlet's, Abboud's and Taft's LSER parameters. The corresponding solute parameters for the methyl ester group are indicated in Table 2.	 



Hexanes	0.009	0.0	−0.08	0
Diethyl ether	0.117	3.9	0.27	0
Benzene	0.111	8.2	0.59	0
Tetrachloromethane	0.052	8.6	0.28	0
1,2-Dichloroethane	0.327	16.7	0.81	0
Acetonitrile	0.46	19.3	0.75	0.19
Dichloromethane	0.269	20.4	0.82	0.185
Trichloromethane	0.256	23.1	0.58	0.44


Reichardt	1748.0	−45	n/a	0.52
Gutmann	1749.0	−0.805	n/a	0.96
LSER	1748.5	−14	−24	0.93

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
