Recent progress in post treatment of silver nanowire electrodes for optoelectronic device applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR02917G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR02917G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 12423-12437Recent progress in post treatment of silver nanowire electrodes for optoelectronic device applications

        
          
            Chi 
            Ma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yue-Feng 
            Liu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yan-Gang 
            Bi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xu-Lin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Da 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Feng
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hong-Bo 
            Sun
          
        
      ac
aState Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: yfliu23@jlu.edu.cn; jingfeng@jlu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Optoelectronic Information Science and Engineering, College of Science, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang 212003, People’s Republic of China
cState Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement Technology and Instruments, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Haidian, Beijing 100084, China
Received 
      7th May 2021
    , Accepted 16th June 2021First published on 16th June 2021AbstractOwing to the economical and practical solution synthesis and coating strategies, silver nanowires (AgNWs) have been considered as one of the most suitable alternative materials to replace commercial indium tin oxide (ITO) transparent electrodes. The primitive AgNW electrode cannot meet the requirements for preparing high performance optoelectronic devices due to its high contact resistance, large surface roughness and poor stability. Thus, various post-treatments for AgNW film optimization are needed before its actual applications, such as welding treatment to decrease contact resistance and passivation to increase film stability. This review investigates recent progress on the preparation and optimization of AgNWs. Moreover, some unique fabrication strategies to produce highly oriented AgNW films with unique anisotropic properties have also been carried out with detailed analysis. The representative devices based on the AgNW electrode have been summarized and discussed at the end of this review.
1. Introduction
In the last few decades, transparent conductive films (TCFs) have attracted considerable attention due to their irreplaceable position in the fabrication of e-readers, flat-panel televisions, organic solar cells (OSCs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and so on.1–7 Among them, ITO is the most commonly used TCF for its excellent optical transmittance (>90%) in visible wavelengths and low sheet resistance with low film thickness (10 Ω sq−1 ∼200 nm).8,9 However, the inherent drawbacks, such as brittle ceramic characteristic and high manufacturing cost, seriously hinder its application in next generation flexible optoelectronic devices. The high-temperature vapour-phase sputtering process also limits its application in low-cost commercial production. Therefore, numerous new materials have been proposed to substitute ITO as the TCF, including conductive polymers,10 carbon nanotubes,11 graphene,12 ultrathin metal film,13 metallic nanowires14 and so on. Solution processable TCFs show great prospect in actual applications, which is mainly due to their easy and cost-effective fabrication process. For example, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is one of the most commonly used conductive polymers and can be applied as a TCF through a simple solution coating method.15–17 However, when the transmittance of the PEDOT:PSS film reaches more than 90%, the film sheet resistance will be higher than 100 Ω sq−1. It is suitable in some capacitive touch sensors but is not good enough to replace ITO in OLEDs or OPVs. Carbon nanotube (CNT) TCFs can be also prepared by the solution coating method, but the high contact resistance between adjacent nanotubes will seriously influence film conductivity.18,19
Except for these solution-based coating materials, some other novel materials or strategies have also been proposed to fabricate TCFs. As a novel carbon material, graphene is considered as a promising ITO substitution for its excellent optical and electrical properties.20–22 However, high quality graphene is usually fabricated by the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method, which requires a high fabrication temperature (∼1000 °C) and a complex transfer process, and these rigorous preparation processes will seriously restrict its actual applications.23,24 Using exfoliated graphite can effectively avoid this problem, but the low aspect ratio and high contact resistance between graphene nano-sheets will seriously deteriorate film performance (3000 Ω sq−1 ∼80%T).25 Metals (e.g. Ag, Au, Cu and so on) are 50 times more conductive than ITO and commonly used as electrode materials.26 Normally, a relative thick metal will be deposited to ensure the overall conductivity, but that will inevitably sacrifice the film transmittance.27 Patterning metal films into meshes can significantly improve the transmittance; however, the complex fabrication process, non-conductive holes and high surface roughness will seriously limit their scope of application.28
Fortunately, low-cost solution-based synthesis strategies make AgNWs much more economical and practical than ITO electrodes. With the assistance of salt additives,29,30 prefab templates,31 hydrothermal environment32 or ultraviolet irradiation,33 AgNWs with different aspect ratios can be easily formed. AgNW based conductive networks present excellent electrical conductivity (20 Ω sq−1) and high optical transmittance (95% at 550 nm) simultaneously.34–38 The relative high mechanical stability makes AgNWs suitable for fabricating flexible electronic devices. Although directly coating AgNWs onto target substrates can result in a conductive network and work as an electrode, the weak physical contact between adjacent AgNWs will inevitably lead to large contact resistance and weak mechanical stability. Therefore, a proper post-treatment to optimize film property becomes an essential part before applying it as conductive electrode in devices. In this progress report, we have summarized the post-treatment methods for enhancing AgNW film properties, including the post-welding treatment for decreasing contact resistance, passivation treatment for increasing stability, and aligned AgNWs with unique properties. Finally, the applications of AgNW electrodes in optoelectronic devices are discussed.
2. Welding treatments for conductivity enhancement of AgNW films
Although AgNW films have been widely used as a transparent conductive film, the inherent drawbacks, such as high contact resistance between adjacent nanowires, weak adhesion on substrates, high surface roughness and so on, still seriously restrict the improvement of device performance. In order to solve these problems, various welding treatments have been applied to improve the film performance (Table 1). The following part will briefly introduce the post welding treatments for AgNW networks, including thermal treatments, chemical approach methods, cold isostatic-pressured welding, and capillary-force induced cold welding.
Table 1 List of representative welding treatment methods




Welding
Resistance (Ω sq−1)

T (%)
Ref.


Method
Condition
Before
After




Thermal treatment
200 °C/20 min
30
10
85

39



Joule heating
0.2 A/25 V/10 s
4 × 104
91
—

40



Electron beam
200 kGy
63
29
83

43



Plasmonic
30 W cm−2/60 s
105
10
80

41



Ostwald ripening
Pre-deposited Ag/water
30
14
79

49



Sodium fluoride
24
9.3
92

47



Chemically welding
Silver nitrate/ascorbic acid
3.5 × 105
20.5
—

48



H2O2 vapor
80
10
95

51



Silver ammonia/glucose
25.9
7.5
86

52



Cold press
25 MPa/5 s
1.8 × 104
8.6
80

54



Capillary force
Water mist/30 s/25 °C
6.3 × 104
37
—

58





2.1 Thermal based re-solidification methods
AgNWs contain excellent electrical conductivity along the axis direction; however, there are more than orders of magnitude resistance enhancement at the junction contact points. Normally, the electron transportation is closely related to the upper and bottom surface of adjacent AgNWs, and the residual surfactants (e.g. PVP) and newly formed oxides (e.g. silver oxide) will make it much harder for electrons transferring into the adjacent AgNWs. The poor contact between adjacent nanowires also deteriorates the film morphology and optical transmittance, and eventually affects the device performance. Therefore, it is very important to increase the effective connections between adjacent AgNWs and increase the film conductivity before being applied as transparent electrodes in devices.
Annealing AgNW networks at high temperature (≥150 °C) is the most commonly applied method to remove the residual PVP surfactant and weld the adjacent AgNWs, but direct thermal annealing will easily cause undesired fractures (Fig. 1a) and oxidation.39 Yang et al.40 skillfully utilized the high contact junction resistance and directly applied voltage at both ends of an AgNW film, welding the AgNWs with the current flow induced heat. This method presents relative high controllability and only a small amount of energy was consumed.
 Fig. 1  (a) AgNW film sheet resistance as a function of the annealing temperature. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (b) The local field distribution at a NW junction. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright © 2016 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Large pulsed electron beam (LPEB) irradiation42 can effectively weld the adjacent AgNWs and decrease the contact resistance, and both film electrical conductivity and mechanical stability were further optimized. Although this method can provide accurate welding at a specific position, the expensive equipment has seriously limited its application. To avoid this shortcoming, Lee et al.41 proposed a flash induced plasmonic treatment method, getting high electrical conductivity (5 Ω sq−1), high transparency (90%) and strong adhesion to the flexible substrate simultaneously. The heat source at the junction point is mainly from the self-limited photo-thermal reaction (Fig. 1b), which can produce a complete welding within a very short time. Similarly, Brongersma and co-workers43 proposed an optical nano-welding method, and the heat at the junction point is from the excitation of localized surface plasmon resonance. Some other similar processing schemes have also been proposed,44–46 but none of them paid attention to the welding temperature at the contact point. It is not difficult to speculate that the point temperature may exceed 150 °C during the welding, which will induce some inevitable damage to the underlying materials.
2.2 Chemical approach strategies for AgNW welding
Appropriate thermal treatments can decrease the contact resistance and optimize the electrical conductivity, but a relative high fusing temperature during the welding process will inevitably damage the underlying flexible substrates. Therefore, some investigators have paid attention to the low temperature welding strategies and proposed some wet chemical approach methods47–53 without producing any heat. Khang et al.51 took advantage of the capillary condensation at the nano-scale gaps between adjacent AgNWs by directly applying the highly oxidized chemical vapour (H2O2) to sinter adjacent AgNWs. The condensation of hydrogen peroxide vapour preferentially occurred at the junction point due to the capillary condensation phenomenon, and then the dissolution and re-solidification of silver can be accomplished at room temperature.
Immersing the AgNW film into silver ammonia-glucose mixed solution (Fig. 2a) can completely weld the adjacent AgNWs in two minutes and only cause negligible influence on the film optical transmittance. Based on a similar principle, Cho et al.48 applied the sodium halide salt aqueous solution (e.g. NaF, NaCl, NaBr, and NaI) to weld the AgNWs and reduce the contact resistance (Fig. 2b). The significantly increased electrical conductivity was attributed to the autocatalytic addition of silver ions at the junction points. These welding strategies require the assistance of additional chemicals and the film morphology will be influenced by the residual impurities. In consideration of this, Park and co-workers49 proposed an electrochemical Ostwald ripening method (Fig. 2c) to selectively weld the adjacent AgNWs in water without any aggressive chemicals. The silver ions were firstly formed by ionizing the pre-deposited silver nano-particles (AgNPs), and then selectively reduced and aggregated at the junction points. During this process, the electrons will transport to the junction points of AgNWs through the conductive under-layer and reduce the silver ions to silver solders. The selectively deposited silver solders can continuously grow until the AgNPs were completely consumed. But the relatively long dissolution and re-solidification time and the additional conductive under-layer seriously influence their industrial applicability. These add-material welding strategies mainly provide additional silvers to clad the junction points to increase the overall film conductivity. However, these additional materials inevitably cause an increased surface roughness and decreased film transmittance, which directly affects the performance of the subsequent devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) Electroless-welding of the AgNW film on PET using silver ammonia. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright © 2016 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Sheet resistance of the halide-welded AgNWs as a function of the treatment time. The right panel shows the SEM images of NaBr-welded and NaF-welded AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the welding process (red and blue indicate electrons and Ag+ ions, respectively). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Cold welding treatments of AgNWs
As mentioned, the thermal and chemical welding treatments will inevitably cause some considerable damage to flexible substrates and the obstinate high surface roughness still greatly reduce their practical application in optoelectronic devices. Therefore, cold pressure methods54–57 have been proposed to minimize the contact resistance and surface roughness simultaneously. In the beginning, mechanical pressure was supplied by a hard template and directly applied on the AgNW percolated networks. However, direct pressing will lead to undesirable deformation of flexible substrates. An ingenious scheme was proposed by Chueh et al. which effectively solved this problem.54 The polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) mediate layer was introduced in the mechanical press welding process, and the reduction of the junction resistance and the fabrication of the transparent conductive film (AgNWs–PMMA) were completed simultaneously (Fig. 3). When semi-buried in the PMMA film, the mechanical stability of the composite AgNW film can be further optimized, but the charge injection ability as a transparent electrode is weakened due to the reduction of the exposed area. Seo et al. proposed a cold isostatic pressing (CIP) technique to weld the junctions of the AgNW film in an all-round uniform high-pressure liquid.56 They placed the prefabricated AgNWs–PET film into a vacuum polyethylene bag which was moved into a metal vessel filled with water. After maintaining the water pressure at 50 MPa for 60 seconds, well-connected AgNW networks can be obtained without any transmittance loss. But both the original and improved mechanical press welding methods cannot be used in some special devices, as the relative high pressure could destroy the useful under-layers.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the room-temperature pressure welding process. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, capillarity force has attracted great attention as it can even provide GPa level pressure between two adjacent particles.58 Inspired by this, Ren et al.58 reported a capillarity force based nano-welding method without any assistance of special equipment or additional materials (Fig. 4). After spraying moisture on an AgNW film, water droplets can be automatically formed in the nano-gaps of adjacent nanowires. With the evaporation of water, the capillary force can effectively weld the junctions and reduce the contact resistance. Similarly, Hu et al.59 used solvent mist as a “zipper” to weld the adjacent AgNWs and remove the residual PVP shell. They found that a strong capillary force formed in the wedge-shaped nano-gaps of AgNWs and the substrate can increase the adhesion significantly, and the adhesion enhancement is also closely related with the wettability of the substrate. Although these capillarity force assisted welding methods provide a novel idea to optimize AgNW conductivity, in order to obtain an ideal welding effect, it is necessary to comprehensively consider the degree of hydrophobicity of the substrate, the shape of the AgNWs, the viscosity coefficient of the solution and the volatilization rate and so on, which greatly increases the difficulty of operation.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of moisture treatment for capillary-force-induced cold welding of AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3. Passivation for the stability enhancement of AgNWs
The welding treatments can effectively decrease the contact resistance between adjacent AgNWs and increase the electrical conductivity. The surface morphology and mechanical stability can be also slightly improved to some extent. However, the degradation of AgNWs in an aerobic environment and under elevated temperature still seriously restricts their practical applications. Therefore, some additional materials, such as polymers, metals and metal oxides, carbon materials and so on, have been introduced as a passivation layer to optimize the thermal stability, flexibility and surface roughness of AgNW films.
3.1 Polymer based passivation layer
In order to solve the problems of large surface roughness, poor mechanical stability and low anti-degradation ability, some researchers proposed to bury the AgNW network into an additional passivation layer. For example, Feng et al.62 buried a random AgNW network into a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) film to fabricate a composite electrode with low surface roughness, high conductivity and transmittance. PEDOT:PSS can improve the stability by preventing local melt of AgNWs at the junction points and smooth the surface by filling the empty gaps.63 Adding some small molecules, such as ethylene glycol (EG) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),64 can further increasing the conductivity and flexibility, but with the evaporation of these small molecules, the film conductivity and mechanical stability will be irreversibly weakened. In consideration of this drawback, Myoung et al.60 mixed a non-ionic surfactant (Triton X-100) into the PEDOT:PSS solution to guide the formation of PEDOT nano-fibrils (Fig. 5a), which was then interpenetrated with the AgNWs to form a hybrid film with excellent bending stability.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS/AgNW hybrid and T-PEDOT:PSS/AgNW hybrid. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of AgNW micromesh with an EC substrate. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Except for combining with conducting polymers, the AgNWs can also be used as a conductive filler to embed in some stretchable polymers, such as poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS),65 to form stretchable and wearable conductors. In actual application, the thick PDMS matrix can provide sufficient protection for AgNWs, but the film transmittance and conformability cannot meet the requirements of high performance flexible devices. Decreasing the PDMS thickness will lead to incomplete wrapping of AgNWs and the weak adhesion also makes them easy to separate under mechanical deformation. Lee et al.66 solved this problem by adding some Zonyl fluorosurfactant into PDMS to increase the adhesion strength between AgNWs and PDMS, thus fabricating an ultrathin AgNWs–PDMS composite film with high transmittance and excellent mechanical stability.
Some other polymer materials have also been applied to fabricate transparent composite electrodes. Kim et al.67 reported a transparent conductor based on the combination of AgNWs and colourless polyimide (PI), which shows excellent flexibility with high transmittance and low sheet resistance. Lee et al.61 embedded AgNW bundles into an ethyl cellulose (EC) transparent substrate to fabricate a composite conductor (Fig. 5b), which led to excellent electrical conductivity (25 Ω sq−1), high transmittance (97%) and low haze (2.6%). The composite conductor also presented superior mechanical and environmental stability, and it can maintain the original conductivity even after 24 hours of washing. Therefore, embedding the AgNWs into durable non-conductive polymers is an effective strategy to increase the anti-degradation ability, but the non-conducting passivation layer will seriously influence the charge transportation and result in a sharp decrease in device performance.
3.2 Metal and metal oxide passivation layer
Under the protection of polymer passivation, the AgNWs still can be degraded in some harsh environments. For example, oxygen molecules can penetrate into the polymers through small cracks or voids to oxidize the AgNWs, and the thermal stability is also not good enough to be used in some high temperature devices. Therefore, some metals68–72 and metal oxides73–76 were introduced as a passivation layer to enhance the thermal and chemical stability without sacrificing the electrical conductivity and optical transmittance. Park et al.68 optimized the anti-oxidation ability and thermal stability of sliver nanowires by locally electro-depositing a nickel (Ni) protective layer. The electro-deposited nickel can increase the conductivity of the AgNW film by welding the adjacent nanowires and providing additional contact area. The film optical transmittance and electrical conductivity can be easily controlled by adjusting the thickness of the deposited nickel shell. Under the protection of the Ni layer, the film stability against the chemical and galvanic corrosion can be significantly improved.
However, in this work, AgNWs were partially embedded in the PDMS flexible substrate to increase the contact adhesion, and the Ni passivation layer only covered the exposed AgNWs, which induced a limited anti-degradation and conductivity enhancement. Considering this, Guo et al.72 used the magnetic assisted electro-deposition technique to provide a fully covered nickel passivation layer onto the AgNWs (Fig. 6a), simultaneously realizing a low sheet resistance (9.8 Ω sq−1), high transmittance (95.3% at 550 nm) and excellent thermal stability (400 °C/30 min). Apart from the pure metal passivation layer, some thermo-tolerant metal oxides can be also used to act as a protective layer and increase the thermal stability of AgNW film. Chu and co-workers75 combined nickel hydroxide (Ni(OH)2) with the AgNWs to fabricate a thermal stable composite conductor (Fig. 6b), which showed excellent conductivity (18.56 Ω sq−1) and transmittance (90.26%). In this method, the graphene-like nickel hydroxide nano-sheets act as bridges to connect AgNWs without sacrificing film transmittance. But the addition of nickel hydroxide nano-sheets will induce an inevitable increase of surface roughness, which will seriously deteriorate the device performance in practical application.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic procedures for preparing metal electroplated TCFs with the assistance of a magnetic field and their applications. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright © 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of Ni(OH)2 NSs after exfoliation. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of a 30 nm thick ZnO-coated AgNW. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In order to obtain uniform passivation, Bellet et al.77 proposed an atmospheric pressure spatial atomic layer deposition method to deposit a conformal compact zinc oxide (ZnO) layer onto AgNWs (Fig. 6c). Both the thermal and electrical stability are significantly improved. The composite film can maintain the conductivity which was almost unchanged under the temperature of 500 °C or an applied voltage of 18 V. Similarly, Moon et al.73 deposited a compact aluminium-doped zinc oxide (AZO) passivation layer on AgNWs through a solution processed method. The dense pinhole-free passivation layer effectively stops the penetration of oxygen and water from the outside environment, resulting in excellent chemical stability. However, it should be noted that as the thickness of the passivation layer increases, the overall transmittance of the film will decrease. And due to the poor conductivity of heat-resistant metal oxides, it will eventually affect the film conductivity to a certain extent. Also, the brittle characteristics of metal oxides will ultimately affect the flexibility of the composite film, limiting its application in flexible wearable devices.
3.3 Carbon material based passivation layer
Carbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),78,81 graphene80,82,83 and graphene oxides,84,85 can be also applied as additives or passivation materials to improve the performance of the AgNW film. Mixing a small amount (less than 3 wt%) of single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) into AgNW networks can obviously increase the film stability and flexibility.78 The additional SWCNTs mainly provide more efficient electrical transportation pathways (Fig. 7a), and the Joule heat generated at the AgNW contact junctions can be significantly reduced, eventually increasing the electrical stability under a certain working voltage. The irregular intertwined single-wall carbon nanotubes and AgNWs also effectively prevent the slippage of AgNWs under deformation, which eventually leads to enhanced mechanical stability. However, the SWCNTs just act as an additive in the AgNW networks and cannot provide effective protection against corrosion. In order to obtain full protection, some investigators proposed to use high quality graphene made by the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method as a capping layer onto the AgNW networks. The electrical conductivity of the graphene–AgNW composite film was obviously improved by the effective connection of graphene between different AgNWs. The graphene layer can also hinder the penetration of water and oxygen from the outside environment, restricting the degradation of AgNWs and increasing the chemical stability. Lee et al.83 proposed a graphene–AgNWs–graphene sandwich structure, simultaneously achieve high conductivity (19.9 ± 1.2 Ω sq−1), high transmittance (88.6% at 550 nm) and good bending stability. The composite film shows excellent long-term stability because of the superior gas-barrier property of graphene (Fig. 7b). Kim et al.82 encapsulated the AgNW networks with single layer graphene through a wet transfer method, they found that the graphene passivation layer can effectively prevent thermal oxidation and sulfurization. However, the complex fabrication and transfer process seriously restrict the large-scale usage of graphene. It also should be noted that the CVD-grown graphene is usually composed of poly-domains with various grain boundaries, which will inevitably decrease the electrical conductivity and anti-degradation ability. Blom et al.80 used exfoliated graphene (EG) (Fig. 7c) to replace the complicated CVD-grown graphene, realizing the fully solution-processable fabrication of a graphene–AgNW transparent conductor, simultaneously achieving the low surface roughness of 4.6 nm and a high electrical conductivity of 13.7 Ω sq−1 without notable transmittance loss. The tightly packed graphene nano-sheets can effectively prevent the degradation and slippage of AgNWs, realizing high chemical and mechanical stability. Compared with graphene, the solution processable graphene oxide (GO) contains abundant oxygen-containing functional groups, such as carboxyl, epoxide, hydroxyl and ketone, which can form strong bonding with the AgNWs. Combined with the high Young's modulus of graphene oxide, the composite transparent conductive film (GO–AgNWs) will reach extremely high flexibility and mechanical stability.80 The developed AgNWs–EG films with superior mechanical and chemical stabilities are versatile for a wide variety of optoelectronics.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the AgNW/SWCNT hybrid networks showing the possible current flow pathways. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Top-view SEM image of the graphene/AgNW/graphene TCFs after a long-term stability test. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Optical image of the electrochemical exfoliation of graphite. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.4 Other materials for passivation
With the development of advanced materials science, there are also some novel findings in the passivation of the AgNW film. For example, Yang et al.86 introduced self-assembled organothiols onto the AgNWs as a physical barrier to inhibit degradation, realizing the overall enhancement of thermal stability, anti-sulfidation and anti-oxidation ability. The self-assembled monolayers of 2-mercaptobenzimidazole can be tightly bound on the surface of AgNWs through the formation of the Ag–S covalent bond, which will eventually result in excellent resistance to the corrosion of hydrogen sulphide (H2S) and even can maintain the conductivity after being subjected to a high temperature (85 °C) and high humidity (85 RH%) environment for four months. Chen et al.87 combined a new two-dimensional material, MXene, onto the AgNW film to fabricate a flexible transparent hybrid film. The MXene nano-sheets can be coated on the prepared AgNW film by a solution-processable method and eventually reach a relatively high figure of merit (162.49) with excellent mechanical stability. In summary, the addition of a physical barrier layer, including polymers, metals and metal oxides, graphene and graphene oxides, MXene and so on, can enhance the properties of the AgNW film in certain aspects. But each passivation material has its own shortcomings; therefore, a fully optimized method for the AgNW network is still urgently in demand.
4. Preparation strategies of aligned AgNW films
Generally, the AgNWs are randomly distributed in the conductive network and inevitably lead to several drawbacks, such as high junction resistance and large surface roughness. The conflict between transmittance and conductivity also hinders the application of the AgNW electrode in novel transparent devices. To address these issues, some investigators have proposed to fabricate the AgNW film with highly directional arrangement.
4.1 Template assisted methods for preparing oriented AgNW films
Due to the unique anisotropic properties and great potential applications in optoelectronic devices, highly aligned AgNW films have attracted considerable attention since the first proposition decades ago. Yang et al.88 assembled aligned AgNWs within a monolayer through the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique (Fig. 8a and b) and applied them as a substrate for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). Based on this strategy, AgNWs can be closely packed to parallel arrays, and the arrangement direction is determined and perpendicular to the compression direction. During this process, the thiol ligands in the PVP capping layer assist AgNWs to disperse on the water surface and prevent aggregation. As the press continuous, the surface pressure will progressively increase until a particular value (14 mN m−1), at which a tightly packaged AgNW film with metallic property can be formed. Strong optical dichroism can be clearly observed in the polarized UV-vis spectra, indicating the directional arrangement of AgNWs. However, the complicated preparation of the surface modified AgNW solution, low qualitative reliability and limited uniformity significantly lower its practical value. And the subsequent indispensable transfer process also limits its application, making this strategy unsuitable for flexible or irregular substrates. Based on the strategy of using substrate deformation, Lieber et al.90 applied blown film extrusion techniques to assemble aligned AgNWs on a large scale on non-rigid substrates. Firstly, the AgNWs were mixed into a polymer to form a uniformly suspended solution, and then the circular die was applied to expand the polymer suspension to a bubble with constant inside pressure. Finally, the bubble film can be transferred to any particular substrate. More than 85% of the nanowires are aligned within 6° of the primary alignment direction. Compared with the LB technique, this method shows much higher controllability and flexibility, but the AgNWs are assembled to the parallel configuration based on the expansionary force, which will lead to non-contact and separated distribution of AgNWs in the film. A few years later, Zhu et al.91 proposed a simple yet effective method to assemble highly aligned nanowires on stretchable substrates. The pre-coated NWs can be aligned in the transverse direction after the strained stretchable substrate was released. The large-strain elasticity of the substrate and the static friction between the NWs and the substrate play key roles in this assembly method. Nam et al.89 utilized a shrinkable shape memory polymer to manipulate random AgNWs into a regular arrangement (Fig. 8c). This method is considered as a solid-state LB technique with superior controllability and higher practicality. The NW density amplification factor increases with the enhancement of the uniaxial shrinkage rate (Fig. 8d). Furthermore, the quantitative investigation also shows the improvement of NW assembly quality (i.e., using the misalignment angle). After shrinkage, the NW misalignment angle decreased from 5.4° (no shrinkage) to 0.6° (310% shrinkage). The full width at half-maximum of the misalignment angle showed a sizable change from 13.8° (no shrinkage) to 3.9° (310% shrinkage), indicating the assembly quality improvement (Fig. 8e). The final fabricated aligned AgNW film can be easily transferred to other two- or three-dimensional substrates for further electronic applications. All these mentioned methods can effectively fabricate the aligned AgNW film, but the poor controllability of final density distribution, surface morphology and conductivity make these strategies only suitable for laboratory research rather than practical application.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) The photographs of the nanowire assembly process at different compression stages of the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright © 2003, American Chemical Society. (c) Concept picture of the shrink-induced NW assembly process. Density increase of NW arrays (d) and improvement of NW assembly quality (i.e., misalignment angle) (e) via shrink-assembly. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Interfacial assembly methods for oriented AgNW films
Except for the substrate deformation assisted strategies, highly oriented AgNWs can be also fabricated by interfacial assembly methods.93–98 In recent years, the self-assembly phenomenon of nano-materials (nano-particles, nano-sheets, nano-tubes and nano-rods) at the solid–air–liquid or air–liquid interface has attracted considerable investigation. The driving forces of this self-assembly process are mainly from the electrostatic force and the decrease of interfacial energy. Zhou et al.99 manipulated carbon nanotubes with the assistance of the self-assembly phenomenon at the substrate–liquid–air interface. Inspired by this investigation, Yu et al.92 used the oil–water–air three phase interface to manage the movement of ultra-long AgNWs without any assistance from external forces (Fig. 9a). During the self-assembly process, the PVP capping layer and the capillary force play crucial roles in the movement and rearrangement of the AgNWs. The aligned AgNW film finally produced exhibits intrinsic large electromagnetic fields localized in the interstitials between adjacent nanowires and show great potential in the fabrication of ultrasensitive molecular sensors. However, the final product shows poor optical transmittance and weak mechanical stability, and there are still considerable improvements need to be done before its real application in optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) The schematic illustration of the oil–water–air interface self-assembly process. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright © 2010 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustration and orientation-color-coded picture of the agitation-assisted alignment method. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright © 2019 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chang et al.94 simplified the preparation process and directly fabricated aligned AgNWs on a transparent and stretchable substrate. In their preparation strategy, a microliter of AgNW solution droplet was trapped in the gap between two templates, and with the continuous dragging of the deposition plate, the generated shear force will deposit the parallel AgNWs onto the target substrate. Under a tensile strain perpendicular to the nanowire arrangement, the aligned AgNWs will be re-orientated and exhibit polarization angle independent extinction spectra. Similarly, Huh and co-workers95 proposed a horizontal-dip (H-dip) coating method. The 2D order parameter (S2D) is calculated and can be used to characterize the degree of orientation.S2D = 〈2cos2θ − 1〉

S
2D shows values between 0 and 1, where S2D = 0 corresponds to a random distribution of AgNWs (isotropic films) and S2D = 1 corresponds to a perfectly parallel alignment (anisotropic films). By changing the coating speed, the homogeneously aligned AgNWs (S2D = 0.37–0.43) and the film thickness can be flexibly adjusted. The highly oriented arrangement of AgNWs induces prominent anisotropic absorption spectra. However, these fabrication strategies require delicate control of the wetting and dewetting of the AgNW solution, the uniformity in a large-scale area is not good enough and requires to be further optimized. With the assistance of solvent agitation, Long et al.93 successfully assembled AgNWs with controllable orientation direction and density. The SEM images were further obtained using the orientation plugin, which will visually present the distribution of the angle θ between the principal axis and each nanowire. Under an appropriate liquid flow rate, the AgNWs present good ordered orientation and exhibit a predominant red colour (Fig. 9b). The AgNWs prepared at 500 and 800 rpm show high and comparable S2D (0.80 and 0.82 for 500 and 800 rpm, respectively). The monolayer or multilayer aligned AgNWs can be layer-by-layer deposited onto a pre-strained soft substrate to fabricate a flexible electrode with excellent mechanical durability. The film conductivity almost remains unchanged in both released and stretched states after 100 times continuous stretching and releasing cycles (40% deformation).
4.3 Capillary force assisted methods for preparing oriented AgNW films
In recent years, capillary force has attracted great attention in the manipulation of AgNWs. Yang et al.102 developed a capillary assisted fluidic assembly (CFA) technique to fabricate an aligned ultra-long AgNW film, which shows significantly improved electrical conductivity (16.6 Ω sq−1) and optical transmittance (92.7% at 550 nm). As the order of the arrangement increases, the number of insufficient junctions along the printing direction of the film reduced, resulting in a decreased sheet resistance and obvious anisotropic conductivity. During this fabrication process, the AgNW suspension solution was directly injected into capillaries, and then the AgNWs will gradually become parallel with the flow direction under the coaction of hydrodynamic force, van der Waals force and capillary force. The final morphology of the aligned AgNW film was controlled by adjusting the inner diameter of the capillary and printing speed. However, AgNWs are prone to form cluster-like aggregation structures in the capillary and affect the flow of the solution. Therefore, it is necessary to carefully select the size of the capillary and pre-treat the AgNW solution to prevent cluster formation. Based on the same principle, Ko et al.103 replaced the capillary with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) nano-channels. This modified method is compatible with the cost-effective roll-to-roll preparation process. With the replacement of PDMS nano-channels, the inherent drawbacks in the CFA technique can be easily solved, including the blocking of AgNW clusters in the capillary, the difficulty of adjusting the infusion rate and so on. However, there is still certain size limit for the preparation of the capillary plate and the PDMS nano-channel plate, otherwise the uniformity of the final film cannot be guaranteed, indicating these strategies may be incompatible with large-area film fabrication.
Soon after, Ko and co-workers100 modified the traditional Mayer bar coating technique and successfully fabricated a large-scale highly oriented AgNW flexible transparent conductive electrode (Fig. 10a). The dark-field optical micrograph gives a visual representation of a unidirectionally aligned AgNW array (Fig. 10b). And the clear line pattern of fast Fourier transform (FFT) image in the optical micrograph also indicates the formation of the highly aligned unidirectional AgNW structure. In the practical test, they fabricated a force sensitive touch screen based on a large-area (more than 20 × 20 cm2) cross-aligned AgNW network transparent electrode and precisely monitored the traces and forces of dynamic writing. Jiang et al.101 used the conical fiber array (CFA) to manipulate the liquid transfer to align the AgNWs onto a soft poly(ethyleneterephthalate) film (Fig. 10c and d). The AgNWs are mainly guided by the directional stress created from the three-phase contact line of the dewetting process. After coating a second conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS) layer, the composite film can present obvious anisotropic electrical conductivity with high optical transmittance (95.2% at 550 nm). All these mentioned strategies mainly paid attention to the wetting and dewetting properties of the AgNW solution on target substrates, and relied on the pressure gradient to manipulate the rearrangement of AgNWs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the solution-processed bar-coating alignment of the AgNWs on a 20 × 20 cm2 PET substrate and the schematic of the AgNW alignment process during the bar-coating of the AgNW solution. (b) Dark-field optical microscopy images of the unidirectionally aligned AgNW arrays. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. Schematic depiction of AgNW alignment using CFA (c) and the detail controllable transfer of AgNW solution by the CFA (d). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.4 Other strategies for preparing oriented AgNW films
Some other novel strategies have also been proposed to rearrange AgNWs.104,106,107 Byun et al.104 combined the electrohydrodynamic (EHD) jet printing method to manipulate and pattern the AgNWs–polymer composite fiber onto a target substrate (Fig. 11a). Under the combined action of flow field, electric field and mechanical stretching, randomly distributed AgNWs can be well rearranged and highly aligned in the composite fiber. The composite fiber can be easily applied to form complex shapes; however, a non-conductive polymer layer will seriously influence the electrical conductivity and the linear structure is also incompatible for fabricating a large-area conductive film. Decher et al.105 developed a template-free spray-coating method to assemble the AgNWs at the solid–air interface (Fig. 11b). Under the assistance of a grazing incidence spraying system, a highly oriented AgNW film (S2D = 0.98) with adjustable density and orientation can be easily formed. The highly aligned AgNW film can be layer-by-layer assembled to increase the polarization efficiency, and, with the combination of four layer oriented nanowires in the same aligned direction, the polarization efficiency can reach 97% in the near infrared region.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of electrohydrodynamic jet printed aligned Ag NWs. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright © 2014 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic of the GIS deposition technique and SEM image of monolayer AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright © 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Application of the AgNW transparent electrode
In this section, we majorly introduce the applications of AgNW electrodes in different devices, including optoelectronic devices,108–112 photovoltaic devices,113–117 sensors,118–127 transparent film heaters128,129 and so on.130–134 The AgNW electrode can be fabricated by coating the initial dispersed solution onto a target substrate though masks to form different patterns. Meanwhile, proper post-treatment can further optimize the properties of the AgNW electrode, endowing it with even superior performance than that of the traditional ITO electrode.
5.1 Optoelectronic devices based on the AgNW electrode
OLEDs have attracted considerable attention in the past decades for their promising applications in solid state lightings and displays. Except for the improvement of luminance and efficiency, the further optimizations of flexibility and mechanical stability are also burning questions for the development of next generation wearable and flexible OLEDs. AgNWs are considered to be one of the most promising electrode materials for their low-cost solution based production, high flexibility, excellent optical transmittance and electrical conductivity. Leo et al.135 embedded AgNWs into a poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) film to fabricate a composite transparent electrode with superior figures of merit (σ/α ≥ 1 Ω−1). With the aid of high conductivity and light scattering property of the AgNWs–PMMA composite electrode, the ITO-free white OLED shows increased current efficiency and excellent angular color stability compared with the ITO based OLED (Fig. 12a). Moreover, the solution processable AgNW electrodes show great advantages in the commercial roll-to-roll fabrication strategy, providing great opportunities to fabricate low-cost and large-area lighting or display devices. As an elementary attempt, Cho et al.110 proposed a roll-to-roll redox-welding and embedding method to fabricate an AgNW film with improved mechanical robustness, high conductivity and transmittance (Fig. 12b). And based on this optimized AgNW electrode, a large-area flexible OLED was also successfully fabricated.
 Fig. 12  (a) Device structure of NW-OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright © 2013 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustrating the roll-to-roll embedding process used for the redox-welded AgNWs and light-emission image of large-area flexible OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright © 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Stretchability is one of the most important components for wearable electronics. Normally, AgNW composites with elastomers can produce excellent mechanical stability without geometric engineering. The elastomers can prevent the AgNWs from sliding over each other and maintain the conductive percolation paths under applied mechanical strain. Zhu et al.136 embedded the AgNWs in a PDMS surface layer to fabricate a stretchable conductor, which shows excellent robustness under repeated mechanical loading (Fig. 13a). And this highly stretchable electrode provides a possibility to fabricate intrinsically stretchable lighting or display devices. For instance, Li et al.112 prepared a hybrid device with an ultrathin LED structure and a surface wrinkled AgNW substrate, realizing high efficiency and mechanical compliancy simultaneously. The pre-wrinkled AgNW substrate further increased the mechanical deformability, realizing stable electroluminescent property under 50% ultimate tensile strain (Fig. 13b). Pei et al.137 proposed a simple light-emitting PIN junction by inserting an electroluminescent polymer between two AgNWs–PUA electrodes. The elastomeric polymer light-emitting device was fabricated by an all-solution-based process and can emit normally under the strain as large as 120%.
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of the AgNW/PDMS surface after the stretching and releasing cycles. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright © 2012 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Optical images of the Pe-QDLEDs with 0% and 50% tensile strains. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright © 2019 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Photovoltaic devices are an environmental friendly energy technology to convert solar energy to electrical energy, and can effectively reduce the consumption of fossil energy. Numerous investigations have been made to reduce the fabrication cost, improve efficiency and develop new energy conversion materials. Considering the basic structural composition of the device, the transparent electrode is responsible for both light inputting and charge outputting, which means the optical transmittance and electrical conductivity of the electrode will seriously influence the photo-conversion efficiency. Leung et al.117 embedded AgNWs in a transparent conductive polymer (PEDOT:PSS) to fabricate a composite electrode with higher conductivity and a smoother surface morphology, resulting in 15% efficiency enhancement of the planar hetero-junction solar cell.
Benefiting from the solution processable fabrication method, the AgNW conductive film can be easily fabricated as the top electrode in the photovoltaic device. Ma et al.116 spray-coated the AgNWs–ZnO composite top electrode in semi-transparent perovskite solar cells, and relatively high power conversion efficiency (13.27%) and low average visible light transmittance (16.3%) were achieved simultaneously. Therefore, it shows great advantages in the fabrication of semi-transparent photovoltaic devices with effective light incidence on both sides, which shows greatly improved light use efficiency and practical utility (Fig. 14). Except for the high transmittance, the haziness of the AgNW network also plays crucial roles in solar cell devices. Appropriate light scattering can increase the effective photon path length and enhance the possibility of photo absorption within the solar cell. Peumans and co-workers139 combined metal grating and AgNWs to investigate the influence on the optical electric field distribution, and eventually fabricated an organic solar cell with excellent performance even comparable with the transparent conducting oxide based devices.
 Fig. 14  Schematic architecture (a) and digital photograph (b) of a big-size solution-processed semitransparent solar cell. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright © 2015 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) J–V curves of the device under different illumination directions. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Other applications of the AgNW electrode
Apart from application as transparent electrodes in optoelectronic or photovoltaic devices, the AgNW conductive film can be also applied in wearable sensors, including strain sensors, pressure sensors, touch sensors, temperature sensors and so on.123–127 The relative strain-resistance relationship can be easily adjusted with different nanowire densities and structures, and eventually excellent sensitivity and a high gauge factor can be obtained. Normally, AgNWs were embedded in flexible polymers as composite electrodes to ensure sufficient mechanical stability during the operation. Kim and co-workers140 reported an AgNWs–cPI composite electrode with an excellent surface morphology and stable conductivity between −20 and 20 °C, and applied to fabricate a real-time temperature sensor to monitor the temperature change of the blood packages. Apart from this single-side configuration, the stability of composite electrodes was further improved by covering the polymer at both sides and forming a double layer structure.
Integrating some micro- or nanostructures into the double layer device can also increase the detection sensitivity. Zhu et al.120 combined two different shaped AgNWs–PDMS composite electrodes together to fabricate a capacitive pressure sensor, which were a planar-shape top electrode and a buckled-shape bottom electrode, and excellent sensitivity (2.94 kPa−1), low detection limit (<3 Pa) and short response time (<50 ms) were achieved simultaneously. Other than the single function sensor, the smart sensor system can be fabricated by combining different sensors into one device to detect different parameters. For example, Park et al.141 developed a capacitive fingerprint sensor to detect tactile pressure and skin temperature simultaneously and applied in mobile devices (Fig. 15a).
 Fig. 15  (a) The schematic diagram of a transparent and flexible multifunctional fingerprint sensor array. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. A photograph (b) and infrared image (c) of the large-area AgNW-based film heater (250 mm × 200 mm). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright © 2013 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic of the stretchable electro-chromic device. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Transparent film heaters (TFHs) can generate heat under certain bias voltage and have been widely used in defrosting, defogging and so on.128,129,142,143 Firstly, the TFHs were used in the de-ice aircraft windscreens, but with the development of technology, the TCOs based TFHs no longer satisfy the new demands of lower fabrication cost, larger surface and higher flexibility. Therefore, some new nano-materials, such as carbon nanotubes, graphene and metallic nanowires (e.g. AgNWs) have been applied to fabricate new generation TFHs. AgNWs based TFHs can get several tens degrees of temperature increase under a bias voltage less than 10 V, and can simultaneously realize large area uniform heating and fast thermal response (Fig. 15b and c). Although AgNWs based TFHs have so many advantages, there is still much work to be done before realizing prefect TFHs with non-haziness, short response time, excellent flexibility and stretchability. In addition, the AgNW network also plays crucial roles in electro-chromic and polymer-dispersed liquid crystal (PDLC) devices (Fig. 15d), transparent touch screen, electromagnetic protection, soft radio frequency (RF) antennas and so on.130–134 And there is no doubt that AgNWs will play more crucial roles in the future development of technology.
6. Conclusion and outlook
Thanks to the simple preparation process and excellent performance, AgNW electrodes are the most suitable substitution for traditional ITO electrodes. However, the high contact resistance and poor stability have seriously hindered their application in new generation flexible and wearable devices. Here, we have discussed the post-treatment methods for optimizing AgNW performance, including welding treatment to decrease the contact resistance and passivation to increase the stability and durability. However, these optimization strategies are subjected to one or several drawbacks of the AgNW electrodes, and there is still no simple method to achieve an overall improvement in electrode performance. With the further development of new-generation flexible and wearable optoelectronic devices, the requirements for the performance of flexible transparent electrodes will also increase. Therefore, the investigation of high performance AgNW transparent electrodes should be carried out persistently.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China and National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants # 2020YFA0715000, #61825402, 61805096.
Notes and references
Y.-F. Liu, J. Feng, Y.-G. Bi, D. Yin and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800371 CrossRef .
D. Yin, N. R. Jiang, Z. Y. Chen, Y. F. Liu, Y. G. Bi, X. L. Zhang, J. Feng and H. B. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 8, 1901525 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chan, M. Tanaka, Y.-T. Lee, Y.-W. Wong, H. Nakanotani, T. Hatakeyama and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 1–5 CrossRef .
J. Song, H. Lee, E. G. Jeong, K. C. Choi and S. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ji, D. Liu, C. Zhang and L. J. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3367 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Huang and L. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902391 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2009399 CrossRef .
W. H. Koo, S. M. Jeong, F. Araoka, K. Ishikawa, S. Nishimura, T. Toyooka and H. Takezoe, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Helander, Z. B. Wang, J. Qiu, M. T. Greiner, D. P. Puzzo, Z. W. Liu and Z. H. Lu, Science, 2011, 332, 944–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. V. Kayser and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806133 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhao, W. Geng, W.-W. Cao, J.-G. Wen, T. Wang, Y. Tian, L.-C. Jing, X.-T. Yuan, Z.-R. Zhu and H.-Z. Geng, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 780–790 RSC .
R. Garg, S. Elmas, T. Nann and M. R. Andersson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601393 CrossRef .
J. Zou, C. Z. Li, C. Y. Chang, H. L. Yip and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3618–3623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, Y. Wang, J. Jian, M. Li, G. Jiang, X. Li, G. Deng, S. Ji, Y. Wei, Y. Pang, Q. Wu, H. Tian, Y. Yang, X. Wu and T.-L. Ren, Carbon, 2020, 156, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, M. Yu, X. Chen, S. Nie, W.-Y. Lai, W. Su, Z. Cui and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705955 CrossRef .
D. Di Carlo Rasi, P. M. J. G. van Thiel, H. Bin, K. H. Hendriks, G. H. L. Heintges, M. M. Wienk, T. Becker, Y. Li, T. Riedl and R. A. J. Janssen, Solar RRL, 2019, 3, 1800366 CrossRef .
V. R. Feig, H. Tran, M. Lee, K. Liu, Z. Huang, L. Beker, D. G. Mackanic and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 30, 1902869 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jiang, P.-X. Hou, M.-L. Chen, B.-W. Wang, D.-M. Sun, D.-M. Tang, Q. Jin, Q.-X. Guo, D.-D. Zhang, J.-H. Du, K.-P. Tai, J. Tan, E. I. Kauppinen, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 9264 CrossRef PubMed .
E. P. Gilshteyn, S. A. Romanov, D. S. Kopylova, G. V. Savostyanov, A. S. Anisimov, O. E. Glukhova and A. G. Nasibulin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27327–27334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-J. Park, T. I. Kim, T. Yoon, S. Kang, H. Cho, N. S. Cho, J.-I. Lee, T.-S. Kim and S.-Y. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704435 CrossRef .
M. Wei, H. Wang, J. Wang, P. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Chen, J. Guo, B. Kang and Y. Duan, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kwon, T. H. Han, T. Y. Ko, N. Li, Y. Kim, D. J. Kim, S. H. Bae, Y. Yang, B. H. Hong, K. S. Kim, S. Ryu and T. W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2037 CrossRef PubMed .
V. L. Nguyen, D. L. Duong, S. H. Lee, J. Avila, G. Han, Y. M. Kim, M. C. Asensio, S. Y. Jeong and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yuan, D. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Huang, W. Chen, X. Xie, J. Zong, Q.-Q. Yuan, H. Zheng, D. Wang, J. Xu, S.-C. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Xi and L. Gao, Nature, 2020, 577, 204–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, B. Deng, J. Sun, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9281–9343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ge, Y. Wang, S. Lu, Y. Zhao, Y. Tang, A. M. Soomro, Q. Hong, X. Yang, F. Xu, S. Li, L. J. Chen, D. Cai and J. Kang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6761–6773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, Z. Zhang, Y. Duan, J. Dong, R. Qiao, S. You, L. Wang, J. Qi, D. Zou, N. Shang, Y. Yang, H. Li, L. Zhu, J. Sun, H. Yu, P. Gao, X. Bai, Y. Jiang, Z. J. Wang, F. Ding, D. Yu, E. Wang and K. Liu, Nature, 2020, 581, 406–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lim, M. Nam, S. Choi, Y. Jeon, Y. H. Son, S. M. Lee and K. C. Choi, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1526–1535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, X. Qiao, X. Qiu, J. Chen and R. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 286–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, I. Wyman, J. Hu, S. Lin, Z. Zhong, Y. Tu, Z. Huang and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2017, 223, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ilie, S. Crampin, L. Karlsson and M. Wilson, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 833–844 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Hu, C. Peng, H. Liu and Y. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 298, 689–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, C. He, J. Li, J. Guo, D. Yang and J. Wei, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2179–2185 RSC .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, B. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 955–960 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Korte, S. E. Skrabalak and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 437–441 RSC .
S. E. Skrabalak, B. J. Wiley, M. Kim, E. V. Formo and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2077–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. da Silva, M. Yang, S. I. Choi, M. Chi, M. Luo, C. Zhang, Z. Y. Li, P. H. Camargo, S. J. Ribeiro and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7892–7900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Teymouri, S. Pillai, Z. Ouyang, X. Hao, F. Liu, C. Yan and M. A. Green, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34093–34100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Song, Y. Chen, C. H. Chung, Y. M. Yang, B. Bob, H. S. Duan, G. Li, K. N. Tu, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2804–2811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, G.-T. Hwang, S. Kim, J. Seo, H.-J. Park, K. Yu, T.-S. Kim and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603473 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, Y. S. Nam, M. H. Song and H. W. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20938–20945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Garnett, W. Cai, J. J. Cha, F. Mahmood, S. T. Connor, M. G. Christoforo, Y. Cui, M. D. McGehee and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 241–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. Wei, C. Wang, J. Cao, Y. Chen, Z. Ma, Y. You, J. Wan, X. Fang and X. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Jang, W. H. Chung, Y. T. Hwang, H. J. Hwang, S. H. Kim and H. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24099–24107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Teymouri, E. Adabifiroozjaei, R. F. Webster, S. M. Hagh, X. Hao, M. A. Green and S. Pillai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3205–3213 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, H. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Zheng, Y. Zhao, X. Kong, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Kong, P. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7167–7172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kang, Y. Kim, S. Cheon, G.-R. Yi and J. H. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30779–30785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Lee, S. Oh, K.-Y. Cho, W.-L. Jeong, D.-S. Lee and S.-J. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14124–14131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, D. Zhang, J. Cheng, J. Liu, J. Mao and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4211–4218 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Yoon and D. Y. Khang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lian, X. Xi, D. Dong and G. He, Org. Electron., 2018, 60, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Tian, C. Hang, Y. Liu, S. Wang, M. Qi, H. Zhang and J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21850–21858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Tseng, L. Lee, Y.-C. Huang, J.-H. Chang, T.-Y. Su, Y.-C. Shih, H.-W. Lin and Y.-L. Chueh, Small, 2018, 14, 1800541 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, J. Jiu, T. T. Nge, Y. Aso and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seo, I. Hwang, H. D. Um, S. Lee, K. Lee, J. Park, H. Shin, T. H. Kwon, S. J. Kang and K. Seo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701479 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu, W. Xu, B. Mao, W. Shen, Y. Yu, R. Tan and W. Song, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 512, 208–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Huang, C. F. Guo and Z. Ren, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1090–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Fang, B. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Zhou and B. Hu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12981–12990 RSC .
S. Kim, S. J. Lee, S. Cho, S. Shin, U. Jeong and J. M. Myoung, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8292–8295 RSC .
J. Xiong, S. Li, Y. Ye, J. Wang, K. Qian, P. Cui, D. Gao, M. F. Lin, T. Chen and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1802803 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-s. Liu, J. Feng, X.-L. Ou, H.-f. Cui, M. Xu and H.-B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2016, 31, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, C. Sachse, M. L. Machala, C. May, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1076–1081 CrossRef CAS .
S. Savagatrup, E. Chan, S. M. Renteria-Garcia, A. D. Printz, A. V. Zaretski, T. F. O'Connor, D. Rodriquez, E. Valle and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 427–436 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Liu, B. C. Pan and G. S. Liou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2633–2639 RSC .
J. Wang, C. Yan, W. Kang and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10734–10739 RSC .
S. W. Yeom, B. You, K. Cho, H. Y. Jung, J. Park, C. Shin, B. K. Ju and J. W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3438 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Eom, J. Lee, A. Pichitpajongkit, M. Amjadi, J. H. Jeong, E. Lee, J. Y. Lee and I. Park, Small, 2014, 10, 4171–4181 CAS .
M. Göbelt, R. Keding, S. W. Schmitt, B. Hoffmann, S. Jäckle, M. Latzel, V. V. Radmilović, V. R. Radmilović, E. Spiecker and S. Christiansen, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 196–206 CrossRef .
H. Chen, L. Wang, J. Li, Y. Yu and X. Bi, Mater. Lett., 2018, 217, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Duan, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Liu and C. Li, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800020 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Ji, Y. Qiu, C. Xu, Z. Liu and Q. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4887–4894 RSC .
E. Lee, J. Ahn, H.-C. Kwon, S. Ma, K. Kim, S. Yun and J. Moon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702182 CrossRef .
R. Liu, M. Tan, X. Zhang, L. Xu, J. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Tang and L. Wan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 584–592 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, Y. Pan, X. Zhang, F. Cao, T. Wan, H. Du, R. Joshi and D. Chu, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 140–146 RSC .
X. Chen, G. Xu, G. Zeng, H. Gu, H. Chen, H. Xu, H. Yao, Y. Li, J. Hou and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khan, V. H. Nguyen, D. Munoz-Rojas, S. Aghazadehchors, C. Jimenez, N. D. Nguyen and D. Bellet, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19208–19217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Woo, J. T. Han, S. Jung, J. I. Jang, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, K. J. Baeg and G. W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4804 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lee, H. Lee, Y. Ahn and Y. Lee, Carbon, 2015, 81, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Ricciardulli, S. Yang, A. H. Wetzelaer, X. Feng and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706010 CrossRef .
M. N. T. Tokuno, J. Jiu and K. Suganuma, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 281 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Seo, S. Lee, K. H. Min, S. Chandramohan, A. H. Park, G. H. Lee, M. Park, E. K. Suh and M. J. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. N. Thilawala, J.-K. Kim and J.-M. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 773, 1009–1017 CrossRef .
W. H. Chae, T. Sannicolo and J. C. Grossman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17909–17920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Chen, W. Li, P. Li, J. Ma, B. Li, X. Zhao, Z. Ju, H. Chang, L. Xiao, H. Xu and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2020, 12, 3337 Search PubMed .
G. S. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Kong, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xie, Y. Luo and B. R. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37699–37708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tang, H. Feng, H. Wang, X. Wan, J. Liang and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25330–25337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bang, J. Choi, F. Xia, S. S. Kwon, A. Ashraf, W. I. Park and S. Nam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3304–3308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, A. Cao and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, J. W. Durham, B. J. Wiley and Z. Yong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1556–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Shi, B. Hu, X.-C. Yu, R.-L. Zhao, X.-F. Ren, S.-L. Liu, J.-W. Liu, M. Feng, A.-W. Xu and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 958–964 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, S. Wang, S. Wang, G. Liu, T. Cao and Y. Long, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902922 CrossRef .
Y. Ko, S. K. Song, N. H. Kim and S. T. Chang, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
B. Park, I. G. Bae and Y. H. Huh, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, H. Xia, F. You, H. Mao, X. Ma, H. Tao, X. Zhao and M.-C. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 607–612 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Z. Long, L. Liao, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1888–1900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, D. Ge, G. A. Calderon-Ortiz, A. L. Exarhos, C. Bretz, A. Alsayed, D. Kurz, J. M. Kikkawa, R. Dreyfus, S. Yang and A. G. Yodh, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6438–6448 RSC .
S. J. O. H. Shimoda, H. Z. Geng, R. J. Walker, X. B. Zhang, L. E. McNeil and O. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 899 CrossRef .
S. Cho, S. Kang, A. Pandya, R. Shanker, Z. Khan, Y. Lee, J. Park, S. L. Craig and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4346–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, R. Bian, C. Guo, B. Xu, H. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706938 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wu, Z. Li, F. Ye, X. Zhao, T. Zhang and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11074–11080 RSC .
S. Kang, T. Kim, S. Cho, Y. Lee, A. Choe, B. Walker, S. J. Ko, J. Y. Kim and H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7933–7942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, B. Seong, J. Kim, Y. Jang and D. Byun, Small, 2014, 10, 3918–3922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, M. Pauly, O. Felix and G. Decher, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1307–1314 RSC .
C. L. Zhang, K. P. Lv, N. Y. Hu, L. Yu, X. F. Ren, S. L. Liu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2012, 8, 2936–2940 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Al-Milaji, Q. Huang, Z. Li, T. N. Ng and H. Zhao, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 3289–3298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Tao, S. Chen, H. Li, P. Chen, M. Z. Wei, H. Wang, K. Li, M. Mazzeo and Y. Duan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16468 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kim, S. Kang, J. Heo, S. Cho, J. W. Kim, A. Choe, B. Walker, R. Shanker, H. Ko and J. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800659 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, Y. E. Sul, H. Kang, Y. Choi, H. S. Lim, S. Lee, L. Pu, G. R. Yi, S. M. Cho and J. H. Cho, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18627–18634 RSC .
W. Li, Y. Q. Li, Y. Shen, Y. X. Zhang, T. Y. Jin, J. D. Chen, X. H. Zhang and J. X. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 15, 1900985 CrossRef .
Y. F. Li, S. Y. Chou, P. Huang, C. Xiao, X. Liu, Y. Xie, F. Zhao, Y. Huang, J. Feng, H. Zhong, H. B. Sun and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2019, 30, 1807516 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Guo, P. Kubis, T. Przybilla, E. Spiecker, A. Hollmann, S. Langner, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, W. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Wang, G. Wu and H. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 171, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Z. Wu, J. Li, F. Jiang, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Zhou and B. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705409 CrossRef .
K. Han, M. Xie, L. Zhang, L. Yan, J. Wei, G. Ji, Q. Luo, J. Lin, Y. Hao and C.-Q. Ma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 399–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Thomas, M. A. Rahman, S. Srivastava, J.-S. Kang, D. McGillivray, M. Abd-Ellah, N. F. Heinig and K. T. Leung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9495–9503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Park, J. Kim, M. Chu and M. Khine, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700158 CrossRef .
J. Shi, L. Wang, Z. Dai, L. Zhao, M. Du, H. Li and Y. Fang, Small, 2018, 14, 1800819 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Yang, F. R. Poblete, X. Hu and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31028–31037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. Cai, H. Ding, N. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6195–6200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Zhu, P. G. Ren, J. Wang, Q. Duan, F. Ren, W. M. Xia and D. X. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19988–19999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, F. R. Poblete, G. Cheng, S. Yao, X. Jiang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 30, 79–85 CrossRef .
M. Amjadi, A. Pichitpajongkit, S. Lee, S. Ryu and I. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5154–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2345–2352 RSC .
S. Yao, P. Swetha and Y. Zhu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, F. R. Poblete and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17836–17842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Kwon, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, H. Cho, J. Shin, J. Yeo and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4744–4751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, Y. Han, Q. Huang, J. Dong and Y. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6806–6811 RSC .
Y.-H. Yu, C.-C. M. Ma, C.-C. Teng, Y.-L. Huang, S.-H. Lee, I. Wang and M.-H. Wei, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Yan, J. Wang, M. Cui, Xu Wang, Ce Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 316–322 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, J. Liang, Lu Li, F. Ren, W. Hu, J. Li, S. Qi and Q. Pei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12874–12882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Kim, K. Y. Shin, J. B. Pyo, J. Lee, J. G. Son, S. S. Lee and J. H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2582–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. S. Kang, R. Shanker, H. Lee, J. Park, D.-S. Um, Y. Lee and H. Ko, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas8772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gaynor, S. Hofmann, M. G. Christoforo, C. Sachse, S. Mehra, A. Salleo, M. D. McGehee, M. C. Gather, B. Lussem, L. Muller-Meskamp, P. Peumans and K. Leo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4006–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5117–5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, L. Li, X. Niu, Z. Yu and Q. Pei, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, P. Kubis, T. Stubhan, N. Li, D. Baran, T. Przybilla, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18251–18257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Youn, U. Jung, M. Naqi, S. J. Choi, M. G. Lee, S. Lee, H. J. Park, I. D. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44678–44685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. An, S. Heo, S. Ji, F. Bien and J. U. Park, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2458 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kim, Y. W. Kim, H. S. Lee, H. Kim, W. S. Yang and K. S. Suh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Celle, C. Mayousse, E. Moreau, H. Basti, A. Carella and J.-P. Simonato, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 427–433 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:


Thermal treatment	200 °C/20 min	30	10	85	
39

Joule heating	0.2 A/25 V/10 s	4 × 104	91	—	
40

Electron beam	200 kGy	63	29	83	
43

Plasmonic	30 W cm−2/60 s	105	10	80	
41

Ostwald ripening	Pre-deposited Ag/water	30	14	79	
49

Sodium fluoride	24	9.3	92	
47

Chemically welding	Silver nitrate/ascorbic acid	3.5 × 105	20.5	—	
48

H2O2 vapor	80	10	95	
51

Silver ammonia/glucose	25.9	7.5	86	
52

Cold press	25 MPa/5 s	1.8 × 104	8.6	80	
54

Capillary force	Water mist/30 s/25 °C	6.3 × 104	37	—	
58


 	Fig. 1  (a) AgNW film sheet resistance as a function of the annealing temperature. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (b) The local field distribution at a NW junction. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright © 2016 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Electroless-welding of the AgNW film on PET using silver ammonia. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright © 2016 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Sheet resistance of the halide-welded AgNWs as a function of the treatment time. The right panel shows the SEM images of NaBr-welded and NaF-welded AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the welding process (red and blue indicate electrons and Ag+ ions, respectively). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright © 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the room-temperature pressure welding process. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of moisture treatment for capillary-force-induced cold welding of AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS/AgNW hybrid and T-PEDOT:PSS/AgNW hybrid. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright © 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of AgNW micromesh with an EC substrate. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic procedures for preparing metal electroplated TCFs with the assistance of a magnetic field and their applications. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright © 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of Ni(OH)2 NSs after exfoliation. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright © 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of a 30 nm thick ZnO-coated AgNW. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the AgNW/SWCNT hybrid networks showing the possible current flow pathways. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Top-view SEM image of the graphene/AgNW/graphene TCFs after a long-term stability test. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Optical image of the electrochemical exfoliation of graphite. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) The photographs of the nanowire assembly process at different compression stages of the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright © 2003, American Chemical Society. (c) Concept picture of the shrink-induced NW assembly process. Density increase of NW arrays (d) and improvement of NW assembly quality (i.e., misalignment angle) (e) via shrink-assembly. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The schematic illustration of the oil–water–air interface self-assembly process. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright © 2010 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustration and orientation-color-coded picture of the agitation-assisted alignment method. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright © 2019 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
S2D = 〈2cos2θ − 1〉

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the solution-processed bar-coating alignment of the AgNWs on a 20 × 20 cm2 PET substrate and the schematic of the AgNW alignment process during the bar-coating of the AgNW solution. (b) Dark-field optical microscopy images of the unidirectionally aligned AgNW arrays. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. Schematic depiction of AgNW alignment using CFA (c) and the detail controllable transfer of AgNW solution by the CFA (d). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright © 2018 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of electrohydrodynamic jet printed aligned Ag NWs. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright © 2014 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic of the GIS deposition technique and SEM image of monolayer AgNWs. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright © 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Device structure of NW-OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright © 2013 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Schematic illustrating the roll-to-roll embedding process used for the redox-welded AgNWs and light-emission image of large-area flexible OLEDs. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright © 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of the AgNW/PDMS surface after the stretching and releasing cycles. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright © 2012 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Optical images of the Pe-QDLEDs with 0% and 50% tensile strains. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright © 2019 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic architecture (a) and digital photograph (b) of a big-size solution-processed semitransparent solar cell. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright © 2015 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) J–V curves of the device under different illumination directions. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The schematic diagram of a transparent and flexible multifunctional fingerprint sensor array. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright © 2018, Springer Nature. A photograph (b) and infrared image (c) of the large-area AgNW-based film heater (250 mm × 200 mm). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright © 2013 WILEY–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic of the stretchable electro-chromic device. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
