Graphene in photovoltaic applications: organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA01047G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA01047G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12136-12149Graphene in photovoltaic applications: organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)

        
          
            Dong Wook 
            Chang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hyun-Jung 
            Choi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alan 
            Filer
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jong-Beom 
            Baek
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical Systematic Engineering, Catholic University of Daegu, 13-13, Hayang, Gyeongbuk 712-702, South Korea. E-mail: dwchang@cu.ac.kr
bSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering/Low-Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST), 100, Banyeon, Ulsan 689-798, South Korea. E-mail: jbbaek@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      1st March 2014
    , Accepted 10th April 2014First published on 11th April 2014AbstractGraphene, a one-atom thick layer of graphite with a two-dimensional sp2-hybridized carbon network, has recently attracted tremendous research interest due to its peculiar properties such as good mechanical strength, high thermal conductivity, superior transparency, large specific surface area and exceptional charge transport properties. To take advantage of its unusual properties, graphene has been widely studied in various energy conversion and storage applications such as supercapacitors, fuel cells, batteries and solar cells. Amongst these applications, the development of efficient solar cells, which can convert sunlight into electricity is in high demand in order to solve up-coming energy-related and global warming issues. So far, significant effort has been devoted to using graphene for improving the overall performance of photovoltaic devices such as organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). It has been reported that graphene can play diverse, but positive roles such as an electrode, an active layer, an interfacial layer and an electron acceptor in photovoltaic cells. Herein, we summarize the recent progress and general aspects of graphene in various photovoltaic cells including the synthesis, structure, properties and performance. In addition, challenges and future perspectives in this field are also discussed.Dong Wook ChangDong Wook Chang is an Assistant Professor and Department Chair of Chemical Systematic Engineering at the Catholic University of Daegu, South Korea. He obtained his PhD in Materials Engineering at the University of Dayton in 2007. Prior to taking up his current position, he worked for two years as a senior researcher at Samsung Total Petrochemicals Company and another two years as a Research Assistant Professor of the Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy at the Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST). Currently, he is working on the synthesis and functionalization of organic materials and carbon-based nanomaterials for optoelectronic and renewable-energy applications.Jong-Beom BaekJong-Beom Baek is a Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering and Director of the Low-Dimensional Carbon Materials Center at the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea. After receiving his PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (USA) in 1998, he joined the Wright-Patterson Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL). After four years at the AFRL, he returned to his home country to take up a position as an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at Chungbuk National University (Korea) in 2003, before moving to UNIST in 2008. His current research interests include the syntheses of high-performance two-dimensional (2D) network polymers and the chemical modifications of carbon-based materials for multifunctional applications.
1. Introduction
Humanity is currently facing serious threats, e.g., energy-related issues and global warming problems, due to the huge increase in world population, rapid economic expansion and large emission of greenhouse gases from fossil fuels. To solve these problems, the development of clean and renewable energy resources has attracted a great deal of interest in both academia and industry. Above all, solar energy is in the limelight owing to its great potential as an unlimited and cheap renewable energy resource. Although most solar cells (∼90%) currently available in the market are composed of silicon-based materials,1 the development of promising alternative solar cells, for example, organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs)2,3 and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),4,5 is gaining traction due to their unique advantages such as flexibility and low manufacturing costs. As a result of the recent progress during the last decade, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OPVs and DSSCs has greatly improved with the current state-of-the-art devices exceeding 9%6 and 15%,7 respectively. However, further improvements of the PCE, costs and long-term stability of OPVs and DSSCs are still greatly required for practical applications. In addition, it is well known that the overall performance of these solar cells strongly depends not only on the structure of the devices, but also on the properties of the materials. Therefore, the development of new materials, which are useable as the various parts of solar cells such as the electrodes, active layers and interfacial layers, as well as the related device fabrication techniques, are of great importance.
Since the breakthrough discovery by Novoselov et al.,8 graphene, a single layer of graphite with a two-dimensional carbon network structure, has attracted great attention for use in various applications. Specifically, graphene has been widely used for emerging energy conversion and storage applications such as supercapacitors, fuel cells, batteries and solar cells,9–11 owing to its fascinating properties, such as its huge mechanical strength (Young's modulus of 1.0 TPa), high thermal conductivity (∼5000 Wm−1 K−1), superior transparency (>97%), large specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), and exceptional charge transport properties (200000 cm2 V−1 S−1).8,12,13
Much attention has been devoted to the application of graphene in the particularly interesting field of OPVs and DSSCs due to its versatility and unique properties.10,14–17 For example, it has been reported that graphene can be successfully employed in most parts of OPVs including the electrode, the active layer and the interfacial layer. The results that have been obtained from graphene in OPVs are promising compared with its counterparts. Similarly, graphene has also shown great potential in DSSCs as a transparent electrode, photoanode, and counter electrode. Although graphene and graphene-based materials have demonstrated a broad range of applications, we will focus on recent advances in OPVs and DSSCs. In addition, the remaining challenges for newly-developed graphene materials in photovoltaic applications will be discussed.
2. Synthesis and functionalization of graphene for solar cells
Although there are a numerous methods to produce graphene, they can be categorized into two representative approaches. The first method is a top-down approach, in which single and a few layer graphene can be prepared by exfoliation of natural or synthetic graphite. The two-dimensional graphene can be exfoliated from graphite using the Scotch tape method8 as well as consecutive oxidation–exfoliation–reduction reactions of graphite,18 the so-called graphene oxide (GO) method, are the most widely used methods for top-down approaches. In addition, liquid-phase exfoliation,19 graphite intercalation compounds (GICs)20 and electrochemical exfoliation21 can be regarded as other examples of top-down approaches. The other method is a bottom-up approach. Graphene can be directly synthesized from a carbon feedstock using various synthetic protocols, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD)22,23 and epitaxial growth.24 This second method is better for producing graphene with high-quality and large-area films, although it has significant drawbacks, such as high manufacturing costs, tedious optimization, and tight control of the process conditions.
Due to large area π–π interaction among graphitic layers, pristine graphite is difficult to exfoliate into single and a few-layer graphene sheets in matrices such as solvents and polymers, which limits not only the scalability of production for practical applications, but also the realization of unique properties. In addition, further tailoring and/or altering the properties of graphene is often necessary to meet requirements for specific applications. To solve these problems, various chemical and/or physical methods for modifying graphene have been developed. Fig. 1A summarizes the most important methods for the functionalization of graphene, including edge-functionalization (Fig. 1A(a)), basal-plane functionalization (Fig. 1A(b)), non-covalent adsorption on the basal plane (Fig. 1A(c)), asymmetric functionalization (Fig. 1A(d)), and the self-assembly of graphene (Fig. 1A(e)).25 Due to its good dispersibility and reactive functional groups such as carboxylic acids, epoxides, carbonyl and hydroxyl groups, graphene oxide (GO), which is produced from the oxidation of graphite using strong oxidizing reagents (e.g., H2SO4 and KMnO4), is widely used as a starting material for the further modification of graphene (Fig. 1B).25 Furthermore, chemical doping of graphene by incorporation of heteroatoms such as boron and nitrogen has attracted significant attention. The electronic properties of graphene, for example, its band structure and charge carrier mobility (of holes and electrons), are greatly modulated after chemical doping of carbon-based graphene structures (Fig. 1C).26
 Fig. 1  (A) Functionalization possibilities for graphene: (a) edge-functionalization, (b) basal-plane functionalization, (c) noncovalent adsorption on the basal plane, (d) asymmetric functionalization and (e) the self-assembly of graphene. (B) Chemical structure of graphene oxide. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (C) Process for boron- and nitrogen-doping of graphene. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Baek et al. reported a simple, cost-effective and eco-friendly method using ball-milling (Fig. 2A)27 and a direct Friedel–Crafts acylation (Fig. 2B)28 for the large-scale production of edge-selectively functionalized graphene (EFG). These methods can efficiently introduce various organic molecular wedges such as 4-substituted benzoyl groups at the edges of graphene, due to the versatility of the mechanochemical ball-milling and the Friedel–Crafts acylation in PPA/P2O5.29 Unlike in GO, the EFG produced by ball-milling and the Friedel–Crafts acylation largely preserved the highly crystalline graphitic structure of its basal plane. In addition, the efficient exfoliation of graphite into graphene could be easily obtained due to the strong repulsive forces between the edge-selectively attached functional groups. As a result, EFG has been used in many applications, such as highly conductive large-area films, metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),28,30,31 and electrodes in DSSCs32,33 with significantly enhanced properties.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic of the ball milling procedure. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from National Academy of Sciences. (B) Schematic representation of the direct Freidel–Crafts acylation in PPA/P2O5. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3. Graphene in organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs)
During the last few decades, organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) have attracted a great deal of interest due to their advantages such as low-cost manufacturing, light weight, the versatility of their components and flexibility.2,3 Various π-conjugated polymers and/or small molecules have been used as the light-absorbing active layers in OPVs.34–36 Incessant and creative efforts by many researchers have led to a significant enhancement in power conversion efficiency (PCE). However, further improvement in PCE and lowering the device cost are still required for commercialization. In this regard, much attention has been focused on the application of graphene in the field of OPVs, because of its outstanding mechanical, optical, and electronic properties with relatively high cost-effectiveness.
3.1. Transparent electrodes
Firstly, graphene has been widely investigated as a transparent electrode in OPVs to replace conventional indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes. Currently, ITO plays a pivotal role as transparent electrodes for OPVs, but it has several drawbacks such as high cost, poor flexibility, low stability, and a complicated manufacturing process.15,37 Although many alternatives including conducting polymers,38 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),39 and metal oxides40,41 have been extensively developed, it has been reported that graphene can offer several potential advantages over these other candidates. For example, the transmittance of single layer graphene can reach more than 97% in the visible region. In addition, a low sheet resistance (a few hundred Ω to kΩ/square), which is necessary to meet the requirements for replacing ITO, can also be easily achieved.42
Recently, Choi et al. reported the device fabrication of OPVs using CVD grown graphene films on glass substrates as transparent electrodes.43 The CVD grown graphene films showed high transparency (∼84%) in conjunction with low sheet resistance (∼374 ± 3Ω/square). For the preparation of OPVs, a thin layer of CVD grown graphene film was first transferred to a glass substrate with the aid of a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) supporting layer (Fig. 3a). After consecutive spin-coatings of a PEDOT:PSS film and a bulk heterojunction active layer composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene)/[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT/PCBM) onto the graphene film, the cathode of Ca(20 nm)/Al(100 nm) was finally evaporated (Fig. 3b). The resultant graphene-based OPVs are shown in Fig. 3c. Although the PCE of the OPVs with the graphene electrode (∼1.17%) was still not comparable to that of devices with a standard ITO electrode (∼3.43%), these yet to be optimized results indicate that graphene films are a promising and economic substitute material for replacing conventional ITO electrodes. Due to the higher carrier concentration and improved compatibility, a further enhancement in PCE has been reported using a doped CVD-grown graphene electrode containing various dopants such as Au,44,45 acids,46,47 and organic molecules.48,49 Moreover, Zhou et al. obtained a nearly equivalent PCE (∼1.18%) to that of an ITO-based OPV device (∼1.27%)50 using highly flexible OPVs with a smooth, large surface area, few-layer CVD-grown graphene film as the transparent electrode.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and transfer of CVD grown graphene onto glass substrates. (b) Schematic diagram of the bulk-heterojunction OPVs comprising a CVD-grown graphene electrode with Al:Ca cathode. (c) A photograph of the OPVs. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier. 
Apart from CVD-grown graphene, chemically or thermally reduced graphene oxide (rGO) derived from graphene oxide (GO) has been also widely investigated as a transparent electrode material for OPVs. This top-down approach is more desirable than a bottom-up approach like CVD from the viewpoint of mass production potential. Chen et al. reported the possibility of using rGO as a transparent electrode for OPVs.51 After an insulating GO film is deposited by spin-coating, annealing at high temperature combined with hydrazine vapor can be used to produce a conductive rGO film. It was also found that the transparency and conductivity, two key properties of transparent electrodes, are strongly dependent on the thickness of the rGO film. For example, the conductivity was significantly improved by increasing the film thickness, whereas the transparency was compromised. Unfortunately, the PCE of the optimized devices with an rGO film as the transparent electrode was limited to 0.4%, which was much lower than that of ITO-based devices (∼0.8%) with the same configuration.51 This low PCE likely originated from the higher sheet resistance of the rGO film as well as its poor compatibility with the PEDOT:PSS layer. Although the PCEs of OPVs with rGO electrodes are still inferior to those of devices with ITO electrodes, they can offer the unique advantage of outstanding flexibility. Recently, Zhang et al. demonstrated highly flexible OPVs using an rGO film on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate as the transparent electrode (Fig. 4).52 The rGO film was obtained by the thermal annealing of a spin-coated GO film under a H2/Ar atmosphere at 1100 °C for 2 h. A higher PCE of 0.78% was obtained using rGO films with a thickness of 16 nm, sheet resistance of 3.2 kΩ/square and transmittance of 65%. Interestingly, the overall performance of the OPVs with an rGO on PET electrode was able to withstand up to 1200 bending cycles (Fig. 4D). The applied tensile strain for the bending–relaxing experiments was estimated to be 2.9%. It is worth noting that ITO-based OPVs with the same device structure easily crack upon bending and their device performance dramatically degrades due to the brittle nature of ITO. This result clearly paves the way to develop various flexible optoelectronic devices using graphene as a transparent electrode. Similarly, several promising results using OPVs with a graphene-based transparent electrode have also been reported.15,52,53 Consequently, graphene made either by top-down approaches like CVD or bottom-up approaches starting from GO has high potential as a transparent electrode in OPV applications.
 Fig. 4  (A) A photograph of rGO on PET. (B) Schematic representation of the layer structure of OPVs, i.e., rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al, with rGO as the transparent electrode. (C) J–V curves of OPVs using a rGO/PET electrode under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination with a rGO film thickness of 21 nm. (D) J–V curves of OPVs with a 4 nm thickness rGO film on PET as the transparent electrode after applying (i) 400, (ii) 800, and (iii) 1200 cycles of bending. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3.2. Electron acceptors
Among the various device configurations of OPVs, the most successful have adopted bulk heterojunction structures with an electron donor (D) and an electron acceptor (A). In bulk heterojunctions, a bicontinuous, nanometer-scale, interpenetrating network of donor and accepter with large interfacial area is efficiently generated. Under these conditions, excitons are mostly located at the D/A interfacial area within their limited diffusion length, which is beneficial for improving the device performance through efficient charge separation.54,55 In contrast to the intensive development of a huge number of electron donors for OPVs including polymers and small molecules with low band gaps,35,36 C60 derivatives, specifically [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), have been predominantly used as electron acceptors for OPVs. However, C60 derivatives have significant drawbacks such as very weak light absorption in the visible range and low energy levels for their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).56,57 Therefore, the development of new electron acceptors has been required for the practical application of OPVs. In this regard, graphene, as a carbon allotrope, is a good candidate for an alternative electron accepting material, due to the unique advantages of its two-dimensional structure, high carrier mobility and versatile functionalization. Chen et al. have reported the solution-processable fabrication and characterization of OPVs with bulk heterojunction structures that have conjugated polymers as the electron donor and graphene as the electron acceptor.58 The structure of the materials used as well as a schematic representation and energy level diagram of the device are shown in Fig. 5. The device has a typical structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3OT:SPFGraphene/LiF/Al (Fig. 5b) and the energy levels of each component in the device are appropriate for successful operation (Fig. 5c). In order to enhance the hydrophobic nature of graphene, a reaction was carried out between GO and phenyl isocyanate to produce functionalized graphene known as SPFGraphene (Fig. 5d). Under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, a limited PCE of 0.4% was obtained from OPVs with a bulk heterojunction structure using P3OT and SPFGraphene as the donor and acceptor, respectively. However, the PCE was greatly increased up to 1.4% after thermal annealing of the devices. Morphological improvement of the active layer and further reduction of the SPFGraphene during the annealing process contributed to this significant enhancement in PCE.58 In addition, this relatively high value of PCE is comparable to most OPVs with new electron acceptors, except C60 derivatives.
 Fig. 5  (a) The idealized chemical structures of graphene and P3OT. (b) Schematic of a device with P3OT/graphene thin film as the active layer. (c) Energy level diagram of P3OT and SPFGraphene. (d) Schematic representation of the reaction of phenyl isocyanate with graphene oxide to form SPFGraphene. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Wiley-VCH. 
Dai et al. fabricated bulk heterojunction OPVs with a graphene–C60 hybrid material used as an electron acceptor (Fig. 6).59 In order to produce the graphene–C60 hybrid material, C60 was grafted onto the surface of GO using a lithiation reaction. A 2.5 fold increase in PCE (∼1.22%) was observed for OPVs using the graphene–C60 hybrid material as an electron acceptor compared to a device with only C60 as an acceptor (∼0.47%). This enhancement in the PCE of the devices with the graphene–C60 hybrid acceptor was clearly attributable to an improvement of the electron transport properties because the introduction of the graphene–C60 hybrid into the active layer of the device could promote the formation of a direct electron conduction pathway through percolation of the highly conducting two-dimensional graphene sheets. As shown in Fig. 6A, the photo-generated electrons from C60 are readily transferred to the graphene and finally reach the Al cathode. So far, while several investigations on graphene-based acceptors for OPVs have been reported, the overall performance of the devices is still poorer than that of OPVs with C60-based acceptors. To overcome this problem, further studies are currently being undertaken on OPVs with graphene-based electron acceptors including studies on controlling the grain size and layer structure of the graphene acceptor, matching the band structures between the donor–acceptor pairs and optimization of the device fabrication processes.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic representation of C60-grafted graphene (C60-G) facilitating electron transfer and transport in a P3HT-based PSC. (B) (a) Absorption spectra of the C60-G:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) film before and after annealing (130 °C, 10 min) and the C60:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) film spin-cast onto quartz plates. (b) Schematic diagram of a PSC with the C60-G:P3HT composite used as the active layer. (c) J–V curves of the photovoltaic devices with the C60-G:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt), C60:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt), or C60/G mixture (10 wt%):P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) used as the active layers after annealing. (d) Energy level diagram for the photovoltaic device with the C60-G:P3HT composite as the active layer. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3.3. Interfacial layers
As discussed above, pristine or functionalized graphene can serve as a transparent electrode and electron acceptor in bulk heterojunction OPVs. However, there are still additional applications of graphene in OPVs. Interfacial layers such as the hole extraction layer (HELs) and electron extraction layer (EEL) are good examples.14,25 For high performance OPVs, these additional layers are often fabricated into OPVs to minimize the energy barriers between the active materials and electrodes. The HEL and EEL are beneficial for matching the energy levels between the work function of the anode and HOMO level of the electron donor, as well as the work function of the cathode and the LUMO level of electron acceptor, respectively. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most widely used HEL, but it has drawbacks such as etching of the ITO electrode and a strong hygroscopic nature, which are detrimental to device efficiency and lifetime.60,61 On the other hand, various materials such as low work function metals or their related salts (e.g., Ca, LiF), metal oxide semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, ZnO), and conjugated polymer electrolytes have been reported as EELs.62–64 Recently, graphene oxide and its derivatives have been emerging as promising candidates for use as interfacial layers in OPVs, due to their high electrical conductivity, tunable optoelectronic properties, low cost, and extraordinary stability. For example, there are several advantages when thin film of graphene oxide is applied as a HEL in OPVs rather than PEDOT:PSS, including less corrosion of the ITO electrode, a better band structure for more efficient hole extraction and higher transparency.
Li et al. reported a graphene based HEL in OPVs. They fabricated OPVs with a simple structure of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al (Fig. 7a).65 The work function of the GO HEL (−4.9 eV) matched well with that of ITO and the LUMO of the P3HT donor (Fig. 7b). In addition, the GO film exhibited a smooth surface with a root mean square (rms) value of 0.7 nm, which is even lower than that of a pristine glass/ITO electrode (rms = 3 nm) (Fig. 7c). Without HEL, the device showed a limited PCE of 1.8%. However, an improved PCE (∼3.5%) was obtained when GO was used as a HEL, which is highly comparable to conventional OPVs using a PEDOT:PSS counterpart (∼3.6%) (Fig. 7d). Furthermore, the device with GO as a HEL demonstrated significantly improved long-term stability, possibly due to effective suppression of the leakage current and separation of the carriers. It was also found that the thickness of the GO film is critical for device performance. Increasing the thickness of the GO film gradually decreases the PCEs of OPVs (Fig. 7e). The higher sheet resistance of the thicker film resulted in a lower short circuit current (Jsc), fill factor (FF) and optical transmittance for the device.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the OPV device structure with GO as a HEL. (b) Energy level diagrams of all of the components in the OPVs. (c) An AFM height image of a GO thin film with an approximate thickness of 2 nm. (d) J–V characteristics of the devices with no HEL, with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS film and with a 2 nm GO film. (e) J–V characteristics of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al devices with different thickness of GO film. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Dai et al. also reported the utilization of sulfonated GO (GO-SO3H), as a HEL in OPVs.66 They introduced the strongly acidic moiety SO3H into the carbon basal plane of GO resulting in an enhancement of the interfacial doping of the electron-donor as well as affording solution-processability. In addition, the conductivity of the GO-SO3H was greatly enhanced during the reaction, due to the dehydration effect of the fuming sulfuric acid used as a reactant. As a result, a greatly improved PCE of 4.37% was obtained along with an FF of 0.71, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.61 V, and Jsc of 0.15 mA cm−2 from the OPVs with GO-SO3H as a HEL. There are also several other reports on the development of graphene oxide derivatives as HELs for high performance OPVs.67–70 So far, graphene-based materials have displayed promising performance as HELs compared with PEDOT:PSS and other candidates like metal oxides.14 Further optimization of the structure and manufacturing process of graphene-based HELs in OPVs should lead to great improvements in overall device performance.
In principle, if the energy level of graphene can be properly tuned it can be used as both a HEL and EEL in OPVs. Dai et al. reported the preparation of edge-functionalized GO for use as the EEL in OPVs. They used a simple charge neutralization reaction of the –COOH groups at the edge of GO with cesium (–COOCs) to modify the work function of GO (Fig. 8a).71 The GO itself has a work function of 4.7 eV, which is suitable for the HEL in OPVs. However, the work function of the cesium neutralized GO (GO-Cs) shifted to 4.0 eV. This value is appropriate for an EEL, because it matches well with the LUMO level of PCBM, which acts as an electron acceptor (Fig. 8c). Well-designed OPV device structures, i.e., normal and inverted configurations, were successfully fabricated with a high PCE of 3.67%, using GO and GO-Cs as the HEL and EEL, respectively, Furthermore, both the normal and inverted devices with GO-based interfacial layers outperformed the corresponding OPVs with a standard HELs and EELs, such as PEDOT:PSS and LiF, respectively.71 Therefore, the work function of graphene can be efficiently tuned by controlled chemical modifications, which open up new avenues for the development of functionalized graphene with tailor-made chemical structures and electronic properties like GO-Cs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure and synthesis scheme for GO-Cs. (b) Energy level diagram of all of the components in the OPV devices. (c) J–V characteristics of the devices (device structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/EEL/Al) with none, LiF, Cs2CO3 and GO-Cs as the EEL. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
4. Graphene in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)
Since the pioneering work on dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) conducted by Grätzel et al.4 these devices have attracted tremendous attention in both academia and industry, owing to their high efficiency and low manufacturing costs. DSSCs are typically composed of a nanocrystalline TiO2 film combined with sensitizers on a transparent electrode, an electrolyte usually containing an I−/I3− redox couple, and a counter electrode. Highly conductive oxides such as ITO or fluorine tin oxide (FTO) are generally used as the transparent electrode, while platinum (Pt) is used as the counter electrode. The generation of electricity in DSSCs involves the following steps: (i) excitation of the sensitizers under light irradiation, (ii) an electron-injection into the conduction band of the semiconducting TiO2 film, (iii) regeneration of the sensitizers by the I−/I3− redox couple, and (iv) reduction of the oxidized species of the redox couple at the counter electrode.72 Although recent progress in DSSCs has led to a relatively high PCE of 15%,7 there are still many challenges for the further development of DSSCs. For example, the replacement of high cost transparent and counter electrodes, the suppression of charge recombination, and the enhancement of long-term stability. In this regard, graphene-based nanomaterials have been intensively explored as replacements for the various components of DSSCs including the transparent electrode, counter electrode, light absorber and so forth, to produce cost-effective devices with promising performance.
4.1. Transparent electrodes
As discussed above, due to their unique electrical, mechanical and optical properties, graphene-based materials have been regarded as promising alternatives to ITO and FTO transparent electrodes. Wang et al. reported a simple approach for the fabrication of a conductive rGO film for use as a transparent electrode in DSSCs.73 Once the GO film was deposited onto a hydrophilic quartz substrate by dip coating the GO dispersion, it was thermally reduced under Ar and/or H2 gas to yield a final rGO film. A high electrical conductivity of 550 S cm−1 and transparency of over 70% in the range of 1000–3000 nm were obtained from the resultant rGO film. The related device structures and energy level diagram for these DSSCs are shown Fig. 9A and B, respectively. In this study, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N′-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) was used as the hole transport material to build solid state devices. Unfortunately, the solid state DSSCs with rGO as a transparent electrode exhibited a PCE of 0.26%, which was lower than that of the device with a standard FTO electrode (0.84%). This significant reduction of PCE in these graphene-based DSSCs can be attributed to the high sheet resistance and low transmittance of the rGO film as well as electronic interfacial change. However, it is believed that there is still room for further improvement of device performance using graphene-based transparent electrodes. As a cheap, abundant and easily processable resource, graphene possesses several advantages such as excellent conductivity, good optical transparency in both the visible and near-infrared region, high chemical stability and superior flexibility, all of which are highly beneficial for its use as a transparent electrode in DSSCs. To maximize these advantages, the development of production methods for high-quality graphene as well as further optimization of device structures and fabrication techniques should be preferentially considered.42
 Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of a dye-sensitized solar cell using a rGO film as a transparent electrode. The four layers from bottom to top are: Au, dye-sensitized heterojunction, compact TiO2, and rGO film. (B) The energy level diagram for the rGO/TiO2/dye/spiro-OMeTAD/Au device. (C) I–V curve of the graphene-based cell (black) and FTO-based cell (red), illuminated under AM solar light (1 sun). Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
4.2. Electron transport and absorption in photoanodes
A layer of a nanocrystalline semiconductor such as TiO2 is indispensable for DSSCs, because it can provide not only an anchoring surface for sensitizers, but also perform the key functions of charge collection and diffusion.10 In general, a porous, nanostructured TiO2 film with a typical thickness of 10–15 μm and a porosity of 50% is fabricated on a transparent electrode to enhance the internal surface area of the film. In this configuration, large amounts of sensitizer can be successfully anchored onto the semiconductor film, which is greatly beneficial for obtaining higher PCE values in DSSCs. However, one of the main drawbacks of semiconductor films in DSSCs is the limited transport of collected electrons across the layer.1 It is reported that this electron transport process in the photoanode competes with undesirable charge recombination. Among the several approaches that have been used to improve electron transport (i.e., suppressing charge recombination), the incorporation of carbon-based nanomaterials into the photoanode has been widely investigated due to the huge potential of these materials in optoelectronics.74–77 Yang et al. reported that the introduction of two dimensional (2D) graphene sheets into a TiO2 nanostructured photoanode as 2D bridges could significantly increase the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and PCE of DSSCs by 45% and 39%, respectively, compared to a standard device containing a TiO2 photoanode without graphene (Fig. 10).78 Due to the unique advantages of graphene including its high conductivity, good interfacial contact with TiO2 nanoparticles and suitable work function (4.4 eV), graphene sheets can not only improve charge transport, but also the electron accepting properties of the semiconductor layer. Furthermore, Tang et al. have reported the in situ incorporation of graphene sheets (GS) into a TiO2 film using a molecular grafting technique and their application of this film in DSSCs as a photoanode.79 Interestingly, the PCE for DSSCs with this newly developed GS/TiO2 composite layer (1.68%) is more than 5 times higher than that based on a TiO2 layer (0.32%). Again, the better performance of the GS/TiO2 based DSSCs is attributable to the enhanced electrical conductivity as well as better dye loading levels for the GS/TiO2 film compared to the bare TiO2 film.
 Fig. 10  Differences between (a, c) 1D and (b, d) 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes. In the 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes (with graphene bridges), the TiO2 particles can anchor to the graphene better and photoinduced electrons can be captured and transferred by the graphene. However, in the 1D nanomaterial composite, there are less intermolecular forces and connection between the TiO2 and the 1D nanomaterial. Therefore, the transfer barrier is larger and recombination is much more likely to happen. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
4.3. Counter electrode
One of the important components of DSSCs is the counter electrode, from which electrons are injected into the electrolyte for the reduction of the redox couple (from I3− to I−). The excellent catalytic activity and high conductivity of platinum (Pt) on a conductive ITO or FTO substrate allows it to be used as a counter electrode in DSSCs. However, Pt-based electrodes have several drawbacks including high costs, limited resources in nature and corrosion due to the redox couple.1,10,72 Recently, significant effort has been made to reduce or replace Pt-based counter electrodes in DSSCs. In particular, graphene-based materials have been widely studied as counter electrodes in DSSCs, due to having the advantages of low cost, high conductivity, transparency, and superior corrosion resistance. Kavan et al. reported the fabrication of DSSCs with an optically transparent graphene film on FTO as a counter electrode.80 High electrocatalytic activity was obtained toward the I3−/I− redox couple from the counter electrode, which was made of commercially available graphene, particularly in ionic liquid electrolytes (Z952). The same group also investigated graphene on an FTO film as a counter electrode in DSSCs using other redox couples such as Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+, to overcome the less efficient performance of Pt-based electrodes with Co mediators.81 Recently, Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+ redox couples have been preferred because great improvement in the PCE of DSSCs can be achieved by using a Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+ redox couple. This enhancement in PCE is closely related to an increase in the open circuit voltage (Voc) of up to 0.9 V, which originates from the higher redox potential of the Co(bpy)33+/Co(bpy)32+ couple (0.56 V) compared with the conventional I3−/I− redox couple (0.35 V).82,83 Interestingly, graphene could outperform Pt as a counter electrode in cobalt mediated DSSCs from the view point of efficiency and chemical stability.81
In general, the higher catalytic activity of graphene as a counter electrode in DSSCs is due to the existence of a large number of active sites on the material. Aksay et al. reported that the content of oxygen containing moieties like hydroxyl, epoxy and carbonyl groups is crucial to the catalytic activity of graphene-based counter electrodes in DSSCs.84 The amount of oxygen-containing groups on graphene can be controlled by a high temperature thermal annealing process. After increasing the population of functional groups, the catalytic activity was also improved for graphene-based counter electrodes in DSSCs. However, the introduction of oxygen-containing active sites on graphene often results in significant damage to the conjugated structure of the graphene network, which can lead to a sharp decrease in electrical conductivity.85 In order to work as an efficient counter electrode in DSSCs, it is important to balance the electrical conductivity and electrocatalytic activity. One of the most promising approaches for improving the catalytic activity without decreasing the electrical conductivity is chemical doping of graphene networks with heteroatoms like B, N and P.86–89 For example, the introduction of nitrogen atoms into graphene can enhance its electron transfer ability and electrocatalytic activity by generating additional lone pairs electrons, which can impart negative charge with respect to the delocalized π-system of the sp2-hybridized carbon framework.32 Furthermore, it has been also demonstrated that heteroatom doping can enhance the electrical conductivity and surface hydrophilicity to promote charge transfer and electrolyte–electrode interactions, respectively. Therefore, chemically doped graphene can be regarded as a promising candidate for efficient counter electrodes in DSSCs.
Dai et al. first reported the application of nitrogen doped graphene as a counter electrode in DSSCs.85 They developed a three dimensional nitrogen-doped graphene foam (N-GF) with a high nitrogen content of 7.6%. This N-GF was manufactured by annealing freeze-dried graphene oxide foam (GOFs) in ammonia and the resulting N-GF was transferred onto a FTO glass substrate for use as a counter electrode in DSSCs (Fig. 11a). Schematic representations of the device structure and triiodide reduction on N-GF are shown in Fig. 11b and c, respectively. From the DSSC with a N-GF counter electrode, a high PCE of 7.07% was obtained, which is comparable to that of a DSSC with a Pt counter electrode (7.44%). The outstanding performance of the DSSC with a N-GF counter electrode can be attributed to the high electrical conductivity and catalytic activity of N-GF induced by heteroatom doping, coupled with the unique three dimensional foam structure, which has a large surface area, high porosity and good surface hydrophilicity.85
 Fig. 11  (a) Preparation route of the N-GF counter electrode. (b) A DSSC with an N-GF counter electrode. (c) Triiodide reduction on the N-doped graphene surface. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, Baek et al. reported a simple, cost-effective and eco-friendly method involving ball-milling33 or a direct Friedel–Crafts acylation32 for the large-scale production of edge-selectively nitrogen doped graphene to be used as a metal-free counter electrode in DSSCs. Firstly, a large quantity of edge-nitrogenated graphene nanoplatelets (NGnPs) was produced by ball-milling pristine graphite in the presence of nitrogen gas (N2).33 The facile formation of active carbon species occurs via mechanochemical cracking of the graphitic C–C bonds during the ball-milling process, which leads to direct nitrogen fixation at the broken edges of the graphite (Fig. 12a).33 An extremely high nitrogen content of 14.84 wt% (equivalent to a carbon/nitrogen atomic ratio of 5.6) was obtained via the mechanochemical reaction of graphite with inert nitrogen gas, which reveals the effectiveness of the ball-milling process. Secondly, a different type of NGnPs was also prepared by a simple two-step reaction sequence (Fig. 12b).32 Briefly, edge-selectively functionalized graphene was made via the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation of pristine graphite and 4-aminobenzoic acid in a PPA/P2O5 medium followed by an additional thermal treatment at 900 °C for 2 h under nitrogen, which was applied to yield the target product of NGnPs.28,32 In order to evaluate the performance of the edge-nitrogenated graphene as a counter electrode, DSSCs with O-alkylated-JK-225, HC-A and Co(bpy)33+/2+ as a sensitizer, co-adsorbent, and redox couple, respectively, were fabricated with graphene-based counter electrodes, i.e., NGnPs (from ball-milling) or NGnPs (from direct Friedel–crafts acylation), on FTO substrates using an electrostatic spray deposition technique. For comparison purposes, DSSCs with Pt as a counter electrode were also fabricated. Interestingly, the DSSCs with the two types of edge-nitrogenated graphene outperformed their Pt counterpart (Fig. 12c and d). For example, the NGnP-based DSSC exhibited a PCE of 9.05%, which is higher than that of the Pt-based device (8.43%) by a factor of 1.07 (Fig. 12d).32 These results suggest that NGnPs produced either by ball-milling or a direct Friedel–Crafts acylation followed by thermal treatment are promising candidates for metal-free counter electrodes in DSSCs.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of (a) the synthesis of NGnPs via mechanochemical ball milling under nitrogen gas (N2) and (b) the synthesis of NGnPs via edge-selective functionalization of pristine graphite with 4-aminobenzoic acid and subsequent heat treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C. Current–voltage characteristics of (c) the DSSCs with Pt and NGnP counter electrodes and (d) with Pt and different thicknesses of NGnPs as the counter electrodes under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (a), (c) Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (b), (d) Reproduced from the ref. 32 with permission From the American Chemical Society. 
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In this feature article, the recent development of graphene for various photovoltaic applications such as OPVs and DSSCs has been discussed. Due to its unique properties and versatility, graphene has quickly emerged as a new class of material useable in a diverse range of device components including the transparent electrode, active layer, interfacial layer and counter electrodes. The great potential of graphene has been widely demonstrated in high performance and cost-effective solar cells with additional advantages suitable for flexible, resilient, and light-weight devices.
Despite notable progress, research in this field is still in its infancy. A large number of additional challenges still exist for the use of graphene as a key component in OPVs and DSSCs. First, the development of simple, large-scale, and cost-effective protocols for the synthesis of graphene with controlled morphological and electronic properties is quite essential, because the performance of graphene-based solar cells is closely related to the intrinsic nature of graphene such as its purity, band-gap, structural uniformity and so on. In this regard, recently developed preparation methods, such as edge-selectively functionalized graphene (EFG) with minimal damage to its basal plane and a large number of desired functional moieties installed at its edges either by mechanochemical ball-milling process27,33 or direct Friedel–Crafts acylation,28,32 can be considered as quite promising candidates for the scalable production of high quality functionalized graphene for OPVs and DSSCs. Secondly, the exploitation of optimized device fabrication techniques with scalability and processability is also of great importance for the practical application of graphene-based OPVs and DSSCs. For example, a roll-to-roll process in conjunction with CVD has been preferred for the mass production of graphene-based transparent electrodes in various optoelectronic devices.42 Finally, the development of new types of graphene-based materials like graphene quantum dots (GQDs) can be also considered another important challenge.90,91 In this approach, more precise control of the structure–property relationship in graphene-based materials for solar cells is possible. Due to quantum confinement and edge effects induced by conversion of 2D graphene sheets into 0D quantum dots, some unusual properties of graphene can be obtained from GQDs, which could ideally allow the fabrication of all graphene-based solar cells in the near future. Therefore, it is believed that continuous ongoing and innovative efforts into the development of graphene-based materials and device fabrication techniques should make graphene quite promising as a material for OPVs and DSSCs.
Acknowledgements
This research work was supported by Basic Science Research (2013R1A1A2007716), BK21 Plus, Mid-Career Researcher (MCR) and Basic Research Laboratory (BRL) programs through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST), VPP program supported by King Saud University and the U. S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR).
References
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, A. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. Dubonos, I. Grigorieva and A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 CAS .
H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132–145 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1297–1306 CAS .
X. Wan, G. Long, L. Huang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5342–5358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, J. Zhu, Q. He, X. Cao, C. Tan, H. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–19 Search PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 39, 228–240 RSC .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne and Y. K. Gun'Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt and E. Kesselman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park and R.
S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Poon, W. Chen, E. S. Tok and A. T. S. Wee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 104102 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass and A. N. Marchenkov, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 31–42 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, Y. R. Shin, G. J. Sohn, H. J. Choi, S. Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, D. Yu, S. Y. Bae, H. J. Choi, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Chang, H. J. Choi, I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Chem. Rec., 2013, 13, 224–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, M. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, M.-J. Kim, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, L. Dai, N. Park and J. B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1810 Search PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, M.-J. Kim, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 1386–1393 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Ju, J. C. Kim, H.-J. Choi, I. T. Choi, S. G. Kim, K. Lim, J. Ko, J.-J. Lee, I.-Y. Jeon and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5243–5250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, M. J. Ju, I. T. Choi, K. Lim, J. Ko, H. K. Kim, J. C. Kim, J.-J. Lee, D. Shin, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, M.-J. Kim, N. Park, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2260 Search PubMed .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1788–1796 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, J. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061–4067 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fanchini, S. Miller, B. B. Parekh and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Park, K.-J. Ahn, K.-I. Park, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 115101 CrossRef .
J.-H. Park, K.-J. Ahn, S.-I. Na and H.-K. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 657–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim and Y. I. Song, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Choi, S. J. Kang, H.-K. Kim, W. M. Choi and S.-I. Na, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 96, 281–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 133–140 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, J. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kasry, M. A. Kuroda, G. J. Martyna, G. S. Tulevski and A. A. Bol, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3839–3844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Özyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-X. Ni, Y. Zheng, S. Bae, C. Y. Tan, O. Kahya, J. Wu, B. H. Hong, K. Yao and B. Ozyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3935–3942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Hsu, C.-T. Lin, J.-H. Huang, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5031–5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Long, L. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3308–3311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, S. Sun, T. Salim, S. Wu, X. Huang, Q. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Liu, M. A. Summers, S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 093521 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. He and Y. Li, Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, K. Park, M. Durstock and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
M. Girtan and M. Rusu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 446–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2575–2598 RSC .
R. Po, C. Carbonera, A. Bernardi and N. Camaioni, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 285–310 CAS .
S.-S. Li, K.-H. Tu, C.-C. Lin, C.-W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Xue and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, H.-L. Yip, S. K. Hau, K. M. O'Malley, N. C. Cho, H. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 203306 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Yun, J. S. Yeo, J. Kim, H. G. Jeong, D. Y. Kim, Y. J. Noh, S. S. Kim, B. C. Ku and S. I. Na, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4923–4928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Jeon, J.-M. Yun, D.-Y. Kim, S.-I. Na and S.-S. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 105, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bon and M. AngeláLopez-Manchado, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 995–1000 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Y. Gao, D. Yu, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2228–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-T. Kong, S.-Y. Dai and K.-J. Wang, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 2007, 75384 Search PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, R. Martínez Domínguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brown, K. Takechi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4776–4782 CAS .
C.-Y. Yen, Y.-F. Lin, C.-H. Hung, Y.-H. Tseng, C.-C. M. Ma, M.-C. Chang and H. Shao, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 045604 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Tang, C.-S. Lee, J. Xu, Z.-T. Liu, Z.-H. Chen, Z. He, Y.-L. Cao, G. Yuan, H. Song and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, J. H. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 165–172 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kavan, J.-H. Yum and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5501–5506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, D. Li, J. Qu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7496 RSC .
F. Haiqiu, Y. Chang, M. Tingli and Q. Jieshan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3328–3330 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L.-S. Li and X. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Dong Wook Chang	Dong Wook Chang is an Assistant Professor and Department Chair of Chemical Systematic Engineering at the Catholic University of Daegu, South Korea. He obtained his PhD in Materials Engineering at the University of Dayton in 2007. Prior to taking up his current position, he worked for two years as a senior researcher at Samsung Total Petrochemicals Company and another two years as a Research Assistant Professor of the Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy at the Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST). Currently, he is working on the synthesis and functionalization of organic materials and carbon-based nanomaterials for optoelectronic and renewable-energy applications.
Jong-Beom Baek	Jong-Beom Baek is a Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering and Director of the Low-Dimensional Carbon Materials Center at the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea. After receiving his PhD in Polymer Science from the University of Akron (USA) in 1998, he joined the Wright-Patterson Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL). After four years at the AFRL, he returned to his home country to take up a position as an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at Chungbuk National University (Korea) in 2003, before moving to UNIST in 2008. His current research interests include the syntheses of high-performance two-dimensional (2D) network polymers and the chemical modifications of carbon-based materials for multifunctional applications.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Functionalization possibilities for graphene: (a) edge-functionalization, (b) basal-plane functionalization, (c) noncovalent adsorption on the basal plane, (d) asymmetric functionalization and (e) the self-assembly of graphene. (B) Chemical structure of graphene oxide. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (C) Process for boron- and nitrogen-doping of graphene. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic of the ball milling procedure. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from National Academy of Sciences. (B) Schematic representation of the direct Freidel–Crafts acylation in PPA/P2O5. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and transfer of CVD grown graphene onto glass substrates. (b) Schematic diagram of the bulk-heterojunction OPVs comprising a CVD-grown graphene electrode with Al:Ca cathode. (c) A photograph of the OPVs. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) A photograph of rGO on PET. (B) Schematic representation of the layer structure of OPVs, i.e., rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/TiO2/Al, with rGO as the transparent electrode. (C) J–V curves of OPVs using a rGO/PET electrode under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination with a rGO film thickness of 21 nm. (D) J–V curves of OPVs with a 4 nm thickness rGO film on PET as the transparent electrode after applying (i) 400, (ii) 800, and (iii) 1200 cycles of bending. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The idealized chemical structures of graphene and P3OT. (b) Schematic of a device with P3OT/graphene thin film as the active layer. (c) Energy level diagram of P3OT and SPFGraphene. (d) Schematic representation of the reaction of phenyl isocyanate with graphene oxide to form SPFGraphene. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from the Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic representation of C60-grafted graphene (C60-G) facilitating electron transfer and transport in a P3HT-based PSC. (B) (a) Absorption spectra of the C60-G:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) film before and after annealing (130 °C, 10 min) and the C60:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) film spin-cast onto quartz plates. (b) Schematic diagram of a PSC with the C60-G:P3HT composite used as the active layer. (c) J–V curves of the photovoltaic devices with the C60-G:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt), C60:P3HT (1:1 wt/wt), or C60/G mixture (10 wt%):P3HT (1:1 wt/wt) used as the active layers after annealing. (d) Energy level diagram for the photovoltaic device with the C60-G:P3HT composite as the active layer. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the OPV device structure with GO as a HEL. (b) Energy level diagrams of all of the components in the OPVs. (c) An AFM height image of a GO thin film with an approximate thickness of 2 nm. (d) J–V characteristics of the devices with no HEL, with a 30 nm PEDOT:PSS film and with a 2 nm GO film. (e) J–V characteristics of ITO/GO/P3HT:PCBM/Al devices with different thickness of GO film. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic structure and synthesis scheme for GO-Cs. (b) Energy level diagram of all of the components in the OPV devices. (c) J–V characteristics of the devices (device structure: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/EEL/Al) with none, LiF, Cs2CO3 and GO-Cs as the EEL. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of a dye-sensitized solar cell using a rGO film as a transparent electrode. The four layers from bottom to top are: Au, dye-sensitized heterojunction, compact TiO2, and rGO film. (B) The energy level diagram for the rGO/TiO2/dye/spiro-OMeTAD/Au device. (C) I–V curve of the graphene-based cell (black) and FTO-based cell (red), illuminated under AM solar light (1 sun). Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Differences between (a, c) 1D and (b, d) 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes. In the 2D nanomaterial composite electrodes (with graphene bridges), the TiO2 particles can anchor to the graphene better and photoinduced electrons can be captured and transferred by the graphene. However, in the 1D nanomaterial composite, there are less intermolecular forces and connection between the TiO2 and the 1D nanomaterial. Therefore, the transfer barrier is larger and recombination is much more likely to happen. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Preparation route of the N-GF counter electrode. (b) A DSSC with an N-GF counter electrode. (c) Triiodide reduction on the N-doped graphene surface. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of (a) the synthesis of NGnPs via mechanochemical ball milling under nitrogen gas (N2) and (b) the synthesis of NGnPs via edge-selective functionalization of pristine graphite with 4-aminobenzoic acid and subsequent heat treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C. Current–voltage characteristics of (c) the DSSCs with Pt and NGnP counter electrodes and (d) with Pt and different thicknesses of NGnPs as the counter electrodes under one sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (a), (c) Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. (b), (d) Reproduced from the ref. 32 with permission From the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
