Graphene -based materials in electrochemistry  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B923596E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B923596E
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157-3180Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsGraphene-based materials in electrochemistry

        
          
            Da 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Longhua 
            Tang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jinghong 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Key Lab of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: jhli@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 6279 5290;   Tel: +86 10 6279 5290
bCollege of Materials Science & Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou 310018, China
Received 
      26th November 2009
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      29th June 2010
    AbstractGraphene, as the fundamental 2D carbon structure with exceptionally high crystal and electronic quality, has emerged as a rapidly rising star in the field of material science. Its sudden discovery in 2004 led to an explosion of interest in the study of graphene with respect to its unique physical, chemical, and mechanical properties, opening up a new research area for materials science and condensed-matter physics, and aiming for wide-ranging and diversified technological applications. In this critical review, we will describe recent advances in the development of graphene-based materials from the standpoint of electrochemistry. To begin with, electron transfer properties of graphene will be discussed, involving its unusual electronic structure, extraordinary electronic properties and fascinating electron transport. The next major section deals with the exciting progress related to graphene-based materials in electrochemistry since 2004, including electrochemical sensing, electrochemiluminescence, electrocatalysis, electrochemical energy conversion and FET devices. Finally, prospects and further developments in this exciting field of graphene-based materials are also suggested (224 references).Da ChenDa Chen is currently a lecturer at China Jiliang University, China. He received his MSc in 2004 from Zhejiang University and his PhD in 2008 from University of Science & Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li. His current research interest is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of functional carbonous nanocomposites and semiconductor nanostructures, as well as their applications for energy conversion and storage.Longhua TangLonghua Tang received his MSc in 2008 from East China University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yihua Zhu. Currently he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li in Tsinghua University, China. His current research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis and electrochemistry of graphene-based materials.Jinghong LiJinghong Li is currently Cheung Kong Professor in the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BSc from University of Science and Technology of China, and his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. He then spent 1997–2001 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of California at Santa Barbara, Clemson University, and Evonyx Inc., New York. He returned CIAC as a Professor of Chemistry in 2001 and moved to the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University in 2004. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bioelectrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry.
1. Introduction
Recently, graphene has emerged as a rapidly rising star in the field of material science.1–3 It is the thinnest known and the strongest ever measured material in the universe.4 Graphene, as defined, is a two-dimensional (2D) crystal, composed of monolayers of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycombed network with six-membered rings.5 As the fundamental 2D carbon structure, graphene can be conceptually viewed as an indefinitely extended, 2D aromatic macromolecule,6 and can be also considered as a basic building block for carbon materials of all other dimensionalities including the wrapped 0D buckyballs (fullerenes), the rolled 1D nanotubes and the stacked 3D graphite.1,7,8 Although known as an integral part of graphite materials, however, at one time graphene was presumed not to exist in the free state, because strictly 2D crystals were thought to be thermodynamically unstable at finite temperatures.9 In 2004, the common wisdom was flaunted by the experimental discovery of graphene by Geim and coworkers.10 They peeled single-layer samples from graphite for the first time by means of mechanical exfoliation, and thus graphene was born. This led to an explosion of interest in the study of graphene with respect to its unique physical, chemical, and mechanical properties, opening up a new research area for materials science and condensed-matter physics, and aiming for wide-ranging and diversified technological applications.11–15
However, just as with other newly discovered allotropes of carbon, such as fullerenes and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), material availability and processability have been the rate-limiting steps in the evaluation of graphene application.10,16,17 For graphene, a key challenge in the synthesis and processing of bulk-quantity graphene is to surmount the strong exfoliation energy of the π-stacked layers in graphite,18 that is, the high cohesive van der Waals energy (5.9 kJ mol−1 carbon)19 adhering graphitic sheets to one another. Until now, several physical and chemical methods have been proposed to produce individual graphene or chemically modified graphene (Table 1), for example, mechanical exfoliation of bulk graphite,1,10,20,21 sublimation of silicon from silicon carbide (SiC) wafers,22–26 and epitaxial growth by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of hydrocarbons on metal substrates.27–31 Among these methods, mechanical cleavage of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), involving the use of a Scotch tape to peel multiple layers of graphene from HOPG, remains to be the most popular and successful in producing single or few layers of graphene.10 In the case of epitaxial growth on SiC, it requires high temperatures exceeding 1100 °C for the sublimation of silicon, and the remained carbon is rearranged to form graphene.22 As for the metal-supported epitaxial growth of graphene via CVD, the nucleation and growth of graphene usually occur by exposure of the transition metal surface to a hydrocarbon gas under low or ultrahigh vacuum conditions.30 Although graphene can be obtained by the three above-mentioned methods, these methods are constrained by low yields, throughput, high cost and/or processing limitations.32 Currently, more practical solution-chemistry based approaches involving the initial oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide, followed subsequently by the mechanochemical or thermal exfoliation of graphite oxide to graphene oxide sheets, and their eventual reduction to graphene have attracted much attention because of the facile scalability and high yields obtained from these processes.6,33–38 This approach that has recently gained favor relies on the initial oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide and subsequent exfoliation of graphite oxide to graphene oxide (GO). Graphite oxide is heavily oxygenated, bearing hydroxyl and epoxide functional groups on their basal planes, making it strongly hydrophilic, which allows its dispersion and swelling in solvents.39 To date, efforts at graphite oxidation and exfoliation have been focused primarily on intercalation, chemical derivatization, thermal expansion, oxidation-reduction, the use of surfactants, or some combination of these.16,18,32,40–45 The subsequent reduction of exfoliated GO sheets to graphene can be carried out by using reducing chemical agents (such as hydrazine hydrate, dimethylhydrazine and hydroquinone),16,36,46–50 photocatalytic reduction,51 electrochemical reduction,52 thermal reduction,18,53 and a hydrothermal/solvothermal route combined with the reducing agent.54,55 To fabricate soluble graphene in a stabilization medium, further treatments of graphene besides the necessary GO reduction are needed, such as covalent modification by amidation of the carboxylic groups,48,56 nucleophilic substitution to epoxy groups,57 the diazonium salts coupling,16,58 or addition of a stabilizer through π–π interactions.44,59–61 Besides, the other important methods employed to produce graphene samples are organic synthetic protocols,62–65in situ electron beam-irradiation of ultrathin poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) nanofibers,66 arc discharge of graphite under suitable conditions,67–69 thermal fusion of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,65,70 liquid-phase exfoliation,71–73 conversion of nanodiamonds,74 sodium reduction of ethanol,75 and unzipping of carbon nanotubes.76,77 In addition, there is a great interest in functionalization78,79 and doping80,81 of graphene to harness its excellent properties to enhance its performance in various applications.
Table 1 Comparison of different graphene preparation methods




Preparation methods
Starting materials
Operating techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages
Implications
References





HOPG: highly oriented pyrolitic graphite; UHV: ultrahigh vacuum; CMOS: complementary metal-oxide semiconductor; PAHs: polyacyclic hydrocarbons; PMMA: poly(methylmethacrylate).




Mechanical exfoliation
HOPG
Scotch-tape
Simplicity, high structural and electronic quality
Delicate and time-consuming, low yields
Fundamental research

10, 20, 21



Epitaxial growth on SiC
4H-/6H- SiC wafer;
Thermal desorption of Si from the SiC substrate under high temperature (>1000 °C) and UHV
Large-scale production, high qualities
High temperature requirement, high cost, non-uniform, low yields
Basic research and graphene electronics

22–26



CVD epitaxial growth
Hydrocarbon gas (such as CH4)
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) under high temperature
Large-scale production, high qualities, uniform, high compatibility with current CMOS technology
High temperature requirement, high cost, complicated process, low yields
Basic research and graphene electronics

27–31



Chemical reduction of graphite oxide
Graphite
Graphite exfoliation and oxidation, subsequent reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide
Facile scalability, high yields, low cost, excellent processability
Structural defects, disruption of the electronic structure of graphene,
Composite materials, electronics, optoelectronics and potential technologically viable devices

34–45



Organic synthetic protocols
PAHs
A controlled organic chemical reaction
Precisely defined structures, tunable solubility and good processability
The limited size range, complicated synthetic process
Building blocks for electronics and optoelectronics

62–65




In situ electron beam-irradiation of PMMA nanofibers
PMMA

In situ electron beam-irradiation
One-step synthesis process in a fine-tuned way, no high temperature
Time-consuming, low yields, non-uniform
Building blocks for electronic and optoelectronics

66



Arc discharge of graphite
Graphite
Direct current arc discharge
One-step synthesis process, low cost, easy doping, large-scale production
Non-uniform, impure
Novel composite materials

67–69



Thermal fusion of PAHs
PAHs
Precursor-controlled solid-state pyrolysis
Large-area production, simplicity, low cost
Low quality, non-uniform, high temperature
Building blocks for electronic and optoelectronics

70



Liquid- phase exfoliation
Graphite
Dispersion and exfoliation of graphite in organic solvents
Direct, simplicity, benign, large-scale production, low-cost, practicability
Time-consuming, impure
Electronic devices, transparent electrodes and conductive composites

71–73



Conversion of nanodiamond
Nanodiamond
Annealing nanodiamond at high temperature
Simple, direct
High temperature, high cost
Composite materials

74



Sodium reduction of ethanol
Ethanol and sodium
Reduction of ethanol by sodium metal, followed by pyrolysis of the ethoxide product
Non-graphitic precursors, a gram-scale production, low-cost, practicability
Impure, the danger of violent reaction, low quality
Composite materials

75



Unzipping of carbon nanotubes
Carbon nanotubes
Solution-based oxidative action of potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid, or plasma etching
Direct, simple, large-scale production, low-cost, high quality (plasma etching)
Time-consuming, complicated process
Electronics and composite materials

76, 77





A variety of techniques have been employed in the characterization of graphene and its derivative materials. Among the more frequently applied techniques are atomic force microscopy (AFM),20,52,82 transmission electron microscopy (TEM),14,83,84 scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM),85,86 scanning electron microscopy (SEM),37,63,87,88 X-ray diffraction (XRD),47,52,88,89 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),81,89,90 Raman spectroscopy,91–93etc. In general, these techniques can be applied for the characterization of morphology, structures, crystal structure, chemical compositions and intrinsic properties of graphene-based materials, respectively. Specific information about them in the characterizations of graphene-based materials can be found in several excellent reviews.7,8,94
Even more intriguing are those unique properties that graphene exhibits. The remarkable properties of graphene reported so far include high specific surface area,95 excellent mechanical strength and fracture strength,96 unparalleled thermal and electricity conductivity,97,98 excellent pliability,96 and unprecedented impermeability,82 plus fascinating electronic properties such as the quantum Hall effect.11,12,99 Furthermore, it was reported that the production cost of graphene in large quantities could be much lower than that of carbon nanotubes.5 These properties have been continuing to fascinate both scientists and technologists. Despite tremendous progress in the field of graphene, the graphene-related research is still in its relative infancy, and the application of graphene-based materials has just begun. Thus, a number of challenges and opportunities with respect to many aspects of graphene, including synthetic strategies, unexpected properties and diverse applications, are yet to be explored.
In this review article, we will discuss recent advances in the field of graphene from the standpoint of electrochemistry. To begin with, peculiar electronic properties of graphene and its electron transfer properties are described. Sequentially and emphatically, the exciting progress made since 2004, in both the electrochemistry and electrocatalysis at graphene-based electrode, will be explored and discussed. Furthermore, prospects and further developments in this exciting field of graphene-based materials are also suggested.
2. Electron transfer properties of graphene
The discovery of techniques to isolate and study graphene has stimulated a massive effort to understand its electronic properties. Remarkably, as a Dirac fermion system with linear energy dispersion, electron–hole symmetry and internal degree of freedom (pseudo spin), graphene promises intriguing electronic properties such as a high integer quantum Hall effect, the Klein paradox, an ambipolar electric field effect, along with ballistic conduction of charge carriers, etc. To date, specific information focused on the electronic structure and properties of graphene has been well discussed in several excellent reviews.1,100–104
2.1 Electronic structure

Energy band structure. 
Extraordinary electronic properties in graphene are really due to the high quality of its electronic structure.1,8,20 Understanding the electronic structure of graphene is the starting point for pursuing the electronic properties of graphene. Intrinsic graphene is a semi-metal or zero-gap semiconductor. The electronic-band structure of graphene combines semiconducting and metallic characteristics, as it can be conceived both as a metal with vanishing Fermi surface and as a semiconductor with a vanishing band gap.6 This peculiarity stems from graphene’s honeycomb lattice, comprised of two equivalent carbon sublattices A and B, and cosine-like energy bands associated with the sublattices. In this honeycomb lattice, the s, px and py orbitals of carbon atoms form σ bonds with the neighboring carbon atoms, while the π electrons in the pz orbital, one from each carbon, form the bonding π and antibonding π* bands of graphene.94 These π- and π*-bands are so indistinguishable at the Fermi energy that they remain equal in energy and the two bands touch each other at the K-point in the Brillouin zone, which results in two ‘conical’ points, K and K′, per Brillouin zone where band crossing occurs (Fig. 1).7,100 In particular, the band structure of graphene exhibits two intersecting bands at these two inequivalent K points in the reciprocal space, and in the vicinity of these points, the electron energy (E) is linearly dependent on the wave vector.
 Fig. 1  (a) The crystal structure of graphene: two sublattices are marked by different colors. (b) Electronic Band structure of graphene: the conductance band touches the valence band at the K and K′ points. 


Massless Dirac fermions. 
Moreover, graphene has a particular unique nature of its charge carriers. Its charge carriers mimic relativistic particles and behave as massless Dirac fermions,11 which can be considered as electrons that have lost their rest mass m0 or as neutrinos that acquired the electron charge e. As a result, these quasiparticles are more easily and naturally described by a Dirac-like equation rather than the usual Schrödinger equation for nonrelativistic quantum particles.1,102,105 The Dirac equation describes relativistic quantum particles for spin 1/2 particles; and the essential feature of the Dirac spectrum, following from the basic principles of quantum mechanics and relativity theory, is the existence of antiparticles, which often indicates the charge-conjugation symmetry.100 Likewise, the Dirac equation for graphene is also a direct consequence of the crystal symmetry of graphene. Due to the linear dispersion of E with respect to the wave vector (k), the Dirac equation describing the linear E-k relation is (1-1)where the Fermi velocity is υF ≈ 106 m s−1, which is 300 times smaller than the speed of light c.90,106 Thus, it is expected that quasiparticles in graphene behave differently from those in conventional metals and semiconductors, which exhibit a parabolic (free-electron-like) dispersion relation.100

2.2 Unusual electronic properties

Pseudospins and chirality. 
Graphene exhibits quite different electronic properties from most conventional three-dimensional materials. From the point of view of its electronic properties, graphene acts as a semimetal or zero-gap semiconductor, in which electronic states near zero E (where the bands intersect) are composed of states belonging to the different sublattices.1 It is necessary to use two-component wave functions (spinors) for the definition of the relative contributions of the A and B sublattices in the quasiparticles’ make-up. In this case, these spinors in graphene, similar to the spinor wave functions in quantum electrodynamics (QED), however, just indicate the two different sublattices rather than the real spin of the electrons; thus it is usually referred to as pseudospin σ. Moreover, for the convenience of analogy with QED, important is the introduction of a quantity called chirality. Chirality, formally a projection of pseudospin σ on the direction of motion,100 essentially signifies the fact that k electron- and -k hole- states are intricately connected because they originate from the same carbon sublattices. In relativistic quantum mechanics, chirality is a consequence of the symmetrical structure of graphene, which also guarantees the linear energy spectrum for massless particles.103 Alternatively, the origin of chirality in graphene can be viewed in terms of Berry’s phase arising from the band degeneracy point. This phase has already manifested itself in the effect of the spin–orbit interaction on the spectrum of graphene.12 It was found that when chiral electron moves along the close contour, its wave functions thus gain an additional Berry phase equal to π.


Anomalous quantum Hall effect. 
The quantum Hall effect (QHE) concerns the dependence of a transverse conductivity on a magnetic field, which is perpendicular to a current-carrying stripe. Usually this QHE phenomenon, the quantization of the so-called Hall conductivity σxy at integer multiples of the basic quantity e2/ℏ (where e is the elementary electric charge and ℏ is Planck's constant) can be observed only in very clean semiconducting solids, and at very low temperatures around 3 K, and at very high magnetic fields.107 Graphene, in contrast, hosts an integer QHE with unusual plateau structure,11,12 known as the anomalous or half-integer QHE, which is probably the most striking demonstration of the massless character of the charge carrier spectrum in graphene.103 It displays an interesting QHE behavior with the sequence of steps shifted by 1/2 with respect to the standard sequence, and with an additional factor of 4 even at room temperature (i.e. at roughly 20 °C).11 That is, in graphene the transverse Hall conductance can be quantized as an integer plus a half-integer: (1-2)where n is the integer “Landau level” index, and the double valley and double spin degeneracies give the prefactor of 4.1 This result has been observed experimentally as shown in Fig. 2,11 and thus provides direct evidence for the Dirac or relativistic nature of the charge carriers in graphene. In fact, the simplest framework allowing us to understand the behavior of the QHE is provided by the structure of Landau levels of a 2D massless Dirac equation,20 which has the charge-conjugation symmetric spectrum. This zero-energy Landau level can be viewed as a consequence of the Atiyah-Singer index theorem, and is half-filled in neutral graphene, leading to an anomalous QHE with half-integer quantization of the Hall conductivity,102,103 instead of the integer one. Interestingly, the index theorem relates the zero energy modes of graphene with the topology of the lattice. In the case of graphene, this means that, the number of states with zero energy expressed in terms of total magnetic flux is a topological invariant and remains the same even if the magnetic field is inhomogeneous.11,100 Due to these topological arguments, inhomogeneous magnetic fields cannot destroy the anomalous QHE in graphene.
 Fig. 2  Quantum Hall effect in graphene as a function of charge-carrier concentration. The peak at n = 0 shows that in high magnetic fields there appears a Landau level at zero energy where no states exist in zero field. The field draws electronic states for this level from both conduction and valence bands. The dashed lines indicate plateaus in σxy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 11) 


Klein paradox and Zitterbewegung. 
Another interesting feature of Dirac fermions in graphene is their insensitivity to external electrostatic potentials due to the so-called Klein paradox, which states that Dirac fermions can be transmitted with probability 1 through a classically forbidden region.102,103 In this case, the transmission probability T depends only weakly on barrier height, approaching perfect transparency for very high barriers, in stark contrast to conventional, nonrelativistic tunneling. In other words, it reflects an essential difference between nonrelativistic and relativistic quantum mechanics, and provides an essential insight into electron propagation through potential barriers. In addition, another tantalizing possibility is to study QED in Zitterbewegung, which describes jittery movements of a relativistic electron due to interference between parts of its wavepacket belonging to positive (electron) and negative (positron) energy states.1,102,103 In fact, Dirac fermions behave in an unusual way in the presence of confining potentials, leading to the phenomenon of Zitterbewegung, or jittery motion of the wave function. In graphene’s case, this corresponds to the graphene’s disorder. Thus, a great deal of interest has been attracted in trying to understand how disorder affects the physics of electrons in graphene and its transport properties.


Weak localization. 
In addition, graphene is also special in the recently-developed theory of weak localization, due to the chirality of its electrons.1,103,104 Conventionally, at low temperatures, when electrons remain coherent over long distances, quantum effects result in interference corrections to the conductivity, the weak-localization correction, leading to the decrease of conductivity. These interference effects can be suppressed by magnetic fields that break down time-reversal symmetry, and thus in most metals the conductivity increases when a small magnetic field is applied (negative magnetoresistance). In the case of graphene, however, even near the neutrality point where resistivity is highest, no significant low-field (B < 1 T) localization effects (magnetoresistance) have been observed down to liquid-helium temperatures,108 attributed to changes in the percolation through electron and hole puddles and size quantization in graphene. Generally, the dominant factor affecting weak localization properties of graphene is trigonal warping of graphene bands, which reflects asymmetry of the carrier dispersion with respect to the center of the corresponding valley. As a result, weak localization in graphene can be observed only in those samples with sufficiently strong intervalley scattering.


Quantum capacitance. 
Quantum capacitance, one of important electrostatic properties, indicates a material's ability to store energy. Unlike classical capacitance limited by the repulsion of like electrical charges (for example, electrons), the graphene’s quantum capacitance dominates overall capacitance, which is the result of the Pauli exclusion principle—the electron charges, once reaching a threshold, need to move to higher energy levels. Undoubtedly, the exploration of quantum capacitance in graphene can to a great extent facilitate the understanding of its extraordinary electronic properties as well as charge transport. Although an expression for the quantum capacitance of a perfect graphene has been derived, it is very difficult to determine the quantum capacitance of graphene in practice.109–111 Initially, the quantum capacitance of graphene attempted to be obtained from the study of charge transport in graphene by using the field-effect transistor configuration. However, in this configuration, the measured capacitance was dominated by the capacitance of the oxide layer,110 thus making it difficult to determine the quantum capacitance of graphene. In another case, Giannazzo et al.112 reported the local capacitive properties of graphene by means of scanning probe microscopy (SPM). However, the absolute values of quantum capacitance were also difficult to obtain due to the unknown and variable SPM tip geometry as well as the negligibly small capacitance contribution from graphene compared to that from the thick oxide used in the experiment. Very recently, Tao and coworkers113 have conducted and described the first direct measurement of quantum capacitance of graphene using an electrochemical gate method (Fig. 3). As shown, two electrodes were attached to graphene, and a voltage applied across the material's two-dimensional surface by means of a third gate electrode. From their experimental results, it was shown that graphene's capacitance is very small, which is greatly biased from the theoretical prediction for the behavior of ideal graphene because of the charged impurities occurred in experimental samples of graphene.
 Fig. 3  Measurement of the quantum capacitance of graphene using a three-electrode electrochemical configuration. (A) Schematic of the quantum capacitance measurement setup in which a graphene on a silicon/SiO2 substrate is connected to a gold electrode. The potential of the graphene is controlled and varied with respect to a platinum reference electrode (RE) using a three-electrode electrochemical configuration, where VTG is electrochemical gate voltage and CE is counter electrode. The inset is an optical micrograph of the graphene device. (B) Total capacitance (blue line) and quantum capacitance (red line) of graphene as a function of gate potential measured in ionic liquid, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIMPF6). The potential is measured with respect to a platinum quasi-reference electrode. (C) Dependence of quantum capacitance on graphene at different effective charged impurities n* (0, 0.5, 2 and 5 × 1012 cm−2 from bottom to top) in BMIMPF6. (D) Capacitance of graphene measured in NaF aqueous solution at different ionic concentrations (0.1, 0.5 and 1 mM, from bottom to top). The potential is quoted with respect to the widely used NHE (normal hydrogen electrode) reference electrode. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 113) 

2.3 Electron transport

Ballistic transport. 
Graphene, as a nearly perfect 2D crystal free of the structural defects,85 presents surprisingly robust transport properties. It behaves like a metal with almost high constant mobility over a large range of temperatures and charge densities. Experimental results from transport measurements show that graphene has a remarkably high electron mobility at low temperatures, with reported values as high as 20000 cm2 V−1 s,1,114 and the mobility is nearly independent of temperature between 10 and 100 K.11,115,116 Additionally, the symmetry of the experimentally measured conductance indicates that the mobilities for holes and electrons are nearly the same. Indeed, charge transport in graphene is essentially ballistic on the micrometre-scale even at room temperature due to its high carrier mobility.1 In addition, both experimental and theoretical studies have shown that the ballistic transport properties of graphene are extremely sensitive to its local environment, including the number of layers, edge structures, ripples, defects, doping, etc.15,117–120 Apparently, improving the graphene’s quality or eliminating the defects and impurities altogether by structural modulation seems a promising strategy towards higher transport quality of graphene.


Ambipolarity. 
Another important issue about charge transport in graphene is ambipolarity. This implies that graphene exhibits a strong ambipolar electric field effect such that charge carriers can be tuned continuously between electrons and holes in concentrations up to 1013 cm−2 and room-temperature mobilities of ∼10000 cm2 V−1 s can be induced by applying gate voltage.10 The schematic diagram of the band structure and resulting ambipolar field effect in graphene is shown in Fig. 4.1,8 As shown, under negative gate bias, the Fermi level drops below the Dirac point, introducing a significant population of holes into the valence band; while under positive gate bias, the Fermi level rises above the Dirac point, promoting a significant population of electrons into the conduction band.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the band structure and resulting ambipolar field effect in graphene. The insets show its conical low-energy spectrum E(k), indicating changes in the position of the Fermi energy EF with changing gate voltage Vg. Under gate bias, the Fermi level moves above or below the Dirac point to introduce a significant number of free carriers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 1) 


Superconductivity. 
Besides, one of recent developments in the transport measurements performed on graphene is the discovery of induced superconductivity in graphene. As known, until recently superconductivity and the theory of relativity—two of the last century's greatest discoveries in physics—had very little affiliation with each other. This affiliation, however, was constructed for the first time by Heersche and coworkers,121 since they detected superconducting properties in graphene comprised of massless, relativistic Dirac fermions. In general, the electrical resistance of a superconductor material completely disappears at very low temperatures; that is to say, an electrical current (i.e., a supercurrent) can continue to flow even without a voltage being applied. Interestingly, when graphene—which itself has no superconducting properties—is contacted together with a superconductor, it can behave like a superconductor owing to the so-called Josephson effect,122 in which the supercurrent is carried by massless Dirac fermions. Furthermore, of particular importance is the fact that graphene is not a semiconductor, but rather a semi-metal with a zero energy gap, leading to a rather large conductivity at zero gate voltage. As a result, the gate effect in graphene is relatively small (Fig. 5).123 This means that not only the magnitude of the supercurrent can be regulated by using a gate voltage, but also the type of charge carrier. This permits investigation of the occurrence of proximity effect mediated by either electrons (with a negative charge) or holes (with a positive charge) in graphene, and to study the proximity induced superconductive behaviour near the charge neutrality point.124
 Fig. 5  Graphene, containing a large number of aromatic rings (a), has a zero energy gap between the conduction and valence bands (b) and shows semimetallic behavior with a weak gate effect (c). (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 123) 

3. Electrochemistry at graphene-based electrodes
Due to their principally advantageous properties, carbon materials are being used in a variety of carbon electrodes, particularly for electrochemistry.125–127 Some of the advantageous properties of these carbon-based electrodes include wide potential windows, fairly inert electrochemistry, and good electrocatalytic activities for many redox reactions. In comparison to metallic electrodes, carbon materials have some extraordinary features relating to their structures and electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties. The advents of sp2 and/or sp3 hybridized structures, such as fullerenes, conducting diamond, and carbon nanotubes, provide a route for surface modification and are very beneficial to electrochemical research, especially electrocatalysis. In fact, the remarkable electrical and electrochemical properties of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, to a large extent, have their origin in the unique electronic structures and properties of graphene. Apparently, graphene and graphene based materials can be considered as ideal materials and strong contenders for potential electronic and electrochemical applications. They possess most of the advantageous properties of carbon nanotubes (such as homogeneous distribution of electrochemically active sites on a nanometre scale) without carrying the most challenging element of carbon nanotube materials—that is, residual metallic impurities.128 Thus, in the past years, graphene-oriented electrochemistry, bioelectrochemistry as well as electrocatalysis have greatly stimulated research interests. Examples are graphene-based electrochemical (bio)sensing, electrochemiluminescence, electrocatalysis, electrochemical energy conversion, field effect transistors, etc.
3.1 Electrochemical sensing
Graphene’s 2D structure constitutes an absolute maximum of the surface area to volume ratio in a layered material and exhibits no distinction between surface sites and the bulk material, which is essential for high sensitivity and has been the major motivation behind implementation of other nanostructured materials in sensors.8 More importantly, versatility of graphene as the basis of a sensor results from its unique electronic structure and fascinating properties. The ambipolarity in graphene, for example, means that adsorption of either electron withdrawing or donating groups can lead to “chemical gating” of the material, which can be easily monitored in a resistive-type sensor setup.8 Combining the ultrahigh surface area with specific electronic features means that any molecular disruption on the graphene can be easily detected, and graphene-oriented sensors can be expected to be high sensitive for detecting individual molecules on and off its surface. The availability of 2D graphene will open up possibilities for designing and preparing graphene-oriented electrodes for a wide range of electrochemical sensing and biosensing applications ranging from amperometric sensors to amperometric enzyme biosensors and label-free DNA biosensors (Table 2).
Table 2 Examples of graphene-based electrodes for electrochemical sensing




Sensor types
Graphene materials
Analytes
Detection method
Detection mechanism
Detection limit
References





ppm: part per million; DFT: density functional theory; ppb: part per billion; DNT: 2,4-dintrotoluene; TMA: trimethylamine; PVP: polyvinylpyrrolidone; rGO: reduced graphene oxide; CMGs: chemically modified graphene; DNA bases: guanine (G), adenine (A), thymine (T), and cytosine (C); NADH: β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; ADH: alcohol dehydrogenase; DPASV: differential pulse anodic stripping voltammetry.




Gas sensors
Graphene form micromechanical cleavage of graphite
NO2, H2O, CO and NH3,
Field-effect measurements
Surface adsorbates-induced conductivity changes
∼ppm

15





Al doped graphene
CO
DFT for theoretical analysis
CO absorption-induced conductivity changes
∼ppb theoretically

131





Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs)
NH3
First principles for theoretical analysis
NH3 adsorption-induced conductivity changes
∼ppb theoretically

133





Chemically converted graphene flakes
NO2, NH3, and DNT
Four-point resistance measurements
Gaseous adsorbates induced-resistance changes
∼ ppm

134





Resist residue contaminated graphene
Water vapor, nonanal, octanoic acid, and TMA
Field-effect measurements
Gaseous adsorbates-induced conductivity changes
∼ppb

135



Biosensors
CMGs
Bacterium, DNA
Electrical measurements
Adsorbates induced-charge carriers density
∼single biomolecule

136





Chemically rGO
Free bases of DNA (G, A, T, C), H2O2, NADH, glucose, ethanol
Electrochemical measurements
Electrocatalytic behaviors of electroactive compounds, direct electrochemisty of glucose oxidase, or ADH
∼10 μM

139





CMGs
Dopamine
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical responses of graphene to target molecules
∼5 μM

141





Ionic liquid- functionalized graphene
NADH and ethanol
Electrochemical measurements
Direct electrochemisty of ADH
∼5 μM

142





Exfoliated graphite nanoplatelets/ PVP-protected graphene/ electrochemically rGO/ CMGs
Glucose
Electrochemical measurements
Direct electrochemisty of glucose oxidase
∼10 μM

143–147



Chemical sensors
Nafion–graphene nanocomposite film
Cd2+ and Pb2+
DPASV analysis
Electrochemical responses of graphene to target molecules
0.02 μg L−1

148, 149





CMGs
Paracetamol
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical responses of graphene to paracetamol
30 nM

156





CNTs have been demonstrated to be one of the promising excellent materials for gas sensors to detect gas molecules with low production costs, fast response time and high sensitivity at room temperature.129,130 As expected, graphene also offers clear advantages in this particular direction.15 Similar to CNTs, the working principle of graphene devices as gas sensors is based on the changes of their electrical conductivity induced by surface adsorbates, which act as either donors or acceptors associated with their chemical natures, preferential adsorption sites and the surrounding atmospheres.15,129–131 By monitoring changes in resistivity, minute concentrations of certain gases present in the environment can be well sensed. Till now, a number of groups have demonstrated good sensitivity for the detection of NO2, NH3, and other gaseous molecules under ambient conditions by using chemically derived graphene-based sensors.15,131–134 For example, the Manchester group15 demonstrated that the adsorbed molecules, such as NO2, H2O, CO and NH3, can change the local carrier concentration in mechanically exfoliated graphene one by one electron, which leads to step-like changes in resistance; thus, micrometre-size gas sensors made from graphene are capable of detecting individual events when a gas molecule, such as NO2, attaches to or detaches from graphene’s surface (Fig. 6). In another case, Fowler et al.134 reported the development of practical chemical sensors from chemically derived graphene for the detection of NO2, NH3, and 2,4-dinitrotoluene. They found that the primary mechanism of the chemical response in sensors is charge transfer between the analyte and graphene, while the electrical contacts play only a limited role. Recently, Dan and coworkers135 investigated the impact of an uncontrolled resist residue, which can be left on the graphene surface during the fabrication of graphene-based devices by means of typical nanolithographic processes, on the sensor characteristics, and explored the intrinsic response of graphene vapor sensors. Interestingly, it was found in their work that compared to the as-fabricated (resist residues contaminated) graphene-based device, the resist residue-removed clean device had four-times higher carrier mobility, roughly one-third the concentration of doped carriers, and much weaker electrical response upon exposure to chemical vapors, including reactive vapors such as ammonia. With respect to this interesting phenomenon, the authors suggested that the contamination layer chemically dopes the graphene, enhances carrier scattering, and acts as an absorbent layer that concentrates analyte molecules at the graphene surface, thereby enhancing the sensor response.
 Fig. 6  Detection of individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene-based device. (a) Concentration of chemically induced charge carriers (Δn) in single-layer graphene exposed to different concentrations (C) of NO2. Upper inset: Scanning electron micrograph of this device. (b) Changes in resistivity (ρ) at zero B caused by graphene's exposure to various gases diluted in concentration to 1 ppm. The positive (negative) sign of changes is chosen here to indicate electron (hole) doping. Region I: the device is in vacuum before its exposure; II: exposure to a 5l volume of a diluted chemical; III: evacuation of the experimental set-up; and IV: annealing at 150 °C. (c) Examples of changes in Hall resistivity observed near the neutrality point (|n| < 1011 cm−2) during adsorption of strongly diluted NO2 (blue curve) and its desorption in vacuum at 50 °C (red curve). The green curve is a reference—the same device thoroughly annealed and then exposed to pure He. The curves are for a three-layer device in B = 10 T. For the blue curve, the device was exposed to 1 ppm. of NO2 leaking at a rate of ≈ 10−3 mbar l s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 15) 
Due to their unique structure features and specific properties, graphene-based materials may provide a suitable microenvironment for biomolecules immobilization retaining their biological activities, and facilitate electron transfer between the immobilized biomolecules and electrode substrates.29 Thus, another enticing possibility is the use of graphene-oriented electrodes in biological devices for biosensing, and novel graphene-based biosensors for virtual applications have started to be concerned.136–147 Mohanty and Berry136 reported the viability of chemically modified graphenes (CMGs) as sensitive building blocks for bioelectronics at both microbial and molecular levels. In this work, the interfacing of CMGs with biological systems to build a novel live-bacterial-hybrid device, a DNA-hybridization device, and a polarity-specific molecular transistor with excellent sensitivity was demonstrated. Recently, Lu et al.137 represented a new detection platform based on water soluble graphene oxide (GO) for the sensitive and selective detection of DNA and proteins. GO could noncovalently bind fluorescein-based dye-labeled biomolecules (such as ssDNA and aptamer) and completely quench the fluorescence of the dye. In the presence of target biomolecules, the binding between the dye-labeled biomolecules and target biomolecules will release the bound dye-labeled biomolecules from the GO, resulting in restoration of dye fluorescence. This fluorescence-enhanced detection is sensitive and selective for the detection of target biomolecules. Similarly, our group138 developed a highly sensitive and specific fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) aptasensor for thrombin detection based on the dye-labelled aptamer-assembled graphene. Due to the noncovalent assembly between aptamer and graphene, fluorescence quenching of the dye takes place because of FRET; while the addition of thrombin leads to the fluorescence recovery due to the formation of quadruplex–thrombin complexes which have weak affinity to graphene and keep the dyes away from graphene surface. Because of the high fluorescence quenching efficiency, unique structure, and electronic properties of graphene, the graphene aptasensor exhibits extraordinarily high sensitivity and excellent specificity in both buffer and blood serum. In another case, a novel electrode system, based on chemically reduced graphene oxide modified glassy carbon (CR-GO/GC) electrode, has been proposed as an electrochemical sensing and biosensing platform (Fig. 7).139 Different kinds of important inorganic and organic electroactive compounds, such as probe molecule (potassium ferricyanide), free bases of DNA (guanine (G), adenine (A), thymine (T), and cytosine (C)), oxidase/dehydrogenase-related molecules (hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)/β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)), neurotransmitters (dopamine (DA)), and other biological molecules (ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA), and acetaminophen (APAP)), were employed to study their electrochemical responses at this CR-GO/GC electrode. It was found that the CR-GO/GC electrode exhibited more favorable electron transfer kinetics and higher electrochemical reactivities than graphite modified glassy carbon (graphite/GC) and glassy carbon (GC) electrodes, which indicates that CR-GO holds great promise for electrochemical sensing and biosensing. In addition, graphene-based glucose biosensors have also been reported by several groups.143–147 For instance, Lin and coworkers147 studied the direct electrochemistry of a glucose oxidase (GOD)–graphene–chitosan nanocomposite, which was further used for sensitive detection of glucose (Fig. 8). It was revealed that the graphene-based biosensor exhibited a wider linearity range from 0.08 mM to 12 mM glucose with a detection limit of 0.02 mM and much higher sensitivity (37.93 μA mM−1 cm−2) as compared with other nanostructured supports. The excellent performance of the biosensor was attributed to large surface-to-volume ratio and high conductivity of graphene, and good biocompatibility of chitosan.
 Fig. 7  Electrochemical sensing and biosensing platform based on chemically reduced graphene oxide (CR-GO). (A and B) SEM images of the chemically reduced graphene oxide modified glassy carbon (CR-GO/GC) electrode; (C and D) Detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of oligonucleotides including the sequence from codon 248 of the p53 gene at the CR-GO/GC electrode: (C) Differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of wild-type oligonucleotide 1 and its single-base mismatch 2 (G → A mutation), (D) Subtraction of the DPVs of 1 and 2; (E) Current-time curves for glucose oxidase (GOD)/CR-GO/GC (j1), GOD/graphite/GC (k1), and GOD/GC electrodes (l1) at −0.20 V with successive addition of 1 mM glucose. Inset: calibration curves for glucose at GOD/CR-GO/GC (m1), GOD/graphite/GC (n1), and GOD/GC electrodes (o1). Electrolyte: air-saturated and magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS without being purged by nitrogen; (F) Current-time curves for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)/CR-GO/GC (at +0.45 V, j2), ADH/graphite/GC (at +0.65 V, k2), and ADH/graphite/GC electrodes (at +0.65 V, l2) with successive addition of 1 mM ethanol. Inset: calibration curves for ethanol at ADH/CR-GO/GC (m2), ADH/graphite/GC (n2), and ADH/graphite/GC electrodes (o2). Electrolyte: magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS containing 10 mM NAD+. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 139) 
 Fig. 8  Glucose oxidase (GOD)–graphene–chitosan modified electrode for direct electrochemistry and glucose sensing. (A) SEM image of graphene–chitosan composite; (B) Cyclic voltammograms of the modified glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs) with (a–d) chitosan, GOD-chitosan, graphene-chitosan, and GOD–graphene–chitosan films in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with N2-saturated at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1; (C) Cyclic voltammograms of the modified GCE with GOD–graphene–chitosan film in PBS with 0.1 M KCl at different scan rates: 20, 50, 80, 100, 150, 200, 250, and 300 mV s−1 (inset: the plot of the peak current vs. scan rates); (D) Cyclic voltammograms of GOD–graphene–chitosan/GCE in PBS with 0.1 M KCl at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in the presence of different concentrations of glucose (a) N2-saturated without glucose, (b) O2-saturated without glucose, and (c–f) with glucose of 3.0, 5.0, 8.0, and 10.0 mM. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 147) 
In addition, an electrochemical sensing platform based on the graphene nanocomposite film modified electrode was presented for ultrasensitive determination of Cd2+ and Pb2+ by differential pulse anodic stripping voltammetry (DPASV).148,149 It was found that this sensing platform exhibited enhanced sensitivity and response to the determination of the Cd2+ and Pb2+, and the detection limits (S/N = 3) were estimated to be around 0.02 μg L−1 for Cd2+ and Pb2+. This electrochemical sensing interface exhibited excellent performance for the analysis of Pb2+ and Cd2+, and has been used to determine the Cd2+ and Pb2+ in real samples with good recovery.
3.2 Electrochemiluminescence
Electrochemiluminescence represents another important area where graphene can be important, although up to now only a small amount of the literature has appeared that explicitly referred to electrochemiluminescence relevant to graphene-based materials. Electrogenerated chemiluminescence, commonly defined as electrochemiluminescence (ECL), is a process in which electrochemically generated species combine to undergo highly-energetic electron transfer (redox or enzymatic) reactions that emit light from excited states.150 The ultrahigh conducting properties of graphene can be extremely helpful in accelerating electron transfer for ECL-based sensors. When graphene is incorporated into a sensor platform, it can act as the conducting pathway between the lumophores and the electrode. Moreover, the introduction of graphene can increase surface area and porosity of the platform, which can be expected to make co-reactant diffusion faster.
Recently, Bard’s group151 reported fairly intense ECL from electrochemically oxidized HOPG and from a suspension of graphene oxide platelets, which can be considered as the first report of ECL of graphene-based materials (Fig. 9). In their work, ECL intensity of >4 × 108 photon counts s−1 cm−2 was found with oxidized HOPG and of >1.8 × 106 photon counts s−1 cm−2 from a 6 ppm suspension of graphene oxide platelets in an aqueous phosphate buffer solution (pH = 7.0) containing 0.1 M NaClO4 and 13 mM tri-n-propylamine (TPrA). It was suggested that a possible explanation of the broad ECL emission was the existence of smaller aromatic hydrocarbon-like domains formed on the “graphitic” layers by interruption of the conjugation by oxidized centers, since ECL of individual graphene oxide nanoparticles was detected by using a coreactant (TPrA) at relatively high concentration. In another case, Li et al.152 developed an ECL sensor based on Ru(bpy)32+-graphene-Nafion composite film. As expected, the introduction of graphene facilitated the electron transfer of Ru(bpy)32+ and retarded the migration of the Ru(bpy)32+ into the electrochemically inactive hydrophobic region of Nafion. It was demonstrated that the Ru(bpy)32+-graphene-Nafion modified electrode showed good sensitivity and stability for the ECL determination of TPrA. Very recently, our group153 reported a graphene oxide-amplified ECL of quantum dots (QDs) platform and its efficient selective sensing for the antioxidants. It was found that graphene oxide can facilitate QDs oxidation and accelerated the output of O2˙−, which could improve the shortcomings of QDs ECL, such as low emission efficiency and unstable radical species. Based on the as-prepared ECL platform, we realized the sensitive and selective detection of glutathione from thiol-containing compounds and further used it for glutathione drug detection.
 Fig. 9  Electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) of partially oxidized highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surfaces and of graphene oxide (GO) nanoparticles (NPs). (A) Schematic illustration of ECL of GO NPs with addition of coreactant (tri-n-propylamine, TPrA). (B) ECL intensity vs. potential: (black curve 1) 0.1 M NaClO4 and PBS only; (red curve 2) with addition of 13 mM TPrA; (blue curve 3) expanded scale of ECL intensity of curve 1. Potential scan rate = 20 mV s−1 at an HOPG electrode (area = 0.07 cm2). (C) ECL intensity vs. potential: (black curve) 0.1 M NaClO4 and PBS only; (red curve) additional 13 mM TPrA; (blue curve) additional 6 ppm GO suspension. Potential scan rate = 20 mV s−1 at a Pt electrode (area = 0.07 cm2). (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 151) 
3.3 Electrocatalysis
Another practice with graphene-based electrodes is to exploit graphene-based materials for electrochemical catalysis, which has attracted great interest in the past few years. These electrocatalytic properties of graphene-based materials can come from two different approaches. On the one hand, graphene or its derivative can itself exhibit excellent catalytic properties. In this case, graphene can be considered as electroactive interface to mediate electrocatalytic activities of redox system.89,154–156 For instance, Shang and coworkers154 demonstrated that multilayer graphene nanoflake films (MGNFs) showed fast electron-transfer kinetics for the Fe(CN)63−/4− redox system and excellent electrocatalytic activities for simultaneously determining DA, AA, and UA. It was suggested that these remarkable electron transfer kinetics and active electrocatalysis of MGNFs were mainly due to edge plane sites/defects that occur at the end of the vertical graphene nanoflakes, similar to those found on edge plane pyrolytic graphite.155 Recently, our group89 also studied the electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties of reduced graphene sheet films (rGSFs), and demonstrated that the rGSFs exhibited fast electron-transfer kinetics and possess excellent electrocatalytic activity toward oxygen reduction (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties of reduced graphene sheet films (rGSFs). (A) SEM image of rGSFs on a glassy carbon sheet; (B) Cyclic voltammograms for the bare glassy carbon (GC) electrode (dashed line) and graphene-modified GC electrode (solid line) in 1.0 M KCl solution between 0 V and 0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1); (C) Typical cyclic voltammograms obtained at rGSF/GC electrodes in 0.10 M KOH solution saturated with Ar (dashed lines) or O2 (solid lines) (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1); (D) Cyclic voltammograms in 0.1 M pH 6.8 PBS containing 1 mM β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) at bare GC (dashed line) and rGSF/GC electrodes (solid line) (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89) 
On the other hand, deposition of inorganic materials, especially noble metal nanoparticles, onto the graphene forms interesting graphene derivatives, which can be expected to present novel electrocatalytic properties due to the excellent catalytic activities of noble metal nanoparticles.157–163 The introduction of catalytic properties into these graphene hybrids can to some extent decrease overpotentials of many analytically important electrochemical reactions and even realize the reversibility of some redox reactions, which are irreversible at common unmodified electrodes. For example, graphene has been receiving recent attention as the catalyst support in methanol oxidation for fuel cell applications, owing to its high surface area, high conductivity, unique graphitized basal plane structure and potential low manufacturing cost.158–162 Recently, our group159 revealed that Pt/graphene nanocomposites could be prepared via reduction of graphite oxide and H2PtCl6 in one pot, and the Pt/graphene composites exhibited superior catalytic performance toward methanol oxidation (Fig. 11). Yoo and coworkers160 reported enhanced electrocatalytic activity of Pt subnanoclusters on graphene nanosheet (GNS) surface. The Pt/GNS electrocatalyst reveals an unusually high activity for methanol oxidation reaction, and also exhibits quite a different characteristic for CO oxidation compared to Pt/carbon black catalyst. In another case, chemically converted graphene (CCG)/3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic acid (PTCA)/Au-ionic liquid (Au-IL) composites (CCG/PTCA/Au-IL) have been prepared by a chemical route, involving functionalization of CCG with PTCA followed by deposition of Au-IL (Fig. 12).161 It was found that the CCG/PTCA/Au-IL composites showed good electrocatalytic behavior toward oxygen reduction. Moreover, selective electrochemical analysis could be achieved due to the selective catalysis of graphene/metal nanocomposites. For instance, Scheuermann et al.163 exploited graphite oxide and its chemically derived graphene (CDG) derivatives as a support for palladium clusters and nanoparticles, which were further employed as active catalysts for the selective C–C coupling reactions (i.e., the Suzuki-Miyaura reaction). In contrast to the conventional Pd/C catalyst, these novel heterogeneous GO- and CDG-based palladium catalysts gave much higher activities with turnover frequencies exceeding 39000 h−1, accompanied by very low palladium leaching (<1 ppm).
 Fig. 11  Electrocatalytic performance for methanol oxidation of Pt/graphene nanocomposites. (A) Scheme of synthesis of Pt/graphene nanocomposites: (1) oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide (GO); (2) exfoliation of graphite oxide in water by sonication; (3) addition of Pt ions to GO solution; and (4) chemical reduction of GO and Pt ions leading to the formation of Pt/graphene composites. (B) TEM images of Pt/graphene composites. (C) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt/graphene in nitrogen saturated aqueous solution of 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (D) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt/graphene and Pt/Vulcan (Vulcan, one kind of carbon materials from Cabot corp., specific surface area of 237 m2 g−1) in nitrogen saturated aqueous solution of 0.5 M H2SO4 containing 0.5 M CH3OH at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 159) 
 Fig. 12  The synthesis of perylene-coated graphene decorated with Au nanoparticles and its electrocatalysis toward oxygen reduction. (A) Illustration of the preparation of chemically converted graphene (CCG)/3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic acid (PTCA)/Au-ionic liquid (Au-IL) composites (CCG/PTCA/Au-IL). (B) TEM images of CCG/PTCA/Au-IL composites at low magnification. (C) Cyclic voltammetry grams of CCG/PTCA/Au-IL-modified GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2 (solid) and N2 (dotted); CCG/PTCA-modified GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2 (dashed). Inset: bare GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2. Scan rate: 0.05 V s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 161) 
3.4 Electrochemical energy conversion
Recently, graphene and graphene-based materials have been considered as one of the promising alternatives as electrode materials in energy-related devices, because these materials have superior electrical conductivities, high surface area, chemical tolerance, high transparency and a broad electrochemical window.14,29,81,164,165 The advantages of graphene-based electrodes have been demonstrated for applications in energe-related electrochemical devices, such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors and solar cells.
A LIB, composed of anode, electrolyte, and cathode, is a lithium ion-induced device for electricity supply.166 The energy densities and performances of LIBs largely depend on the physical and chemical properties of the anode materials. Thus, to meet the increasing demand for batteries with higher energy density and better performance, many research attempts have been made to explore new anode electrode materials or design novel nanostructures of anode electrode materials. Currently, graphene-based materials, including graphene nanosheets,167–170 graphene paper171 and graphene hybrid nanostructures (such as TiO2/graphene,172 SnO2/graphene173,174 and ceramic/graphene175 composites), have attracted special attention as high capacity anode materials in LIBs, owing to their excellent lithium storage properties. For example, Paek and coworkers173 demonstrated enhanced cyclic performance and lithium storage capacity of SnO2/graphene nanoporous electrodes with three-dimensionally delaminated flexible structure (Fig. 13). In their work, SnO2/graphene nanoporous electrode materials with delaminated structure were fabricated with the reassembly of graphene nanosheets (GNS) in the presence of SnO2 nanoparticles. It was demonstrated that the obtained SnO2/GNS electrode exhibited an enhanced reversible capacity as well as superior cycling performance in comparison with that of the bare SnO2 electrode. A thorough discussion focused on graphene-based materials for LIBs can be found in a recent review.176
 Fig. 13  Enhanced cyclic performance and lithium storage capacity of SnO2/graphene nanoporous electrodes with three-dimensionally delaminated flexible structure. (A) Schematic illustration for the synthesis and the structure of SnO2/graphene nanosheets (GNS). (B) Charge/discharge profile for SnO2/GNS. (B) Cyclic performances for (a) bare SnO2 nanoparticle, (b) graphite, (c) GNS, and (d) SnO2/GNS. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173) 
Supercapacitors represent another important class of energy storage devices where graphene-based electrodes have been employed. Supercapacitors, involving electric double-layer capacitance (physical) and electrochemical pseudo-capacitance, can store and release electric energy by nanoscopic charge separation at the interfaces between the electrode and the electrolyte. Highly desirable as a modern energy storage system, supercapacitors are available with large power density, moderate energy density, good operational safety, and long cycling life.177,178 Vital is a freestanding electrode with favorable mechanical strength and large capacitance for a supercapacitor. Thus, recent researches on supercapacitors have been mainly focused on the exploitation of electrode materials. In the last few years, it has been proposed that graphene should be a competitive electrode material for supercapacitor applications due to its superb characteristics of chemical stability, high electrical conductivity, and large surface area. Graphene-based ultracapacitors were developed by Rao and co-workers.179 So far, graphene95,179,180 and graphene-based materials181–183 have been demonstrated to exhibit excellent performance as electrode materials in supercapacitors. For instance, Ruoff and coworkers95 reported a novel graphene-based supercapacitor from chemically modified graphene (CMG), and demonstrated its exciting excellent performance with specific capacitances of 135 and 99 F/g in aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively (Fig. 14). In another case, Wang et al.180 fabricated supercapacitor devices using the reduced graphene as electrode materials and investigated their performance. A maximum specific capacitance of 205 F/g with a measured power density of 10 kW kg−1 at energy density of 28.5 Wh/kg in an aqueous electrolyte solution, significantly higher than those of CNT-based supercapacitors, was obtained. Meanwhile, these supercapacitor devices exhibit excellent long cycle life along with ∼90% specific capacitance retained after 1200 cycle tests. Thus, the graphene-based supercapacitors possess the exciting commercial potential for high performance, environmentally friendly and low-cost electrical energy storage devices in the future.
 Fig. 14  Graphene-based supercapacitors. (A) Scheme of the assembly of supercapacitors from chemically modified graphene (CMG). (B) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) plots of CMG-based supercapacitors with KOH electrolyte, and (C) tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate in acetonitrile (TEABF4AN). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95) 
In addition, graphene-based materials have also been emerged as one of the fascinating alternative electrode materials for application in solar cells, although their power conversion efficiencies are comparatively low probably due to the relatively high resistance of the presently prepared graphene films. Müllen’s group184 reported transparent, conductive, and ultrathin graphene films as an alternative to the ubiquitously employed metal oxides window electrodes for solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) (Fig. 15). It was found that the current–voltage (I–V) characteristic of this graphene-based solar cell showed an overall power conversion efficiency of 0.26%, which was relatively lower than that of an FTO-based cell fabricated with the same procedure. The same group also presented a new bottom-up chemical approach towards the synthesis of transparent graphene-constructed films and their successful use as hole-collecting electrodes in organic solar cells.70 Wu et al.185 demonstrated solution-processed graphene thin films as transparent conductive anodes for organic photovoltaic cells. Shi and coworkers186 reported a novel counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cell, in which the counter electrode was fabricated with the deposition of composite films of graphene and polystyreneslufonate doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (graphene/PEDOT-PSS) on indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates. Furthermore, other than its application as electrode materials, graphene-based materials have also been used as active acceptor materials in conjugated-polymer-based organic solar cells.187,188 In such an organic solar cell, a photoexcited electron–hole pair is generated when an electron is excited from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the conjugated polymer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) upon photon absorption; and the separation of the photoexcited electron–hole pair can be achieved by creating a heterojunction with an acceptor material, which has an electron affinity that is larger than that of the polymer, but a relatively lower than its HOMO level.189 It is well known that graphene exhibits a high electron affinity, high electron mobility, and a large 2D plane structure with one-atom thickness. When mixed with conjugated polymers, it is expected to be a good candidate for the acceptor material because large donor/acceptor (D/A) interfaces for charge generation and a continuous pathway for electron transfer will be formed in the graphene component. For example, Liu et al.187 demonstrated solution-processable functionalized graphene as the electron-accepting material in organic photovoltaic devices for the first time. In their work, graphene was used as the acceptor material, blended with poly(3-hexylthiophene) and poly(3-octylthiophene) to form bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells, and a power conversion efficiency over 1% was obtained at 100 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 15  Transparent, conductive graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC). (A) Schematic illustration of DSSC using graphene film as electrode, the four layers from bottom to top are Au, dye-sensitized heterojunction, compact TiO2, and graphene film. (B) Transmittance of a ca. 10 nm thick graphene film (red), in comparison with that of ITO (black) and FTO (blue). (C) I–V curve of graphene-based cell (black) and the FTO-based cell (red), illuminated under AM solar light (1 sun). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 184) 
3.5 Field effect transistors
Field Effect Transistors (FETs) have attracted much attention in the past decades because of their potential applications in large-area, flexible, and low-cost electronics. The FET operates by the effects of an electric field on the flow of one type of charge carrier (electrons or holes) from the source to drain through a single type of semiconductor material (i.e., a “conductive channel”). Graphene holds a set of remarkable structure, electronic and physical properties, which make them ideal for a revolutionary application in FETs.6 This enables faster and smaller transistors consuming less energy and dissipating heat faster than silicon based FET-devices.190
However, intrinsic graphene is a semimetal or zero band-gap semiconductor,10,99 which prevents its direct application in FETs at room temperature.191,192 Thus, an essential prerequisite for graphene to become a viable channel material for transistor applications is to open its band gap. It has been suggested that a band gap can be opened up by fabricating graphene nanostructures of confined geometry such as nanoribbons.164,191–200 These graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are predicted to be semiconducting due to edge effects and quantum confinement of the electron wave function in the transverse direction, leading to the creation of a band gap. Many theoretical201–203 and experimental164,192,194 results proposed this induced band gap to be inversely proportional to the ribbon width. Till now, GNR-based FETs have been fabricated by e-beam lithography and plasma etching,194,196,204 transfer-printing,192,205 transfer-free photolithography process,206 and also by a combination of thermal and ultrasonic exfoliation of graphite in solution and deposition onto the substrate.164 The high performance of GNR-based FETs has been demonstrated to be generally affected by several factors, such as edge doping,195 the ribbon width,196 electrical contact types and shapes,198,207 and the thickness of graphene.204 Analogous to nanotube transistors, GNR-based FETs have confirmed the possibilities for potential exploitation in many fields.
A common practice with GNR-based FETs is to exploit and study its charge transport properties. For example, Tao’s group employed a back gate-controlled GNR-based FET for the investigation of the ionic effect on the charge transport properties of graphene FETs.208,209 They revealed that ions can have a profound effect on the charge transport properties of the graphene FET via screening of impurity charges in the device, that is, with the increase of the ionic concentration or the dielectric constant of the solvent, the carrier mobilities increase significantly. At the same time, Tao and coworkers210 studied the charge transport in single layer graphene transistors in ionic liquids and aqueous solutions with an electrochemical-gating approach (Fig. 16), which is suggested to be much more effective than the back gate approach in tuning the charge carriers. By means of the electrochemically-gated graphene FETs, the authors illustrated the determination of the mobile carrier density using a simplified capacitor model and the interpretation of the electron transport characteristics in terms of charged impurity induced scattering in an ionic liquid, and they also revealed a systematic dependence of the conductivity shift toward electrochemically-gated potentials on the concentration of charged impurities in aqueous solutions. Moreover, based on graphene-FETs, Freitag et al.211 investigated the graphene thermal transport properties by using Raman scattering microscopy of the 2D-phonon band. According to their research results, the gate stack (300 nm SiO2 on silicon) directly below the active graphene channel is responsible for 77% of the heat dissipation, while the remainder is carried to the graphene that extends beyond the device and metallic contacts. Particularly, for a graphene-FET, of further interest is its superior surface extremely sensitive to the local environment, which makes it attractive for sensing.212–216 For example, Robinson et al.212 reported a novel FET device based on chemically produced graphene (reduced graphene oxide) as the promising active material for high-performance molecular sensing (Fig. 17), achieving sensitivities at parts-per-billion levels for chemical warfare agents and explosives. Das et al.213 have demonstrated an electrochemically top-gated graphene FET for monitoring dopants by Raman scattering. Ang et al.214 have shown that graphene electrical properties are sensitive to pH by means of a solution-gate graphene FET. In another case, Ohno and coworkers215 investigated electrolyte-gated graphene FETs for electrical detecting pH and protein adsorptions (Fig. 18). The sensing mechanism was suggested to be that chemical or biological species adsorbed on the surface of the graphene act as electron donors or acceptors, resulting in conductance changes. It was found that the conductance of the graphene FET exhibits a direct linear increase with electrolyte pH, and also increases with exposure to a protein at several hundred picomolar. This indicates that graphene FETs can act as highly sensitive electrical sensors for detecting pH and biomolecule concentrations.
 Fig. 16  Electrochemical gate-controlled charge transport in graphene in ionic liquid and aqueous solution. (A) Schematic diagram of electrochemical gate tuned graphene FET devices. Inset is the graphene–solution interface capacitance model. (B) Transport characteristic of graphene FET that is conducted in ionic liquid (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate). Inset: optical micrograph of a graphene transistor. (C) Conductivity vs. carrier density trace corresponding to (A) in ionic liquid. (D) Conductivity comparison in aqueous solution containing different concentrations of NaF (0.01, 0.1, and 1M, respectively). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 210) 
 Fig. 17  Reduced graphene oxide-based sensors for gaseous molecules: (a) graphene oxide; (b) scheme of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) devices; (c) real-time conductance response to 10 s vapor pulses of increasing concentration for a rGO network sensor; (d) the normalized response ΔG/G0 of an rGO device to 10 s doses of increasing concentration of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) in nitrogen, in which the minimal detectable level (MDL) is defined as that concentration of vapor which gives rise to a change in conductance ΔG that is exactly three standard deviations from G0 (i.e., a signal-to-noise ratio of three). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 212) 
 Fig. 18  Electrolyte-gated graphene field effect transistors (FETs) for detecting pH and protein adsorption. (A) Scheme of electrolyte-gated graphene FETs for detecting pH and protein adsorption; (B) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for electrolyte-gated graphene FETs; (C) Conductance versus time data of a graphene FET for pH values from 4.0 to 8.2; (D) Conductance versus time for electrical monitoring of exposure to various bovine serum albumin (BSA) concentrations. Dashed lines indicate the average conductance. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 215) 
Notably, recent attempts have also been made to use graphene-derived composites as novel channel materials in FETs for electronics. When incorporated into polymer35,217,218 or ceramic81 matrices, graphene’s extraordinary properties manifest as remarkable improvements in the host material. The highly conductive nature of graphene and ease of incorporation into the host matrices have opened up the possibility of their use as a new channel material in FETs. For instance, Eda and Chhowalla219 reported the electrical properties of solution-processed composite thin films consisting of functionalized graphene nanosheets (FGS) as the filler and polystyrene as the host material. It was demonstrated that FETs from graphene-based composite thin films exhibited ambipolar field effect characteristics, and the characteristics of FETs were dependent on the FGS size. To date, most of the reported graphene-based FETs display unipolar p-type character, which has been ascribed to the high-work-function metal electrodes producing close-to-Ohmic contact to the valence band.6 It is known that for a material to transport electrons (n-type) requires access to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level for electron injection, and molecules with strong electron-withdrawing groups are good candidates as n-type semiconductors. Thus, it is expected that graphene-oriented derivatives with n-type semiconducting performance can be obtained by the introduction of fluoro or fluoroalkyl substituents into graphene. In fact, this feasibility has been recently verified by the work of Mori and coworkers.220 In their work, they firstly synthesized a fluorinated-graphene, which was subsequently deposited by vacuum sublimation as a channel material in a FET. It was found that the obtained FET with fluorinated-graphene molecules performs as an n-type semiconductor, in contrast to those ordinary graphene-FETs.
Apart from being a channel material described above, graphene-based materials have also emerged as promising source and drain (S/D) electrode materials for use in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), which have attracted considerable interest owing to their incorporation as fundamental building blocks for plastic electronics, such as bendable displays.221 It is known that graphene possesses fascinating unusual physicochemical properties, such as high mobility, room-temperature quantum Hall effect, good optical transparency, low resistivity, high chemical stability, and mechanical strength. The most important characteristic of graphene, however, is its work function, of 4.7–4.9 eV, which is similar to that of S/D metal materials and enables possible ohmic hole injection into most organic semiconductors with comparable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels. Thus, these advantages call for the incorporation of graphene as S/D electrodes in OFETs. For instance, Di et al.222 reported a simple way to obtain interdigital graphene S/D electrodes on SiO2/Si substrates for the fabrication of high-performance OFETs. It was demonstrated that the graphene electrodes exhibited excellent hole-injection characteristics and outstanding interface contact with the organic semiconductor, and the fabricated OFETs showed a high mobility of 0.53 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is one of the best results for OFETs with bottom-contact configuration and narrow channel length. Recently, Pang and coworkers223 have demonstrated the first highly defined patterned graphene S/D electrodes fabricated by means of a novel oxygen-plasma etching approach from solution-processed GO films (Fig. 19). Based on these graphene contacts, solution-processed OFETs were observed with device performances comparable to or even better than those using gold S/D electrodes. In particular, Cao et al.224 reported a general methodology for fabricating stable photoresponsive OFETs with single-layer graphene as S/D electrodes. It was demonstrated that these OFETs based on graphene contacts exhibited high-performance FET behavior with bulk-like carrier mobility, high on/off current ratio, and high reproducibility. Due to the presence of photoactive molecules, at the same time, these devices also display reversible changes in current when they are exposed to visible light.
 Fig. 19  Patterned graphene source/drain (S/D) electrodes from solution-processed graphite oxide films for organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). (A) Schematic illustration of the approach to fabrication of patterned graphene electrodes; (B) Output characteristics for various gate biases VG and (C) transfer characteristics at a source–drain bias VSD = −60 V of OFETs employing patterned 60 nm thick graphene S/D electrodes annealed at 1000 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 223) 
4. Future work and prospects
The emergence of graphene is opening new horizons for the investigation of materials science and condensed-matter physics. This strictly 2D material exhibits extraordinary structural and electronic properties, and, despite its short history, has already revealed a cornucopia of new physics and potential applications.1 Undoubtedly, there are aspects of this material that make it fascinating for the applications in the area of electrochemistry, and remarkably rapid progress in this area has already been made. Nonetheless, research towards the application of graphene-based materials in electrochemistry is still at an early stage. A number of challenges remain to be explored. Many of these challenges are related to the facile synthesis and controlled processing of graphene-based materials in large scale. For example, graphene synthesis through chemical conversion from graphite introduces a considerable number of defects, reducing the crystal quality and electrical conductivity. Apparently, new strategies are needed to produce more conducting yet processable graphene with high quality structure. Additionally, to enable applications in batteries, supercapacitors, and as supports for catalysts, the hierarchical structure of graphene assemblies must be controlled to make the surface of individual sheets maximally accessible.142 Moreover, to broaden the scope of these graphene-based materials in the future, the size and shape are also issues. There is considerable scope for more research into these challenges.
Apart from preparation issues, another major obstacle relies on the fundamental research. So far, we are still at a fairly early stage of understanding fundamental theories of various aspects of graphene-based materials, including electronic structure, charge transport, electrochemical properties, doping effects and dependence of properties on the number of layers, etc. In terms of graphene-related electrochemistry, specific attentions should be more focused on the interpretation of the electron transport characteristics at the graphene/substrate interface and/or the graphene/solution interface, the determination of the mobile carrier density, the estimation of the concentration of charged impurities, the understanding of the impurities’ effect on the graphene conductivity as well as the charged impurity induced scattering mechanisms, and the exploration of the charge transport properties and interfacial capacitance as a function of electrochemical surface potential. Thus, the charge-transport mechanism of graphene-based electrodes in the field of electrochemistry still remains an intriguing issue and needs to be explored further. In addition, construction of graphene-based devices is another challenging work. The future of using graphene-based devices in electrochemistry depends on the quality enhancement of synthetic materials, improvement of the intrinsic charge carrier mobilities, the assembly control of thin films on electrode substrate, and device fabrication processes.
Despite a number of remaining challenges, the advances in the last few years have been significant and researchers are now making rapid progress toward the investigation and applications of graphene-based materials. It is certain that these problems will soon be circumvented. Following the further understanding of the basic structure and properties of graphene, as well as the development of novel synthetical strategies and device fabrication processes, it will be possible to more effectively promote the graphene-based applications in electrochemistry, such as electrochemical (bio)sensing, electrocatalysis, advanced batteries, solar cells, and FETs, etc. The future should be very interesting and fantastic.
5. Conclusions
Graphene, a single layer two-dimensional carbon structure, has attracted an explosive interest in the recent years. Among all the carbon-based materials, graphene offers the advantages of unique physical, chemical, and mechanical properties, which may open up a new research area for materials science and condensed-matter physics, and aims for wide-ranging and diversified technological applications. This review has addressed recent advances in the field of graphene from the standpoint of electrochemistry. As known, extraordinary electronic properties in graphene are really due to the high quality of its electronic structure. Graphene, as a Dirac fermion system, promises intriguing electronic properties such as a high integer quantum Hall effect, the Klein paradox, an ambipolar electric field effect, along with ballistic conduction of charge carriers, etc. Owing to these principally advantageous electronic and electrochemical properties, graphene-based materials have been used to design and prepare graphene-oriented electrodes for a wide range of applications in electrochemistry, ranging from electrochemical sensing, electrocatalysis, electrochemiluminescence to energy conversion and FET devices. Considerable advances in this area have already been made. Nonetheless, graphene-related research in electrochemistry still remains an intriguing issue and needs to be explored further.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20975060) and National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB310500).
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Brumfiel, Nature, 2009, 458, 390–391 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. H. Sykes, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 175–176 Search PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burghard, H. Klauk and K. Kern, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2586–2600 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Biswas, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2457–2469 RSC .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1968, 176, 250–254 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef .
Y. B. Zhang, Y. W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
A. Altland, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 236802 CrossRef .
J. C. Meyer, A. K. Geim, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth and S. Roth, Nature, 2007, 446, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, Y. Z. Hu, C. Li, C. Qin, M. Shi and M. X. Ye, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6122–6128 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Schniepp, J. L. Li, M. J. McAllister, H. Sai, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. H. Adamson, R. K. Prud’homme, R. Car, D. A. Saville and I. A. Aksay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8535–8539 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zacharia, H. Ulbricht and T. Hertel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 155406–155407 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Ritter and J. W. Lyding, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015704 CrossRef .
C. Berger, Z. M. Song, X. B. Li, X. S. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. B. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohta, A. Bostwick, T. Seyller, K. Horn and E. Rotenberg, Science, 2006, 313, 951–954 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. de Heera, C. Berger, X. Wu, P. N. First, E. H. Conrad, X. Li, T. Li, M. Sprinkle, J. Hass, M. L. Sadowski, M. Potemski and G. Martinez, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 92–100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hass, W. A. de Heer and E. H. Conrad, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 323202 CrossRef .
E. Rollings, G. H. Gweon, S. Y. Zhou, B. S. Mun, J. L. McChesney, B. S. Hussain, A. V. Fedorov, P. N. First, W. A. de Heer and A. Lanzara, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 2172–2177 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Sutter, J. I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Dedkov, M. Fonin, U. Rüdiger and C. Laubschat, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 107602 CrossRef .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. B. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. Coraux, A. T. N‘Diaye, C. Busse and T. Michely, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 565–570 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. M. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zomney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. C. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lee, L. Whittaker, C. Jaye, K. M. Baroudi, D. A. Fischer and S. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3905–3916 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Bon, L. Valentini, R. Verdejo, J. L. G. Fierro, L. Peponi, M. A. Lopez-Manchado and J. M. Kenny, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, W. Guo, R. H. Hauge and W. E. Billups, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3134–3136 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lomeda, C. D. Doyle, D. V. Kosynkin, W. F. Hwang and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16201–16206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chattopadhyay, A. Mukherjee, C. E. Hamilton, J. H. Kang, S. Chakraborty, W. Guo, K. F. Kelly, A. R. Barron and W. E. Billups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5414–5415 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Mueller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. G. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Q. Chen, N. Q. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
G. X. Wang, J. Yang, J. Park, X. L. Gou, B. Wang, H. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8192–8195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niyogi, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, J. L. McWilliams, M. A. Hamon and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7720–7721 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, P. Chia, L. Chua, L. Zhao, R. Png, S. Sivaramakrishnan, M. Zhou, R. G. S. Goh, R. H. Friend, A. T. S. Wee and P. K. H. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, M. J. Allen, Y. Yang and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Guo, X. F. Wang, Q. Y. Qian, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653–2659 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J. L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Caro, R. K. Prud’homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2950–2956 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, J. T. Robinson, X. L. Li and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9910–9911 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Poner, N. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3342–3347 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bourlinos, D. Gournis, D. Petridis, T. Szabó, A. Szeri and I. Dékány, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6050–6055 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, P. Ramesh, C. Berger, M. Sprinkle, W. A. de Heer and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1336–1337 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hao, W. Qian, L. Zhang and Y. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6576–6578 RSC .
H. Bai, Y. X. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667–1669 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Zhang, P. Yu and Y. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4527–4529 RSC .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Dou, A. Rouhanipour, L. J. Zhi, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4216–4217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rouhanipour, M. Roy, X. Feng, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4602–4604 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhi and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1472–1484 RSC .
H. G. Duan, E. Q. Xie, L. Han and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3284–3288 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, L. S. Panchakarla, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4257–4259 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, G. Dong and L. Guan, Phys. E., 2010, 42, 1267–1271 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, N. Li, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 175602 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi, N. Tsao, Z. Tomovic, J. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2990–2992 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Guńko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vallés, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Pénicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef .
A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis and A. K. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. R. C. Vivekchand, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1517–1523 RSC .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872–876 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. R. Wang, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sundaram, C. Gomez-Navarro, K. Balasubranianian, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3050–3053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, M. Y. Han, J. Maultzsch, T. F. Heinz, P. Kim, M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4597–4602 CrossRef CAS .
T. O. Wehling, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, E. E. Vdovin, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and A. I. Lichtenstein, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 173–177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bunch, S. S. Verbridge, J. S. Alden, A. M. van der Zande, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2458–2462 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Meyer, C. Kisielowski, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3582–3586 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner, M. H. Rümmeli, L. Ge, T. Gemming, B. Montanari, N. M. Harrison, B. Büchner and G. A. D. Briggs, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 500–504 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stolyarova, R. K. Taeg, S. Ryu, J. Maultzsch, P. Kim, L. E. Brus, T. F. Heinz, M. S. Hybertsen and G. W. Flynn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 9209–9212 CrossRef CAS .
R. Balog, B. Jørgensen, J. Wells, E. Lægsgaard, P. Hofmann, F. Besenbacher and L. Hornekær, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8744–8745 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shivaraman, R. A. Barton, X. Yu, J. Alden, L. Herman, M. V. S. Chandrashekhar, J. Park, P. L. McEuen, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and M. G. Spencer, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3100–3105 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Huang, B. Wu, J. Chen and G. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11147–11154 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, H. B. Feng, J. Lu and J. H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, J. R. Lomeda, B. K. Price, W. Lu, Y. Zhu and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3045–3047 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Kudin, B. Ozbas, H. C. Schniepp, R. K. Prud’homme, I. A. Aksay and R. Car, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, G. Chen, P. Joshi, S. Tadigadapa and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2667–2673 CrossRef CAS .
D. Graf, F. Molitor, K. Ensslin, C. Stampfer, A. Jungen, C. Hierold and L. Wirtz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 238–242 CrossRef .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim and A. K. Geim, Science, 2007, 315, 1379–1379 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Katsnelson, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Phys.-Usp., 2008, 51, 744–748 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 3–13 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Fal’ko, K. Kechedzhi, E. McCann, B. L. Altshuler, H. Suzuura and T. Ando, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris, Z. Chen and V. Perebeinos, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 605–615 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Yennie, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1987, 59, 781–824 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, L. A. Ponomarenko, D. Jiang and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 016801 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. John, L. C. Castro and D. L. Pulfrey, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 5180–5184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Yoon and Y. J. Ouyang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1935–1940 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fang, A. Konar, H. L. Xing and D. Jena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 092109 CrossRef .
F. Giannazzo, S. Sonde, V. Raineri and E. Rimini, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 23–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Xia, F. Chen, J. H. Li and N. J. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505–509 CrossRef CAS .
K. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 720–721 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Adam, M. S. Fuhrer, E. D. Williams and M. Ishigami, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 377–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Tan, Y. Zhang, K. Bolotin, Y. Zhao, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, S. Das Sarma, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 246803 CrossRef .
S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, V. M. Galitski and S. D. Sarma, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 18392–18397 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Hwang, S. Adam and S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 186806 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Heersche, P. Jarillo-Herrero, J. B. Oostinga, L. M. K. Vandersypen and A. F. Morpurgo, Nature, 2007, 446, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. Titov and C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 041401 CrossRef .
F. Chen and N. J. Tao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Heersche, P. Jarillo-Herrero, J. B. Oostinga, L. M. K. Vandersypen and A. F. Morpurgo, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646–2687 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wen and J. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8707–8713 RSC .
M. Pumera, Chem. Rec., 2009, 9, 211–223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. W. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. J. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins, K. Bradley, M. Ishigami and A. Zettl, Science, 2000, 287, 1801–1804 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Ao, J. Yang, S. Li and Q. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 461, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125416 CrossRef .
B. Huang, Z. Y. Li, Z. R. Liu, G. Zhou, S. G. Hao, J. Wu, B. L. Gu and W. H. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13442–13446 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Dan, Y. Lu, N. J. Kybert, Z. T. Luo and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1472–1475 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mohanty and V. Berry, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4469–4476 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lu, H. H. Yang, C. L. Zhu, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4785–4787 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Chang, L. H. Tang, Y. Wang, J. H. Jiang and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 2341–2346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, Y. M. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS .
S. Alwarappan, A. Erdem, C. Liu and C. Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8853–8857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, L. H. Tang, J. Lu and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1504–1508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, L. T. Drzal, R. M. Worden and I. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6240–6246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, I. Do, L. T. Drzal, R. M. Worden and I. Lee, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1825–1832 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, J. F. Song, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2378–2382 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, X. Z. Zhou, J. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14071–14075 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Kang, J. Wang, H. Wu, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and Y. H. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 901–905 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. J. Guo, Y. M. Zhai and E. K. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1085–1088 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. J. Guo, Y. M. Zhai and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 649, 196–201 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bertoncello and R. J. Forster, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3191–3200 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan, S. Park, Y. W. Zhu, R. S. Ruoff and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 937–939 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, J. Chen, S. Han, W. X. Niu, X. Q. Liu and G. B. Xu, Talanta, 2009, 79, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Lu, L. H. Tang, H. X. Chang and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9710–9715 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, M. McMullan, M. Chu, A. Stamboulis, A. Potenza, S. S. Dhesi and H. Marchetto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3506–3514 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Wildgoose, C. E. Banks, H. C. Leventis and R. G. Compton, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 152, 187–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Kang, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. H. Lin, Talanta, 2010, 81, 754–759 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Fang, S. J. Guo, C. Z. Zhu, Y. M. Zhai and E. K. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 100316095053001,  DOI:10.1021/la100575g .
C. Xu, X. Wang and J. W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19841–19845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Li, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Li, H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4022–4025 RSC .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novák, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. S. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Pan, S. Wang, B. Zhao, M. H. Wu, H. J. Zhang, Y. Wang and Z. Jiao, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3136–3142 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Wang, X. P. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, H. H. Song and X. H. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, R. Kou, D. H. Hu, C. M. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. G. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, X. P. Shen, B. Wang, H. K. Liu and G. X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ji, Y. L. Li, J. M. Feng, D. Su, Y. Y. Wen, Y. Feng and F. Hou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9063–9067 RSC .
M. H. Liang and L. J. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5871–5878 RSC .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, C. S. Rout, K. S. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Q. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, C. Y. Wang, M. M. Chen and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Q. L. Hao, X. J. Yang, L. D. Lu and X. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. Li, J. F. Song, H. F. Yang, S. Y. Gan, Q. X. Zhang, D. X. Han, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455602 CrossRef .
Y. P. Zhang, H. B. Li, L. K. Pan, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 634, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. J. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. N. Bao, Z. F. Liu, Y. S. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
W. J. Hong, Y. X. Xu, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. F. Ma, S. G. Yin, X. Y. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. F. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, L. Y. Yang, N. Zhang, G. L. Pan, S. G. Yin, Y. S. Chen and J. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 894–904 CrossRef CAS .
F. Padinger, R. S. Rittberger and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taghioskoui, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sharma, N. Nair and M. S. Strano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14771–14777 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Bai, X. F. Duan and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2083–2087 CrossRef CAS .
B. Obradovic, R. Kotlyar, F. Heinz, P. Matagne, T. Rakshit, M. D. Giles, M. A. Stettler and D. E. Nikonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 142102 CrossRef .
M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
Q. M. Yan, B. Huang, J. Yu, F. W. Zheng, J. Zang, J. Wu, B. L. Gu, F. Liu and W. H. Duan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1469–1473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Chen, Y. M. Lin, M. J. Rooks and P. Avouris, Phys. E., 2007, 40, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 455–457 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, N. Neophytou, M. S. Lundstrom and D. E. Nikonov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1819–1824 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Wang, Y. J. Ouyang, X. L. Li, H. L. Wang, J. Guo and H. J. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 206803 CrossRef .
S. S. Datta, D. R. Strachan, S. M. Khamis and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1912–1915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 216803 CrossRef .
V. Barone, O. Hod and G. E. Scuseria, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2748–2754 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gunlycke and C. T. White, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 115116 CrossRef .
Y. Sui and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2973–2977 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Liang, Z. L. Fu and S. Y. Chou, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3840–3844 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Levendorf, C. S. Ruiz-Vargas, S. Garg and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4479–4483 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. H. Lee, K. Balasubramanian, R. T. Weitz, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 486–490 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, J. L. Xia and N. J. Tao, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1621–1625 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, J. L. Xia, D. K. Ferry and N. J. Tao, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2571–2574 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Q. Qing, J. L. Xia, J. H. Li and N. J. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9908–9909 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, M. Steiner, Y. Martin, V. Perebeinos, Z. H. Chen, J. C. Tsang and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1883–1888 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Q. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. K. Sood, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Ang, W. Chen, A. T. S. Wee and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14392–14393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, Y. Yamashiro and K. Matsumoto, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3318–3322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Cheng, Q. Li, Z. J. Li, Q. Y. Zhou and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1864 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verdejo, F. Barroso-Bujans, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. A. de Saja and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2221–2226 RSC .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 814–818 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mori, Y. Kikuzawa and H. Takeuchi, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 328–332 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Science, 1998, 280, 1741–1744 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Di, D. C. Wei, G. Yu, Y. Q. Liu, Y. L. Guo and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3289–3293 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Pang, H. N. Tsao, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3488–3491 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, S. Liu, Q. Shen, K. Yan, P. J. Li, J. Xu, D. P. Yu, M. L. Steigerwald, C. Nuckolls, Z. F. Liu and X. F. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Da Chen	Da Chen is currently a lecturer at China Jiliang University, China. He received his MSc in 2004 from Zhejiang University and his PhD in 2008 from University of Science & Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li. His current research interest is mainly focused on the design and synthesis of functional carbonous nanocomposites and semiconductor nanostructures, as well as their applications for energy conversion and storage.
Longhua Tang	Longhua Tang received his MSc in 2008 from East China University of Science and Technology under the supervision of Prof. Yihua Zhu. Currently he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Jinghong Li in Tsinghua University, China. His current research interests are mainly focused on the synthesis and electrochemistry of graphene-based materials.
Jinghong Li	Jinghong Li is currently Cheung Kong Professor in the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University, China. He received his BSc from University of Science and Technology of China, and his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences. He then spent 1997–2001 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of California at Santa Barbara, Clemson University, and Evonyx Inc., New York. He returned CIAC as a Professor of Chemistry in 2001 and moved to the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University in 2004. His current research interests include electroanalytical chemistry, bioelectrochemistry and sensors, physical electrochemistry and interfacial electrochemistry.


Mechanical exfoliation	HOPG	Scotch-tape	Simplicity, high structural and electronic quality	Delicate and time-consuming, low yields	Fundamental research	
10, 20, 21

Epitaxial growth on SiC	4H-/6H- SiC wafer;	Thermal desorption of Si from the SiC substrate under high temperature (>1000 °C) and UHV	Large-scale production, high qualities	High temperature requirement, high cost, non-uniform, low yields	Basic research and graphene electronics	
22–26

CVD epitaxial growth	Hydrocarbon gas (such as CH4)	Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) under high temperature	Large-scale production, high qualities, uniform, high compatibility with current CMOS technology	High temperature requirement, high cost, complicated process, low yields	Basic research and graphene electronics	
27–31

Chemical reduction of graphite oxide	Graphite	Graphite exfoliation and oxidation, subsequent reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide	Facile scalability, high yields, low cost, excellent processability	Structural defects, disruption of the electronic structure of graphene,	Composite materials, electronics, optoelectronics and potential technologically viable devices	
34–45

Organic synthetic protocols	PAHs	A controlled organic chemical reaction	Precisely defined structures, tunable solubility and good processability	The limited size range, complicated synthetic process	Building blocks for electronics and optoelectronics	
62–65


In situ electron beam-irradiation of PMMA nanofibers	PMMA	
In situ electron beam-irradiation	One-step synthesis process in a fine-tuned way, no high temperature	Time-consuming, low yields, non-uniform	Building blocks for electronic and optoelectronics	
66

Arc discharge of graphite	Graphite	Direct current arc discharge	One-step synthesis process, low cost, easy doping, large-scale production	Non-uniform, impure	Novel composite materials	
67–69

Thermal fusion of PAHs	PAHs	Precursor-controlled solid-state pyrolysis	Large-area production, simplicity, low cost	Low quality, non-uniform, high temperature	Building blocks for electronic and optoelectronics	
70

Liquid- phase exfoliation	Graphite	Dispersion and exfoliation of graphite in organic solvents	Direct, simplicity, benign, large-scale production, low-cost, practicability	Time-consuming, impure	Electronic devices, transparent electrodes and conductive composites	
71–73

Conversion of nanodiamond	Nanodiamond	Annealing nanodiamond at high temperature	Simple, direct	High temperature, high cost	Composite materials	
74

Sodium reduction of ethanol	Ethanol and sodium	Reduction of ethanol by sodium metal, followed by pyrolysis of the ethoxide product	Non-graphitic precursors, a gram-scale production, low-cost, practicability	Impure, the danger of violent reaction, low quality	Composite materials	
75

Unzipping of carbon nanotubes	Carbon nanotubes	Solution-based oxidative action of potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid, or plasma etching	Direct, simple, large-scale production, low-cost, high quality (plasma etching)	Time-consuming, complicated process	Electronics and composite materials	
76, 77


 	Fig. 1  (a) The crystal structure of graphene: two sublattices are marked by different colors. (b) Electronic Band structure of graphene: the conductance band touches the valence band at the K and K′ points.	 
	(1-1)
	(1-2)

 	Fig. 2  Quantum Hall effect in graphene as a function of charge-carrier concentration. The peak at n = 0 shows that in high magnetic fields there appears a Landau level at zero energy where no states exist in zero field. The field draws electronic states for this level from both conduction and valence bands. The dashed lines indicate plateaus in σxy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 11)	 

 	Fig. 3  Measurement of the quantum capacitance of graphene using a three-electrode electrochemical configuration. (A) Schematic of the quantum capacitance measurement setup in which a graphene on a silicon/SiO2 substrate is connected to a gold electrode. The potential of the graphene is controlled and varied with respect to a platinum reference electrode (RE) using a three-electrode electrochemical configuration, where VTG is electrochemical gate voltage and CE is counter electrode. The inset is an optical micrograph of the graphene device. (B) Total capacitance (blue line) and quantum capacitance (red line) of graphene as a function of gate potential measured in ionic liquid, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIMPF6). The potential is measured with respect to a platinum quasi-reference electrode. (C) Dependence of quantum capacitance on graphene at different effective charged impurities n* (0, 0.5, 2 and 5 × 1012 cm−2 from bottom to top) in BMIMPF6. (D) Capacitance of graphene measured in NaF aqueous solution at different ionic concentrations (0.1, 0.5 and 1 mM, from bottom to top). The potential is quoted with respect to the widely used NHE (normal hydrogen electrode) reference electrode. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 113)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the band structure and resulting ambipolar field effect in graphene. The insets show its conical low-energy spectrum E(k), indicating changes in the position of the Fermi energy EF with changing gate voltage Vg. Under gate bias, the Fermi level moves above or below the Dirac point to introduce a significant number of free carriers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 1)	 

 	Fig. 5  Graphene, containing a large number of aromatic rings (a), has a zero energy gap between the conduction and valence bands (b) and shows semimetallic behavior with a weak gate effect (c). (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 123)	 


Gas sensors	Graphene form micromechanical cleavage of graphite	NO2, H2O, CO and NH3,	Field-effect measurements	Surface adsorbates-induced conductivity changes	∼ppm	
15


	Al doped graphene	CO	DFT for theoretical analysis	CO absorption-induced conductivity changes	∼ppb theoretically	
131


	Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs)	NH3	First principles for theoretical analysis	NH3 adsorption-induced conductivity changes	∼ppb theoretically	
133


	Chemically converted graphene flakes	NO2, NH3, and DNT	Four-point resistance measurements	Gaseous adsorbates induced-resistance changes	∼ ppm	
134


	Resist residue contaminated graphene	Water vapor, nonanal, octanoic acid, and TMA	Field-effect measurements	Gaseous adsorbates-induced conductivity changes	∼ppb	
135

Biosensors	CMGs	Bacterium, DNA	Electrical measurements	Adsorbates induced-charge carriers density	∼single biomolecule	
136


	Chemically rGO	Free bases of DNA (G, A, T, C), H2O2, NADH, glucose, ethanol	Electrochemical measurements	Electrocatalytic behaviors of electroactive compounds, direct electrochemisty of glucose oxidase, or ADH	∼10 μM	
139


	CMGs	Dopamine	Electrochemical measurements	Electrochemical responses of graphene to target molecules	∼5 μM	
141


	Ionic liquid- functionalized graphene	NADH and ethanol	Electrochemical measurements	Direct electrochemisty of ADH	∼5 μM	
142


	Exfoliated graphite nanoplatelets/ PVP-protected graphene/ electrochemically rGO/ CMGs	Glucose	Electrochemical measurements	Direct electrochemisty of glucose oxidase	∼10 μM	
143–147

Chemical sensors	Nafion–graphene nanocomposite film	Cd2+ and Pb2+	DPASV analysis	Electrochemical responses of graphene to target molecules	0.02 μg L−1	
148, 149


	CMGs	Paracetamol	Electrochemical measurements	Electrochemical responses of graphene to paracetamol	30 nM	
156


 	Fig. 6  Detection of individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene-based device. (a) Concentration of chemically induced charge carriers (Δn) in single-layer graphene exposed to different concentrations (C) of NO2. Upper inset: Scanning electron micrograph of this device. (b) Changes in resistivity (ρ) at zero B caused by graphene's exposure to various gases diluted in concentration to 1 ppm. The positive (negative) sign of changes is chosen here to indicate electron (hole) doping. Region I: the device is in vacuum before its exposure; II: exposure to a 5l volume of a diluted chemical; III: evacuation of the experimental set-up; and IV: annealing at 150 °C. (c) Examples of changes in Hall resistivity observed near the neutrality point (|n| < 1011 cm−2) during adsorption of strongly diluted NO2 (blue curve) and its desorption in vacuum at 50 °C (red curve). The green curve is a reference—the same device thoroughly annealed and then exposed to pure He. The curves are for a three-layer device in B = 10 T. For the blue curve, the device was exposed to 1 ppm. of NO2 leaking at a rate of ≈ 10−3 mbar l s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 15)	 

 	Fig. 7  Electrochemical sensing and biosensing platform based on chemically reduced graphene oxide (CR-GO). (A and B) SEM images of the chemically reduced graphene oxide modified glassy carbon (CR-GO/GC) electrode; (C and D) Detection of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of oligonucleotides including the sequence from codon 248 of the p53 gene at the CR-GO/GC electrode: (C) Differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of wild-type oligonucleotide 1 and its single-base mismatch 2 (G → A mutation), (D) Subtraction of the DPVs of 1 and 2; (E) Current-time curves for glucose oxidase (GOD)/CR-GO/GC (j1), GOD/graphite/GC (k1), and GOD/GC electrodes (l1) at −0.20 V with successive addition of 1 mM glucose. Inset: calibration curves for glucose at GOD/CR-GO/GC (m1), GOD/graphite/GC (n1), and GOD/GC electrodes (o1). Electrolyte: air-saturated and magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS without being purged by nitrogen; (F) Current-time curves for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)/CR-GO/GC (at +0.45 V, j2), ADH/graphite/GC (at +0.65 V, k2), and ADH/graphite/GC electrodes (at +0.65 V, l2) with successive addition of 1 mM ethanol. Inset: calibration curves for ethanol at ADH/CR-GO/GC (m2), ADH/graphite/GC (n2), and ADH/graphite/GC electrodes (o2). Electrolyte: magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS containing 10 mM NAD+. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 139)	 

 	Fig. 8  Glucose oxidase (GOD)–graphene–chitosan modified electrode for direct electrochemistry and glucose sensing. (A) SEM image of graphene–chitosan composite; (B) Cyclic voltammograms of the modified glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs) with (a–d) chitosan, GOD-chitosan, graphene-chitosan, and GOD–graphene–chitosan films in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) with N2-saturated at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1; (C) Cyclic voltammograms of the modified GCE with GOD–graphene–chitosan film in PBS with 0.1 M KCl at different scan rates: 20, 50, 80, 100, 150, 200, 250, and 300 mV s−1 (inset: the plot of the peak current vs. scan rates); (D) Cyclic voltammograms of GOD–graphene–chitosan/GCE in PBS with 0.1 M KCl at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 in the presence of different concentrations of glucose (a) N2-saturated without glucose, (b) O2-saturated without glucose, and (c–f) with glucose of 3.0, 5.0, 8.0, and 10.0 mM. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 147)	 

 	Fig. 9  Electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) of partially oxidized highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surfaces and of graphene oxide (GO) nanoparticles (NPs). (A) Schematic illustration of ECL of GO NPs with addition of coreactant (tri-n-propylamine, TPrA). (B) ECL intensity vs. potential: (black curve 1) 0.1 M NaClO4 and PBS only; (red curve 2) with addition of 13 mM TPrA; (blue curve 3) expanded scale of ECL intensity of curve 1. Potential scan rate = 20 mV s−1 at an HOPG electrode (area = 0.07 cm2). (C) ECL intensity vs. potential: (black curve) 0.1 M NaClO4 and PBS only; (red curve) additional 13 mM TPrA; (blue curve) additional 6 ppm GO suspension. Potential scan rate = 20 mV s−1 at a Pt electrode (area = 0.07 cm2). (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 151)	 

 	Fig. 10  Electrochemical and electrocatalytic properties of reduced graphene sheet films (rGSFs). (A) SEM image of rGSFs on a glassy carbon sheet; (B) Cyclic voltammograms for the bare glassy carbon (GC) electrode (dashed line) and graphene-modified GC electrode (solid line) in 1.0 M KCl solution between 0 V and 0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1); (C) Typical cyclic voltammograms obtained at rGSF/GC electrodes in 0.10 M KOH solution saturated with Ar (dashed lines) or O2 (solid lines) (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1); (D) Cyclic voltammograms in 0.1 M pH 6.8 PBS containing 1 mM β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) at bare GC (dashed line) and rGSF/GC electrodes (solid line) (Scan rate, 100 mV s−1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 89)	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrocatalytic performance for methanol oxidation of Pt/graphene nanocomposites. (A) Scheme of synthesis of Pt/graphene nanocomposites: (1) oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide (GO); (2) exfoliation of graphite oxide in water by sonication; (3) addition of Pt ions to GO solution; and (4) chemical reduction of GO and Pt ions leading to the formation of Pt/graphene composites. (B) TEM images of Pt/graphene composites. (C) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt/graphene in nitrogen saturated aqueous solution of 0.5 M H2SO4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (D) Cyclic voltammograms of Pt/graphene and Pt/Vulcan (Vulcan, one kind of carbon materials from Cabot corp., specific surface area of 237 m2 g−1) in nitrogen saturated aqueous solution of 0.5 M H2SO4 containing 0.5 M CH3OH at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 159)	 

 	Fig. 12  The synthesis of perylene-coated graphene decorated with Au nanoparticles and its electrocatalysis toward oxygen reduction. (A) Illustration of the preparation of chemically converted graphene (CCG)/3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic acid (PTCA)/Au-ionic liquid (Au-IL) composites (CCG/PTCA/Au-IL). (B) TEM images of CCG/PTCA/Au-IL composites at low magnification. (C) Cyclic voltammetry grams of CCG/PTCA/Au-IL-modified GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2 (solid) and N2 (dotted); CCG/PTCA-modified GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2 (dashed). Inset: bare GC electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution saturated with O2. Scan rate: 0.05 V s−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 161)	 

 	Fig. 13  Enhanced cyclic performance and lithium storage capacity of SnO2/graphene nanoporous electrodes with three-dimensionally delaminated flexible structure. (A) Schematic illustration for the synthesis and the structure of SnO2/graphene nanosheets (GNS). (B) Charge/discharge profile for SnO2/GNS. (B) Cyclic performances for (a) bare SnO2 nanoparticle, (b) graphite, (c) GNS, and (d) SnO2/GNS. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173)	 

 	Fig. 14  Graphene-based supercapacitors. (A) Scheme of the assembly of supercapacitors from chemically modified graphene (CMG). (B) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) plots of CMG-based supercapacitors with KOH electrolyte, and (C) tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate in acetonitrile (TEABF4AN). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 95)	 

 	Fig. 15  Transparent, conductive graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC). (A) Schematic illustration of DSSC using graphene film as electrode, the four layers from bottom to top are Au, dye-sensitized heterojunction, compact TiO2, and graphene film. (B) Transmittance of a ca. 10 nm thick graphene film (red), in comparison with that of ITO (black) and FTO (blue). (C) I–V curve of graphene-based cell (black) and the FTO-based cell (red), illuminated under AM solar light (1 sun). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 184)	 

 	Fig. 16  Electrochemical gate-controlled charge transport in graphene in ionic liquid and aqueous solution. (A) Schematic diagram of electrochemical gate tuned graphene FET devices. Inset is the graphene–solution interface capacitance model. (B) Transport characteristic of graphene FET that is conducted in ionic liquid (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate). Inset: optical micrograph of a graphene transistor. (C) Conductivity vs. carrier density trace corresponding to (A) in ionic liquid. (D) Conductivity comparison in aqueous solution containing different concentrations of NaF (0.01, 0.1, and 1M, respectively). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 210)	 

 	Fig. 17  Reduced graphene oxide-based sensors for gaseous molecules: (a) graphene oxide; (b) scheme of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) devices; (c) real-time conductance response to 10 s vapor pulses of increasing concentration for a rGO network sensor; (d) the normalized response ΔG/G0 of an rGO device to 10 s doses of increasing concentration of hydrogen cyanide (HCN) in nitrogen, in which the minimal detectable level (MDL) is defined as that concentration of vapor which gives rise to a change in conductance ΔG that is exactly three standard deviations from G0 (i.e., a signal-to-noise ratio of three). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 212)	 

 	Fig. 18  Electrolyte-gated graphene field effect transistors (FETs) for detecting pH and protein adsorption. (A) Scheme of electrolyte-gated graphene FETs for detecting pH and protein adsorption; (B) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for electrolyte-gated graphene FETs; (C) Conductance versus time data of a graphene FET for pH values from 4.0 to 8.2; (D) Conductance versus time for electrical monitoring of exposure to various bovine serum albumin (BSA) concentrations. Dashed lines indicate the average conductance. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 215)	 

 	Fig. 19  Patterned graphene source/drain (S/D) electrodes from solution-processed graphite oxide films for organic field-effect transistors (OFETs). (A) Schematic illustration of the approach to fabrication of patterned graphene electrodes; (B) Output characteristics for various gate biases VG and (C) transfer characteristics at a source–drain bias VSD = −60 V of OFETs employing patterned 60 nm thick graphene S/D electrodes annealed at 1000 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 223)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
