A perspective on the production of dye-sensitized solar modules  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE01724B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01724B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3952-3981A perspective on the production of dye-sensitized solar modules

        
          
            Azhar 
            Fakharuddin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rajan 
            Jose
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Thomas M. 
            Brown
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Francisco 
            Fabregat-Santiago
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Juan 
            Bisquert
          
          
        
      *cd
aNanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Faculty of Industrial Sciences & Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 26300, Malaysia
bC.H.O.S.E. (Centre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy), Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome-Tor Vergata, via del Politecnico 1, 00133, Rome, Italy
cPhotovoltaic and Optoelectronic Devices Group, Departament de Física, Universitat Jaume I, 12071 Castelló, Spain
dDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      4th June 2014
    , Accepted 8th September 2014First published on 8th September 2014AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are well researched globally due to their potential as low-cost photovoltaic (PV) devices especially suited for building and automobile integrated PV (BIPV, AIPV) and portable or indoor light harvesting applications. Since 1991, large monetary and intellectual investments have been made to develop DSCs into deployable technologies, creating a wealth of knowledge about nano-interfaces and devices through an increasing number of research reports. In response to these investments, the dawn of the new millennium witnessed the emergence of a corporate sector of DSC development. Advances in their design, their incorporation on flexible substrates, the development of solid state modules, their enhanced stability in outdoor environments, and their scalable fabrication tools and techniques have allowed DSCs to move from the laboratory to real-life applications. Although photoconversion efficiencies are not on a par with commercially available CIGS or single crystalline silicon solar cells, they possess many features that compel the further development of DSC modules, including transparency, light weight, flexibility, conformability, workability under low-light conditions, and easy integration in buildings as solar windows. In fact, DSC panels have been shown to deliver even more electricity than their silicon and thin film counterparts of similar power ratings when exposed to low light operating conditions due to their workability in such conditions; thus, they are potential market leaders in BIPV and indoor light harvesting photovoltaic technology. However, large area dye-solar modules lack in performance compared to their laboratory scale devices and also suffer from long term stability issues. Herein, we discuss the main factors behind their inferior photovoltaic performance and identify possible opportunities for the design of more efficient DSC modules.Azhar FakharuddinAzhar Fakharuddin obtained his bachelor's degree in electronic engineering from Mehran University of Engineering & Technology, Pakistan and Master's degree in electronic engineering from Universiti Malaysia Pahang (UMP). He is currently pursuing doctoral research at the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory of UMP on the scalability issues of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). His work is primarily focused on investigating the charge transport parameters while upscaling DSCs and exploring appropriate device designs and material architectures to improve charge collection efficiency in large area photoelectrodes. His research interests also include the synthesis and characterisation of metal oxide semiconductors for organic photovoltaics, particularly dye and perovskite-sensitized solar cells/modules. Email: E-mail: clife03@yahoo.com.Rajan JoseRajan Jose is a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the Faculty of Industrial Sciences and Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang (UMP). He supervises the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory in the UMP. He conducted his doctoral research at the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Trivandrum, India and received a PhD degree in 2002 for his work on nanostructured perovskite ceramics for microwave and superconducting electronics. He has worked at various capacities at the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (India), AIST (Japan), Toyota Technological Institute (Japan), and the National University of Singapore (Singapore) before joining UMP. He has published over 100 papers in SCI journals. He holds over 20 patents nationally and internationally. His h-index is 29 and his g-index is currently 50. His research interests include nanostructured materials and renewable energy devices. E-mail: E-mail: rjose@ump.edu.my; /joserajan@gmail.com.Thomas M. BrownThomas M. Brown investigated polymer OLEDs for his PhD at the Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge. From 2001–2005 he developed E-paper as a Senior Engineer with Plastic Logic Ltd. In 2005 he was recipient of a “Re-entry” Fellowship awarded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research and is an Associate Professor at the Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome-Tor Vergata. Cofounder of the Centre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy, his current research is in dye-sensitized, perovskite, and polymer solar cells. He is on the Advisory Board of Dyepower and is the author of over 100 publications including 16 patents. E-mail: E-mail: thomas.brown@uniroma2.it.Francisco Fabregat-SantiagoFrancisco Fabregat-Santiago is an Associate Professor in the Physics Department of Universitat Jaume I de Castelló (Spain). He is an expert in electro-optical characterisation of devices and particularly known by his works on the use of impedance spectroscopy to model, analyse and interpret the electrical characteristics (charge accumulation, transfer reactions and transport) of devices and films including ZnO and TiO2 nanostructured films (nanocolloids, nanorods and nanotubes), dye-sensitized and quantum dot solar cells, electrochromic materials and liquid and solid state hole conductors. His latest research is focused on perovskite solar cells, photoinduced water splitting, microbial fuel cells and bio-sensors. He has published 85 papers that have accumulated more than 4000 citations with an h-index of 31. Email: E-mail: fran.fabregat@fca.uji.es.Juan BisquertJuan Bisquert is a professor of applied physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló, Spain (http://www.elp.uji.es/jb.php). He conducts experimental and theoretical research on nanoscale devices for the production and storage of clean energies. His main topics of interest are materials and processes in perovskite solar cells, nanostructured solar cells, solar fuel production, and lithium batteries. He has developed the application of measurement techniques and physical modelling of nanostructured energy devices that relate the device operation to the elementary steps taking place at the nanoscale: charge transfer, carrier transport, chemical reaction, etc., especially in the field of impedance spectroscopy, as well as general device models. He has authored 280 peer reviewed papers, has an h-index of 53, and is currently a Senior Editor of the Journal of Physical Chemistry and a member of Editorial Board of Energy and Environmental Science, and ChemElectroChem. E-mail: E-mail: bisquert@fca.uji.es.

Broader context
Dye-sensitized solar cells represent a sustainable cheap solar electricity domain; working under the framework of nanotechnology, these modern devices have opened up new opportunities for economic development. This article aims to cater to the need for a diverse readership from academic researchers for an overview of progress made in developing dye solar science to an adapted technology and subsequent “need driven” studies to solve critical issues to entrepreneurs to identify key opportunities in the dye-solar business, to corporations to obtain an overview of the current state of affairs in dye-solar technology. We address many questions relevant to dye-solar research, development, and business: how far are the state-of-the art dye-sensitized solar modules from exhibiting characteristics of a matured technology to guarantee its promise as a medium for cheap solar electricity? What is the size of the industrial sector, and what are their core businesses? What are the different designs employed in dye-solar modules? What are the areas requiring innovations to further develop dye-solar modules? These studies lead us to conclude that, at the moment, dye-solar modules appear as an undergraduate student who offers enormous possibilities, although many problems are yet to be solved before being considered as mature!

1. Introduction—renewable energy scenario
The development of a primary supply of clean and sustainable energy is a top global issue. A great portion of today's energy demand (>85%) is fulfilled by fossil fuel-based resources at the expense of global warming and the consequent severe changes in climate.1 The statistics of increasing energy demand and depleting fossil fuels are alarming: (i) the energy demand is expected to increase two-fold by 2050; and (ii) due to depleting fossil fuel reserves, an additional energy demand equal to today's total energy consumption is expected in the next three decades.2,3 Renewable energy resources such as solar and wind are potentially cost effective, abundant in nature, and evenly distributed across the globe; therefore, they have the potential to help alleviate this energy gap.4 These resources also eliminate the environmental issues associated with the use of fossil fuels. Among renewable energy resources, solar energy alone has the potential to meet the world's primary energy demand, which would require covering less than 0.4% of our planet's surface with 15% efficient solar panels.5 Alternatively, using 25% efficient solar panels, a solar farm with an area of ∼400 km × 400 km in the Sahara desert would meet the projected energy demand. Above all, energy from sunlight is 200 times more abundant than all other renewable energy resources combined.3
The photovoltaic effect was discovered in the 19th century by Edmond Becquerel. Subsequently, solar energy appears not only as a promising alternative energy resource, but also as a better off-grid choice in remote applications and portable electronics. Solar cell technology can be divided into three types: (i) crystalline silicon solar cells; (ii) thin film solar cells (CuInGaSe2, CdTe, a-Si:H, etc.), which are called thin because their working electrode comprises much thinner films (∼1 μm) than that of the first generation (∼350 μm); and (iii) molecular absorber solar cells, in which molecules or inorganic clusters are the primary absorbers, including polymer solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), quantum dot solar cells, and the recently-developed perovskite solar cells. Over half a century of research in silicon-based solar cells, which currently dominate the photovoltaic market, have resulted in an installed capacity of >40 GW, up from 1.5 GW in 2000 (Fig. 1).6 As a result, solar cells (mostly silicon-based) currently contribute to energy demands in peak hours. In Germany, ∼5.3% of daily demand is fulfilled by solar electricity; this value increases to 20% on longer sunny days.4,7 Commercial modules of silicon-based solar cells (first generation) with efficiencies (η) of up to ∼20% are commercially available. On the other hand, thin film solar cells (second generation) based on CuInGaSe2 (CIGS) have achieved η >20% on a laboratory scale,8,9 and commercial modules with η ∼ 15% are commercially available.10 Despite the rapidly increasing global installations, many of the first and second generation solar cells still suffer from drawbacks such as long payback, relatively high costs associated with the extreme purity requirement for the active material, scarcity of materials such as indium and silver, and low working capability in cloudy conditions or shaded regions.4,11 Additionally, due to their opacity (for example, silicon solar cells), these solar cells are not an option for integration into buildings. These drawbacks necessitate the third generation photovoltaics, which aim to resolve many of the issues of the first two generations. Although the initial development of these new photovoltaics involved delivering applications and building integrated photovoltaics (BIPV; e.g., automotive integrated photovoltaics, AIPV), further reducing their costs remains an important target as the cost of silicon solar cells has significantly dropped in recent years. However, the third generation devices currently generally suffer from lower η and short term outdoor stability compared to the other two well-established photovoltaic generations.
 Fig. 1  (a) A chart showing the paradigm shift in the share of renewable energy sources (data collected from ref. 12 and 13). The values are in million tons of oil equivalents (mtoe). 
The purpose of this article is to review the progress made in deploying a third generation solar cell – the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) – from the laboratory scale to real life application. A photoconversion efficiency comparable to that of market-leading CIGS or single crystalline silicon solar cells is yet to be achieved by DSCs; however, their positive inherent features such as workability under low-light conditions, transparency, flexibility, conformability, superior performance under low-level or indoor light and easy integration in buildings as solar windows will facilitate their market entry. This article is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the working principle, various components and types of laboratory scale DSCs. Section 3 compares the outstanding features of DSC technology that facilitate its entry into the photovoltaic market, and Section 4 discusses their worldwide business growth. Sections 5–9 elaborate on the developments in dye-solar modules (DSMs). Section 10 critically analyses the major factors in the inferior performance of DSMs and introduces alternative designs for these modules. Research on the long term stability of DSMs is reviewed in Section 11, while Section 12 talks about the standards required to advance DSCs from the laboratory to successful commercial application. In Section 13, we conclude our observations and make recommendations for future research on high performance and cost effective DSMs.
2. Dye-sensitized solar cells
Among the various types of 3rd generation solar cells, DSCs are promising as they are cost effective, relatively easy to fabricate on large panels, lightweight and flexible; they also offer transparency compared to the first two generations of solar cells.14–16 Due to their unique transparency,17 DSCs can easily be integrated into BIPVs and AIPVs; however, outdoor long term stability is yet to be achieved. DSCs have also shown superior performance under indoor lighting18 and have been developed extensively on flexible substrates.19 Many reports have been published on the phenomenology of photovoltaic action in DSCs and on the various materials used.20–22 The DSC is a photoelectrochemical device in which the photocurrent is generated at a junction between a dye-anchored metal oxide semiconductor and a hole-conducting electrolyte upon light absorption. Various materials and their interfaces constituting the DSCs along with the photochemical process are presented in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the working mechanism of a DSC. N719 and Z907 are ruthenium-based dyes. ECO3+, EFc/Fc+, and  are the electrochemical potentials of the cobalt, ferrocene and iodide electrolytes, respectively, measured with respect to a standard hydrogen electrode (NHE). The working electrode (WE) is a mesoporous film of a metal oxide semiconductor (MOS, usually TiO2) with a thickness of ∼3–20 μm coated on a conducting glass substrate. The film is then conjugated with a molecular absorber (dye); a junction is made by putting the film in contact with an electrolyte followed by sealing with a conducting counter electrode (CE) equipped with a catalyst layer. Upon absorption of sunlight, the dye oxidizes and injects the photogenerated electrons into the MOS, which are collected at the WE. The oxidized dye is regenerated by accepting electrons from the redox couple. The electron travels to the CE via an external circuit and completes the cycle. Fractions of absorbed energy are lost at the dye–TiO2 interface (overpotential #1) and the dye–electrolyte interface (overpotential #2). The rest, i.e., {absorbed energy − (overpotential #1 + overpotential #2)}, contribute to the open circuit voltage (VOC). The redox potentials and HOMO level of the dyes are taken from ref. 23 and 24, and b & c are the chemical structures of the dyes Z907 and N719, respectively. Figures adapted from ref. 25 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
DSCs are promising due to their low cost fabrication compared to the first two generations of solar cells; however, their η is much lower than commercially available thin film and silicon solar modules. Although η values up to ∼13% have been reported in DSCs,26 the certified value is ∼11.9% for devices built on rigid substrates (fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass)9 and ∼7.6% for those built on flexible substrates (polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/indium tin oxide (ITO)).27 As shown in Fig. 3, independent certifications for other types of DSCs such as solid state DSCs (s-DSCs), p-type DSCs (p-DSCs), and tandem DSCs (T-DSCs) are yet to be seen. In view of commercial applications, the outdoor stability of solar panels is crucial in addition to their η value. For example, amorphous silicon (∼10%) and organic thin film modules (6.8%) with η values much lower than the certified value of DSMs (8.2%) are commercially available due to their significantly higher lifetimes (∼20 years for thin film modules).28 Although DSCs have shown significant stabilities in indoor accelerated testing,29,30 the lifetimes of liquid electrolyte-based DSCs (l-DSCs) are far lower in outdoor conditions due to their high volatility. Alternatively, s-DSCs have been developed in order to overcome some of the issues related to the liquid electrolytes. Future research on s-DSCs will be dedicated to solving their primary issues such as poor pore filling (infiltration of the hole transport material into mesoporous MOS), inferior hole mobility and hole diffusion length in these devices. The T-DSCs are also promising; however, their performance is limited due to the low voltage of p-type photocathodes.31 A breakthrough in the third generation solar cells is the emergence of perovskite-sensitized solid state solar cells (PSCs), which employ an organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite absorber (commonly CH3NH3PbX3, X = Br, Cl, or I) on a very thin MOS layer (<1 μm).32–37 Although PSCs initially emerged as a class of DSCs, they are likely to be considered a new class of solar cells. Confirmed η values as high as ∼17.9% have been reported in PSCs, which represents a four-fold improvement in just four years since the first report.9 These PSCs are another emerging area; nevertheless, the replacement of lead (Pb) with some non-toxic material may presumably increase their market acceptability.38 Results on the scalable fabrication of PSCs have recently been reported across the globe, with η values reaching 8.7%.39,40
 Fig. 3  Efficiency comparison of various types of DSCs. The stars show certified efficiency values of corresponding devices. The confirmed η for various devices is reported in ref. 9. 
3. DSCs versus other PV technologies
One of the major drawbacks of conventional silicon PV technology is the amount of solar irradiation required for its start-up operation (200–300 watt per m2); this amount increases to 800–900 watt per m2 for peak performance.41 Despite the fact that the certified η in DSMs (8.2%)76 is far lower than that achieved in the first two generation solar cells (∼15–20%), their working capability in low light conditions and transparency place them at the forefront for applications such as BIPVs. This exclusive feature of DSMs not only increases their operating hours, but also allows them to be deployed in shaded regions, corners or bends in buildings. A comparative study by Dyesol Ltd. revealed that DSMs deliver 65–300% higher power output on cloudy days compared to silicon and thin film solar cells (Fig. 4a and b).42 Their analysis revealed that the performance of DSMs is higher on days when the solar irradiance is <300 kW m−2. In another six month comparative study by Aisin Seiki CO. Ltd.,43 DSMs (64 cell modules of size 10 × 10 cm2) showed 10% increased performance on a hot sunny day and 20% increased performance on a cloudy day compared to single crystalline Si-modules. The study also demonstrated that DSMs perform better in midmorning and midevening, widening their available performing hours. A similar performance was demonstrated in Japan in a world solar car rally (July 2008); 2 × 8 m2 DSMs (developed by Taiyo Yuden Co. Ltd.) were deployed on a test race car and achieved a speed of 11.8 km h−1 in cloudy weather, a speed similar to the 12.5 km h−1 achieved in sunny weather.43 These reports highlight the exclusive features of DSMs and their capability to work in low light conditions to overcome the limitations of conventional PV technology. Moreover, a recent study by Zardetto et al.44 showed that when turned into a curved shape, DSMs on flexible substrates outperform flat devices, further strengthening their potential application diversity. The study reported ∼10% higher power output in the flexible device built on a metallic substrate compared to a flat one when normalised to their footprint. These results are encouraging for the potential applications of DSMs in low light areas and conditions. For example, in zero energy buildings, DSMs can be deployed as smart windows to simultaneously add to the aesthetic quality while producing solar electricity for almost the entire day.
 Fig. 4  Performance comparison of DSCs with other photovoltaic technologies on (a) a sunny day and (b) a cloudy day (data courtesy of Dr Damion Milliken of Dyesol Ltd.). 
Unlike the first two generation solar cells, which require clean rooms and vacuum-based device fabrication facilities, DSMs can be fabricated in less demanding conditions. To further ease their fabrication, researchers have successfully demonstrated low temperature (<150 °C), binder-free coating processes on plastic substrates, reporting η values as high as ∼8% for single cells27 and ∼3–4.5% for DSMs.45,46
The performance of DSCs improves from room temperature to ∼40 °C (ref. 47) because electrolyte viscosity decreases with increasing temperature, which meliorates the ionic transport inside the MOS.48,49 Conversely, the performance of silicon-based solar cells drops at elevated temperatures as the dark recombination current increases with temperature.50,51
3.1 Manufacturing cost of DSMs
In addition to the applicability of DSMs in low-light and flexible conditions, their deployability strongly depends on the module manufacturing cost and associated economics. Table 1 shows a comparison of manufacturing costs normalised with respect to the peak output power compiled from various sources. Kalowekamo et al.52 estimated the manufacturing cost for DSMs and compared it with first two generation solar cells. In their study, the estimated DSM cost varies from 0.5$/WP (η ∼ 5%) to 1$/WP (η ∼ 15%). The DSMs provide solar electricity at a cost significantly cheaper than the first two generations of solar cells (Table 1). Fujikura Ltd., a DSM manufacturer, reports that the manufacturing cost can be reduced to 0.4$/WP provided that an annual production level of 100 MW is achieved.53 The lower cost of DSMs can be attributed to the cheaper material cost and easy fabrication. In addition, the photoelectrode MOSs such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2 are very abundant, unlike indium, which is used in some of the thin film solar cells.4
Table 1 Cost/WP and η comparison of various types of solar cells/modules; the values are taken from ref. 28 unless stated otherwise. Certified efficiencies are marked with a ‘*’. * Market prices of silicon panels have dropped in recent years to as low as ∼0.7$/Wp; however, such prices are from few producers, and the practicality and sustainability of such prices are yet to be determined (http://www.nyse.com)




Device

η in cells (%)

η in modules (%)
Module manufacturing cost/Wp ($)




Multijunction (III–V)
44.7* (FhG-ISE)
—
—


Si
24.7 (UNSW)
14.5 (ref. 54)
∼0.7*–1.29 (ref. 55)


CIGS
19.8* (NREL)
18.7* (FhG-ISE)
1.13 (ref. 55)


Si (amorphous)
10.1* (AIST)
—
—


CdTe
17.3* (NREL, ref. 55)
11.7
0.74


Organic PVs
10 (ref. 55)
6.8*
0.75–2 (ref. 56)


Dye solar cells
11.9* (SHARP)
8.2* (SHARP)
0.5–0.94 (ref. 52 and 57)


Perovskite solar cells
17.9*9
8.7 (Planar structure)% (ref. 40)
NA


5.1% (Monolithic modules)39


QDSCs
7 (ref. 58)
Not developed yet
NA




The major contribution (50–60%) to the manufacturing cost of DSMs arises primarily from dyes, electrolyte, and substrates.57,59 The materials for DSMs are still produced on a research scale; the cost would be significantly reduced for commercial scale production.

Fig. 5 shows manufacturing cost data for a series of monolithic DSMs (90 cm × 60 cm, power output 50 WP m−2). These statistics were compiled by one of the world's leading DSM developers, Solaronix Ltd., for an annual production of ∼20 MWP per year.59 The DSM manufacturing cost was estimated to be ∼0.97 Euro/WP for η ∼ 7% and process output yield ∼90%. Notably, two thirds of the total cost arose from materials: dyes and electrolytes contributed one third, sealing and interconnections cost more than one third (37%), and substrates cost ∼17% of the material cost (∼22%, ∼25% and ∼12% of the total cost, respectively). As suggested by Hashmi et al.,57 a substantial reduction in this price is possible by replacing some of the expensive material components (i.e., replacing glass with plastic will reduce substrates cost by one third, although one must consider the additional costs of additional barrier layers). Replacing FTO by stainless steel sheets can save up to 80% of the substrate cost (9% of the total cost). Similarly, although s-DSCs offer fewer sealing difficulties than l-DSCs, they are still vulnerable to moisture and oxygen permeation.
 Fig. 5  Estimation of the projected share to overall cost during large scale manufacturing (left panel) and the cost for various materials used to fabricate 20-MW DSMs (right panel). Data taken from ref. 59. 
4. Dye-solar modules: from laboratory to commercial development
After the single cell η was reported in 1991, the same group reported the first DSMs in 1996.60 In their module, six DSCs with areas of ∼3.3 cm2 were serially connected on an FTO substrate to achieve an η of ∼5.3%. Since then, a number of studies worldwide have reported the development of various types of DSMs with various designs including series, parallel or their combination. A survey of the literature shows that efforts in the development of DSMs are rather unimpressive; only one research paper on DSMs is published for each hundred papers on laboratory devices. Fig. 6a shows a summary of research papers and patents published on DSCs and DSMs. A study on the involvement of different countries in DSMs was also made and is shown in Fig. 6b; one can see that, in order of descending contribution, China, Japan, Korea, Taiwan and the USA are the leaders in DSM fabrication.
 Fig. 6  (a) Research trends in DSCs: papers published on single cells (bottom panel); publications on DSMs (middle panel); and patents registered globally (top panel; data is taken from ref. 61). (b) Trends show the affiliation of various countries working on large area development of DSCs. Data is taken from Scopus in January, 2014 using the keywords ‘dye-sensitized solar modules’ and ‘large area dye-sensitized solar cells’. 
4.1 Dye-solar cell/modules as electrochromic windows
For residential and commercial users, a significant portion (10–30%) of the peak electricity demand arises from overheating caused by glass windows that allow heat radiation to enter a building.62 This share can be reduced by (i) controlling the optical transparency of the windows to block heat radiation from entering the buildings and (ii) converting the passive windows into smart windows that can harvest the solar light into electricity.63–65 Towards the second strategy, an energy storage smart window, also called an electrochromic device (ECD), that simultaneously harvests and stores solar energy by integrating two electrochemical devices (DSCs and supercapacitors) has been developed.66,67 The ECD can be divided into two parts: photovoltaic and EC components separated by an ionic conductor with negligible electronic conductivity to avoid short circuits between them. Such devices are self-powered, unlike the conventional ECD windows, which need an energy supply for operation. The window changes from a bleached to a coloured state due to the reversible reaction in the electrolyte upon light absorption.68
Self-powered switchable devices can be made in two ways: (i) photoelectrochromic window (PECW), which changes its transmittance using the electrical output of the DSC to block heat radiation (Fig. 7);69 and (ii) smart energy storage window, where the primary concern is to produce electricity and store it in an integrated supercapacitor.66 The primary requirement for PECWs is an electrochemical material that changes its transmittance with applied potential. Various metal oxides (WO3, NiO, IrO2, and Nb2O5) and polymers such as polyaniline and poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene) have been employed as EC materials.70–73 In a recent study, Yang et al.69 reported a lowering of transmittance from 47 to 9% upon electrochemical reaction employing PECW (η ∼ 1.2%). In another study, an η of up to ∼2% was reported for an Al-doped boron oxide-based PECW due to the conductivity of the dopant used.74
 Fig. 7  Switching sequence of an ECW. Figure adapted from ref. 75. 
As the self-powered switchable devices need to be highly transparent, the films should be made very thin. These devices usually consist of three sequentially coated layers and require precise fabrication to avoid short circuit.76,77 Thin silicon solar modules are commercially available as switchable windows with η ∼ 5%;78 however, DSC-based ECDs are still in the laboratory stage. There are rare reports on employing T-DSCs as switchable or smart windows; however, the work is still at the laboratory scale.79
4.2 Emergence of dye-solar module businesses
DSMs have now reached a level of deployment as a photovoltaic device. Table 2 shows a list of industrial sectors that have emerged to develop this photovoltaic technology, their inferred core business and key achievements. Owing to the transparency of DSCs and their excellent performance in low levels of light, the potential key venues for installing DSCs are indoor electronic applications and BIPVs (Fig. 8a–d),80 as their efficiency vs. transparency performance can be tuned.17 DSCs work well in diffused or low light and are less affected by the angle of incidence, with efficiencies that increase with angle of light incidence (up to ∼50°) by ∼10–16%.81 Moreover, BIPVs have an advantage over centralized solar power generation because the electricity generated is consumed in place, avoiding transmission line losses and infrastructure costs. DSMs with active areas of ∼200 m2 were installed as windows of a green building in April, 2014 at the École Polytechnique Fédérale De Lausanne (EFPL) campus, Switzerland (Fig. 8a and b).82 These panels are estimated to be able to generate ∼2000 kW h of annual solar electricity. The transparent panels are in five different colours (representing a desirable unique feature of DSCs) and were developed by Solaronix. This massive production is an important milestone for the commercial deployment of DSCs, although a number of issues including the lifetime of these panels under operating conditions are yet to be fully addressed.
Table 2 Global commercial companies that develop dye-solar cells/modules. The information is inferred from their websites/published reports on websites and (ref. 43), unless stated otherwise




No
Company
Affiliation
Core business
Major achievements in DSCs




1
S Samsung SDI
Korea
Electronic devices such as LCDs, mobile phones, and more recently, energy storage and harvesting devices
Dye solar panels for BIPVs, smart windows with integrated storage, tandem DSPs


2
SHARP
Japan
Electronic products
Certified η of 11.9% in single cells by tuning haze effect, certified highest module PCE (8.2%) in W-type module, cost effective back contact DSCs (η ∼ 7.1%) with only one substrate, 8.1% efficient quasi-s-DSCs employing a polymer electrolyte


3
G24 Power
UK
Solar power, especially third generation PVs
Started DSC plant in 2007 (18000 sq. ft), flexible waterproof bags, commercial applications for indoor electronics, roll-to-roll processing capability of 800 m in ∼3 h, specialized in indoor electronics such as key-boards, mouses, e-book covers, solar bags, MP3 players, etc.


4
Konarka
USA
Spinoff company of MIT for DSCs
Licensed its DSC IP to G24


5
Dyesol
Australia
DSCs materials and commercial development
DSMs, BIPVs, integration of DSCs in roof materials (in process), s-DSMs and f-DSMs. Developing DSMs and s-DSMs


6
Solaronix
Switzerland
DSC material and commercial development
Panels with an active area of ∼200 m2 are shipped to EFPL with an estimated annual production of 2000 kW h. Developing DSMs and materials for solar cells/modules


7
Dynamo
Sweden
DSCs materials and commercial development
Preparing co-based electrolytes and porphyrin dyes


8
Oxford PVs
UK
s-DSMs, PSMs
Currently working on perovskite solar modules


9
Dyepower
Italy
Development of DSMs for BIPV and facades applications
Running an automated pilot line for the production of A4 size DSMs and for larger area strings/panels. UV, humidity-freeze and damp-heat IEC 61646 stability tests successfully passed on A4 size modules


10
EFPL
Switzerland
Organic PVs, materials and characterisation
Held the main patent on mesoporous dye solar cell structure. Highest uncertified η in DSCs (13%), one of the highest η in perovskite-based solar cells (15%), the first report on DSMs in 1996 (monolithic series modules (10 × 10 cm2) with η ∼ 6%


11
Fujikura
Japan
Optical fibres
Developing DSCs for both outdoor applications and indoor electronics such as mobile phones, testing ionic liquids and gel-electrolytes in modules, thermal stability and outdoor testing of more than 200 sub-modules (20 cm2), modules passed IEC 61646 (stability test)


12
3G Solar
Israel
DSC technology
Installed DSC mini modules to charge computer peripherals, surveillance cameras, electronic bracelets and medical devices


13
CSIRO
Australia
Research agency
Colourful and transparent DSMs for BIPVs, materials for cost-effective DSCs


14
Taiyo Yuden Co. Ltd.
Japan
Electronic components
Flexible DSC using Ti foil as counter electrode for a sub-module of 15 × 15 cm2 (0.3 mm thin), tested race car using 2 × 8 m2 connected sub-modules in world solar car rally in 2008 and achieved a speed of 11.8 km h−1 in cloudy weather, similar to the 12.5 km h−1 achieved in sunny weather


15
SONY Technology Centre
Japan
Electrical appliances
Started research on DSCs in 2001, applications for terrestrial power and indoor electronics, achieved 11.1% confirmed η in 2009 (APL, 94(073308)), “Hana-akari”, a solar lamp powered by DSCs, developed


16
Shimane Institute of Technology
Japan
Governmental organization
J2 dye, large area DSC (1.25 m × 0.75 m) developments and stability testing for 1000 h at 80 °C, ‘EneLEAF’ in collaboration with Nissha. Ltd.


17
Toyota/Aisen Seiki
Japan
Components and systems for automotive industry
One of the earlier R&D industries to work on DSMs, S-type monolithic connections, stability tests in outdoor exposure in 2006 for 2.5 years


18
Peccell Technologies, Inc.
Japan
Venture company of Toin University of Yokohama
Plastic modules of DSCs, 4 V in a serially connected module of 10 × 10 cm2, the world's largest fully developed plastic module (0.8 × 2.1 m) is the lightest DSM weight (800 g m−2) with a capability of providing >1000 V


19
Eneos Co. Ltd.
Japan
Iol company but established a joint sub company named as ‘Sanyo Eneos solar co. Ltd.’
Bi-layer photoanodes, solid state DSMs (10 × 10 cm2)


20
NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd.
Japan
Spark plugs
Started DSC research in 2003, adopted lithography in monolithic module fabrication, founder of ball grid DSC structures, which replace Pt for catalysis purposes and utilize 95% active area


21
ITRI Taiwan (Industrial Tech. Research Inst. Of Taiwan)
Taiwan
Applied research and technical services
Transferred technology to Formosa Plastics and mass production is expected in 2015


22
Mitsubishi Paper Mills
Japan
Paper, pulp, and photosensitive materials
D-series dyes or indoline dyes perform better with ZnO due to metal free nature


23
Panasonic Denko Co. Ltd.
Japan
Branch company of Panasonic, electronic appliances
See-through modules for indoor applications, stability testing and encapsulation to prevent electrolyte leaking, use of K9 dye instead N719 to improve stability


24
KIST (Korean Ins. Of Sc. and Tech.)


Materials for DSCs and device development
Flexible DSCs, especially stainless steel-based devices with η ∼ 4.2% higher than plastic based DSCs, molecular engineering helped in achieving an PCE of 11% at their labs, the technology is transferred to Dongjin Semichem Ltd.


25
J Touch Taiwan
Taiwan
Touch panel solutions
Started using DSCs in indoor electronics such as portable time clocks


26
Fraunhofer ISE
Germany
Environmentally friendly energy harvesting and storage research
Scalable development and stability research on DSMs, first large area (30 × 30 cm2) glass frit-based module design with thermal stability testing up to 80 °C


27
Institute of Plasma Physics (CAS, China)
China
Utilisation of fusion energy
A 500 W DSC power station was installed in 2004 with η ∼ 5.9% in parallel modules, research focused on photoanode optimization, device packaging and interconnections


28
ECN (Energy Research Center of the Netherlands)
Netherlands
Energy research institute
First EU lab for DSC development started in 1995, stability tests for 1000 and 10000 h, introduced master plate design, installed semi-automated DSC manufacturing up to 100 cm2


29
Gunze Ltd.
Japan
Electronic components and garments
Wearable DSC, a unique application (28 cells with required electronics are attached to a jacket and used as mobile charge)


30
Yingkou OPV Tech New Energy Co., Ltd.
China
Upscaling DSCs/DSMs
Colourful, artistic and transparent DSMs in the form of glass windows and screens. Flexible and portable DSMs are also manufactured and available for commercial use


31
Ricoh
Japan
Electronic (imaging and printing devices, for example)
s-DSMs for indoor lighting


32
Merck
Germany
Chemicals and pharmaceuticals
Electrolytes for DSCs, precursors for various photoanode materials


33
Acrosol
Korea
Research & development, solar panel manufacturer
N/A


34
NLAB Solar (name changed to Exeger)
Sweden
Industrial production of DSMs
Pilot plant installed for the production of DSMs as BIPVs and AIPVs


35
Dye Tec Solar (Dyesol-Pilkington JV)
USA/Global
DSMs in BIPVs
Joint venture of Dye-sol and Pilkington


36
Tata Steel Europe
India
Steel roofing
Joint venture of Dye-sol and Tata Steel




 Fig. 8  (a and b) DSM installation recently completed at the EFPL campus (photos are courtesy of David Martineau of Solaronix Ltd.), (c) images of few commercial DSC products on the market (i–iii) are indoor electronics by G24, while iv and v are developed by 3G Solar, and (d) DSMs installed as the interior of a washroom by Dyesol Ltd. (image courtesy of Dr Damion Milliken of Dyesol Ltd.). 
Dyesol, another leading DSC company, has recently launched projects on the integration of DSCs into buildings with their various industrial partners (Tata Steel Europe of UK, Pilkington North America of USA, Timo Technologies of South Korea) and on DSC-powered combined energy generation and storage (CEGS) devices.83 These projects are expected to further reduce the cost/kW h as double-coated glass windows in the buildings meant for UV protection and antireflective coatings are used as substrates for DSMs. Oxford Photovoltaics, a spin-off company of Oxford University, is working on all solid state perovskite based modules (PSMs). However, the lifetime of the solid state PSMs under outdoor conditions is yet to be determined.
5. Current research on dye solar modules
Several major advancements have been made to upscale DSMs in terms of their various interconnection designs, material components, scalable fabrication processes, outdoor stability testing, tandem cells/modules to absorb a wider range of light over the solar spectrum, and innovative applications such as a hybrid energy harvesting and storage devices. These advancements are paving the way towards the ultimate goals of this technology: successful commercial deployment as a fossil fuel alternative and cost-effective competition with the incumbent photovoltaics. Many developments have been seen in the scalable production of DSMs such as the fabrication of modules with certified η values of up to 8.2%,84 the emergence of s-DSCs and s-DSMs to enhance device lifetimes,85–87 the initiation of flexible DSMs and their low temperature processing,44,46 long term stability and thermal testing of transparent conducting oxide (TCO)-based DSCs up to 80 °C,81,119 and their application as smart windows.88,89 Recent achievements such as the first commercial large scale delivery of DSMs from Solaronix, high efficiency s-DSMs from Dyesol (reported η ∼ 11.3% at 1 sun, results are yet to be published),90 and thermal stability testing up to 90 °C have made further progress towards the successful commercial production of DSMs.91Fig. 9 shows a timeline of DSM development since their first report in 1996. It highlights the major achievements in DSM development and also projects their future progress. In this section, we briefly review various developments in DSM fabrication techniques and designs.
 Fig. 9  Step-by-step historical evaluation of dye-sensitized solar modules. 
5.1 Fabrication processes of dye-solar modules
The fabrication of DSMs differs from that of single cells primarily due to the electrical connections among neighbouring cells. Screen printing is usually employed as a coating method for the photoanodes of DSMs92,93 as it permits the facile and controlled deposition in the few to 20 μm thickness range and is also compatible with roll-to-roll processing. In addition, this technique offers compactness and good adhesion of TiO2 with the substrates, which otherwise often peels off from the surface upon annealing. Screen printing technology is a commercially available printing method and can be used for printing on both glass and plastic substrates. Fig. 10 shows a block diagram of various processes involved in DSM fabrication. For details of each section, we refer the reader to the pioneering work of Späth et al.94 and a recent review by Hashmi et al.57
 Fig. 10  A schematic of a parallel DSM assembly line. The figure is drawn based on the ref. 96 and 97 which outline the steps for parallel modules. For series-connected modules, the FTO has to be scribed for cell isolation. The W-type modules requires no Ag interconnections, and for the Z architecture, the order of the steps can change. For more detail on the fabrication of series modules, refer to ref. 96 and 98. 
The working and pre-drilled counter electrodes are cleaned using trichloroethylene, acetone and ethanol. The electrodes are then etched for series connections. CEs are platinized by depositing Pt precursor pastes and then cured in a furnace. TiO2 layers are coated on the working electrode (WE) via screen printing to obtain the desired photoanode thickness (∼10 μm). A heat treatment (100 °C) after each coating cycle is helpful to stabilise each layer. In a batch process, the coated FTOs are heated on a belt furnace to remove organic binders in the paste and to sinter TiO2 nanoparticles together. Interconnections (series) or current collecting fingers (parallel) between neighbouring cells are made using conducting media (such as silver). The WEs are sensitized with a dye, and the device is completed by placing the patterned CEs on the WEs separated with a 30–60 μm thick spacer and sealing. The Ag patterns are encapsulated to avoid their contact with the liquid electrolyte. The electrolyte is filled through drilled holes, and the holes are sealed via cover slips and sealant material after filling.
The typical dye-sensitisation methods are not suitable for DSM batch production as it requires longer soaking hours. Accelerated dye-sensitization processes are introduced, requiring a few minutes for dye-anchoring and yielding similar photovoltaic performances to that of typical overnight soaking. Such accelerated methods may reduce the batch production time significantly. ECN researchers introduced a novel dye-anchoring method where they pumped the dye solution in a pre-sealed DSM through two drilled holes.95 Such a method is beneficial when the device is to be sealed using a glass frit that requires high temperature (∼500 °C) for adhesion because the dye decomposes at such a temperature. During DSM fabrication, encapsulation and electrolyte filling are amongst the crucial steps. Good encapsulation is crucial for long lifetimes, and improper filling leads to significant performance degradation for similar devices. At present, many researchers use pre-drilled holes at the CE to inject the electrolyte via vacuum filling. This process, however, is tedious, and a number of automated units for electrolyte filling are now offered by various companies such as Dyesol Ltd. to ease the continuous production of DSMs.
5.2 Design configurations of dye-solar modules
After intensive research for nearly two decades, commercial DSM developments are underway (Table 2). The fabrication of DSMs is different from a laboratory scale device due to (i) large scale metal oxide coating on TCOs, (ii) extensively impermeable sealing to humidity and air as well as to prevent liquid electrolyte from drying and leaking, (iii) electrolyte filling, (iv) interconnection for modules (series or parallel) and external electrical connections, and (v) most importantly, the anticipated lifetime of the device compared to that offered by silicon based devices (∼20 years). Electrical connections need intensive care during the fabrication process as an ineffective contact will ultimately lower FF by adding to the series resistance and eventually lowering the η.98,99 Two major types of connections are employed for DSMs fabrications: (i) parallel designs, which provide high photocurrent, such as parallel grid connections; and (ii) series designs for high output voltage including Z-type, W-type, and monolithic connections. These designs employ large rectangular strips (area ≥3 cm2) interconnected serially or in parallel (Fig. 11a–e). Other types of connections such as master plate design and ball-grid connection have been reported by a few researchers.128,129
 Fig. 11  Some commonly adopted designs of conventional DSMs. (a) Design schematic of a DSM employing P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)) as a hole transport medium,87 (b) DSM design for façade application under the European project COMSOL,100 (c) a flexible plastic DSM,101 (d) a series Z-type module,102 and (e) a parallel grid type design where the individual strips are surrounded by a metallic current collector.103 Other common architectures involve the W-type and monolithic designs for series connected DSMs (not shown). 
In this section, we highlight the differences in these various interconnections along with their advantages and disadvantages and also critically analyse their photovoltaic performances. For convenience, we define three common terms (active area, aperture area, and total area) that will be used extensively in this article: active area is the area covered by only the TiO2 strips on a substrate; aperture area is the sum of active area and the region between the cells (which are occupied by the sealants, interconnections or collecting grids); and total area is the total substrate area that also includes the peripheral area used for bus bars and blank spaces on the substrate.

5.2.1 Series connections. 
i. Monolithic design (S-type). 
Here, the term monolithic refers to the sequential deposition of electrode material layers by successively pasting and pressing them. The monolithic DSMs are attractive as they are made on a single substrate (Fig. 12a) and eliminate the need for the CE. Owing to their single substrate architecture, monolithic designs are highly compatible with roll-to-roll processing of flexible DSMs as they do not require continuous photoanode thickness.104 The fact that the device is fabricated layer-by-layer, rather than by assembling two electrodes together, makes this design more tolerant to substrate non-planarity. These designs also replace expensive platinum by cheaper carbon black as the CE; therefore, 20–30% of material cost reduction is estimated for monolithic-type series module designs compared to other designs.105
 Fig. 12  Schematic of different types of series connections: (a) monolithic, (b) parallel grid, (c) Z-type and (d) W-type. 
Monolithic design is also called Kay cell, named after the inventor Andreas Kay, who reported the first DSM in 1996 with η ∼ 5.3%.60 The notable achievements in their report are (i) the replacement of expensive platinum with porous carbon as CE, (ii) a porous insulating layer between the WE and CE to avoid short circuit while allowing the electrolyte to freely diffuse through its pores, and (iii) a continuous, conveyerised fabrication process of series connected DSMs. The thickness of the photoanode in the Kay cell was ∼80 μm (TiO2 10 μm, Rutile spacer 10 μm, & carbon black 60 μm). The DSMs (six strips of 4.7 × 0.7 cm2 with total area ∼21 cm2) yielded η ∼ 5.3% (VOC ∼ 3.90 V, ISC ∼ 28.55 mA, & FF ∼ 0.61). The major drawbacks of this design are a much lower JSC (1.3 mA cm−2) despite a high output voltage (∼4 V), high opacity and poor sealing of the device. ZrO2 has also been employed to replace the opaque rutile spacer; however, the transparency was lower than that of a conventional Pt electrode.104
Since the first report on series interconnections, there has been no significant progress in these designs. Thirteen years after the work of Kay in 1996, the improved transparency of the monolithic designs was reported by AISIN SEIKI.106 They replaced (i) the opaque counter CE material (carbon black) by a highly transparent paste comprising In2O3:Sn and Pt nanoparticles and (ii) the opaque rutile spacer by SiO2 (refractive index 1.5, close to that of the electrolyte used), thereby considerably improving the transparency. The photovoltaic performance of their module was rather inferior compared to the first report; the four-fold larger modules developed by AISIN SEIKI (95 mm × 95 mm, area ∼ 91 cm2) resulted in 30% greater JSC (∼1.7 mA cm−2) compared to Kay's first design (area ∼ 21 cm2). The lower JSC limited the η to <3% despite a higher output voltage (∼8 V).
Monolithic DSMs are built on a single substrate (WE only) and are therefore known as a cost effective design. Another major advantage of this design is the high active to total area ratio. In both reports on monolithic designs, this ratio was >90%. However, these connections result in lower JSC due to high series resistance and low FF (≤0.6).106,107 As the individual strips are connected in series, immense attention is to be given to match the JSC in all individual cells. Due to the type of series connection, the final JSC is lowest in the serially connected cells. Monolithic transparent DSMs on a single substrate with high transparency have yet to be reported.
ii. Z-type and W-type interconnections. 
Both of these types are series connected devices: one of them uses a vertical metallic conductor to connect the neighbouring cells (Z-type), whereas the other (W-type) does not require it (Fig. 12c and d). The names ‘Z-type’ and ‘W-type’ stem from their resemblance to the letters ‘Z’ and ‘W’, respectively. The Z-type connection, also called Z-contact, is adopted from thin film solar cells.104 In this design, the individual cells are serially interconnected via a conducting medium (usually silver) so that the CE of the first cell is connected to the WE of neighbouring cell and vice versa (Fig. 12c).
The first Z-type DSM was demonstrated in 2004 by Toyoda et al.,108 who connected 64 DSMs (10 × 10 cm2) in series to form a large panel. The researchers carried out the first long term stability testing of DSMs for six months and compared their performance with a crystalline silicon module of similar output power rating. Although the photovoltaic parameters of the DSMs were not exclusively reported, the DSMs showed a 10–20% greater power output over a period of six months. The major issue reported during fabrication is the hermetic sealing of the DSMs, resulting in performance degradation. This issue is resolved in a subsequent report by Sastrawan et al.,95 who introduced a highly stable glass frit as a sealant. As the frit is processed at a high temperature (>500 °C) at which the dye decomposes, a novel pumping method for dye anchoring was employed. The dye was pumped via two holes after the sealing of DSMs of a total area up to 30 × 30 cm2. The DSMs resulted in an η of ∼3.5% (VOC ∼ 20 V, ISC ∼ 168 mA, & FF ∼ 0.53) with an active area of ∼680 cm2 (74% of total area). The major drawbacks of these reports are the low FF (<0.55) and low JSC (<0.5 mA cm−2) arising from the high series resistance of the photoelectrodes. Jun et al.107 reported a DSM (10 × 10 cm2) with significantly superior performance, i.e., η ∼ 6.6% (VOC ∼ 8 V, JSC ∼ 1.23 mA cm−2, & FF ∼ 0.67). The significant enhancement in FF and JSC was achieved by restricting the width of each individual strip (<1 cm). A similar advancement was reported by Giordano et al.,102 who optimised the geometry of the photoelectrode using a back reflector to achieve an η of up to ∼7% on the aperture area in modules with areas of ∼45 cm2.
Despite the high voltage achieved by Z-type DSMs, they can suffer from relatively low active areas due to the vertical connections and surrounding seals, the complexity of fabrication and the additional series resistance produced by added interconnection, which can reduce the fill factors. Furthermore, the silver interconnects corrode easily in the presence of liquid electrolytes. In an innovative design by Dyesol, the silver is replaced by a less corrosive material (45 μm titanium particles and 5 μm tungsten particles in a polymer matrix).109 Although the vertical connections are presumably less conductive than Ag per unit section, in addition to adding stability to the device, this design also eliminated some additional sealing required in the Z-type to protect the interconnections.
The W-type design offers a comparatively higher active area than the Z-type design as it avoids additional metallic interconnections.104 Unlike the Z-type design, the neighbouring cells of alternative bias are interconnected in the W-type, as shown in Fig. 12d. Their simpler design and lack of additional serial interconnections can result in higher device FF values. The operation of W-type DSMs is different from that of Z-type ones because there are two types of cell configurations, i.e., front illuminated (TiO2 side, also called F-side) and back illuminated (Pt side, also called R-side) on the same module. The issue with W-type designs is their difficulty in matching the JSC of these two different types.98 The JSC decreases in the R-side due to light absorption by iodide/triiodide and the low transmittance of platinum.84 Thus, many optimisation procedures to match the JSC of both types add complexity to the fabrication. However, SHARP Co. reported the highest confirmed η in W-type interconnected DSMs (8.2% and 9.3% with respect to active and total area, respectively); the active area (25.45 cm2) was 85% of the total area.
One crucial requirement for both Z- and W-type designs is the separation required between neighbouring cells to avoid the mass transfer of electrolyte.104 As the redox potential of the electrolyte changes when illuminated, a possible ion exchange between adjacent cells can separate the redox couple. This process is called photophoresis and is responsible for performance deterioration over time in DSMs. Thus, an individual cell must be a completely isolated compartment.


5.2.2 Parallel connection. 
Despite the high VOC achieved by series interconnected DSMs, the required precision to match the JSC of individual cells and the intensive care needed to interconnect the neighbouring cells to avoid lower FF and metal corrosion make their design and fabrication complex. On the other hand, parallel grid type DSMs offer ease of fabrication as they avoid the interconnection of working and counter electrodes (Fig. 12b). An example of such connections is the ‘masterplate’ designed by the joint research of various European institutions under the programme Nanomax.128 In parallel connections, charge is collected not only from the bottom of the electrode in contact with the FTO, but also from the sides of the strips using metal grids (Ag, Ni, Cu Al, and Au).49,110–114 These metal grids significantly enhance the photovoltaic performance of DSMs; a 100% increase in JSC, a >200% increase in FF and a five-fold enhancement in η was reported for silver grids coated around large strips.144 Späth et al.94 reported the reproducible manufacturing of parallel connected DSMs (27 DSMs with a total area of ∼100 cm2) with η ∼ 4.3 ± 0.07%. This method was further developed to deliver an η of ∼7.4% employing silver in the current collecting grids.115
These designs can result in high FF; however, their major drawback is the low active area due to the silver current collectors, which need to be wide enough to collect the high currents with minimal voltage drops. Care must also be exercised to avoid the corrosion of silver grids by the iodide/triiodide electrolyte, for example, by using thick spacers (Surlyn or Bynel) to cover the grids.57,104


5.2.3 Ball grid DSC (BD-DSCs). 
Ball grid connection (based on ball grid array connection in electronic circuits) was introduced by NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd., Japan to overcome lower FF when the electrode width was increased beyond a critical size.43,116 This critical width is determined to be ∼0.5–1 cm2 such that the ohmic resistance of the film is reduced and a higher FF is offered.102,117 The ball grid design (Fig. 13b and c) resembles monolithic designs as it employs only one substrate (FTO). These modules are connected in parallel and employ vertical metallic balls as current collectors; the major difference is that the electrons and holes are collected at the same side, unlike in other designs where electrons are collected from the FTO (Fig. 13c). The vertically oriented balls are connected to a flexible hybrid copper polyimide substrate and are taken to the external circuit. Surprisingly, the DSMs with areas of 8 × 8 cm2 resulted in similar performances to that of a single cell (area ∼ 0.5 cm2); the DSMs showed an η of ∼7–8% (JSC ∼ 16 mA cm−2, VOC ∼ 760 mV, FF ∼ 0.65) with a VOC higher than that of a single cell. The remarkable performance of the ball grid, which also has commercial advantages, is due to its ability to retain the performance of a single cell during the scaling up process. It also has enhanced cost effectiveness as it eliminates the expensive Pt-coated CE. These designs do not require additional interconnections and external electrical connection; therefore, they result in very high active areas (95%), as shown in Fig. 13b.
 Fig. 13  (a) Solder shape ball connected on a flexible copper polyimide substrate, (b) an 80 mm square sub-module with η 7–8%, and (c) cross-section of a ball grid DSM. Figures are taken from an online report from NGK Spark Plug. 


5.2.4 Combined series and parallel connected DSMs. 
Until now, we have discussed various series or parallel connected DSMs that provide either added photovoltage or photocurrent, respectively. In these designs, one of the two parameters is compromised; the DSMs with high VOC result in very low JSC and vice versa (Table 3). To control the value of both of these parameters in a single device, which may be important for managing the electrical output of the module, combinations of series and parallel connection have also been attempted by researchers (Table 3).148,149 Thus far, the best performing dually interconnected device resulted in an η of ∼6% (VOC ∼ 1.4 V, ISC ∼ 287 mA, FF ∼ 0.56) in a device of area ∼90 cm2. The issue here is very low active area; ∼50% of the total area is utilized for additional interconnections. Nevertheless, such designs are desired, especially when designing large area panels, as will be discussed in Section 8 (Table 4).
Table 3 A comparison of PV performance and device designs of a few DSMs. The percentages of active to total area are given to provide a meaningful comparison




Connection type
Active area (cm2)
Active to total area

I
SC (mA)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)
Comments
References





a At 0.84 sun, 64 series and parallel connected DSMs.
b 
η 7% at 0.5 sun.
c CE consisting of mixed Ti:Pt.
d The value is taken from ref. 28, the original report stating the value was not found in our search.
e 3D wire shaped DSM tree, I–V measured at 0.87 sun.
f The highest certified η in DSMs.
g Reported η is without a mask.
h Calculated with respect to active area only.
i Ti foil as a substrate and photovoltaic performance is reported at 55 mW cm−2.
j The reported photocurrent is only for a single DSM of area ∼700 cm2.





Parallel (grid coated)
68
68%
NA
0.7
0.65
4.3
These designs are mostly grid coated using Ag or other metals such as Ni. This type of connection results in enhanced current density but creates stability issues in the device. To avoid exposure of the metallic grid to electrolyte, it should be encapsulated in sealant, adding complexity to the fabrication process. The advantage of these designs is a more simple power management at the individual DSM level compared to series designs where high levels of current matching are required. These designs also survive reverse bias degradation

94



187
62.3%
1296
0.7
0.52
4.84

110



81
81%
820
0.7
NA
4.3

111



75
NA
50
0.76
0.7
5.7

49



2246
63%
2100
9
0.62
5.9a

113



18
73%
235
0.63
0.67
5.47b

114



151
67%
2287
0.72
0.68
7.4c

115



15.12
60.5%
172
0.75
0.66
5.52

97



17.11 (ap. area)
NA
19.4
0.719
0.71
9.9d




Series + parallel
110
NA
120
2.2
NA
NA
This design reduces the active area available on the photoelectrode and provides lower JSC but multiplies VOC. The design is not widely adopted and has minimal potential for commercialization

103



NA
NA
23.45
1.85
0.58
3e

144



90
50
287
1.4
0.56
5.9

145



Z-type
43
73
51
9
0.65
7
Z-type DSMs provide good performance and high active area. However, they can suffer from lower FF due to excess interconnections that add to series resistance. Careful encapsulation of vertical connections is necessary

102



47.5
47%
58
7.7
0.68
6.6

107



505
74%
169
20
0.53
3.5

146



512
73%
140
29
0.58
4.5

147



W-type
25.5
85%
54
6.3
0.61
8.2f
The highest certified efficiency reported in any DSM; however, careful design for current matching is required

84



Series monolithic
19.75
94%
28.55
3.9
0.61
5.29
Any mismatch of current in cells will affect the efficiency of the module. This design yields lower current density

60



90.25
90.25%
40
9
∼0.6
<2.5

106



Ball grid
80
95%
∼1200
0.76
NA
∼8%
Very high active area, similar performance to that of a single cell

116



DSCs (single cells)
∼0.2


4.6
0.91
0.78
13
Routinely reported JSC values in the best performing l-DSCs

26



0.2
—
∼4.6
0.93
0.74
12.3

148



0.22
—
4.57
0.73
0.72
11.1

149



s-DSMs/quasi s-DSMs
100
∼45%
37
5.16
0.47
0.8
Pore-filling, lower photoelectrode thickness, high stability

141



625
46%
28
10.6
0.35
0.32

141



112
52%
20
8
NA
0.9

142



2.25
NA
20
0.62
0.50
2.8

150



8
NA
∼35
1.5
0.47
∼2.5

86





13.5
54%
21.5
3.2
0.39
2



87



s-DSCs
0.2
—
19.2
0.73
0.73
10.2g
The highest efficiency solid state laboratory scale device

151



Flexible DSMs
58
∼60–70%
47
6.5
0.33
∼3



124



900
NA
77
6.7
<0.5
2–3%



101



5.4
NA
69h
0.76
0.54
4.8
Devices fabricated on conducting plastic (PET/ITO) or metallic substrates such as titanium foil

123



16.4
69%
30
3.8
0.53
3.3

46



100
90%
727
0.72
0.73
6.7i

140



Large area panels
2246
63%
2100
9
0.62
5.9a
As per the definition of DSPs in Section 5.3, large area panels are ≥1000 cm2

113



14000
74%
945j
4.5
0.56
3.58

100 and 143



6000
48%
—
—
—
2.3

143





Table 4 Comparison of photovoltaic parameters of the three devices (S1–S3). The parameters are calculated by considering the active area (28 mm2) and aperture area (28, 28.8, and 30.28 mm2 for S1, S2 and S3 respectively). Reproduced from ref. 156




Device design
Dimensions & active area (cm2)

I
SC (mA)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η
1 % (active area)

η
2 % (aperture area)




Single (S1)
∼0.28
3.11
10.67
0.66
0.701
5.01
5.01


Split (S2)
∼0.14 × 2 = 0.28
3.70
13.21
0.67
0.678
6.06
5.87


Split (S3)
∼0.07 × 4 = 0.28
4.65
16.21
0.67
0.644
7.32
6.88





6. Fabrication of flexible modules
At present, the automated manufacturing of DSMs has steps (Fig. 10) that still require development for high volume and low-cost production. The rigid glass substrate used for DSM manufacturing, the high temperature required to evaporate the organic binders in the TiO2 paste and electrolyte insertion are typical issues in the batch production of DSMs. Alternatively, various flexible substrates that are compatible with the roll-to-roll process can be introduced.118–121 In addition to their flexibility, these substrates are also cost effective. For example, commercial plastic substrates (PET/ITO) available from Solaronix cost only one third of FTO-coated TCO.122 However, additional encapsulation may be required, especially for long term outdoor operation, which can offset the lowering of cost. Flexible devices, however, are very desirable for applications where lightweight, conformable, flexible, thin power sources are sought. Furthermore, roll-to-roll high-throughput manufacturing can be applied.19
To utilize the flexibility of these substrates, various researchers have replaced the conventional FTO-coated TCOs with conducting plastic123 and metallic substrates such as Ti foil or steel (Table 3).124,125 For information on the developmental history of flexible DSCs and DSMs (f-DSMs), we recommend the comprehensive reviews by Weerasinghe et al.126 and T. M. brown et al.19 The first report on f-DSMs utilized a stainless steel substrate as WE and Pt-coated flexible plastic as CE, demonstrating an η of ∼3% (VOC ∼ 6.5 V, ISC ∼ 47 mA, FF ∼ 0.33).124 The low observed FF for the less resistive metallic substrate is surprising and was attributed to high series resistance. However, a reference single cell also showed a similar FF and JSC (∼8 mA cm−2); therefore, the low FF might be due to poor device fabrication and poor contact between the substrate and photoanode layer. This poor performance of a metallic substrate was later improved by Jen et al. by employing a Ti foil and growing ∼35 μm vertically aligned nanotubes.123 They employed a Pt-coated flexible polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)/ITO as CE. A parallel connected f-DSM (∼5.5 cm2) resulted in an η of ∼4.8% (VOC ∼ 0.76 V, JSC ∼ 13 mA cm−2, FF ∼ 0.54). Here, a better contact between TiO2 nanotubes and Ti foil resulted in a significantly improved performance; however, the stability of the devices has not yet been addressed. Conducting plastic substrates (PET/ITO and ITO/PEN) are widely employed as substrates in f-DSMs owing to their transparency. Ikegami et al.101 reported an η of ∼2% (VOC ∼ 6.6 V, ISC ∼ 77 mA, FF < 0.50) in DSMs (30 × 30 cm2) on a PEN substrate. The corrosive electrolyte negatively affected the performance of these f-DSMs over time; their performance degraded ∼40% after ∼1000 h, primarily due to the removal of ITO from the substrate caused by reaction with electrolyte.
A mass production compatible process for the TiO2 paste application remains elusive. Various methods employed so far such as anodization,127–129 the lift up technique for a mesoporous highly conductive TiO2 layer,130 the compression method to enhance TiO2 film interconnection,131–135 and the printing of binder free paste via doctor blading118,136 have hindered the roll-to-roll production of f-DSMs. Zardetto et al.46 employed a UV irradiation process for the fabrication of both working and counter electrodes that is compatible with the roll-to-roll process and showed (i) η ∼ 4.3% (VOC ∼ 0.73 V, JSC ∼ 11 mA cm−2, FF ∼ 0.56) in single cells and (ii) η ∼ 3.3% (VOC ∼ 3.8 V, JSC ∼ 1.8 mA cm−2, FF ∼ 0.53) in W-contact modules with areas of ∼17 cm2. In another comparative study on the performance of flat and bent f-DSMs, the same group reported that bent DSMs can yield 10% extra power output compared to the flat device.44
The flexible DSMs routinely demonstrate lower FF and JSC as a result of the high sheet resistance due to the poor contact between the mesoporous layer and the substrate along with the higher sheet resistance of the conducting substrates. The deposition of a thin TiO2 layer via TiCl4 solution treatment is a common practice in conventional DSCs to improve the adhesion of photoanode layers.137–139 However, it cannot be applied on f-DSMs as it requires annealing at 450 °C before coating with the mesoporous TiO2 layer. The flexible plastic substrates are not compatible with such a high temperature. Replacing conducting plastic with low resistivity metallic substrates such as steel did generate significant progress. Ti foil, however, is an often used material in this regard as TiO2 nanostructures can be grown directly onto it with no adhesion issues between the substrate and the mesoporous layer. A study by Wu et al.140 made a significant development towards this end, reporting an η of ∼7% (VOC ∼ 0.72 V, ISC ∼ 727 mA, FF ∼ 0.73) at 55 mW cm−2 in a flower-shaped mesoporous film directly grown on Ti foil. A high FF and JSC (∼8 mA cm−2) were achieved due to the absence of additional interconnections, resulting in a high ratio of active to total area for the device (>90%). However, the η reported is at 55 W m−2; therefore, the relationship between the performance of f-DSMs with the high efficiency DSMs on TCOs is not straightforward.
7. Emergence of solid state DSMs
Although l-DSCs have achieved η >8% in DSMs and ∼13% in DSCs, they are susceptible to performance degradation due to leakage and changes in redox species concentrations during the regeneration process.81 Furthermore, electrolyte insertion is not a trivial process over large areas. Because of these issues, DSMs with alternative HTMs such as quasi-solid state electrolytes141 and solid state hole conductors have been tested.85 The s-DSMs using HTMs are relatively new and only a few reports have been published. The first report on s-DSMs employed poly-methyl-meta-acrylate (PMMA) and propylene carbonate to make a gel out of the conventional iodide/triiodide electrolyte.141 Their series connected 100 cm2 DSMs resulted in an η of ∼0.8% (VOC ∼ 5.16 V, ISC ∼ 37 mA, FF ∼ 0.47). They also demonstrated that s-DSMs can be fabricated without sealing the neighbouring cells; however, the performance of such DSMs dropped 60% in ∼1000 h. Their upscaled s-DSMs with sizes up to ∼625 cm2 (23 serially connected DSCs with an active area of ∼12.5 cm2) showed relatively inferior performances compared to the DSMs with total areas of ∼100 cm2; the η dropped to 0.32%, mainly due to decreases in ISC (28 mA) and FF (0.35). The lower FF and JSC values (2–3 mA cm−2) in both DSMs are primarily due to high series resistance (200–400 Ω) and reduced TiO2 thickness (4–4.5 μm) compared to a conventional photoelectrode (15 μm), respectively. On the other hand, these modules showed a slight improvement in performance after 1000 h, unlike the liquid-based DSMs (l-DSMs). In a similar report, Freitas et al.142 employed plasticized polymer electrolyte-based series connected s-DSMs (4.5 cm2). Although a high VOC ∼ 8 V was obtained in outdoor testing, the low ISC (∼20 mA) resulted in a lower η <1%. Furthermore, the performance of these s-DSMs was rather discouraging after 1800 h; the devices retained only 30–40% of their original power output.
Unlike the l-DSMs, the performance of s-DSMs is significantly inferior compared to their single cells. In a comparative study by Snaith et al.,86 serially connected 8 cm2 s-DSMs employing mesoporous TiO2/Al2O3 and spiro-OMeTAD showed an η of ∼2% (VOC ∼ 1.5 V, ISC ∼ 35 mA, FF ∼ 0.47), merely 25% that of a reference single cell with an area of ∼0.12 cm2. Low pore-filling (∼40%) was found to be one of the factors contributing to low η in their modules, which can be improved by changing the solvent concentration of HTM and the porosity of the photoanode film. In a similar report by Matteocci et al.,87 an η of ∼2% (VOC ∼ 0.3.2 V, ISC ∼ 22 mA, FF ∼ 0.39) was achieved on a TCO-based device on an active area of ∼14 cm2. The η was ∼6.7% in flexible s-DSMs fabricated on Ti foil.140 The researchers employed P3HT as the HTM with a TiO2 nanoparticle photoanode.
The performances of s-DSMs are mainly hindered due to the poor infiltration of HTM into the mesoporous photoanode, unlike the liquid electrolyte, which easily penetrates throughout the TiO2 film (∼15 μm). Owing to the inferior pore filling (∼40% in both reports where s-DSMS showed η >2%), the TiO2 photoanode thickness is restricted to ∼2 μm, resulting in a JSC yield of only 30% compared to that of an l-DSM. The pore filling could be improved by using tubular or hollow nanostructures with high porosities (>60%) instead of nanoparticles, thus increasing the layer thickness to ≥10 μm. If these issues can be resolved along with the development of semi-transparency (i.e., for BIPV) for these types of devices, s-DSMs will have strong industrial potential since they do not use volatile liquids, they have fewer lifetime issues, and their fabrication costs are expected to be cheaper than those of l-DSMs as they require less complicated sealing during fabrication.
8. Dye solar panels (DSPs)
For realistic commercial applications, DSMs must be transformed into larger panels for installation. The primary difference between DSMs and DSPs is their size, even though there is no clear description of size limit. In this article, we define a panel as having a photoelectrode size ≥1000 cm2.
Numerous industrial developments in DSPs can be seen across the globe (Table 2); however, few experimental results regarding their performance have been published.100,143 The first panel was reported in 2008 with a total area of >2 m2; the individual modules had areas of ∼300 cm2 each.113 The dually interconnected panel resulted in an η of ∼6% on the active area (VOC ∼ 9 V, ISC ∼ 2.1 A, FF ∼ 0.62) at 0.87 sun. This η is the highest reported for DSPs thus far. Subsequently, a joint European project termed ‘ColorSol’ was established to develop DSPs for BIPV applications;100 DSPs of areas up to ∼14000 cm2 (serially connected individual modules with areas of ∼900 cm2) resulted in η values of ∼3.6% (VOC ∼ 4.55 V, ISC ∼ 945 mA, FF ∼ 0.56) with respect to total area under 1 sun conditions (η = 4.6% with respect to its active area). These panels employed glass frit as the sealing material, resulting in high stabilities (∼500 h). Both of these panels were manufactured by serially interconnecting individual DSMs; therefore, upscaling the DSC technology (i.e., the development of an automated process for large scale panels) still remains a challenge. A study by Hinsch et al.143 reported a semi-automatic process for the fabrication of DSPs up to ∼1 m2, which is an industrially viable size. Although the performances of these panels were lower (η <3%) than in previous reports, this is the first published report on the development of a semi-automatic reproducible process.
9. Summary of DSM development
All these designs have relative merits and drawbacks. Monolithic series are good in terms of continuous industrial mass production and cost effectiveness; however, they compromise on performance because of pore filling issues. Similarly, parallel (Ag grid encapsulated) designs are being developed by companies such as 3G solar, but they lead to problems for large areas as currents become so high as to cause problems in voltage drops. W-type is the simplest design to make, but has problems with current matching, which can limit efficiency and stability. Z-type delivers good performance, although their manufacture is more complex due to the vertical interconnections and their encapsulation.
10. Emergence of alternative designs
10.1 Dye-solar module designs with improved FF
As described in Table 3, various designs of DSMs, s-DSMs, f-DSMs and DSPs have been fabricated to bring the device from laboratory scale to a level compatible with industrial mass production. These various types of connections resulted in devices with voltages as high as ∼20 V and currents as high as ∼2.5 A in separate devices. However, since the first report on large area DSCs, lower JSC values have been routinely observed in DSMs compared to their single cell counterparts (Table 3). The highest confirmed JSC in any DSM is ∼18 mA cm−2, as reported by L. Han et al.84 in a W-type design and by Giordano et al.102 in a Z-type design; however, routinely achieved JSC values are much lower than that. The highest JSC in any other design is ∼15 mA cm−2 (in parallel designs). In contrast, the highest JSC in a laboratory scale single cell is ∼27 mA cm−2,35 and JSC >20 mA cm−2 is commonly obtained in high efficiency devices (Table 3).
This loss of 30–50% of the generated photoelectrons in large area devices is critical and is rarely explained in published reports. A few studies published on DSMs suggest that the comparatively lower JSC in DSMs results from increased series resistance (RS), which also affects the FF of these devices. This increased RS originates from two sources: (i) the width of the TiO2 photoanode; and (ii) the added metallic interconnections, particularly in series type DSMs.100,117 The realization that TiO2 width contributes to RS was first experimentally demonstrated in 2006 by Biancardo et al.141 The researchers varied the TiO2 strip thickness from 2–0.5 cm and suggested that the lower thickness results in superior DSM performance; however, a clear trend between FF and RS could not be drawn from their experimental results. In a subsequent report, Jun et al.107 demonstrated the effect of photoelectrode dimensions (length and width of TiO2) on FF. They first optimized the TiO2 strip width (WS) to be 0.8 cm for optimum FF (∼0.65–0.62) by varying it from 0.25 to 3 cm. The FF dropped drastically from 0.65 to 0.3 when WS increased from 0.8 cm to 3 cm. On the other hand, when the length (L) was varied from 5–15 cm at a WS of ∼0.8 cm, the FF showed no dependence on L. Similar dimensions are recommended by Zhang et al.117 based on simulation and by Giordano et al.98 based on experiments to design guidelines for DSM geometric parameters. The latter suggested that WS be kept between 0.5 and 0.7 cm for photoelectrode lengths up to 15 cm as this provides the best compromise between aperture area and resistive loss. In another study using modelling of geometric dimensions, Giordano et al.102 reported a systematic decrease in FF upon increasing WS from 0.5–2 cm. Varying the L had no effect on the VOC or JSC of the devices. They correlated the RTCO with the photoelectrode dimensions (WS, L, and distance to the collecting electrode ‘d’) as: (1)
Nevertheless, the optimization suggested in these reports only involves minimising the WS to reduce the RS offered by the substrate. In all the above reports, an increase in WS is suggested as the primary source of the increase in RS and thereby the drop in FF. However, even after minimising the width of the individual strips to <1 cm, the performance of DSMs is only <50–60% of that of DSCs at 1 sun.152 Although it improved the FF of the DSMs, the suggested optimisation in these designs added a number of interconnections, reducing the aperture ratio of the modules. In addition, none of the reports on the optimisation of device geometry discussed the reasons behind the low JSC in DSMs, and a comparative charge transport analysis of large area photoelectrodes with that of single cells is lacking. Therefore, a detailed understanding of charge dynamics is surprisingly still missing in the DSM literature.
10.2 Area dependent charge collection in DSMs
We note that all the adopted designs in DSMs are similar. In common practice, these modules are made in the form of large rectangular strips (Fig. 11a–c) with areas ≥3 cm2 interconnected in either series, parallel or both. Many of these designs are adopted from other PV technologies; the parallel or grid connections are adopted from amorphous silicon solar cells, while the series interconnections are inspired by thin film modules. Recent studies by Fakharuddin et al.153–157 suggest that these designs do not work well for DSMs due to their diffusive charge transport in a “soft” environment, which is largely different from the first two generation solar cells. Notably, due to the neglect of charge transport parameters while upscaling the DSCs, significant current collection comes only from a limited region of the photoelectrode. For example, under similar experimental conditions, ECN researchers obtained η ∼ 12% in their single cells and η ∼ 4–5% in ∼225 cm2 modules in a masterplate design.105 Such trends are routinely seen in DSMs; their JSC (Table 3) values are significantly smaller than those of DSCs.
It is important to note that charge transport in DSCs occurs via hopping or trap-mediated conduction through n-MOS, which are several orders of magnitude slower than transport through single crystalline semiconductors.158–163 Due to diffusive charge transport and the competitive situation where the generated electrons are rapidly intercepted by the electrolyte ions, the photoelectrode thickness is limited to below ∼15 μm in single cells (area ≤ 0.2 cm2). Currently, diffusion length (Ln = (Dnτn)1/2) is the only defined parameter considered for the complete collection of photogenerated electrons in TiO2 films,164–166 where Dn is the electron diffusion coefficient and τn is the electron lifetime (i.e., the length above which electrons recombine with holes in the electrolyte). In recent experiments, the number of paths and path lengths of electron diffusion have been observed to increase during scaling up; therefore, the device parameter Ln has limitations in DSMs.156,157 We first reported that η drops bi-exponentially upon increasing the active area in the photoelectrode for TiO2 NPs.154 The η drops off three-fold when the photoelectrode area is increased in the range of 0.15–2 cm2; the main contributor to this drop is the drop in JSC (Fig. 14a). The detailed charge transport studies of these devices suggest that upon increasing the photoelectrode area, the recombination resistance (RCT) decreases and the electron transport time (τd) increases; consequently, only the photoelectrons from a fraction of TiO2 (few microns) nearer to the working electrode are collected (Fig. 14b). A similar concept was reported by Halme et al.,22 who suggested based on device simulations that the possibility of electrons being collected is higher if they are produced nearer to the working electrode substrate. As the τn is several tens of milliseconds in DSCs employing TiO2 NPs, a high RCT and low τd (10–100 times smaller than τn) is preferred for high efficiency devices.20,167
 Fig. 14  (a) The efficiency of a DSC decreases bi-exponentially with increasing device area in a range of 0.15 cm2–2 cm2 and (b) schematic showing electron collection from only a fraction of the photoelectrode film nearer to the WE in DSCs with large photoelectrode areas. Figure reproduced from ref. 153. 
These studies show that the Ln alone as a device parameter has limitations in the description of photoelectron collection in large area DSCs; a three-dimensional analogue such as diffusion volume (Vn) is suggested as a possible alternative. In the experiment designed in ref. 157, which employs three photoelectrodes of similar active volumes but different device designs (Fig. 15a), restricting the diffusion pathways in three dimensions by appropriate device designs resulted in enhanced JSC and η in photoelectrodes of similar active volumes (Fig. 15b). Upon increasing the photoelectrode area, the competition between τn and τd becomes crucial. Given a τn of a few milliseconds, the photoelectrons beyond a limit are never collected due to their longer τd. A ∼20% greater charge collection efficiency (ηcc) in those designs was demonstrated by considering Vn, resulting in an overall enhancement in η; η = f(α, ϕin, ϕreg, ηcc). The α (absorption coefficient), ϕin (injection efficiency) and ϕreg (dye-regeneration efficiency) are the same in all the devices as they are made of similar materials and have similar photoelectrode thicknesses (∼14 μm) (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of stacked cells on a single substrate and (b) I–V curve of the three DSCs. Figures adapted from ref. 157. 
Based on our insights into photoanode area dependent DSC performance, we tested various module designs with unit cells of 1–100 mm2 as shown in Figure 16(a–c). We note that such split designs likely add difficulty in the fabrication process as the sealing and interconnection of individual cells will become a major issue. However, such designs have a greater probability of success in s-DSMs as the concentration differences in redox species between neighbouring cells do not arise in solid electrolytes. Based on the connection types, these cells are likely to provide very high photocurrents or photovoltages in DSMs.
 Fig. 16  (a) A DSM photoelectrode (100 cm2) printed at the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Faculty of Industrial Sciences & Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang laboratory with individual cell dimensions of 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm with 2 mm interspacing, (b) a 25 cm2 printed electrode with tiny dots of 1 mm2 and interspacing of ∼0.3 mm, and (c) a 25 cm2 photoelectrode with individual cell sizes of 4 mm2 and an interspacing of ∼1 mm. Such designs are expected to yield very high JSC or VOC depending on the type of interconnection. 
An alternative to avoid lateral diffusion and improve the ηcc could be the use of vertically aligned one-dimensional structures such as nanowires or nanotubes that would keep constant values of JSC even with increased electrode area. Unfortunately, to date, the use of these kinds of nanostructures in small area DSCs has not resulted in comparable JSC values with respect to nanocolloidal films due to their lower roughness and thus dye uploads.
11. DSM stability tests
For DSC technology to be commercially successful, their long term performance under device working conditions such as high temperature, humidity, and continuous light illumination must be ensured. The commercial deployment of DSCs requires device working performance without significant degradation for >10 years,168 especially when their competitors (i.e., silicon PVs) perform for ∼25 years while retaining >80% of the original η. Here, we separately discuss the stability of (i) various components of DSCs such as dyes and electrolytes and (ii) the long term outdoor stability of DSMs.
11.1 Thermal stability of dyes and electrolytes
The organic materials of DSCs are known to suffer high degradation rates when exposed to ambient conditions.169 In addition, liquid electrolytes cause leaking and corrode the metallic grids used for interconnections if not properly encapsulated. In DSCs, the stability is primarily associated with the hermetic sealing; the sealants should be stable at high temperature and passive to liquid electrolytes, and in case of spot sealing failure (pinholes), the materials chosen for grids should be corrosion resistant, and the design should be robust enough to avoid spreading of the electrolyte out of the cell compartment.
The ECN started the Joule program (LOTS-DSC JOR3-CT98-0261) to realise device outdoor performance capabilities over ∼10 years.170,171 They investigated DSC stability under intensive light (2.5 sun) as well as thermal stability at temperatures up to 80 °C. Their masterplate design using a Surlyn spacer with η ∼ 5–6% showed stability up to 8300 h at 2.5 sun, a time equivalent to ∼10 years of outdoor operation. The η decreased <10% for 2000 h operation at 60 °C; at 80 °C, the decrease was 30%.49 Such thermal stability is achieved by chemically changing the iodide/triiodide based electrolyte composition via the addition of MgI2 and CaI2. The higher temperature induces instability to (i) the dye molecules by detaching them from the TiO2 surface,172 and (ii) the electrolyte components such as tert-butyl pyridine(TBP) and lithium iodide (LiI) during thermal aging.49 To improve the high temperature stability of dyes, co-grafting it with 1-decylphosphnic acid (1-DPA) or hexadecylmalonic acid (HDMA) is suggested as a possible solution.173,174 Although the above procedure improved the integrity of the dye–TiO2 surface, the additional dilution reduced the amount of dye-anchoring and light harvesting. A major advancement in electrolyte stability was reported by Grätzel et al.,172 who introduced a low volatility robust electrolyte in conjunction with an amphiphilic ruthenium sensitizer (K19). In their study, ∼8.2% efficient DSCs retained 98% of their original performance after soaking for 1000 h at 60 °C in light. The thermal stability of the above dye–TiO2 conjugate was further verified at 80 °C in the dark. Through these studies, the DSCs achieved the specifications laid out for the outdoor performance of silicon solar cells for the first time.
A significant advancement in DSC performance at temperatures >80 °C was reported by Dyesol Ltd. By employing stable dyes (N709 and Y123) and a 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN)-based electrolyte, the DSCs showed stabilities of over 90% for 1000 h at 95 °C.91 The major contributor to the observed ∼10% drop in η came from the VOC originating from the change in redox species concentration in the electrolyte. Other photovoltaic parameters (JSC and FF) showed no notable degradation. These results are encouraging and suggest that DSC technology can possibly be deployed in extremely hot places.
The substitution of Surylin with other more stable sealants such bynel (EPFL), frits (ECN) or UV-cured epoxy composite sealants (Dyesol) has been a key factor in these advancements. Surylin starts softening at 70 °C, making it unsuitable for high temperature applications, and is permeable to water, which may cause long term stability problems.
11.2 Long term stability of DSMs
Only a few studies to date have reported on DSM stability. In general, DSM stability is inferior to those of their laboratory counterparts. In 2004, a research group of AISIN SEIKI carried out the first outdoor stability testing of DSMs (64 serially connected cells of 10 × 10 cm2) for over half of a year.108 Surprisingly, no significant effect of moisture on device performance was noticed. They reported that a DSM generated comparatively more electricity than a silicon-based cell over one year due to: (i) the superior performance of DSMs in low light; (ii) the improved rheology of the electrolyte at higher temperatures; and (iii) their weaker dependence on the angle of light incidence. The devices showed an ∼20% drop in output power after one year of operation, although the source of this drop was not elaborated upon with the exception of the reported electrolyte leakage in a few cells. This drop in output power was overcome in an extended investigation using a set of experimental techniques to determine the contribution from each DSM component to its performance degradation.103 This study showed remarkable long term (2.5 years) outdoor stability results: (i) no electrolyte leakage was found in the device; and (ii) the dye (N719) and carbon counter electrode were stable, as confirmed by Raman spectroscopy and the stable JSC. However, the concentration of triiodide is still reduced in the electrolyte. This effect was attributed to irreversible reactions between iodide and iodine species with water present in the electrolyte, leading to electrolyte bleaching and the irreversible formation of:175,176 (2)
These reactions have been shown to be enhanced by UV light and temperature.176,177 Electrolyte bleaching is also dependent on the electrolyte solvent and its origin, which are not yet clearly stated, associated with TiO2–electrolyte or TiO2–dye–electrolyte interactions.178 Good sealing and low humidity conditions during the fabrication process are then required to obtain good long term stability results.
Towards the thermal stability testing of DSMs, a report by Kroon et al.179 of ECN showed significantly stable (80%) performance at >80 °C for 3000 h. The devices showed a decrease in power output of ∼20% using a robust electrolyte. In another study by Mastroianni et al.,99 the stability of DSMs (30 cells with an area of 3.6 cm2) were tested in indoor (at AM 1.5 G and 85 °C) and outdoor (horizontally placed and tiled at 25°) conditions. For a period of 3200 h, the outdoor DSMs were significantly stable, with only a 10% decrease in their original efficiency. However, the vertically placed outdoor cells showed greater degradation at maximum power point due to the uneven triiodide concentration, indicating that the vertical orientation of l-DSMs affect device lifetime. A detailed impedance characterization also revealed a reduction in the diffusion length and a possible alteration at the TiO2/electrolyte interface.
Asghar et al.169 summarized the major instability issues in a recent review and suggested that (i) Z709 and K19 are the only stable dyes at a temperature of ∼80 °C, and (ii) devices mostly employing polymer and ionic liquid electrolytes passed light soaking tests (60 °C) and thermal stress tests (80 °C) for 1000 h. Although significant advancements have been made towards determining the stabilities of DSCs and DSMs, such reports were limited to glass substrate-based devices. The stabilities of flexible DSCs/DSMs at temperatures >50 °C are yet to be investigated, although such devices have shown considerable stabilities up to 50 °C.180 Furthermore, a standard criterion is needed for the investigation of stability because devices undergo chemical changes when exposed to outdoor conditions; therefore, chemical investigations along with electrical characterisations are essential when reporting stability analyses.
DSM design involves more complexity compared to the simpler DSCs, and the sealing process is consequently more difficult. To avoid failure in a single point of the sealing that ruins the performance of a complete module, it is necessary that the external components that may be affected by direct contact with leaking electrolyte do not degrade. Of particular importance are the collecting grids; silver should be avoided in the most exposed sections of the cells as iodide reacts very efficiently with it. Alternative materials for collecting electrodes may be carbon, titanium or tin (at the cathode).
Robust module designs must consider ways to control or neutralize the occurrence of localised electrolyte escape. The use of gellified electrolytes,181,182 solid electrolytes or double sealing structures (Fujikura) may help to avoid the loss of electrolyte and thus improve module performance.
11.3 Reverse bias degradation of DSMs
With respect to single cells, the stability of modules is considerably more complex due to the fact that large areas increase the probability of disuniformities and defects, which can lead to increased degradation rates or failures (e.g., non-uniform coverage or pinholes in the encapsulation or interconnections). Furthermore, when cells are connected together in series in a module, the possibility of the occurrence of reverse bias degradation effects must be considered. In fact, a cell that is electrically mismatched in a module, which occurs when it is shadowed or has degraded at a higher rate compared to other cells, can become inversely polarized by the other well-performing cells in the system.146 Current is then forced though it by the other cells. Over the long term, this can lead to device degradation and even failure.183 Contributing to reverse bias degradation are triiodide depletion and the presence of impurities, particularly water. Developing a further understanding of reverse bias phenomena acting upon these components and setting up diode protection strategies is important for delivering long-lasting DSMs.184
12. Standards for DSMs
With some exceptions, due to the relative infancy of industrial development, reports on systematic statistical long term outdoor testing are scarce. At the moment, stability testing on DSMs involves protocols developed for thin films. Even though more statistics and continued tests are required, some promising developments have been reported. DSMs have passed thermal stability testing (IEC 1215), although with η values decreased by 30–40%. Fujikura have shown that cells and sub-modules have passed several endurance tests according to JIS C 8938 standards.185 Dyepower has reported successful UV preconditioning, humidity freeze and damp heat IEC 61646 tests carried out over large area (>500 cm2) DSC modules.186 The IEC tests are meant only for indoor analysis and do not consider the chemical changes that DSMs undergo upon exposure to atmospheric conditions. For DSMs, a different set of standards are required that analyse device performance in conditions close to natural outdoor conditions and account for chemical changes such as UV-stability and chemical stability under atmospheric conditions.
For DSMs to be a successful commercial product, they must pass few standards that are widely applied to silicon and thin film solar cells such as IEC 61646, IEC 1215, IEC 1646, and IEC 1215. These standards are necessary to ensure sufficient device stability over the required lifetime. Test protocols tailored for DSC technology have yet to be designed and implemented. Additionally, there is also a need to set standards for DSM fabrication and characterisation because different fabrication techniques and experimental conditions result in significant variation in η (Sections 5–9). A similar standardisation has been suggested by Yang et al.187 for the reliable evaluation of laboratory scale DSCs involving the calibration of the solar simulator via reference cells, the measurement time of the photovoltaic characterisations (I–V & incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency), and the masking process. Nevertheless, absence of such standards for DSMs leads to misconceptions, particularly in the reporting of module efficiency values; a number of researchers reported η with respect to active area, while others reported with respect to active and aperture area. Ultimately, the latter is the most important number. In fact, since aperture ratios (the ratio between active and aperture areas) can differ greatly depending on the construction methods, the performance on active area and aperture area of DSMs can differ significantly. In the literature, aperture ratios vary from 85% (ref. 84) to less than 50%;141 thus, η drops between 85% and less than half of the reported active area value when total area is considered. It is important that both numbers are given.
13. Conclusions and future projections
Any PV technology entering the market has usually been pitched in terms of three main parameters: (a) efficiency, (b) lifetime and (c) cost. Over 80% of the current market is cornered by silicon cells, which remain the benchmark for PV systems. Over the last few years, the price of silicon modules has decreased considerably. In fact, the drop has been so significant that in 2012, the average cost of modules dropped below the significant threshold of 1$/Wp (i.e. ∼0.8$/Wp).188 While part of this is due to oversupply in the market, a significant portion is due to advances in technology and economies of scale resulting from an increase in cumulative worldwide PV production. Thus, whereas a decade ago new technologies may have aimed at also competing on cost calculated in $/Wp, a more suitable roadmap today considers the development of applications where the new technology offers competitive advantages in functionality over silicon or other existing PV technologies. In Fig. 17, we have added a technological “functionality” entry to the competitive mix in which DSM must compete.
 Fig. 17  Scheme representing inter-relations between the three parameters (power conversion efficiency, stability and cost) that must be considered together with functionality for the successful industrial product development of dye-solar cell modules. Different applications and markets lead to different mixes of requirements and thus different DSM technological developments (e.g., glass, flexible, material combinations, device architectures, etc.). 

Fig. 17 helps identify entry or niche market products (each with a different mix of the three parameters and associated technological functionalities) on which particular DSM technology development can be focused. Subsequently, the market space will grow with continued R&D development, and economies of scale will kick in so that in the longer term, the technology may even enter the more conventional PV system arena. The capital cost to implement industrial fabrication of DSMs is another advantage of this technology as the required investments are one order of magnitude smaller compared to standard technologies. The roadmap for the technological development of DSMs depends strongly on the application. This also explains why different DSM designs and architectures are being explored (e.g., glass, flexible, liquid-based, solid state, monolithic, double plate Z, W or parallel, etc.).
Although there are many commercial developers of materials and technology working on various aspects of DSMs and prototypes, the market where available commercial products integrate DSMs (at the time of writing) is represented by electronic products, especially those for portable or indoor uses.19 G24 Power Ltd. provides DSMs for these applications that are made with flexible titanium foil working electrodes and plastic/ITO counter electrodes and are series connected.
Due to their remarkable performance under low levels of light and compact fluorescent lamps, there is strong interest in both glass-based products (http://ricoh.com/release/2014/<?pdb_no 0611?>0611<?pdb END?>_1.html) and even more so in thin flexible DSMs (http://www.gcell.com), which can be easily integrated in fixed or portable electronic products such as sensors in the home and personal computer peripherals. Although the efficiencies of these flexible modules are still not particularly high under STC, their power output has been shown to outperform competing technologies including amorphous silicon (the current most suitable technology) under indoor lighting.18 The commercialisation of these products with integrated DSMs has been enabled by the fact that their efficiencies are particularly high indoors, their flexibility and light weight characteristics permit easy integration (and portability), their degradation rates are reduced in less-harsh indoor conditions and their lifetimes of a few years (similar to that of the electronic product they are integrated on) are commercially acceptable. Thus, in this particular arena, the DSMs deliver functionalities that conventional crystalline silicon does not. The cost here is not measured in $/Wp, but in the added value that their integration brings (e.g., eliminating the need to replace batteries). The developmental roadmap for flexible devices involves continuing to diminish costs (opening up the possibility of integrating the devices in cheaper products) and increasing lifetimes, particularly outdoors (for portable or semi-fixed/portable installations), by researching better performing (and cheaper) material combinations and encapsulation barrier strategies. Furthermore, the development of efficient hole blocking compact layers at the working electrode is particularly important under low levels of illumination.
A huge market for DSMs is represented by BIPVs, where devices can be incorporated into big installations worth hundreds of millions of dollars globally. Development work by various industrial entities (see Table 2) is on-going to produce prototypes and demonstrators for integration in applications such as bus shelters, roofing and building facades, including semi-transparent windows.189 The latter is particularly suited for DSMs because most technological development has been carried out on glass. Glass also has exceptional barrier properties (which is crucial for lifetimes) and is becoming an ever more widespread material for modern buildings. For integration in shelters, lifetimes of a few years can suffice; however, integration in buildings requires very challenging lifetimes exceeding 15–20 years. Glass DSM technology brings the competitive advantage of enabling the power-generating unit to be semitransparent.190 In fact, the transparency versus efficiency of the DSM can be tuned depending on the requirements for energy generation, visible light transmission and colour.17 For properly rating glass facade applications, the efficiency parameter at STC should be at least complemented by other parameters such as energy produced over the course of the year in real environmental conditions,191 which depends strongly on location, both geographic and related to the building (e.g., vertical or tilted conditions). DSMs have been shown to deliver 10–20% more energy (at the same power rating) compared to silicon installations (even though efficiencies still remain significantly lower).108 For BIPV applications, perfecting encapsulation and developing more stable dyes, less volatile electrolytes with stabilizing additives, and quasi or fully solid-state carrier mediators are paths used by researchers to improve stability. For large scale installations, the uniformity and tolerances that can be achieved in the manufacturing process over (very) large areas together with the management of the electrical output power of the modules (and panels) are important and complex issues to be tackled. The most suitable device architecture can depend on the size of the unit module that makes up the panel. Parallel, series or combined interconnections can be selected to deliver the required voltage and current levels. Electrical and diode protection strategies will also differ depending on the type and size of the module. For BIPVs, as much as the $/Wp, it is important to consider the marginal added costs with respect to conventional building materials (e.g., the cost of a façade with PV functionality compared to that without). Much of the engineering work needed to bring efficiency, stability and costs to the levels required by the BIPV industry along with the peculiar functionality of DSMs required by the markets is being carried out, often “quietly” in industrial R&D divisions, and results and developments are only partly publicly available. The growing activity in patent filing in this field shows (see Fig. 6a), however, that intense work is being carried out to bring the technology to market, and, at the same time, that there are tremendous opportunities for exciting innovation in the field.
While a great body of research is carried out on improving laboratory scale DSCs, little attention is paid to their large area devices; research on DSMs is ∼1% of that on DSCs. Due to this negligence, the η of DSMs has shown comparatively little improvement since their first report (5.6% in 1996). The maximum η reported for DSMs is 8.2% through optimized front and back illumination, which is still significantly lower than that obtained in high efficiency single cells (∼13%). The lack of focus towards device engineering and a complete negligence of charge transport in DSMs are the main factors behind the comparatively lower performance of DSMs.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the ministry of higher education of Malaysia through a prototype research grant scheme. We also acknowledge support by a project from Generalitat Valenciana (ISIC/2012/008). We are thankful to David Martineau of Solaronix Ltd. and Damion Milliken of Dyesol Ltd. for sharing information on the comparative performance of DSMs, and also to Iván Mora Seró for discussion on DSC cost analysis. The authors also thank Dr Hans Desilvestro of Dyesol for useful discussion on the ‘route to DSMs' future’.
References
Key World Energy Statistics, http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/KeyWorld2013.pdf, accessed December 2013.
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Perez, K. Zweibel and T. E. Hoff, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 7290–7297 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nelson and C. J. Emmott, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 371, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4013–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Solar generation PV capacity, http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/about-bp/statistical-review-of-world-energy-2013/review-by-energy-type/renewable-energy/solar-energy.html, accessed January 2014.

          H. Wirth, http://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en/publications/veroeffentlichungen-pdf-dateien-en/studien-und-konzeptpapiere/recent-facts-about-photovoltaics-in-germany.pdf, accessed November 2013.
ZSW press release, http://www.zsw-bw.de/uploads/media/pi18-2013-ZSW-WorldrecordCIGS.pdf, accessed December 2013.
NREL: Best research cell efficiencies, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed May 2014.
First Solar, http://www.firstsolar.com/Innovation/Advanced-Thin-Film-Modules, accessed December 2013.
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
British Petroleum review, bp.com/statisticalreview, accessed November 2013.
IEA, http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/PresentationtoPress.%20pdf, accessed January 2014.
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 1633–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tagliaferro, D. Colonna, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 3235–3242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Sridhar and D. Freeman, Proceedings of 26th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, hamburg, Germany,  2011 Search PubMed .
T. M. Brown, F. De Rossi, F. Di Giacomo, G. Mincuzzi, V. Zardetto, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10788–10817 CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 49–72 RSC .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210–E234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Daeneke, T. H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 211–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18847–18855 CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto, T. Nagai and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 812–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. Harikisun and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1179–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bari, N. Wrachien, R. Tagliaferro, T. M. Brown, A. Reale, A. Di Carlo, G. Meneghesso and A. Cester, Microelectron. Reliab., 2013, 53, 1804–1808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiong and W. Chen, Front. Optoelectron., 2012, 5, 371–389 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
I. E. Castelli, T. Olsen, S. Datta, D. D. Landis, S. Dahl, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5814–5819 CAS .
M. J. Carnie, C. Charbonneau, M. L. Davies, J. Troughton, T. M. Watson, K. Wojciechowski, H. Snaith and D. A. Worsley, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7893–7895 RSC .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
F. Matteocci, S. Razza, F. Di Giacomo, S. Casaluci, G. Mincuzzi, T. M. Brown, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia and A. Di Carlo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3918–3923 RSC .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. Chan Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 CAS .
S. Ubertini and U. Desideri, Renewable Energy, 2003, 28, 1833–1850 CrossRef .

          Dyesol, http://www.dyesol.com/about-dsc/advantages-of-dsc, accessed 13 December 2013,  2013.

          K. Kalyanasundaram, Dye-sensitized Solar Cells, CRC press, Switzerland, 1st edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
V. Zardetto, G. Mincuzzi, F. De Rossi, F. Di Giacomo, A. Reale, A. Di Carlo and T. M. Brown, Appl. Energy, 2014, 113, 1155–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arakawa, T. Yamaguchi, T. Sutou, Y. Koishi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto and T. Nagai, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, S157–S160 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Zardetto, F. Di Giacomo, D. Garcia-Alonso, W. Keuning, M. Creatore, C. Mazzuca, A. Reale, A. Di Carlo and T. M. Brown, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1292–1298 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berginc, U. Opara Krašovec, M. Jankovec and M. Topič, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 821–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hinsch, J. M. Kroon, R. Kern, I. Uhlendorf, A. Meyer, J. Holzbock and J. Ferber, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 425–438 CAS .
P. M. Sommeling, M. Späth, H. J. P. Smit, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 137–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Skoplaki and J. A. Palyvos, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 614–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. L. Ray, Bachelor of Science Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2010 .
J. Kalowekamo and E. Baker, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1224–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tanabe, Fujikura Tech. Rev., 2010 Search PubMed .
D. M. Powell, M. T. Winkler, H. J. Choi, C. B. Simmons, D. B. Needleman and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5874–5883 Search PubMed .
Z. M. Beiley and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9173–9179 CAS .
B. Azzopardi, C. J. M. Emmott, A. Urbina, F. C. Krebs, J. Mutale and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3741–3753 Search PubMed .
G. Hashmi, K. Miettunen, T. Peltola, J. Halme, I. Asghar, K. Aitola, M. Toivola and P. Lund, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3717–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Meyer, M. S. Asef Azam, D. Martineau, F. Oswald, S. Narbey, G. Laporte, R. Cisneros, G. Tregnano and A. Meyer, CleanTechDay 3rd Generation Photovoltaics, CSEM, Basel,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pettersson, K. Nonomura, L. Kloo and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7376–7380 CAS .
D. K. Benson and H. M. Branz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 39, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, T. B. Song, C. H. Chung, B. Lei, B. Bob, R. Zhu, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1368–1374 CrossRef CAS .
C. López-López, S. Colodrero, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1260–1266 Search PubMed .
Z. Xie, X. Jin, G. Chen, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 608–610 RSC .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8384–8389 CAS .
D. Wei, M. R. J. Scherer, C. Bower, P. Andrew, T. Ryhänen and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1857–1862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Thakur, G. Ding, J. Ma, P. S. Lee and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4071–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Zheng, M. Li and C. Xu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 97, 186–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Shen, H. T. Huang and A. C. C. Tseung, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 1840–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhong, J. R. Dahn and K. Colbow, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Cronin, D. J. Tarico, J. C. L. Tonazzi, A. Agrawal and S. R. Kennedy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1993, 29, 371–386 CrossRef .
M. Deepa, M. Kar and S. A. Agnihotry, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 468, 32–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kumar, N. Singh, V. Kumar, L. P. Purohit, A. Kapoor, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa and H. C. Swart, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 134506 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Baetens, B. P. Jelle and A. Gustavsen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 87–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bechinger, S. Ferrere, A. Zaban, J. Sprague and B. A. Gregg, Nature, 1996, 383, 608–610 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bechinger and B. A. Gregg, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 54, 405–410 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Huang, C.-W. Hu, H.-C. Liu, C.-Y. Hsu, C.-H. Chen and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Ahn, S. J. Yoo, M.-S. Kang, J.-W. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 533–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Maçaira, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 334–349 CrossRef PubMed .
D. D'Ercole, L. Dominici, T. M. Brown, F. Michelotti, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 213301 CrossRef PubMed .
Solaronix NEWS, http://www.solaronix.com/news/ccrdelivery/, accessed January 2014.
Dyesol NEWS, http://www.dyesol.com/partners/current-projects, accessed December 2013.
L. Han, A. Fukui, Y. Chiba, A. Islam, R. Komiya, N. Fuke, N. Koide, R. Yamanaka and M. Shimizu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 013305 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, N. Noel, V. Sivaram, T. Leijtens, J. A. Alexander-Webber and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 495, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Hey and H. J. Snaith, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 183105 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Matteocci, S. Casaluci, S. Razza, A. Guidobaldi, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 361–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Agarkar, V. V. Dhas, S. Muduli and S. B. Ogale, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 11645–11649 RSC .
J. G. Kang, J. H. Kim and J. T. Kim, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2013, 472086 CAS .
Dyesol Media, http://www.dyesol.com/posts/cat/corporate-news/post/dyesol-achieves-technical-breakthrough/, accessed December 2013.
N. Jiang, T. Sumitomo, T. Lee, A. Pellaroque, O. Bellon, D. Milliken and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 119, 36–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, R. Bernhard, L. Häggman, M. Gorlov, G. Boschloo, T. Edvinsson, L. Kloo and A. Hagfeldt, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 113–121 CAS .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Späth, P. M. Sommeling, J. A. M. Van Roosmalen, H. J. P. Smit, N. P. G. Van Der Burg, D. R. Mahieu, N. J. Bakker and J. M. Kroon, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2003, 11, 207–220 Search PubMed .
R. Sastrawan, J. Beier, U. Belledin, S. Hemming, A. Hinsch, R. Kern, C. Vetter, F. M. Petrat, A. Prodi-Schwab, P. Lechner and W. Hoffmann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1680–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dai, J. Weng, Y. Sui, C. Shi, Y. Huang, S. Chen, X. Pan, X. Fang, L. Hu, F. Kong and K. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 125–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giordano, E. Petrolati, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 2759–2764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mastroianni, A. Lanuti, S. Penna, A. Reale, T. M. Brown, A. Di Carlo and F. Decker, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2925–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hinsch, H. Brandt, W. Veurman, S. Hemming, M. Nittel, U. Würfel, P. Putyra, C. Lang-Koetz, M. Stabe, S. Beucker and K. Fichter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 820–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ikegami, J. Suzuki, K. Teshima, M. Kawaraya and T. Miyasaka, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 836–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giordano, A. Guidobaldi, E. Petrolati, L. Vesce, R. Riccitelli, A. Reale, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1653–1658 Search PubMed .
N. Kato, Y. Takeda, K. Higuchi, A. Takeichi, E. Sudo, H. Tanaka, T. Motohiro, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Fang and Z. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 3178–3184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. Kroon, Energy Research Center report,  2005, ECN-C-05-078, 1–41.
Y. Takeda, N. Kato, K. Higuchi, A. Takeichi, T. Motohiro, S. Fukumoto, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 808–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jun, J.-H. Son, D. Sohn and M. G. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 200, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Toyodaa, J. Nakajimaa, S. Doia, S. Fukumotoa, A. Itoa, T. Tohyamaa, M. Yoshidaa, T. Kanagawaa, T. Motohirob, T. Shigab, K. Higuchib, H. Tanakab, H. Takedab, T. Fukanob, N. Katohb, A. Takeichib, K. Takechib and M. Shiozawab, Photochem. Photobiol., 2004, 164, 203–207 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. A. Hopkins, G. Phani and I. L. Skryabin, Google Patents,  2006 .
S. Dai, J. Weng, Y. Sui, C. Shi, Y. Huang, S. Chen, X. Pan, X. Fang, L. Hu, F. Kong and K. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 125–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Okada, H. Matsui, T. Kawashima, T. Ezure and N. Tanabe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Kroon, N. J. Bakker, H. J. P. Smit, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, A. Hinsch, S. Hore, U. Würfel, R. Sastrawan, J. R. Durrant, E. Palomares, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, J. Walter, K. Skupien and G. E. Tulloch, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 1–18 CAS .
S. Dai, J. Weng, Y. Sui, S. Chen, S. Xiao, Y. Huang, F. Kong, X. Pan, L. Hu, C. Zhang and K. Wang, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 786–791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wei, J. L. Lan, C. C. Wan, W. C. Hsu and Y. H. Chang, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 21, 1625–1633 Search PubMed .
G. R. A. Kumara, S. Kawasaki, P. V. V. Jayaweera, E. V. A. Premalal and S. Kaneko, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 4119–4121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Takashima, T. Fujii and K. Furusaki, Electrochem. Soc. meeting, 2008, MA2008-02, 478 Search PubMed .
Y. D. Zhang, X. M. Huang, K. Y. Gao, Y. Y. Yang, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li and Q. B. Meng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2564–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pichot, J. R. Pitts and B. A. Gregg, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5626–5630 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kado, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Yamada and S. Hayase, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 1056–1057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, T. Peng, J. Chen, X. Zhang and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16121–16126 RSC .
K. Fan, R. Li, J. Chen, W. Shi and T. Peng, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 1596–1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Solaronix Webshop, http://shop.solaronix.com/electrode-materials.html, accessed May 2014.
H.-P. Jen, M.-H. Lin, L.-L. Li, H.-P. Wu, W.-K. Huang, P.-J. Cheng and E. W.-G. Diau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10098–10104 CAS .
Y. Jun, J. Kim and M. G. Kang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 779–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, U. B. Cappel, E. L. Unger, M. Karlsson, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 779–789 RSC .
H. C. Weerasinghe, F. Huang and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 174–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Macák, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100–2102 CrossRef PubMed .
C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1451–1457 RSC .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dürr, A. Schmid, M. Obermaier, S. Rosselli, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 607–611 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Boschloo, H. Lindström, E. Magnusson, A. Holmberg and A. Hagfeldt, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dürr, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 061110 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, L. Wu, M. Wu, G. Xin, H. Lin and T. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1000–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Chen, C. Y. Lin, Y. H. Lai, J. G. Chen, C. C. Wang, C. W. Hu, C. Y. Hsu, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4859–4864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Senthilarasu, T. A. N. Peiris, J. García-Cañadas and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19053–19061 CAS .
D. Zhang, T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Furuta and H. Minoura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vesce, R. Riccitelli, G. Soscia, T. M. Brown, A. Di Carlo and A. Reale, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2010, 356, 1958–1961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2011, 551, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Noh, K. N. Bae, H. J. Ahn and T. Y. Seong, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 8097–8101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Xiao, Q. Tang, G. Yue, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, Z. Lan, S. Yin and T. Sato, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1884–1888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Biancardo, K. West and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2575–2588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nei de Freitas, C. Longo, A. F. Nogueira and M.-A. De Paoli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1110–1114 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hinsch, W. Veurman, H. Brandt, R. Loayza Aguirre, K. Bialecka and K. Flarup Jensen, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 698–710 CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shen and W. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 436–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wei, S. P. Feng, Y. H. Chang, S. J. Cherng, Y. J. Lin, C. M. Chen and H. H. Chen, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 11904–11916 CAS .
R. Sastrawan, J. Renz, C. Prahl, J. Beier, A. Hinsch and R. Kern, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 33–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cornaro, S. Bartocci, D. Musella, C. Strati, A. Lanuti, S. Mastroianni, S. Penna, A. Guidobaldi, F. Giordano, E. Petrolati, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chiba, A. Islam, Y. Watanabe, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L638–L640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schiefer, B. Zimmermann and U. Würfel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 115, 29–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wei, J. L. Lan, C. C. Wan, W. C. Hsu and Y. H. Chang, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1625–1633 Search PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, P. S. Archana, Z. Kalidin, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2683–2689 RSC .

          R. Jose, A. Fakharuddin, P. S. Archana and M. M. Yusoff, Ab. Am. Chem. Soc., American Chemical Society spring meeting, New Orleans USA,  2013, vol. 245 Search PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, I. Ahmed, Z. Khalidin, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 053905 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, I. Ahmed, Z. Khalidin, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 164509 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, I. Ahmed, Q. Wali, Z. Khalidin, M. M. Yusoff and R. Jose, Adv. Mater. Res., 2014, 295, 553–558 CrossRef .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15374–15380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17163–17168 CAS .
J. P. Gonzalez-Vazquez, J. A. Anta and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10359–10367 RSC .
A. B. F. Martinson, M. r. S. Góes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4015–4021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gagliardi, D. Gentilini and A. D. Carlo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23882–23889 CAS .
G. J. Nelson, B. N. Cassenti, A. A. Peracchio and W. K. S. Chiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 475–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Jennings and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16100–16104 CAS .
J. P. Gonzalez-Vazquez, J. A. Anta and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8552–8558 CAS .
J. Navas, E. Guillén, R. Alcántara, C. Fernaández-Lorenzo, J. Martín-Calleja, G. Oskam, J. Idígoras, T. Berger and J. A. Anta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1045–1050 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CAS .

          P. M. K. Sommeling and J. M. Kroon, 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Hamburg, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. I. Asghar, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, M. Toivola, K. Aitola and P. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 418–426 CAS .
R. Kern, V. D. Burg, G. Chmiel, J. Ferber, G. Hasenhindl, A. Hinsch, R. Kinderman, J. M. Kroon, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, R. Niepmann, J. A. M. van Roosmalen, C. Schill, P. Sommeling, M. Späth and I. Uhlendorf, Opto-Electron. Rev., 2000, 8, 284–288 CAS .

          J. M. Kroon, A. Hinsch, J. A. M. van Roosmalen, N. P. G. van der Burg, N. J. Bakker, R. Kinderman, P. M. Sommeling, M. Späth, R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, M. Schubert, G. Hasenhindl, C. Schill, M. Lorenz, R. Stangl, S. Baumgärtner, C. Peter, A. Meyer, T. Meyer, I. Uhlendorf, J. Holzbock and R. Niepmann, Energy Research Center report,  2001, JOR3-CT98-0261, 1–11.
P. Wang, C. Klein, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123508 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Sekiguchi and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-E. Moser and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2101 CrossRef CAS .
B. Macht, M. Turrión, A. Barkschat, P. Salvador, K. Ellmer and H. Tributsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mastroianni, I. Asghar, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, A. Lanuti, T. M. Brown and P. Lund, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6092–6100 RSC .

          H. B. K. F. Jensen, C. Im, J. Wilde and A. Hinsch, presented in part at the 28th European PV Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Paris, France,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. G. Kontos, T. Stergiopoulos, V. Likodimos, D. Milliken, H. Desilvesto, G. Tulloch and P. Falaras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8636–8646 CAS .

          J. M. Kroon, P. M. Sommeling, N. J. Bakker, H. van Mansom, A. Hinsch, W. Veurman, H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, B. C. O'Regan, F. Sauvage, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, E. Palomares, J. Clifford, E. Martínez, T. Torres, M. Feigenson, B. Breen, S. Vallon, S. Logunov and M. Spratt, 25th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Valencia, Spain,  2010, pp. 306–311 Search PubMed .
K.-M. Lee, C.-Y. Chen, Y.-T. Tsai, L.-C. Lin and C.-G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9994–10000 RSC .
J. Goldstein, I. Yakupov and B. Breen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, R. Deng, S. A. Kulkarni, X. Wang, S. S. Pramana, C. C. Wong, M. Gratzel, S. Uchida and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4345–4351 CAS .
S. Mastroianni, A. Lembo, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2964–2975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mastroianni, A. Lanuti, T. M. Brown, R. Argazzi, S. Caramori, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 123302 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Y. Hirnori Arakawa, K. Okada, H. Masturi, T. Kitamura, N. Tanabe, Vol. Fujikura Technical Reviews,  2009, pp. 55–60 Search PubMed .

          C. B. Claudia Barolo, R. Boaretto, T. Brown, L. Bonandini, E. Busatto, S. Caramori, D. Colonna, G. De Angelis, A. Di Carlo, A. Guglielmotti, A. L. Andrea Guidobaldi, A. Lembo, D. Magistri, V. Mirruzzo, S. Penna, S. Pietrantoni, D. Prencipe, A. Reale, R. Riccitelli, A. Smarra, G. Soscia, R. Tagliaferro, L. Vesce, G. Viscardi and P. Mariani, proceeding of HOPV14, page 72,  2014.
X. Yang, M. Yanagida and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 54–66 CAS .

          L. Tillemann, http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2013/09/f2/200130917-revolution-now.pdf, U.S. Department of Energy,  2013.

          H. Zervos, http://www.idtechex.com/research/reports/dye-sensitized-solar-cellsdssc-dsc-2013-2023-technologies-markets-players-000345.asp?viewopt%BCshowall%26viewopt=contents, ID-TechEx,  2013.
S. Yoon, S. Tak, J. Kim, Y. Jun, K. Kang and J. Park, Build. Environ., 2011, 46, 1899–1904 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Reale, L. Cinà, A. Malatesta, R. De Marco, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, Energ. Tech., 2014, 2, 531–541 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Azhar Fakharuddin	Azhar Fakharuddin obtained his bachelor's degree in electronic engineering from Mehran University of Engineering & Technology, Pakistan and Master's degree in electronic engineering from Universiti Malaysia Pahang (UMP). He is currently pursuing doctoral research at the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory of UMP on the scalability issues of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). His work is primarily focused on investigating the charge transport parameters while upscaling DSCs and exploring appropriate device designs and material architectures to improve charge collection efficiency in large area photoelectrodes. His research interests also include the synthesis and characterisation of metal oxide semiconductors for organic photovoltaics, particularly dye and perovskite-sensitized solar cells/modules. Email: E-mail: clife03@yahoo.com.
Rajan Jose	Rajan Jose is a Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the Faculty of Industrial Sciences and Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang (UMP). He supervises the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory in the UMP. He conducted his doctoral research at the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Trivandrum, India and received a PhD degree in 2002 for his work on nanostructured perovskite ceramics for microwave and superconducting electronics. He has worked at various capacities at the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (India), AIST (Japan), Toyota Technological Institute (Japan), and the National University of Singapore (Singapore) before joining UMP. He has published over 100 papers in SCI journals. He holds over 20 patents nationally and internationally. His h-index is 29 and his g-index is currently 50. His research interests include nanostructured materials and renewable energy devices. E-mail: E-mail: rjose@ump.edu.my; /joserajan@gmail.com.
Thomas M. Brown	Thomas M. Brown investigated polymer OLEDs for his PhD at the Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge. From 2001–2005 he developed E-paper as a Senior Engineer with Plastic Logic Ltd. In 2005 he was recipient of a “Re-entry” Fellowship awarded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research and is an Associate Professor at the Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Rome-Tor Vergata. Cofounder of the Centre for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy, his current research is in dye-sensitized, perovskite, and polymer solar cells. He is on the Advisory Board of Dyepower and is the author of over 100 publications including 16 patents. E-mail: E-mail: thomas.brown@uniroma2.it.
Francisco Fabregat-Santiago	Francisco Fabregat-Santiago is an Associate Professor in the Physics Department of Universitat Jaume I de Castelló (Spain). He is an expert in electro-optical characterisation of devices and particularly known by his works on the use of impedance spectroscopy to model, analyse and interpret the electrical characteristics (charge accumulation, transfer reactions and transport) of devices and films including ZnO and TiO2 nanostructured films (nanocolloids, nanorods and nanotubes), dye-sensitized and quantum dot solar cells, electrochromic materials and liquid and solid state hole conductors. His latest research is focused on perovskite solar cells, photoinduced water splitting, microbial fuel cells and bio-sensors. He has published 85 papers that have accumulated more than 4000 citations with an h-index of 31. Email: E-mail: fran.fabregat@fca.uji.es.
Juan Bisquert	Juan Bisquert is a professor of applied physics at Universitat Jaume I de Castelló, Spain (http://www.elp.uji.es/jb.php). He conducts experimental and theoretical research on nanoscale devices for the production and storage of clean energies. His main topics of interest are materials and processes in perovskite solar cells, nanostructured solar cells, solar fuel production, and lithium batteries. He has developed the application of measurement techniques and physical modelling of nanostructured energy devices that relate the device operation to the elementary steps taking place at the nanoscale: charge transfer, carrier transport, chemical reaction, etc., especially in the field of impedance spectroscopy, as well as general device models. He has authored 280 peer reviewed papers, has an h-index of 53, and is currently a Senior Editor of the Journal of Physical Chemistry and a member of Editorial Board of Energy and Environmental Science, and ChemElectroChem. E-mail: E-mail: bisquert@fca.uji.es.

Broader context
Dye-sensitized solar cells represent a sustainable cheap solar electricity domain; working under the framework of nanotechnology, these modern devices have opened up new opportunities for economic development. This article aims to cater to the need for a diverse readership from academic researchers for an overview of progress made in developing dye solar science to an adapted technology and subsequent “need driven” studies to solve critical issues to entrepreneurs to identify key opportunities in the dye-solar business, to corporations to obtain an overview of the current state of affairs in dye-solar technology. We address many questions relevant to dye-solar research, development, and business: how far are the state-of-the art dye-sensitized solar modules from exhibiting characteristics of a matured technology to guarantee its promise as a medium for cheap solar electricity? What is the size of the industrial sector, and what are their core businesses? What are the different designs employed in dye-solar modules? What are the areas requiring innovations to further develop dye-solar modules? These studies lead us to conclude that, at the moment, dye-solar modules appear as an undergraduate student who offers enormous possibilities, although many problems are yet to be solved before being considered as mature!


 	Fig. 1  (a) A chart showing the paradigm shift in the share of renewable energy sources (data collected from ref. 12 and 13). The values are in million tons of oil equivalents (mtoe).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the working mechanism of a DSC. N719 and Z907 are ruthenium-based dyes. ECO3+, EFc/Fc+, and  are the electrochemical potentials of the cobalt, ferrocene and iodide electrolytes, respectively, measured with respect to a standard hydrogen electrode (NHE). The working electrode (WE) is a mesoporous film of a metal oxide semiconductor (MOS, usually TiO2) with a thickness of ∼3–20 μm coated on a conducting glass substrate. The film is then conjugated with a molecular absorber (dye); a junction is made by putting the film in contact with an electrolyte followed by sealing with a conducting counter electrode (CE) equipped with a catalyst layer. Upon absorption of sunlight, the dye oxidizes and injects the photogenerated electrons into the MOS, which are collected at the WE. The oxidized dye is regenerated by accepting electrons from the redox couple. The electron travels to the CE via an external circuit and completes the cycle. Fractions of absorbed energy are lost at the dye–TiO2 interface (overpotential #1) and the dye–electrolyte interface (overpotential #2). The rest, i.e., {absorbed energy − (overpotential #1 + overpotential #2)}, contribute to the open circuit voltage (VOC). The redox potentials and HOMO level of the dyes are taken from ref. 23 and 24, and b & c are the chemical structures of the dyes Z907 and N719, respectively. Figures adapted from ref. 25 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Efficiency comparison of various types of DSCs. The stars show certified efficiency values of corresponding devices. The confirmed η for various devices is reported in ref. 9.	 

 	Fig. 4  Performance comparison of DSCs with other photovoltaic technologies on (a) a sunny day and (b) a cloudy day (data courtesy of Dr Damion Milliken of Dyesol Ltd.).	 

Multijunction (III–V)	44.7* (FhG-ISE)	—	—
Si	24.7 (UNSW)	14.5 (ref. 54)	∼0.7*–1.29 (ref. 55)
CIGS	19.8* (NREL)	18.7* (FhG-ISE)	1.13 (ref. 55)
Si (amorphous)	10.1* (AIST)	—	—
CdTe	17.3* (NREL, ref. 55)	11.7	0.74
Organic PVs	10 (ref. 55)	6.8*	0.75–2 (ref. 56)
Dye solar cells	11.9* (SHARP)	8.2* (SHARP)	0.5–0.94 (ref. 52 and 57)
Perovskite solar cells	17.9*9	8.7 (Planar structure)% (ref. 40)	NA
5.1% (Monolithic modules)39
QDSCs	7 (ref. 58)	Not developed yet	NA

 	Fig. 5  Estimation of the projected share to overall cost during large scale manufacturing (left panel) and the cost for various materials used to fabricate 20-MW DSMs (right panel). Data taken from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Research trends in DSCs: papers published on single cells (bottom panel); publications on DSMs (middle panel); and patents registered globally (top panel; data is taken from ref. 61). (b) Trends show the affiliation of various countries working on large area development of DSCs. Data is taken from Scopus in January, 2014 using the keywords ‘dye-sensitized solar modules’ and ‘large area dye-sensitized solar cells’.	 

 	Fig. 7  Switching sequence of an ECW. Figure adapted from ref. 75.	 

1	S Samsung SDI	Korea	Electronic devices such as LCDs, mobile phones, and more recently, energy storage and harvesting devices	Dye solar panels for BIPVs, smart windows with integrated storage, tandem DSPs
2	SHARP	Japan	Electronic products	Certified η of 11.9% in single cells by tuning haze effect, certified highest module PCE (8.2%) in W-type module, cost effective back contact DSCs (η ∼ 7.1%) with only one substrate, 8.1% efficient quasi-s-DSCs employing a polymer electrolyte
3	G24 Power	UK	Solar power, especially third generation PVs	Started DSC plant in 2007 (18000 sq. ft), flexible waterproof bags, commercial applications for indoor electronics, roll-to-roll processing capability of 800 m in ∼3 h, specialized in indoor electronics such as key-boards, mouses, e-book covers, solar bags, MP3 players, etc.
4	Konarka	USA	Spinoff company of MIT for DSCs	Licensed its DSC IP to G24
5	Dyesol	Australia	DSCs materials and commercial development	DSMs, BIPVs, integration of DSCs in roof materials (in process), s-DSMs and f-DSMs. Developing DSMs and s-DSMs
6	Solaronix	Switzerland	DSC material and commercial development	Panels with an active area of ∼200 m2 are shipped to EFPL with an estimated annual production of 2000 kW h. Developing DSMs and materials for solar cells/modules
7	Dynamo	Sweden	DSCs materials and commercial development	Preparing co-based electrolytes and porphyrin dyes
8	Oxford PVs	UK	s-DSMs, PSMs	Currently working on perovskite solar modules
9	Dyepower	Italy	Development of DSMs for BIPV and facades applications	Running an automated pilot line for the production of A4 size DSMs and for larger area strings/panels. UV, humidity-freeze and damp-heat IEC 61646 stability tests successfully passed on A4 size modules
10	EFPL	Switzerland	Organic PVs, materials and characterisation	Held the main patent on mesoporous dye solar cell structure. Highest uncertified η in DSCs (13%), one of the highest η in perovskite-based solar cells (15%), the first report on DSMs in 1996 (monolithic series modules (10 × 10 cm2) with η ∼ 6%
11	Fujikura	Japan	Optical fibres	Developing DSCs for both outdoor applications and indoor electronics such as mobile phones, testing ionic liquids and gel-electrolytes in modules, thermal stability and outdoor testing of more than 200 sub-modules (20 cm2), modules passed IEC 61646 (stability test)
12	3G Solar	Israel	DSC technology	Installed DSC mini modules to charge computer peripherals, surveillance cameras, electronic bracelets and medical devices
13	CSIRO	Australia	Research agency	Colourful and transparent DSMs for BIPVs, materials for cost-effective DSCs
14	Taiyo Yuden Co. Ltd.	Japan	Electronic components	Flexible DSC using Ti foil as counter electrode for a sub-module of 15 × 15 cm2 (0.3 mm thin), tested race car using 2 × 8 m2 connected sub-modules in world solar car rally in 2008 and achieved a speed of 11.8 km h−1 in cloudy weather, similar to the 12.5 km h−1 achieved in sunny weather
15	SONY Technology Centre	Japan	Electrical appliances	Started research on DSCs in 2001, applications for terrestrial power and indoor electronics, achieved 11.1% confirmed η in 2009 (APL, 94(073308)), “Hana-akari”, a solar lamp powered by DSCs, developed
16	Shimane Institute of Technology	Japan	Governmental organization	J2 dye, large area DSC (1.25 m × 0.75 m) developments and stability testing for 1000 h at 80 °C, ‘EneLEAF’ in collaboration with Nissha. Ltd.
17	Toyota/Aisen Seiki	Japan	Components and systems for automotive industry	One of the earlier R&D industries to work on DSMs, S-type monolithic connections, stability tests in outdoor exposure in 2006 for 2.5 years
18	Peccell Technologies, Inc.	Japan	Venture company of Toin University of Yokohama	Plastic modules of DSCs, 4 V in a serially connected module of 10 × 10 cm2, the world's largest fully developed plastic module (0.8 × 2.1 m) is the lightest DSM weight (800 g m−2) with a capability of providing >1000 V
19	Eneos Co. Ltd.	Japan	Iol company but established a joint sub company named as ‘Sanyo Eneos solar co. Ltd.’	Bi-layer photoanodes, solid state DSMs (10 × 10 cm2)
20	NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd.	Japan	Spark plugs	Started DSC research in 2003, adopted lithography in monolithic module fabrication, founder of ball grid DSC structures, which replace Pt for catalysis purposes and utilize 95% active area
21	ITRI Taiwan (Industrial Tech. Research Inst. Of Taiwan)	Taiwan	Applied research and technical services	Transferred technology to Formosa Plastics and mass production is expected in 2015
22	Mitsubishi Paper Mills	Japan	Paper, pulp, and photosensitive materials	D-series dyes or indoline dyes perform better with ZnO due to metal free nature
23	Panasonic Denko Co. Ltd.	Japan	Branch company of Panasonic, electronic appliances	See-through modules for indoor applications, stability testing and encapsulation to prevent electrolyte leaking, use of K9 dye instead N719 to improve stability
24	KIST (Korean Ins. Of Sc. and Tech.)	
	Materials for DSCs and device development	Flexible DSCs, especially stainless steel-based devices with η ∼ 4.2% higher than plastic based DSCs, molecular engineering helped in achieving an PCE of 11% at their labs, the technology is transferred to Dongjin Semichem Ltd.
25	J Touch Taiwan	Taiwan	Touch panel solutions	Started using DSCs in indoor electronics such as portable time clocks
26	Fraunhofer ISE	Germany	Environmentally friendly energy harvesting and storage research	Scalable development and stability research on DSMs, first large area (30 × 30 cm2) glass frit-based module design with thermal stability testing up to 80 °C
27	Institute of Plasma Physics (CAS, China)	China	Utilisation of fusion energy	A 500 W DSC power station was installed in 2004 with η ∼ 5.9% in parallel modules, research focused on photoanode optimization, device packaging and interconnections
28	ECN (Energy Research Center of the Netherlands)	Netherlands	Energy research institute	First EU lab for DSC development started in 1995, stability tests for 1000 and 10000 h, introduced master plate design, installed semi-automated DSC manufacturing up to 100 cm2
29	Gunze Ltd.	Japan	Electronic components and garments	Wearable DSC, a unique application (28 cells with required electronics are attached to a jacket and used as mobile charge)
30	Yingkou OPV Tech New Energy Co., Ltd.	China	Upscaling DSCs/DSMs	Colourful, artistic and transparent DSMs in the form of glass windows and screens. Flexible and portable DSMs are also manufactured and available for commercial use
31	Ricoh	Japan	Electronic (imaging and printing devices, for example)	s-DSMs for indoor lighting
32	Merck	Germany	Chemicals and pharmaceuticals	Electrolytes for DSCs, precursors for various photoanode materials
33	Acrosol	Korea	Research & development, solar panel manufacturer	N/A
34	NLAB Solar (name changed to Exeger)	Sweden	Industrial production of DSMs	Pilot plant installed for the production of DSMs as BIPVs and AIPVs
35	Dye Tec Solar (Dyesol-Pilkington JV)	USA/Global	DSMs in BIPVs	Joint venture of Dye-sol and Pilkington
36	Tata Steel Europe	India	Steel roofing	Joint venture of Dye-sol and Tata Steel

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) DSM installation recently completed at the EFPL campus (photos are courtesy of David Martineau of Solaronix Ltd.), (c) images of few commercial DSC products on the market (i–iii) are indoor electronics by G24, while iv and v are developed by 3G Solar, and (d) DSMs installed as the interior of a washroom by Dyesol Ltd. (image courtesy of Dr Damion Milliken of Dyesol Ltd.).	 

 	Fig. 9  Step-by-step historical evaluation of dye-sensitized solar modules.	 

 	Fig. 10  A schematic of a parallel DSM assembly line. The figure is drawn based on the ref. 96 and 97 which outline the steps for parallel modules. For series-connected modules, the FTO has to be scribed for cell isolation. The W-type modules requires no Ag interconnections, and for the Z architecture, the order of the steps can change. For more detail on the fabrication of series modules, refer to ref. 96 and 98.	 

 	Fig. 11  Some commonly adopted designs of conventional DSMs. (a) Design schematic of a DSM employing P3HT (poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl)) as a hole transport medium,87 (b) DSM design for façade application under the European project COMSOL,100 (c) a flexible plastic DSM,101 (d) a series Z-type module,102 and (e) a parallel grid type design where the individual strips are surrounded by a metallic current collector.103 Other common architectures involve the W-type and monolithic designs for series connected DSMs (not shown).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of different types of series connections: (a) monolithic, (b) parallel grid, (c) Z-type and (d) W-type.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Solder shape ball connected on a flexible copper polyimide substrate, (b) an 80 mm square sub-module with η 7–8%, and (c) cross-section of a ball grid DSM. Figures are taken from an online report from NGK Spark Plug.	 


Parallel (grid coated)	68	68%	NA	0.7	0.65	4.3	These designs are mostly grid coated using Ag or other metals such as Ni. This type of connection results in enhanced current density but creates stability issues in the device. To avoid exposure of the metallic grid to electrolyte, it should be encapsulated in sealant, adding complexity to the fabrication process. The advantage of these designs is a more simple power management at the individual DSM level compared to series designs where high levels of current matching are required. These designs also survive reverse bias degradation	
94

187	62.3%	1296	0.7	0.52	4.84	
110

81	81%	820	0.7	NA	4.3	
111

75	NA	50	0.76	0.7	5.7	
49

2246	63%	2100	9	0.62	5.9a	
113

18	73%	235	0.63	0.67	5.47b	
114

151	67%	2287	0.72	0.68	7.4c	
115

15.12	60.5%	172	0.75	0.66	5.52	
97

17.11 (ap. area)	NA	19.4	0.719	0.71	9.9d	

Series + parallel	110	NA	120	2.2	NA	NA	This design reduces the active area available on the photoelectrode and provides lower JSC but multiplies VOC. The design is not widely adopted and has minimal potential for commercialization	
103

NA	NA	23.45	1.85	0.58	3e	
144

90	50	287	1.4	0.56	5.9	
145

Z-type	43	73	51	9	0.65	7	Z-type DSMs provide good performance and high active area. However, they can suffer from lower FF due to excess interconnections that add to series resistance. Careful encapsulation of vertical connections is necessary	
102

47.5	47%	58	7.7	0.68	6.6	
107

505	74%	169	20	0.53	3.5	
146

512	73%	140	29	0.58	4.5	
147

W-type	25.5	85%	54	6.3	0.61	8.2f	The highest certified efficiency reported in any DSM; however, careful design for current matching is required	
84

Series monolithic	19.75	94%	28.55	3.9	0.61	5.29	Any mismatch of current in cells will affect the efficiency of the module. This design yields lower current density	
60

90.25	90.25%	40	9	∼0.6	<2.5	
106

Ball grid	80	95%	∼1200	0.76	NA	∼8%	Very high active area, similar performance to that of a single cell	
116

DSCs (single cells)	∼0.2	
	4.6	0.91	0.78	13	Routinely reported JSC values in the best performing l-DSCs	
26

0.2	—	∼4.6	0.93	0.74	12.3	
148

0.22	—	4.57	0.73	0.72	11.1	
149

s-DSMs/quasi s-DSMs	100	∼45%	37	5.16	0.47	0.8	Pore-filling, lower photoelectrode thickness, high stability	
141

625	46%	28	10.6	0.35	0.32	
141

112	52%	20	8	NA	0.9	
142

2.25	NA	20	0.62	0.50	2.8	
150

8	NA	∼35	1.5	0.47	∼2.5	
86


	13.5	54%	21.5	3.2	0.39	2	
	
87

s-DSCs	0.2	—	19.2	0.73	0.73	10.2g	The highest efficiency solid state laboratory scale device	
151

Flexible DSMs	58	∼60–70%	47	6.5	0.33	∼3	
	
124

900	NA	77	6.7	<0.5	2–3%	
	
101

5.4	NA	69h	0.76	0.54	4.8	Devices fabricated on conducting plastic (PET/ITO) or metallic substrates such as titanium foil	
123

16.4	69%	30	3.8	0.53	3.3	
46

100	90%	727	0.72	0.73	6.7i	
140

Large area panels	2246	63%	2100	9	0.62	5.9a	As per the definition of DSPs in Section 5.3, large area panels are ≥1000 cm2	
113

14000	74%	945j	4.5	0.56	3.58	
100 and 143

6000	48%	—	—	—	2.3	
143


Single (S1)	∼0.28	3.11	10.67	0.66	0.701	5.01	5.01
Split (S2)	∼0.14 × 2 = 0.28	3.70	13.21	0.67	0.678	6.06	5.87
Split (S3)	∼0.07 × 4 = 0.28	4.65	16.21	0.67	0.644	7.32	6.88
	(1)

 	Fig. 14  (a) The efficiency of a DSC decreases bi-exponentially with increasing device area in a range of 0.15 cm2–2 cm2 and (b) schematic showing electron collection from only a fraction of the photoelectrode film nearer to the WE in DSCs with large photoelectrode areas. Figure reproduced from ref. 153.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of stacked cells on a single substrate and (b) I–V curve of the three DSCs. Figures adapted from ref. 157.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) A DSM photoelectrode (100 cm2) printed at the Nanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Faculty of Industrial Sciences & Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang laboratory with individual cell dimensions of 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm with 2 mm interspacing, (b) a 25 cm2 printed electrode with tiny dots of 1 mm2 and interspacing of ∼0.3 mm, and (c) a 25 cm2 photoelectrode with individual cell sizes of 4 mm2 and an interspacing of ∼1 mm. Such designs are expected to yield very high JSC or VOC depending on the type of interconnection.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 17  Scheme representing inter-relations between the three parameters (power conversion efficiency, stability and cost) that must be considered together with functionality for the successful industrial product development of dye-solar cell modules. Different applications and markets lead to different mixes of requirements and thus different DSM technological developments (e.g., glass, flexible, material combinations, device architectures, etc.).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
