Thin film transition metal dichalcogenide photoelectrodes for solar hydrogen evolution: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01108E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01108E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9327-9347Thin film transition metal dichalcogenide photoelectrodes for solar hydrogen evolution: a review

        
          
            Farabi 
            Bozheyev
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Klaus 
            Ellmer
          
        
      c
aInstitute of Photoelectrochemistry, Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon GmbH, Max-Planck-Str. 1, D-21502 Geesthacht, Germany. E-mail: farabi.bozheyev@gmail.com
bNational Nanolaboratory, Al-Farabi Kazakh National University, Almaty, 050000, Kazakhstan
cOptotransmitter-Umweltschutz-Technologie e.V., Köpenicker Str. 325b, 12555 Berlin, Germany
Received 
      10th February 2022
    , Accepted 18th March 2022First published on 18th March 2022AbstractTransition metal dichalcogenides (TMD: MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2) attracted much attention during the last few decades as 2D-layered nanoparticles and thin films for renewable energy applications. TMDs are not widely studied as thin film photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, even though they have demonstrated an excellent performance in photonics and optoelectronics (as photodetectors and field-effect transistors), which is related to their specific intrinsic structural, mechanical, optical and electronic properties. In this review, we focus on WSe2, one of the most promising compounds among TMDs. The emergence, development and performance of WSe2, especially, in the form of 2D layers and thin film photoelectrodes, the role of passivation, co-catalysts and plasmonic structures for the solar hydrogen evolution reaction are discussed and compared to those of other TMDs and other photoelectrode materials. Practical efficiency limits for PEC hydrogen evolution for TMDs with respect to theoretical limits are discussed. The advantages and disadvantages of TMDs are assessed based on intrinsic and extrinsic reasons. Strategies that could advance the performance of TMDs for PEC hydrogen generation are proposed.
1. Introduction
One of the great challenges of mankind is to provide the world with sufficient and sustainable energy to achieve the desired standards of living for all of mankind. Today, the world's energy is generated mainly from fossil fuels, which contribute significantly to the greenhouse effect by the emission of CO2. The total energy consumption will double by 2050 with the increasing world population and increasing standards of living in developing countries. These harmful consequences require an urgent transition to sustainable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydroelectric energy.
One of the most promising strategies is to use sunlight to generate electricity and fuel(s).1,2 While the conversion of sunlight into electricity is already commercialized in the GW range,3,4 the generation of fuels with solar energy is, at least on an industrial scale, in its infancy.5 The prospective transformation of energy systems requires, taking into account the intermittent nature of solar energy, an easily storable chemical energy carrier ideally also by using sunlight.6 Over the past few decades, photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) have been developed, in which the photoactive semiconducting layer plays the key role that splits water molecules from an electrolyte under illumination by sunlight. As a result, the produced hydrogen (H2) can be used as a fuel while the oxygen is usually released into the atmosphere. However, the efficiency of PECs is currently quite low (about 5–9%) and, in addition, often photoelectrodes are unstable in the electrolyte due to photocorrosion of the photoactive layer(s).7 Consequently, optimizations as well as new designs and materials are needed to improve efficiency and stability significantly. One of the best investigated photoanode materials for water oxidation is BiVO4. However, the solar-to hydrogen (STH) efficiency of BiVO4 (9%) is limited by its large band gap of 2.5 eV, which allows for voltages much higher than the voltage required for splitting water (1.23 eV), i.e., a large amount of the solar energy is wasted since it is not absorbed.7,8 Various groups are working on alternative ternary oxides (CuBi2O4 and SnWO4) with smaller band gaps (1.7–1.9 eV),7,9–12 which could be alternatives to BiVO4. Another solution path is the use of transition metal dichalcogenides (MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2), which exhibit better-suited band gaps (1–2 eV) for water splitting and show excellent light absorption properties.13 In photovoltaics, semiconducting compound thin films, such as CuInS2, CuInGaS(e)2 and CdTe, have demonstrated excellent efficiencies in solar cells.14 However, their large-scale production is limited by the low amounts of In, Se and Te in the earth’s crust. Compared to these elements, W, Mo and S are much more abundant;15 therefore, materials made from these elements should be preferred for large-scale applications. In addition, metal sulfides are rarely studied compared to metal oxides under the aspect of solar water splitting and, therefore, should be of great interest in this research area.
In this review, we will survey the status of TMD photoelectrodes for water splitting and compare them to the state-of-the-art of photovoltaic materials. Based on this survey, we will devise tasks for prospective research. Among transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), the mineral molybdenite (MoS2) is the best known. Berzelius reported molybdenum sulfide in 1826.16 First hints on the hexagonal structure of molybdenite were given by Hintze17 in 1904. The identification of the lattice structure was performed by Dickinson and Pauling in 1923 using X-ray spectral and Laue photographs.18 The electrical conductivity of natural MoS2 was measured by Dutta in 1947.19 He observed a very large difference (a factor of 103) in the conductivity along the basal plane and perpendicular to the basal plane, proving its strongly anisotropic nature. The anisotropy of these layer-type materials can also be inferred from their easy cleavability parallel to the basal planes, making MoS2 also a common dry lubricant.
A review on the chemistry of molybdenum chalcogenides was given by Opalovski and Fedorov in 1966.20 A very comprehensive overview on the structural, electrical and optical properties of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) was published by Wilson and Yoffe in 1969.21 The electrochemical and photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties of MoS2 single crystals for water oxidation with visible light were first reported by Tributsch in 1977.22–24 A severe problem for photocatalytical water splitting was and is to find photoelectrode materials that remain chemically stable during the photoexcitation of electrons, which is the main challenge for semiconductors like CdS, GaAs or GaP.23
For these polar semiconductors, when the excited electron moves from the anion valence band to the cation conduction band, the chemical bonds are broken under illumination, i.e., photocorrosion takes place. Therefore, the idea was to find more covalently bonded semiconductors, exhibiting a split metallic d–d band for the absorption of photons of energies of about 2 eV. TMDs exhibit such a band structure and thus were the topic of further investigations. From the theoretical elaborations on the seventeen TMDs,25 MoS2 and WS2 emerged as a new class of prospective photoelectrodes due to their suitable d–d energy band alignment. Due to the lack of natural WS2 single crystals, at first naturally available MoS2 single crystals were tested. Later, TMDs such as MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 were studied one after the other and compared in the search for better photoelectrochemical performance. Next to an excellent STH conversion efficiency, the main requirements for a promising photoelectrode material are chemical stability, a composition of non-toxic elements and easy and cheap producibility. With respect to these properties and availability in the earth’s crust, TMDs are promising candidates.
A high surface-to-volume ratio in the form of 2D layers that can be further exfoliated makes TMDs attractive materials also for other optoelectronic applications. A comprehensive discussion on the current status of photoactive TMDs can be found in a recent overview,26 where the fabrication methods of TMD photocatalysts for PECs are discussed. Excellent performances of TMDs as photocatalysts on Si photoelectrodes were also reported.13,27,28 In our review, the focus is on the preparation methods and the properties of TMD thin films, particularly of WSe2 compared to MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2, as prospective photoelectrode materials for solar water splitting.
2. Structural, optical and electronic properties of TMDs
WSe2 has a suitable band gap (1.5–1.6 eV)29 and high absorption coefficient (105–106 cm−1) for visible light.30 It exhibits a layer-type structure: W atoms are sandwiched between Se atoms held together by strong ion-covalent bonds in a trigonal prismatic arrangement that has a structural similarity to 2H-MoS2 (Fig. 1). 2H-WSe2 belongs to the space group D6h4, where two (Se–W–Se) layers are stacked in hexagonal symmetry per unit cell.31,32 The W-W bond length is 3.28 Å and the lattice constants are: a = b = 0.329 Å, c = 12.98 Å (JCPDS 38-1388). These layers are weakly bonded by so-called van der Waals forces so that they can be easily exfoliated by mechanical shear forces similar to other TMDs.33 The most well-known example is graphene,34,35 which makes traces from a graphite pencil while drawing on paper. The electronic structure of bulk and thin film WSe2 was determined by ab initio theory based on the local-density approximation (Fig. 1c).36 The calculated electronic structure for WSe2 shows an indirect band gap of 1.2 eV at the K point between the maximum of the valence band and minimum of the conduction band, which is in agreement with the experimental value.37
 Fig. 1  (a) Part of a MoS2 sandwich layer, showing the trigonal prismatic coordination of the Mo atom. (b) (110) cross-section of the hexagonal unit cell. z is the distance between Mo and S along the c-axis that equals 0.132. (c) Band structure of bulk WSe2 for the theoretical lattice constants. Note that the band structure shows an indirect gap (adapted with permission from ref. 32 and 36. Copyrights 1987 and 1999 American Physical Society). 
The band structure and band alignment of TMDs were calculated using a first-principles approach. A systematic theoretical study of the dichalcogenides MX2 (M = Nb, Mo, Ta, W, Ti, V, Zr, Hf, and Pt; X = S, Se, and Te) was performed (Fig. 2).38 The conduction (CB) and valence band (VB) edge positions were calculated with respect to the proton reduction (H+/H2) and oxidation (O2/H2O) potentials. It was found that single-layer MoS2, WS2, PtS2, and PtSe2 are potential photocatalysts for water splitting since their band edges straddle the redox potential. The band edges for WSe2 are slightly shifted towards the positive energy side indicating its great potential for water splitting, which has also been shown experimentally. The electronic band structure of the TMDs were also calculated using the G0W0 approximation and compared with the results of other density functional theory (DFT) methods by Rassmussen and Thygesen.39 They obtained similar band positions of MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 with respect to the redox potentials of water.38
 Fig. 2  Band edge positions of single-layer transition-metal dichalcogenides relative to the vacuum level. The redox potentials of water splitting at pH 0 (red dotted line) and pH 7 (green dashed line) are shown for comparison (adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
3. Preparation of transition-metal dichalcogenides
3.1. Single crystal WSe2 photoelectrodes
The chemical vapor transport method was used for the growth of WSe2 single crystals for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The first demonstration of the photoelectrochemical efficiency of up to 10.2% was reported by Kline et al.40 in 1981. An efficiency up to 14% was achieved by Tenne and Wold in 1985.41 Prasad and Srivastava in 1988,42 using n-type WSe2 single crystal photoelectrodes in polyiodide solutions, measured conversion efficiencies up to 17%. The photoelectrochemical efficiency was significantly improved after photoetching of the surface of the WSe2 single crystals. By this procedure, edge steps, responsible for electronic recombination centers that are detrimental for PEC conversion, were passivated.43 The main reason for this effect is the strong anisotropy of WSe2 for the electrical transport of charge carriers. Photogenerated holes and electrons are preferentially transported along the basal planes but not perpendicular to them.44 Along the basal planes edge steps occur where they recombine. These early studies clearly set the benchmarks for efficient WSe2 photoelectrodes with respect to their structure, high light absorption, quantum efficiency and their photoelectro-chemical activity.
For instance, open circuit potentials (OCP) up to 0.6 V and short circuit currents up to 38 mA cm−2 were demonstrated after photo-etching, which are still the highest reported values for WSe2.42 However, the role of the edge steps/defects and their photoetching that led to better charge transfer remains unclear. Another detailed study on the surface treatment for efficiency increase of p-type WSe2 single crystal photoelectrodes was reported recently by Shearer et al.45 It was stated that UV-ozone oxidation of the surface followed by etching of the nonstoichiometric WSex (edge sites show Se vacancies) in a phosphate buffer significantly enhanced the photocurrent density. This report indicates that avoidance of non-stoichiometric WSe2 phases is one way to reduce charge carrier recombination. McKone et al.46 in 2013 reported a STH efficiency of 7% for p-type WSe2 single crystals coated with a Pt/Ru catalyst in alkaline as well as acidic electrolytes. The maximum photocurrent density was 25 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE in an acidic solution (Fig. 3). The combination of Pt and Ru showed a better charge transfer than that of Pt and Ru separately, which could be due to the better adsorption of water molecules at Pt/Ru co-catalysts. Ma et al.47 investigated the monodisperse spherical alloy FePt and pure Pt nanocrystals as catalysts on p-WSe2 single-crystal photocathodes for the HER. DFT calculations demonstrated that FePt better transferred the charges into the electrolyte than Pt due to better H2O adsorption and thus its higher dissociation rate. The photocurrent density significantly improved after deposition of Pt or FePt up to 0.27 and 4.0 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, which were 7.4 and 15 times higher than that of pristine WSe2 single crystals. The photocurrent values for these single crystals were much lower than other reported values;42,46 this could be due to the lower quality of the single-crystals and a larger number of defects in the structure as well as on the surface. Unassisted hydrogen iodide (HI) photoelectrolysis to H2(g) and HI3(aq) was demonstrated for n-WSe2 single crystals under illumination by simulated sunlight.48 It was shown that the photoelectrodes operated quite stable in strongly acidic solutions. Overall, single crystals exhibit a low defect density thus enabling high efficiencies; however, for a large-scale energy production they cannot be used due to the limited surface area (up to 1 cm2) exposed to the light source. Therefore, in the last decade, studies were directed to the preparation of photoelectrodes in the form of thin films that can be deposited on large areas and achieve a comparable quality to single crystals.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–E behavior of p-WSe2 photoelectrodes generating H2(g) from aqueous pH 4.2 electrolyte without catalyst coating and with Ru, Pt, or Ru/Pt coatings, respectively. All electrodes were illuminated using an ELH tungsten halogen lamp calibrated to an equivalent of 100 mW cm−2 intensity using a Si photodiode. The inset shows details of the region around the open-circuit potential of the photoelectrodes. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of p-WSe2 coated with the Pt electrocatalyst. The scale bar corresponds to 200 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
3.2. Solution processed WSe2 nanoflake thin film photoelectrodes
The first demonstration of WSe2 thin films for solar water splitting was reported by Yu et al.49 in 2015 using solution processed WSe2 nanoflake films (Fig. 4). This technique allows the deposition of relatively large-area films; however, it cannot provide a homogeneous thickness due to the quite inert vdW bonding between the nanoflakes and their stacked arrangement. Without a catalyst, the WSe2 photocathode is barely photoactive. On the surface of the films, Pt was electrodeposited to improve the charge transfer to the electrolyte. A maximum photocurrent density of 1 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE was achieved with a solvent-deposited Pt/WSe2 junction in sulfuric acid.
 Fig. 4  Space-confined self-assembled (SCSA) approach for 2D TMD thin film deposition and results with WSe2. (a) Schematic of the deposition method (HEX = hexane; EG = ethylene glycol). Step 1: injection of WSe2 dispersion. Step 2: flake confinement and self-assembly. Step 3: hexane removal. Step 4: ethylene glycol removal and film deposition. Step 5: drying at 150 °C. (b) Photograph of a single-flake-layer WSe2 thin film deposited on flexible In2O3:Sn (ITO)-coated PET plastic and (c) representative TEM image of a single-flake-layer WSe2 layer SCSA thin film deposited on a carbon-coated TEM grid. Panels (d) and (e) show the cross-sectional SEM images of the SCSA and the (aggregated-compacted) AC film, respectively. The scale bars are 400 nm. (f) Photoelectrochemical characterization of the WSe2 thin films prepared by the SCSA and AC techniques under linear scanning voltammetry (LSV) with intermittent illumination (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2) after Pt deposition. A horizontal axis corresponding to zero current is indicated for each curve (adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature). 
Since nanoflakes exhibit a large edge-to-area ratio, the understanding and optimization of edges are even more crucial (compared to single crystals) to achieve a significant STH conversion with this type of photoelectrode. Photoetching/treating was used to passivate or remove the recombination sites at the edge steps on single crystals in earlier reports.50–52 Even though this technique is suited to remove recombination sites, it also removes a considerable fraction of the material; this means that it is not well suited for thin films. An example is the etching of PdSex nanocrystallites from the surface of WSe2 thin films, which act as recombination centers. After etching, the WSe2 films showed an improved photoactivity; however, a significant part of the film was removed too.53
Yu and Sivula54 developed a process to systematically vary the dimensions of WSe2 nanoflakes, a multistage track-etched membrane filtration method (Fig. 5). Decreasing the nanoflake size and its thickness resulted in the increase of the photocurrent density in chloranil electrolyte, despite the fact that a very thin layer can absorb only about 30% of the incident photons. The as-prepared films exhibited only a low photoactivity due to poor charge carrier transfer to the electrolyte at the edge sites. Their passivation, using atomic layer deposition of a 5 nm thick Al2O3 film, proved earlier for hematite photoanodes,55 led to a significant improvement of the photocurrent density. Al2O3 was deposited mainly at the edge steps, i.e., Al2O3 was not conformally deposited as expected for the ALD process. The improvement of the charge transfer cannot be attributed to Al2O3 acting as a catalyst enhancing the photocurrent transfer to the electrolyte. Instead, the observed increase in jph is due to the passivation/reduction of recombination sites (a lower concentration of trap states), which was inferred from the increase of the photovoltage after the Al2O3 deposition. The lateral size and the thickness of the crystallites determine the photovoltage, since bigger crystals generate a larger number of charge carriers. However, the photovoltage is limited by the defect density at the edges on the basal planes with the growing crystal size; thus it is saturated after reaching a certain crystallite size.
 Fig. 5  Exfoliated WSe2 flake size separation: (a) schematic of the multistage track-etched membrane separation column developed. (b) Estimated external quantum efficiency (EQE) at −0.5 V vs. VFB and 760 nm illumination. The approximate average flake sizes of fractions A–D are indicated. Photoelectrochemical performance of passivated electrodes in chloranil electrolyte: (c) LSV curves of bare electrodes (electrodes A–D, green curves) and Al2O3-coated electrodes (electrodes A*–D*) at −10 mV s−1 under intermittent (1 Sun) illumination (adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
The passivation of defect sites can be performed by coating TMDs with a very thin oxide layer as was shown for Al2O3 or TiO2.56–58 Another approach is to use chalcogens (S, Se) itself as passivating species, since TMDs exhibit dangling surface bonds, which hinder charge carrier transfer at the semiconductor electrolyte interface (SEI). These dangling bonds can be passivated by a partial sulfurization (selenization) in S(Se) vapor. The rest of the dangling bonds can be passivated using silane-based surfactants. This strategy was used by Yu and Sivula59 for WSe2 nanocrystals taking elemental Se powder for selenization and hexyl-trichlorosilane (HTS) as a surfactant (Fig. 6). They demonstrated a photocurrent density of 4 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE using a Pt/Cu catalyst for the HER. The combination Pt/Cu catalyst exhibited a better photocatalytic performance than Pt alone, which could be due to the better adsorption of water molecules on the Pt/Cu catalyst. Platinum is one of the best catalysts known; however for mass production, cheaper catalysts are mandatory.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the WSe2 flake treatments used in this work and their proposed effect on defects. (a) WSe2 prepared by exfoliating as-received powder, which likely contains Se vacancies both at the exposed flake edges and internally in the few-layer flakes. (b) WSe2 prepared by exfoliating pre-annealed powder is suggested to have fewer internal Se vacancies, but a similar number of defects on the edges formed during the exfoliation process. Treatment with the hexyltrichlorosilane (HTS) surfactant is suggested for the filling of the exposed edge vacancies of the WSe2 samples (panels c and d). (e) PEC characterization of Pt–Cu-modified WSe2 electrodes with pre-healing or post-passivation treatments or both. (e) LSV curves scanned from positive to negative potentials (10 mV s−1) under intermittent (1 sun) illumination (adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
3.3. Physical vapor deposition of WSe2 photocathodes
Surface defects (states) play the key role for the charge transfer process from the semiconductor to the electrolyte. Thus, passivation of these defects increases the charge-transfer efficiency. Bozheyev et al.60 reported a large-area-scalable technique for the production of WSe2 thin films by combining reactive magnetron sputtering of selenium-rich WSe2+x films with a subsequent amorphous–solid–liquid–crystalline solid (aSLcS) process. They also investigated the role of the catalyst at the edge/step (defect) sites on the photocatalytic efficiency of WSe2 films.53,61,62 These sites consist typically of dangling bonds due to Se vacancies. Pt atoms were deposited at the edges by the reduction of Pt ions by electrons, generated upon illumination at the open circuit potential (OCP) (Fig. 7a and b). The pristine WSe2 film is only slightly photoactive upon illumination. An increasing amount of Pt-nanoislands increased the photocurrent density significantly up to 2.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. This is an indication that the charge carrier transfer occurs via the deposited Pt nanocrystallites at the crystallite edges. Such kind of photodecoration by metal islands can be used to map the photocatalytically active sites on a photoelectrode material. This observation is in qualitative agreement with a recent report on the electrocatalytic effect of MoS2 nanocrystallites. In this case, the electrocatalytic activity is correlated with the number of MoS2 nanoislands at the edges but not with their area due to the fact that the inert van der Waals planes of TMDs hinder strongly the charge transfer from the semiconductor to the electrolyte.63
 Fig. 7  (a) Chopped (light/dark) I–V scans for 150 nm thick WSe2 thin films crystallized on a 30 nm thick Pd film in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at different continuous Pt-deposition times. The inset shows the dependence of the photocurrent density at 0 VRHE for different Pt-deposition times. Each light-on cycle corresponds to 30 s light exposure. (b) The open circuit potential VOC change during the periodic exposure (12 cycles) to AM 1.5 light in 0.1 M HCl. (c) A SEM image of a Pt-coated WSe2 film by photochemical precipitation (180 s). The scale bar is 500 nm. (d) Schematic cross section of our photoelectrode configuration: Pt-WSe2:PdSex/Ti/TiN:O/SiO2/Si. The Pt nanoislands are preferentially photodeposited at the grain boundaries of WSe2 (adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyrights 2017 Springer Nature). 
A decreasing absorber film thickness leads to lower photovoltages caused by a smaller number of photogenerated charge carriers. It is the shrinking ratio between the photo current to saturation current (recombination) that leads to a reduced VOC ∼ Ln(ISC/I0). The photovoltage is also strongly correlated with the defect density in the bulk of the crystallites. To study the intrinsic electronic properties, the thickness of WSe2 films (i.e., along the (001) direction) was changed by increasing the amount of the Pd growth-promotor.61 Rocking curve measurements exhibited an increase in the (002) diffraction peak indicating a strong (001)-texturization of the films with the basal planes parallel to the substrate. Time resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements showed an increase of mobility, diffusion length and lifetime of the charge carriers with the increasing crystallite thickness.
Platinum is one of the most active catalysts known; however, it is a very rare and expensive element.64 Therefore, it has to be replaced by cheaper, i.e., more abundant elements and/or their combinations preferably exhibiting similar qualities, especially for large-scale applications, like direct water splitting. Recently, ammonium thiomolybdate (ATM: (NH4)2Mo3S13) was shown to be a prospective catalyst65,66 as well as a semiconductor with a band gap of 1.9 eV,67 and can therefore be used as a cheap catalyst not only for electrolysis but also for photoelectrolysis.
ATM exhibits a large number of active sites, a prerequisite for a good (photo)catalyst. It is well known that TMDs are only catalytically active at the edge steps, whereas the vdW planes remain inert. In Fig. 7c it is clearly visible that Pt is deposited only at the grain boundaries leading to the decoration of the active sites responsible for photocatalysis. A schematic cross section of the Pt/WSe2 photoelectrode is shown in Fig. 7d. On the other hand, coating of WSe2 with ATM led to the activation of the vdW planes, which significantly increased the charge carrier separation and hence the photocurrent density (Fig. 8c). The band alignment of the ATM/WSe2 heterojunction is similar to that of a 2D-MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction (Fig. 9a and d),68 which assists the charge carrier separation at the SEI (Fig. 8a). The charge carrier separation was also studied by surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements, which clearly showed that the photovoltage, generated in the ATM/WSe2 heterojunction, is more than 3 times higher than that of pristine WSe2 or Pt/WSe2 (Fig. 8b). The pristine WSe2 is only slightly photoactive; the ATM coating leads to a significant increase of the photocurrent density with an optimized WSe2 absorber thickness of about 350 nm (Fig. 8c). The ATM/WSe2 heterojunction system achieved a record photocurrent density of up to 5.6 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE under AM 1.5 illumination in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte. The ATM passivates not only the grain boundaries/edge steps on the surface of the WSe2 film, but also activates the usually inert vdW planes of WSe2. The time-linear H2 and O2 evolution from this photoelectrode for two hours of illumination is shown in Fig. 8d.
 Fig. 8  (a) Energy band diagram of the ATM/WSe2 junction in relation to the potentials for 2H+/H2 and 4H+, O2/2H2O. The work function for ATM/WSe2 is plotted at 1 V vs. RHE. (b) Surface photovoltage (SPV) as a function of the photon energy of the TiN:O back contact, pristine WSe2, Pt/WSe2 and ATM/WSe2 thin films (120 nm thick film). (c) Dependence of the photocurrent density at 0 VRHE on the thickness of the WSe2 film upon AM 1.5 illumination. (d) Gas production by the WSe2 photocathode: H2 and O2 gas evolution for a duration of 2 h at a WSe2 photocathode coated with an ATM catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 61 and 67. Copyrights 2017 Springer Nature and 2019 RCS). 
 Fig. 9  (a) Optical image of the monolayer MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction (dashed in white triangle). The white dots marked in the optical image are the spots where the spectra are accumulated (scale bar is 30 μm). (b) AFM scanning showing the thickness of the surface of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction and the line scan profile (scale bar is 4 nm). (c) PEC current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction (red), monolayer WSe2 (green), and monolayer MoS2 (black) under the same white light illumination conditions. (d) Energy band position of monolayer MoS2 and WSe2 compared with redox potentials for water splitting. (e) MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction formed a type II band alignment. When illuminated, photo-generated electrons are transferred from the valence band to conduction band and the built-in electric field helps to separate excitons (adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 Springer). 
3.4. 2D exfoliated WSe2 photoelectrodes
The formation of a suitable heterostructure is a key strategy to boost the photoelectrochemical performance of photoelectrodes. Xiao et al.68 used a MoS2/WSe2 2D heterojunction stack for the HER and could increase the efficiency up to 5.6 times compared to that of the bare WSe2 electrode. An optical image and an AFM profile of the heterojunction stack are shown in Fig. 9a and b. The valence (VB) and conduction bands (CB) of WSe2 are negatively shifted relative to the corresponding bands of MoS2 (Fig. 9d). The electrons, upon illumination excited to the CB of WSe2, can easily move to the CB of MoS2, whereas holes generated in the VB of MoS2 move to the VB of WSe2 (Fig. 9e). Such kind of heterojunction is suitable for fast charge carrier separation.69 In Xiao's report a quite low maximum photocurrent density of only 28 μA cm−2 at 1 V bias was observed (Fig. 9c). This low value could be caused by the ultrathin heterojunction stack and tiny surface area illuminated. This behavior was also observed by Si et al.,70 who prepared a mixture of 2D nanoflakes of WSe2 and MoS2 thus forming a heterostructured MoS2/WSe2 film, which had a better photoelectrochemical performance than films made of separate MoS2 and WSe2 nanoflakes. Their finding was complemented by first-principles calculations,71 where the work function, band alignment, density of states for a MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction for hydrogen evolution from water splitting were calculated. This study proved that potentials for water splitting are located within the bands of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction. The system was thermodynamically stable and created a built-in electric field for electron and hole separation at the heterojunction upon illumination resulting in effective photocatalytic water splitting.
The electronic and optical properties of a ZnO/WSe2 monolayer heterojunction for photocatalytic water splitting were investigated using first-principles calculations.72 The energetically separated band gaps for the WSe2 and ZnO monolayers with type-II alignment (staggered band gap alignment for the heterojunction) were predicted to be a suitable heterojunction with respect to HER and OER potentials. The band gaps of ZnO and WSe2 are 3.57 eV and 1.9 eV according to HSE06 functional calculations. The heterostructure ZnO/WSe2 exhibits a direct band gap of 2.03 eV, small carrier effective mass and high carrier mobility (∼103 cm2 V−1 s−1). Thus, the ZnO/WSe2 heterojunction could be of interest for a practical implementation. Fan and Zhao73 predicted a SnSe2/WSe2 heterostructure by first-principles calculations as a promising photoelectrode, where the possibility for a separate HER and OER at the WSe2 and SnSe2 layers were pointed out. In addition, it was claimed that Se-vacancies in a WSe2 monolayer lower the HER overpotential providing catalytic reactions to occur spontaneously. Such a unique band alignment for a SnSe2/WSe2 photocatalyst predicted a high STH energy conversion efficiency up to about 10%, which could be of interest for applications.
The photocurrent density strongly depends on the film thickness. Fig. 8c shows that the highest photocurrent density of 5 mA cm−2 is achieved for a thick 350 nm WSe2 film. Thinner films absorb only a small amount of the incident light leading to a low photocurrent. Too thick films result in a lesser share of charge carriers reaching the film to react with the electrolyte due to bulk recombination simply due to the limitation of the diffusion length by grain boundaries, the thickness of the film and defect density. For the best performance, the diffusion length should be comparable or larger than the film thickness.
3.5. ALD, CVD, PLD and MBE of WSe2 photocathodes
Recently, significant progress in the growth of TMD monolayers by physical and chemical methods has taken place.74,75 However, single layers of 2D-WSe2 were not widely studied as photoelectrodes for water splitting due to the difficulties in preparation, formation of back contacts, and pinholes in the extremely thin films, which lead to short circuiting and degradation in the electrolyte. Furthermore, these extremely thin monolayers absorb only a small amount of the incident light.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)54,76,77 is another method to produce samples for studying how large-area ultrathin layers split water under illumination. The main challenge for such thin coatings is that they cannot homogeneously cover the substrate over a large area forming only polycrystalline films or islands (of 10–100 μm in size) that are separated from each other. Furthermore, substrate surface states, adhesion, roughness, contamination and preparation temperature directly influence the deposition conditions. For instance, cracks are formed under temperature treatment even at low temperatures of 200 to 250 °C.55
Another widely known technique is chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which uses WOx films for selenization78,79 or is carried out by evaporation of WO3 and Se powders followed by their reaction to create a WSe2 film.80,81 Ultrathin films have similar challenges to ALD-deposited films. There are still big challenges on preparation of uniform and large-scale TMD coatings on conductive substrates. Vertically aligned WS2 nanocrystals were produced by CVD on FTO and ITO substrates.82 A photocurrent density of 3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE was reported for a WS2 photoanode. The vertically aligned TMDs should be optimized with respect to their size and orientation on the substrate. Recently, Wang et al.83 demonstrated mono- and bi-layered WSe2 on amorphous wafer scale SiOx prepared by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) for solar water splitting. After illumination, the WSe2 monolayer absorber generated electrons and holes, which produced H2 and O2 (Fig. 10a). The H2 and O2 gas production is linear in time, i.e., the evolution rates are constant. The evolved H2 gas volume is twice higher than that of O2 according to the corresponding half reactions of water splitting, where 4 holes are needed for water oxidation to form O2 and 2 electrons for proton (H+) reduction to form H2 (Fig. 10b).84 Similar to MBE-prepared TMD films, optimized ultrathin WSe2 thin films prepared by ALD and CVD are of great interest in the context of solar water splitting.
 Fig. 10  Solar water splitting measurements of the MBE-grown multi-functional monolayer WSe2 photocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the overall water splitting reaction on monolayer WSe2 without incorporating any co-catalyst. Inset: conduction and valence band edge positions vs. water reduction and water oxidation reactions in pH = 7 water solution. (b) Overall photocatalytic water splitting on monolayer WSe2 under 300 W xenon lamp irradiation with an AM1.5G optical filter. No degradation of the photocatalytic activity was observed during the course of the reaction (adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
A pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method has enabled the preparation of centimeter-scale TMD thin films (MoS2, WS2, WSe2) on various substrates.85–88 Furthermore, a MoS2/WS2/WSe2 multi-heterojunction was formed with good uniformity.88 Herein, WSe2 exhibited – 9 layers, WS2 – 3 layers and MoS2 – 3 layers with the total thickness of 10 nm. These multi-heterojunctions significantly improved PEC hydrogen evolution on a p-Si photoelectrode. Such kind of combination of the layered stacks improved charge carrier generation, separation and transfer by the built-in electric field. These structures are of great interest for further studies, especially, comparison of the PEC performances of a single layer TMDs with bilayer, trilayer and bigger number of stacks. The main advantage that a single layer TMD exhibits is a direct band gap and starting from bilayers an indirect band gap. However, single layers cannot absorb most of the incident light; therefore, a balance in the thickness of the films should be established, which can also be tuned combining different TMD layers.
4. Plasmonic photocatalysis by 2D WSe2 photoelectrodes
Another approach, to improve the efficiency of solar water splitting, is to use plasmonic structures, i.e., the so-called plasmonic photocatalysis. Plasmonic nanoislands can increase light coupling by a local electric field enhancement leading to an increased electron–hole generation rate. The most used plasmonic structures are based on metallic Au, Ag or Cu nanoislands. A significant effect of plasmonic structures was already demonstrated for bulk materials as well as for thin film coatings and 2D materials.89 For example, plasmonic particles were investigated on different photoelectrodes such as TiO2,90 BiVO4,91 MoS2,92 and SnS.93 In the case of bulk TiO2 material, coating by plasmonic Au nanoparticles enhanced the photocurrent 66× times for photocatalytic water splitting.90 An enhancement of the photocatalytic activity was achieved by coating Au nanoislands with a diameter of 5 nm onto WSe2 monolayer films, where the photocurrent increased 7 times from 20 nA to 140nA (Fig. 11).94 The AC current for WSe2 is about 1 nA and in the range of 20 nA and 40 nA without and with illumination. This indicates that the absolute value of photocurrent for Au/WSe2 is increased by a factor of 6 though it is still very small due to the thinness of the WSe2 monolayer.
 Fig. 11  (a) AC photocurrent measurements for the monolayer WSe2 electrode with and without Au nanoislands under visible illumination. (b) Enhancement factor of the electric field intensity at the Au nanoislands/monolayer WSe2 interface calculated using the FDTD method. (c) Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic iodine redox process (adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
Electromagnetic field simulations by the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method indicated that near field optical enhancement increases the electron–hole generation rate. This enhances the amount of photogenerated charge carriers that improve the photoelectrochemical reaction at the surface of the WSe2 monolayer. Recently, plasmonic Ag island decorated vertically grown MoS2 on graphene (G) has shown its potential for efficient photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting.95 The Ag-MoS2/G heterojunction yielded up to 10 times higher photo-to-dark current ratio compared to bare MoS2 nanosheets on indium tin oxide, i.e. photocurrent density was increased up to 5 mA cm−2 using a 0.5 M NaSO3 scavenger in 0.5 M NaSO4 solution at a potential of −0.6 VSCE. Such synergetic effects of surface plasmon resonances with favorable TMD/G heterojunctions and multijunctions can significantly enhance PEC activity and is a future research field.
5. Photoelectrochemical stability of WSe2 photoelectrodes
The stability of WSe2 thin film photoelectrodes is mandatory for a long-term operation in different electrolytes. It depends on different factors such as chemical states, charge carrier transport, and redox processes. McKone et al.46 showed a slight decrease of the photocurrent density for a p-type WSe2 single crystal covered with Pt/Ru co-catalysts after 2 hours of testing under alkaline and acidic conditions. The photocurrent density dropped from 15.5 to 15.0 mA cm−2 at −0.65 VSCE under acidic conditions (pH = 2) and from 14.0 to 12.5 mA cm−2 at −0.6 VSCE under alkaline conditions (pH = 10) in a 50 mM solution of methyl viologen dichloride using 0.5 M potassium phosphate as a buffer. Even though the WSe2 single crystals demonstrated stability over 2 h, long-term stability and the surface states of the WSe2 single crystals were not studied afterwards.
Yu et al.49 demonstrated a steady-state photocurrent density of about 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE for 30 min for solution processed WSe2 thin films and demonstrated the evolution of H2.59 This was the first report with respect to direct H2 detection using WSe2 thin film photoelectrodes. The authors indicated a stable performance of their thin film photoelectrode similar to WSe2 single crystals.46 Further experiments of this group improved the photocurrent density up to 1.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE for 2 h for WSe2 thin films coated with Pt/Cu co-catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte after postselenization and passivation of the Se vacancies with surfactants. However, the stability issue of WSe2 thin film photocathodes still remains challenging.
The stability of WSe2 thin film photocathodes was studied using Rh, Pt, ATM and BaSO4 as catalysts or a protection layer. The coating of WSe2 photocathodes with Pt and Rh did not lead to a constant photocurrent over time. The Pt and Rh coatings at the edge steps/sites tend to degrade followed by oxidation and amorphization of the WSe2 surface upon long term testing under illumination.61,62 A similar observation was reported by Wang et al.96 for a Pt/TiO2/CdS/CuBi2O4 photocathode, where a delamination of Pt rather than the photo-corrosion of the absorber layer CuBi2O4 resulted in a significant decrease of the photocurrent. Replatination of the photocathode restored more than half of the photocurrent density initial value. Furthermore, systematic optimization of photoelectrode adhesion to the back contact and protection layer on top was indicated as the next stage of the research.
An ATM layer on top of WSe2 thin films was able to passivate the vdW planes of WSe2 as well as to stabilize it to some extent.62,67 The photocurrent density significantly decreased from 4.4 to 0.8 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE after 3 h 10 min of testing due to the dissolution of the ATM layer. Similar to the TiO2 protection coating, a 50 nm thick SnO2 thin film prepared by magnetron sputtering on top of ATM/WSe2 was also tested.62 The SnO2 considerably decreased the initial photocurrent density of ATM/WSe2 even though it could stabilize the WSe2 thin film photoelectrode. Pt and Rh coatings prepared by photodeposition of Pt and Rh salts were also not able to stabilize the surface of the ATM/WSe2 photocathode.62 First, the surface of the ATM layer was reduced in an acidic electrolyte during the stability testing; second, when the ATM surface was exposed to air after the testing, the ATM/WSe2 photoelectrode was readily oxidized. A protection of the ATM layer was achieved by insoluble Ba2+ cations, which coordinated to a high number of active [S2]2− sites of the Mo3S13 cluster units responsible for catalytic reactions. However, the photocurrent density for BaSO4/ATM/WSe2 decreased from 3.6 to 2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE after 3 h 10 min of testing, which could be due to pinholes and diffusion/intercalation of electrolyte species into cracks and irregularities. The authors suggested other insoluble cations such as Mg2+ and Sr2+ (similar to Ba2+) and their combination for the protection and passivation of TMDs. These cations can form thin layers of MgSO4, SrSO4 and BaSO4 on TMD photoelectrodes protecting them from photocorrosion.
6. Discussion
6.1. Maximum theoretical photocurrent density and STH limit for TMD thin film and single crystal photoelectrodes
The solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency is given by Chen et al.:97 (1)where, jSC is the photocurrent density under AM1.5G irradiation, ηF is the Faradaic efficiency of the charge transfer to the electrolyte and Ptotal is the solar irradiation power density. It is important that these parameters have to be measured under standard illumination conditions (AM1.5G), without sacrificial agents in the electrolyte and without an electrical bias between working and counter electrodes. From formula (1) it is clear that in order to reach a high conversion efficiency, the photocurrent density jSC has to be maximized. This means first that the photoelectrode should absorb most of the incident solar light corresponding to its optical band gap. The thickness of the photoelectrode should be large enough to absorb most of the light. The direct band gap is observed only for single layered TMDs,69,98 whereas for thin films more than 2 single layers thick, the optical band gap is indirect. In Fig. 12 the absorption spectrum and the absorption coefficient are shown for WSe2 and WS2 films prepared by a magnetron sputtering and an amorphous solid–liquid–crystalline solid (aSLcS) process.60,99 An absorption of more than 90% is achieved at a photon energy of 1.5 eV which corresponds to the A-exciton absorption characteristic for WSe2 (Fig. 12a). The absorption is increased further as the energy increases to more than 2 eV. A similar behavior is observed for a 180 nm thick WS2 thin film, where 90% absorption is achieved at 1.9 eV (Fig. 12c). Peaks at 1.91, 2.33 and 2.64 eV correspond to the strong A, B and C excitons, which are due to the valence band splitting as a result of a spin–orbit coupling characteristics for TMDs.100–102 The maximum photocurrent density jmax and STH efficiency can be calculated by integration of the photon flux over the wavelength:97 (2)where λ is the photon wavelength (λ1 and λ2 are the integration limits), q is the electron charge, d is the film thickness, αλ is the experimentally measured absorption coefficient, and Φλ is the photon flux of the AM 1.5 solar spectrum. The absorbed portion of the solar spectrum increases with increasing film thickness from 50 nm to 350 nm which is also dependent on αλ (Fig. 12b). jmax increases from 13 to 28.5 mA cm−2 which corresponds to the STH increase from 16 to 35% for WSe2 films (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a) Absorption and absorption coefficient α for a 250 nm thick WSe2 thin film with the optical band gap of 1.5 eV. (b) Absorbed portions of AM1.5 by different thick films determined from the α of WSe2. (c) Absorption and α for a 180 nm thick WS2 thin film with the optical band gap of 1.8 eV. (d) Absorbed portions of AM1.5 by different thick films determined from the α of WS2. Maximum photocurrent density, jmax, and STH efficiency as a function of the (e) film thickness and (f) optical band gap.97 
This value is a maximum theoretical achievable limit for the WSe2 with the indirect optical band gap of 1.5 eV and thickness of more than 350 nm. In the case of a bigger indirect band gap of 1.8 eV for WS2 the achievable STH efficiency is lower; jmax increases from 11.8 to 19.6 mA cm−2 which corresponds to the STH increase from 14.5 to 24.5% for a film thickness between 50 nm and 350 nm (Fig. 12d–f). The calculated efficiencies indicate that the maximum STH efficiency can be obtained by a more than 350 nm thick film, which can be further studied in practice. Since the calculation does not take into account the limiting factor of the finite diffusion length, it really suggests that a layer of infinite thickness leads to the highest STH. The optical band gap of 1.78 eV (ref. 103) for a MoS2 thin film is close to that of WS2 (1.8 eV); therefore theoretical efficiency and photocurrent limits are close (MoS2: jmax = 20.22 mA cm−2 and STH = 24.88%). The optical bandgap for a MoSe2 film equals 1.26 eV,104 which shows theoretical limits of jmax = 37.16 mA cm−2 and STH = 45.71%.
The calculated values above are close to the Shockley–Queisser (S–Q) limit for the band gaps of the MoS2 thin film (1.78 eV): jmax = 20.18 mA cm−2 and STH = 27.53%; and for the WS2 thin film (1.8 eV): jmax = 19.64 mA cm−2 and STH = 27.16%; for WSe2 (1.5 eV): jmax = 28.97 mA cm−2 and STH = 32.9%. However, for the MoSe2 thin film (1.26 eV) these values are higher compared to the S–Q limit: jmax = 37.12 mA cm−2 and STH = 32.97%. Formula (2) does not take into account reflection at the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface, any losses due to the deficiency of the material and recombination effects at the SEI. All theoretical efficiency limit calculations for TMDs were performed under the assumption that all absorbed photons generate electron–hole pairs and that the Faradaic efficiency is 100%. However, these values are close to the S–Q limit for the considered band gaps closer to 1.5 eV, especially the values of jmax.
The experimental values are far below the theoretical ones due to the imperfections in the crystal lattice thus leading to photovoltage losses. The theoretical limit for a single junction solar cell is 33.7% at 1.34 eV according to the S–Q limit (Fig. 13).105 Therefore, for TMDs with the band gaps of 1–2 eV, solar cell efficiencies in the range of 22–33% are expected. Recently, the thickness dependence of the solar cell efficiency in transition metal dichalcogenides was calculated by density functional theory and GW + BSE.106 Herein, it was shown that among TMDs, a 100 μm thick slab of WS2 has potential for the highest solar cell efficiency of 36.3% that should be proved experimentally.
 Fig. 13  Comparison of the efficiencies for MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 with different solar cell materials depending on their band gap. The solid line shows the S–Q limit for a single junction solar cell.105 The solar cell efficiencies for the materials were taken from ref. 117 and 118. 
The maximum VOC values for the photoelectrodes can be determined using the Shockley diode equation, where it is assumed that bulk carrier recombination is dominant thus limiting the maximum photovoltage:107 (3)where k – Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10−23 J K−1), q – electron charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), T –temperature (K), jmax – maximum photocurrent density (mA cm−2), Ln – minority-carrier diffusion length (cm), NA – dopant density (cm−3), and Dn – diffusion coefficient (cm2 s−1), which can be calculated from Dn = kTμ/q, where μ – mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1), and ni – intrinsic carrier density (cm−3). The intrinsic carrier concentration ni can be calculated using the formula:108 (4)where NC(T) and NV(T) – electronic density of states at conduction and valence bands, where they were approximated to be NC(300 K) = NV(300 K) = 1019 cm−3,107 and Eg –band gap (eV).
As an example, the calculation for a WSe2 single crystal is shown below. Taking into account the theoretical jmax = 32.93 mA cm−2 and reported values for WSe2 photocathodes: T = 300 K, Ln = 5 μm, NA = 1017 cm−3, ni = 1.73 × 107 cm−3;46,107,109,110 the maximum VOC can be estimated to be 1.12 V. This value is much larger than that of experimentally measured maximum VOC = 0.6 V.38,42 In addition, the theoretical and experimental parameters are compared and summarized for MoS2, WS2 and MoSe2 in Table 1. Experimental jmax and VOC values are below the theoretical limits for all TMDs. The highest maximum VOC = 1.17 V is found to be for WS2 among the other TMDs; WS2 has demonstrated the highest diffusion length Ln = 200 μm.111 Lower experimental values for jmax and VOC are due to the defects in the structure that point at a further need in improvements of the photoelectrode purity and quality that would increase Ln, jmax and consistently VOC. These calculated values, below however are close to the potential of 1.23 V needed for water splitting which is the main goal of the studies.
Table 1 Comparison of the theoretical and experimental parameters for single crystal TMDs. The maximum theoretical current density jmax (th.) and STH (th.) represent the S–Q limit for the corresponding band gap of the material considering Faradaic efficiency of 100%. The parameters used to calculate VOC (th.) were taken from the references mentioned in the table. The calculation of the STH (exp.) was performed considering the maximum achieved fill factor (FF = 0.61) for TMDs112




Material

E
g, eV

j
max (th.), mA cm−2

j
max (exp.), mA cm−2
Electrolyte

n
i, cm−3

N
A, cm−3

D
n, cm2 s−1

L
n, μm
VOC (th.), V
VOC (exp.), V
STH (th.), %
STH (exp.), %
Ref.




MoS2
1.25
37.58
16.7
2 M Br−/Br2
3.16 × 108
1017
4 × 104
1.4
0.83
0.5
33.05
5.09

113, 112 and 114


WS2
1.35
34.66
13.9
2 M Br−/Br2
4.57 × 107
1017
2.5 × 104
200
1.19
0.72
33.65
6.10

111, 113, 112 and 115


MoSe2
1.32
35.43
25.5
1 M Nal and 0.05 M I2
8.16× 107
1017
5 × 104
5
1.04
0.65
33.42
10.11

40 and 116


WSe2
1.4
32.87
25
0.5 M H2SO4
1.73 × 107
1017
5 × 104
5
1.12
0.71
33.42
10.82

40, 46, 107, 109 and 110




The efficiencies for MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2, summarized in Table 1, are compared to those of the best materials in Fig. 13. One can clearly see that the record efficiencies for well developed materials almost reach the theoretical limit.109 The determined efficiencies for TMDs are in the range of 5–10%. Considering the maximum S-Q efficiency of 33% for TMD band gaps of 1.2–1.4 eV, still there is a big gap that should be systematically reduced with detailed studies and massive research activities similar to that for traditional semiconductors such as Si, CIGS, GaAs, perovskites, etc.110 For instance, the efficiency of the best GaAs photoelectrode is very close to the S–Q limit and it has a comparable band gap of 1.42 eV to TMDs. The main limiting factors of the material efficiency are surface and bulk defects, series resistances, and electronic band alignment with respect to back contact. The detrimental factors that decrease the efficiency should be eliminated.
The efficiency of PEC cells compared to that of solar cells is rather low due to the hindered charge transfer at the SEI. For an efficient HER, a suitable catalyst/passivation layer is needed which increases the transfer of the charge carrier to the electrolyte to initiate the chemical reaction instead of a solid junction that has a gradual transition between layers in solar cells. In the experiments, the Faradaic efficiency is less than one, i.e. charge carriers partially recombine at the SEI. Herein, a suitable electrolyte solution with adjusted pH is required to provide better conductivity and long term stability.119 In addition, the losses at the PEC (quartz or glass) window due to light scattering/reflection and absorption in the electrolyte can be in the range of 10–20%.9 Therefore, a suitable design of the PEC cell is required to maximize the efficiency.
6.2. Anisotropic features of TMDs
Due to the strong anisotropic crystallographic structure of TMDs, the orientation of the crystalline planes on the substrate strongly influences the photocatalytic activity of the films. The crystallographic anisotropy of TMDs leads to different electrical transport properties; for instance, the electrical and thermal conductivities for in-plane directions are about 100 times higher than that of out-of-plane directions for WS2.120 The anisotropy parameter, defined as the ratio of the resistivities parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis γ = ρ‖/ρ⊥, is found to be 104 for WSe2 and even 106 for MoSe2.121,122 Therefore, the role of the growth direction of crystallites with respect to the substrate is crucial for an efficient charge transfer and PEC reaction, since the efficiency is dependent on the type of the exposed lattice planes.
TMD crystals can be prepared with the c-axis parallel to the substrate normal, i.e. along the (001) planes, as well as perpendicular to the substrate normal, i.e. along the (100) and (010) planes.123 The adhesion to the back contact is usually weak due to the inert vdW planes; therefore, their perpendicular orientation can improve the adhesion, since the crystal edges contain defects (S or Se vacancies) and inhomogeneities that create chemical bonds with the substrate surface. Such kinds of exposed vdW edges are favorable for photoelectro-chemical reactions, since the photogenerated charge carriers move faster along the basal vdW planes and reach the edge sites to react at the SEI. This difference is due to a different nature of the chemical bonding (ion-covalent bonds in the in-plane direction and vdW bonds in the out-of-plane directions) as well as impurity intercalates between the planes.
6.3. Intercalation of TMDs
The intercalation chemistry of TMDs is an important aspect that influences the performance and stability of TMD photoelectrodes. The intercalation of the species generates internal stress, which can break the van der Waals force between the adjacent layers. TMD thin films are not long term stable during photoelectrochemical reactions due their large interlayer spacing having an inert vdW nature, which can be easily occupied by chemical species of the electrolyte (H+, SO42−, H2O, OH˙,O˙).62 Such intercalation can lead to the weakening of the contact between the inert vdW planes of TMD layers as well as to the back contact layer through the pinholes and cracks. The volume of the material increases thus leading to efficiency losses due to the hindering of the charge transfer between the adjacent vdW layers to the SEI. The mechanisms of chemical and electrochemical intercalation and exfoliation in TMDs were comprehensively reported by Zhang et al.124 In order to avoid the intercalation as well as oxidation processes the photoelectrode has to be coated by protection/passivation layers (e.g. TiO2, Al2O3, SnO2, and ATM).62
6.4. Vertical alignment of TMDs and their nanoarrays
Complementary to heterostructures with horizontal atomic layers, a heterostructure based on n-type MoS2 and p-type WSe2 with vertically aligned atomic layers was reported (Fig. 14).125 With the aim of increasing the charge transfer for the PEC reaction, TMDs can be oriented vertically to the back contact, since a higher amount of exposed edge sites for vertically aligned TMDs enhances the reaction rate at the SEI. With such a heterostructure synthesis, a rectifying p–n junction diode behavior (a process of converting the AC signal to DC signal) was demonstrated with an area of 1 cm2. Furthermore, such kind of vertically aligned structure can improve the contact and adhesion to the substrate due to the edge sites containing chalcogen vacancies and metallic dangling bonds that improve the charge transport. The number of the edge sites of TMDs defines the charge transfer efficiency, since it is dependent on the value of the surface area and its states. It was already shown that the catalytic activity for vertically aligned MoS2 and MoSe2 correlated with the current density depending on the density of the exposed edge sites.126
 Fig. 14  Schematics of the synthesis of a MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructure. (a) Tungsten (W) is coated onto the substrate. (b) WSe2 film with a vertically aligned layer is formed via rapid selenization. (c) Molybdenum (Mo) is coated on top of the synthesized WSe2 film. (d) MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructure is formed via rapid sulfurization. (e) The heterostructure consists of the MoS2 and WSe2, in which their van der Waals layers are aligned perpendicular to the substrate (adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Recently, Li et al. reported vdW heterostructure nanoarrays of metallic and semiconducting TMD materials (VSe2/WSe2, NiTe2/WSe2, CoTe2/WSe2, NbTe2/WSe2, VS2/WSe2, VSe2/MoS2 and VSe2/WS2).127 These heterojunctions were produced by nucleation of periodic arrangements with tunable lateral dimensions. Depending on the heterostructure stack types, the photoactivities of photoelectrodes are different due to the different charge transfer mechanisms and kinetics between the stacks. Vertical TMD heterostructures and TMD heterojunction nanoarrays could be promising for a variety of electronic and optoelectronic devices, particularly, also for water splitting photoelectrodes.
7. PEC performances of thin film TMD photoelectrodes
The STH efficiency of a photoelectrode material is determined by the trade-off between light absorption and charge carrier separation, their diffusion length, and the charge transfer to the electrolyte. For instance, 2D thin layers cannot absorb all incident light (about 30%: depends on the film thickness) due to their limited thickness. However, it was shown that the maximum internal quantum yield ∼60% from the thinnest passivated WSe2 fraction (150 nm × 9 nm) is comparable to that of the state-of-the-art p-type WSe2 single crystal.46 With a band gap of ∼1.6 eV and a Faradaic efficiency of 100% it can convert ca. 10% of the incident light into solar fuel.54 Such kind of performance can be implemented in industry provided, that the material is stable in aqueous environments. The main advantage of the self-assembled nanoflake thin films is their simple processing, filtration and possibility of coating on large areas.128 Furthermore, these crystallites exhibit a large number of grain boundaries exposed to the electrolyte, which can beneficially act as photocatalytic active sites as well as detrimental recombination centres. The maximum photo current density jmax is directly related to a high charge transfer and low recombination rates. Still the solution-processed self-assembled nanocrystal films need an improvement of the adhesion to the back contact and suffer from efficiency limitation due to bulk defects, and pinholes between the crystals inducing shot-circuits which have to be avoided by further optimization. Recently, Todt et al.129 demonstrated by locally resolved scanning-photocurrent microscopy that exfoliated MoSe2 nanoflake ensembles consist of only 7% of nanoflakes which are highly photoactive, whereas 66% of the nanoflakes are more or less inactive. This explains why nanoflake TMDC layers are less photoactive than bulk TMDC materials.
Physical vapor deposition requires high vacuum as well as high temperatures, which could be disadvantages of the method. However, these conditions are needed to prepare homogeneous films and to eliminate any side reactions during sample preparation. Thin films with a high electronic quality and controlled thickness can be easily coated on large areas. Therefore, this method can be used to prepare appropriate films with respect to physical properties61 such as a high diffusion length, a high mobility, long electron and hole lifetimes, an efficient charge carrier separation, and a high light absorption. The maximum value of these parameters is determined by the defect density (point defects, inclusions, and dislocations) in the films. The best films with a thickness of 350 nm absorb up to 80% of the photons and show the highest photocurrent density (5.6 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE),67 which, however is far below that of single crystals (24 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE) and even far lower than the theoretical limit (32.87 mA cm−2, see Table 1).46

Table 2 summarizes photocurrent densities jphoto for thin film WSe2 photocathodes reported in the literature. Pt catalyst islands, necessary for charge transfer to the electrolyte, grow mainly at the grain boundaries or at edges. Thus, active sites are limited by the total length of the grain boundaries, since the vdW planes are more or less inactive for charge transfer. Activation of the vdW planes is the best way for the total surface functionalization of polycrystalline films. The ATM semiconducting catalyst significantly improves the charge carrier separation as well as its transfer to the electrolyte. In addition, ATM is cheap and consists of widely available elements (Mo and S) and therefore has great potential to replace expensive catalysts. Furthermore, ATM is a semiconducting material that generates electrons and holes upon illumination. The further development of ATM and other nanocluster-based transition metal sulfides/selenides as photocatalysts is a prospective strategy and of interest for large-scale energy production. Stabilization of the S or Se sites of TMDs by suggested Ba2+, Mg2+ and Sr2+ cations can be effective towards continuous long term operation of the photoelectrodes.
Table 2 Comparison of reported p-type TMD thin film and structured composite photoelectrode performances




Methods
Semiconductor
Co-catalyst/junction
Substrate
Electrolyte

j at 0 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Electrode area (cm2)
OCP(V)
Light intensity (mW cm−2)
Ref.




Space-confined self-assembly
p-WSe2
Pt
FTO
1.0 M H2SO4
1
0.26
—
100

49



aSLcS process
p-WSe2
Pt
TiN:O/Si
0.5 M H2SO4
2.5
0.24
0.2
100

61



Solution processed
p-WSe2
Pt/Cu
FTO
1.0 M H2SO4
4
0.236
0.3
100

59



aSLcS process
p-WSe2
ATM
TiN:O/Si
0.5 M H2SO4
5.6
0.24
—
100

67



Pulsed laser deposition
p-WSe2
MoSx
CB/Al2O3
0.5 M H2SO4
2.5
—
—
100

130



Van der Waals rheotaxy
p-WS2
—
Pt/Quartz
0.2 M H2SO4
5
—
0.1
300

123





TMD thin film and composite photoelectrodes are compared with respect to their jmax under different measurement conditions in Tables 2 and 3. Different preparation methods result in different photoelectrode performances. p-WSe2 thin film photocathodes exhibit j from 1 up to 5.6 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE which are suitable for hydrogen evolution. MoS2 and WS2 photoanodes were used for oxygen evolution, where j was measured from 0.008 up to 2.79 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE for different types of junctions/catalysts. This list indicates only a few studies performed on TMD thin film photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting even though they are widely reported for optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications. The best performance is found for WSe2, which exhibits jmax = 5.6 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and VOC = 0.3 V (Table 2). The estimated efficiency from these parameters is less than 1% (taking into account a maximum FF = 0.61 for a WSe2 single crystal40 and Faradaic efficiency of 0.8,61 STH = 0.82%). Research on MoSe2 photoelectrodes is of great interest for the HER as a 2D monolayer, thin film and multijunction stack with other TMDs, h-BN and graphene considering its similar nature to WSe2. Only a single-MoSe2-nanoflake liquid junction photoelectrochemical cell was reported.131
Table 3 Comparison of the reported n-type TMD thin film and structured composite photoelectrode performances




Methods
Semiconductor
Co-catalyst/junction
Substrate
Electrolyte

j at 1.23 VRHE (mA cm−2)
Electrode area (cm2)
OCP(V)
Light intensity (mW cm−2)
Ref.




Electrophoretic deposition
n-WS2
CdS
ITO
0.05 M Na2S
0.35 (at 1.1 VRHE)
—
—
55

132



Sulfurization of WO3
n-WS2
—
FTO
0.05 M Na2S
3
0.5
—
100

82



Liquid–liquid self-assembled
n-MoS2
WS2
FTO
0.5 M NaClO4
0.45 (at 1 VRHE)
0.5
—
100

133



Lithium exfoliation
n-MoS2
Au
FTO
0.1 M KH2PO4
0.79
2
—
350, λ = 500 nm

134



Ultrasonication
n-MoS2
CoTe
FTO
0.5 M Na2SO4
2.79
1
—
100

135



Hydrothermal
n-MoS2
NaNbO3
—
0.5 M Na2SO4
0.5
—
0.22
—

136



Ultrasonication
n-MoS2
In2Se3
FTO
1 M Na2SO4
0.008
4.5
—
—

137





8. Outlook
In this review, we considered TMD photoelectrodes for water splitting which are immersed directly in the electrolyte. Solar water splitting can be performed also by using external solar cells (photovoltaic cells or modules) that are combined with an electrolyzer (in the dark) for the production of hydrogen, named photovoltaic-electrolysis (PV-EC). A detailed assessment of the STH efficiencies of different PEC cells was reported recently by Ager et al.138 The STH efficiencies vary from 1 to 18%, but only a few values >10% were reported up to 2015. The highest hydrogen conversion efficiencies were achieved with external photovoltaic cells based on III–V semiconductors with 2 or 3 junctions, i.e. with very sophisticated and expensive solar cells.
A comprehensive review of the pros and cons of particulate photocatalysis (PC), photoelectrochemical (PEC), and photovoltaic–electrolysis (PV–EC) was also reported.39,61 The different systems were compared with respect to their architecture, complexity and STH efficiencies. The reported efficiency values for PC, PEC and PV-EC architectures are shown in Fig. 15versus system complexity. As can be clearly seen, the efficiency strongly depends on the system complexity, i.e., the number of components and p–n junctions, fabrication efforts, costs, etc.140 The region where industrially practical STH evolution would be possible is highlighted in green, indicating that at least 10% STH efficiency is needed for the simplest (cheapest) systems. Jia et al.141 demonstrated a record STH efficiency of 30% using an InGaP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb triple-junction PV–EC system that produces an open-circuit voltage of 2.9 V under sunlight. This voltage is more than two times higher than the thermodynamically minimum voltage required for water splitting (1.23 V) and the efficiency is significantly higher than that of the best 19% efficient PEC tandem system.142 Such multijunction PV–EC devices significantly overcome the efficiencies of any reported PEC configuration and are therefore of great interest for future applications. However, despite the very high efficiency, costs should be taken into account for large-scale applications of such devices since they contain rare and expensive elements such as In, Ga, P, and As. The complexity of a system is correlated with its cost (Fig. 15). For instance, simple ternary metal oxide systems can provide up to 7% of efficiency as PEC systems. PEC systems can provide direct separation of the reaction products and can be cheaper fabricated compared to PV-EC systems.139 However, there is no large-scale demonstration for PEC devices as well as stable operations over 10 years.
 Fig. 15  Solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency values for the different materials and system architectures noted as PC, PEC and PV-EC as a function of the system complexity. (1) Al:SrTiO3, STH = 0.4% (2018).143 (2) C3N4, STH = 2% (2015).144 (3) Mo:BiVO4–Au–Rh, La:SrTiO3, STH = 1.1% (2014).145 (4) BiVO4–Cu2O, STH = 3.0% (2018).146 (5) BiVO4–p-Si, STH = 2.0% (2018).147 (6) BiVO4/perovskite, STH = 6.2% (2016).148 (7) BiVO4–Fe2O3–2pSi, STH = 7.7% (2016).8 (8) BiVO4/WO3–InGaP/GAs, STH = 8.1% (2015).149 (9) InGaP/GaAs/Ge, STH = 10% (2015).150 (10) GaInP/GaInAs/GaAs, STH = 19% (2018).142 (11) Perovskite solar cell – NiFe, STH = 12.3% (2014).151 (12) Si–PEM, STH = 14.2% (2016).152 (13) Light concentrator – GaInP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb–PEM, STH = 30% (2016).141 (Re-elaborated from ref. 6). 
In the current state of research and development, all reported data clearly indicate that PECs cannot compete with PV–EC water splitting devices with respect to STH efficiency, scaling up prospects and techno-economic assessment. For practical solar hydrogen evolution, the system should be as simple as possible and exhibit high efficiency. This is the main challenge for a widespread implementation of the findings and large-scale production as in the case of available solar modules. Comparing the evaluated performance of TMD thin films (η <1%) with the maximum reported STH efficiencies of PV-EC (η = 30%), an enormous amount of effort has to be undertaken in order to close the efficiency gap.
The following steps are devised to increase the TMD efficiency: (i) the quality of TMD thin films should be significantly improved up to the efficiencies for single crystals (η = 17%);42 (ii) TMDs should be combined with already developed photoelectrodes such as perovskites, Si, CZTS, etc in hetero-, dual-, triple- and multi-junction stacks to reach the maximum efficiency limit of 20–30% similar to the developed PEC or PV-EC architectures. Stacking leads to an increase in voltage. Considering the overpotentials one needs 1.5–1.9 V instead of 1.23 V, the remaining voltage above 1.6 V is a loss. Taking an example with VOC = 2.9 V, 1 V is lost and only 1.23 V contribute to STH.
There are two reasons why TMDs exhibit a very poor electronic quality and were not included in Fig. 15. First, an intrinsic reason, connected with the material properties such as the weak vdW bonding, is the bad adhesion to the substrate, high intrinsic defect densities due to chalcogen vacancies,153 strong electrical and mechanical anisotropy, and easy oxidation due to weaker bonding of chalcogen atoms (S, Se, and Te). Second, an extrinsic reason is connected with research and development efforts in the past 5 decades, which were far below (orders of magnitude with respect to many years) the efforts, which were devoted to the research and development of commercial semiconductors such as GaN, InP, GaAs, and Si and their derivatives. Almost all of the activities on TMD materials have been performed in academic institutions and universities, not in industry, i.e., the research was not device-focused enough. The reason for that could be that the growth and preparation of vdW TMDs is more difficult compared to those of the above-mentioned semiconductors. This indicates also the need to elaborate easier methods for the preparation of TMDs. Also, the use of S and Se brings additional technical and safety difficulties, which reduces the number of research groups going into this field. The experiments require toxic gases such as H2S and H2Se or elemental S and Se, which should be handled and processed carefully, and wasted materials and the rest should be recycled or stored safely. There are other developing fields for the application of vdW TMDs such as catalysts with (100)-oriented films, TMD nanoparticles/sheets, materials for 2D-electronic transport devices such as heterostructures, transistors, batteries, and other fields, which could be more prospective than PEC application of TMDs.154,155
9. Conclusions
In this review, the status of transition metal dichalcogenide photoelectrodes for direct water splitting has been surveyed and the PEC properties of thin film and bulk TMD photoelectrodes were related to theoretical and practical efficiencies for the HER. The solar-to hydrogen efficiencies of thin TMD films are far below those of their single crystalline counterparts and also significantly below the theoretical limit. However, the efficiency of the single crystalline TMDs (5–17%) is 2–6 times lower than the theoretical limit (33%); the reported (estimated) efficiencies of the TMD thin films are less than 1%. This indicates a strong need for further studies and developments of TMD films as well as single crystal qualities.
The advantage of thin films is their suitability for scaling up to large areas; however, achieving a reasonable photocurrent and photovoltage is still problematic. Defects in the structure of the films as well as the surface states at the TMD edges are limiting factors towards efficient hydrogen evolution. The nature of charge carrier generation, its separation and transfer mechanisms, and redox processes at the SEI should be studied together since slow kinetics of these processes are the main limiting factors leading to a high rate of recombination and, hence, low efficiencies.
Also, most of the surface area is reaction-inert due to the van der Waals like surface characteristic of c-axis oriented TMDs, which strongly hinders charge transfer to the electrolyte. Another disadvantage of TMD photoelectrodes is that they cannot operate stably over longer periods without passivation strategies and co-catalysts, which additionally should help to transfer photogenerated charge carriers from the absorber to the electrolyte. On the other hand, the formation of heterojunction stacks in different combinations with other sulfides and oxides has led to significant improvements of the STH efficiencies, i.e., it could be a path for future studies. At the current state of development, PEC systems based on TMDs cannot compete with well-developed PEC as well as PV-EC systems, based on commercially available semiconductors such as silicon, GaAs and other compound semiconductors. Summarizing the literature data and our own results, the following strategies can be devised for future research on thin film TMD photoelectrodes for efficient PEC water splitting:
(i) improvement of the film crystalline and electronic qualities,
(ii) increase of the surface area,
(iii) heterojunction formation,
(iv) optimization of co-catalysts and implementation of plasmonic structures,
(v) preparation of vertically aligned TMD heterojunctions,
(vi) decrease of series resistances (at the back contact and at the film/electrolyte interface),
(vii) improvement of the adhesion of the photoelectrodes to the back contact,
(viii) coating with protection/passivation layers against redox processes and intercalation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The Alexander-von-Humboldt-Stiftung Foundation (Bonn, Germany) granted a Georg-Forster-Research Fellowship to one of us (F. B.). Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie (Berlin, Germany) and Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon (Geesthacht, Germany) hosted F. B. during his former stays and his current stay in Germany. All three institutions are greatly acknowledged for their valuable support. We thank Dr Steffen Fengler for reading and commenting on the review.
References
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, Joule, 2019, 3, 631–633 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed .
K. Ayers, MRS Energy & Sustainability, 2017, 4, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
F. F. Abdi and S. P. Berglund, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 193002 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, Y. H. Jo, F. F. Abdi, Y. H. Lee, R. Van De Krol and J. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, E. M. Akinoglu, L. Wu, H. Lu, R. Nemkayeva, Y. Xue, M. Jin and M. Giersig, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 8676–8685 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feng, E. M. Akinoglu, F. Bozheyev, L. Guo, M. Jin, X. Wang, G. Zhou, M. J. Naughton and M. Giersig, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 495501 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. Van De Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kölbach, I. J. Pereira, K. Harbauer, P. Plate, K. Höflich, S. P. Berglund, D. Friedrich, R. Van De Krol and F. F. Abdi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8322–8331 CrossRef .
C. Li, Q. Cao, F. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, J. J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981–5037 RSC .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352(6283), aad4424 CrossRef .
K. Ellmer, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1745–1760 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Berzelius, Ann. Phys., 1826, 82, 331–350 CrossRef .

          C. Hintze, Handbuch der Mineralogie, Viet and Co., Leipzig, 1st edn,  1904 Search PubMed .
R. G. Dickinson and L. Pauling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1923, 45, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Dutta, Nature, 1947, 159, 477 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Opalovskii and V. E. Fedorov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1966, 35, 186–204 CrossRef .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch and J. C. Bennett, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 81, 97–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für physikalische Chemie, 1978, 81, 361–369 CrossRef .
H. Tributsch, Struct. Bonding, 1982, 49, 127–175 CrossRef .
H. Tributsch, Zeitschrift für Naturforschung A, 1977, 31, 972–985 CrossRef .

          R. M. Yunus, M. N. I. Salehmin and N. N. Rosman, Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides for Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Wiley,  2020 Search PubMed .
Q. Ding, B. Song, P. Xu and S. Jin, Chem, 2016, 1, 699–726 CAS .
M. Ben-Naim, R. J. Britto, C. W. Aldridge, R. Mow, M. A. Steiner, A. C. Nielander, L. A. King, D. J. Friedman, T. G. Deutsch, J. L. Young and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2631–2640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jäger-Waldau and E. Bucher, Thin Solid Films, 1991, 200, 157–164 CrossRef .
R. F. Frindt, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1107–1108 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Beal and A. R. Liang, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1976, 9, 2459 CrossRef .
R. Coehoorn, C. Haas, J. Dijkstra, C. J. F. Flipse, R. A. De Groot and A. Wold, Phys. Rev. B, 1987, 35, 6195–6202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao and W. Ghorannevis, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 791–797 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voß, P. Krüger, A. Mazur and J. Pollmann, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 60, 14311–14317 CrossRef .
K. K. Kam, C. L. Chang and D. W. Lynch, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1984, 17, 4031–4040 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zhuang and R. G. Hennig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20440–20445 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Rasmussen and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13169–13183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kline, K. Kam, D. Canfield and B. A. Parkinson, Sol. Energy Mater., 1981, 4, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tenne and A. Wold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 47, 707–709 CrossRef CAS .
O. N. Prasad and G. Strivastava, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1988, 21, 1028 CrossRef .
H. J. Lewerenz, A. Heller and F. J. DiSalvo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 1877–1880 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Hu, M. C. Cheng, K. K. Tiong and Y. S. Huang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 3575–3583 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Shearer, W. Li, J. G. Foster, M. J. Stolt, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, P. Konze, M. Küpers, K. Wiemer, D. Hoffzimmer, S. Neumann, S. Kunz, U. Simon, R. Dronskowski and A. Slabon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11877–11885 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, R. A. Potash, F. J. Disalvo and H. D. Abruña, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13984–13991 RSC .
X. Yu, M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Mahalu, M. Peisach, W. Jaegermann, A. Wold and J. Tenne, Phys. Chem., 1990, 1, 8012–8013 CrossRef .
D. Mahalu, A. Jakubowicz, A. Wold and R. Tenne, Phys. Rev. B, 1988, 38, 1533–1536 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jakubowicz, D. Mahalu, M. Wolf, A. Wold and R. Tenne, Phys. Rev. B, 1989, 40, 2992–3000 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozheyev, M. Rengachari, S. P. Berglund, D. Abou-Ras and K. Ellmer, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 93, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6863–6875 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
Z. Insepov, A. Ainabayev, F. Bozheyev, A. Zhuldassov, M. Lukasheva and K. B. Tynyshtykbaev, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 11630–11639 Search PubMed .
J.-P. Niemelä, G. Marin and M. Karppinen, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 93005 CrossRef .
J. A. Kropp, Y. Cai, Z. Yao, W. Zhu and T. Gougousi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2018, 36, 06A101 CrossRef .
X. Yu, N. Guijarro, M. Johnson and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, D. Friedrich, M. Nie, M. Rengachari and K. Ellmer, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozheyev, K. Harbauer, C. Zahn, D. Friedrich and K. Ellmer, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16003 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, F. Xi, I. Ahmet, C. Höhn and K. Ellmer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 19112–19120 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xi, P. Bogdanoff, K. Harbauer, P. Plate, C. Höhn, J. Rappich, B. Wang, X. Han, R. Van De Krol and S. Fiechter, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2368–2380 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozheyev, F. Xi, P. Plate, T. Dittrich, S. Fiechter and K. Ellmer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10769–10780 RSC .
J. Xiao, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, N. Xu and S. Deng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 60 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, D. Valiev and R. Nemkayeva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 93111 CrossRef .
K. Si, J. Ma, C. Lu, Y. Zhou, C. He, D. Yang, X. Wang and X. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145082 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Liu, W. Tian, Y. Zhang, P. Shan, Y. Chen, W. Wei, H. Yuan and H. Cui, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 41127–41136 RSC .
F. Hu, L. Tao, H. Ye, X. Li and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7104–7113 RSC .
Y. Fan, J. Wang and M. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14836–14843 RSC .
K. Chen, X. Wan and J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603884 CrossRef .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Park, H. Kim, M. Leem, W. Ahn, S. Choi, J. Kim, J. Uh, K. Kwon, S. J. Jeong, S. Park, Y. Kim and H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 884–889 RSC .
R. Browning, N. Kuperman, R. Solanki, V. Kanzyuba and S. Rouvimov, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 12–16 CrossRef .
R. Tenne, E. Galun, A. Ennaoui, S. Fiechter, K. Ellmer, M. Kunst, C. Koelzow, C. Pettenkofer, S. Tiefenbacher, R. Scheer, H. Jungblut and W. Jaegermann, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 272, 38–42 CrossRef CAS .
H. Medina, J. G. Li, T. Y. Su, Y. W. Lan, S. H. Lee, C. W. Chen, Y. Z. Chen, A. Manikandan, S. H. Tsai, A. Navabi, X. Zhu, Y. C. Shih, W. S. Lin, J. H. Yang, S. R. Thomas, B. W. Wu, C. H. Shen, J. M. Shieh, H. N. Lin, A. Javey, K. L. Wang and Y. L. Chueh, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1587–1598 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Huang, J. Pu, C.-L. Hsu, M.-H. Chiu, Z.-Y. Juang, Y.-H. Chang, W.-H. Chang, Y. Iwasa, T. Takenobu and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. H. Chiu, C. H. Chen, W. Chen, L. J. Li and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8653–8661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahmadi, M. Z. Shoushtari and M. Farbod, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 6342–6349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Zhao, Y. Wang, D. A. Laleyan, Y. Wu, B. Ouyang, P. Ou, J. Song and Z. Mi, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohammed, H. Nakamura, P. Wochner, S. Ibrahimkutty, A. Schulz, K. Müller, U. Starke, B. Stuhlhofer, G. Cristiani, G. Logvenov and H. Takagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 1–6 CrossRef .
G. Siegel, Y. P. Venkata Subbaiah, M. C. Prestgard and A. Tiwari, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 056103 CrossRef .
S. Seo, H. Choi, S. Y. Kim, J. Lee, K. Kim, S. Yoon, B. H. Lee and S. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Seo, S. Kim, H. Choi, J. Lee, H. Yoon, G. Piao, J. C. Park, Y. Jung, J. Song, S. Y. Jeong, H. Park and S. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900301 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2679–2696 RSC .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Y. Lin, V. K. Valev, E. Reisner, U. Steiner and J. J. Baumberg, Small, 2014, 10, 3970–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, B. Lee, C. H. Naylor, H. S. Ee, J. Park, A. T. C. Johnson and R. Agarwal, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1262–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, F. Lei, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, C. S. Bailey, Y. Hong, L. Wang, Z. Cai, L. Shen, B. Hou, Y. Wang, H. Shi, J. Sambur, W. Ren, E. Pop and S. B. Cronin, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Seo, T. N. Trung, D. O. Kim, D. V. Duc, S. Hong, Y. Sohn, J. R. Jeong and E. T. Kim, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, W. Septina, A. Chemseddine, F. F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, P. Bogdanoff, R. Van De Krol, S. D. Tilley and S. P. Berglund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15094–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Milled and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 2–5 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. Bozheyev, Highly-oriented nanotextured WS2 and WSe2 thin films with photoactive properties, Tomsk Polytechnic University,  2014 Search PubMed .
R. F. Frindt and A. D. Yoffe, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1963, 273, 69–83 Search PubMed .
D. Tonti, F. Varsano, F. Decker, C. Ballif, M. Regula and M. Remškar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2485–2490 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Mattheiss, Phys. Rev. B, 1973, 8, 3719–3740 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Ponomarev, M. Neumann-Spallart, G. Hodes and C. Lévy-Clément, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 280, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mallouky and J. C. Bernede, Thin Solid Films, 1988, 158, 285–298 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ozdemir and V. Barone, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 212, 110557 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2496–2503 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carvalho and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 1–5 Search PubMed .
G. K. Solanki, D. N. Gujarathi, M. F. Deshpande, D. Lakshminarayana and M. K. Agarwal, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2008, 43, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Velazquez, J. John, D. V. Esposito, A. Pieterick, R. Pala, G. Sun, X. Zhou, Z. Huang, S. Ardo, M. P. Soriaga, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy and Environmental Science, 2016, 9, 164–175 RSC .
J. A. Baglio, G. S. Calabrese, E. Kamieniecki, R. Kershaw, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Ricco, A. Wold, M. S. Wrighton and G. D. Zoski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1461 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kline, K. K. Kam, R. Ziegler and B. A. Parkinson, Sol. Energy Mater., 1982, 6, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jäger-Waldau, M. C. Lux-Steiner and E. Bucher, Solid State Phenom., 1994, 37–38, 479–484 Search PubMed .
W. Kautek, H. Gerischer and H. Tributsch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2471–2478 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ballif, M. Regula and F. Lévy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 57, 189–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gobrecht, H. Tributsch and H. Gerischer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 2085–2086 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2021, 29, 657–667 CrossRef .
B. Ehrler, E. Alarcón-Lladó, S. W. Tabernig, T. Veeken, E. C. Garnett and A. Polman, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3029–3033 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pisoni, J. Jacimovic, R. Gaál, B. Náfrádi, H. Berger, Z. Révay and L. Forró, Scr. Mater., 2016, 114, 48–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Agarwal, A. R. Jani, J. D. Kshtriya, M. N. Vashi and P. K. Garg, Cryst. Res. Technol., 1984, 19, 1575–1582 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Agarwal, P. D. Patel and O. Vijayan, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1983, 79, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Matthäus, A. Ennaoui, S. Fiechter, S. Tiefenbacher, T. Kiesewetter, K. Diesner, I. Sieber, W. Jaegermann, T. Tsirlina and R. Tenne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1013–1019 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, L. Mei, X. Cao, Y. Tang and Z. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15417–15444 RSC .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. Kong, H. W. Lee, H. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, H. Wang, J. J. Cha, M. Pasta, K. J. Koski, J. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Ma, W. Dang, Z. Wei, K. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Yan, M. Sun, B. Li, X. Pan, J. Luo, G. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Nature, 2020, 579, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu and K. Sivula, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Todt, A. E. Isenberg, S. U. Nanayakkara, E. M. Miller and J. B. Sambur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6539–6545 CrossRef CAS .
R. Romanov, V. Fominski, M. Demin, D. Fominski, O. Rubinkovskaya, S. Novikov, V. Volkov and N. Doroshina, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 1461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Isenberg, M. A. Todt, L. Wang and J. B. Sambur, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27780–27786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zirak, M. Zhao, O. Moradlou, M. Samadi, N. Sarikhani, Q. Wang, H. L. Zhang and A. Z. Moshfegh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Pesci, M. S. Sokolikova, C. Grotta, P. C. Sherrell, F. Reale, K. Sharda, N. Ni, P. Palczynski and C. Mattevi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4990–4998 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, B. Chen, M. Bosman, X. Cao, J. Chen, B. Zheng and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3537–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sitara, H. Nasir, A. Mumtaz, M. F. Ehsan, M. Sohail, S. Iram and S. A. B. Bukhari, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kumar, T. Malik, D. Sharma and A. K. Ganguli, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2651–2662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Q. Wang, L. Han, X. Zhang, L. Jiang, Z. Wu, Y. Lai, D. Wang and F. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 752–758 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy and Environmental Science, 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
V. Romano, G. D’Angelo, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5760 RSC .
K. Sayama and Y. Miseki, Synthesiology, 2014, 7, 79–91 CrossRef .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
W. H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H. J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Joule, 2018, 2, 509–520 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, S. S. K. Ma, Y. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M. K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
W. Vijselaar, P. Westerik, J. Veerbeek, R. M. Tiggelaar, E. Berenschot, N. R. Tas, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P. C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pihosh, I. Turkevych, K. Mawatari, J. Uemura, Y. Kazoe, S. Kosar, K. Makita, T. Sugaya, T. Matsui, D. Fujita, M. Tosa, M. Kondo and T. Kitamori, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–2 Search PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy and Environmental Science, 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
P. Ci, X. Tian, J. Kang, A. Salazar, K. Eriguchi, S. Warkander, K. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Tongay, W. Walukiewicz, J. Miao, O. Dubon and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bozheyev, A. Zhexembekova, S. Zhumagali, A. Molkenova and Z. Bakenov, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 4567–4571 Search PubMed .
Q. Zeng and Z. Liu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700335 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Part of a MoS2 sandwich layer, showing the trigonal prismatic coordination of the Mo atom. (b) (110) cross-section of the hexagonal unit cell. z is the distance between Mo and S along the c-axis that equals 0.132. (c) Band structure of bulk WSe2 for the theoretical lattice constants. Note that the band structure shows an indirect gap (adapted with permission from ref. 32 and 36. Copyrights 1987 and 1999 American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 2  Band edge positions of single-layer transition-metal dichalcogenides relative to the vacuum level. The redox potentials of water splitting at pH 0 (red dotted line) and pH 7 (green dashed line) are shown for comparison (adapted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–E behavior of p-WSe2 photoelectrodes generating H2(g) from aqueous pH 4.2 electrolyte without catalyst coating and with Ru, Pt, or Ru/Pt coatings, respectively. All electrodes were illuminated using an ELH tungsten halogen lamp calibrated to an equivalent of 100 mW cm−2 intensity using a Si photodiode. The inset shows details of the region around the open-circuit potential of the photoelectrodes. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of p-WSe2 coated with the Pt electrocatalyst. The scale bar corresponds to 200 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Space-confined self-assembled (SCSA) approach for 2D TMD thin film deposition and results with WSe2. (a) Schematic of the deposition method (HEX = hexane; EG = ethylene glycol). Step 1: injection of WSe2 dispersion. Step 2: flake confinement and self-assembly. Step 3: hexane removal. Step 4: ethylene glycol removal and film deposition. Step 5: drying at 150 °C. (b) Photograph of a single-flake-layer WSe2 thin film deposited on flexible In2O3:Sn (ITO)-coated PET plastic and (c) representative TEM image of a single-flake-layer WSe2 layer SCSA thin film deposited on a carbon-coated TEM grid. Panels (d) and (e) show the cross-sectional SEM images of the SCSA and the (aggregated-compacted) AC film, respectively. The scale bars are 400 nm. (f) Photoelectrochemical characterization of the WSe2 thin films prepared by the SCSA and AC techniques under linear scanning voltammetry (LSV) with intermittent illumination (1 sun, 100 mW cm−2) after Pt deposition. A horizontal axis corresponding to zero current is indicated for each curve (adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 5  Exfoliated WSe2 flake size separation: (a) schematic of the multistage track-etched membrane separation column developed. (b) Estimated external quantum efficiency (EQE) at −0.5 V vs. VFB and 760 nm illumination. The approximate average flake sizes of fractions A–D are indicated. Photoelectrochemical performance of passivated electrodes in chloranil electrolyte: (c) LSV curves of bare electrodes (electrodes A–D, green curves) and Al2O3-coated electrodes (electrodes A*–D*) at −10 mV s−1 under intermittent (1 Sun) illumination (adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the WSe2 flake treatments used in this work and their proposed effect on defects. (a) WSe2 prepared by exfoliating as-received powder, which likely contains Se vacancies both at the exposed flake edges and internally in the few-layer flakes. (b) WSe2 prepared by exfoliating pre-annealed powder is suggested to have fewer internal Se vacancies, but a similar number of defects on the edges formed during the exfoliation process. Treatment with the hexyltrichlorosilane (HTS) surfactant is suggested for the filling of the exposed edge vacancies of the WSe2 samples (panels c and d). (e) PEC characterization of Pt–Cu-modified WSe2 electrodes with pre-healing or post-passivation treatments or both. (e) LSV curves scanned from positive to negative potentials (10 mV s−1) under intermittent (1 sun) illumination (adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chopped (light/dark) I–V scans for 150 nm thick WSe2 thin films crystallized on a 30 nm thick Pd film in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at different continuous Pt-deposition times. The inset shows the dependence of the photocurrent density at 0 VRHE for different Pt-deposition times. Each light-on cycle corresponds to 30 s light exposure. (b) The open circuit potential VOC change during the periodic exposure (12 cycles) to AM 1.5 light in 0.1 M HCl. (c) A SEM image of a Pt-coated WSe2 film by photochemical precipitation (180 s). The scale bar is 500 nm. (d) Schematic cross section of our photoelectrode configuration: Pt-WSe2:PdSex/Ti/TiN:O/SiO2/Si. The Pt nanoislands are preferentially photodeposited at the grain boundaries of WSe2 (adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyrights 2017 Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Energy band diagram of the ATM/WSe2 junction in relation to the potentials for 2H+/H2 and 4H+, O2/2H2O. The work function for ATM/WSe2 is plotted at 1 V vs. RHE. (b) Surface photovoltage (SPV) as a function of the photon energy of the TiN:O back contact, pristine WSe2, Pt/WSe2 and ATM/WSe2 thin films (120 nm thick film). (c) Dependence of the photocurrent density at 0 VRHE on the thickness of the WSe2 film upon AM 1.5 illumination. (d) Gas production by the WSe2 photocathode: H2 and O2 gas evolution for a duration of 2 h at a WSe2 photocathode coated with an ATM catalyst (adapted with permission from ref. 61 and 67. Copyrights 2017 Springer Nature and 2019 RCS).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Optical image of the monolayer MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction (dashed in white triangle). The white dots marked in the optical image are the spots where the spectra are accumulated (scale bar is 30 μm). (b) AFM scanning showing the thickness of the surface of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction and the line scan profile (scale bar is 4 nm). (c) PEC current density versus voltage (J–V) curves of the MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction (red), monolayer WSe2 (green), and monolayer MoS2 (black) under the same white light illumination conditions. (d) Energy band position of monolayer MoS2 and WSe2 compared with redox potentials for water splitting. (e) MoS2/WSe2 heterojunction formed a type II band alignment. When illuminated, photo-generated electrons are transferred from the valence band to conduction band and the built-in electric field helps to separate excitons (adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 10  Solar water splitting measurements of the MBE-grown multi-functional monolayer WSe2 photocatalyst. (a) Schematic illustration of the overall water splitting reaction on monolayer WSe2 without incorporating any co-catalyst. Inset: conduction and valence band edge positions vs. water reduction and water oxidation reactions in pH = 7 water solution. (b) Overall photocatalytic water splitting on monolayer WSe2 under 300 W xenon lamp irradiation with an AM1.5G optical filter. No degradation of the photocatalytic activity was observed during the course of the reaction (adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) AC photocurrent measurements for the monolayer WSe2 electrode with and without Au nanoislands under visible illumination. (b) Enhancement factor of the electric field intensity at the Au nanoislands/monolayer WSe2 interface calculated using the FDTD method. (c) Schematic diagram of the photocatalytic iodine redox process (adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Absorption and absorption coefficient α for a 250 nm thick WSe2 thin film with the optical band gap of 1.5 eV. (b) Absorbed portions of AM1.5 by different thick films determined from the α of WSe2. (c) Absorption and α for a 180 nm thick WS2 thin film with the optical band gap of 1.8 eV. (d) Absorbed portions of AM1.5 by different thick films determined from the α of WS2. Maximum photocurrent density, jmax, and STH efficiency as a function of the (e) film thickness and (f) optical band gap.97	 

 	Fig. 13  Comparison of the efficiencies for MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 with different solar cell materials depending on their band gap. The solid line shows the S–Q limit for a single junction solar cell.105 The solar cell efficiencies for the materials were taken from ref. 117 and 118.	 
	(3)
	(4)

MoS2	1.25	37.58	16.7	2 M Br−/Br2	3.16 × 108	1017	4 × 104	1.4	0.83	0.5	33.05	5.09	
113, 112 and 114
WS2	1.35	34.66	13.9	2 M Br−/Br2	4.57 × 107	1017	2.5 × 104	200	1.19	0.72	33.65	6.10	
111, 113, 112 and 115
MoSe2	1.32	35.43	25.5	1 M Nal and 0.05 M I2	8.16× 107	1017	5 × 104	5	1.04	0.65	33.42	10.11	
40 and 116
WSe2	1.4	32.87	25	0.5 M H2SO4	1.73 × 107	1017	5 × 104	5	1.12	0.71	33.42	10.82	
40, 46, 107, 109 and 110

 	Fig. 14  Schematics of the synthesis of a MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructure. (a) Tungsten (W) is coated onto the substrate. (b) WSe2 film with a vertically aligned layer is formed via rapid selenization. (c) Molybdenum (Mo) is coated on top of the synthesized WSe2 film. (d) MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructure is formed via rapid sulfurization. (e) The heterostructure consists of the MoS2 and WSe2, in which their van der Waals layers are aligned perpendicular to the substrate (adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

Space-confined self-assembly	p-WSe2	Pt	FTO	1.0 M H2SO4	1	0.26	—	100	
49

aSLcS process	p-WSe2	Pt	TiN:O/Si	0.5 M H2SO4	2.5	0.24	0.2	100	
61

Solution processed	p-WSe2	Pt/Cu	FTO	1.0 M H2SO4	4	0.236	0.3	100	
59

aSLcS process	p-WSe2	ATM	TiN:O/Si	0.5 M H2SO4	5.6	0.24	—	100	
67

Pulsed laser deposition	p-WSe2	MoSx	CB/Al2O3	0.5 M H2SO4	2.5	—	—	100	
130

Van der Waals rheotaxy	p-WS2	—	Pt/Quartz	0.2 M H2SO4	5	—	0.1	300	
123


Electrophoretic deposition	n-WS2	CdS	ITO	0.05 M Na2S	0.35 (at 1.1 VRHE)	—	—	55	
132

Sulfurization of WO3	n-WS2	—	FTO	0.05 M Na2S	3	0.5	—	100	
82

Liquid–liquid self-assembled	n-MoS2	WS2	FTO	0.5 M NaClO4	0.45 (at 1 VRHE)	0.5	—	100	
133

Lithium exfoliation	n-MoS2	Au	FTO	0.1 M KH2PO4	0.79	2	—	350, λ = 500 nm	
134

Ultrasonication	n-MoS2	CoTe	FTO	0.5 M Na2SO4	2.79	1	—	100	
135

Hydrothermal	n-MoS2	NaNbO3	—	0.5 M Na2SO4	0.5	—	0.22	—	
136

Ultrasonication	n-MoS2	In2Se3	FTO	1 M Na2SO4	0.008	4.5	—	—	
137


 	Fig. 15  Solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency values for the different materials and system architectures noted as PC, PEC and PV-EC as a function of the system complexity. (1) Al:SrTiO3, STH = 0.4% (2018).143 (2) C3N4, STH = 2% (2015).144 (3) Mo:BiVO4–Au–Rh, La:SrTiO3, STH = 1.1% (2014).145 (4) BiVO4–Cu2O, STH = 3.0% (2018).146 (5) BiVO4–p-Si, STH = 2.0% (2018).147 (6) BiVO4/perovskite, STH = 6.2% (2016).148 (7) BiVO4–Fe2O3–2pSi, STH = 7.7% (2016).8 (8) BiVO4/WO3–InGaP/GAs, STH = 8.1% (2015).149 (9) InGaP/GaAs/Ge, STH = 10% (2015).150 (10) GaInP/GaInAs/GaAs, STH = 19% (2018).142 (11) Perovskite solar cell – NiFe, STH = 12.3% (2014).151 (12) Si–PEM, STH = 14.2% (2016).152 (13) Light concentrator – GaInP/GaAs/GaInNAsSb–PEM, STH = 30% (2016).141 (Re-elaborated from ref. 6).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
