Engineering the surface chemistry of lead chalcogenide nanocrystal solids to enhance carrier mobility and lifetime in optoelectronic devices   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC07916D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC07916D
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 728-731Engineering the surface chemistry of lead chalcogenide nanocrystal solids to enhance carrier mobility and lifetime in optoelectronic devices†

        
          
            S. J. 
            Oh
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            D. B. 
            Straus
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            T. 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J.-H. 
            Choi
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            S.-W. 
            Lee
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            E. A. 
            Gaulding
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C. B. 
            Murray
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            C. R. 
            Kagan
          
        
      *acd
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
dDepartment of Electrical and System Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. E-mail: kagan@seas.upenn.edu
eRare Metals Research Center, Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources, Daejeon, 34132, Republic of Korea
fDepartment of Semiconductor System Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
Received 
      30th September 2016
    , Accepted 11th December 2016First published on 12th December 2016AbstractWe introduce a stepwise, hybrid ligand-exchange method for lead chalcogenide nanocrystal (NC) thin films using the compact-inorganic ligand thiocyanate and the short organic ligand benzenediothiolate. Spectroscopic and device measurements show that hybrid exchange enhances both carrier mobility and lifetime in NC thin films. The increased mobility-lifetime product achieved by this method enables demonstration of optoelectronic devices with enhanced power conversion and quantum efficiency.
Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) are promising materials for light-harvesting photovoltaic and light-sensing photodetector applications due to their size tunable electronic and optical properties and the solution-based processes that enable the integration of these materials into optoelectronic devices.1–4 Both photovoltaic devices and photodetectors operate by converting light into electricity. The common mechanism is that carriers are excited upon light absorption and are transported to electrodes, generating a photocurrent that determines the power conversion or quantum efficiency of the devices.1,4,5 To absorb ∼90% of incident light, the thickness of the NC thin film should be ∼1 μm.6,7 However photo-excited carriers must be able to travel across this long distance to reach the electrodes without recombining. Therefore, to increase the efficiency of devices, photo-excited carriers in NC solids should move faster and survive longer before being trapped, i.e. with higher carrier mobility (μ) and longer carrier lifetime (τ), respectively.
Devices may be designed to operate based on majority or minority carrier transport. Photoconductor and Schottky junction devices are majority carrier devices, while photodiodes are minority carrier devices. However unlike single crystal semiconductor devices, μ and τ of majority and minority carriers in NC solids may be considerably different. The μ and τ strongly depend on the NC thin film's surface chemistry. As-synthesized NCs have long organic ligands at their surface, which create large interparticle separations that limit carrier transport and lead to low μ, insulating thin films. A general approach to increase μ is to reduce the interparticle spacing by ligand exchange.8–10 However, during the deposition and ligand exchange of NC thin films, the NC surface is often “attacked” by solvents or ligands, creating surface defect sites.11–14 These surface defects generate in-gap states that may scatter mobile carriers and reduce the τ of photogenerated carriers by trapping.1,3,4,10 Many efforts have been made to understand the effects of different ligands on μ and τ in NC solids.15–18 For example, inorganic chalcogenide, halide, and pseudohalide ligands are known to increase μ, whereas short organic thiol and acid ligands are known to create NC solids with long carrier τ.15 Hybrid passivation methods using halide and organic ligands have been conducted to reduce the density of trap states and increase τ.2,3,19–21
Here, we seek to design NC thin films with both a high μ and a long τ for majority and minority carriers, to optimize the μ–τ product and therefore optoelectronic device performance. We investigate two commonly used ligands: benzenedithiol (BDT) and thiocyanate (SCN), which have been widely used to construct NC films for solar cells and field-effect transistors (FETs), respectively.8,22–25 The long length of BDT ligands creates NC thin films with relatively large interparticle distance and therefore low μ and conductivity, but BDT passivates NC surface sites supporting long carrier τ.11,25 The compact SCN ligands are effective at reducing interparticle distance to yield high μ thin films, but a low surface coverage of SCN ligands generates a greater concentration of surface states.23 We introduce a rational approach to increase both μ and τ by decreasing interparticle distance and passivating surface states through sequential treatment of lead chalcogenide NC thin films with SCN and BDT (Fig. 1). We systematically study the effects of these ligands on the electronic and optoelectronic properties of NC thin films using spectroscopic and device measurements. Using this hybrid ligand exchange method, we successfully show an enhanced μ–τ product of majority carriers, enabling the demonstration of high-performance photoconductive photo-detectors, and of minority carriers, resulting in improved efficiencies in photodiodes for light harvesting.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of (black) as-synthesized PbE (E = S, Se) NCs and ligand exchange with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, and (purple) the hybrid SCN–BDT strategy used to enhance carrier μ and τ in NC films. Note: SCN is ambidentate, i.e. S- and N-binding are possible. 
We synthesize 3 nm and 6 nm oleic-acid capped PbSe NCs and 4 nm oleic-acid capped PbS NCs,22 and prepared NC thin films on various substrates (See ESI†). The structural and optical properties of PbSe NC thin films treated with BDT and SCN are shown in Fig. 2(A–D). BDT-treated PbSe NC thin films have an interparticle distance of ∼1 nm (Fig. 2A)11 and a first excitonic resonance only slightly red-shifted from the parent oleic-acid capped NC thin film (Fig. 2C). The SCN-treated thin film shows some fusion of the NCs, as previously reported (Fig. 2B).11 Although some degree of fusion is observed for SCN-treated PbSe NC thin films, the films maintain a distinct first excitonic resonance, consistent with the large, 46 nm excitonic Bohr radius of PbSe,11,26 that is more significantly red-shifted than that for BDT-treated, PbSe NC thin films (Fig. 2C).11 FTIR spectroscopy confirms that the CH peak from the oleic-acid ligands is greatly reduced upon ligand exchange with BDT and almost disappears upon exchange with SCN. A new C–N stretch appears at 2100 cm−1 for the SCN-treated NC samples (Fig. 2D).22,23
 Fig. 2  TEM images of (A) BDT- and (B) SCN-treated PbSe NC assemblies (scale bar: 20 nm). (C) Absorption and (D) FTIR spectra of (black) as-synthesized, oleic-acid capped, (blue) BDT- and (red) SCN-treated PbSe NC thin films. (E) Transfer curves of (blue) BDT- and (red) SCN-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs. (F) I–V curves of PbS NC thin-film Schottky solar cells in which the NCs are treated with (blue) BDT and (red) SCN and the cells are measured (open diamond) in the dark and (closed circle) under illumination. 
Transport of majority carriers in PbSe NC thin films treated with BDT and SCN is characterized in the three-terminal device platform of the FET (Fig. 2E) and in the two-terminal geometry of the conductor (Fig. S1, ESI†). BDT-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs have a low μhole of 9.1(±2.5) × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while SCN-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs have a two orders of magnitude higher μhole of 9.4(±3.5) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 2E), in good agreement with literature.11,22 Both devices show ambipolar, predominantly p-type or p-type behaviour. The degree of p-doping is variable and difficult to control unless the NC thin film is further treated, as small amounts of oxygen (<1 ppm in the N2 glove box) create acceptor states.22,27 The dominance of the p-type behaviour also originates from greater hole than electron injection in the NC channel from the high work function Au source and drain electrodes used here.11 The two-terminal conductivity of SCN-treated devices is 500 times higher than that of BDT-treated devices, and is dominated by its higher carrier μ.
To understand the optoelectronic properties that follow from different ligand treatments on majority carrier behaviour, we fabricate ITO/PbE (E = S, Se) NC/Al Schottky solar cells with a thin, 150 nm NC layer (Fig. 2F).22I–V curves of Schottky solar cells made of BDT- and SCN-treated PbS NC thin films in the dark and under illumination are shown in Fig. 2F. The BDT-treated PbS NC Schottky cells show a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.2 ± 0.26%, however, the SCN-treated PbS NC cell shows a PCE of 0%. Similar behaviour is observed in PbSe NC Schottky cells: the PCE of BDT-and SCN-treated PbSe NC cells are 2.3 ± 0.14% and 0%, respectively (Fig. S2, ESI†).
The lack of PCE in SCN-treated lead chalcogenide NC Schottky junctions can be understood as SCN is known to sparsely cover the surface of metal chalcogenide NCs, leaving a large percentage of the NC surface unpassivated.23 The unpassivated surface introduces a high concentration of in-gap states that scatter and capture photogenerated carriers.1,3,4 Short carrier τ in SCN-treated metal chalcogenide NC films have been previously reported.15–17 The high density of in-gap states is more detrimental to solar cell than to FET performance. In FET operation, the gate voltage may shift the Fermi level so that in-gap states are filled. However, in the solar cell, the quasi-Fermi level shift under photoexcitation is not significant and photogenerated carriers are readily captured by in-gap states that serve as effective recombination-generation centres.
To achieve both high μ and long τ, we conceive a hybrid ligand exchange strategy. We fabricate hybrid ligand-exchanged devices in two ways: treat the NC thin films (1) first with BDT and then with SCN and (2) first with SCN and then with BDT. The transfer characteristics of PbSe NC FETs with the hybrid treatments are shown in Fig. 3A and B. FET measurements are carried out on the same sample before and after the subsequent ligand treatments, in order to directly examine the effects of the second ligand. When the BDT-treated device is subsequently treated with SCN, the device behaviour does not change (Fig. 3A). This is consistent with TEM and FTIR measurements (Fig. 3C left, and D), that show the interparticle distance does not decrease upon subsequent SCN treatment as SCN is not competitive with the strong thiol binding of BDT to the NC surface. However, when the SCN-treated device is subsequently treated with BDT, the current level increases without changing the polarity (Fig. 3B). ION/IOFF remains at ∼200, but μhole increases from 0.09 ± 0.04 to 0.29 ± 0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1 after the additional BDT treatment. The structure of SCN-treated NC thin films subsequently treated with BDT does not change, showing a similarly small interparticle distance and degree of NC fusion (Fig. 3C, right). FTIR measurements show the C–N stretch disappears upon subsequent BDT treatment and an aromatic C–C bend appears around 1500 cm−1 (Fig. 3D), consistent with BDT outcompeting and replacing SCN on the NC surface.
 Fig. 3  (A) Transfer characteristics of BDT-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs (blue) before and (green) after subsequent SCN treatment. (B) Transfer characteristics of SCN-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs (red) before and (purple) after BDT treatment. (C) TEM images of PbSe NCs (left) initially treated with BDT and subsequently treated with SCN and (right) initially treated with SCN and subsequently treated with BDT (scale bar: 10 nm). (D) FTIR spectra of PbSe NC thin films treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, (green) BDT followed by SCN and (purple) SCN followed by BDT. 
We fabricate PbSe NC thin-film photoconductive-type photo-detectors to probe μ and τ of majority carriers. Fig. 4A shows the photoconductive response of devices with V = 10 V across the junctions. The device treated with BDT (blue) shows a current of 2.40 × 10−9 A in the dark and a photocurrent (IPH) of 1.85 × 10−8 A, yielding IPH/IDARK of 7.71. While the BDT-treated device current increases under illumination, both dark- and photo-conductivity are very low as the NC thin film is quite insulating. The SCN-treated device (red) shows a current of 2.4 × 10−7 A in the dark. IPH is 3.50 × 10−8 A and therefore IPH/IDARK is 0.15. The SCN-treated device shows high dark conductivity and high photoconductivity, but IPH is not significant, suggesting τ is short due to surface states. The hybrid treated device (purple) shows a dark current of 1.46 × 10−6 A with the largest IPH of 5.28 × 10−6 A and IPH/IDARK of 3.62. These devices show >285 times higher IPH than BDT-treated devices and >150 times high IPH than SCN-treated devices, suggestive of an enhanced μ–τ product as IPH ∝ μ × τ.
 Fig. 4  (A) Photocurrent response of (blue) BDT, (red) SCN and (purple) sequential SCN and BDT treated PbSe NC thin films upon periodic excitation at 488 nm. (B) (black) Dark and (purple) photocurrent of sequential SCN- and BDT-treated PbSe NC thin films. (C) TRMC (left) quantum yield-mobility product and (right) lifetime of PbSe NC thin films treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, and (purple) SCN followed by BDT. (D) I–V curves of PbS NC thin film solar cells treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN and (purple) SCN followed by BDT (dash line) in the dark and (straight line) under illumination. 
Majority carrier characteristics are summarized in Tables SI and SII (ESI†). The ∼3 times higher μFET for hybrid treated NC devices than for SCN-only treated NC devices suggests majority carrier τ in NC thin films with both SCN and BDT treatment is ∼50 times longer than that in NC films with SCN treatment alone. The additional BDT treatment enhances both μ and τ of initially SCN-treated NC thin films. The τ of the hybrid treated device is slightly shorter than that of the BDT-only treated device, but its μ is 320 times higher. Exploiting this rational, stepwise ligand treatment with SCN and BDT, we realize a NC photodetector with a high responsivity of 167 A W−1 for 488 nm excitation (Fig. 4B and Table SIII, ESI†). The responsivities of devices treated with BDT only and SCN only are 0.58 A W−1 and 1.1 A W−1, respectively. We also calculate the photo-conductive gain of the devices, i.e., the ratio of the lifetime to transit time or the equivalently the ratio of the number of majority carriers to the number of photons. The gain of the device with BDT only, SCN only, and the hybrid treatment is found to be 1.49, 2.82 and 425, respectively (Table SIII, ESI†). The high gain of hybrid treated device is attributed to the long τ and short transit time of majority carrier holes, as the μ is inversely proportional to the transit time.5 We also construct stable PbS NC based photoconductors (Fig. S3A, ESI†). Our method is very effective in enhancing the responsivity and gain, but it also increases the dark current. The optimal device design or method to achieve high photocurrent and low dark current should be investigated. We examine the effect of the hybrid ligand exchange process on the performance of Schottky solar cells (Fig. S3B, ESI†). While the initial SCN treatment completely kills the performance of NC Schottky cells, subsequent treatment with BDT “repairs” the device performance, resulting in a PCE of 1.3%.
To separately probe μ and τ, we conduct time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) measurements on PbSe NC thin films treated with BDT, SCN, and SCN followed by BDT (Fig. 4C and Table SII and Fig. S4, ESI†).17,28 TRMC measures the product of the carrier yield and the sum of μelectron and μhole and the τ of those carriers. However, given the substantially larger μ and τ of majority than minority carriers in NC solids,18 the TRMC measurements are dominated by the majority carrier characteristics. TRMC data show a similar and expected increase in μ and decrease in τ for SCN in comparison to BDT treatment of NC thin films. The μ–τ product of hybrid treated NC thin films is 5.6 ± 0.4 times higher than that of BDT-only treated thin films and is consistent with the increase in carrier μ realized by the SCN treatment, and is 1.9 ± 0.2 times higher than that of SCN-only treated thin films and is dominated by an increase in τ with the additional BDT treatment. TRMC of SCN, BDT, and hybrid treated PbS NC thin films is shown in Fig. S4, ESI.† The ∼102 enhancement in μ for NC thin films exchanged with compact inorganic compared to short organic ligands measured in FETs and by TRMC is consistent with previously reported measurements (See ESI† for extended discussion).15,29
We also anticipate our hybrid ligand exchange process can be utilized to enhance the μ–τ product of minority carriers which dominate the performance of photovoltaic cells. In the hybrid ligand exchange process, the compact SCN exchange reduces the interparticle distance which is expected to enhance transport of both majority and minority carriers. The subsequent BDT treatment ligates the NC surface and is expected to passivate in-gap states, enhancing both majority and minority carrier τ. To test that our hybrid ligand treatment approach also enhances the μ–τ product of minority carriers, we construct P–I–N (p-type/intrinsic/n-type) PbS NC photodiodes (Fig. 4D). Thin, 40 nm p- and n-type NC layers are realized by tetramethylammonium hydroxide treatment,30 and by deposition of 1 nm lead,22 respectively. A thick I-layer (360 nm) is fabricated from PbS NCs treated with SCN, BDT, or with SCN followed by BDT. As shown in Fig. 4D, while the device with an SCN-treated I-layer shows a PCE of 0% and the device with a BDT-treated I-layer shows a PCE of 2.1%, a device using hybrid treatment of the I-layer has a PCE of 3.5% (Table SIV, ESI†). The increased PCE of hybrid treated NC devices is consistent with the picture that SCN treatment increases carrier μ, as seen by the lower series resistance and increased short circuit current of the device, and that subsequent BDT treatment passivates the NC thin films, giving rise to an increase in device open circuit voltage and fill factor. We note that BDT treatment is only effective in creating optoelectronic devices with thin NC films, such as the 150 nm NC layers used in the Schottky junctions, and not thick films, such as the 440 nm NC films used in the P–I–N junction device. The low μ of BDT-treated NC thin films limits charge transport in thicker films. The hybrid ligand treatment achieves both high μ and relatively long τ, allowing the use of thicker NC films favourable for absorbing more light while still transporting charge.
In this work, we introduce a simple, two-step, hybrid SCN and BDT ligand treatment to enhance both μ and τ of carriers in lead chalcogenide NC thin films, and to improve the performance of their photodetectors and solar cells. In order to make NCs a competitive materials class for optoelectronics, we need to realize NC thin films with both high carrier μ (>1 cm2 V−1 s−1) and long carrier τ.1 Further optimization of NC surface chemistry through hybrid methods, such as the one proposed here, promise a pathway to achieve the needed breakthrough in the performance of NC optoelectronics.
The work is primarily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Science and Engineering, under Award DE-SC0002158 for NC synthesis and for the fabrication, measurement, and chemical, electronic and optoelectronic analysis of NC thin films and their FETs, photoconductors, and solar cells. We thank the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2016R1C1B2006534) for optical and structural analysis of NCs. DBS acknowledges a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Award DGE-1321851.
References
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, aac5523 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2011, 54, 278–282 CAS .
K. S. Jeong, J. Tang, H. Liu, J. Kim, A. W. Schaefer, K. Kemp, L. Levina, X. Wang, S. Hoogland, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, E. H. Sargent and J. B. Asbury, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 89–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang and E. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Choi, A. T. Fafarman, S. J. Oh, D.-K. Ko, D. K. Kim, B. T. Diroll, S. Muramoto, J. G. Gillen, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2631–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, N. E. Berry, J.-H. Choi, E. A. Gaulding, H. Lin, T. Paik, B. T. Diroll, S. Muramoto, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1559–1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1013–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, Z. Wang, N. Berry, J.-H. Choi, T. Zhao, E. A. Gaulding, T. Paik, Y. Lai, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6210–6216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Oh, Y. Lai, D. Kim, T. Zhao, A. T. Fafarman, B. T. Diroll, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8275–8283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Goodwin, B. T. Diroll, S. J. Oh, T. Paik, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27097–27105 CAS .
S. Thon, A. Ip, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, K. W. Kemp, G. H. Carey, S. Masala and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7680–7688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Guglietta, B. T. Diroll, E. A. Gaulding, J. L. Fordham, S. Li, C. B. Murray and J. B. Baxter, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1820–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Turk, P. M. Vora, A. T. Fafarman, B. T. Diroll, C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and J. M. Kikkawa, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1440–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Straus, E. D. Goodwin, E. A. Gaulding, S. Muramoto, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4605–4609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Goodwin, D. B. Straus, E. A. Gaulding, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Chem. Phys., 2015, 471, 32–36 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Gao, E. M. Miller, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 614–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Crisp, D. M. Kroupa, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Miller, J. Zhang, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, N. E. Berry, J.-H. Choi, E. A. Gaulding, T. Paik, S.-H. Hong, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2413–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fafarman, W. Koh, B. Diroll, D. K. Kim, D.-K. Ko, S. J. Oh, X. Ye, V. Doan-Nguyen, M. R. Crump, D. C. Reifsnyder, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15753–15761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Choi, H. Wang, S. J. Oh, T. Paik, P. Sung, J. Sung, X. Ye, T. Zhao, B. T. Diroll, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Science, 2016, 352, 205–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla and S. Myrskog, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kang and F. W. Wise, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1997, 14, 1632–1646 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Oh, C. Uswachoke, T. Zhao, J. Choi, B. T. Diroll, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7536–7544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Infelta, M. P. De Haas and J. M. Warman, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1977, 10, 353–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, M. Aerts, C. S. S. Sandeep, E. Talgorn, T. J. Savenije, S. Kinge, L. D. A. Siebbeles and A. J. Houtepen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9606–9614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, H. Liu, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland, X. Wang, M. Furukawa, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NC synthesis, deposition, characterization and discussions. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc07916dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of (black) as-synthesized PbE (E = S, Se) NCs and ligand exchange with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, and (purple) the hybrid SCN–BDT strategy used to enhance carrier μ and τ in NC films. Note: SCN is ambidentate, i.e. S- and N-binding are possible.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of (A) BDT- and (B) SCN-treated PbSe NC assemblies (scale bar: 20 nm). (C) Absorption and (D) FTIR spectra of (black) as-synthesized, oleic-acid capped, (blue) BDT- and (red) SCN-treated PbSe NC thin films. (E) Transfer curves of (blue) BDT- and (red) SCN-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs. (F) I–V curves of PbS NC thin-film Schottky solar cells in which the NCs are treated with (blue) BDT and (red) SCN and the cells are measured (open diamond) in the dark and (closed circle) under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Transfer characteristics of BDT-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs (blue) before and (green) after subsequent SCN treatment. (B) Transfer characteristics of SCN-treated PbSe NC thin film FETs (red) before and (purple) after BDT treatment. (C) TEM images of PbSe NCs (left) initially treated with BDT and subsequently treated with SCN and (right) initially treated with SCN and subsequently treated with BDT (scale bar: 10 nm). (D) FTIR spectra of PbSe NC thin films treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, (green) BDT followed by SCN and (purple) SCN followed by BDT.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Photocurrent response of (blue) BDT, (red) SCN and (purple) sequential SCN and BDT treated PbSe NC thin films upon periodic excitation at 488 nm. (B) (black) Dark and (purple) photocurrent of sequential SCN- and BDT-treated PbSe NC thin films. (C) TRMC (left) quantum yield-mobility product and (right) lifetime of PbSe NC thin films treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN, and (purple) SCN followed by BDT. (D) I–V curves of PbS NC thin film solar cells treated with (blue) BDT, (red) SCN and (purple) SCN followed by BDT (dash line) in the dark and (straight line) under illumination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: NC synthesis, deposition, characterization and discussions. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc07916d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
