Unveiling the irreversible performance degradation of organo-inorganic halide perovskite films and solar cells during heating and cooling processes  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP03106H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03106H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 19487-19495Unveiling the irreversible performance degradation of organo-inorganic halide perovskite films and solar cells during heating and cooling processes

        
          
            Abdullah Al 
            Mamun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tanzila Tasnim 
            Ava
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hye Ryung 
            Byun
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Hyeon Jun 
            Jeong
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Mun Seok 
            Jeong
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Loi 
            Nguyen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Christine 
            Gausin
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Gon 
            Namkoong
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Applied Research Centre, 12050 Jefferson Avenue, Newport News, VA 23606, USA. E-mail: gnamkoon@odu.edu
bDepartment of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea
cCenter for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. E-mail: mjeong@skku.edu
Received 
      10th May 2017
    , Accepted 28th June 2017First published on 28th June 2017AbstractWhile organo-inorganic halide perovskite solar cells show great potential to meet future energy needs, their thermal instability raises serious questions about their commercialization viability. At present, the stability of perovskite solar cells has been studied under various environmental conditions including humidity and temperature. Nonetheless, understanding of the performance of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells is limited. This study reports the irreversible performance degradation of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells during the heating and cooling processes under AM 1.5 and unveils what triggers the irreversible performance degradation of solar cells. Particularly, the primary cause of the irreversible performance degradation of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx is quantitatively analyzed by monitoring in real time the development of deteriorated crystallinity, charge trapping/detrapping, trap depth, and the PbI2 phase, namely a critical signal of perovskite degradation while varying the temperature of the perovskite films and solar cells. Most surprisingly, it is revealed that the degradation of both perovskite films and solar cells was triggered at ∼70 °C. Remarkably, even after the device temperature cooled down to room temperature, the degraded performance of the solar cells persisted with increasing charge trapping and further development of the PbI2 phase. Identification of the irreversible performance degradation of perovskite solar cells provides guidance for future development of more stable perovskite solar cells.
Introduction
Organo-inorganic halide perovskites have evolved rapidly into the most important new candidates for next-generation photovoltaics in an unprecedentedly short period of time.1–4 During the past few years, refined fabrication processes of perovskite solar cells, improved understanding of solar cell physics, and innovative device engineering have led to significant progress and much improved cells that operate at greater than 20% efficiencies.5 Despite all these advances, the instability of halide perovskite solar cells6–10 has been a major obstacle to their commercial viability. Either CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) or CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (MAPbI3−xClx) has been widely studied for photovoltaic applications, which display a distorted three-dimensional network.11 From a chemical point of view, a perovskite material is composed of complicated chemical structures in the ABX3 coordination, in which the A cation is composed of CH3NH3+ (or MA+), the B metal cation is a divalent metal ion of Pb2+ while the X anions are halides including Cl− and I−. As predicted using theoretical frameworks, the optoelectronic properties of perovskites will be in part governed by the CH3NH3+ organic moiety, the Pb–X (X = Cl and I) bonds and their chemical configurations.12 Therefore, the chemical distortion or rupture induced by decomposition or degradation of perovskite films will inevitably alter the optoelectronic properties of solar cells. Indeed, recent studies6 demonstrated that the presence of moisture accelerated the chemical decomposition from the dark brown MAPbI3−xClx to yellow PbI2 when the perovskite layer was not properly encapsulated. In addition, Zhou et al.3 demonstrated an 80% decrease in photovoltaic performance of unencapsulated perovskite solar cells when stored under ambient conditions for 24 h at room temperature, which highlights the importance of an advanced encapsulation technique. To mitigate the degradation of perovskite solar cells, inverted p–i–n perovskite solar cells13,14 have been enthusiastically studied because they are more stable than the perovskite solar cells with a regular structure (n–i–p structure). In particular, the oxide layer inserted between the perovskite films and metal electrodes mitigated the decomposition of the perovskite films by forming a permeation barrier that effectively prevented water or oxygen from penetrating into the perovskite films.14
In addition, considerable efforts have been devoted to employing the encapsulation layers as a means of protecting the underlying perovskite films. Nevertheless, studies have revealed that perovskite films are inherently unstable and highly sensitive to the temperature7 even in an inert environment. In particular, Conings et al.8 systematically investigated the thermal instability of MAPbI3 from a morphological, electronic and chemical point of view. Their investigation concluded that perovskite films are not intrinsically stable but gradually disintegrate from MAPbI3 to PbI2 with loss of CH3NH3I when heated to 85 °C even in an inert atmosphere. Deretzis et al.9 also made a similar observation of thermal instability of CH3NH3PbI3 which transformed into PbI2 at 150 °C under vacuum. Recently, in situ high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy also confirmed the intrinsic thermal degradation of perovskite films under illumination.10
Although there is some understanding of the thermal instability of perovskite solar cells, little is known about the impact of thermal instability on the reversible or irreversible behaviour of the perovskite solar cells. At present, studies on the thermal instability of the perovskite solar cells have been conducted at specific temperatures for a specific period of time.3,6–10 However, it should be noted that device temperatures can increase up to 45 °C higher than ambient temperature under direct sunlight which also varies depending on the time of day and the time of year.15 As a result, the device operating temperature fluctuates from low to high or vice versa, depending on ambient temperatures. In this work, we conducted a quantitative and systematic investigation of pathways for thermal degradation and their impacts on MAPbI3−xClx based perovskite solar cell performance during heating and cooling processes between room temperature and 82 °C. Currently, MAPbI3−xClx photoactive materials are widely developed for perovskite solar cells and are also used in this study. This is because the presence of Cl led to fewer defects, longer diffusion lengths, and a higher open circuit voltage of perovskite solar cells.16–19 Most surprisingly, it is revealed that the irreversible performance degradation of perovskite solar cells was triggered at 70 °C in a nitrogen environment. Another intriguing observation is that the irreversible degradation momentum of perovskite solar cells did not stop but continued even when the device temperature cooled down from 82 °C, close to a solar cell's field operating temperature to room temperature. Our new finding implies that the instability of perovskite solar cells at such a low temperature under illumination may limit their real field commercial applications.
Results and discussion
Temperature-dependent photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells during heating and cooling processes
Perovskite solar cells were fabricated having the device structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/carbon/Ag, as shown in Fig. 1(a). MAPbI3−xClx films can be obtained using a conventional spin-coating method1,20 in which a mixed halide perovskite precursor solution is obtained by dissolving CH3NH3I (MAI) and PbCl2 (3:1 molar ratio) in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide. Spin-coated perovskite films were then placed on a hot plate set at 100 °C for 45 minutes in air. However, in this study, photoactive MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films were prepared using a hot casting technique21 in which a hot (70 °C) perovskite solution was spin-coated onto FTO/PEDOT:PSS substrates maintained at 180 °C. A precursor solution of MAPbI3−xClx was prepared by dissolving an equimolar ratio of PbI2 and CH3NH3Cl (MACl) in N,N-dimethylformamide at a concentration of 11 wt% that achieved the best morphology of the perovskite films. Unlike conventional spin-casting methods a hot-casting technique produces uniform, pinhole-free perovskite morphologies, as shown in Fig. 1(b). As an electron transport layer (ETL), combined PCBM/carbon was utilized. In previous studies,22 we have found that the deposition of carbon on top of PCBM resulted in improved series and shunt resistances of perovskite solar cells. Particularly, a 10 nm thick carbon film led to a high conductivity (σ = 4.24 ± 0.68 S cm−1) that is much better than the reported conductivity values of C60 (2.4 × 10−3 S cm−1) and PCBM (3.2 × 10−4 S cm−1). Fig. 1(c) shows the current (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of MAPbI3−xClx solar cells with PCBM/carbon. The short-circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) were 23.69 mA cm−2, 0.96 V and 0.71, resulting in a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 16.2% at room temperature. The detailed fabrication and device performance of the perovskite solar cells with and without carbon layers are reported in ref. 22.
 Fig. 1  (a) Inverted p–i–n perovskite solar cell structure and (b) SEM image of perovskite films fabricated using a hot-cast technique. (c) Current–voltage J–V characteristics of perovskite solar cells exhibited a PCE of 16.2% at room temperature. However, after soldering electrodes to the electrical connectors of the THM S600E system, the photovoltaic parameters of the perovskite solar cells changed slightly and the initial efficiency dropped to ∼13%. Also, the evolution of the photovoltaic parameters of (d) short circuit current density (JSC), (e) fill factor (FF) and (f) open circuit voltage (VOC) of perovskite solar cells during the heating and cooling processes is illustrated. 
For temperature-dependent J–V measurements, MAPbI3−xClx perovskite solar cells were placed in a nitrogen-filled Linkam THM S600E system while adjusting the temperature at 1 °C intervals for 2 min each point before collecting data. In addition, cool water was circulated using a Linkam water circulation pump to control the temperature precisely. The device temperature was increased from room temperature to 82 °C and then cooled to room temperature. Fig. 1(d–f) summarizes the temperature dependencies of the principal photovoltaic parameters (JSC, VOC and FF) of the perovskite solar cells during the heating and cooling processes. Particularly, we observed the irreversible performance degradation of JSC and VOC during the heating and cooling processes. Upon increasing the temperature, JSC in Fig. 1(d) gradually decreased at a rate of approximately −0.18 mA °C−1. In the cooling process, the decrease of JSC of the perovskite solar cells was also observed. Remarkably, the VOC showed a very strong temperature-dependent decrease, as shown in Fig. 1(f). As the temperature increases from room temperature to 70 °C, the VOC gradually decreased at a rate of −0.9 mV °C−1 whereas above 70 °C, the VOC sharply decreased at a faster rate of −9.5 mV °C−1. During the cooling process, the VOC slowly recovered as the temperature decreased to room temperature.
Temperature dependent steady-state PL
It is recently demonstrated that increased charge trapping was considered as one of the plausible causes responsible for the irreversible degradation of perovskite films.23 In this regard, we conducted temperature dependent, steady-state and time-resolved PL measurements on perovskite films to probe the evolution of carrier dynamics that determine the photovoltaic performance during the heating and cooling processes. For temperature-dependent PL measurements, the MAPbI3−xClx films were coated with PMMA to prevent degradation due to air exposure and placed in a nitrogen-filled Linkam THM S600E system. Fig. 2 shows the temperature-dependent PL as a function of temperature and wavelength in a two-dimensional (2D) contour. Remarkably, from the PL contour plots in Fig. 2(a and b), we noticed a very low PL intensity in the cooling process. In addition, the integrated PL intensity in Fig. 2(c) clearly shows an irreversible PL behaviour during heating and cooling processes. Interestingly, at elevated temperatures, the integrated PL showed three distinct PL transition peaks at 40 °C, 54 °C and 70 °C on a logarithmic scale, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Obviously, the PL peak at 54 °C marked a tetragonal-cubic phase transition,24–26 while an unusual increase in PL from room temperature to 40 °C was also observed. Recently, it has been assumed that the PMMA layer accumulates pressure and temperature which causes phase transitions that occur at temperatures well below the theoretical predicted phase transition temperatures.27 However, tetragonal-cubic phase transition was clearly observed at 54 °C. Therefore, the peak at 40 °C is not related to tetragonal-cubic phase transition. However, it is assumed that an unusual increase in PL might be related to the light soaking effect.7 To verify this, we undertook two consecutive PL measurements by the varying temperature between RT and 50 °C – below the tetragonal-cubic phase transition temperature, as shown in Fig. 2(d). For the first heating and cooling process, a large discrepancy in PL was observed in which the PL intensity gradually increased up to 40 °C and then decreased. However, for the second heating and cooling process, the PL intensity increased sharply and continued to drop as the temperature increased. In addition, PL exhibited more reversible behaviour during the second process. This might be a consequence of the light soaking effect at elevated temperatures. Indeed, Peng et al.7 reported that combined pre-light and heat exposure greatly enhanced the defect passivation of perovskite films.
 Fig. 2  Two-dimensional contour plots of PL during the (a) heating and (b) cooling temperature cycle. (c) Temperature-dependent PL intensity was re-plotted as a function of temperature clearly showing three transitional PL peaks during the heating process. (d) Consecutive PL measurements between room temperature and 52 °C were plotted during the heating and cooling processes. After the 1st thermal cycle was completed, the perovskite films were left in the dark for 30 min at room temperature and then the 2nd thermal cycle was conducted. (e) PL spectra were deconvoluted using the bi-Gaussian function for ordered (red) and disordered (blue) phases. (f) An evolution of deconvoluted PL intensities in a heating process is shown. 
Another intriguing observation is a sharp decrease in the PL intensity at around 70 °C, a vital indicator of degradation of perovskite films shown in Fig. 2(c). As is well established, the collected PL spectra can be interpreted in terms of structural changes. In particular, structural degradation typically resulted in spectral broadening of PL,28 involving newly created defect states. Recently, our group29,30 reported a close correlation between chemical disorders and PL spectra of perovskite films using spatially and chemically resolved two-dimensional (2D) energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) and PL mapping studies of the perovskite films. It was revealed that the PL spectrum observed in MAPbI3−xClx perovskite thin films is asymmetric, which can be deconvoluted with a bi-Gaussian function, representing the ordered and disordered phases of the perovskite films.30,31 Critically, our chemical analysis of controlled morphologies29,30 revealed that non-stoichiometric chemical disorder led to a broad shoulder peak at a short wavelength while the stoichiometric perovskite grains showed a relatively very uniform but longer wavelength. Fig. 2(e) shows the deconvoluted PL spectra at room temperature, one with a broad full-width at half maximum (FWHM = 74.9 nm) but a shorter wavelength (754.9 nm) and the other with a narrow FWHM (46.7 nm) but a longer wavelength (762.2 nm). Using the deconvoluted PL approach, we quantitatively analysed the evolution of ordered and disordered phases of perovskite films in a heating process. Fig. 2(f) shows the deconvoluted PL spectra obtained using a bi-Gaussian function with increasing temperature. Remarkably, the analysis of the evolution of PL intensities of ordered and disordered perovskite phases revealed that the disordered phase began to dominate above 70 °C. This suggests that the structural degradation of perovskite films might occur at 70 °C, the temperature at which VOC began to decrease, as shown in Fig. 1(f).
Temperature dependent time-resolved PL
Since the structural degradation of perovskites will accompany the increased trapping rates of charge carriers, it is expected that charge trapping will accordingly vary during the heating and cooling processes. For this purpose, we measured temperature-dependent lifetime decays and calculated the trapping and detrapping rates of photogenerated charge carriers.32,33 Particularly, the trapping rate is proportional to the photogenerated carrier density and the number of empty trap states while the detrapping rate is proportional to the number of occupied trap states and empty conduction band states as expressed by the following equations:33 (1) (2)where n is the density of free electrons and ntr the density of electrons in the traps, ktr the trapping rate and kde the detrapping rate. Fig. 3(a) shows best-fitting of the lifetime decay using the trapping and detrapping model. Also, temperature-dependent lifetimes and calculated trapping and detrapping rates are shown in Fig. 3(b and c). When the temperature increases from room temperature to 40 °C, the lifetime value increased while the charge trapping rate dropped sharply but the detrapping rate increased. Again, reduced charge trapping but an increased detrapping rate confirm the defect passivation of perovskite films due to both light and heat exposure. As the temperature increases to 70 °C, lifetime values decreased gradually while a rapid decrease in lifetime values above 70 °C was observed. From temperature-dependent lifetime transitions, we quantitatively analysed the trap depth using an Arrhenius plot (3)that yielded a trap depth of 145 meV at a temperature of 40–70 °C, which is in good agreement with reported values.34 Above 70 °C, a deeper trap depth of 1.1 eV was observed, which might be related to the thermal degradation of perovskite. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that a sharp increase in the trapping rate in Fig. 3(c) could be related to the formation of deep trap states in the perovskite films. Indeed, thermal degradation of the perovskite films at higher temperatures produced deep defects in the perovskite films with a deep activation energy of ∼1.5 eV.9,35 In addition, we observed very interesting behaviour when the perovskite temperature decreased, i.e. the lifetime value and charge trapping continued to increase. This indicates that the degradation of perovskite films triggered around 70–82 °C did not stop but continuously occurred even after lowering the temperature.
 Fig. 3  (a) Best-fitting of lifetime decay using trapping and detrapping model and the evolution of (b) lifetime and (c) trapping and detrapping rates during the heating and cooling processes. Quantitative analysis of Arrhenius plots resulted in the trap depth of 145 meV between 40 and 70 °C and 1.1 eV above 70 °C, respectively. 
Temperature dependent UV-VIS measurements
Since light harvesting is closely related to the photocurrent of perovskite solar cells, we conducted temperature-dependent UV-VIS measurements of the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films. Note that PbI2 is known to have a band edge absorption around 510 nm36 while MAPbI3−xClx exhibits a band edge absorption at much longer wavelengths of 700–800 nm. Fig. 4 shows UV-VIS measurements of perovskite films during the heating and cooling processes. At room temperature, the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films exhibited a band edge absorption in the range from 700 nm to 800 nm. Upon heating from 28 °C to 82 °C in Fig. 4(a), we observe a gradual blue-shift of the absorption band edge from 760 nm (or 1.63 eV) at room temperature to 736 nm (or 1.69 eV) at 82 °C, which is related to the downshift of the valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum.37,38 Interestingly, we did not observe a sharp change in the light absorption over the tetragonal–cubic phase transition at around 54 °C, inferring the continuous tilting of the PbI6 octahedra and the continuous change of the Pb–I bond length with a temperature increase.24,39 However, in the shorter wavelength range of less than 550 nm in Fig. 4(a) we observed a gradual decrease in light absorption. We also observed that upon cooling down from 82 °C to 28 °C the absorption spectrum at shorter wavelengths of less than 550 nm continued to decrease, as shown in Fig. 4(b and c). Remarkably, the absorption band edge of PbI2 in Fig. 4(c) became sharper during the cooling process. In addition, the comparison of UV-VIS absorption before and after heating and cooling processes in Fig. 4(d) shows the decreased light absorption. This suggests that the light harvesting capability of MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films deteriorated continuously during the cooling process.
 Fig. 4  Temperature dependent UV-VIS absorption of MAPbI3−xClx during (a) heating and (b) cooling processes. (c) Absorption spectra from 450 nm to 550 nm were re-plotted to clearly show the development of the PbI2 phase. (d) Comparison of UV-VIS before and after the thermal process indicates the decreased light absorption after completing the thermal process. 
SEM and X-ray diffraction measurements
Degradation in solar cells can primarily occur in three places: (i) in the bulk of the active layer; (ii) at the interface of the perovskite and the electrodes; and (iii) at the electrode itself.40 To probe any morphological degradation of the perovskite films, perovskite/metal interfaces and metal electrodes of the perovskite solar cells, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were conducted. In this case, two solar cells were fabricated under the same conditions and heat-treated for 0 and 3 h. Fig. 5(a and b) show cross-sectional SEM images of the perovskite solar cells heated for 0 and 3 h at 82 °C. No noticeable degradation of the perovskite films, perovskite/metal interfaces, and Ag electrodes was found from the cross-sectional SEM images. However, we cannot rule out subtle degradation of the perovskite films that SEM cannot detect but that leads to structural deformation. Therefore, we also performed X-ray diffraction measurements on the perovskite solar cells heated at different temperatures. Fig. 5(c) shows the X-ray diffraction of the perovskite solar cells heat-treated in the nitrogen-filled Linkam sample stage. Before heating the perovskite solar cells, we observed the presence of Ag from the metal electrode, PbI2, MAPbI3−xClx, and CH3NH3PbCl3 phases, which is typical for the spin-casting and hot-casting techniques of MAPbI3−xClx thin films.1,21 When the perovskite solar cells were heated at 55 °C, the X-ray peak of PbI2 did not show a noticeable change. In contrast, we found that the X-ray peak intensity of PbI2 slightly increased when the perovskite solar cells were heated at 70 °C. This confirms that the thermal degradation of the perovskite layers indeed occurred at above 70 °C. In addition, a sharp increase in the PbI2 phase was observed at 82 °C, inferring further degradation of the perovskite layers. Such structural degradation of the MAPbI3−xClx films might explain the observed optical degradations – a rapid increase in the disordered phase, charge trapping rate and trap depth of the MAPbI3−xClx films and the degraded perovskite solar cell performance above 70 °C.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) 0 h and (b) 3 h heating at 82 °C and (c) X-ray diffraction measurements at different temperatures, particularly showing the development of PbI2 above 70 °C. 
Conclusions
We systematically studied the effects of heating and cooling processes on the principal photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells by combining temperature-dependent J–V, steady-state PL, UV-VIS and time-resolved lifetime decay measurements. In particular, we have observed the dynamic evolution of degraded crystallinity, increased charge trapping, deep trap depth and the PbI2 phase. During the heating process, the thermal degradation of the perovskite films was observed at 70 °C or higher. An increase in the disordered phase of the perovskite films involved a drastic increase in charge trapping and the development of a deeper trap depth. Interestingly, when the film temperature was cooled down from 82 °C to room temperature, we observed on-going thermal degradation of MAPbI3−xClx thin films as demonstrated from PL and UV-VIS measurements. In conjunction, we observed a similar degradation of the photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells during the heating and cooling processes. This result confirms that the irreversible device performance is closely related to the intrinsic thermal degradation of the MAPbI3−xClx thin films. Particularly, we noticed that there was a slightly different irreversible behaviour between VOC and JSC during the cooling process. It is found that during the cooling process the VOC gradually recovered whereas the JSC decreased continuously. Such a difference might originate from the fact that the VOC is very sensitive to the surface and interfacial defects and is determined by the difference in quasi-Fermi levels (or chemical potentials) of electrons and holes. In contrast, the JSC is more related to the surface defects, bulk defects, charge carrier mobility, and diffusion processes. We think that structural deformation occurring above 70 °C creates considerable defects in the bulk. As a consequence, a number of defects in the bulk facilitate non-radiative recombination of photo-generated charge carriers while diffusing towards the respective electrodes, resulting in the degradation of the photocurrent. In addition, we observed a continued decrease in light absorption from UV-Vis measurements during the cooling process, which might in part explain the decreased photocurrent of the MAPbI3−xClx solar cells. It is worthwhile noting that perovskite solar cells based on MAPbI3 thin films have also been widely developed. We performed similar measurements of X-ray diffraction and PL of MAPbI3 thin films to monitor the development of PbI2 and the integrated PL intensity at elevated temperatures. Even though their results are not shown here, we observed similar evolutions of the X-ray diffraction peaks of PbI2 and integrated PL, as shown in Fig. 2 and 5. This indicates that the degradation mechanisms of MAPbI3 might be similar to those of MAPbI3−xClx but need further systematic investigation. In summary, our characteristics of perovskite films and solar cells consistently indicate that the thermal instability of MAPbI3−xClx films is closely related to irreversible performance degradation of perovskite solar cells, which provides guidance for future development of more stable perovskite solar cells.
Experimental methods
Perovskite solar cell fabrication
Fluorine doped tin oxide coated (FTO) glasses (SnO2/F, ∼8 Ω sq−1, Aldrich) were used as transparent electrodes and substrates of the devices, which were etched by using zinc powder (Zn, Sigma-Aldrich, 98%) and 3 M hydrochloric acid (HCl, Alfa-Aesar) solution to form the desired patterns. The patterned FTO substrates were subsequently cleaned in an ultrasonic bath (Branson 1500) containing mucasol (Sigma-Aldrich), de-ionized water, methanol (Alfa-Aesar), acetone (Alfa-Aesar) and 2-propanol (J. T. Baker), respectively (each for 10 minutes). Afterwards, the substrates were dried with nitrogen, followed by heat treatment at 120 °C for 20 min to remove the last traces of any solvent. A hole transporting layer was deposited on the cleaned FTO substrates at 3000 rpm for 1 min using PEDOT:PSS (AI 4083, HERAEUS) solution in 2-propanol (J. T. Baker) (1:3 ratio), which was annealed at 150 °C for 20 min. To form active layers of perovskites, a precursor solution of MAPbI3−xClx was prepared by dissolving equimolar ratios of lead iodide (PbI2, Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) and methylamine hydrochloride (MACl, Sigma-Aldrich) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) at a concentration of 11 wt%. Perovskite films were fabricated by using a hot casting process in which the substrates were kept at 180 °C and the precursor solution at 70 °C. The solution was then immediately spin-coated on the top of the hot PEDOT:PSS layers so that the substrate temperature was retained. Then, the devices were transferred to a nitrogen-filled glove box. PCBM, used as an n-type collection layer, was spun on the top of the perovskite layers at 1250 rpm for 60 s using a solution of 2 wt% PCBM (Nano-C, 99.5%) in 1,2-dichlorobenzene (Alfa-Aesar, 99%). Subsequently, graphite (Aldrich, 99.99%) was placed in a graphite crucible and irradiated by an e-beam to deposit ∼10 nm thick carbon on top of the PCBM layers at a base pressure <1 × 10−7 Torr. Finally, 170 nm thick silver (Alfa-Aesar, 99.9%) as a cathode electrode was deposited at 4 angstroms per second under a pressure of 1 × 10−7 Torr using an electron beam (E-beam) evaporator. The resultant device structure composed of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3−xClx/PCBM/carbon/Ag has an active area of 10 mm2.
Optical and morphological characterization
Perovskite samples were prepared on glass substrates to obtain the optical characteristics using steady-state and time-resolved PL. The cleaning steps of the glass substrates and the deposition procedure of the perovskite layers were the same as mentioned for perovskite solar cells. To prevent degradation by air exposure, the samples were coated by using a polymer, polymethyl–methacrylate (PMMA, Sigma-Aldrich, Mw ∼ 120000), in chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.5%) (10 mg ml−1) at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Steady-state and time-resolved PL spectra were recorded using a spectrophotometer (Flurolog, Horiba Jobon Yvon) and a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) system connected with a solid-state laser. For PL measurements, an excitation wavelength of 450 nm with a 20 MHz repletion rate was used and the emission spectra were measured from 600 nm to 850 nm. For time-resolved PL (TRPL), a high-speed photomultiplier tube detector (FL-1073, Horriba scientific Inc) was employed for photon counting with a repetition rate of 4 MHz and 450 nm excitation wavelength. Both PL and TRPL measurements were performed at a very low excitation density of 0.2 µW cm−2 to avoid possible degradation by the laser. For temperature-dependent PL and TRPL measurements, a THM S600E Linkam temperature control stage with 0.1 °C accuracy was used. To passivate the defects in perovskite films, 20 min of light soaking was applied at room temperature before conducting the measurement. The temperature-dependent measurement was conducted over thermal cycles of 28–82–28 °C. In the heating and cooling processes, the temperature was increased and decreased respectively at a step size of 1 °C and a waiting time of 2 min was maintained at each temperature in order to hold the sample at an assigned temperature. During the temperature-dependent measurement, cool water was circulated using a Linkam ECP water circulation pump to control the temperature precisely. A Perkin Elmer Lambda 45 spectrophotometer was used to measure the UV/vis spectrum. SEM images were taken using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM7500F, JEOL) to investigate degradation in the perovskites.
X-ray diffraction measurements
X-ray diffraction was conducted on a solar cell device using a Rigaku MiniFlex II X-ray diffractometer. The solar cell device was heated in a N2 atmosphere at different temperatures using the THM S600E Linkam system. An acquisition rate of 5° min−1 with a step size of 0.02° was used.
Temperature-dependent J–V measurements
The photocurrent density (J) vs. voltage (V) curves were determined using a Keithley 2400 source meter under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 provided by a solar simulator (Newport 69907). One sun illumination was adjusted using the NREL-calibrated, KG-2 filtered Si diode. A 450 W Xenon lamp was used as a light source and the lamp remained on for 30 min before starting the photocurrent measurement to stabilize the light intensity. J–V curves were obtained by scanning from −0.05 V to 1 V. Temperature-dependent J–V measurements were carried out following the identical procedure and keeping all conditions the same as temperature-dependent PL and TRPL measurements. A N2 atmosphere was provided to protect the sample from moisture during temperature-dependent J–V measurements.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under projects (1355678, 1428298 and 1547771).
References
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2000, 338, 643–647 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim, J. Seo, J. H. Noh, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7837–7840 CrossRef PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, National Renewable Energy Laboratory Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, accessed, November 2016.
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Sung, Y. Chen, Y. Yao and Z. Laing, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
I. Deretzis, A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, E. Smecca, F. Giannazzo, N. Sakai, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 131904 CrossRef .
B. Yang, O. Dyck, W. Ming, M. H. Du, S. Das, C. M. Rouleau and K. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32333–32340 CAS .
F. Brivio, J. M. Frost, J. M. Skelton, A. J. Jackson, O. J. Weber, M. T. Weller, A. R. Goni, A. M. A. Leguy, P. R. F. Barnes and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 144308 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T. B. Song, C. C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. O. Brinkmann, J. Zhao, N. Pourdavoud, T. Becker, T. Hu, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, L. Hoffmann, T. Gahlmann, R. Heiderhoff, M. F. Oszajca, N. A. Luechinger, D. Rogalla, Y. Chen, B. Cheng and T. Riedl, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 CAS .
F. Xie, W. Li, J. Chen and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 24, 7102–7108 Search PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. D. Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 CAS .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. D. Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Mamun, T. T. Ava, K. Zhang, H. Baumgart and G. Namkoong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 17960–17966 RSC .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, S. M. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Weller, O. J. Weber, P. F. Henry, A. M. Di Pumpo and T. C. Hansen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4180–4183 RSC .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 CAS .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 11033–11038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dittrich, C. Awino, P. Prajongtat, B. Rech and M. C. Lux-Steiner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23968–23972 CAS .
P. Urbánek and I. Kuřitka, J. Lumin., 2015, 168, 261–268 CrossRef .
G. Namkoong, J. H. Jeong, A. Mamun, H. Byun, D. Demuth and S. M. Jeong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mamun, T. T. Ava, H. J. Jeong, M. S. Jeongb and G. Namkoong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9143–9148 RSC .
B. W. Park, S. M. Jain, X. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, G. T. Boschloo and T. Edvinsson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2088–2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liao, R. Stangl, T. Mueller, F. Lin, C. S. Bhatia and B. Hoex, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 024509 CrossRef .
C. Wehrenfennig, C. M. Palumbiny, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston, L. Schmidt-Mende and L. M. Herz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9159–9168 CAS .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218–6227 CrossRef CAS .
E. Smecca, Y. Numata, I. Deretzis, G. Pellegrino, S. Boninelli, T. Miyasaka and A. Alberti, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13413–13422 RSC .
D. Bi, S.-J. Moon, L. Häggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762–18766 RSC .
C. Quarti, E. Mosconi, J. M. Ball, V. D'Innocenzo, C. Tao, S. Pathak and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 155–163 CAS .
B. J. Foley, D. L. Marlowe, K. Sun, W. A. Saidi, L. Scudiero, M. C. Gupta and J. J. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 243904 CrossRef .
Y. Kawamura, H. Mashiyama and K. Hasebe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 71, 1694 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, F. Liu, A. M. C. Ng, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. Ng and C. Surya, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 281–299 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Inverted p–i–n perovskite solar cell structure and (b) SEM image of perovskite films fabricated using a hot-cast technique. (c) Current–voltage J–V characteristics of perovskite solar cells exhibited a PCE of 16.2% at room temperature. However, after soldering electrodes to the electrical connectors of the THM S600E system, the photovoltaic parameters of the perovskite solar cells changed slightly and the initial efficiency dropped to ∼13%. Also, the evolution of the photovoltaic parameters of (d) short circuit current density (JSC), (e) fill factor (FF) and (f) open circuit voltage (VOC) of perovskite solar cells during the heating and cooling processes is illustrated.	 

 	Fig. 2  Two-dimensional contour plots of PL during the (a) heating and (b) cooling temperature cycle. (c) Temperature-dependent PL intensity was re-plotted as a function of temperature clearly showing three transitional PL peaks during the heating process. (d) Consecutive PL measurements between room temperature and 52 °C were plotted during the heating and cooling processes. After the 1st thermal cycle was completed, the perovskite films were left in the dark for 30 min at room temperature and then the 2nd thermal cycle was conducted. (e) PL spectra were deconvoluted using the bi-Gaussian function for ordered (red) and disordered (blue) phases. (f) An evolution of deconvoluted PL intensities in a heating process is shown.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Best-fitting of lifetime decay using trapping and detrapping model and the evolution of (b) lifetime and (c) trapping and detrapping rates during the heating and cooling processes. Quantitative analysis of Arrhenius plots resulted in the trap depth of 145 meV between 40 and 70 °C and 1.1 eV above 70 °C, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Temperature dependent UV-VIS absorption of MAPbI3−xClx during (a) heating and (b) cooling processes. (c) Absorption spectra from 450 nm to 550 nm were re-plotted to clearly show the development of the PbI2 phase. (d) Comparison of UV-VIS before and after the thermal process indicates the decreased light absorption after completing the thermal process.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of (a) 0 h and (b) 3 h heating at 82 °C and (c) X-ray diffraction measurements at different temperatures, particularly showing the development of PbI2 above 70 °C.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
