Progress in the preparation and application of three-dimensional graphene-based porous nanocomposites  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR00030K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR00030K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5563-5577Progress in the preparation and application of three-dimensional graphene-based porous nanocomposites

        
          
            Zhengquan 
            Yan
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Wenli 
            Yao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dandan 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chundong 
            Wang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Chun-Sing 
            Lee
          
        
      *c
aAnhui Provincial Laboratory of Biomimetic Sensor and Detecting Technology & Solar Photovoltaic Materials Research Center, West Anhui University, Lu'an 237012, China. E-mail: yanzhq2008@163.com
bJiangxi Research Institute of Tungsten and Rare Earths & School of Materials and Chemical Engineering, Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, Ganzhou, 341000, China
cCenter of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF) & Dept. of Phys. and Mater. Sci., City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. E-mail: apcslee@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      4th January 2015
    , Accepted 16th February 2015First published on 19th February 2015AbstractDue to high specific surface area, excellent conductivity, low mass density, good compatibility and elegant flexibility, three-dimensional graphene composites with interconnected porous structures possess unusual and novel physical and electronic properties, unsurpassed chemical functionalities and other attractive features. Therefore, different three-dimensional graphene-based nanoporous scaffolds have been extensively designed, prepared and investigated for practical applications in lithium-ion batteries, super-capacitors, solar cells, catalysis, thermal management, environment pollution enrichment and separation, and chemical sensors with high performance from both fundamental and technological viewpoints. To present readers with a better understanding of this kind of important porous material, in this feature article, we will highlight the main achievements made in the preparation of 3D graphene micro- and/or nano-architectures and their potential applications in the aforementioned fields.
1. Introduction
Graphene, a two-dimensional (2D) monolayer sheet of hexagonal sp2-hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice, has attracted a lot of attention since its experimental discovery in 2004.1 Owing to its remarkable properties, such as large specific surface area, excellent electrical and thermal conductivity, good light transmission and high mechanical strength, graphene-based materials have been developed for active materials of energy storage and conversion,2–7 transparent conductors,8–11 nanoelectronics,12–14 and chemical sensors,15–19etc. There being strong π–π stacking interactions, van der Waals forces and high surface energy, however, graphene monolayer sheets tend to stack and self-aggregate. So many graphene macro-assemblies with three dimensional (3D) nanostructures have appeared in recent reports using an in situ reduction-assembly method,20,21 chemical vapor deposition (CVD)22–24 and template-direction methods.25,26 3D graphene porous nanocomposites with interconnected networks are highly conductive and mechanically robust compared with 2D graphene monolayers. Also, the low mass density, high specific surface area, good compatibility and excellent flexibility give 3D graphene networks novel or special physical and electronic properties, unsurpassed chemical functionality and other attractive features. Up to now, they have been widely applied in energy storage/conversion,27,28 as contamination absorbents,29 in catalysis,30,31 composites,32 and chemical sensors33,34 with better functions than 2D graphene. All of these conclusions strongly demonstrated that integrating nano monolayer graphene into macroscopic 3D porous interconnected networks has proved to be a key role in realizing their practical applications, through which properties at the nanoscale could be effectively translated to those at the macroscopic level.
To present readers with a systematic overview, the following sections will highlight the development of the preparation and application of 3D graphene-based macroscopic porous composites, based on the work developed during recent years, which will be different from previous overviews summarizing 3D graphene architectures comprehensively in the literature.25,35–37
2. Preparation methods
2.1 Self-assembly methods
Self-assembly is a ubiquitous natural phenomenon capable of spontaneously forming multiple ordered structures within a system composed of many individual subunits through non-covalent bonds, such as hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, metal-to-ligand bonds, electrostatic forces, hydrophobic–hydrophilic interactions, and π–π stacking interactions.38–40 In particular, self-assembly has integrated and translated individuals into resultant macrostructures with numerous breakthrough and special applications in optoelectronics, energy-storage, biomedicine and environmental pollution separation. For example, Vickery, et al.41 reported two high-order 3D graphene–polymer nanocomposites, i.e., sponge-like macroporous scaffolds and hollow micrometer-sized spheres, using template-directed self-assembly methods. As shown in the top of Fig. 1a, a sponge-like macroporous scaffold could be controllably fabricated by ice-segregation-induced self-assembly. A homogeneous aqueous mixture of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and polystyrene sulfonate-stabilized graphene sheets (PSS-G) was first transferred into an insulin syringe and frozen by controlled immersion in liquid nitrogen. The frozen scaffold was then freeze-dried to sublime the ice crystals to produce a macro-porous monolith, whose morphology could be effectively controlled by immersion rate, graphene concentration and polymer type. On the other hand, PSS-G-coated polymer hollow micro-spheres were constructed by controllably depositing negatively charged PSS-G dispersions on the surface of positively charged polymer beads (bottom of Fig. 1a). After subsequent treatment with toluene to remove the core template, hollow PSS-G microspheres were produced. This study demonstrates that electrostatically induced assembly is a feasible method for controlling high-order graphene-based architectures from polymer-stabilized graphene sheets dispersed in aqueous solutions.
 Fig. 1  The representative self-assembly routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 41, 42, 44–47, and 49. 
Using polystyrene-grafted graphene oxide (GO) as a precursor, Lee, et al.42 reported a “breath-figure” method to self-assemble 3D macroporous carbon films with tunable porous morphologies. As shown in Fig. 1b, the dispersion was cast onto a suitable substrate and exposed to a stream of humid air after GO platelets were dispersed in benzene. Endothermic evaporation of the volatile organic solvent resulted in the spontaneous condensation and close packing of aqueous droplets at the organic solution surface. After subsequently drying the polymer-grafted GO on the substrate, a mechanically flexible and robust macroporous film comprised of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) platelets was formed and constructed upon pyrolysis. The pore size and the number of porous layers could be effectively controlled by the concentration of the organic precursor dispersion and the length of polymer chains grafted to the GO surface. Therefore, a more straightforward self-assembly method to fabricate high ordered, mechanically flexible macro-porous RGO assemblies with tunable open porous morphologies was developed. A very recent report further developed self-assembled 3D RGO structures via boiling a reduced graphene oxide (RGO) colloidal dispersion accordingly.43
Using a hydrothermal method with the assistance of noble-metal nanoparticles (Au, Ag, Pd, Ir, Rh, Pt, etc.), Tang, et al.44 described a 3D GO assembly with macro-porous structure as shown in Fig. 1c. For example, Pd nanoparticles anchored onto GO sheets could act as active sites for self-assembly with another GO sheet. The corrugations formed in the Pd-bearing GO would also result in porous structures, which could be easily controlled by adjusting the volume of the vessel and the effective concentration of GO. The work not only provides a simple way to fabricate porous structures from GO, but also indicates that GO can be self-assembled into more complicated 3D structures with high catalytic activity and selectivity in the chemical reaction for either fixed- or fluid-bed processes in large-scale production.
Lv, et al.45 developed a one-pot self-assembly process to construct cylinder-like 3D graphene macro-assemblies with core–shell structures below 100 °C at normal atmospheric pressure (Fig. 1d). Catalyzed by MnO2 nanoparticles decomposed from KMnO4, the self-assembly was effectively to avoid the face-to-face stacking of RGO sheets as shown in Fig. 1d (right). Furthermore, the porous structure and size of the assembly can be tuned by changing the KMnO4 fraction. The one-pot assembled nanoporous carbons with layered shells show potential application in electrochemical energy storage devices.
By heating a mixture of GO aqueous dispersion and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) aqueous solution (1:1 V/V) at 90 °C for 5 min, Xu, et al.46 prepared a typical GO/DNA composite self-assembled hydrogel. As illustrated in Fig. 1e, dsDNA was unwound to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) during the heating process, and then the in situ formed ssDNA chains bridged adjacent GO sheets via strong noncovalent interactions, such as π–π stacking interactions, etc. Thus, a stable self-assembled hydrogel was constructed from GO sheets and ssDNA chains. This work provides new insight for the assembly of functionalized graphene with biomolecules, which will benefit the rational design and fabrication of hierarchical graphene-based materials.
By virtue of the chemical bonds and hydrogen bonds among RGO sheets, divalent metal ions (Ca2+, Ni2+, or Co2+) and water molecules, Jiang, et al.47 assembled RGO sheets into gel-like 3D architectures under hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 1f). After GO was dispersed in deionized water under sonication, some CaCl2 with different Ca2+/GO weight ratios was added and the mixture was stirred for 3 h. The mixture was then treated hydrothermally at 120 °C for 10 h. After the autoclave was cooled down to room temperature, a black gel-like cylinder was formed in the bottom of the autoclave. Replacing CaCl2 by NiCl2 or CoCl2, similar RGO cylinders were also obtained. The as-prepared RGO cylinder was immersed in 0.25 wt% PVA (MW ∼ 20000) solution for 5 min and then freeze-dried to prepare a PVA-strengthened 3D architecture. In the resultant porous structures, RGO sheets, water molecules and divalent ions play the roles of skeleton, filler, and linker, respectively. The large amount of water (∼99 wt%) in the galleries of RGO sheets can offer many water channels for introducing PVA molecules. This presents promising potential for preparing versatile 3D RGO-based host–guest composites.
Using covalent carbon cross-links between graphene sheets instead of common physical bonds, Worsley, et al.26 prepared a kind of 3D graphene aerogel. The GO suspension was first gelated via resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) sol–gel chemistry. The resulting GO–RF wet gel was then dried and pyrolyzed to produce the graphene aerogel, whose electrical conductivity was orders of magnitude higher than that of the graphene aerogel made through physical cross-links alone. Later, using the sol–gel chemistry proposed, they48 further introduced chemical bonds between the graphene sheets to control the bulk properties of the graphene-based aerogels. A 3D graphene assembly with decreasing RF content possesses a higher degree of exfoliation and less C–H bonding than that with higher RF content, while maintaining high conductivity.
Chen, et al.49 reported a universal strategy for fabricating 3D porous graphene-based composites with a two-step electro-chemical deposition process. As shown in Fig. 1g, a porous 3D graphene framework was first prepared by electrochemical reduction of GO aqueous solution, and then the second component was incorporated into this 3D framework by in situ electrochemical deposition. A low deposition rate is quite necessary for the uniform deposition of the second component. Recently, through π–π stacking interactions, Wang, et al.50 further developed the in situ self-assembly of 3D graphene sheets using chemical reduction of GO in the presence of natural phenolic acids. This method has the benefit of low cost, an environmentally friendly procedure and mild reaction conditions.
Combining self-assembly with a hot press technique, Wu, et al.51 fabricated 3D graphene–polymer composites using polystyrene and ethylene vinyl acetate as raw materials. The obtained composites possessed higher electrical conductivity than that of the corresponding reported composites chemically functionalized with the same components.52 Another substrate-assisted GO reduction and assembly method was developed by Hu, et al.,53 without any additional reducing agents on arbitrary substrates. The substrate-assisted assembly method offers a facile and efficient approach to construct a variety of unique graphene assemblies for practical applications.
2.2 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method
Template-directed chemical vapor deposition is another important and easy method to prepare 3D foam-like graphene macrostructures with entire sp2-hybridized carbon atoms. Using this methodology, Chen, et al.54 first reported foam-like graphene macrostructures (GFs) using an interconnected 3D nickel scaffold as a template. As shown in Fig. 2a, carbon was first introduced and precipitated on the surface of the nickel template by decomposing CH4 at 1000 °C under ambient pressure. Owing to the difference between the thermal expansion coefficients of nickel and graphene, ripples and wrinkles could be formed on the graphene films, which resulted in an improved mechanical interlocking and better adhesion with polymer chains to form different functional composites. So poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was easily deposited on the surface of the graphene films to prevent graphene networks from collapsing before etching away the nickel skeleton by hot HCl (or FeCl3) solution. After the PMMA layer was carefully removed by hot acetone, a monolith of continuous and interconnected 3D graphene networks was obtained. The GF copied and inherited the interconnected 3D scaffold structure of the nickel foam template. The as-prepared GF possesses an electrical conductivity of ∼10 S cm−1, 6 orders of magnitude higher than that of chemically derived graphene-based composites,55 due to the interconnected flexible network for the fast transport channel of charge carriers.
 Fig. 2  The representative chemical vapor deposition routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 54 and 59. 
Using ecofriendly ionic liquids and microwave irradiation as the energy source, Sridhar, et al.56 constructed 3D graphene shell-plate nanostructures with “nanocup arrays” vertically anchored on few-layered graphene substrates. The synthetic procedure included two simple steps, i.e., one-pot synthesis of the composites with metal nanoparticles anchored on the graphene surface, and etching of metals with dilute HCl to result in unique graphene-based shell-plate nanostructures subsequently. This provides a promising and convenient pathway to achieve mass production of 3D graphene with a domestic microwave and green ionic liquids.
Recently, using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition, our group57 obtained a 3D graphene scaffold with much larger surface area. When the Ni foam was heated to 550 °C, hydrogen plasma was produced by introducing 1300 W microwave power. After the Ni foam scaffold was etched, a 3D graphene micro-graphene tube was obtained, which was a bit different from the one grown by Chen, et al.54i.e., it was a 3D graphene architecture grown on the surface of the 3D graphene scaffold, which was named as a micro-graphene nanotube accordingly.
Using PVA/iron as precursors, Yoon, et al.58 reported a substrate-free CVD method to fabricate 3D graphene composites. The PVA/iron precursor was annealed under a hydrogen environment and then infiltrated into 3D colloidal silica. During the experiment, iron ions were reduced and few-layer graphene was precipitated on the surface of the reduced iron, whose dimensions could be effectively tuned by regulating the creation of nanonetworks. Importantly, the resultant 3D graphene could be further transferred onto any arbitrary substrate for flexible devices.
Xiao, et al.59 described the conversion of predefined 3D pyrolyzed photoresist films into well-defined 3D porous graphene. The conversion followed a three-step process as shown in Fig. 2b, where 3D amorphous carbon structures were conformably sputtered with nickel and annealed to convert the material into 3D graphene monoliths. After acidic etching to remove the remaining nickel template, hollow and interconnected 3D multilayered graphene structures were chemically converted with pore sizes of around 500 nm.
2.3 Other methods
It has been discovered that local strain in a graphene sheet can alter its conducting properties and transport gap. Based on this, Li, et al.60 developed a scalable strain-engineering technique to generate 3D graphene nanostructures. Utilizing laser-induced shock pressure, the graphene sheet was conformably pressed onto the mold patterns and took the shape of the patterns with tunable strains as shown in Fig. 3a. The process could be scaled up to roll to roll ones by changing the laser beam size and scanning speed. The proposed approach possesses great potential for realizing an all graphene circuit for applications in various nanoelectrical devices.
 Fig. 3  Other representative routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 60 and 62. 
Freeze casting is another template-free strategy for fabricating graphene sponge developed recently. For example, Xie, et al.61 proposed a very convenient and general protocol to finely tailor the porous architecture and properties. Using the modified freeze casting process, the resulting pore sizes and wall thicknesses could be gradually tuned from 10 to 800 mm and from 20 to 80 mm, respectively, with the corresponding properties changing from hydrophilic to hydrophobic and the Young's Modulus varying by 15 times.
To simultaneously combine the excellent properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene, Zhu, et al.62 devised a sandwich structure using graphene and CNTs through covalent bonds. As shown in Fig. 3b, graphene was grown on a copper foil by decomposing CH4 or PMMA at 1000 °C. Then, the iron catalyst and alumina buffer layer were deposited on the graphene in series by electron beam evaporation. During the process, the iron catalyst and alumina buffer layer were lifted up and the CNT carpet was grown directly out of the graphene. There was no barrier between the graphene and nanotube carpet. The top alumina layer acted as a floating buffer layer to assist the formation of small-diameter CNT carpets. Not only serving standalone properties of CNT and graphene, the hybrid material also exhibited a specific surface area of 42000 m2 g−1 with ohmic contact from the vertically aligned single-walled CNT to graphene. The work provides a new benchmark to understand 3D graphene/single-walled CNT-conjoined materials.
Using a uniquely defect-engineered microwave technique, Sridhar, et al.63 grew CNTs on graphene sheets to form 3D carbon nanostructures. The sequential process included defect generation on graphene sheets under microwave irradiation, anchoring of palladium nanoparticles on these defects and growth of carbon nanotubes with the aid of an ionic liquid. The resulting 3D graphene–CNT–palladium composites consisted of carbon nanotubes vertically standing on graphene sheets through covalent bonding and palladium nanoparticles attached to the top of the carbon nanotubes. You, et al.64 further reported 3D N-doped graphene–CNT networks by hydrothermal treatment, freeze-drying and subsequent carbonization of graphene oxide-dispersed pristine CNTs in the presence of pyrrole, successively. Its key feature was using GO as a “surfactant” to directly disperse pristine CNTs without any additives.
Li, et al.65 reported a one-step ion-exchange/activation method to construct 3D graphene-based materials using a metal ion exchange resin as a carbon precursor at low temperature. The ion-exchange resin containing Ni2+ decomposed, carbonized, and finally graphitized to generate gaseous CO and CO2, which resulted in porous graphene-like network structures. In the presence of KOH, the graphene-like materials were then activated to form 3D hierarchical porous architectures. The method is simple, scalable and compatible.
Recently, ordered 3D conjugated polyaniline (PANI)–graphene composites were fabricated by Liu, et al.,66 using in situ chemical oxidative polymerization of aniline in the presence of amino-functionalized graphene sheets. PANI polymerization could be initiated by amino groups on graphene. Also, the density and size of ordered PANI nanorod arrays could be manipulated by controlling the amount of amino-functionalized graphene sheets. Owing to conjugated covalent bonds and ordered PANI nanorod arrays, the resultant composite possessed high special capacitance, low electrical resistance and excellent cycling stability.
3. Performances and applications
3.1 Lithium-ion batteries
The lithium-ion battery (LIB) is one of the most important power sources for portable electronic devices in our daily life. Devising and exploring new electrode materials with high conductivity is an urgent task in constructing next-generation high-performance LIBs. By virtue of their excellent conductivity, large surface area, high stability and mechanical robustness, 3D graphene-based porous materials with interconnected networks have been promising candidates for high-performance LIBs.
Tang, et al.67 reported 3D porous graphene networks decorated with LiFePO4 as electrodes for LIBs. Due to the incorporation of 3D graphene networks, LiFePO4-based composites exhibited high conductivity of ∼600 S cm−1, low square resistance of 1.6 Ω sq−1 and excellent rate performance of 109 mA h g−1 at 10 C, indicating a promising application in high-performance LIBs. Later, Ding, et al.68 further confirmed the application of 3D graphene/LiFePO4 composites for flexible LIBs. Even with low graphene content, the composites exhibited a high capacity of 163.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and 114 mA h g−1 at 5 C without further incorporating any other conductive agents. Similar results were also confirmed by Kuo, et al.69
Using mesoporous TiO2 submicrospheres embedded in 3D RGO networks (MTO/3D-GN), Yu, et al.70 developed a novel electrode for LIBs. As shown in Fig. 4, even at a high current rate of 20 C, MTO/3D-GN still possessed a favorable reversible capacity of 124 mA h g−1, while MTO-G and pure mesoporous TiO2 only exhibited capacities of 81 mA h g−1 and 38 mA h g−1, respectively. The cycling performance and rate capability of MTO/3D-GN at each rate were also superior to those of MTO-G and pure mesoporous TiO2 without an RGO support. The action mechanism might be that MTO/3D-GN provided a high contact area between the electrolyte and electrode, favorable diffusion kinetics for both electrons and lithium ions, double protection against the volume changes of electro-active TiO2 materials and excellent electrical conductivity of the overall electrode during electrochemical processes.
 Fig. 4  (Left) cycling performance of pure TiO2, TiO2–G mixture and the MTO/3D-GN composite at current rates of 0.5 C and 5 C, respectively. (Right) cycling performance at different current rates from 0.5 C to 20 C of pure TiO2, TiO2–G mixture and the MTO/3D-GN composite. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 70. 
By depositing MoS2 on the surface of 3D graphene networks, Cao, et al.71 demonstrated a binder-free anode for LIBs. The as-prepared anode possessed excellent electrochemical performance, i.e., reversible capacities of 877 and 665 mA h g−1 during the 50th cycle at current densities of 100 and 500 mA g−1, and a 10th-cycle capacity of 466 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 4 A g−1, respectively. Furthermore, the interconnected porous 3D graphene networks saving as effective pathways for electronic and Li+ ion exchange, there was no need to add any other conductive additives for constructing LIBs.
Fe3O4 has always been regarded as a promising anode material for LIBs except for its poor cyclability and low rate capability. To overcome this shortcoming, Luo, et al.72 developed bi-continuous mesoporous Fe3O4 attached onto 3D GFs and utilized it directly as the LIB anode. The resultant anode exhibited a high capacity of 785 mA h g−1 at 1 C rate without decay up to 500 cycles. It may be have been the best rate performance reported for Fe3O4 used in LIBs up to then.
Chen, et al.73 constructed a multi-walled carbon nanotube/sulfur (MWCNT@S) composite with core–shell structure, which was further embedded into the interlayer galleries of graphene sheets (GS). The cathode for Li/S batteries with this composite expressed a higher initial capacity of 1396 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.2 C compared to the corresponding ones without GS or MWCNTs.74 The synergistic effects between GS and MWCNTs provides a 3D conductive network for electron transfer, open channels for ion diffusion, strong confinement for soluble polysulfides, and an effective buffer for volume expansion of the S-containing cathode during discharge.
Recently, Ye, et al.75 reported a 3D interconnected network of GAs with lattice defects introduced by 3 MeV He ion bombardment. Used as anodes for LIBs under the same conditions, the resultant 3D GAs showed drastically different charge/discharge behavior from that of graphite. The initial lithiation capacity and the reversible capacity of 3D GAs were ∼3200 mA h g−1 [nearly one order of magnitude higher than that of graphite (∼372 mA h g−1)] and ∼770 mA h g−1 (twice the value of graphite) under the same conditions, respectively. Furthermore, the capacity of 3D GAs could be obtained mainly below the discharge voltage of 1.0 V, whereas little capacity would be observed between 0.5 and 1.0 V discharge potential in graphite. The study indicated for the first time the importance of defect types in affecting the lithium storage capacity of graphene materials.
Our group is also devoted to the construction of 3D graphene-based composites for LIBs. For example, a novel Sn–3D graphene anode was designed, which possessed excellent electrochemical performances and a dramatic improvement in the aspects of capacity, cycle life, and rate capacity with very high reversible capacity and long cycling life.76 The Sn–3D graphene electrode delivered a reversible capacity of 794 mA h g−1 under 1/3 C for 400 cycles with over 100% capacity retention and 466 mA h g−1 under 1 C for 4000 cycles with 100% capacity retention. The superior performance could be attributed to the unique architecture, intrinsic flexibility, and high conductivity of the designed 3D foothill-like graphene scaffold. On the basis of this work, another anode for LIBs was further developed using 3D Si thin films supported on a graphene scaffold.2 Owing to the good electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical flexibility of the 3D graphene scaffold, the Si anode exhibited a gravimetric capacity as high as 1560 mA h g−1 at a current density of 797 mA g−1 and a capacity retention of 84% after 500 cycles relative to the capacity value in the 50th cycle. Meanwhile, specific capacities of 1083 and 803 mA h g−1 were demonstrated after 1200 cycles at 2390 mA g−1 and 7170 mA g−1, respectively. All of the studies will pave a new way for preparing 3D Si–graphene hybrid structures as robust and scalable Si-based anodes for all-solid-state thin film LIBs.
3.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are a kind of important energy-storage device since they can deliver power density, cycle efficiency, and charge/discharge rates orders of magnitude higher than a common battery. 3D graphene nanostructures represent a new class of ultralight and porous carbon material that are associated with high strength-to-weight and surface-area-to-volume ratios. More importantly, interconnected 3D porous networks can provide multidimensional electron transport pathways, easy access to the solid-state electrolyte, and minimized transport distances between the bulk electrode and electrolyte. All the features strongly suggest that 3D porous graphene composites could be qualified for application as supercapacitor electrodes.
Fan, et al.77 for the first time, applied 3D CNT/graphene sandwich structures with CNT pillars grown between the graphene layers as supercapacitor electrodes. The unique structure endowed the electrode with a high-rate transportation of electrolyte ions and electrons, resulting in a specific capacitance of 385 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH solution. Importantly, the electrode possessed excellent electrochemical stability. For example, the capacitance increased by ca. 20% compared to the initial one even after 2000 cycles. By controlling the lengths of vertical CNT forests emanating from the graphene surface, Yan, et al.78 prepared 3D seamless metal–graphene–CNT hybrids on porous nickel substrates. The resulting 3D porous seamless structure effectively overcame inadequate CNT–metal–electrode contact, low surface-area-utilization efficacy and post-transfer difficulties. The high-performance capacitor was further confirmed by You, et al.64 using 3D N-doped graphene–CNT networks as supercapacitor electrodes.
Wu, et al.79 presented 3D graphene-based hierarchical macro and mesoporous carbons (GA-MC) as supercapacitor electrodes. As shown in Fig. 5a, the cyclic voltammetry profiles exhibit typical electrical double layer behavior at all sweeping rates by virtue of a strong synergistic effect between macro and mesopores. 3D GA-MC manifested outstanding specific capacitance of 226 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1, which was much higher than those of macroporous graphene, mesoporous carbon without involving graphene, physically mixed GA-MC with a 1:1 weight ratio, 2D graphene-based mesoporous carbon sheets without macropores, and reduced graphene powder (Fig. 5b). There was no remarkable capacitance loss for GA-MC electrodes even after 5000 cycles (Fig. 5c). The reason might be attributed to the improvement of ion accessibility in 3D graphene frameworks during the cycling process. Later, using 3D N and B co-doped monolithic graphene aerogels (BN-GAs), the group further initiated a simplified prototype of all-solid-state supercapacitors (ASSSs).80 In the integrated electrode-separator-electrolyte prototype, GAs served as additive/binder-free electrodes and a PVA/H2SO4 gel as the solid-state electrolyte and thinner separator, respectively. Owing to doping N and/or B in carbon networks, charge transfer was greatly facilitated between neighboring carbon atoms, with high specific capacitance (∼62 F g−1) and enhanced energy density (∼8.65 W h kg−1) and power density (∼1600 W kg−1) compared to the corresponding undoped, N-doped or B-doped GAs. Monolithic GA materials provide potential for more efficient, light and minimized energy-storage devices.
 Fig. 5  The representative properties of supercapacitors using 3D graphene-based composites. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 79 and 85. 
By virtue of the reinforcing effect of PANI, Tai, et al.81 developed a 3D graphene/polyaniline (GNS/PANI) composite hydrogel as a supercapacitor electrode. The as-prepared device exhibited a specific capacitance of 334 F g−1, which is about 150% higher than that of a pure GNS hydrogel-based electrode. GNS/PANI hydrogel might be a novel promising candidate for high-performance capacitor electrodes. Soon after, the same conclusion was effectively confirmed by Dong, et al.82 Liu, et al.83 and Liu, et al.84
In 2013, Xu, et al.85 reported a flexible solid-state supercapacitor using a 120 μm thick graphene hydrogel film as the electrode and PVA/H2SO4 gel as the electrolyte (Fig. 5d). The resulting device exhibited a high gravimetric specific capacitance of 186 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, excellent rate capability of 70% retention at 20 A g−1, a small leakage current of as little as 10.6 μA, and an unprecedented area-specific capacitance of 372 mF cm−2. In particular, at a current density of 10 A g−1, only 8.4% capacitance decayed over 10000 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 5e). The reason may be attributed to the exceptional mechanical and electrical robustness of the high interconnected network structure of the graphene hydrogel films.
3D graphene networks have been confirmed to be ideal supports for active materials. On this point, He, et al.86 reported a flexible supercapacitor using 3D graphene networks loaded with MnO2 as electrodes. Under the optimized MnO2 content, a maximum specific capacitance of 130 F g−1 and a high area capacitance of 1.42 F cm−2 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 were reached. Ji, et al.87 and Wang, et al.88 further described MnO2-wrapped graphene aerogels and graphene-VO2 nanobelt hydrogels as super-capacitor electrodes, respectively. All of the resultant hydrogels exhibited high specific capacitance, remarkable rate capability and excellent cycling ability.
Ye, et al.89 utilized a graphene aerogel-nickel foam as a binder-free supercapacitor electrode. The resulting electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 366 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 owing to the synergistic effect among the hierarchically porous structure, large specific surface area, high conductivity, low contact resistance, and sufficient deposition mass of the graphene aerogel. Bello, et al.90 reported the application of graphene foams decorated with silver nanoparticles in a three-electrode electrochemical cell. Soon after, binding bimetal to flexible graphene sheets, Xu, et al.91 prepared 3D graphene sandwiched structures with NiAl-layered double hydroxide nanosheets. The as-prepared electrode showed a specific capacitance of 1329 F g−1 at a current density of 3.57 A g−1 and at least 91% of the specific capacitance was maintained after 500 cycles at 15.3 A g−1. All of this demonstrated that graphene foams were an excellent platform to incorporate metal particles for improving their electrochemical performance.
In order to obtain excellent desalination behavior during the capacitive deionization (CDI) process, Wang, et al.92 opened up a novel opportunity to prepare high performance CDI electrodes utilizing 3D macroporous graphene architectures (3DMGAs). The electrosorption capacity of the proposed 3DMGA electrode was ca. 3.9 mg g−1, which was much higher than those of commercial activated carbon (2.9 mg g−1) and 2D graphene in the literature (1.0–2.0 mg g−1).93,94 3DMGAs are promising materials for high performance CDI electrodes. Using 3D graphene-based hierarchically porous carbon as an electrode for CDI, Wen, et al.95 drew the same conclusion as above.
Very recently, Li, et al.96 further presented KOH-activated 3D graphene as an electrode material for CDI application. The resultant electrode possessed a super-large specific surface area of 3513 m2 g−1, high electrical conductivity of 104 S m−1, and a high electrosorption capacity of 11.86 mg NaCl g−1 C for 74 mg L−1 NaCl solution within 25 min. The superior electrosorption capacity and the fast adsorption rate make KOH-activated 3D graphene an ideal electrode material for micro CDI in miniaturized water-cooling systems.
Our group grew porous NiO nanoflakes on 3D graphene scaffolds and utilized them as monolithic free-standing electrodes for pseudo-supercapacitors without any other binders or metal-based current collectors.57 The hierarchical NiO–3D graphene composite delivered a high specific capacity of ∼1829 F g−1 at a current density of 3 A g−1 (the theoretical capacitance of NiO is 2584 F g−1). A full-cell was realized with an energy density of 138 W h kg−1 at a power density of 5.25 kW kg−1, which is much superior to commercial ones as well as reported devices in asymmetric capacitors of NiO. Furthermore, the asymmetric supercapacitor exhibited a capacitance retention of 85% after 5000 cycles relative to the initial value of the 1st cycle.
3.3 Solar cells and fuel cells
Nowadays, environmental concerns and the finite nature of fossil fuels have led to great interest and fast development in the field of renewable energy sources. Solar energy conversion is one of the most promising ways to resolve this problem. Among all the methods to utilize solar energy, solar cells are a common electrical device that directly convert the energy of light into electricity by the photovoltaic effect. To investigate the application of 3D graphene composites in solar cells, Bi, et al.97 prepared 3D graphene networks and utilized them as back electrodes of CdTe solar cells. As shown in Fig. 6, the as-constructed CdTe solar cell possessed a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 20.1 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.78 V, a fill factor (FF) of 58.0% and an overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 9.1%. The η was much higher than those of CdTe cells with RGO (6.50%), B-doped graphene (7.86%) and carbon nanotubes (7.0%) as back electrodes. The reason maybe results from the fact that 3D interconnected porous networks can greatly improve the hole-collecting ability and reduce the barrier height to form a better back contact with the p-CdTe.
 Fig. 6  The J–V characteristics of a CdTe solar cell with a 3D graphene back electrode. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 97. 
Furthermore, Tang, et al.98 added 3D graphene networks into the photoanodes of dye sensitized solar cells to boost the photovoltaic performance. Under AM-1.5G light intensity, the resultant η with 3D graphene networks (1 wt%)-P25 photoanode increased by 32.7% from 4.96% to 6.58% comparing to that of a pure P25 photoanode. Under the optimized quality of the added 3D graphene networks, η could further increase to 6.87%. The continuous porous structures of 3D graphene networks could efficiently reduce inter-sheet junction contact resistance between the graphene sheets and make the sample a great channel for carrier transport besides enhancing dye absorption and prolonging electron lifetime.
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are another important sustainable and green energy source that can convert chemical energy in organic waste into electricity and integrate environmental bioremediation with power production. To enhance bacteria loading onto the electrode and to increase extracellular electron transfer efficiency between bacteria and electrodes, Yong, et al.99 developed a macroporous and monolithic MFC anode with PANI hybridized 3D graphene. The 3D graphene/PANI electrode with large specific surface area could integrate with bacterial biofilms three-dimensionally and accept electrons through multiplexing and highly conductive pathways. The maximum power density obtained from the resultant MFC is ∼768 mW m−2, which is about 4 times higher than that from the carbon cloth MFC (∼158 mW m−2). This study provides a new dimension to MFC anode design as well as to the applications of 3D porous graphene networks.
3.4 Cocatalytic activity
Cocatalysts, a kind of polynary catalyst, play a crucial role in many heterogeneous catalytic processes. Since the properties of cocatalysts are dependent not only on their components but also on their structures, the development of cocatalysts with 3D structures have opened up a new opportunity for enhancing the catalytic properties. Moreover, 3D cocatalysts are crucial to achieve specific and multiple catalytic activities, and it is easy to achieve the optimized properties by tailoring their structures with high loadings.
For example, Hu, et al.100 designed a novel cocatalyst system with ternary Pt/PdCu nanoboxes anchored onto 3D graphene sheets (Pt/PdCu/3DGF). The peak current density was 183 mA cm−2 for the ethanol oxidation reaction on the Pt/PdCu/3DGF electrode, which was 3, 4, and 6 times higher than those on the Pt/C electrode (55 mA cm−2), Pt/3DGF electrode (45 mA cm−2) and PdCu/3DGF electrode (27 mA cm−2), respectively. A more than 6-fold improvement in activity per unit mass of Pt over the commercial Pt/C catalyst (E-TEK 20%) was obtained for the Pt/PdCu/3DGF electrode based on the peak current density. The geometry-defined Pt/PdCu/3DGF will be an excellent cocatalyst for ethanol electrooxidation in alkaline media with great potential.
Maiyalagan, et al.101 further reported a catalyst for methanol electrooxidation in acidic media, i.e., a 3D porous graphene monolith decorated with Pt nanoparticles. Due to the 3D seamlessly interconnected porous structure, high surface area and excellent conductivity, the obtained 3D graphene composites possessed much improved catalytic activity for methanol oxidation compared to the 3D carbon fiber scaffold. The peak current density of the forward anodic peaks with 3D graphene was approximately 1.6 mA cm−2, nearly two times the peak current density of the carbon fiber (0.8 mA cm−2) and also more than that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (1.39 mA cm−2).102 All of this further suggests that 3D graphene plays a critical role in promoting methanol oxidation. The work could be excellently extended by decorating free-standing 3D graphene with other noble metal nanoparticles or alloys for various electrocatalysis applications. For example, with Cu nanoparticles deposited onto 3D graphene hydrogels, Wu, et al.103 demonstrated good catalytic performance for both the reduction of 4-nitrophenol and the photo degradation of methyl orange.
Employing GO and ammonium thiocyanate as precursors, Su, et al.104 developed 3D N and S co-doped graphene frameworks (N/S-GFs) as metal-free catalysts to accelerate the oxygen reduction reaction under alkaline conditions. N/S-GFs showed a kinetic-limiting current density of 3.90 mA cm−2, which was comparable to that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst (4.2 mA cm−2) and was much higher than 2.8 mA cm−2 for N-GFs measured at ∼0.36 V.
Recently, Chen, et al.105 reported a 3D graphene-MnO2 framework incorporated with NiCo2O4 (G–Mn–NiCo). The resultant 3D porous G–Mn–NiCo presented an outstanding catalytic activity for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution with a more negative onset potential of 321 mV than other catalytic samples (366 mV for G–NiCo, 475 mV for 2DG–Mn–NiCo, 366 mV for G–Mn, 399 mV for graphene and 365 mV for NiCo). As the edges and defects of NiCo2O4 were all active centers to expedite water dissociation, graphene–MnO2 in the polynary cocatalyst could significantly increase the use of NiCo2O4 active species. For example, O atoms in MnO2 or functional groups of graphene had low electronegativity and they might interact with Ni or Co atoms of NiCo2O4 to form strong metal–O bonds. Moreover, Ni(Co)–O bonds were other active centers to boost water oxidation. Thus, a dual-active-site mechanism will be responsible for the great catalytic performance of G–Mn–NiCo.
3.5 Thermal interface material
Low operation temperature and efficient heat dissipation are quite important for device life in current photonic and electronic technologies. However, high interfacial thermal resistance between contact solid surfaces resulted in a major bottleneck of heat dissipation in various devices. 3D graphene-based porous structures may be novel promising candidates for thermal interfacial materials (TIMs) from both theoretical and experimental investigations owing to their high thermal conductivity, large surface-to-volume ratio and continuous covalently-bonded porous networks. For example, Liang, et al.106 constructed 3D vertically aligned multilayer graphene sheets TIM (VA-fMG TIM) between silicon/silicon surfaces using pure indium as a metallic medium. The target composites VA-fMG possessed an excellent thermal conductivity of ∼112 W m−1 K−1 at 25 °C and an ultralow thermal expansion coefficient of ∼−0.71 ppm K−1 in the in-plane direction without any reduction process. Compared with its counterpart recumbent aligned multilayer graphene sheets between silicon surfaces, VA-fMG TIM had a significantly higher equivalent thermal conductivity of 75.5 W m−1 K−1 and a lower contact thermal resistance of 5.1 mm2 K W−1. This finding will provide a thorough approach for a graphene-based TIM assembly as well as knowledge of vertically aligned graphene architectures.
Pettes, et al.107 prepared 3D freestanding GFs comprised of few layer graphene and ultrathin graphite and studied their thermal properties in detail. The room temperature thermal conductivity (κGF) of the resultant GF, with a solid concentration of ca. 0.45 ± 0.09 vol%, was increased from 0.26 to 1.7 W m−1 K−1 when the etchants for the sacrificial nickel supports changed from aggressive hydrochloric acid to slow ammonium persulfate. The κGF showed a quadratic dependence on temperature between 11 and 75 K and peaked at ca. 150 K, eliminating internal contact thermal resistance in the continuous GF structure. 3D graphene-based architectures would be promising thermal interface and heat spreading materials.
Ahn, et al.108 reported a novel boiling heat transfer phenomenon using RGO colloids. A 3D interconnected foam-like graphene multilayer was self-assembled on the heater surface once the RGO colloid boiled. This phenomenon would provide an efficient and safe boiling heat transfer mode to eliminate the sudden and rapid increase of wall temperature at critical heat flux, a dangerous limitation of nucleate boiling heat transfer.
Recently, Zhang, et al.109 uncovered the thermal interface properties of GF, too. The thermal interfacial resistance of GF at the Si–Al interface was as low as 0.04 cm2 K W−1, which outperformed the commercially available thermal grease and pastes, and had an enhancement of at least ∼75% compared to that of the best reported carbon-based TIMs.110–112 The thermal contact resistance between GF and the mating surface accounted for the major part of all of the overall thermal resistance, with an asymptotic-type conformation and a plateau value at an ultralow contact pressure (∼0.1 MPa). 3D GF could conform well to the mating surface and fill in the gaps between the mating surfaces, so it could serve as a next generation high performance TIM for thermal management in electronic packages.
3.6 Sensors
3D porous graphene nanostructures have great advantages for applications as excellent sensing platforms due to the strong synergistic effects between graphene and chromophores, as well as its large 3D active surface area which maximizes exposure to analytes. Charge carriers can also move rapidly with little resistance through the continuous and interconnected graphene networks and so boost analytic sensitivity.
Combining the 3D graphene porous structure with a 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ionic liquid, Ng, et al.113 reported a novel carbon paste electrode for the amperometric detection of NO. NO oxidation in the presence of the resultant composite possessed a fast response of less than 4 seconds, an excellent sensitivity of 11.2 mA cm−2 (mmol L−1)−1 and an extremely low detection limit of 16 nM, which were all superior to those of all relevant reported works based on carbon nanotubes and nanoparticles.114,115 The results demonstrate that 3D graphene/ionic liquid composites can provide sensitive NO detection and furthermore, a robust electrode material in various electrochemical devices.
Yavari, et al.116 reported a foam-like 3D graphene network, which efficiently merged the merits of both nanostructures and conducting polymers. Based on the changes in their electrical conductivity, the proposed sensor to detect NH3 and NO2 possessed a high sensitivity of parts-per-million level detection limit in air at room-temperature. Just through Joule-heating, all of the chemisorbed molecules could be expelled from the foam's surface leading to full-reversibility. This work is promising for reversibly determining, enriching and separating air pollution.
Using 3D graphene as a template to anchor some electroactive materials, i.e. Pt nanoparticles and multiwalled carbon nanotubes, Cao, et al.71 developed them as electrochemical sensors to detect H2O2 for the first time. The detection limit was as low as 8.6 nM. 3D porous graphene networks would be novel and promising platforms to anchor other electroactive materials for electrochemical sensors. Later, 3D GFs incorporating Pt–Ru bimetallic nanoparticles (PtRu/3DGF) were developed by Kung, et al.117 for detecting H2O2. PtRu/3DGF exhibited an excellent catalytic activity toward the electrochemical oxidation of H2O2 without any additional mediator, showing high sensitivity (1023.1 mA mM−1 cm−2) and a low detection limit (0.04 mM). Yuan, et al.118 reported a 3D graphene hydrogel decorated with PdCu bimetallic nanoparticles (PdCu/GE) to detect glucose in an alkaline solution containing chloride ions. At −0.4 V, the PdCu/GE modified electrode showed a quick response to glucose oxidation with a wide linear range from 1 mM to 18 mM and a reproducible sensitivity of 48 μA (mg mM)−1.
Yang, et al.119 constructed a flexible 3D graphene network-based chemical sensor deposited on a paper substrate. After the 3D graphene foam network was transferred to a flexible and environment-friendly paper substrate, a sensing electrode was established. The resulting 3D graphene foam-based sensor on the paper substrate was very reliable with sensitivity up to 200 ppm and 800 ppm when either compressive (−0.5%) or tensile (+0.5%) strain was applied with introducing NO2 gas, respectively. After each experiment, the sensors could be refreshed by UV treatment under vacuum conditions, which assured the lowest baseline by accelerating the desorption process.
Yang, et al.120 prepared large-area 3D graphene intercalated by PANI nanofibers and investigated it for the determination of guanine and adenine. Because of the negative charge and the specific structure, the resultant composite could prompt adsorbing positively charged guanine and adenine via strong π–π* interactions or electrostatic adsorption. Under the optimized conditions, the anodic peak currents to detect guanine and adenine were linear over a large range of 0.5 to 200 μmol L−1 with detection limits of 7.5 × 10−8 and 5.0 × 10−8 mol L−1 for guanine and adenine, respectively. In the related physiological process, the developed sensing platform would be used to determine other small molecules.
Another 3D graphene incorporated with polydimethyl-siloxane micropillars was constructed for sensitive enzyme-based phenol detection.121 Using the proposed 3D graphene-based composite as a working electrode, excellent electron-transfer properties were demonstrated in 1 mM K3Fe(CN)6 and 0.1 M KCl solution. After tyrosinase enzymes were immobilized on the surface of the graphene micropillar, it was effective for the detection of phenol in the microchannel with a detection limit of 50 nM. This is the first demonstration of using 3D graphene as an excellent electrochemical biosensor in a microfluidic system.
Xi, et al.122 developed another 3D non-enzymatic electrochemical sensor for sensitively detecting H2O2. Using in situ polymerized polydopamine as the linker, the 3D graphene-based electrode was functionalized with thionine molecules to mediate the reduction of H2O2 at close proximity to the electrode surface. Such a sensor could detect H2O2 with a wide linear range (0.4 to 660 μM), high sensitivity (169.7 μA mM−1), low detection limit (80 nM), and fast response (reaching 95% of the steady current within 3 s). Furthermore, this sensor was efficiently used for real-time detection of dynamic release of H2O2 from live cancer cells in response to a pro-inflammatory stimulant.
3.7 Enrichment and separation
Owing to the global scale of severe water and air contamination arising from industrial/agricultural pollutants and oil spills, the development of novel strategies to separate and absorb air and water contaminants is of significant importance for environmental issues.19 However, producing functional materials with high absorbency and excellent recyclability and tolerance under harsh conditions still remains a key challenge for practical application. 3D graphene porous nano networks have attracted a great deal of research interest because of their intriguing properties such as superior chemical stability, large surface-to-volume ratio, excellent electrical conductivity, and high thermal and mechanical stability, etc.
The sorption abilities of 3D graphene networks to N2, H2, CO2 and water vapor were investigated and reported by Wang, et al.123 3D graphene materials, with a mesoporosity centered at 4 nm and a specific surface area of ca. 477 m2 g−1, possessed quite high absorbencies to the gases above. For example, the H2 sorption capacities were 1.40 and 1.25% by weight at 77 and 87 K at 106.6 kPa, respectively. The CO2 sorption capacity was 2.98% by weight at 273 K and 106.6 kPa and the water vapor sorption capacity was 18.7% by weight at 293 K and 97.0 kPa. All of the data could be used for characterization and molecular simulation of adsorption/diffusion in carbonaceous adsorbents.
Liu, et al.124 demonstrated the potential of 3D GO sponges as water pollutant adsorbents to remove both methylene blue (MB) and methyl violet (MV) dyes, two main contaminants from dye manufacturing and textile finishing. The results showed that 99.1% of MB and 98.8% of MV could be removed and equilibrium status could be reached within 2 min. 3D GO sponges displayed excellent adsorption capacities as high as 397 and 467 mg g−1 for MB and MV dye, respectively. The adsorption mechanism for MB and MV may be attributed to endothermic chemical adsorption through the strong π–π stacking and anion–cation interactions with activation energies of 50.3 and 70.9 kJ mol−1, respectively. 3D GO sponges possess high capability as promising organic dye scavengers with good efficiency.
Utilizing a 3D graphene super-wetting mesh film (3D-SMF) prepared by a simple dip-coating method, Sun, et al.125 developed a new strategy for selectively separating and absorbing organic compounds or oils from polluted water. As shown in Fig. 7a, 3D-SMF possessed higher volume absorption capacity for a wide range of organic compounds and oils than that of any bulk absorbent material reported up to then.126–130 Importantly, 3D-SMF can be regenerated simply by washing off the organic compounds or oils attached on its surface after use and remained nearly unchanged after six cycles of absorption/ washing tests (Fig. 7b). This means that 3D-SMF would be an ideal absorbent material for removing organic compounds or oils from polluted water on a large scale. 3D-SMF opens up prospective insight into liquid–liquid separation or selective absorption technology.
 Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical absorption capacities of 3D-SMF for different organic compounds and oils. (b) Relationship between washing times and water CA of the SMF. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 125. 
Wu, et al.103 fabricated porous graphene-based aerogels (GAs) and studied their absorption performances for different oils and organic dyes. As shown in Fig. 8a, the absorption capacities were 28 to 40 times the weight of the GAs for the different oils, relating to the density of the oils. The absorption capacities of the GAs for the different organic dyes ranged from 150 mg g−1 to 650 mg g−1 (Fig. 8b). These results further confirm that GAs would be promising absorbents for removing dyes or oil pollutants from contaminated water.
 Fig. 8  (a) The absorption capacities (saturated) of different oils by GAs, and (b) the absorption capacities of the GAs for different dyes after 5 days. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 103. 
3.8 Other
Some other potential applications were also investigated apart from the major application fields mentioned above. For instance, Wang, et al.131 prepared 3D graphene networks doped with different amounts of Ni–B nanoalloys for hydrogen storage. 3D graphene with 0.83 wt% Ni and 1.09 wt% B showed a maximal reversible hydrogen storage capacity of 4.4 wt%, which was three times better than that reported for pristine graphene. The analysis of BET specific surface area and pore volume confirmed that the high hydrogen adsorption capacity comes from a process other than physical adsorption. Doping appropriate contents of Ni–B nanoalloys can lead to the dissociative chemisorption of hydrogen molecules by spillover to achieve a high hydrogen storage capacity.
Yu, et al.132 demonstrated 3D stacked multilayer graphene (s-MLG) as a potential candidate for interconnect applications. Compared with 3D exfoliated multilayer graphene, s-MLG possessed superior conduction due to interlayer decoupling. The wire resistivity of s-MLG was continually reduced with increasing layers, while the contact resistance would be saturated with more stacked layer numbers. Therefore, the s-MLG system offers a promising material platform for high performance on-chip interconnect applications for the future.
Kim, et al.133 efficiently demonstrated 3D GF-based transparent conductive electrodes for GaN-based blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs). After 3D GFs grown on 3D Cu foam were transferred onto a p-GaN layer of blue LEDs, their optical and electrical performances were enhanced greatly. For example, at an injection current of 100 mA, the forward operating voltage and the light output power were improved by ∼26% and ∼14%, respectively. The robustness, high transmittance, and outstanding conductivity give 3D GFs great potential as advanced transparent conductive electrodes in LED devices.
Due to their specific topographical, chemical and electrical properties, 3D GFs could be promising candidates for novel tissue scaffolds in the field of tissue engineering. Li, et al.,134 utilized 3D porous GFs as a scaffold for neural stem cells (NSCs) in vitro for the first time. The results confirmed that 3D GFs could support NSCs growth, and also kept cells in a more active proliferation state with up regulation of Ki67 expression than that of 2D graphene films. The study implies the great potential of 3D GFs in NSC research, neural tissue engineering and neural prostheses, and so on.
4. Conclusions
3D graphene, as a vital platform to construct porous functional composites, has been at the center stage of research recently from both fundamental and technological viewpoints. A wide range of 3D graphene-based nanocomposites have been constructed and reported in recent reports through in situ reduction-assembly methods, chemical vapor deposition, cross-linking methods and template-direction methods. By virtue of their high conductivity, robust mechanical intensity, low mass density, high specific surface area, good compatibility and excellent flexibility, 3D graphene porous composites with interconnected networks have been widely applied in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells and fuel cells, cocatalysts, chemical sensors, contamination absorbents and even biomimetic composites with excellent performance and potential. It is expected that with the research effort of all us, the engineering and applications of 3D graphene-based porous nanocomposites will have a much greater and better future either in all of the above-mentioned fields or in other novel applications not yet envisaged.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Fund of China (no: 21277103 and 21271141), Anhui Provincial Natural Science Fund (no: 1508085QB35) and the Science and Technology Project of Anhui Province (no: 1206c0805031 and 1406c085021).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Ren, C. D. Wang, Q. H. Wu, X. Liu, Y. Yang, L. F. He and W. J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3353–3360 RSC .
Z. Y. Yin, J. X. Zhu, Q. Y. He, X. H. Cao, C. L. Tan, H. Y. Chen, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300574 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. G. Tu, Z. D. Li, C. X. Bao, H. Dai, T. Yu, J. G. Liu and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3481–3485 RSC .
S. AbdulAlmohsin and J. B. Cui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9433–9438 CAS .
H. B. Yang, G. H. Guai, C. X. Guo, Q. L. Song, S. P. Jiang, Y. L. Wang, W. Zhang and C. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12209–12215 CAS .
G. Kalita, M. Matsushima, H. Uchida, K. Wakita and M. Umeno, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9713–9717 RSC .
X. M. Li, D. Xie, H. Park, T. H. Zeng, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, M. L. Zhong, D. H. Wu, J. Kong and H. W. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, N. H. Tai, S. Y. Chen and Y. L. Chueh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 632–638 RSC .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roche, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 8–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 455–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Westervelt, Science, 2008, 320, 324–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Tung, L. M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Y. Li, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, X. M. Li, E. Y. Xu, Z. Li, S. Luo, Y. Lei and D. H. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3502–3504 RSC .
G. W. Xu, J. W. Liu, Q. Wang, R. Q. Hui, Z. J. Chen, V. A. Maroni and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, Op71–Op76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, W. Huang and P. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 60 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Q. Yan, H. T. Xue, K. Berning, Y.-W. Lam and C.-S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22761–22768 CAS .
F. Yang, M. W. Xu, S. J. Bao and H. Wei, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25317–25322 RSC .
W. F. Chen and L. F. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
G. H. Moon, Y. Shin, D. Choi, B. W. Arey, G. J. Exarhos, C. Wang, W. Choi and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6291–6296 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, F. M. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11291–11297 RSC .
J. S. Lee, H. J. Ahn, J. C. Yoon and J. H. Jang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7938–7943 RSC .
M. Zeng, W. L. Wang and X. D. Bai, Chin. Phys. B, 2013, 22, 098105 CrossRef .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Si, S. J. Ding, X. W. Lou and D. H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1271–1278 RSC .
G. Y. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. M. Feng, Y. W. Ma, Q. L. Fan, L. H. Wang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079–1085 RSC .
S. Park, S. O. Kang, E. Jung, S. Park and H. S. Park, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 899–902 RSC .
M. M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13169–13177 RSC .
F. He, N. Niu, F. Y. Qu, S. Q. Wei, Y. J. Chen, S. L. Gai, P. Gao, Y. Wang and P. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8507–8516 RSC .
Z. Han, Z. H. Tang, P. Li, G. Z. Yang, Q. B. Zheng and J. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5462–5467 RSC .
X. C. Dong, Y. F. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364–4369 RSC .
S. M. Avdoshenko, C. G. da Rocha and G. Cuniberti, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3168–3174 RSC .
C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
H. C. Gao and H. W. Duan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 404–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, H. Y. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 99, 720–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, H. Y. Xu, X. Y. Su, X. L. Ji and X. Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8021–8027 RSC .
L. Hu, Z. Q. Yan and H. Y. Xu, RSCAdv., 2013, 3, 7667–7676 RSC .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Lee, J. Kwon, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10084–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jo, H. Noh, M. Kaviany, J. M. Kim, M. H. Kim and H. S. Ahn, Carbon, 2015, 81, 357–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Tang, S. L. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lv, Y. Tao, W. Ni, Z. Zhou, F. Y. Su, X. C. Chen, F. M. Jin and Q. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12352–12357 RSC .
Y. X. Xu, Q. O. Wu, Y. Q. Sun, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, Y. W. Ma, J. J. Li, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22462–22465 CAS .
M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. I. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Chen, L. B. Chen, Y. Q. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20968–20976 RSC .
J. L. Wang, Z. X. Shi, J. C. Fan, Y. Ge, J. Yin and G. X. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22459–22466 RSC .
C. Wu, X. Y. Huang, G. L. Wang, L. B. Lv, G. Chen, G. Y. Li and P. K. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Potts, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hu, X. Q. Zhai, L. L. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2065 Search PubMed .
Z. P. Chen, W. C. Ren, L. B. Gao, B. L. Liu, S. F. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sridhar, I. Lee, H. S. Yoon, H. H. Chun and H. Park, Carbon, 2013, 61, 633–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Wang, J. L. Xu, M.-F. Yuen, J. Zhang, Y. Yangyang, X. F. Chen and W. J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6372–6380 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yoon, J. S. Lee, S. I. Kim, K. H. Kim and J. H. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1788 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik, D. R. Wheeler, D. B. Burckel and R. Polsky, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, T. F. Chung, Y. P. Chen and G. J. Cheng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4577–4583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, Y. L. Zhou, H. C. Bi, K. B. Yin, S. Wan and L. T. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2117 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. G. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Z. Sun, Z. Yan, G. D. Ruan, Z. W. Peng, A. R. O. Raji, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Sridhar, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jung, C. Lee, S. Park and I. K. Oh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10562–10570 CAS .
B. You, L. L. Wang, L. Yao and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5016–5018 RSC .
Y. Y. Li, Z. S. Li and P. K. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2474–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Y. Guang, F. Y. Ke and H. Y. Xu, Carbon, 2015, 83, 79–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Tang, F. Q. Huang, H. Bi, Z. Q. Liu and D. Y. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 130–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ding, H. M. Ren, Y. Y. Huang, F. H. Chang and P. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3713–3716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Kuo, C. H. Hsu, H. T. Chiang and J. M. Hsu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15(12), 1–8 CrossRef .
S. X. Yu, L. W. Yang, Y. Tian, P. Yang, F. Jiang, S. W. Hu, X. L. Wei and J. X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12750–12758 CAS .
X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Zeng, W. H. Shi, P. R. Yep, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Luo, J. L. Liu, Z. Y. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. J. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Y. Lin, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Chen, T. Zhao, J. Lu, F. Wu, L. Li, J. Z. Chen, G. Q. Tan, Y. S. Ye and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4642–4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson, J. J. Cha, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Ye, S. Charnvanichborikarn, M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, B. C. Wood and Y. M. Wang, Carbon, 2015, 85, 269–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Wang, Y. Li, Y. S. Chui, Q. H. Wu, X. F. Chen and W. J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10599–10604 RSC .
Z. J. Fan, J. Yan, L. J. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. L. Zhang, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, L. L. Ma, Y. Zhu, I. Lahiri, M. G. Hahm, Z. Liu, S. B. Yang, C. S. Xiang, W. Lu, Z. W. Peng, Z. Z. Sun, C. Kittrell, J. Lou, W. B. Choi, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 58–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Z. Tan, S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Tai, X. B. Yan and Q. J. Xue, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1702–A1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, J. X. Wang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. G. Li, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 576–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Liu, Y. Wang, X. L. Gou, T. Qi, J. Yang and Y. L. Ding, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178, 293–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Y. Guang, H. Y. Xu and X. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 813–823 CAS .
Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Lin, X. Q. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. He, W. J. Chen, X. D. Li, Z. X. Zhang, J. C. Fu, C. H. Zhao and E. Q. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Ji, M. W. Xu, S. J. Bao, Z. J. Lu, C. J. Cai, H. Chai, R. Y. Wang, F. Yang and H. Wei, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 4199–4205 RSC .
H. W. Wang, H. Yi, X. Chen and X. F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1165–1173 CAS .
S. B. Ye, J. C. Feng and P. Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7122–7129 CAS .
A. Bello, M. Fabiane, D. Dodoo-Arhin, K. I. Ozoemena and N. Manyala, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2014, 75, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, S. L. Gai, F. He, N. Niu, P. Gao, Y. J. Chen and P. P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1022–1031 CAS .
H. Wang, D. S. Zhang, T. T. Yan, X. R. Wen, J. P. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and Q. D. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11778–11789 CAS .
H. B. Li, T. Lu, L. K. Pan, Y. P. Zhang and Z. Sun, J.Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6773–6779 RSC .
H. B. Li, L. D. Zou, L. K. Pan and Z. Sun, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 8692–8697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. R. Wen, D. S. Zhang, T. T. Yan, J. P. Zhang and L. Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12334–12344 CAS .
Z. Li, B. Song, Z. K. Wu, Z. Y. Lin, Y. G. Yao, K.-S. Moon and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 711–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, F. Q. Huang, J. Liang, Y. F. Tang, X. J. Lu, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17366–17370 RSC .
B. Tang, G. X. Hu, H. Y. Gao and Z. X. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 60–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5493–5498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maiyalagan, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286–5290 RSC .
F. Su, J. Zeng, X. Bao, Y. Yu, J. Y. Lee and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3960–3967 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, M. X. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Y. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Yan, W. Wang and J. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7612–7621 CAS .
Y. Z. Su, Y. Zhang, X. D. Zhuang, S. Li, D. Q. Wu, F. Zhang and X. L. Feng, Carbon, 2013, 62, 296–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. J. Duan, W. Han and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 207–209 RSC .
Q. Z. Liang, X. X. Yao, W. Wang, Y. Liu and C. P. Wong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2392–2401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Pettes, H. X. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Ahn, J. M. Kim, C. Park, J. W. Jang, J. S. Lee, H. Kim, M. Kaviany and M. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1960 Search PubMed .
X. F. Zhang, K. K. Yeung, Z. L. Gao, J. K. Li, H. Y. Sun, H. S. Xu, K. Zhang, M. Zhang, Z. B. Chen, M. M. F. Yuen and S. H. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 66, 201–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Chai, M. M. F. Yuen, D. G. W. Xiao and P. C. H. Chan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 215706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. Chen, J. Di, G. Xu, H. Li and Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3903–3909 CAS .
Q. Liang, X. Yao, W. Wang, Y. Liu and C. P. Wong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Ng, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 442–448 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. B. Tian and J. J. Zhu, Bioelectrochemistry, 2008, 74, 157–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Li, J. Zang, D. Zhan, W. Chen, C. Q. Sun, A. L. Teo, Y. T. Chua, V. S. Lee and S. M. Moochhala, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 713–718 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yavari, Z. P. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 Search PubMed .
C. C. Kung, P. Y. Lin, F. J. Buse, Y. H. Xue, X. Yu, L. M. Dai and C. C. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, A. P. Liu, M. Zhao, W. J. Dong, T. Y. Zhao, J. J. Wang and W. H. Tang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 190, 707–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, C. Lee and J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, B160–B163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, Q. Guan, Q. H. Li, L. Meng, L. L. Wang, C. X. Liu and K. Jiao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2926–2933 RSC .
F. Liu, Y. Piao, J. S. Choi and T. S. Seo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 50, 387–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Xi, D. J. Zhao, X. W. Wang and P. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 26, 81–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Guan, K. Wang, C. X. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2011, 56, 642–645 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, S. Chung, G. Oh and T. S. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 922–927 CAS .
H. X. Sun, A. Li, X. J. Qin, Z. Q. Zhu, W. D. Liang, J. An, P. Q. La and W. Q. Deng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2377–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, X. Liu, O. Akbulut, J. Hu, S. L. Suib, J. Kong and F. Stellacci, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Wei, F. Liu, Y. Du, S. Liu, Y. Jia, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and F. Xiao, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 135–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, F. Tzeng, H. Chen and C. Chang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10015–10019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Nguyen, N. Tai, S. Lee and W. Kuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7908–7912 CAS .
H. Bi, X. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Wan, L. He, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4421–4425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. X. Guo, X. Wang, C. Guan, H. B. Yang, K. A. Wang and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 195–200 CAS .
T. H. Yu, C. W. Liang, C. Kim, E. S. Song and B. Yu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 1110–1112 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, G. Yang, M. J. Park, J. S. Kwak, K. H. Baik, D. Kim and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(16), 161902 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Gao, Q. Song, R. Huang, L. Wang, L. W. Liu, J. W. Dai, M. L. Tang and G. S. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1604 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The representative self-assembly routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 41, 42, 44–47, and 49.	 

 	Fig. 2  The representative chemical vapor deposition routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 54 and 59.	 

 	Fig. 3  Other representative routes for 3D graphene composites proposed in the literature. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 60 and 62.	 

 	Fig. 4  (Left) cycling performance of pure TiO2, TiO2–G mixture and the MTO/3D-GN composite at current rates of 0.5 C and 5 C, respectively. (Right) cycling performance at different current rates from 0.5 C to 20 C of pure TiO2, TiO2–G mixture and the MTO/3D-GN composite. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 70.	 

 	Fig. 5  The representative properties of supercapacitors using 3D graphene-based composites. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 79 and 85.	 

 	Fig. 6  The J–V characteristics of a CdTe solar cell with a 3D graphene back electrode. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 97.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical absorption capacities of 3D-SMF for different organic compounds and oils. (b) Relationship between washing times and water CA of the SMF. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 125.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The absorption capacities (saturated) of different oils by GAs, and (b) the absorption capacities of the GAs for different dyes after 5 days. Acknowledgements for reproduction from ref. 103.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
