Tuning the band gap and polarization of BaSnO 3 /SrSnO 3 superlattices for photovoltaic applications   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP06042K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP06042K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 7032-7039Tuning the band gap and polarization of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices for photovoltaic applications†

        
          
            Yajun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. P. K. 
            Sahoo
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Engineering Mechanics, School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310007, China. E-mail: jw@zju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Soft Machines and Smart Devices of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310007, China
cDepartment of Physics, RGUKT IIIT, Nuzvid Campus, Andhra Pradesh, India
Received 
      1st September 2016
    , Accepted 1st February 2017First published on 2nd February 2017AbstractBand gap and polarization are two important quantities for enhancing the performance of photovoltaic materials. Based on first-principles calculations, we demonstrate that direct band gap and hybrid improper ferroelectric polarization coexist in BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices. Furthermore, the band gap and polarization can be simultaneously tuned by mechanical strain and pressure. In the presence of tensile strain or negative pressure, the band gap is substantially lowered and the polarization is enhanced by about five times in comparison with that without mechanical loads. The lowered band gap is necessary for increasing the efficiency of light absorption, whereas the enhanced polarization is desirable for the separation of photo-excited carriers in the materials. The present work suggests that the strained BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices are promising ferroelectric semiconducting materials for photovoltaic applications.
I. Introduction
The capture and conversion of solar energy is one of the most promising approaches to generate renewable energy due to its abundance, accessibility, and sustainability. There are two key factors that determine the efficiency of photovoltaic (PV) devices, namely, light absorption and subsequent charge separation. A suitable band gap guarantees the ability to harvest sunlight in the visible spectrum. The desirable separation of photo-excited carriers will promote the collection of electrons and holes and thus enhance the PV effect in the materials. Current PV technology made of bulk silicon is very costly, compared with fossil energy resources.1 Besides, the efficiency of the current commercially available p–n junction-based solar cells is also limited by the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit2 due to the application of an internal electric field near the junction interface. Moreover, inevitable heavy doping processes in traditional solar cells lead to strong Auger recombination. Thus, obtaining PV materials with low cost and high efficiency of energy conversion is of great interest and has been the subject of intensive research explorations.
BaSnO3 (BSO), a member of the alkaline-earth stannates, is a semiconducting perovskite oxide with large optical band gap3 and good stability at high temperature,4 which is a very promising material for thermally stable capacitors,5 gas sensors6,7 and fuel cells.8 In particular, BSO plays an important role in dye-sensitized solar cells.9,10 In a recent study, mesoporous BSO layer-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs) show better performance than TiO2.11 In addition, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of BSO-based nanocuboids/nanoparticles can reach a value of 4.28%.12 SrSnO3 (SSO) is another alkaline-earth stannate with a band gap of about 3.93 eV.13 In contrast to cubic BSO, it exhibits orthorhombic structure (Pbnm space group). The three-dimensional network of the octahedral tilting a−a−c+ is compatible with the experimental ground state.14 As the temperature increases, it undergoes Pbnm–Incn–I4/mcm–Pmm phase transitions.14 In addition, SSO has been demonstrated to show very high mobility and carrier concentration.15 In fact, stannate-based solar cells are more realistic and have several advantages over the conventional ones: (i) higher electron mobility than the widely investigated TiO2-based PSCs,11 (ii) strain-sensitive electronic properties, leading to the mechanical control of the band gap,16 and (iii) in contrast to conventional p–n junction solar cells, where the electric field is only limited in a thin interfacial depletion layer, the polarization in the stannate superlattice17 may induce additionally an internal electric field that could extend over the whole volume.18,19
Despite the promising properties of stannates and stannate-based superlattices, as a PV material in solar cell components, the ability to harvest sunlight in the visible spectrum is limited by its large optical band gaps. Therefore, seeking methods to lower the band gap and enhance the polarization is an essential step towards improving its efficiency. Due to the electromechanical coupling, the epitaxial strain and experimentally accessible negative pressure20 are possible ways to tune the electronic and ferroelectric properties of stannates. If a large polarization and a lower band gap are obtained in stannates simultaneously, they will not only increase the efficiency of light absorption but will also promote the separation of photo-excited carriers in the materials, which may greatly enhance the performance of the photovoltaic materials for solar cell applications.
In this work, the effects of epitaxial strain and hydrostatic pressure on the electronic, structural and ferroelectric properties of BSO and BSO/SSO superlattices are systematically investigated by using first-principles calculations and the lattice dynamics method. An intriguing indirect–direct transition of the band structure is found from the bulk BSO to the superlattices. Moreover, we demonstrate that epitaxial tensile strain and negative pressure can significantly enhance the polarization in BSO/SSO superlattices. At the same time, a narrow band gap with a suitable value for PV applications is obtained. The BSO/SSO superlattices meet the requirements of band gap and polarization for photovoltaic materials.
II. Methods
Density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations were performed within the local density approximation (LDA) on the basis of the projector-augmented wave (PAW) method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).21 Due to the underestimation of the band gap by the LDA method, the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06) screened hybrid functional is also employed for comparison.22,23 The Brillouin zone is sampled using 8 × 8 × 8 and 6 × 6 × 4 for cubic BSO and  superlattices, respectively.24 Careful test calculations show that a relatively high plane-wave cutoff energy of 500 eV can provide well-converged results. The lattice constant is fully optimized until the Hellmann–Feynman forces on the atoms are less than 0.01 eV Å−1. Frozen phonon calculations are performed on 2 × 2 × 2 cubic phase (BSO and SSO with 40 atoms) and P4/mmm phase (BSO/SSO superlattices with 80 atoms) supercells using a linear response method based on the density-functional perturbation theory.25,26 The spontaneous polarization P is calculated using the Berry-phase approach.27 ISOTROPY programs are used to check the group–subgroup relationship and quantify the octahedral tilting.28
III. Results and discussion
A. Strain and pressure controlled polarization
Prior to the investigation of the BSO/SSO superlattices, the structural properties of the parent material BSO are investigated. Note that Singh et al. investigate the influence of volumetric strain on the electronic and structural properties of BSO,16 and the present calculations go beyond previous work by proposing two mechanical loads, namely the experimentally accessible epitaxial strain and hydrostatic pressure. After structural optimization in the cubic phase, the lattice parameter of BSO is found to be 4.100 Å, 4.185 Å and 4.139 Å for LDA, GGA and PBEsol, respectively. The LDA results are in very good agreement with the experimental value (4.116 Å at room temperature).29 The phonon dispersion curves of cubic BSO and SSO are calculated, as shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† It is found that the phonon mode does not show any unstable mode for BSO. This result indicates that the cubic phase is stable and does not exhibit any ferroelectric instability, whereas SSO has an orthorhombic structure with the a−a−c+ tilting mode in Glazer notation.30 As shown in Fig. S1(b) (ESI†), the unstable modes are located at R+4 and M+3 points, which originate from the out-of-phase tilting and in-phase rotation modes, respectively. It has been demonstrated that oxygen octahedral rotation and tilting are important components in the design of hybrid improper ferroelectrics due to the couplings between polarization, rotation and tilting.31 Thus, ferroelectric polarization which can improve the separation and migration of electron–hole pairs is possible to be induced in SSO and BSO-based superlattices.
For PV materials, ferroelectric polarization is important because it can promote the desirable separation of photo-excited carriers in the materials. Sim et al. show that hybrid improper ferroelectric polarization exists in BSO/SSO superlattices.17 This kind of an interface structure is a standard model and has been widely employed for ABO3/A′BO3 superlattices in the literature.32,33 In the present study, we study the evolution of ferroelectric polarization in BSO/SSO superlattices as a function of tensile strain and negative pressure. By comparing the energies of different phases, it is found that the ground state (GS) remains in the Pmc21 phase throughout the full range of the considered strain and pressure. Therefore, we will focus on the properties of the Pmc21 phase in the following. Fig. 1 shows the polarization as a function of strain and pressure. Under zero strain, the BSO/SSO superlattices possess a polarization of 3.24 μC cm−2 due to the unequal A-site atomic displacements. Fig. 1(a) and (b) clearly show that the amplitude of the polarization increases as the tensile strain and negative pressure increase. To understand the enhancement of polarization in view of phonon instability, we have plotted the phonon dispersion curves of BSO/SSO superlattices with the P4/mmm phase under zero strain, tensile strain and pressure as shown in Fig. 2. For the strain-free state, a notable imaginary phonon frequency is found at the M point, while there is no imaginary phonon frequency at the Γ point; thus, the notable polarization is purely induced by the trilinear improper coupling in the Landau free energy expansion.32 The magnitude of the negative frequency at the Γ point increases from zero to nonzero values with the increase of tensile strain and negative pressure, which coincides with the increase of polarization. A more precise explanation of this enhanced polarization can be obtained by comparing the relative displacement between Ba and Sr atoms. Fig. 1(c)–(e) show the atomic structures of the BSO/SSO superlattices at a tensile strain of 5%, zero strain and a hydrostatic pressure of −18 GPa, respectively. For the strain-free case in Fig. 1(d), the relative displacements between A-site atoms and O in the Ba–O layer and the Sr–O layer are opposite and unequal, leading to the appearance of the polarization. For the tensile strain in Fig. 1(c), it is found that the Ba–O relative displacement increases slightly, while the Sr–O relative displacement increases greatly. Thus, the uncancelled Ba–Sr displacement increases and leads to the enhancement of macroscopic polarization. For the negative pressure in Fig. 1(e), both the Ba–O and Sr–O relative displacements increase. In addition, Ba and Sr move along different directions, in which Sr has a larger displacement than Ba, resulting in the increase of polarization. These results suggest that both tensile strain and negative pressure can enhance the macroscopic polarization in BSO/SSO superlattices.
 Fig. 1  Polarization of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices as a function of (a) epitaxial strain and (b) hydrostatic pressure. The polarizations are calculated from the Berry phase method. (c–e) Show the atomic structures of the superlattice under the tensile strain of 5%, zero strain and the hydrostatic pressure of −18 GPa, respectively. 
 Fig. 2  Phonon dispersion curves of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices with the P4/mmm phase under (a) the strain-free state, (b) the tensile strain of 5% and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa. 
B. Band gap engineering of heterostructures under strain and pressure
Now let us turn our attention to the effect of mechanical loads on the electronic structure. First, a band gap of 2.79 eV is obtained for cubic BSO, which is close to the experimental value (3.1 eV).3 Fig. S2 (ESI†) illustrates the band gap of cubic BSO as a function of biaxial strain and pressure. It is found that the band gap of BSO is strongly dependent on the biaxial strain and pressure, exhibiting a nearly linear relationship. By applying a compressive strain, the band gap increases by 35% at a compressive strain of 5%, whereas it reduces monotonically from 2.79 to 1.65 eV as the tensile strain increases from zero to 7%. For the effect of hydrostatic pressure on the band gap, a very similar trend is found as shown in Fig. S2(b) (ESI†). To clarify the underlying mechanism of a mechanically-tunable band gap, the total density of states is analyzed in Fig. S3 (ESI†). It is found that the position of VBM and CBM is very sensitive to the strain and pressure. Tensile strain and negative pressure directly lower the energies of VBM and CBM, while the energies reach higher levels under compressive strain and positive pressure. The change in the band gap with mechanical loads in Fig. S3 (ESI†) suggests that strain and pressure are two effective mechanical routes to control the absorption of solar energy for BSO.
Next, we move to the tuning of the band gap of BSO/SSO superlattices by mechanical loads. Fig. 3(b) shows the band structure of strain-free BSO/SSO superlattices. It is interesting to note that the system becomes a direct semiconductor at the Γ point. It is well known that BSO is an indirect semiconductor. Thus, there is an indirect–direct transition from the bulk BSO to the BSO/SSO superlattices. The band structures of BSO/SSO superlattices under tensile strain (5%) and negative pressure (−12 GPa) are given in Fig. 3(a) and (c), respectively. It is found that the band gap decreases greatly while the direct type of band gap remains under external strain and pressure. Fig. 4 presents the dependence of band gap on the strain and pressure by LDA. Even though the LDA method may underestimate the band gap of BSO/SSO superlattices, it does not affect our qualitative conclusion on the variation trend in the band gap. The variation in the band gap of the superlattices under strain and pressure by LDA is similar to those of the bulk BSO using the HSE method as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). The band gap gradually decreases as the tensile strain and negative pressure increase. In addition, VBM and CBM decrease simultaneously, in which CBM has a larger decrease compared to VBM. As a result, the band gap is narrowed under tensile strain and negative pressure.
 Fig. 3  Band structures of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices under (a) the tensile strain of 5%, (b) the strain-free state and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa. The Fermi energy is denoted by a horizontal dashed line at zero energy. 
 Fig. 4  The variation in band gap for BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices as a function of (a) epitaxial strain and (b) hydrostatic pressure. 
C. Detailed electronic structure analysis
To clarify the underlying mechanism of the decreased band gap, Fig. 5 illustrates the partial density of states (PDOSs) for the BSO/SSO superlattices with and without mechanical loads. For the case without mechanical load, the bottom of the conduction band is mostly composed of Sn-5s and O-2p orbitals, whereas the top of the valence band is mostly contributed by Sn-4d and O-2p orbitals, as shown in Fig. 5(b). In addition, a strong hybridization between Ba, Sr, Sn and O is observed as peaks below the Fermi level, as denoted by the dotted lines. The peak indicated by ‘1’ shows a weak hybridization between Ba-6s, Sn-5p/4d and O-2p orbitals, whereas a much stronger interaction of Ba/Sr-p/d orbitals with Sn-4d and O1, O2, and O3-2p orbitals is exhibited at the peaks indicated by ‘2 and 3’. Furthermore, the peaks indicated by ‘4’ reveal the intermixing of Sn-4d and O-2p orbitals, which develops a covalent bonding character in BSO/SSO. Similar covalent bonding character is also observed in BSO.35 The band gap in BSO/SSO superlattice structure is mainly controlled by the SnO6 octahedral activity. The evolution/suppression of antiferrodistortive rotation and the relative displacement of Ba and Sr atoms under mechanical strain and hydrostatic pressure may substantially affect the electronic interaction near the Fermi level, thereby resulting in a change in band gap and polarization of the superlattices.
 Fig. 5  Projected densities of states of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices under (a) the tensile strain of 5%, (b) the strain-free state and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa. 
To explore the effect of strain on the electronic properties, we investigate the PDOS at the tensile strain of 5%, as shown in Fig. 5(a). It is found that the electronic structures at the bottom of the conduction band and at the top of the valence band in BSO/SSO superlattices are similar to those under strain-free conditions. The difference is that the bottom of the conduction band under epitaxial strain moves close to the Fermi level, which finally results in a decreased band gap. Interestingly, a moderately developed Sr-5p/Sn-4d/O-2p orbital interaction (peaks indicated by ‘1’) is observed at a tensile strain of 5%, which is suppressed when the strain is zero. Nevertheless, the emergence of new peaks between −2 and 0 eV indicates the enhanced interaction between Ba/Sr/Sn-p/d orbitals and O-2p orbitals. This improved orbital interaction is responsible for the enhanced polarization driven by the hybrid improper ferroelectricity in SSO/BSO superlattices.

Fig. 5(c) depicts the PDOS of BSO/SSO superlattices at a hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa. It is found that under hydrostatic pressure the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band preserve similar hybridization features to those without mechanical load. However, in contrast to zero pressure, the peaks indicated by ‘1’ and ‘2’ under pressure show an improved interaction between the Ba-6s/5p orbitals and Sn-5p/4d and O-2p orbitals in the Sn–O2 layer. In comparison to the electronic structures at the strain with those at the hydrostatic pressure, one can find that the strain induces a weak interaction between the Sn and Sr (O) in the Sr–O layer, whereas the hydrostatic pressure activates the interaction between all the cations and anions in the superlattices. This activated interaction is responsible for the lower band gap under the hydrostatic pressure compared to the strain.
Finally, we shed light on the strain or pressure controlled polarization and band gap from the view of local lattice structures. Fig. 6(a) plots the evolution of distorted modes as a function of tensile strain. It is found that tensile strain will increase the in-plane polar mode (Γ−5) and the tilting mode (M−5), while the rotation mode (M+2) is gradually decreased, which is consistent with previous work.34 Thus, the tensile strain enhances the in-plane polar distortion, as a result, the polarization is increased. It is also observed in Fig. 6(b) that the volume of the superlattices increases as the strain increases. In terms of the band gap, we analyze the individual effect of volume, in-plane polar distortion, oxygen octahedral rotation and tilting on the band gap. The relationship between the band gap and volume and three distortions is shown in Fig. 7. We found that the band gap is greatly volume dependent, and increased volume significantly decreases the band gap. Oxygen octahedral rotation and tilting modes could slightly increase the band gap, while the in-plane polar mode has a negligible effect on the band gap. We also check the relationship between negative pressure and polarization and band gap, it is found that the mechanism is the same. So we can draw the conclusion that tensile strain or negative pressure simultaneously tunes the polarization and band gap by the strain-in-plane polar mode and volume–band gap couplings, respectively. It should be noted that the efficiency of the superlattices may not only be determined by the band gap and polarization. Here, we theoretically demonstrate that a large polarization and a lower band gap are obtained in BSO/SSO superlattices simultaneously. It may increase the light absorption range and promote the separation of photo-excited carriers, which are key factors that contribute to the efficiency of photovoltaic materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Amplitude of distorted modes and (b) volume as a function of tensile strain. 
 Fig. 7  The evolution of band gap as a function of (a) volume, (b) Γ−5, (c) M+2 and (d) M−5 modes. 
IV. Summary
In summary, we demonstrate from first principles calculations that direct band gap and hybrid improper ferroelectric polarization coexist in the BSO/SSO superlattices. Furthermore, an epitaxial tensile strain and negative pressure can not only significantly enhance the polarization but also lower the band gap to a suitable level for the visible spectrum in the BSO/SSO superlattices. The lowered band gap is necessary for increasing the efficiency of light absorption, whereas the enhanced polarization is desirable for the separation of photo-excited carriers in the materials, which will greatly improve the photovoltaic efficiency of the materials. The present work suggests that the strained BSO/SSO superlattices are promising ferroelectric semiconducting materials for photovoltaic applications. It may stimulate more experimental investigations on the materials for solar energy conversion and related applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11472242, 11672264 and 11621062), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. LZ17A020001) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. Computations were performed in National Supercomputer Center in Guangzhou with the joint project (nsfc2015-497) of NSFC and Guangdong province, China.
References
D. Wöhrle and D. MeiSSOer, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 129 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizoguchi, H. W. Eng and P. M. Woodward, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ostrick, M. Fleischer, U. Lampe and H. Meixner, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 44, 601 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bucur, A. I. Bucur, S. Novaconi and I. Nicoara, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 542, 142 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Chu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2004, 106, 305 CrossRef .
C. V. G. Reddy, S. V. Manorama, V. J. Rao, A. Lobo and S. K. Kulkarni, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 348, 261 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schober, Solid State Ionics, 1998, 109, 1 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, S. S. Shin, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. S. Jung and K. S. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, J. S. Kim, J. H. Suk, K. D. Lee, D. W. Kim, J. H. Park, I. S. Cho, K. S. Hong and J. Y. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Zhu, Z. P. Shao, J. J. Ye, X. H. Zhang, X. Pan and S. Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970 RSC .
N. Rajamanickam, P. Soundarrajan, V. K. Vendra, J. B. Jasinski, M. K. Sunkara and K. Ramachandran, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8468 RSC .
B. Bellal, B. Hadjarab, A. Bouguelia and M. Trari, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2009, 45, 172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Glerup, K. S. Knight and F. W. Poulsen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 507 CrossRef CAS .
E. Baba, D. Kan, Y. Yamada, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, Y. Kanemitsu and Y. Shimakawa, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 455106 CrossRef .
D. J. Singh, Q. Xu and K. P. Ong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 4 Search PubMed .
H. Sim, S. W. Cheong and B. G. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 7 Search PubMed .
Y. Inoue, K. Sato, K. Sato and H. Miyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2809 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Young and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 116601 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Wylie-van Eerd, T. Sluka, C. Sandu, M. Cantoni, X.-K. Wei, A. Kvasov, L. J. McGilly, P. Gemeiner, B. Dkhil, A. Tagantsev, J. Trodahl and N. Setter, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 219906 CrossRef .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1976, 13, 5188 CrossRef .
S. Baroni, S. De Gironcoli, A. Dal Corso and P. Giannozzi, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73, 515 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gonze and C. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 10355 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. King-Smith and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 1651 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Hatch and H. T. Stokes, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2003, 36, 951–952 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bevillon, A. Chesnaud, Y. Wang, G. Dezanneau and G. Geneste, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 145217 CrossRef .
A. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr., 1972, 28, 3384 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Rondinelli and C. J. Fennie, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1961–1968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bousquet, M. Dawber, N. Stucki, C. Lichtensteiger, P. Hermet, S. Gariglio, J. M. Triscone and P. Ghosez, Nature, 2008, 452, U732–U734 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Zhao, X. Q. Liu, X. M. Chen and L. Bellaiche, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 195147 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. Sahoo, T. Shimada, H. Zhao, J. Wang and T. Kitamura, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 385901 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Soleimanpour and F. Kanjouri, Phys. B, 2014, 432, 16–20 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp06042kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Polarization of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices as a function of (a) epitaxial strain and (b) hydrostatic pressure. The polarizations are calculated from the Berry phase method. (c–e) Show the atomic structures of the superlattice under the tensile strain of 5%, zero strain and the hydrostatic pressure of −18 GPa, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Phonon dispersion curves of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices with the P4/mmm phase under (a) the strain-free state, (b) the tensile strain of 5% and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa.	 

 	Fig. 3  Band structures of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices under (a) the tensile strain of 5%, (b) the strain-free state and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa. The Fermi energy is denoted by a horizontal dashed line at zero energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  The variation in band gap for BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices as a function of (a) epitaxial strain and (b) hydrostatic pressure.	 

 	Fig. 5  Projected densities of states of BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices under (a) the tensile strain of 5%, (b) the strain-free state and (c) the hydrostatic pressure of −12 GPa.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Amplitude of distorted modes and (b) volume as a function of tensile strain.	 

 	Fig. 7  The evolution of band gap as a function of (a) volume, (b) Γ−5, (c) M+2 and (d) M−5 modes.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp06042k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
