Optical features of hybrid molecular/biological-quantum dot systems governed by energy transfer processes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00232D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00232D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6512-6526Optical features of hybrid molecular/biological-quantum dot systems governed by energy transfer processes

        
          
            Terianna J. 
            Wax
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jing 
            Zhao
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Connecticut, 55 North Eagleville Rd., Storrs, CT 06269-3060, USA. E-mail: jing.zhao@uconn.edu;  Fax: +1-860-486-2981;   Tel: +1-860-486-2443
bInstitute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, 97 North Eagleville Rd., Storrs, CT 06269-3136, USA
Received 
      12th January 2019
    , Accepted 7th May 2019First published on 8th May 2019AbstractEnergy transfer processes are continually being explored in both molecular and biological systems that are coupled to colloidal quantum dots (QDs). Quantum dots display unique size and composition dependent photophysical properties. The conjoining of QDs with various molecular and biological components has led to the development of a range of hybrid materials for energy-related applications. These hybrid systems vary in complexity from those composed of QDs and dyes to that of intricate assemblies of QDs with different proteins and light-harvesting complexes. The optical profiles of these systems such as absorption, emission, and fluorescence lifetime are often influenced by energy transfer processes. In this Review, we discuss the evolving field of molecular/biological-QD systems and enumerate on the interesting optical features these systems exhibit due to energy transfer. We also provide our perspective on the challenges and future directions that are worthy of investigation in this field.
1. Introduction
The field of nanotechnology encompasses various aspects of material science research, such as exploring the interface between inorganic nanomaterial components with that of molecular and biological systems. These hybrid systems have been extensively studied in a plethora of applications, including solar cells,1 light emitting devices,2,3 bio-imaging probes,4 and sensors.5,6 Specifically, meteoric advancements have been made in the field of energy conversion and storage using hybrid nanosystems. One such inorganic nanomaterial of these hybrid systems is colloidal quantum dots (QDs). Colloidal QDs are nanoscale semiconductor crystals that exhibit multiple advantageous optical properties over those of the traditionally used organic fluorophores, such as broad absorption, narrow emission, and high photostability. In addition, the absorption and emission spectra of QDs can be conveniently tuned by changing their size and composition in the synthesis. When conjugated with molecular and biological components, the optical properties of the QD-based hybrid nanomaterials can be further adjusted for energy applications.7–10 In addition to these applications, interest has also been placed on fundamental processes that modulate the optical properties of the hybrid systems, such as energy transfer mechanisms.11–13 To optimize energy transfer in these systems for desired applications, it is paramount to understand how energy transfer in hybrid systems influences the physical characteristics of the single elements, such as the absorption and photoluminescent properties of QDs. Furthermore, it is well-known that QDs can also transfer electrons to nearby electron acceptors with good efficiency, making them promising catalysts for photochemistry. Although this type of work is beyond the scope of this Review, we encourage the readers to peruse the recently published Viewpoint from the Weiss group on the prospects of integrating QDs as photocatalysts in light-driven devices.14 We have included additional references therein for readers interested in learning more on this topic.15–18
The evolution of the bio-nanotechnology field has resulted in a growing interest to explore the interaction between QDs and various organic and biological materials. The organic components in these hybrid assemblies can range from small molecules to proteins. QD-molecule/protein systems are promising platforms for biological sensing and imaging, which has been discussed previously.19–23 There has also been a number of comprehensive reviews that have concentrated on how the physical properties (i.e., size, distance, shape, or ligand encapsulation) of QDs influence energy transfer within a molecular system.17,24,25 Unlike in previous reviews, this Review focuses on the optical properties and energy transfer processes in QD-based hybrid nanostructures with potential applications in an energy-related field. The importance of energy transfer-related studies stems from an interest in emulating the process of photosynthesis. Sunlight provides the most abundant source of energy for earth leading many researchers to investigate how to efficiently harvest solar energy. The natural conversion of solar energy to promote various biological processes is strongly contingent upon the electronic energy transfer from excited donor to acceptor molecules that exist in nature.26 Hence, a greater understanding of these systems is crucial to improve upon photon capture and energy transfer in hybrid QD/molecular assemblies for potential use in biomimetic applications.
In this Review, we first provide an overview of the Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), Dexter energy transfer (DET) and triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) mechanisms. Second, we concentrate on the coupling between QDs and small molecules, such as J-aggregates and organic dyes, and examine energy transfer processes in these systems. Third, we explore more sophisticated QD heterostructures, in which either light harvesting complexes or proteins are anchored to the QDs. In the final section of this Review, we offer our insight into future directions on energy transfer studies and in designing QD/protein systems.
2. Energy transfer processes in heteronanostructures
The coupling of QDs within various molecular and biological contexts results in the change of the optical properties of QDs and the molecules via different energy transfer mechanisms. The most comprehensively investigated energy transfer process to date is Förster resonance energy transfer, or FRET. There has been a myriad of QD-based FRET studies in which QDs have been paired with fluorescent dyes, proteins, enzymes, etc., reported in the literature.27–31 Although the FRET mechanism has played a pivotal role in governing the optical properties of complexed QD heteroassemblies, the prospect of energy transfer via electron exchange occurring in these systems should not be overlooked. In particular, electron exchange via the Dexter energy transfer (DET) process has been observed between QDs coupled to small molecules, such as ruthenium, ferrocene, quinones, etc.32–34 Unlike FRET-based applications that are strongly dependent on quantitative optical features (i.e., overlap of absorption and emission spectra of the donor and acceptor molecules),35–37 DET is contingent on more nuanced factors, such as energy level alignment and the surface properties of the individual components. The following sub-sections of this Review provide a foundation for the FRET and DET mechanisms, in addition to introducing the processes of nanometal surface energy transfer (NSET) and triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET).
2.1 Förster resonance energy transfer
Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) was discovered over 100 years ago by Theodor Förster.38,39 FRET is a distance-dependent event that entails a nonradiative energy transfer process between an excited fluorophore (donor) and another molecule (acceptor) via a long-range dipole–dipole coupling. In order for FRET to occur between two species, certain guidelines must be fulfilled. The FRET rate (kFRET), or the probability of FRET to occur between a donor and an acceptor over time, is defined by eqn (1) (1)where τD−1 is the inverse of the photoluminescence lifetime of the donor without the influence of FRET, R0 is the Förster distance, and r is the distance between the donor and acceptor molecules. In order for FRET to occur, the proximity between the donor and acceptor molecules should vary between 10–100 Å. Furthermore, the efficiency of FRET (EFRET) is dependent upon the inverse sixth-distance between the donor and acceptor as shown in eqn (2). (2)Concomitant with the distance-dependent nature of FRET, optimal spectral overlap between the acceptor absorption and donor emission spectra is crucial to achieve high FRET efficiencies in hybrid systems, which determines R0. The Förster distance, R0, is defined by eqn (3) and is the distance at which the excited state donor transfers 50% of its energy to the accepting molecule or emits 50% fluorescence. R0(FRET) = 0.02108[n−4Φdκ2J]1/6(3)In eqn (3), n is the refractive index of the sample, Φd is the quantum yield of the donor molecule, κ2 is the orientation factor for the transition dipoles, and J is the overlap integral. Moreover, since FRET is dependent upon dipole coupling, the transition dipole orientations of the donor and acceptor must be approximately parallel to one another in order for FRET to occur within a system.
2.2 Nanometal surface energy transfer
In classical FRET systems, the average orientation factor (κ2) is considered to be ⅔ for randomly oriented transition dipoles.40,41 The orientation factor of ⅔ can be used in QD-based systems when the synthesized QDs are perfectly spherical, meaning that symmetric QDs exhibit isotropic transition dipoles.42,43 However, the alignment of transition dipoles in hybrid QD assemblies is often complexed due to the anisotropic nature of the transition dipoles when synthesized QDs are aspherical in shape. Hence, the equations related to FRET cannot always be applied when investigating energy transfer in QD heteroassemblies. Moreover, studies have unveiled that, for QD/nanoparticle (NP) systems, the rate of FRET does not always follow the d−6 distance-dependent relationship between the donor–acceptor pair. For example, Li and coworkers demonstrated a d−4 distance dependence quenching of QD photoluminescence when QDs were coupled to ∼3 nm gold (Au) NPs.44 Unlike the FRET formalism that entails a resonant coupling between donor and acceptor, this QD photoluminescence quenching was ascribed to the interaction of oscillating dipoles near the Au surface as a result of nanometal surface energy transfer, or NSET.
The NSET mechanism details a long-range, distance-dependent relationship between QDs and metal NPs similar to FRET, however NSET accounts for the coupling of dipoles located near a metallic surface. In other words, the QD is treated as a transition point dipole, while a smaller sized Au NP (∼3 nm) is considered as an infinite metal surface. The NSET study conducted by Li et al. demonstrated a size-dependent energy transfer relationship between QDs and Au NPs. CdSe/ZnS QDs were coupled to Au NPs that were either 3, 15, or 80 nm in diameter. Their findings indicated that QDs anchored to the 15 or 80 nm Au NPs followed FRET, while the energy transfer between QDs and 3 nm Au NPs was due to NSET. Energy transfer based on the NSET formalism has also been investigated over longer intermolecular distances (R0 ≥ 50 nm). As opposed to conventional FRET systems in which R0 is within 2–6 nm, the NSET mechanism can be applied as a long-range spectroscopic ruler between a donor and an acceptor.45,46 Work conducted by Samanta and coworkers47 observed NSET-like energy transfer between Au NPs and CdTe/CdS QDs self-assembled on DNA scaffolds. By modulating the distance between the Au NPs and QDs from 15 to 70 nm on the DNA, a long-range quenching in the QD emission was observed, thus demonstrating the potential of the NSET mechanism as a spectroscopic ruler technique.
2.3 Dexter energy transfer
Dexter energy transfer (DET) was first theoretically proposed by D. L. Dexter in 1953.48 Unlike FRET, DET is a short-range energy transfer event that involves the nonradiative exchange of an electron from the excited state donor to the ground state acceptor molecule and is strongly dependent on the energy level alignment of the donor/acceptor pair. Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between the FRET and DET processes.49
 Fig. 1  Illustration depicts Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and Dexter energy transfer (DET) that can occur between donor and acceptor pairs. The top image shows the photoexcitation of a ground state donor resulting in either FRET or DET to an acceptor molecule that is in the ground state. The bottom schemes illustrate energy transfer via electronic transitions following FRET or DET leading to the creation of a ground state donor and an excited state acceptor. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Eqn (4) shows the rate constant of DET (kDET) and demonstrates how there is an exponential decay between the donor and acceptor at distances longer than 1 nm. (4)In the equation shown above, K is defined as the experimental factor, J is the overlap integral, RDA is the donor–acceptor distance, and L is the sum of the van der Waals radii for the donor and acceptor molecules. For the exchange of an electron to occur within a donor/acceptor system, the wave functions of the separate components need to overlap. Hence, DET strongly depends on the close association between the donor and acceptor molecules at distances around 1 nm. In other words, the conduction band of the inorganic, semiconducting nanocomponent must interact with the LUMO of the organic molecule for electron exchange to occur via the Dexter mechanism in hybrid assemblies. Due to the short distance between donor and acceptor pairs, DET-based studies often concentrate on QDs coupled to small molecular systems, such as polymers or dyes, that result in either a quenching or enhancement in QD photoluminescence. This quenching or enhancement of the QD emission can be monitored using steady-state and time-resolved photoluminescence, in addition to femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy.50 The close coupling (∼1 nm) between the donor and acceptor molecules via orbital interactions results in faster timescales observed for DET than FRET. Thus, the two mechanisms can be differentiated by examining the spectra and kinetics traces from transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. The efficiency of either DET or FRET was found to be dependent upon the size of the QD which in turn determined both the distance between the donor and acceptor.17,50 Not only has QD size been paramount in controlling the donor/acceptor spacing in these hybrid assemblies, ligands functionalized on the QD surface have also been reported to impact the rate of Dexter-like energy transfer in such systems.51 In the following section, we further delineate on the process of triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET) via the Dexter mechanism.
2.4 Triplet–triplet energy transfer
One recent exciting application of QDs is the coupling of excitons in QDs and the triplet excited states of organic molecules via triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET). Molecular triplet excited states are characterized by two electrons with parallel spins, which have long lifetimes of micro, milli, or even seconds. The long lifetime allows them to transfer electrons to facilitate many photochemical reactions. However, these triplet states are optically forbidden and cannot be directly photoexcited from the molecular ground state. Hence, a photosensitizer is desired in order to absorb a photon into a singlet state and convert the energy into a triplet state.
Emerging examples of photosensitizers include metal–organic complexes or semiconducting QDs. When metal–organic complexes are utilized as photosensitizers, intersystem crossing enables energy transfer from singlet to triplet states. However, high exchange splitting between the singlet and triplet states of this photosensitizer generates a significant amount of energy loss.52 On the other hand, there is minimal energy loss when QDs are used as photosensitizers to interconvert a singlet to triplet state. Strong spin–orbit coupling in the QD leads to an exciton that experiences an accelerated spin dephasing and exhibits both singlet and triplet character.53 As shown in Fig. 2, a spin-allowed energy transfer is possible between the “triplet” QD exciton and the triplet state of the molecular acceptor.54 The creation of two molecular triplet states in the acceptor can result in the termination of these two states yielding a higher energy molecular singlet state. The termination of these two triplet states is referred to as triplet–triplet annihilation resulting in the emission of a higher energy photon. By modifying the molecular structure of the acceptor or QD size or shape, it is possible to modulate TTET to generate either an upconversion or a downconversion in photons, which will be further discussed in the following sub-sections. The ability to up- or down-convert photons is highly advantageous in optoelectronic applications.55,56
 Fig. 2  Diagram depicts the triplet–triplet annihilation process that occurs between a QD photosensitizer and an acceptor molecule leading to photon upconversion. Photoexcitation of the QD sensitizer leads to excitation from the ground state (GS) to an excited singlet state (1ES*) in the QD. As a result of strong spin–orbit coupling in the QD, the exciton experiences spin dephasing and displays both singlet and triplet character. A spin-allowed energy transfer is possible between the “triplet” QD exciton and a triplet state of the acceptor (3A*). The excited triplet states of the acceptor can then terminate into a higher energy singlet state (1A*) via triplet–triplet annihilation ([A–A]*), resulting in the emission of a photon with higher energy than the incident photon. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
3. Optical features of hybrid quantum dot/small molecular systems
Hybrid nanosystems composed of QD and small molecules have been explored for energy-related device applications (i.e., solar cells, light-emitting diodes, etc.) due to the tunability in their optoelectronic properties by joining QDs with small molecules.13,57–60 Specifically, there has been a growing interest to study the competing energy transfer processes such as FRET and DET in these systems which influence the optical properties of the heteroassemblies. In this section, we focus our attention on the infrared (IR) dye, squaraine, and J-aggregates coupled to QDs.
3.1 Förster resonance energy transfer vs. Dexter energy transfer in QD/squaraine coupled systems
Although QDs possess a multitude of favorable properties for solar light harvesting applications,7,61,62 one major drawback of the commonly used CdSe/ZnS (core/shell) QDs is that they do not absorb light in the IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Although advancements have been made in the fabrication of colloidal QDs that can absorb and emit light in the IR region,63–66 it is convenient to broaden the absorption of the most well-developed CdSe-based QDs by coupling them with IR-absorbing dyes.67,68 Such examples have been demonstrated by Choi and coworkers, in which a dye from the squaraine (SQSH) family was covalently linked to CdSe QDs and titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles.50,59,68
Interest has been concentrated on squaraine dyes due to their strong absorption in the near-infrared (NIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum and high molar extinction coefficients.69,70 The SQSH molecule (molecular structure shown in Fig. 3A) played a dual role in these hybrid systems, in which the dye acted as a bridge between the QDs and TiO2 film and as a NIR absorber. A stepwise synthesis was executed to create the NIR SQSH linker with a HS-R-COOH configuration that displayed similar functionalities to 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA).59 The SQSH linker connected CdSe QDs to a TiO2 film for the potential use of this hybrid assembly to be employed in a solar cell design. In this study, the SQSH molecule first acted as a FRET acceptor to the CdSe QD and then as an electron injector into the TiO2 film. The results indicated a successful energy/electron transfer from the CdSe QDs to the TiO2 film mediated by the SQSH linker. Moreover, the power conversion efficiency was recorded to be 3.65% for the hybrid solar cell design. Hoffman and coworkers expanded upon these previous findings to gain further insight into the energy transfer processes between QDs and the SQSH linker. In a later work, equimolar amounts of QDs and the SQSH molecules were mixed together resulting in a broadened absorption of the assembled system from the visible to the NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Furthermore, upon photoexcitation at 440 nm, a decrease in the QD photoluminescence, concomitant with an increase in the SQSH emission, was observed (Fig. 3C) due to FRET from the QDs to SQSH.
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustrating the sulfur from the thiol group of the squaraine (SQSH) dye binding to the CdSe QD. (B) Absorbance and (C) photoluminescence spectra of (a) 4.3 nm CdSe QDs, (b) mixture of 4.3 nm CdSe QDs with SQSH in equimolar amounts, and (c) SQSH in toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to FRET, the possibility of DET in the QD/SQSH system was also investigated.50 Steady-state photoluminescence and femtosecond TA spectroscopy were utilized to differentiate between the FRET and DET mechanisms. Efforts were devoted to understanding how DET competes with FRET and how the QD size determines the occurrence of either DET or FRET. The diameters of the QDs studied ranged from 3–5 nm, and the SQSH dye was covalently attached to the QD by thiol linkages (Fig. 3A). The results demonstrated that the QD diameter did dictate which energy transfer mechanism would dominate. The TA spectroscopy experiments revealed that energy transfer on the ultrafast timescale decreased upon increasing the diameter of the QD donor. It was concluded that the ultrafast photoluminescence quenching (∼200 ps) was the result of energy transfer via DET, whereas slower photoluminescence quenching (∼1 ns) was due to FRET for QDs that had a ∼3 nm diameter. As illustrated in the energy level diagrams of Fig. 4B, DET was the principal energy transfer pathway for smaller sized QD (i.e., 2.7 and 2.9 nm) as a result of greater orbital interactions between the individual QD and SQSH dye. However, as the diameter of the QD increased, DET was less influential due to smaller energy level overlap between the conduction band of the QD and the LUMO of SQSH. Nevertheless, the prospect of DET as a leading energy transfer mechanism over FRET should not be overlooked, in particular for light-harvesting systems, and future studies are needed to corroborate this idea.71
 Fig. 4  (A) Normalized absorption spectrum of squaraine (SQSH) dye and normalized emission spectra of different size CdSe QDs. (B) Energy level diagram of QDs and SQSH dye. As the diameter of the QD is decreased, there is greater energy band alignment between the QD and HOMO and LUMO of SQSH, leading to Dexter energy transfer (DET) dominating the system. (C) Diagram demonstrates the difference between FRET and DET in the QD/SQSH system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Enhanced optical features and energy transfer in QD/J-aggregate coupled systems
J-aggregates of dyes are ordered supramolecular systems that exhibit interesting optical properties for photoelectric applications.72–74 These unique optical features include a large oscillator strength, small Stokes shift, and sharply narrow absorption band. Additionally, photoexcitation of J-aggregate systems yields chromophore coupling and the delocalization of excitation energy within the aggregates, which has been extensively studied in the literature.75–79 Due to the impressive optical features of J-aggregates, many have coupled these structures with QDs to investigate the viability of energy transfer in a hybrid QD/J-aggregate system. When J-aggregates are conjugated to QDs, they can act as antennas to strongly absorb light in a specific wavelength range due to their large absorption cross-sections. The energy can then be transferred to QDs resulting in light emission in low-intensity or diffuse lighting. Therefore, such hybrid QD/J-aggregate system will have higher light utilization efficiency than isolated QDs. Earlier studies conducted by Walker et al. integrated thiacyanine J-aggregates with CdSe/ZnCdS QDs both in solution and on spin-casted films.80,81 These studies highlighted an enhanced light absorption and an increase in the QD photoluminescence as shown in Fig. 5. Furthermore, high energy transfer efficiencies (∼90%) were reported from both works, demonstrating how thiacyanine J-aggregates act as effective light harvesting antennas in these hybrid assemblies.
 Fig. 5  (A) An enhanced absorption of CdSe/ZnCdS QDs is observed when the QD is coupled to J-aggregates. (B) The coupling of QDs with J-aggregates results in an increase in the QD emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
More recent works have investigated the utilization of J-aggregates to enhance the NIR absorption of PbS QDs. There has been a burgeoning interest in Pb-based QDs due to the strong absorption and high emission of Pb-based QDs in the NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum, leading to the possibility of Pb-based QDs in solar applications. As previously explained, QDs possess many unique photophysical characteristics. One such intriguing photophysical property of QDs, in particular of PbS QDs, is the capability of QDs to downconvert incident photons to many lower-energy photons, resulting in photon downconversion.82 The process of photon downconversion is highly advantageous for signal or photocurrent amplification in QD-based sensors or photovoltaics, respectively. However, fast Auger recombination of excitons in the QDs competes with photon downconversion and makes it challenging to make use of the NIR excitons. To circumvent the possibility of Auger recombination in QD systems, molecular J-aggregates have been incorporated into QD assemblies for fast extraction of NIR excitons from the PbS QDs to the J-aggregates via FRET. Wang and coworkers successfully demonstrated sub-nanosecond energy transfer from PbS QD donors to the J-aggregate cyanine dye acceptor, IR-140-Cy+, in colloidal solutions.83 The fastest exciton extraction was recorded to be ∼90 ps and found to be potentially competitive with the Auger recombination process. To expand upon their QD/J-aggregate work, Wang et al. explored the possibility of a J-aggregate acting as a molecular bridge between the donor and acceptor QDs to further accelerate the transfer of NIR excitons.84
Their work published in 2017 demonstrated the potential of relayed energy transfer in composite films, in which a J-aggregate layer of the cyanine dye, IR-140-Cy−, was sandwiched between layers of PbS/CdS QDs that acted as donor (DQD) and acceptor (AQD) QDs within the system as shown in Fig. 6. The donor and acceptor QDs were rendered positively charged by encapsulating the QDs in the molecule, 2-aminoethanethiol (AET). A layer by layer protocol (LbL) was implemented to design the QD/J-aggregate composite film. The initial step of the LbL procedure entailed coating the glass substrate with solutions of poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride (PDDA) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS). Subsequent steps of the LbL method involved immersing the substrate in a solution of the DQDs, an IR-140-Cy− solution, and a solution of AQDs. Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy was utilized to monitor the energy transfer within the QD/J-aggregate/QD film. Unlike previous PbS QD studies which reported energy transfer within a few nanoseconds between donor and acceptor QDs,85–88 a sub-nanosecond transfer of NIR excitons was achieved from the QD donor to QD acceptor, because of the J-aggregate linker resulting in a relayed FRET assembly. Specifically, a 20-fold increase in the energy transfer efficiency was observed for the QD/J-aggregate/QD assembly compared to isolated QD systems. Accelerating the extraction of excitons from QDs is highly desired for applications that are contingent on ultrafast charge separation for optimal device performance.
 Fig. 6  Scheme demonstrates the sandwiched structure of the QD/J-aggregate/QD film. Donor (DQD) and acceptor (AQD) PbS/CdS QDs were first coated in 2-aminoethanethiol (AET) rendering the QDs with a positively charged surface. The glass substrate was initially immersed in the polymers, poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride (PDDA) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS). The films were created via a layer by layer (LbL) method in which the positively charged PbS/CdS QDs electrostatically interacted with the negatively charged J-aggregate of the cyanine dye, IR-140-Cy−. Findings demonstrated an acceleration in NIR exciton movement from DQD to AQD via the J-aggregate bridge compared to previous works focused on direct energy transfer between QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Others have also demonstrated the ability of J-aggregates to act as light-harvesting antennas in QD/J-aggregate assemblies. One study conducted by Freyria et al. explored the interaction between self-assembled molecular J-aggregates from the cyanine dye, C8S3, that were mixed in a colloidal solution of IR-emitting PbS QDs.89 The QD/J-aggregate assemblies were also prepared in solid matrices in the same work. Despite no direct conjugation between the J-aggregates to QDs, an enhancement was still observed in the QD emission for both liquid and solid media. This enhancement in QD emission was attributed to efficient funneling of excitons by the J-aggregates, resulting in the observed “antenna” effect.
3.3 Triplet–triplet energy transfer via the Dexter mechanism in QD/molecular assemblies
Recent work performed on TTET in QDs coupled to various molecules in the acene family highlights the prominence of the Dexter mechanism.90,91 One such study conducted by Tabachnyk et al.90 demonstrated TTET from the molecule, pentacene, to PbSe QDs in organic semiconducting films. The molecular triplet excitons of pentacene were produced upon singlet exciton fission and transferred to PbSe QDs at the bilayer interface of the film. The transfer of the triplet excitons of pentacene to QDs was probed using ultrafast absorption spectroscopy and was discovered to occur on a sub-picosecond timescale. Moreover, Tabachnyk and coworkers investigated the effect of tuning the band gap of the PbSe QD on TTET and found that the most efficient TTET occurred when the QD band gap was close in energy to the triplet energy of pentacene. The work conducted by Tabachnyk et al. illuminates on the necessity of orbital overlap between the donor and acceptor for efficient TTET.
Alternative studies have explored the roles of visible and IR-emitting QDs as triplet sensitizers in molecular QD systems. As mentioned above, triplet excited states of organic molecules are desired in many photochemical reactions, but the formation of the triplet excited state is often inefficient because direct excitation from a singlet ground state to a triplet state is forbidden by the spin-selection rules. The TTET process from QDs to molecular triplet states provides an efficient alternative to generate molecular triplets. Due to the ill-defined spin character of QDs,92 the triplet exciton energy of QDs cannot be directly transferred to the molecular triplets. The pioneering work by the Castellano group93 demonstrated that triplet excitons from QDs can be extracted by two types of triplet acceptor molecules that are anchored onto the QD surface. The TTET mechanism in this system was evident by the correlation between the decay of the exciton in the CdSe QDs and the growth of the triplet state of the acceptor molecule using ultrafast TA spectroscopy. The quantum efficiency of TTET in the system was reported to be higher than 90%.
Nuanced factors can also play a critical role in mediating the rate of TTET in hybrid QD/molecular systems. For example, the impact of ligand length on TTET was investigated by Nienhaus and coworkers,51 in which carboxylic acid ligands acted as spacers between PbS QDs and rubrene molecules in a bilayered film. The rubrene layer was doped with the emitter molecule, dibenzotetraphenylperiflanthene (DBP), to enhance the emission of the rubrene film. Photoexcitation of the QDs sensitized the triplets in rubrene, resulting in triplet–triplet annihilation and the creation of singlet states in the rubrene layer. They demonstrated that the termination of these two triplets yielded photon upconversion in their solid-state structure and reported an increase in the upconversion efficiency compared to previous studies.94 By decreasing the length of the ligands passivated onto the QD surface, Nienhaus et al. discovered that the rate of triplet energy transfer (kTET) was dependent upon the effective dielectric constant of the bilayered structure. As shown in Fig. 7, it was found that the TET time  asymptotes at τTET ≈ 100 ns when the QD shell thickness was ≤10 Å. Hence, the extracted TET rate kTET for QDs functionalized with shorter ligands was slower than what was previously reported in the literature.90,93 Furthermore, a direct exponential relation was expected between kTET and the donor–acceptor spacing (LC) as can be determined using eqn (5). kTET ∼ |V|2e−2LC/LTET(5)
 Fig. 7  The triplet energy transfer times (τTET) plotted as a function of the donor–acceptor spacing (LC) between the PbS QDs and rubrene molecules. The aliphatic ligands functionalized on the QD surface were varied from longer ligands (i.e., oleic acid, OA, and stearic acid, 18C) to shorter ligands (i.e., hexanoic acid, 6C). “18C” and “6C” refers to the number of carbon atoms in the ligand chains. The green dashed line denotes the anticipated exponential relationship between that of τTET and the ligand shell thickness (LC) and characteristic TET length (LTET). The gray line represents the experimental discrepancy from the theoretical result, in which the τTET saturates at ∼100 ns when the QD shell thickness is ≤10 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 

Eqn (5) demonstrates how the triplet energy transfer rate (kTET) is related to the electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor (V), in addition to the ligand shell thickness (LC) and the characteristic TET length (LTET). Tuning the ligand length not only impacted the spacing between neighboring QDs and the QD/rubrene film interface, but also increased the number of QDs in the QD monolayer, resulting in an increase in the dielectric screening of the excitons. The combination of the high dielectric constant (ε) of PbS QDs95 with the lower dielectric constants of the ligands yielded a greater change in the effective medium dielectric constant. Since the electronic coupling constant (V) in eqn (5) is inversely proportional to the medium dielectric constant ,48,96 this would mean that kTET is also inversely related to the dielectric constant of the medium. Thus, the slower rate of TTET (kTET) was attributed to an increase in the dielectric constant of the film as a result of a greater volume of PbS QDs (shell thickness ≤10 Å) in the QD layer. In order to obtain the expected exponential relationship between kTET and LC (eqn (5)), a separate equation was used to normalize kTET so that it was independent of the effective medium dielectric constants. By normalizing kTET, the anticipated exponential trend between kTET and the donor–acceptor spacing (LC) was achieved in this study.
A parallel study conducted by Bender et al.97 concentrated on how the creation of surface sites upon the attachment of TIPS-pentacene (2-CP) on PbS QDs impacted TTET in QD-acene heterostructures. Upon absorption of IR photons, excitons generated in the PbS QDs were transferred to the covalently linked molecules, resulting in the creation of triplet excitons. The formation of these triplet excitons was monitored with TA spectroscopy as shown in the TA spectra in Fig. 8A and B. Spectral signatures illustrated the generation of triplet excitons by a positive absorbance band at ∼525 nm as previously shown in the literature.98,99Fig. 8A demonstrates the progression of the 2-CP:PbS QD TA spectrum at increasing pump–probe time delays. The photobleached feature at 715 nm decays to baseline, while an induced absorption band emerges at ∼535 nm over longer time delays. Moreover, additional photobleached signals are apparent at ∼607 and ∼657 nm. Comparisons were then made between the 2-CP triplet state spectrum obtained from photosensitization measurements and the extracted TA spectral feature at ∼535 nm taken from the 2-CP:PbS QD sample (Fig. 8B). It was determined that excitation of the PbS QDs yielded 2-CP triplet excitons as evidenced by the good agreement between the two TA spectra. Based on their findings, Bender et al. concluded that these triplet excitons were created via a kinetic intermediate that was comprised of a concerted hole and electron transfer event from the QDs to 2-CP molecules. The surface states formed due to the covalent attachment of 2-CP localized excitations within the heteroassembly, ultimately slowing the TTET process. In order to expedite the production of triplet excitons, Bender and coworkers suggested that improvements must be made to QD surface passivation methods to eliminate surface states from mediating TTET.
 Fig. 8  (A) Transient absorption (TA) spectra collected at different pump–probe time delays for TIPS-pentacene (2-CP) and PbS QD samples. Arrows indicate the formation and decay of absorption bands. (B) The black dashed line represents the TA spectrum of the 2-CP triplet excitons, which was obtained from solution phase sensitization studies. The red solid line signifies an extracted spectral feature from the TA spectrum of 2-CP:PbS QDs taken at ∼200 ns. Since the lineshapes appear almost identical between the two spectra, it was concluded that excitation of the 2-CP:PbS QD system generated 2-CP triplet excitons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
4. Quanutm dot as energy donor or acceptor in hybrid biological systems for energy-related applications
Complexed nanosystems have been developed that mimic similar functions to those found in nature. Both plants and bacteria possess light harvesting components, such as chlorophylls and carotenoids, that have been conjugated with QDs to create intricate nanosystems for solar energy conversion. Compared to historically used organic fluorophores, QDs are capable of capturing light over a wider spectral range, leading to an overall enhancement in the light energy conversion of a hybrid QD assembly that would be ideal for an artificial antenna system. The focus of this section concentrates on the role of QD as either a donor or acceptor in advanced hybrid structures. These systems incorporate biological materials ranging from light harvesting complexes (i.e., LHCII) to the photochromic protein, bacteriorhodopsin (BR).
4.1 Light harvesting complex II as potential energy donor to QD in coupled system
Light harvesting complex II (LHCII) is the most abundant light harvesting system found on earth. This complex is comprised of both proteins and chlorophyll a/b molecules that are affixed to the thylakoid membrane of higher plants and are associated with photosystem II. Moreover, LHCII demonstrates high photostability due to the carotenoids in the complex that prevent oxidation of the chlorophylls. Upon photoexcitation, energy is transferred from the core pigment (chlorophyll a) and antenna pigments (chlorophyll b, xanthophylls, and carotenoids) to the reaction center of the photosystem leading to photosynthesis.
Due to the broad range of light absorption by QDs, studies have focused on QDs as the donor molecule to enhance the absorption of the light harvesting complexes.9,25,100 However, work conducted by Werwie et al.101 demonstrated that the biological component of a hybrid system could also serve as an energy donor. In this study, CdTe/CdSe/ZnS QDs were electrostatically bound to the light harvesting complex, LHCII. Fig. 9A displays the absorption features after assembling LHCII with QDs, that are different from the individual absorption spectra. To increase the nonradiative energy transfer efficiency between LHCII and QDs, QDs with an absorption spectrum that overlapped with the LHCII emission spectrum were chosen for this system. As illustrated in Fig. 9B, there is a faster photoluminescence decay of the LHCII donor when it was coupled to the QDs.
 Fig. 9  (A) Absorption spectra of light harvesting complex II (LHCII) with and without QDs, respectively. (B) Photoluminescence decays of LHCII coupled to and without QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Energy transfer via the FRET mechanism was quantitatively determined by calculating the areas under the donor (Aq) and acceptor (As) emission profiles. If a system displays FRET-like energy transfer, the decreased area under the quenched donor emission would be equivalent to the increased area under the sensitized emission spectrum of the acceptor. Thus, a ratiometric determination between  would be close to unity for a system that exhibits FRET. In this case, the calculated ratio of  for the QD/LHCII assembly was determined to be 1.1 indicative of a FRET-like energy transfer.
An additional experiment was conducted that focused on enhancing the absorption cross-section of the hybrid complex in the entire visible region. Previous work has shown the existence of a “green gap” in the visible region of the chlorophyll absorption spectrum.102 To circumvent this issue, dyes (i.e., the Alexa Fluor dyes) were adhered to LHCII to increase the light absorption of the complex.102–104 The hybrid LHCII/dye/QD system had a broader absorption range in the entire visible region, showing its potential as a biomimetic light harvester for photovoltaic applications. However, further work is needed to improve upon the photostability of the hybrid complex before implementation of this system in commercial devices.
4.2 QD energy donor demonstrates enhanced biological function of reaction centers in purple bacteria
Unlike the previous study which focused on the reaction center of photosystem II in green plants, other works have concentrated on QDs as the donor responsible for an enhancement in exciton generation in bacterial systems.25,71,105 In 2010, Nabiev et al.106 demonstrated a three-fold increase in exciton generation as a result of energy transfer from CdTe QDs to the reaction centers (RCs) in the well-studied purple bacteria, Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Rb. sphaeroides). Fig. 10A illustrates integral components of the RC extracted from the purple bacteria in the heteroassembly. The RC is comprised of two building blocks, one of which is an active site that is responsible for electron–hole separation and electron transfer. Both the active and inactive branches have one bacteriochlorophyll (BA or BB), one bacteriopheophytin (HA or HB), and one quinone (QA or QB) in each branch as shown in Fig. 10A. A dimer of bacteriochlorophylls acts as a bridge between the two sites and is called P870 (Fig. 10A). Initial light excitation of the RC results in electron–hole separation at P870 that channels an electron toward the quinone in the active branch. As shown in Fig. 10B, the bacteriochlorophyll pair of P870 displays an emission peak at ∼910 nm.
 Fig. 10  (A) A simplified illustration highlights the structure of the reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Rb. sphaeroides) coupled to a QD. The reaction center is divided into an active (A) and inactive (B) branch. Electron–hole separation and transmembrane electron transfer occur at the active branch. The active and inactive branches are each comprised of one quinone (QA or QB), one bacteriochlorophyll (BChl, BA or BB), and one bacteriopheophytin (HA or HB). A dimer of BChl molecules (P870) acts as a bridge between the two branches and is responsible for charge separation at the active branch. The carotenoid of Rb. sphaeroides is located in the inactive branch and is labeled “Car” in the figure. (B) An enhancement in the emission of the bacteriochlorophyll dimer (P870) is apparent after coupling with QD nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. 
Similar to the QD/LHCII study, the hybrid QD/RC assemblies were formed by electrostatic interactions. Unlike the previous mentioned LHCII work, here the QDs act as artificial light harvesting antennas that transfer energy to the RC acceptors. The QD photoluminescence was overlapped with the absorption spectra of the RC chromophores in order to achieve energy transfer via FRET within the assembly. Photoexcitation of the hybrid structure resulted in an enhancement in the emission of the RC due to an increase in the number of excitons created at the RC site. Förster-type energy transfer was also confirmed by both time-resolved and steady-state photoluminescence experiments conducted on the QD/RC moieties at different molar ratios. The greatest photoluminescence enhancements were recorded for the smallest RC/QD molar ratios as a result of more QDs coupled to one RC site. This study by Nabiev and coworkers was one of the first to prove an efficient energy transfer between inorganic nanocrystals, acting as artificial light harvesters, and a sophisticated photosynthetic complex.106
4.3 Tunability of bacteriorhodopsin photocycle kinetics due to a QD energy donor
Work conducted in our own group107 has explored the interaction between colloidal QDs and the photoactive protein, bacteriorhodopsin (BR). Upon light absorption of BR, a well-characterized photocycle is initiated that leads to a net translocation of a proton from the cytoplasmic surface to the extracellular domain of the lipid bilayer membrane that contains BR.108,109 The primary photointermediate of this photocycle is often referred to as the K photostate (λmax = 590 nm) and is characterized by a strained 13-cis conformation of the light absorbing chromophore, retinal, which drives all subsequent photocycle reactions in BR.110–112 Following the generation of K, the protein decays through the spectrally distinct photointermediates—the L, M, N, and O states—before returning to the resting state (bR).113
In our own study, we have investigated how the interaction between QDs and BR in solution enables the direct modulation of the lifetime of the photocycle. Although numerous research groups114–116 have studied the influence of BR on the emission properties of the QDs, there have been limited investigations that explore how QDs impact the kinetics of the BR photocycle. For our work, CdSe/CdS QDs were added to individual solution samples of the BR mutant, A103C. We selected this mutant to enable the conjugation between the protein and QDs in solution. The M and bR photointermediates were monitored via time-resolved absorption spectroscopy in the presence of QDs. The historical importance of the M and bR photostates stems from the M/bR pairing being utilized as a photochromic medium in computing systems designed with biological materials.117Fig. 11 illustrates the time-dependent evolution of the M and bR photointermediates as shown in two-dimensional heat maps for A103C/QD assemblies at different molar ratios (i.e., 900:1, 500:1, and 300:1). As the relative concentration of QDs increased in solution, the M and bR decay photointermediate lifetimes were elongated. Meanwhile, photoluminescence quenching of the QDs by BR was also evident from the QD fluorescence lifetime measurements indicative of a nonradiative energy transfer. From our experimental findings, we propose that the fixation of QDs to the protein affects the proton translocation during the photocycle of BR, and the excitonic coupling between BR and QDs leads to modified kinetics of the BR photocycle.
 Fig. 11  The evolution of the M and bR photointermediates for each A103C/QD system was followed using two-dimensional heat maps for (A) A103C, (B) 900:1, (C) 500:1, (D) 300:1. The heat maps demonstrate elongations in the M (410 nm, positive red peak) and bR (570 nm, negative green peak) photointermediates for A103C/QD assemblies, specifically for A103C/QD systems that have high QD concentrations (Panels C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
4.4 Higher-ordered, self-assembled heterostructures consisting of stable protein one and QDs
In our own QD/protein study and others,30,107,118,119 the hybrid assemblies were created by non-specific or electrostatic interactions between the QD and the protein. Recently, there has been considerable effort by various research groups to produce self-assembled protein systems with control.118,120–123 Constructing such complexed systems has proven to be a challenging feat due to the heterogeneity of the protein structure. Nonetheless, there have been multiple works that have proposed several ways to design higher-ordered, self-assembled heterostructures.124,125 One protein, in particular, that has been considered for higher-ordered systems is stable protein one (SP1), or the cricoid protein. Stable protein one is a ring-like protein that is comprised of 12 sub-units through hydrophobic interactions. The double-layered, six-membered ring has a negatively charged structure and displays high symmetry. Similar to BR, SP1 exhibits high thermal and chemical stability, which has made the protein ideal for bio-nanotechnology applications.126,127 Self-assembled, hybrid systems of SP1 and QDs have been successfully engineered by Miao and coworkers.128 Varying sizes of CdTe QDs (QD1: 3.3 nm, QD2: 5.8 nm, and QD3: 11.5 nm) were electrostatically assembled onto the SP1 scaffold as illustrated in Fig. 12A.
 Fig. 12  (A) Illustration depicts the self-assembly of the SP1 protein onto different sized QDs and the relayed energy transfer in the system. (B) Emission spectra of QD1 (3.3 nm), QD2 (5.8 nm), and QD3 (11.5 nm) and QD/SP1 assemblies. (C) Emission spectra of QD1/SP1, QD3/SP1, and a mixture of QD1 and QD3 with SP1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The conjugation of QDs with SP1 resulted in an enhancement of the QD emission for all hybrid assemblies shown in Fig. 12B. Similar findings have also been reported for other inorganic nanoparticle/protein moieties.129–132 Since there was less spectral overlap between the emission peaks of QD1 and QD3, these two QDs were chosen for the coupling with SP1. Fig. 12C shows two new emission peaks after combining QD1 and QD3 with SP1. The drop in the emission peak for QD1, in addition to the enhancement in QD3 emission, was demonstrative of a nonradiative energy transfer relayed by the self-assembled protein.
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
There is no question that energy transfer has occurred in many hybrid QD-based systems.25,71 These QD heterostructures that are comprised of either molecular or biological components have demonstrated promising success in various applications, such as in sensing, energy, etc. In these heteroassemblies, the photoluminescence of QDs is often quenched or sometimes enhanced at the ensemble level. At the single QD level, the energy donor/acceptor molecules also impact the “blinking” (photoluminescence intermittency) behavior of individual QDs.133–135 The appropriate combination of QDs and molecules can potentially suppress or eliminate “blinking” of the single QDs, creating steady emitters. In addition to the traditional FRET and DET mechanisms, the recent findings in TTET between the excitons in QDs and molecular triplets open a new avenue of QD-enabled energy transfer. Despite successful examples demonstrating the potential high efficiency of this process in creating triplet states, the quality of QD surface passivation could largely impact TTET, which is an area worthy of further investigation. Although more recent studies have fixated on single excitons in QDs, multi-excitons can be generated in high quality core/shell QDs that have nanosecond scale lifetimes. We propose that these multi-excitons could also transfer energy to molecular triplets by selecting the ideal QD-molecular triplet combination. The prospect of multi-exciton to triplet energy transfer is an exciting topic that has yet to be explored in the near future.
In the QD/biomolecule constructs, the impact of energy transfer on the QD absorption/photoluminescence properties has been demonstrated in a substantial number of systems.71,136 The hybrid QD/biological systems have shown enhanced properties, such as broader absorption compared to that of isolated QDs. The broad absorption can potentially increase the light harvesting efficiency in the hybrid materials. However, the impact of QDs on the spectral features of biological components is much less studied. Moreover, how QDs alter the function of proteins remains an important, yet under investigated topic, especially on the biological activity of proteins. Since there are few studies that concentrate on the influence of QDs on proteins, this limitation can create issues in engineering biomimetic devices, in which the hybrid materials must maintain the desired physical/biological properties and long-term stability for optimal device performance. Therefore, proper ligand functionalization on QD surfaces is essential to fabricate bio-compatible QDs. In the past years, there have been many chemical and physical methods developed to functionalize the QD surface so that the QDs are anchored to the proteins. Nevertheless, specific attachment of QDs to desired sites on the proteins with well-controlled QD/protein molar ratios is still a challenge and an avenue worth exploring in more detail.
Similar to the favorable properties that QDs possess, multiple biological systems display interesting optical characteristics that can be employed for biomimetic devices. As demonstrated in our own study,107 the photoactive protein bacteriorhodopsin (BR) exhibits unique optical and physical characteristics, leading to the incorporation of BR into a myriad of device applications.117 In addition to photoluminescence quenching of the QDs by BR, we observed a modulation in the BR photocycle for multiple QD/BR assemblies. We envisage that the tunability of the BR photocycle would be highly advantageous for protein-based computing applications that depend on the photochromic pairing of the M and bR photointermediates of the photocycle. We hope that our current findings inspire other research groups to study analogous QD/biological systems and to further elucidate on how the optical properties of the biological components are influenced by QDs.
The results from these fundamental studies on energy transfer in hybrid QD/molecular nanomaterials have laid the foundation for the development of advanced optoelectronic devices that are dependent on hybrid QD assemblies. Overcoming the limitations in energy transfer efficiency concomitant with the stability and reproducibility of current hybrid nanosystems will enable future practical applications of these materials in display, light harvesting, catalysis, and biological sensing and imaging systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (CAREER-1554800).
References
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Kim, J. Lee, S.-P. Yang, H. G. Kim, H.-S. Kweon, S. Yoo and K.-H. Jeong, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2994–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fresta, V. Fernández-Luna, P. B. Coto and R. D. Costa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707011 CrossRef .
V. Biju, T. Itoh, A. Anas, A. Sujith and M. Ishikawa, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 2469–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 22, 47–52 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Kairdolf, A. M. Smith, T. H. Stokes, M. D. Wang, A. N. Young and S. Nie, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2013, 6, 143–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, H.-J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955–958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 7, 13–23 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Wang, X. Xiang, R. Yan, Y. Liu and F.-L. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1148–1157 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dworak, S. Roth and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2613–2619 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dworak, V. V. Matylitsky, T. Ren, T. Basché and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4396–4402 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kodaimati, K. P. McClelland, C. He, S. Lian, Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang and E. A. Weiss, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3659–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 267–300 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Harris, S. Bettis Homan, M. Kodaimati, C. He, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, N. K. Swenson, S. Lian, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12865–12919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati, D. S. Dolzhnikov, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8931–8938 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C.-y. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11669–11717 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, M. Yang and Y. Duan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6130–6178 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and J.-J. Zhu, Analyst, 2013, 138, 2506–2515 RSC .
D. Geißler, L. J. Charbonnière, R. F. Ziessel, N. G. Butlin, H.-G. Löhmannsröben and N. Hildebrandt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1396–1401 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, S. Gao and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Q. Peng, L.-Y. Niu, Y.-Z. Chen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and Q.-Z. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7502–7542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and A. Patra, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 712–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, G. Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249–293 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shamirian, A. Ghai and P. T. Snee, Sensors, 2015, 15, 13028–13051 CrossRef .
M. Wu, M. Massey, E. Petryayeva and W. R. Algar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26183–26195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, D. Majhi, K. Bhattacharyya, N. Preeyanka, A. Datta and M. Sarkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 9523–9535 RSC .
A. M. Dennis and G. Bao, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1439–1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dayal and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7977–7981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sykora, M. A. Petruska, J. Alstrum-Acevedo, I. Bezel, T. J. Meyer and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9984–9985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malicki, K. E. Knowles and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4400–4402 RSC .
A. M. Scott, W. R. Algar, M. H. Stewart, S. A. Trammell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson, J. R. Deschamps, R. Goswami, E. Oh, A. L. Huston and I. L. Medintz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9239–9250 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, W. Lin, K. Zheng and S. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1462–1473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, C. Kim and J. Jang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10280–10286 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Jares-Erijman and T. M. Jovin, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1387–1395 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Naturwissenschaften, 1946, 33, 166–175 CrossRef .

          R. M. Clegg, in Reviews in Fluorescence, ed. C. D. Geddes and J. R. Lakowicz, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2006, pp. 1–45 Search PubMed .
R. E. Dale, J. Eisinger and W. E. Blumberg, Biophys. J., 1979, 26, 161–193 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Dale and J. Eisinger, Biopolymers, 1974, 13, 1573–1605 CrossRef CAS .
H. Htoon, M. Furis, S. Crooker, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 035328 CrossRef .
D. B. Tice, D. J. Weinberg, N. Mathew, R. P. Chang and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13289–13296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. K. Cushing, Q. Wang, X. Shi, L. A. Hornak, Z. Hong and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2125–2129 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Yun, A. Javier, T. Jennings, M. Fisher, S. Hira, S. Peterson, B. Hopkins, N. O. Reich and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Breshike, R. A. Riskowski and G. F. Strouse, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23942–23949 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samanta, Y. Zhou, S. Zou, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5052–5057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Arias-Rotondo and J. K. McCusker, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5803–5820 RSC .
J. B. Hoffman, H. Choi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18453–18461 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nienhaus, M. Wu, N. Geva, J. J. Shepherd, M. W. B. Wilson, V. Bulović, T. Van Voorhis, M. A. Baldo and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7848–7857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amemori, Y. Sasaki, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8702–8705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, C. Y. Wong and G. D. Scholes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1037–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mailoa, A. J. Akey, C. B. Simmons, D. Hutchinson, J. Mathews, J. T. Sullivan, D. Recht, M. T. Winkler, J. S. Williams, J. M. Warrender, P. D. Persans, M. J. Aziz and T. Buonassisi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3011 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, X. Feng and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 788–794 CrossRef CAS .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5718–5726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadhu, K. K. Haldar and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3891–3897 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, W. Gu and C. Larabell, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2005, 7, 55–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmüller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11752–11753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Tan, S. T. Selvan, L. Zhao, S. Gao and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3112–3117 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. McArthur, J. M. Godbe, D. B. Tice and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6136–6142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, R. Nicolaescu, S. Paek, J. Ko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9238–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Yum, P. Walter, S. Huber, D. Rentsch, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, F. De Angelis, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10320–10321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paek, H. Choi, C. Kim, N. Cho, S. So, K. Song, M. K. Nazeeruddin and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2874–2876 RSC .
N. Hildebrandt, C. M. Spillmann, W. R. Algar, T. Pons, M. H. Stewart, E. Oh, K. Susumu, S. A. Díaz, J. B. Delehanty and I. L. Medintz, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 536–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Eisele, H. v. Berlepsch, C. Böttcher, K. J. Stevenson, D. A. Vanden Bout, S. Kirstein and J. P. Rabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2104–2105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirstein and S. Daehne, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2006, 1–21 Search PubMed .
G. Scheibe, A. Schöntag and F. Katheder, Naturwissenschaften, 1939, 27, 499–501 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Davydov, Phys.–Usp., 1964, 7, 145–178 CrossRef .
M. van Burgel, D. A. Wiersma and K. Duppen, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 20–33 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Lebedenko, R. S. Grynyov, G. Y. Guralchuk, A. V. Sorokin, S. L. Yefimova and Y. V. Malyukin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12883–12887 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Eisele, J. Knoester, S. Kirstein, J. P. Rabe and D. A. V. Bout, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 658–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Lyon, D. M. Eisele, S. Kirstein, J. P. Rabe, D. A. Vanden Bout and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1260–1268 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Walker, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3995–3999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Walker, G. P. Nair, L. F. Marshall, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9624–9625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9557–9564 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and E. A. Weiss, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5666–5671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Clark, J. M. Harbold and F. W. Wise, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7302–7305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. S. Kodaimati, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1981–1984 RSC .
F. Xu, X. Ma, C. R. Haughn, J. Benavides, M. F. Doty and S. G. Cloutier, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9950–9957 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Litvin, E. V. Ushakova, P. S. Parfenov, A. V. Fedorov and A. V. Baranov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6531–6535 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Freyria, J. M. Cordero, J. R. Caram, S. Doria, A. Dodin, Y. Chen, A. P. Willard and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7665–7674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Gélinas, M. L. Böhm, B. J. Walker, K. P. Musselman, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and A. Rao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Thompson, M. W. Wilson, D. N. Congreve, P. R. Brown, J. M. Scherer, T. S. Bischof, M. Wu, N. Geva, M. Welborn and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1039–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1157–1172 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner, E. Thomsen, A. R. Watt, N. R. Heckenberg and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Nanotechnology, 2004, 16, 175–179 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Q. You and C. P. Hsu, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2014, 114, 102–115 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Bender, E. K. Raulerson, X. Li, T. Goldzak, P. Xia, T. Van Voorhis, M. L. Tang and S. T. Roberts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7543–7553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Garakyaraghi, C. Mongin, D. B. Granger, J. E. Anthony and F. N. Castellano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Walker, A. J. Musser, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, F. Gao, E. A. Makarova, A. A. Heikal and V. N. Nemykin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9754–9761 CrossRef CAS .
M. Werwie, X. Xu, M. Haase, T. Basché and H. Paulsen, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gundlach, M. Werwie, S. Wiegand and H. Paulsen, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2009, 1787, 1499–1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoneda, T. Noji, T. Katayama, N. Mizutani, D. Komori, M. Nango, H. Miyasaka, S. Itoh, Y. Nagasawa and T. Dewa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hassan Omar, S. la Gatta, R. R. Tangorra, F. Milano, R. Ragni, A. Operamolla, R. Argazzi, C. Chiorboli, A. Agostiano, M. Trotta and G. M. Farinola, Bioconjugate Chem., 2016, 27, 1614–1623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4330–4335 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nabiev, A. Rakovich, A. Sukhanova, E. Lukashev, V. Zagidullin, V. Pachenko, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan, A. B. Rubin and A. O. Govorov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7217–7221 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Wax, J. A. Greco, S. Chen, N. L. Wagner, J. Zhao and R. R. Birge, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 365–373 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Stuart and R. R. Birge, in Biomembranes, ed. A. G. Lee, JAI Press, London,  1996, vol. 2A, pp. 33–140 Search PubMed .
R. H. Lozier, W. Niederberger, R. A. Bogomolni, S. Hwang and W. Stoeckenius, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1976, 440, 545–556 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lanyi, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 2004, 66, 665–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hayashi, E. Tajkhorshid and K. Schulten, Biophys. J., 2002, 83, 1281–1297 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edman, P. Nollert, A. Royant, H. Beirhali, E. Pebay-Peyroula, J. Hajdu, R. Neutze and E. M. Landau, Nature, 1999, 401, 822–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Balashov, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2000, 1460, 75–94 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rakovich, I. Nabiev, A. Sukhanova, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, Y. P. Rakovich and J. F. Donegan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2154–2160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Zaitsev, E. P. Lukashev, D. O. Solovyeva, A. A. Chistyakov and V. A. Oleinikov, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 117, 248–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rakovich, A. Sukhanova, N. Bouchonville, E. Lukashev, V. Oleinikov, M. Artemyev, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, M. Molinari, M. Troyon, Y. P. Rakovich, J. F. Donegan and I. Nabiev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2640–2648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Birge, N. B. Gillespie, E. W. Izaguirre, A. Kusnetzow, A. F. Lawrence, D. Singh, Q. W. Song, E. Schmidt, J. A. Stuart, S. Seetharaman and K. J. Wise, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10746–10766 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, D. M. Marini, W. Hwang and S. Santoso, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro, E. R. Goldman, G. P. Anderson, V. C. Sundar, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12142–12150 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venerando, G. Miotto, M. Magro, M. Dallan, D. Baratella, E. Bonaiuto, R. Zboril and F. Vianello, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20320–20331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Miao, J. Li, S. Fu, G. An, C. Si, Z. Dong, Q. Luo, S. Yu, J. Xu and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5461–5469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Bai, Z. Huang, C. Si, Z. Dong, Q. Luo and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7991–7997 RSC .
Y. Bai, Q. Luo and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2756–2767 RSC .
E. R. Ballister, A. H. Lai, R. N. Zuckermann, Y. Cheng and J. D. Mougous, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3733–3738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kitagishi, Y. Kakikura, H. Yamaguchi, K. Oohora, A. Harada and T. Hayashi, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 1297–1300 CrossRef .
I. Medalsy, O. Dgany, M. Sowwan, H. Cohen, A. Yukashevska, S. G. Wolf, A. Wolf, A. Koster, O. Almog, I. Marton, Y. Pouny, A. Altman, O. Shoseyov and D. Porath, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 473–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khoutorsky, A. Heyman, O. Shoseyov and M. E. Spira, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2901–2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Miao, J. Han, H. Zhang, L. Zhao, C. Si, X. Zhang, C. Hou, Q. Luo, J. Xu and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3743–3751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Wang, C. Zhu, X. Wei and X. Kan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 468, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Mamedova, N. A. Kotov, A. L. Rogach and J. Studer, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
K.-i. Hanaki, A. Momo, T. Oku, A. Komoto, S. Maenosono, Y. Yamaguchi and K. Yamamoto, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2003, 302, 496–501 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Wang, X.-W. Kan, M.-C. Zhang, C.-Q. Zhu and L. Wang, Analyst, 2002, 127, 1531–1534 RSC .
S. Jin, J.-C. Hsiang, H. Zhu, N. Song, R. M. Dickson and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 519–526 RSC .
S. Jin, N. Song and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1545–1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Song, H. Zhu, S. Jin, W. Zhan and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 613–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Conroy, J. J. Li, H. Kim and W. R. Algar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17817–17828 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
R0(FRET) = 0.02108[n−4Φdκ2J]1/6	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Illustration depicts Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and Dexter energy transfer (DET) that can occur between donor and acceptor pairs. The top image shows the photoexcitation of a ground state donor resulting in either FRET or DET to an acceptor molecule that is in the ground state. The bottom schemes illustrate energy transfer via electronic transitions following FRET or DET leading to the creation of a ground state donor and an excited state acceptor. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Diagram depicts the triplet–triplet annihilation process that occurs between a QD photosensitizer and an acceptor molecule leading to photon upconversion. Photoexcitation of the QD sensitizer leads to excitation from the ground state (GS) to an excited singlet state (1ES*) in the QD. As a result of strong spin–orbit coupling in the QD, the exciton experiences spin dephasing and displays both singlet and triplet character. A spin-allowed energy transfer is possible between the “triplet” QD exciton and a triplet state of the acceptor (3A*). The excited triplet states of the acceptor can then terminate into a higher energy singlet state (1A*) via triplet–triplet annihilation ([A–A]*), resulting in the emission of a photon with higher energy than the incident photon. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustrating the sulfur from the thiol group of the squaraine (SQSH) dye binding to the CdSe QD. (B) Absorbance and (C) photoluminescence spectra of (a) 4.3 nm CdSe QDs, (b) mixture of 4.3 nm CdSe QDs with SQSH in equimolar amounts, and (c) SQSH in toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Normalized absorption spectrum of squaraine (SQSH) dye and normalized emission spectra of different size CdSe QDs. (B) Energy level diagram of QDs and SQSH dye. As the diameter of the QD is decreased, there is greater energy band alignment between the QD and HOMO and LUMO of SQSH, leading to Dexter energy transfer (DET) dominating the system. (C) Diagram demonstrates the difference between FRET and DET in the QD/SQSH system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) An enhanced absorption of CdSe/ZnCdS QDs is observed when the QD is coupled to J-aggregates. (B) The coupling of QDs with J-aggregates results in an increase in the QD emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme demonstrates the sandwiched structure of the QD/J-aggregate/QD film. Donor (DQD) and acceptor (AQD) PbS/CdS QDs were first coated in 2-aminoethanethiol (AET) rendering the QDs with a positively charged surface. The glass substrate was initially immersed in the polymers, poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride (PDDA) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS). The films were created via a layer by layer (LbL) method in which the positively charged PbS/CdS QDs electrostatically interacted with the negatively charged J-aggregate of the cyanine dye, IR-140-Cy−. Findings demonstrated an acceleration in NIR exciton movement from DQD to AQD via the J-aggregate bridge compared to previous works focused on direct energy transfer between QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
kTET ∼ |V|2e−2LC/LTET	(5)

 	Fig. 7  The triplet energy transfer times (τTET) plotted as a function of the donor–acceptor spacing (LC) between the PbS QDs and rubrene molecules. The aliphatic ligands functionalized on the QD surface were varied from longer ligands (i.e., oleic acid, OA, and stearic acid, 18C) to shorter ligands (i.e., hexanoic acid, 6C). “18C” and “6C” refers to the number of carbon atoms in the ligand chains. The green dashed line denotes the anticipated exponential relationship between that of τTET and the ligand shell thickness (LC) and characteristic TET length (LTET). The gray line represents the experimental discrepancy from the theoretical result, in which the τTET saturates at ∼100 ns when the QD shell thickness is ≤10 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Transient absorption (TA) spectra collected at different pump–probe time delays for TIPS-pentacene (2-CP) and PbS QD samples. Arrows indicate the formation and decay of absorption bands. (B) The black dashed line represents the TA spectrum of the 2-CP triplet excitons, which was obtained from solution phase sensitization studies. The red solid line signifies an extracted spectral feature from the TA spectrum of 2-CP:PbS QDs taken at ∼200 ns. Since the lineshapes appear almost identical between the two spectra, it was concluded that excitation of the 2-CP:PbS QD system generated 2-CP triplet excitons. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Absorption spectra of light harvesting complex II (LHCII) with and without QDs, respectively. (B) Photoluminescence decays of LHCII coupled to and without QDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) A simplified illustration highlights the structure of the reaction center (RC) from Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Rb. sphaeroides) coupled to a QD. The reaction center is divided into an active (A) and inactive (B) branch. Electron–hole separation and transmembrane electron transfer occur at the active branch. The active and inactive branches are each comprised of one quinone (QA or QB), one bacteriochlorophyll (BChl, BA or BB), and one bacteriopheophytin (HA or HB). A dimer of BChl molecules (P870) acts as a bridge between the two branches and is responsible for charge separation at the active branch. The carotenoid of Rb. sphaeroides is located in the inactive branch and is labeled “Car” in the figure. (B) An enhancement in the emission of the bacteriochlorophyll dimer (P870) is apparent after coupling with QD nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  The evolution of the M and bR photointermediates for each A103C/QD system was followed using two-dimensional heat maps for (A) A103C, (B) 900:1, (C) 500:1, (D) 300:1. The heat maps demonstrate elongations in the M (410 nm, positive red peak) and bR (570 nm, negative green peak) photointermediates for A103C/QD assemblies, specifically for A103C/QD systems that have high QD concentrations (Panels C and D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Illustration depicts the self-assembly of the SP1 protein onto different sized QDs and the relayed energy transfer in the system. (B) Emission spectra of QD1 (3.3 nm), QD2 (5.8 nm), and QD3 (11.5 nm) and QD/SP1 assemblies. (C) Emission spectra of QD1/SP1, QD3/SP1, and a mixture of QD1 and QD3 with SP1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
