Functional conjugated pyridines via main-group element tuning  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CC00373D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CC00373D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3311-3322Functional conjugated pyridines via main-group element tuning

        
          
            Monika 
            Stolar
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Baumgartner
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada. E-mail: tbaumgar@yorku.ca
Received 
      15th January 2018
    , Accepted 1st March 2018First published on 8th March 2018AbstractPyridine-based materials have seen widespread attention for the development of n-type organic materials. In recent years, the incorporation of main-group elements has also explored significant advantages for the development and tunability of organic conjugated materials. The unique chemical and electronic structure of main-group elements has led to several enhancements in conventional organic materials. This Feature article highlights recent main-group based pyridine materials by discussing property enhancements and application in organic electronics.
Monika Stolar
Monika Stolar received her PhD degree in 2017 from the University of Calgary, Canada. Her thesis research in the group of Thomas Baumgartner dealt with the development of phosphoryl-bridged viologens toward functional materials. She currently is a lab manager in the Department of Chemistry at York University, Toronto, and will join the Swager group in the Department of Chemistry at MIT as postdoctoral fellow in the summer of 2018.
Thomas Baumgartner
Thomas Baumgartner received his PhD degree in 1998 from the University of Bonn, Germany. Since 2017, he is a Full Professor and Canada Research Chair at York University, Toronto, Canada. Prior to that he was a professor at the University of Calgary, Canada. His research interests are focused on molecular organophosphorus π-conjugated materials, as well as supramolecules and polymers for organic electronics.
Introduction
Main-group conjugated materials are rapidly gaining increased attention for next-generation organic electronics due to their intriguing molecular, i.e., structural and electronic, as well as material properties. There are a number of main-group elements that have successfully been utilized in conjugated materials, but the largest library to date primarily includes B, Si, P, S, and Ge species.1 While heavier main-group elements have also been employed in conjugated materials, these examples are far less prevalent due to the limited environmental stability of the corresponding species.1a,2
It is important to note that organic conjugated materials can act as charge carriers upon application of external energy (either thermal or electric), leading to similar features found in traditional semiconductors.3 While there is a plethora of existing p-type materials (hole conducting), the number of suitable n-type (electron conducting) counterparts is strikingly low. p-Type materials can easily be accessed via completely carbon-based conjugated materials, but complications arise in the synthesis of n-type materials. This is in large part due to the required incorporation of electron-deficient heteroatoms, which often necessitates more challenging synthetic protocols.
Incorporation of main-group elements provides the value-added ability to conveniently tune the properties of conjugated materials to be either p-type (i.e., S) or n-type (i.e., B, Si, P, Ge).1,2 Notably, considerable n-type behavior can also be achieved by the incorporation of nitrogen atoms into the core backbone, thereby further enhancing the properties of these materials.4 To date, such nitrogen-based materials are far better known than their main-group counterparts and have seen widespread attention in the literature.5 While there have been many nitrogen-based conjugated materials surfacing in recent years, it is important to set a definition for materials that will be the primary focus of this Feature article.
We have chosen pyridine as the core nitrogen-containing structural element and will focus on materials that at least contain a distinct pyridyl ring. In addition, we focus on small conjugated materials and the molecular property enhancements offered by the incorporation of main-group elements that can lead to potential applications in organic electronics. With these criteria in mind, this article will cover a selected range of pyridyl-based main-group containing materials and is divided into two main sections: the first will cover fused systems, where there is at least one distinct pyridyl ring fused with a conjugated backbone, containing one of the aforementioned main-group elements. Due to the nature of our own research, many of the selected materials will resemble that of a dibenzoheterole core (Fig. 1). The second part will examine conjugated materials that contain a distinct pyridyl moiety, which coordinates to a main group element to form a complexing structure (Fig. 1). Both sections have a targeted focus on n-type materials for potential application in organic electronics.
 Fig. 1  Generic core structures for compounds that are the focus of this review. 
Effects of pyridine incorporation
One of the simplest ways to induce n-type properties in an organic semiconductor is through the incorporation of one or more imine-type nitrogen atoms. The electronic effects of adding nitrogen into a conjugated scaffold can be easily illustrated by comparing the electronic structure of benzene to its single nitrogen-substituted counterpart, pyridine (Fig. 2).6
 Fig. 2  Benzene and pyridine molecular orbitals representing the effect on the degeneracy from adding a nitrogen center. 
Due to the electronegativity differences between carbon and nitrogen, the molecular orbitals of pyridine are no longer degenerate resulting in an energy level change of the molecular orbitals, most importantly the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital). The orbital energy level is lowered as the electronegativity increases. When an atom of lower electronegativity bonds to carbon, the electrons of that bond will reside closer to the electronegative atom (i.e., nitrogen).7 This simple aromatic hydrocarbon example can be used as a fundamental illustration towards the development on n-type materials, which can be further enhanced through addition of main group elements. Moreover, additional nitrogen atoms will accentuate this electronic degeneracy and result in increased n-type character within a molecule.
These electronic principles are identical in larger conjugated systems that incorporate additional nitrogen atoms, such as (hetero)pentacenes. In the examples shown in Fig. 3, it is evident that both the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO have a decreased energy when going from pentacene (1) to diazapentacene (2) to tetraazapentacene (3) (when the position of the nitrogen atoms remains consistent).8
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of pentacene and its aza-derivatives with their corresponding HOMO and LUMO energies. 
Addition of pyridyl rings in the presence of a heterole
Moreover, we must also consider the effects of the pyridine systems in the presence of another heteroatom. Due to our contributions to this field of research, we have chosen to use phosphole as a base comparison of the property-enhancing features fusing pyridine rings has to offer. While the phosphole unit itself adds n-type character to conjugated materials,9 the addition of one or more nitrogen atoms has the ability to further enhance and tune these desirable properties.
Prior to the known fused ring systems, Réau et al. offered initial insight into the use of pyridyl substituents in the presence of a phosphole (4–6; Fig. 4) to investigate the photophysical and electrochemical properties.10
 Fig. 4  Structure of pyridyl-functionalized phospholes and dibenzophosohole. 
Incorporation of nitrogen atoms in a non-fused but conjugated molecule did not show very profound effects on the photophysical properties overall, resulting only in a slight red shift of the absorption maximum (from 354 nm for 4 to 390 nm for 5). But it had a much greater influence on the electrochemical properties. The addition of the pyridyl ring resulted in a significantly decreased reduction threshold from −2.88 V in 4 to −2.45 V in 5 (vs. Fc/Fc+ in DCM) due to the electron-accepting nature of the pyridyl rings. The electron-accepting nature of these phospholes was further enhanced by oxidation of the phosphorus center, going from a trivalent species to a pentavalent species (6), which resulted in a reduction potential of −1.88 V.† While this example does not involve a fused system, it is important to briefly mention the results and how they relate towards the advances in this field of organomain-group materials, which are discussed below.
Fused dibenzophospholes have also been shown to have promising properties for organic electronics. Fluorinated examples 7–8 (Fig. 4) were investigated by Tilley et al. as potential building blocks for electron transport (n-type) materials due to their low LUMO energy levels of −3.0 eV and −3.1 eV, respectively.11 These LUMO energy levels can be compared to perylene, a highly sought after building block for organic materials, which has a LUMO energy of −3.2 eV.12 The low energy of 7–8 demonstrates the pronounced effects of the phosphole ring system and its potential for organic materials incorporating main-group elements.
These two examples illustrate how functionalization of conjugated materials using pyridyl rings and/or main-group elements can enhance the electron-accepting properties and lead to n-type materials. The addition of pyrido-fused rings has the potential to offer enhanced electrochemical properties and a wide array of new material application, which will be a main focus of this article. While much of the literature available to date is phosphorus-based, we will also evaluate other main-group elements of similar structure where the phosphorus atom is replaced with B, S, Si, or Ge and offer insight to the potential of these materials.
Fused ring systems
Mono-pyridine-based heteroles
In 2011, we introduced a mono pyrido-fused phosphole as new electron-accepting molecular building block, where we studied the effects of the nitrogen center location on the molecular properties.13 These phospholes were obtained via multi-step syntheses beginning with the design of the appropriately substituted phenylpyridine starting materials. The brominated species were accessed via Suzuki–Miyaura cross coupling from either commercially available starting materials or modified pyridines.13Fig. 5 highlights the conventional phosphole synthesis from the appropriate phenylpyridine starting materials, where the first step involves simultaneous dilithiation at the brominated positions, followed by ring closure of the phosphole using dichlorophenylphosphane. From here the trivalent species was either isolated or the phosphorus was subsequently oxidized to afford the final azadibenzophosphole products (9–11; Fig. 5). Unfortunately, the trivalent species were found to oxidize more readily than the analogous dibenzophospholes in solution to obtain reportable photophysical data. The trivalent species also had irreversible redox behavior and did not prove very useful in terms of materials applications. However, the oxidized phospholes showed more promising electrochemical results. While the compounds showed no luminescence, they all demonstrated reversible redox properties and provided great insight into the structure–property relationship of the nitrogen position within these compounds.
 Fig. 5  Phosphole ring closure of mono pyrido-fused phospholes. 
Compound 10 demonstrated the most electron-accepting properties with the lowest reduction threshold suggesting that the nitrogen atom in the 2-position provides the most stabilization of the core and is thus the most interesting from a materials application point of view (also supported by the related bipyridyl systems; see below). While these compounds themselves were not applied as materials in organic electronics, the value of these compounds lies in the structure–property relationship, which can be expanded to other systems and lead to applicable materials. In 2013, a new method of phosphole synthesis surfaced involving palladium-catalysed synthesis through cleavage of carbon-hydrogen bonds.14 As a proof of concept, this synthesis was successfully applied to compound 10 which also resulted in a higher yield of 85%, compared to the conventional phosphole formation (69%). It should be noted that advancements in the generally challenging syntheses of such electron poor materials are essential for their prosperity as organic materials.
The remainder of the literature regarding mono pyrido-fused heteroles with the above architecture is centered around thiophene fused systems15 and a sparse silole system.16 Of the four known thiophene derivatives, the 2-pyrido analogue is the only example found in materials application, while the other isomers are only limited to detection from coal derived products or synthetic examples for hetero ring fusion synthesis. Lee et al. used a phenylbenzothienopyridine ligand in order to create a yellowish-green phosphorescent emitter with an iridium core (12; Fig. 6).15b
 Fig. 6  Molecular structure of phenylbenzothienopyridine ligand yellowish-green emitter. 
The design of this emitter replaced the common pyridine unit with benzothienopyridine to achieve a yellow tint in emission. This was achieved through tuning of the triplet bandgap of the dopant material to result in a longer wavelength green emission. This material was employed as a yellowish-green dopant in a phosphorescent organic light-emitting device (PHOLED), which ultimately gave a high quantum yield efficiency of 22.4%. While this was a single color example, access to a wide array of colors in luminescent materials is highly sought after towards the access of white light emitting devices.
Bipyridyl based heteroles
In the context of bipyridines, there are six possible isomers (13–18; Fig. 7), each offering unique properties and applications. Of these isomers, the most interesting and commonly reported are the 2,2′-bipyridine (13) and 4,4′-bipyridine (18), which are used as either chelating ligands for transition metals17 or as strongly electron-accepting precursor unit, respectively.18 Due to the popularity and known properties of these two regioisomers, they are typically sought after for heterocyclic fused conjugated materials as well. More specifically, derivatives of 4,4′-bipyridine are highly desirable due to the aforementioned effects of the nitrogen position and other favorable properties (discussed below).
 Fig. 7  Chemical structure of bipyridine isomers. 

2,2′-Bipyridyl. 
While fusion of 2,2′-bipyridine has been achieved with either a carbon19 or nitrogen20 bridge, main-group examples have not seen much prevalence in the literature to date. Song et al. have reported carbon-bridged examples that behave as ambidentate ligands,19b where the properties could be tuned via the addition of a heteroatom bridge. However, due to the size of many main-group elements evaluated in this review, structural complications arise with heterole fusion limiting the synthetic availability of such systems. Primarily, atoms such as P, Si, and Ge require more space within the 5-membered ring and have weaker orbital overlap,21 ultimately pushing the nitrogen lone pairs together which would need to be alleviated through a twisting of the rigid backbone causing instability of the molecules (Fig. 8). Alternatively, coordination to a metal center through the nitrogen atoms could induce the opposite effect on the heterole, also causing a destabilization of the ligand and weakening of the heterole. Due to synthetic complications and potential product instability, the only examples of these species to date are with a fused thiophene.
 Fig. 8  Illustration of potential sterics and strain associated with main-group element bridged 2,2′-bipyridine. 
An extended S,N-heteroacene was reported in 2016 by Chen et al. as an analogue to 1,10-phenanthroline (19–20; Fig. 9).22 Bischler–Napieralski reactions were utilized to synthesize a family of S,N-heteroacenes as new building blocks for organic electronic applications.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis and structure of S,N-heteroacenes. 
Chen et al. utilized the electron-rich properties of the thiophenes for the cyclization of the pyridine rings, rather than attempting to functionalize an electron-poor pyridine ring. These syntheses were also performed on a multigram scale with moderate yields of the final product of 73% yield. Brominated analogues of 19–20 (Fig. 9) were also synthesized as polymer building blocks in potential chemosensor or electrochemical devices. Due to the synthetic availability of 19 over 20, the brominated analogue of 19 was further explored and incorporated into a polymer via Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling with fluorene to result in a blue-fluorescent polymer. The polymers had moderate to good quantum yields ranging from 45% to 87%. However, their practical values lie in the acid-response behavior due to the pyridine units of the S,N-heteroacene. Upon addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), Chen et al. observed a decrease in fluorescence intensity and a weak broad-band red shift. This was also observed visually with a change in the solution color from colorless to yellow and a change in fluorescence from blue to green upon increase of the TFA concentration.
While, to date, there are no ligand applications to main-group bridged analogues of 2,2′-bipyridine, this S,N-heteroacene example demonstrates an alternative application for such materials as luminescent polymers or chemosensors.


4,4′-Bipyridyl. 
Although 4,4′-bipyridine itself is not of particular interest to materials science (with the exception of metal–organic frameworks; MOFs), it is a valuable precursor to the N-quaternized species, known as viologens. Viologens have the ability to undergo reversible redox processes that give rise to differently colored oxidation states; notably, the bipyridinium radical cation is among the most stable known organic radicals.23 Incorporation of main-group elements to bridge these viologen species has offered some exceptional properties for organic electronics and insight into the role of particular main-group elements.
The first reported main-group bridged viologen was the sulfur analogue in 1985 in an attempt to build on the library of S-bridged bipyridine regioisomers and their properties.24 The S-bridged viologen was synthesized through an intramolecular ring closure of the backbone, followed by methylation with methyl iodide to give viologen 21-I (Fig. 10). At this stage Summers et al. only reported the herbicidal activity of the species as this was the primary use of conventional viologen at the time. The following year, the same group expanded the scope of 21-I as a potential sensitizer for photoreduction of water based on the known electron relay activity of methyl viologen for water reduction.25 Similar to methyl viologen, 21-I was shown to quench the tris-bipyridine ruthenium dication (the photoexcited state of Ru(bpy)33+). Upon irradiation of a solution containing 21-I, Ru(bpy)32+, EDTA, and colloidal platinum in acetate buffer, the quantum yield of hydrogen production was found to be 0.072, compared to methyl viologen under identical conditions that gives a quantum yield of 0.091. Surprisingly, hydrogen production was also observed in an experiment using 21-I in the absence of Ru(bpy)32+ (typically necessary as the sensitizer) when irradiated with a 150 W xenon lamp. This result was unique to the S-bridged viologen as there was no hydrogen production observed for methyl viologen under the same conditions. Upon investigation of the absorption spectra of 21-I and methyl viologen, respectively, the authors found a lowering of the π–π* transition of 21-I compared to methyl viologen due to the conjugation provided by the bridging sulfur atom facilitated this sensitizer behavior. Additionally, 21-I was found to be fluorescent, while methyl viologen is not, with a lifetime of 6.1 ns (3 orders of magnitude longer than methyl viologen) enabling 21-I to undergo biomolecular reactions. Due to its long singlet-state lifetime, the sulfur-bridged viologen was proposed as a viable component for a new design in solar energy conversion. However, there have been no follow up reports to date that suggest 21-I can indeed play a major role in current solar energy conversion models.
 Fig. 10  Synthesis and structure of the S-bridged viologen. 
Alternatively, viologen-based molecules also offer the potential for energy storage due to their stable redox states. This was explored in a molecular extension of the sulfur-bridged viologen, which gave rise to a disulfide-strapped viologen derivative reported by Benniston et al. in 2012.26 The authors adopted the S–S bond motif from examples in nature, where it is known to undergo a two-electron reduction as is seen in cysteine-rich peptides. This main-group modification would increase the traditional two-electron reduction of viologens to a four-electron reduction and improve the potential charge storage per molecule available for these systems. Benniston et al. successfully synthesized the disulfide-strapped precursor via multistep synthesis in good yields. They began with readily available 4,4′-bipyridyl-3,3′-diol where they were able to install the sulfur atoms with the addition of N,N-dimethylthiocarbamoyl chloride followed by a thermal Newman–Kwart rearrangement to place the sulfur atoms in the appropriate position.26 This product was then hydrolyzed and simultaneously ring-closed in dichloromethane in the presence of oxygen to give the appropriate disulfide-strapped precursor. However, diquaternization of the nitrogen centers in the precursor proved to be quite challenging, where methylations resulted in the S-bridged viologen 21-PF6, with no indication of the successful formation of 22 (Fig. 11). Nonetheless, the authors were able to isolate the disulfide-bridged species 23via benzylation but ultimately this compound also decomposed to the corresponding singly S-bridged species 24. The decomposition was elucidated via DFT calculations where the authors discovered that compound 21-PF6 resembles a traditional viologen, while the disulfide-strapped compound 22 does not. Even though the stability of compound 23 was poor, the authors were able to provide CV data where they were able to store four electrons at a potential less than −1.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl in dichloromethane).
 Fig. 11  Synthesis, structures, and decomposition of disulfide-bridged viologens. 
In 2011, we provided a significant contribution to this field of organomain-group materials with a phosphorus-bridged viologen (25; Fig. 12).27 Most notably, the reduction potentials for both redox events of 25 required a 500 mV lower energy input than methyl viologen due to the electron-accepting enhancement of the phosphole heterocycle described above. We have since expanded our P-bridged viologen library to include both aryl and alkyl substituted viologens for electrochromic and change storage applications (see below).
 Fig. 12  Molecular structure of P-bridged viologens with methyl and benzyl substituents. 
We first investigated the effects of adding different p-benzyl quaternizing substituents (26–29; Fig. 12).28 Due to the electron-poor nature of the P-bridged viologen, traditional benzylation gave mixtures of mono- and diquaternized salts that could not be easily purified. This was alleviated with the use of neat reaction conditions using liquid benzyl bromides to give the desired products in moderate yields, which could be further accelerated through the use of a microwave reactor. While the resulting substitution pattern was not conjugated, we were able to correlate the reduction potentials to the Hammett-constants of the various p-benzyl substituents, where the most electron-donating substituted 27 was the hardest to reduce (Ered1 = −554 mV/Ered2 = −992 mV) and the most electron-withdrawing benzyl substituted 29 was the easiest to reduce (Ered1 = −529 mV/Ered2 = −940 mV); all potentials were referenced to Fc/Fc+ in DMF. While we were able to modify the electronic properties of these phosphoryl-bridged viologens through a small modification of the quaternizing species, the photophysics of all three redox states remained the same. Using simple proof-of-concept electrochromic devices we were able to demonstrate the potential of P-bridged viologens as electrochromic materials.‡
Simultaneously, we also reported a new synthetic strategy leading to effective arylation of 4,4′-bipyridine and its phosphoryl-bridged derivative utilizing a procedure involving aryl iodonium salts and a copper(II) catalyst (Fig. 13).29 We were able to employ this strategy for the arylation with both electron-donating (30) and electron-withdrawing (31) substituents, in moderate to good yields, ranging from 61–95%. As expected, N-quaternization with aryl substituents increases the conjugation throughout the viologen and thus we were able to access a new variety of colors between the dicationic species and their redox states. The electron-donating thiophene-quaternized viologen exhibited a yellow dicationic species due to the charge transfer of the terminal electron-donating thiophene unit to the highly electron-accepting P-bridged viologen core. Upon the first reduction, this species provided a violet-colored radical and an amber-colored neutral species upon second reduction (Fig. 13). This was the first viologen to have three distinctly colored states that were not due to the charge transfer between the dicationic core and the counter anions (bromide and iodide based viologens are typically colored due to a charge transfer between the anion and cation). The electron-withdrawing p-fluorophenyl substituent provided a green-colored radical cation and a lemon-yellow neutral species (from a colorless dicationic species; Fig. 13). In addition to developing new P-bridged viologen colors, these species were reported to have some of the lowest reduction thresholds for viologen-based molecules, with Ered1 = −0.38 V/Ered2 = −0.71 V for the thiophene substituted viologen (30) and Ered1 = −0.42 V/Ered2 = −0.75 V for the p-fluorophenyl substituted viologen (31), all potentials were referenced to Fc/Fc+ in DMF.
 Fig. 13  Synthesis of aryl-substituted P-bridged viologens and their colored redox states (30 top; 31 bottom).29 
Due to the stability of our P-bridged viologen radicals and the neutral species, we have subsequently developed xylene-bridged viologens as polymeric materials for battery applications (32–33; Fig. 14).30 The polymers (along with model compounds for comparison) were tested in hybrid organic/Li-ion half cells following the design illustrated in Fig. 14. The batteries were able to retain over 80% of their initial capacity after long cycles (>100) with performance reaching up to 90% of their theoretical capacity. Most notably, due the lower reduction potential thresholds, the P-bridged viologens can be changed/discharged over both redox steps while traditional viologens are only changed/discharged to the first redox step, ultimately increasing the number of charge that can be stored per molecule. This has led to main-group based materials to see high potential as new materials for energy-storage applications.
 Fig. 14  P-bridged viologen polymers used for hybrid organic/Li-ion half-cells with cell schematic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
One drawback of the P-bridged viologens discussed thus far is their poor solubility in water and many organic solvents, especially when compared to their conventional viologen counterparts. More recently, we have addressed this issue by increasing the overall charge on a single molecule or introduction of quaternizing substituents with potential water solubilizing properties. Water-soluble P-bridged viologens were first obtained via star-shaped oligomers (34–35; Fig. 15), where we developed single molecules with high positive charge density and therefore highly ionic character attributing to their water solubility.31 While the properties of these oligomers resemble those of the benzylated monomers, with both similar photophysical and electrochemical results, they were the first examples of water-soluble P-bridged viologens. Water-soluble materials capable of large charge storage are highly sought after in the field of redox-flow batteries for more environmentally sustainable methods of large-scale change storage (compared to conventional redox-flow batteries that use toxic metal ions and highly corrosive solutions).32
 Fig. 15  Structures of water-soluble P-bridged viologens. 
We have also collaboratively investigated the charge-separation efficiency of P-bridged viologens for potential photocatalytic applications using a new set of water-soluble P-bridged viologens (Fig. 15).33 In this study, methylene blue (a well-known acceptor of photoexcited TiO2 electrons) was used as the control. Solutions containing either 36 or 37 in the presence of TiO2 and methylene blue were irradiated with a 406 nm LED lamp. At comparable concentrations of either viologen and methylene blue, there was a significant decrease in the photodegradation of methylene blue, suggesting that both viologens were better acceptors of the photoexcited TiO2 electron. Interestingly, the electron-transfer rates of 36 were on an order of magnitude slower than 37 suggesting that the improved electron-accepting properties introduced through the phosphole and lowered reduction potential threshold are capable of introducing a charge-separated state of TiO2. This study provided strong support for main-group element modification to organic electronics as they open the door for tunable properties resulting in materials comparable (and in some cases, improved) compared to conventional organic materials.
In 2017, Studer, Yamaguchi et al. expanded on the phosphoryl-bridged viologens by introducing a doubly-bridged analogue, 38 (Fig. 16).34 The tetrabrominated precursor was prepared from 3,5-dibromopyridine via a modified Ullmann coupling to give the desired precursor in a moderate yield of 71%. The authors used radical phosphanylation to obtain the doubly-bridged species following the scheme in Fig. 16. While complications were encountered using traditional oxidation conditions to obtain the phosphole oxide, they were able to selectively oxidize the phosphorus using elemental sulfur. Due to the tetrahedral nature of phosphorus, these doubly-bridged compounds exist as cis and trans isomers. Interestingly, only the trans viologen species showed two reversible reductions, while the cis isomer had an irreversible reduction that was proposed to trigger a degradation of the viologen. The addition of a second phosphole moiety within a viologen produced one of the lowest reduction potential thresholds known to date with a potential of −0.38 V (vs. Fc/Fc+ in DMF). The enhanced electron-acceptor character of 38 was tested as a quencher for more powerful oxidizing agents, Ru(bpz)32+ (compared to the traditional Ru(bpy)32+) where 38 was able to quench the excited state due to its extremely strong electron-accepting properties. This new redox couple of 38/Ru(bpz)32+ could offer new synthetic applications with are currently not accessible due to the redox limitations of methyl viologen/Ru(bpy)32+.
 Fig. 16  Synthesis of doubly P-bridged viologen. 
Group-14-bridged bipyridyl analogues of 4,4′-bipyridine were introduced in 2014 by Ohshita et al. utilizing silicon and germanium as the bridging main-group elements.35 Ring closure with Si and Ge was carried out in a similar manner to the phosphole ring closure described above to give the desired bipyridyl species (39–40; Fig. 17). Both bridged bipyridyl species gave predominantly featureless absorption profiles, with maxima at ∼270 nm and were non-emissive in solution at room temperature. However, they did exhibit aggregation-induced emission, which was also found to be temperature dependent. The Ge-bridged bipyridyl exhibited a new low-energy band below −80 °C attributed to the phosphorescence (Fig. 17). This was unique to the solid-state Si- and Ge-bridged bipyridyls since 4,4′-bipyridine has only been observed to exhibit phosphorescence when in solution at low temperature.
 Fig. 17  Chemical structure of Si- and Ge-bridged bipyridine and temperature dependent fluorescence of 40. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
In 2015, the same group reported the corresponding Ge-bridged viologen.36 This compound did not show enhanced electron-acceptor character over what has been discussed thus far suggesting that in the case of germanium, there was no significant contribution of the σ*–π* interaction of the Ge ring which was expected to stabilize the LUMO energy level.
The Si-bridged bipyridyl was investigated as a viologen in 2017, which also demonstrated only a minor impact on the electronic properties due to the incorporation of a main-group element.37 While there was ultimately little electronic influence from group 14 elements on the viologen species, these elements still offer interesting structural properties with the ability to introduce an anchoring group to create immobilized viologen materials while maintaining the rigid-flat core necessary for the redox properties of viologen.
Germanium-bridged bipyridyls have also seen use in spiro compounds utilizing a main-group bridge between acceptor–donor units.38 A bithiophene-bipyridine example was synthesized through step-wise cyclization of a Ge-bridged bithiophene followed by the cyclization of the bipyridine unit (41; Fig. 18) and subsequently used as an electron-accepting unit within a polymer. The monomer showed an absorption profile that suggested no interaction between the two components of the spiro compound. Typically, Ge-bridged bithiophenes exhibit photoluminescence, however, in this example, there was near complete quenching of the fluorescence, suggesting an intramolecular charge transfer between the two halves of the spiro compound upon excitation. In a subsequent publication, Ohshita et al. found their Ge-bridged spiro compound to be a good sensitizer for singlet oxygen.39 Several spiro derivatives (42–43; Fig. 18) were dissolved in air-saturated dichloromethane–MeOH solution containing dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) and irradiated with a filtered xenon lamp. DHN acted as a singlet oxygen scavenger where a change in the absorption profile was observed with time, confirming the production of singlet oxygen. This example marked the first germole-based sensitizer, opening the door for a new sensitizer design.
 Fig. 18  Structures of Ge-bridged bipyridyl spiro compounds. 

Intramolecular coordination
Another interesting use of pyridine is in coordination chemistry. In the context of materials chemistry, pyridine has seen many applications as a ligand in transition metal chemistry.40 We therefore wish to highlight the coordination of pyridine to main-group elements, where it is used for materials applications. It is important to acknowledge that quinoline (a benzo-fused pyridine) as a coordination complex with main-group elements has seen extensive research in materials chemistry due to its highly tunable photophysical properties that result in a wide array of colored materials, but those are beyond the scope of this article.41 To the best of our knowledge, pyridyl units complexed to main-group elements are limited to B and Si atoms. When it comes to Si–N complexes utilizing pyridine, a recent review in 2016 has provided an extensive overview of the existing materials and their potential applications.42 As this has been recently reviewed, we have chosen to focus on B–N coordination materials. It is also important to acknowledge several reviews on the photophysical properties of complexes with nitrogen donors and main-group elements by the Wang group,43 and we will thus shift our focus to follow-ups and more recent advances.
Recently Wang et al. have expanded on their traditional photoisomerization species 44 (Fig. 19) to include a series of multicolored derivatives and color switching compounds. By introducing different polycyclic aromatic hydrocarobons (PAH) on the boron center (45) and irradiating the compounds to reach their “dark state”, the authors were able to achieve a wide array of borirane-based colored materials (46; Fig. 19).44 The color of these dark isomers was attributed to the HOMO → LUMO charge transfer from the bonding σ-orbitals of the borirane with the π-orbitals of the dearomatized aryl rings and the π*-antibonding orbitals of the chelating backbone. These new PAH substitutions represent ground-breaking work for the development of future reversible photochomic materials.
 Fig. 19  Structures of photochromic B–N complexes and their colors in “dark state” 46.44 
Additionally, Wang et al. have also functionalized their B–N complexes with an external boron atom on the backbone for potential fluoride sensing, along with tuning of the backbone to give different colors.45 From the appropriate precursor, the B–N complexes were prepared by a one-step lithium–halogen exchange and deprotonation of the precursor to give 47–50 (Fig. 20) in moderate yields of 28–66%.45 Upon addition of fluoride, there was a hypsochromic shift in the absorption spectrum and a change in the emission from blue-green to blue. Much like their previous work, these molecules also underwent rapid photoisomerization to give the dark isomer with a distinct color change. Moreover, each of these isomers was responsive to the addition of fluoride resulting in an additional color change. Interestingly, both the photoswitching and fluorine addition were completely reversible, resulting in a reversible four-state molecule. The B–N complexes were also doped into polystyrene matrices, where the same four-state switching behavior was observed (Fig. 20) resulting in highly versatile materials for sensing.
 Fig. 20  Chemical structure of photochromic B–N complexes for fluoride sensing. Four-state switching of complex 47. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, the same group also incorporated their photochromic B–N complex into a copolymer, resulting in the first example of an organoboron-based photochromic polymer.46 The photochromic unit was incorporated as a pendant group onto a polymeric backbone prepared via atom transfer free radical polymerization. The polymer showed photochromic behavior identical to 44, where it went from colorless to dark blue upon irradiation, as well as experienced a quenching of the fluorescence. The polymer was cast into a thin film to demonstrate its potential optical device application.
In 2013, Jäkle et al. incorporated a pyridyl coordinated borane onto a ferrocene for potential application as redox-active materials and new supramolecular building blocks.47 The goal was to develop enantiomerically pure chiral ferrocenes. This was achieved by using an enantiomerically pure precursor 2-pyridyl-1-(p-tolylsulfinyl)ferrocene to obtain the stannyl and mercurio precursors (Fig. 21). From the stannyl and mercurio derivatives, transmetallation with PhBCl2 readily gave the desired products in moderate yields with high enantiomeric excess (ee) of 99% for 51-R and 90% for 51-S. The corresponding borenium cation (52) was also investigated from the 51-R isomer (Fig. 21).48 The cation was obtained via halide extraction using the Ag or Li derivative of Krossing's salt to afford the novel planar-chiral borenium-type Lewis acid. Finally, the authors used this new Lewis acid to demonstrate stereoselective reduction of ketones, which could also be observed through color changes of the borenium species.
 Fig. 21  Synthesis of B–N complexes containing ferrocene. 
Additionally, incorporation of B–N complexes can offer enhancements to other organic materials. Qiu et al. incorporated B–N complexes into two tetraphenylethene-based luminogens.49 Two compounds (53, 54; Fig. 22) were synthesized using pyridine–boron complexes that could be installed via electrophilic aromatic borylation. While these materials only showed a weak fluorescence in THF solution, upon addition of water, the authors observed a drastically enhanced emission due to aggregation. The addition of the B–N complex resulted in a lower LUMO energy level due to the interaction between pπ orbital of boron and π* orbitals of the aromatic rings, improving the potential electron injection and transport in this material. In addition, B–N coordination within 53–54 improved the electroluminescent properties (compared to the B–N-coordination free analogues) of these luminogens by one order of magnitude, suggesting potential application as light-emitting materials in OLEDs.
 Fig. 22  Structure of luminescent B–N complexes. 
Other interesting luminescent organoboron materials are the ladder-based systems introduced by Jäkle et al.50 Negishi cross-coupling was utilized to obtain the pyridyl functionalized fluorene in a moderate isolated yield of 44%, followed by electrophilic aromatic borylation with BBr3 to give the desired ladder product (55; Fig. 22). Incorporation of B–N complexes resulted in a red-shift in both absorption and emission compared to the free ligand where it was also observed that the fluorinated phenyl rings have little effect on the optical properties. In addition, both species underwent two consecutive reversible reduction processes with the fluorinated compounds resulting in a lowered reduction threshold by 200 mV, due to a decrease in LUMO energy from the addition of electron-withdrawing groups. While these are certainly preliminary results for these ladder-based compounds, they show great potential as value-added building block in conjugated oligomers and polymers.
Linking an electron donor (carbazole or triphenyl amine) to the boron atom of these B–N complexes has recently been shown to lead to thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF), which aims to improve the efficiency of organic compounds for efficient LEDs.51 In 2017, Chi et al. synthesized a series of donor–acceptor based B–N complexes (56–58; Fig. 23). The complexes exhibited emission that were strongly solvent-dependent, which was attributed to the strong interligand charge transfer within these molecules. After promising transient photoluminescence decay dynamics, the authors went on to investigate OLED performance utilizing these new materials. The best performing device was reported among the most efficient TADF OLEDs to date with external quantum efficiency of 26.6%, current efficiency of 88.2 cd A−1, and power efficiency of 81.5 lm W−1. Additionally, the authors were able to show that enhancing the electron-withdrawing features of the backbone provides improved stabilization in these materials.
 Fig. 23  Chemical structure of donor–acceptor based B–N complexes (56–59), B–N monomer for solar cells (60), and O2 sensing B–N complex 61. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Using an alternative donor–acceptor motif, Yasuda et al. were also able to create TADF molecules using a B–N complex.52 In this example the authors chose to use spiro[2,7-dimethylacridan-9,9′-fluorene] as the donor and linked it to the backbone of the acceptor (59; Fig. 23). For comparison, they also synthesized the boron-free analogue. They found that B–N complexes provided a lowering of the LUMO energy level which provides access to TADF. The corresponding OLEDs showed efficiencies of up to 22.7%.
Due to their electron-deficient nature, B–N complexes have also shown promise in organic solar cells. Liu et al. used a doubly B,N-bridged bipyridyl 60 (Fig. 23) as an electron-accepting monomer unit for an all-polymer solar cell.53 Single crystals of 60 (R = linear chain) showed that the bridging C–C distance resembled more of a double bond character than in 2,2′-bipyridine, suggesting more effective conjugation in 60. UV-vis spectra showed a low-energy absorption when B–N was present in the moiety further supporting the improved delocalization of π electrons over the framework. Monomer 60 (R = branching chain) was incorporated into a conjugated polymer with thiophene via Stille polymerization to obtain an average molecular weight polymer (24600 Da) and good thermal stability (decomposition temperature of 357 °C). Incorporation of the polymer into an organic solar cell resulted in a power conversion efficiency of 3.38% in the preliminary device reported, where further optimization could improve the solar cell performance and provide a new architecture to these devices.
Apart from their potential applications as luminescent materials or in organic solar cells, B–N-complexes utilizing pyridine have also been shown to behave as O2 sensitizers. Jäkle et al. reported a B–N functionalized anthracene core 61 (Fig. 23).54 This compound was shown to readily react with oxygen in the presence of light to give an endo-peroxide product, which could be visually observed by a color change from red to colorless and a loss in fluorescence. Interestingly, this process was reversible upon heating in a solution of toluene. These fascinating properties offer great insight and potential for B–N complexes as O2 capture/release agents.
Conclusions
This Feature article was aimed at providing an overview of recently developed main-group based pyridine materials. With an increasing need for sustainable devices and energy storage, it is essential to develop new organic materials for the development and enhancement of organic electronics. The materials highlighted in here are crucial for advances in n-type materials and ultimately, organic electronics. We also highlighted how the combination of both main-group elements and nitrogen centers leads to improved tunability and n-type properties of conjugated materials, as well as new sites for further functionalization and modification. Several examples featured have been employed as materials in research-based electronic devices, with promising performance going forward. For example, the high charge storage capability of many viologen analogues could lead to new generations of battery materials, which could potentially also be employed as (super)capacitors.
By contrast, the powerful reactivity of the B–N coordinating species, may enable potential utilization in (photo)catalysis down the road, as there are certainly some noticeable parallels to the now established, highly valuable Frustrated Lewis Pairs.
The examples highlighted herein clearly lay a solid foundation for the development of future main-group based pyridine materials as powerful functional materials in day-to-day applications and we see great potential for this field to surface in the coming years. It is inherently evident that the properties of the materials presented herein will certainly allow to build upon toward more complex systems and smart next-generation materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and the Canada Research Chairs program for financial support.
Notes and references

  (a) 
Main Group Strategies towards Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. T. Baumgartner and F. Jäkle, Wiley, Chichester,  2018 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Handbook of Thiophene-Based Materials, ed. I. F. Perepichka and D. F. Perepichka, Wiley, Chichester,  2009, vol. 1–2 Search PubMed .
S. M. Parke, M. P. Boone and E. Rivard, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9485–9505 RSC .
Z. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296–1323 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) A. L. Appleton, S. M. Brombosz, S. Barlow, J. S. Sears, J.-L. Bredas, S. R. Marder and U. H. F. Bunz, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 91 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Berger, A. Giannakopoulos, P. Ravat, M. Wagner, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10520–10524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Wang, T. Malyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. N. Wood, R. O’Hayre and S. Pylypenko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1212–1249 RSC .

          I. Fleming, Molecular Orbitals and Organic Chemical Reactions, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2009 Search PubMed .

          E. V. Anslyn and D. A. Dougherty, Modern Physical Organic Chemistry, University Science Books,  2004 Search PubMed .
X.-D. Tang, Y. Liao, H. Geng and Z.-G. Shuai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18181–18191 RSC .
T. Baumgartner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1613–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hay, M. Hissler, C. Fischmeister, J. Rault-Berthelot, L. Toupet, L. Nyulászi and R. Réau, Chem. – Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4222–4236 CrossRef CAS .
K. Geramita, J. McBee and T. D. Tilley, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 820–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Markiewicz and F. Wudl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28063–28085 CAS .
S. Durben and T. Baumgartner, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 6823–6836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Baba, M. Tobisu and N. Chatani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11892–11895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Ooyama, K. Uenaka, M. Kanda, T. Yamada, N. Shibayama and J. Ohshita, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 122, 40–45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-A. Seo, M.-S. Gong and J. Y. Lee, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2068–2072 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Kumar, C. Cruz-Hernández, S. Pal, R. K. Saunthwal, M. Patel, R. K. Tiwari, E. Juaristi and A. K. Verma, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 10548–10560 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. Kumar, R. K. Saunthwal, T. Aggarwal, S. K. R. Kotla and A. K. Verma, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 9063–9071 RSC ; 
  (e) S. Dhiman, U. K. Mishra and S. S. V. Ramasastry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7737–7741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Shintani, R. Takano and K. Nozaki, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1205–1211 RSC ; 
  (b) R. Shintani, N. Misawa, R. Takano and K. Nozaki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2660–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kaes, A. Kats and M. W. Hosseini, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 3553–3590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. J. Mortimer, D. R. Rosseinsky and P. M. S. Monk, Electrochromic Materials and Devices, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2015 Search PubMed .

  (a) V. T. Annibale and D. Song, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5416–5418 RSC ; 
  (b) V. T. Annibale, R. Batcup, T. Bai, S. J. Hughes and D. Song, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 6511–6521 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Martin, M. L. Trudell, H. D. Arauzo, M. S. Allen, A. J. LaLoggia, L. Deng, C. A. Schultz, Y. C. Tan and Y. Bi, J. Med. Chem., 1992, 35, 4105–4117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fukazawa and S. Yamaguchi, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1386–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Guo, M.-F. Liu, Y. Han, S. Han and Y.-L. Chen, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2016, 34, 1319–1329 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. S. Monk, The Viologens: Physicochemical Properties, Synthesis and Applications of the Salts of 4,4′-Bipyridine, Wiley, Chichester,  1998 Search PubMed .
M. I. Attalla and L. A. Summers, Heterocycl. Chem., 1985, 22, 751–752 CrossRef CAS .
A. Launikonis, A. W.-H. Mau, W. H. F. Sasse and L. A. Summers, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1645–1647 RSC .
A. C. Benniston, J. Hagon, X. He, S. Yang and R. W. Harrington, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 506–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Durben and T. Baumgartner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7948–7952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolar, J. Borau-Garcia, M. Toonen and T. Baumgartner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3366–3371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Reus, M. Stolar, J. Vanderkley, J. Nebauer and T. Baumgartner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11710–11717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolar, C. Reus and T. Baumgartner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600944 CrossRef .
L. Striepe, M. Vespa and T. Baumgartner, Org. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 717–723 RSC .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolar, B. Heyne and T. Baumgartner, Organometallics, 2017, 36, 2685–2691 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Greulich, E. Yamaguchi, C. Doerenkamp, M. Lübbesmeyer, C. G. Daniliuc, A. Fukazawa, H. Eckert, S. Yamaguchi and A. Studer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 6029–6033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ohshita, K. Murakami, D. Tanaka, Y. Ooyama, T. Mizumo, N. Kobayashi, H. Higashimura, T. Nakanishi and Y. Hasegawa, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakami, J. Ohshita, S. Inagi and I. Tomita, Electrochemistry, 2015, 83, 605–608 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Lee, D. M. Peloquin, E. W. Yapi, L. A. McMinn, J. W. Merkert, B. T. Donovan-Merkert, A. A. Vitallo, A. R. Peterson, D. S. Jones, C. Ceccarelli and T. A. Schmedake, Polyhedron, 2017, 133, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakami, Y. Ooyama, H. Higashimura and J. Ohshita, Organometallics, 2016, 35, 20–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohshita, Y. Hayashi, K. Murakami, T. Enoki and Y. Ooyama, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 15679–15683 RSC .

  (a) G. de Ruiter, M. Lahav and M. E. van der Boom, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3407–3416 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. N. Zafara, A. H. Atifa, M. F. Nazara, S. H. Sumrraa, Gul-E-Sabab and R. Parachac, Russ. J. Coord. Chem., 2016, 42, 1–18 CrossRef .

  (a) D. Farth, J. Massue, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2290–2310 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) A. C. Shaikh, D. S. Ranade, S. Thorat, A. Maity, P. P. Kulkarni, R. G. Gonnade, P. Munshi and N. T. Patil, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16115–16118 RSC ; 
  (c) V. F. Pais, J. M. Lassaletta, R. Fernández, H. S. El-Sheshtawy, A. Ros and U. Pischel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7638–7645 CrossRef CAS PubMed   and references therein.
D. M. Peloquin and T. A. Schmedake, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 323, 107–119 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y.-L. Rao, H. Amarne and S. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 759–770 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 215, 79–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mellerup, L. Häfele, A. Lorbach, X. Wang and S. Wang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3851–3854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Mellerup, Y.-l. Rao, H. Amarne and S. Wang, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4436–4439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, B. Jin, N. Wang, T. Peng, X. Li, Y. Luo and S. Wang, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4629–4638 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gamboa, A. Sundararaman, L. Kakalis, A. J. Lough and F. Jäkle, Organometallics, 2013, 32, 5843–5851 CrossRef .
J. Chen, R. A. Lalancette and F. Jäkle, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4893–4895 RSC .
B. He, Z. Chang, Y. Jiang, B. Chen, P. Lu, H. S. Kwok, A. Qin, Z. Zhao and H. Qiu, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 101, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yusuf, K. Liu, F. Guo, R. A. Lanacette and F. Jäkle, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4580–4587 RSC .
Y.-J. Shiu, Y.-T. Chen, W.-K. Lee, C.-C. Wu, T.-C. Lin, S.-H. Liu, P.-T. Chou, C.-W. Lu, I.-C. Cheng, Y.-J. Lienc and Y. Chi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1452–1462 RSC .
K. Matsuo and T. Yasuda, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8723–8726 RSC .
C. Dou, X. Long, Z. Ding, Z. Xie, J. Liu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1436–1440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, R. A. Lalancette and F. Jäkle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18170–18173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Sulfide data was used as the oxide was not isolated due to decomposition.‡ See ESI from ref. 28 for video clips of working devices.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Monika Stolar
	Monika Stolar received her PhD degree in 2017 from the University of Calgary, Canada. Her thesis research in the group of Thomas Baumgartner dealt with the development of phosphoryl-bridged viologens toward functional materials. She currently is a lab manager in the Department of Chemistry at York University, Toronto, and will join the Swager group in the Department of Chemistry at MIT as postdoctoral fellow in the summer of 2018.

Thomas Baumgartner
	Thomas Baumgartner received his PhD degree in 1998 from the University of Bonn, Germany. Since 2017, he is a Full Professor and Canada Research Chair at York University, Toronto, Canada. Prior to that he was a professor at the University of Calgary, Canada. His research interests are focused on molecular organophosphorus π-conjugated materials, as well as supramolecules and polymers for organic electronics.

 	Fig. 1  Generic core structures for compounds that are the focus of this review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Benzene and pyridine molecular orbitals representing the effect on the degeneracy from adding a nitrogen center.	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of pentacene and its aza-derivatives with their corresponding HOMO and LUMO energies.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of pyridyl-functionalized phospholes and dibenzophosohole.	 

 	Fig. 5  Phosphole ring closure of mono pyrido-fused phospholes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structure of phenylbenzothienopyridine ligand yellowish-green emitter.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structure of bipyridine isomers.	 

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of potential sterics and strain associated with main-group element bridged 2,2′-bipyridine.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis and structure of S,N-heteroacenes.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis and structure of the S-bridged viologen.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis, structures, and decomposition of disulfide-bridged viologens.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structure of P-bridged viologens with methyl and benzyl substituents.	 

 	Fig. 13  Synthesis of aryl-substituted P-bridged viologens and their colored redox states (30 top; 31 bottom).29	 

 	Fig. 14  P-bridged viologen polymers used for hybrid organic/Li-ion half-cells with cell schematic. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  Structures of water-soluble P-bridged viologens.	 

 	Fig. 16  Synthesis of doubly P-bridged viologen.	 

 	Fig. 17  Chemical structure of Si- and Ge-bridged bipyridine and temperature dependent fluorescence of 40. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structures of Ge-bridged bipyridyl spiro compounds.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structures of photochromic B–N complexes and their colors in “dark state” 46.44	 

 	Fig. 20  Chemical structure of photochromic B–N complexes for fluoride sensing. Four-state switching of complex 47. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Synthesis of B–N complexes containing ferrocene.	 

 	Fig. 22  Structure of luminescent B–N complexes.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structure of donor–acceptor based B–N complexes (56–59), B–N monomer for solar cells (60), and O2 sensing B–N complex 61. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Sulfide data was used as the oxide was not isolated due to decomposition.
‡ See ESI from ref. 28 for video clips of working devices.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
