Computational electromagnetics in plasmonic nanostructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01742J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01742J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9791-9819Computational electromagnetics in plasmonic nanostructures

        
          
            Amirmostafa 
            Amirjani
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            S. K. 
            Sadrnezhaad
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, P. O. Box: 11155-9466, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: amirjani@sharif.edu; sadrnezh@sharif.edu
Received 
      15th April 2021
    , Accepted 6th July 2021First published on 15th July 2021AbstractPlasmonic nanostructures have emerging applications in solar cells, photodynamic therapies, surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection, and photocatalysis due to the excitation of localized surface plasmons. The exciting electric field resulting from the collective oscillation of free electrons is highly dependent on the dielectric medium, shape, size, composition, and configuration of plasmonic nanostructures. From an engineering perspective, one can tune the optimal properties in the desired applications of geometrical parameters such as the shape, size, and nanoparticles’ configuration. Such optimization should be performed analytically (with exact solutions) or numerically (with specific approximations). Despite the accuracy of the analytical approaches (such as Mie theory), they have mainly been limited to arbitrary and simple geometries, i.e. spheres. This review revisited the theory of mostly implemented numerical approaches for simulating the optical response of plasmonic nanostructures. This paper discusses the finite difference time domain (FDTD), finite element method (FEM), discrete dipole approximation (DDA), and boundary element method (BEM) from both theoretical and practical points of view. The most recent applications of numerical simulations in different fields are presented and discussed. This comprehensive review can be promisingly considered as a guide for the researchers.
Amirmostafa Amirjani
Amirmostafa Amirjani is a tenure-track assistant professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. He received his BSc and PhD at Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), Tehran, Iran. He entitled Iran's National Elites Foundation award for four years between 2014 and 2018. After graduation, he continued his research as a scientist at École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland between 2018 and 2020. His research interests include the size and shape-controlled synthesis of nanostructures, optical sensors, and plasmonics.
S. K. Sadrnezhaad
Sayed Khatiboleslam Sadrnezhaad is a distinguished professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of the Sharif University of Technology. He received his PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1979 and his BSc from the Sharif University of Technology in 1974. He was entitled as 1% world's top scientists by ESI citation database from Thomson Reuters, 2015 and 2016. He is the holder of a research chair from the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF). His current interest is in the emerging bio–nano and SMA fields of the materials science and engineering discipline.
1 Introduction
The importance of light–matter interaction can be traced back to antiquity, followed by Islam's golden age of science and the European Renaissance. Until the eighteenth century, the nature of light was still unknown and the “corpuscular theory of light” was generally accepted among the scientists.1 The nineteenth century was a breakthrough in the “wave theory of light,” which was started by Thomas Young's double-slit experiment and flourished by Maxwell's dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field.2 At present, the light–matter interaction is still essential; however, there is a solid understanding of the nature of light with extraordinary properties being discovered every day.
One of the most exciting phenomena in this regard since the last decade was the interaction of light with metallic nanoparticles, studied in a new photonic branch called plasmonics. The excitation of surface plasmons enables various linear and non-linear optical properties such as optical sensors,3–7 nanoantennas, light-harvesting, and photocatalysis,8 to name a few.9–13 The emerging applications of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) are not the primary goal of this review, and one can refer to the most recent reviews from Homola et al. and Chen et al. on this topic.14,15
The underlying mechanism for this extraordinary optical behavior is the near-field distribution of electromagnetic fields resulting from light interaction with the oscillating electrons at the surface of plasmonic nanoparticles.16–19 This interaction is highly dependent on the size, shape, configuration, medium, and dielectric function of the nanostructure. The formulation of light interaction with plasmonic nanostructures can be used in the pre-design process to reach the final application's desired configuration and properties. The efforts for this formulation started from the pioneering work of Gustav Mie, who proposed an analytical solution to Maxwell's equation for a spherical system. This theory has been adapted to other structures but is mainly limited to spheroidal shapes.19 In the case of a spherical nanostructure, one can write the scattering and absorption cross-sections as (1) (2)where x is the size parameter and equals 2πr/λ, and the aj and bj values are the expansion coefficients expressed by Riccati–Bessel functions. Also, j is an integer representing the dipole (j = 1), quadrupole (j = 2), and higher modes of excitations (j = 3, 4,…). One can calculate the extinction cross-section by the summation of Csca and Cabs. The exact solution to Maxwell's equations obtained from this method is reliable. Howbeit, as mentioned earlier, Mie's theory is not valid for heterogeneous nanostructures with complex and irregular geometries. In this regard, several numerical methods have been developed to address this issue. Finite-difference time-domain, discrete dipole approximation, the finite element method, and the boundary element method are the most used methods.20 Numerical simulation of light interaction with plasmonic nanoparticles is not simply a descriptive study but has practical use in engineering applications. This review revisits the theory of the methods mentioned above for numerical simulation of light interaction with plasmonic nanostructures was first revisited. Then, the most recent efforts for using each method are presented and discussed from an application point of view along with the positive and negative aspects of each approach. This review is not intended to present a compilation of previous efforts on numerical simulation of plasmonic nanostructures. Instead, it aims to give an in-depth insight into each method's possible application. The authors believe that this review can be used as a guideline for researchers in the field who are interested in numerical simulations.
2 Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
The FDTD method, as a finite-difference technique, changes the Maxwell's differential equations to difference equations in an explicit time-stepping scheme. Kane Yee developed this method in 1996.21 By dividing the physical space into finite small meshes (Yee cells, see Fig. 1) and also Δt time step for time discretization, the H-fields and E-fields can be calculated after a first-order approximation was made. For example, at first, the electric field vector components are solved at a given time in the schematized Yee cell (Fig. 1). In the next time step, the magnetic field vector components are solved for the same cell. This process is continued for many iterations until convergence is obtained.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of Yee cells for the discretization of magnetic and electric fields in space. 
According to the Maxwell's equations (eqn (3)), the exact value of the E-field at any time step is dependent on the distribution of the H-field in space at that timeframe, and this is also true vice versa; e.g., the exact value of the H-field at any time step is dependent on the local distribution of the E-field. (3)
Calculating the numerical curve for the E-field and H-field is complicated, especially in a three-dimensional space. With the Yee lattice aid, the FDTD approach can solve Maxwell's difference equations in a leapfrog manner, even though many time-steps may be required to converge the results. The Drude–Lorentz model is used as a frequency-dependent permittivity model to calculate the dispersion in a wide range of frequencies. The accuracy and efficiency of the FDTD computation depend on the size of the element compared with the available features in the nanoparticle's geometry. The convergence could be problematic when the implemented mesh is dense. The frequency dependent dielectric functions of the constituent materials need to be inserted as a mathematical expression (for example Drude–Lorentz), and then transformed into the time-domain. Many computational packages have been developed based on this method to solve and visualize the magnetic and electric fields in the near-field or far-field of the studied domain. FDTD has been extensively used in different multidisciplinary frameworks for predicting the optical properties of metallic nanoparticles. This section is categorized based on the various applications of FDTD in these frameworks.
2-1 Simulation of near-field and far-field optical properties
Predicting the optical properties of plasmonic nanoparticles in a specific configuration is one of the most used applications of FDTD. The optical properties of nanostructures in different shapes, sizes, and compositions on different substrates can be modeled using FDTD in a facile manner. These theoretical studies have possible optical engineering applications where the absorption and scattering cross-section of a given system are required in the design process. In the following subsection, the most recent efforts for simulating the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures using the FDTD method were discussed.
Tira et al.22 have successfully predicted the LSPR position in gold nanoparticles organized in chain-like structures. The numerically obtained extinction coefficients were in good agreement with experimentally obtained data for different numbers of nanoparticles. The effects of nanoparticle–substrate separation and dielectric permittivity of the substrate were fully characterized in another study by Wu and Nordlander.23 As shown in Fig. 2, both dipole (D0) and quadrupole (Q0) resonance frequencies and intensities changed significantly by changing the polarization of the incident field. According to the obtained data using FDTD, the dielectric substrate's effect decreased as the gap distance between NPs and the substrate increased. Similar results were reported by Devaraj et al.24 for silver nanoparticles on a gold film or AuNPs on TiO2 substrates.25
 Fig. 2  The geometry and parameters of the designed nanoshell and the finite slab model in the FDTD method (a). Panel (b) shows the effect of different polarizations of the incident field on the extinction cross-section spectra of the gold nanoshell/dielectric slab structure: p-polarized (red), 45°-polarized (green), and s-polarized (blue). The individual nanoshell spectrum (black) is shown for comparison. The slab parameters are L = 320 nm, T = 80 nm, d = 2 nm, and εs = 6.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. 
Hermann and Gordon26 made a systematic comparison on the performances of several near-field optical antennas using FDTD simulation. According to the reported data, the support material in the probe's design plays a key role in the enhancement of local electric fields, and materials with lower absorption energies (SiO2, Si3N4, and Si) are highly recommended for this method. In another study, Mu et al.27 have simulated the signal enhancement of photonic crystals incorporated with AuNPs using FDTD. According to the obtained results, in AuNPs, the numerical simulation showed nearly two times field enhancement for the localized electric field. Similar work was performed to study the electromagnetic coupling between LSPR and Wood-Rayleigh anomalies of the photonic crystal.28 In another study, Zhang29 developed an FDTD algorithm to incorporate spatial dispersion in metallic nanostructures. According to the reported results for nanoparticles with characteristic sizes below 20 nm, spatial dispersion has a crucial effect on their optical properties, including a blue-shift in the extinction spectrum together with an overall decrease in the extinction cross-section. Mosin and Salim30 performed a systematic study using FDTD to calculate the scattering cross-section, quantum yield, and near-field enhancement of gold nanoparticles in different shapes and sizes. They observed that a red-shift accompanied a decrease in the separation distance between nanoparticles in the SPR peak. Multiple plasmon peaks may also follow due to higher-order resonances. Gapska et al.31 simulated the electromagnetic field propagation through the Au–Si platform using the FDTD method and found a good agreement with experimentally obtained data. In another study, Chen et al.32 studied the optical properties of AuNPs on an Au nanosheet using FDTD. The size and surface coverage of AuNPs and the NP–NP distance and the nanosheet thickness were the crucial parameters. Similar simulations were also performed for deposited Ag and Au nanoparticles on different substrates.33–36 According to the reviewed works, FDTD is a robust method for simulating the scattering or absorption cross section of nanoparticles near the substrates.
2-2 Solar cell efficiency enhancement
It is widely known that the excitation of free electrons in the near-field of plasmonic nanostructures can be used to enhance the overall efficiency of solar cells.37 The absorption efficiency of perovskite solar cells, dye-synthesized solar cells, and organic solar cells can be enhanced by plasmonic nanostructures using near-field localized SPR and far-field scattering scenarios (see Fig. 3). The configuration, geometry, and size of nanostructures have a crucial effect on this optical efficiency enhancement. Numerical simulation of light interaction using the FDTD method can optimize the involved parameters for maximum efficiency. In the following subsection, FDTD simulation application in the pre-design process of plasmon-enhanced solar cells is discussed.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of organic solar cells embedded with plasmonic nanostructures in (a) an active layer, (b) charge carrier transport layer, and (c) photoactive layer. Modified reproduction with permission from ref. 38. 
Singh and Verma39 simulated a thin-film GaAs solar cell decorated with metal nanoparticles on the surface. The solar cell performance was evaluated by calculating the enhanced conversion efficiency, total power absorbed, absorption enhancement (g), and current density (J). According to the obtained results, Al nanoparticles showed superior enhancement among Ag, Au, and Cu nanoparticles, which can be attributed to the broadband light absorption enhancement and enhanced current density of Al over the solar spectrum. They also implemented a similar methodology for designing AgNP-decorated GaAs thin-film solar cells.40 Day and Khaled Rauf41 simulated a periodic array of In nanoparticles on thin-film silicon solar cells using FDTD and obtained nearly 40% light absorption enhancement. According to the received data, the separation distance between NPs and the size of In NPs play a crucial role in the final light absorption enhancement. Tabrizi and Pahlevan42 performed a similar study on silicon thin-film solar cells using AgNPs as an anti-reflective layer. FDTD results showed that in the presence of AgNPs and the coupling between photonic and plasmonic modes, the light absorption efficiency of conventional silicon thin-film solar cells improved by 92%. Such methodology was also used in DSSCs by Sreeja et al.,43 and a 17.55% increase in the efficiency of solar-cells was observed in the presence of AgNPs in the size range of 50–80 nm. Sreeja and Pesala44 used FDTD to simulate the plasmonic power enhancement in betanin–lawsone co-sensitized solar cells. Fig. 4(a) shows the schematic configuration. According to the obtained data, AgNPs with 20 nm and 60 nm size are ideal for enhanced absorption by lawsone and betanin, respectively (Fig. 4(b)).
 Fig. 4  Panel (a) shows the bimodal distribution of 20 nm and 60 nm AgNPs incorporated in the betanin–lawsone sensitized solar cell photoanode. Panel (b) shows the power absorption density map for the betanin and lawsone photoelectrode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. 
FDTD simulation was also used in the case of organic photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells. For instance, Vangelidis et al.45 used FDTD to examine the optical enhancement mechanisms of practical PCDTBT:PC70BM OPV cells incorporating metal nanoparticles. The noteworthy aspect of this study was to differentiate the effect of LSPR near-field focusing and far-field scattering in the optical absorption enhancement. According to the obtained results, dense or sparse arrays of AgNPs showed different optical enhancement with the maximum enhancement value of 20%.
A similar study was also performed by Sreeja and Pesala46 for efficiency enhancement of betanin–chlorophyll co-sensitized natural pigment solar cells using different size profiles of AgNPs. The absorption enhancement of organic solar cells using plasmonic AgNPs in different concentrations was studied by Ciesielski et al.47 They have found that the dominant mechanism of absorption enhancement is different when individual AgNPs or a continuous layer of AgNPs is modeled. This should be considered in FDTD simulations. Royanian et al.48 enhanced the efficiency of copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) solar cells by spherical AuNPs using FDTD simulation. The numerical studies revealed that the plasmonic AuNPs increased the efficiency up to 19% by restricting, absorbing, navigating, or scattering the incident light. In another study, AuNPs were used in the light-trapping layer inside the photoactive layer to enhance the perovskite solar cell's multiple scattering and light absorptions.49 According to the FDTD simulations, employment of AuNPs on both sides resulted in a maximum efficiency improvement. These studies suggest that FDTD provides a suitable framework for simulating the enhancement from incorporating single nanoparticles or arrays of nanoparticles in the solar cell architecture. Not only the geometrical features of nanoparticles (size, morphology, etc.), but also the actual position of nanoparticles could be optimized using FDTD simulation.
2-3 Sensing application/SERS analysis enhancement
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detection is based on the electromagnetic and chemical enhancement and Raman signal from the desired molecule in the proximity of metallic nanostructures.50 Localized surface plasmon resonance excitation from the noble metal nanostructures can enhance the Raman signal by intensifying the molecule's polarization. However, several parameters include the distance between the nanostructure and the molecule, the shape and size of the plasmonic nanostructure, the substrate's composition, etc., which cannot be identified thoroughly without experimental measurements. However, numerical simulations can investigate the effect of pertinent parameters on the excited electromagnetic fields. FDTD simulation is widely used for this purpose, and in the following section, the most recent works were reviewed.
Berto-rosello et al.51 used 3D-FDTD numerical simulation to evaluate the performance of gold-coated nano-porous anodic alumina as a reflectometry-based plasmonic biosensor. According to the obtained data, thinner gold coatings increased the sensitivity, but the measurement resolution was also decreased. Sheena et al.52 studied the ability of AgNPs on a Si substrate for in situ cellular DNA detection using FDTD. The obtained results showed that the sensing platform's SERS efficiency was maximum when non-identical NPs were used (see Fig. 5(a)). In another work, by Luo et al.53 FDTD was used as a preliminary study to simulate the electric field distribution of a plasmonic gold nanohole array as a SERS substrate for DNA methylation detection. Such preliminary investigations can help geometrical parameter optimization yield robust plasmonic response to the desired analyte (cytosine in this study). Kahraman et al.54 used the same scenario to optimize the heights and diameters of the Ag nanodomes as a SERS sensing platform. Wei et al.55 improved the sensitivity of on-site detection of pesticides using SERS by optimizing the nanowire and nanoparticle architecture using FDTD. According to the published data, by increasing the quantity of AgNWs, a larger and more uniform EM field distribution was obtained, which helps SERS detection's sensitivity. Crucial parameters in SERS detection, such as the thickness of the substrate and the concentration of plasmonic nanoparticles, can be optimized straightforwardly using FDTD. However, it should be mentioned that the maximum electromagnetic field enhancement (for instance, by increasing the quantity of the nanoparticles) is not necessarily followed by a suitable detection limit. In a sensing scenario, both of these features should be optimized at the same time.
 Fig. 5  Panel (a) shows the FDTD electromagnetic field enhancement simulation of AgNPs in identical and non-identical sizes of 5 nm, 8 nm, and 12 nm. Panel (b) shows the schematic illustration of a plasmonic gold nanohole array for surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection of DNA methylation. Panel (c) and (d) show the schematic combination of AgNWs and AgNPs as hot spots in SERS substrates and the numerical simulation of maximum enhancement using FDTD, respectively. All of the figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 52, 53 and 55. 

Available packages for FDTD simulation. 
Even though some studies used a self-written code for calculating the electric fields using the FDTD approach, several software packages are available for FDTD simulation with superior outputs as graphics or plots, and Table 1 gives a comprehensive list of the most widely used software.
Table 1 The most widely used commercial software and freeware to simulate the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures using the FDTD method




Software package
Release date of the final version
Ref.




Lumerical©
2021

56



Meep©
2021

57



OptiFDTD©
2021

58



OmniSim©
2020

59



CST Studio Suite©
2021

60



Silvaco ATLAS©
2020

61






3 Discrete dipole approximation (DDA)
As mentioned earlier, the exact solutions to Maxwell's equations are available only for specific geometries such as spheres and spheroids. Therefore, all numerical solutions use approximations for the calculation of absorption and scattering properties. Discrete dipole approximation (DDA) can be used for calculating the optical properties of particles with arbitrary shapes and geometries by discretizing the geometry using small polarizable points (Fig. 6). This method was first presented by Purcell and Pennypacker62 and improved by Draine and Flatau.63 The polarizabilities αi (i = 1, 2, …, N) of the cubic N-point array can be determined from the particle dielectric functions and the induced dipole Pi for each point in the presence of a plane wave field is Pi= αiEloc,i. For i = 1, 2,…, N, the local field (Eloc,i) can be calculated using eqn (4):64 (4)where k = 2π/λ and E0 are the wave vector and amplitude of the incoming wave, respectively. Einc,i and ri are the incident field and the position of each point, respectively. Also, for i = 1, 2, …, N and j = 1, 2, …, N, j ≠ i, A is the diploe interaction matrix which can be calculated by eqn (5): (5)
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of how different geometries discretized to polarizable dipoles in discrete dipole approximation (DDA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. 
In this equation, rij is the vector from dipole i to dipole j. By solving eqn (4) and (5) and the Pi values are known; hence the extinction and absorption cross-section can be determined from eqn (6) and (7) as follows: (6) (7)
The efficiency of the DDA approach highly depends on two parameters: the size of the dipole and the inter-particle distance between the dipoles. For a given system, the size of the dipoles should be much smaller than the wavelength of the light and be able to reproduce the actual geometry accurately. Usually, the number of dipoles N > 106 should be used. The optical constants could be easily inserted from the experimental data, for example real and imaginary parts versus wavelength. The DDA method has been used for calculating the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures in different frameworks. In the following section, the most recent efforts were presented and discussed.
3-1 Simulation of near-field and far-field optical properties
DDA can be used for arbitrary and non-arbitrary geometries to simulate the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures in intricate designs. Roopak et al.65 simulated the broadband scattering of coated and non-coated Au nanostructures in different geometries using DDA. According to the obtained data, in the same radii, the core–shell nanospheroid geometry showed better tunability in surface plasmon resonance. In another study, the effect of size-asymmetric heterodimers on the SERS activity of AgNPs was studied by Khadem and Tavassoli.66 According to this study, the single plasmon peak splits into two different peaks with a significant spectral redshift (Fig. 7). With the aid of DDA simulation, the optimum conditions for maximum enhancement in electric near-fields were achieved when heterodimer AgNPs of 30 and 45 nm were used. Another work was conducted on silver nanosphere dimers of similar and different sizes.67,68 Xu et al.69 performed a similar study on AuNPs to calculate the optical properties of different Au nanodimers using the DDA method.
 Fig. 7  Panel (a) shows the distribution of the electromagnetic field around homo and heterodimer AgNPs using DDA simulation. Panel (b) shows how the interparticle distance (D) and radius (r) of the silver nanoparticle dimers affect the extinction coefficient calculated using DDA. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 66 and 67. 
In another study, the tunable optical properties of Fe3O4@Au core–shell nanostructures with a different shell thickness of gold in the range of 3–5 nm were simulated using DDA.70 According to the obtained data (Fig. 8(a)), the SPR peak position changed from 600 nm to 700 nm, which was consistent with the experimentally obtained results. Similar work was performed by Zhang et al.71 on Fe3O4/Au nano hybrids and Catalán-Gómez et al.72 on Ga@Ga2O3 core–shell nanostructures. The optical properties of Ag–Au bimetallic nanostructures were also simulated using DDA.73 According to the obtained results in Fig. 8(b), by changing the alloy composition (from pure Ag to pure Au), the SPR peak position shifts from 420 nm to 550 nm. A similar trend can be seen in the experimental synthesis of Ag–Au bimetallic nanostructures. The optical properties of Ag–Fe, Au–Fe, and Ag–Fe–Au bimetallic and trimetallic alloy nanostructures were also explored by DDA simulation.74,75 Lee et al.76 used the DDA method to simulate silver nano prisms and nanospheres’ optical properties during a galvanic reaction with Au, which showed similar trends in both experimental and simulation data. In another study, the extinction effect of gold shells on the up-conversion (UC) luminescence enhancement in lanthanide@mSiO2–Au structures was studied using DDA.77 The distance between Au nanostructures and up-conversion nanoparticles was adjusted using mesoporous silica (mSiO2) spacers. According to these theoretical investigation results, a 2-fold enhancement in the up-conversion luminescence can be obtained if the distance was adjusted to 30 nm. Roopak et al.78 performed a comprehensive study on the optical properties of Ag, Au, and Al nanostructures in monomer, homodimer, and heterodimer configurations using DDA. The number and position of peaks, plasmonic coupling, and the effect of size on each configuration's optical properties were thoroughly studied. Similar work was performed by Wei et al.79 on two-dimensional assemblies of Au and Ag nanostructures. In Ag self-assembled planar geometry, splitting of the SPR band into transverse and longitudinal modes was observed. However, in Au planar geometry, only one SPR mode (longitudinal mode) was observable using DDA. The simulation results were consistent with experimentally obtained data. The SPR of Ag and Au nanostructures in the proximity of graphene in different configurations (flakes, cage, sandwiched, and shell) was investigated by Amendola using DDA.80 This systematic study revealed that the SPR of metallic nanostructures was quenched in the proximity of graphene no matter which configuration of graphene or the geometry of NPs was used. Haiwei et al.81 simulated the optical properties of sliced Ag/ITO nanospheres in different morphologies using DDA. According to the obtained results, the geometry of sliced nanospheres has a drastic effect on the number and position of the LSPR peaks. In addition, the separation distance (0–8 nm) between slices plays a crucial role in the optical properties of nanostructures.
 Fig. 8  Panel (a) shows the theoretical absorbance spectra for Fe3O4 and core–shell Fe3O4@Au nanoparticles calculated using the DDA method. Panel (b) shows the extinction spectra of Au–Ag alloys with different Ag contents calculated using DDA. All figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 70 and 73. 
Ni–Ag and Ni–Au bimetallic alloys in different sizes and shapes (sphere, ellipsoid, and nanobar) were modeled by the DDA method to obtain their optical absorption spectra.82 Bhatia and Sinha performed a similar study for Ag–Co bimetallic nanostructures.83 Siabi-Garjan et al.84 studied the effect of the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) matrix on the optical properties of Ag2S nanoparticles. DDA results revealed that the PVA matrix as an insulator material caused asymmetry in electromagnetic field distribution around Ag2SNPs and resulted in new peaks in the spectra. Sun and colleagues85 used DDA to investigate the optical properties of AuxAg1−x alloy nanobars and observed that the material composition played a crucial role in the final plasmonic sensitivity of nanostructures. The Vincenzo Amendola team performed similar alloying assessment studies on the Fe–Au or Fe–Ag magnetic–plasmonic nanoparticles.86–88 Such systematic studies on the tuneable formation of electromagnetic hot spots are essential for fabricating SERS substrates with enhanced local field enhancement.
The effect of a native oxide shell on the ultraviolet plasmonic behavior of Ga, Mg, and Al nanostructures was simulated using DDA.89 Interestingly, it was reported that the absorption efficiency (Qabs) is decreased or increased depending on the material and shell thickness. The role of size and shape of metallic nanoparticles (Ag, Au, and Al) in interaction with an organic–inorganic perovskite (methyl ammonia lead halide (CH3NH3PbI3)) environment was simulated using the DDA method.90 Spherical and cylindrical Ag nanostructures showed enhanced electric field intensity and photon absorption with promising applications in perovskite thin-film solar cells. Emilie Ringe used Crystal Creator software to generate Mg nanostructures in desired shapes and sizes with crystal twinning in multiple planes in a dipole array geometry.91 The generated dipole array was utilized in the DDA approach to simulate the (far-field) optical scattering and (near-field) electron energy loss (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Panel (a) shows the graphical user interface of Crystal Creator software with the possibility to include twins and defects in the structure (Panel b). Panel (c) and (d) show the far-field and near-field simulation using the DDA method. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 91. 
Arzola-Flores and González combined the DDA with machine learning to predict the plasmonic resonance of gold concave nanocubes.92 This methodology predicted the SPR value with an accuracy of more than 93%. Hadilou et al.93 have optimized the architecture of Fe3O4@MNPs (M = Ag and Au) from compositional and geometrical points of view. According to the obtained data using the DDA approach, the thickness of the shell and the inner core and the core–shell structure's geometry were the most significant parameters on the optical properties. Similar work was performed by Kwizera and colleagues94 to simulate the plasmonic properties of Fe3O4@Au core–shell nanostructures in different shapes and sizes.
In another study, the coupling of metal–semiconductor hybrid nanostructures, including AuNPs and CdSe/CdS QDs, was modeled using DDA.95 According to the obtained data, the Au–QD–Au configuration gap played a crucial role in controlling the plasmon-exciton coupling strength. Avsar et al.96 used the vectorized version of the discrete dipole approximation with surface interactions (DDA-SI-v) to simulate the plasmon resonance of Ag@Au core–shell nanoparticles near an external tip. The volumetric filling ratio, the refractive index of the medium, and the tip composition significantly affected the absorption enhancement. Co@M (M = Ag, Au, and Ag–Au) core–shell nanostructures in different configurations were simulated for their magneto-plasmonic properties using DDA.97 According to the obtained results, the yolk–shell nanostructures yielded more enhancement in SPR than the simple core–shell geometry. Bulavinets and colleagues98 synthesized spherical and triangular Ag nanostructures using laser-assisted methods and compared the experimentally and numerically derived optical properties (Fig. 10). As can be seen, there is a good agreement between experimental and theoretical spectra obtained using the DDA approach.
 Fig. 10  Panel (a) shows the dipole array scheme mimicking a gold concave nanocube and the extinction spectra of the concave nanocube with different edge lengths (L). Panel (b) shows the comparison of numerical simulation (DDA) and experimental results for spherical and triangular silver nanostructures. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 92 and 98. 
West et al.99 simulated the plasmon hybridization in monomer to pentamer assemblies of a nanorhombus using DDA. According to the obtained data, the infrared optical response of the nanorhombus is governed by the major and minor axis dipole and quadrupole localized surface plasmon modes arising from each nanorhombus monomer. Shabaninezhad et al.100 simulated the extinction, scattering quantum yield, and field enhancement of single plasmonic nanostructures (Ag, Au, and Cu) embedded in a dielectric medium using DDA. The Ag rod-shaped nanostructures showed superior optical properties among other nanostructures. Ren et al.101 studied Au nanotriangle dimers’ optical properties in different arrangements (Fig. 11) using DDA. As can be seen, by changing the arrangement of nanostructures and the interparticle distance (s), different optical spectra trends can be obtained.
 Fig. 11  The simulated extinction efficiency of gold nanotriangles with an edge length of 120 nm in different configurations. (a): side by side, (b): parallel along the prism axis, and (c): aligned bottom-to-bottom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. 
Sharma et al.102 modeled the metal@dielectric and dielectric@metal core–shell geometry with different shell thicknesses and aspect ratios using DDA. According to their observations, the SPR peak shifting trends for these two configurations were quite different from each other. The effect of plasmonic coupling in closed-packed ordered gallium nanoparticles (GaNPs) was studied by Catalán-Gómez et al.103 using DDA modeling. According to the theoretical data (Fig. 12), which fit well with experimental observations, the LSPR wavelength decays exponentially with the interparticle distance. In other words, the plasmonic coupling is stronger as the NPs are closer; e.g., as the interparticle distance increases in the range of 2–40 nm, the electric field intensity decreases due to the lower interaction. Gordillo et al.104 simulated Ga and In nanoparticles’ plasmonic enhancement in both in-plane and out-of-plane modes. According to the obtained data (Fig. 12), for InNPs, the electric field enhancement increased in the in-plane mode while it was opposite in the case of GaNPs.
 Fig. 12  Panel (a) shows the DDA calculated extinction spectra of Ga dimers as the interparticle distance increases from 2 to 40 nm. Panel (b) shows the local electric field distribution in-plane and out-of-plane for Ga NPs. Panel (c) shows the representative illustration of an NP-enhanced plasmonic Ag NW network and the electric field distribution of NWs and NWs decorated with Ag@SiO2 NPs using DDA. All figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 103, 104 and 109. 
DDA is promising for compositional and structural optimization. For instance, one can easily investigate the effect of shell thickness or composition on the optical characteristics of the final nanostructure. This performance could be compared with FDTD, where more computational cost is needed.
3-2 Photocatalytic activity, solar cell enhancement, and sensing simulation
The enhanced activity of TiO2 nanostructures for photodegradation of phenol in Ag nanoparticles’ presence was simulated using DDA.105 According to the obtained data, the SPR band's overlap with the bandgap of TiO2 is the main mechanism for the observed enhancement in the photocatalysis reaction. Siahpoush et al.106 have coupled the DDA with the thermal Green's function to simulate the temperature increase in a random assembly of AgNPs under continuous-wave illumination. In another study by Avsar et al.,107 a similar thermal simulation was performed for plasmonic nanostructures on a dielectric substrate. Such simulations can be used as a pre-design process for photothermal application. In another study, Honda et al.108 investigated plasmonic nanoparticles’ role immobilized on a TiO2 substrate for photocatalytic enhancement using the DDA method. The effect of the Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanostructure on the electroluminescence efficiency, power efficiency, and power conversion efficiency of organic optoelectronic devices was investigated by Kim and colleagues.109 The DDA results revealed that in the presence of the decorating core–shell Ag@SiO2 NPs, a strong plasmon-coupling effect was induced onto the Ag nanowires. This plasmon-coupling effect resulted in a sizeable near-field enhancement, which improves the light absorption efficiency of optoelectronic devices (such as solar cells). McClure et al.110 used DDA to simulate the plasmonic enhancement in Au–Fe2O3 modified electrodes for the photo-electrochemical ethanol oxidation reaction. The enhanced ethanol oxidation reaction by surface modification of fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) using Au–Fe2O3 nanostructures can be attributed to the near-field enhancements within or near the semiconductor band edge. The role of plasmonic AuNPs in enhancing up-conversion luminescence in the NaYF4@SiO2@Au structure was modeled using the DDA approach.111 According to the obtained data, the AuNPs might play a dual role; e.g., if the SPR peak of AuNPs falls in the excitation region of up-conversion NPs, the luminescence was enhanced while the luminescence quenching can be seen if the SPR peak of AuNPs falls in the emission region of up-conversion NPs. In another study, Dasri used the DDA approach to simulate the effect of spherical, rod-shaped, and cubic silver nanostructures embedded in the organic solar cell.112 The role of geometry and the size of each nanostructure in the absorption efficiency of organic solar cells was carefully studied. Sartorio and colleagues113 studied the optimal positioning of naphthalenethiol-capped AuNPs on the power conversion efficiency of P3HT/PCBM organic solar cells using DDA. The simulation suggests that the localized scattering of aggregated naphthalenethiol-capped AuNPs leads to a fourteen fold increase in the power conversion efficiency by enhancing the charge transfer in the heterojunction of the donor and acceptor. In another study, Coletta and Amendola114 investigated how to increase the dynamic range of immuno-turbidimetric assays by incorporation of plasmonic NPs into latex NPs. By the help of DDA, it was found that an optimal size ratio between plasmonic and latex NPs is needed to improve both sensitivity and dynamic range of immuno-turbidimetric assays.
For a direct comparison with the FDTD method, it can be concluded that one of the shortcomings of DDA is that the actual array of nanoparticles (for example, in solar cell configuration) cannot be simulated. It works robustly in individual nanoparticles or two-particle systems and is usually more efficient and faster than FDTD.

Available packages for DDA simulation. 
Most of the DDA approach works used a freely available open-source software called DDSCAT©, based on FORTRAN.115 However, other versions of DDSCAT have been developed, such as DDA with surface interactions (called DDA-SI)116 or the vectorized version of DDA-SI (DDA-SI-v)117 and DDA-SI-z.118

4 Finite-element method (FEM)
The FEM discretizes the object of interest into thousands of tiny uniform or non-uniform mesh elements (Fig. 13) to discretize the Helmholtz’ wave equations (eqn (8) and (9)) in space: ∇2E + k2E = 0(8) ∇2H + k2H = 0(9)
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of a meshed nanostructure before (left side) and after (right side) numerical simulation of electric field distribution using the FEM. 
These equations are solved numerically for each element to find the satisfying fields in the pre-defined boundary conditions. The material parameters could be set via the wavevector equation (eqn (10)): k2(r) = ω2ε(r)μ(r)/c2(10)
The process is finished as the H and E field gradient between adjacent elements reaches a specific criterion. The FEM simulation can be performed in one, two, or three dimensions, even with complex geometrical features. The mesh refinement process is critical, especially in geometries with special features. The main difference between the FEM and FDTD method is that the FEM is capable of dividing the computational domain into elements of any shape. This feature is highly desired in simulating complex geometries where the FDTD method suffers from the stair-casing problem due to the cubical nature of the elements. The FEM could be exploited to calculate both near- and far-field optical properties. Scattering and perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary conditions are often used for single nanostructures. The dielectric constants of materials can be easily inserted as a file containing numbers in the (x, y) format (such as the Lorentz–Drude dispersion model).
The potential applications of the FEM for the numerical simulation of optical properties in plasmonic nanostructures were discussed in the following sections.
4-1 Simulation of near-field and far-field optical properties
Most of the efforts with the FEM were implemented for the simulation of waveguides in the field of nano-optics for the determination of loss, dispersion, and electromagnetic field distributions. However, the optical properties of single or hybridized plasmonic nanostructures were also simulated using the FEM. The main advantage of the FEM for this application is that the model's actual geometry can be used for the simulation, and no simplification is needed.
For instance, nanogaps’ effect on the plasmonic behavior of metallic nanoparticle dimers was studied using the FEM.119 According to the obtained results (Fig. 14(a)), the gap size has a minimum effect on the near-field enhancement factor but significantly affected the near-field resonance shift. The same team performed another optimization using the FEM for the near-field enhancement in the nanoparticle-on-mirror (NPOM) system.120 Rahaman and Kemp121 simulated the plasmonic resonances of Ag-dielectric core–shell nanostructures. According to their reports, the core-to-shell ratio and the distance between nanoparticles play a vital role in the near-field enhancement. Johannsen and colleagues122 used finite element analysis to model the up-conversion enhancement in an Er3+ doped TiO2 thin film that resulted from Ag plasmonic nanostructures (Fig. 14(b)). Such pre-experiment simulation helped to find the correct configuration for maximum up-conversion enhancement numerically. The FEM results were inconsistent with the experiments, and a 160-fold up-conversion enhancement was obtained using this optimization. Grand and Ru123 worked on the validity of FEM results in comparison with analytical methods. According to their study, the type of PML and the mesh size used for the modeling significantly affect the result.
 Fig. 14  Panel (a) shows the FEM calculated local electric field (upper panel) and extinction cross-section (bottom panel) of 60 nm Ag nanospheres with the interparticle distance of ‘g’. Panel (b) shows the model's structure for the up-conversion enhancement in an Er3+ doped TiO2 thin film using plasmonic Ag nanostructures. The microscopy image shows the actual sample fabricated with the optimal values of parameters. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 119 and 121. 
Emma Marlow simulated the plasmonic resonance of gold nanorod arrays in different conditions (spacing, height, and diameter).124 An enhancement factor up to 20 was obtained for specific arrangements, and the obtained data were in agreement with the experiments. The ability of the well-known Turkevich method for the synthesis of alloyed nanoparticles was studied in depth by Blommaerts and colleagues using finite element analysis.125 The FEM results revealed that the synthesized Au–Ag alloyed NPs are not perfectly 50:50 but rather an alloy with gradually altering the composition. Cesca et al.126 simulated how plasmonic resonances of the Ag–Au bilayered prismatic alloy changed with the composition. According to the obtained results, by simply changing the Au fraction (Fig. 15), the maximum enhancement factor could reach 600 and 260 for dipole and quadrupole plasmon resonances, respectively.
 Fig. 15  Panel (a) shows the Ag–Au bilayered prismatic alloy designed geometry for the local field enhancement of electromagnetic field. Panel (b) shows the microscopy image of the configuration and the FEM results obtained for the maximum local field enhancement of the Ag0.5Au0.5 alloy. Panel (c) shows the effect of Au fraction on the intensity of dipole and quadrupole peaks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. 
The LSPR effect of randomly distributed AuNP arrays was studied on the up-conversion emission of the Gd2O3:Er3+/Yb3+ film.127 According to the simulated electric field distribution using the FEM, it was revealed that the absorption band of metal NPs should match the emission wavelength of UCNPs for a significant enhancement. Ali and colleagues128 worked on broadband perfect absorbers by incorporating Mxene Ti3C2Tx (Tx = –F, –O or –OH) and gold nanoparticles (NPs) in the metal–insulator–metal configuration (Fig. 16(a)). The FEM simulation results perfectly matched the experimental data, and the prepared composite can absorb nearly 100% of the wavelengths in the range of 300–1800 nm. Tiwari et al.129 studied Au–Ag bimetallic nanostructures’ optical properties with different shapes (sphere, triangle, and star) using the FEM. According to the obtained data, the electric field intensity enhancement on the surface of bimetallic nanostructures can vary widely according to the nanostructure's composition and shape. Xing et al.130 used the FEM to predict the most possible geometric configuration in the synthesis of hollow Ag/Au nanoparticles among shell-to-core, core-to-shell, and off-center core-to-shell structures (Fig. 16(b)). According to the obtained results, the off-center core-to-shell NPs (case c) may lead to the most significant electric field enhancement factor. A similar simulation was performed for the Cu–Ag bimetallic system using finite element analysis to investigate the effect of different arrangements.131
 Fig. 16  Panel (a) shows a schematic illustration from the designed absorber structure. Absorbance plots show the measured and calculated optical response of the heterostructure for absorbing the electromagnetic radiation in the range of 300–1800 nm. Panel (b) shows the electric field enhancement of Au–Ag bimetallic nanospheres, nanoshells, nanoprisms, and nanostars. The geometrical dimension for each structure is mentioned in each plot. There is three possible geometries for the products of the reaction between Ag and HAuCl4; case a: shell-to-core, case b: core-to-shell, and case c: off-center core-to-shell structure. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 128 and 130. 
Chen et al.132 used the finite element method for a transparent screen design process using Au–Ag nanoparticles. The optical parameters were first optimized numerically to achieve strong scattering with green, red, and blue colors. After the numerical investigation, the NPs with the determined size and geometry were synthesized and used. The main positive point of the FEM for simulation of scattering or absorption cross-sections in comparison with other methods is the simple and friendly graphical user interface (GUI). Also, any arbitrary shape can be designed, meshed, and studied, which can be frustrating in DDA.
4-2 Simulation of fluorescence and solar cell efficiency enhancement
Seker et al.133 simulated the fluorescence enhancement from Rh-6G fluorophore in the presence of Au-capped Si nanowires using finite element analysis. Both experimental and theoretical results showed a direct relationship between the fluorescence enhancement and the distance between AuNPs and Rh-6G fluorophore. Zhang et al.134 simulated GaAs plasmonic solar cells’ quantum efficiency in the presence of Au and Ag spherical and cylindrical nanostructures using the finite element method. It was observed that spherical AgNPs are recommended for photoelectrical enhancement, while cylindrical Ag and Au nanoparticles showed better performance for photothermal augmentation. Au/SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles’ effect on the performance of perovskite light-emitting diodes (PeLEDs) was studied using the FEM.135 The plasmonic Au/SiO2 nanoparticles enhanced the radiative recombination rate of PeLEDs four times by carefully designing the optimum core to shell ratio. Jabeen used the FEM to simulate plasmonic nanostructures’ effect to optimize the thin-film solar cell efficiency.136 According to the obtained results, by embedding the Ag and Au nanostructures in the configuration of thin-film solar cells, a substantial enhancement was observed in optical absorption, which leads to the enhanced power efficiency of thin-film solar cells. A similar FEM simulation study was performed using AgNPs to enhance silicon-based thin-film solar cells.137 Cao et al.138 studied the effect of plasmonic NPs on the absorption enhancement of organic solar cells using finite element analysis. According to this systematic study, the Ag nano-cone geometry possessed the highest optical absorption enhancement in a wide wavelength range. Al nanoparticles’ ability to enhance the optical properties of perovskite thin films was simulated using finite element analysis.139 In this study, Chen and colleagues showed that by tuning the size, array period, position, and the shell material, Al nanoparticles are able to improve the optical efficiency of perovskite thin films even better than well-known Ag and Au nanoparticles. Chen and colleagues140 investigated the coupled plasmon resonances of Au thorn nanoparticles using the FEM for possible applications as solar absorbers (Fig. 17). According to the obtained data (Fig. 17), the radius of the sphere, the length, and number of thorns showed a significant effect on the absorption cross section of the nanostructure.
 Fig. 17  Panel (a) shows the structural parameters and the optical properties of Au nanothorns compared with Au nanospheres. Panel (b) shows the modeled geometry of six and eighteen thorn nanoparticles and their absorption and scattering cross-sections calculated using the FEM. The bottom row shows the electric field enhancement of eighteen thorns at different wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. 
The role of Au plasmonic nanoparticles in enhancing the efficiency of organic solar cells was investigated by Zarei and Emami using the FEM.141 It was revealed that by incorporating the Au@TiO2 nanostructures into organic solar cells, a 25% improvement could be achieved.
4-3 Simulation of photocatalytic activity, sensing ability, and SERS enhancement
In another study, the effect of local enhancement from multi-layered Au nanospheres and Au nanorods on SPR fiber sensors’ sensitivity was modeled using the FEM.142 The electrical field enhancement of Al octopods, nanocubes, and nanocrystals (Fig. 18(a)) was simulated by Yuan et al.143 using the FEM. The obtained data revealed that these nanostructures’ photocatalytic activity strongly depends on their electric field distribution on the outer surface of the NPs. Scarano et al.144 used the FEM in the design process of a gold nanoparticles-embedded in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film as a potential RI-based sensor. Xie et al.145 studied the SERS activity of TiO2 nanorods decorated with AuNPs using finite element analysis. The simulation results revealed that the hot spots between AuNPs are responsible for this SERS activity and could reach the maximum value of 104 in hat-capped nanorod configurations (Fig. 18(b)). The plasmonic resonances of boron phosphide (BP) were simulated in the boron phosphide/graphitic carbon nitride (BP@g-C3N4) composite using the FEM with promising applications in photocatalysis.146
 Fig. 18  Panel (a) shows the electric field enhancement of Al octopods (top row), Al nanocubes (middle row), and Al nanocrystals (bottom row) calculated using the FEM at 450 nm, 550 nm, and 750 nm excitation wavelengths. Panel (b) shows the variation of the electromagnetic field at hotspots in TiO2 nanorods decorated with AuNPs with different configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 and 145. 
Chou Chau et al.147 tuned the electric field distribution and the enhancement factor for Ag and dielectric nanosphere/nanorod arrays using the FEM. The proposed structure (Fig. 19) showed promising applications as a RI sensor with a sensitivity of 500 nm per RIU ability. In another study, the silica shell's effect on the surface-enhanced Raman scattering and Ag nanoparticles’ fluorescence was comprehensively studied using the FEM.148 The obtained data revealed that the Ag@SiO2 dimers provide better hot spots in comparison with bare Ag dimers. A maximum SERS enhancement of 109 could be obtained using Ag@SiO2 dimers. Huang and colleagues149 showed how small morphology variations affect the dimer hotspots. In the light of this study, it is clear why SERS substrates often provide poor reproducibility. In another study, Hassan and colleagues150 used the FEM to simulate niobium nanofilm's optical properties as a potential refractive index sensor. The ability of the proposed sensor to work in a wide range of wavelengths (780–1000 nm) and the configuration parameters were optimized using the finite element method.
 Fig. 19  Panel (a) shows the nanosphere/nanorod plasmonic nanostructures’ geometrical parameters designed for a refractive index sensor. Panel (b) shows the electric field intensity distribution in x–y and y–z planes using 670 nm excitation wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. 
4-4 Simulation of catalysis activity and bio-related application
In another study, plasmonic–magnetic hybrid nanostructures were synthesized and studied for possible applications as nanoheaters.151 The near-field optical properties of hybrid nanostructures were simulated using the FEM, in which a maximum enhancement factor of 20 was observed (Fig. 20(a)). The enhanced electric field resulting from plasmonic nanostructures conjugated with magnetic dipoles showed synergistic effects on the hybrid structure's amount of heat dissipated.
 Fig. 20  Panel (a) shows the designed geometry used in FEM studies and the obtained near-field enhancement generated at the excitation wavelength of 515 nm and 860 nm. Panel (b) shows the local electric field distribution (upper row) and local heating power distribution (bottom row) of Ag@Ag and Ag@Pd nanostructures obtained from FEM simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 and 155. 
Manrique-Bedoya et al. simulated the highly localized heating in Au nanostructures for plasmonic photothermal therapy (PPTT) applications.152 It was observed that the plasmonic excitation of Au nanorods increased the local temperature up to 100 °C while 37 °C can be obtained using Au spherical NPs. A similar simulation was performed by Elhoussaine et al.153 for the PPTT application of gold nanorods. Self-assembled 2D structures from Ag and AuNPs were evaluated for their tunable localized surface plasmon resonance using finite element analysis.154 The LSPR of these structures can be tuned from the visible to the mid-IR regions. Xu et al.155 modeled the Ag@Pd core–shell nanocubes as a potential catalyst for efficient ammonia borane hydrolysis. The Pd shell's effect with different thicknesses on the plasmonic property and charge density of the plasmonic nanostructure was thoroughly investigated using the FEM (Fig. 20(b)).
In another study, the simulation of magneto-plasmonic nanostars with possible applications in image-guided and NIR-triggered drug delivery was conducted using the FEM.156 A unique multipolar surface plasmon mode of the MNP@Au nanostars was demonstrated from simulation results (Fig. 21(a)). In another study, Debu and colleagues157 successfully modeled the local electric fields and 3D surface charge distributions at near-field resonance peaks of plasmonic hetero-dimmers. It was also inferred that the gap size plays a vital role in the intensity of plasmon coupling (Fig. 21(b)).
 Fig. 21  Panel (a) shows the FEM simulated absorption spectra of magneto-plasmonic nanostars and the charge distribution in a magneto-plasmonic nanostar at the resonance wavelength. Panel (b), the top row shows the local electric field distribution of Au–Ag heterodimers at the excitation wavelength of 660 nm, 470 nm, and 370 nm. The bottom row shows the charge distribution on the surface of NPs simulated using the finite element method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 and 157. 
Chen et al.158 successfully controlled the local heating of plasmonic AuNPs using a finite element approach. Different configurations of nanoparticles and light sources were investigated, and the multi-layered Au shell configuration was suggested for possible use in photothermal applications. Chen et al.159 numerically investigated the light absorption and heating of Ag, Au, Cu, and Al plasmonic nanoparticles. According to the FEM results, Au nanocubes obtain a higher maximum temperature than other plasmonic nanoparticles and other Au nanostructures. As mentioned earlier, any anisotropic shape can be modeled using the FEM, of course with high computational cost.
4-5 Waveguide simulation
The evolution of plasmonic modes in a silver nanowire deposited on a substrate was studied using FEM simulation by Ghosh et al.160 In another study, the propagation length, spatial length, and electromagnetic field profile of the graphene and noble metal waveguides were simulated and compared by finite element analysis.161 Butt and colleagues162 designed a plasmonic refractive index sensor based on metal–insulator–metal waveguides using the finite element method. The structural parameters were optimized using the FEM, and a sensitivity of 1367 nm per RIU was obtained. Similar teams have another report on the design of a highly integrated plasmonic sensor based on waveguides to detect multiple analytes using finite element analysis.163 Hameed et al.164 designed a highly sensitive hybrid plasmonic slot-waveguide biosensor capable of detecting DNA hybridization using the full vectorial finite element method.

Available packages for FEM simulation. 
Commercially available COMSOL Multiphysics© software is the most implemented package for FEM simulation of plasmonic nanostructures.165 However, other software are also available and rarely used for this purpose: JCMsuite,166 HFSS,167 and TiberCAD.168

5 Boundary element method (BEM)
The BEM was first introduced to the plasmonic community by Garcia de Abajo and Howie.169 The electromagnetic field is expressed as a function of charge density and current density on the particle's surface (Fig. 22). The continuity of the tangential components of the electric and magnetic fields serves as the boundary conditions in the surface-integral system. Garcia de Abajo and Howie have shown that the discretization of the surface integrals at the boundary using a set of N representative points makes it possible to find the solutions for the arbitrary particle shapes. Boundary discretization decreases the computational costs while increasing the ability to consider the geometry's details.170,171 The dielectric constants should be inserted as data tables in the beginning of the simulation. In the following sections, the most recent efforts on using the BEM to simulate plasmonic nanostructures’ optical properties are presented and discussed.
 Fig. 22  The boundary element method discretizing the boundary between the plasmonic nanostructure and the dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. 
5-1 Simulation of near-field and far-field optical properties
For instance, Womiloju et al.172 simulated the optical properties of Au@Ag core–shell nanostructures using the BEM in different configurations. As shown in Fig. 23, the prism@prism structure shows maximum far-field scattering in comparison with other structures.
 Fig. 23  Calculated scattering cross-section of Au@Ag NPs using the BEM for spherical core–spherical core (top row), spherical core–prism shell (middle row), and prism–prism configurations (bottom row). Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. 
Shiri and Akbarian173 used the boundary element method to map the cathodoluminescence emission from the silver nanodimers (crescent-shaped). According to the obtained results, a 48% enhancement in Purcell factor was obtained inside the gap in comparison with a single spherical nanocrescent (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of Ag nanodimer simulation using the BEM. Normalized radiative decay rate map of the x-oriented (otherwise mentioned) dipoles at different wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. 
Mousavi et al.174 simulated the surface plasmon resonance of wrinkled gold structures using the BEM. According to the obtained data, short-wavelength nano features have a relatively more significant effect than the long-wavelength micro-sized features present in the wrinkles. De Marchi and colleagues175 used the BEM to simulate the optical properties of Pd nanoparticles. The simulation results revealed that when the size of Pd, Ag, and Au NPs increased from 30 nm to 120 nm, Pd exhibited the largest red-shift among other metallic nanoparticles (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Simulated optical properties of Pd, Ag, and Au nanoparticles using the BEM. Panel (a) shows the extinction efficiency of Pd NPs in different sizes. Panels (b–d) show Pd, Ag, and Au nanoparticles’ optical cross-sections in 30 nm and 120 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. 
Lyu et al.176 employed the BEM as a co-characterization technique during the kinetic study of surfactant-stabilized gold nanoparticles. The particle configuration during the reaction was evaluated based on the degree of fitting with numerical results obtained by the BEM. Fitria et al.177 investigated the influence of gap spacing in Ag nanorods’ LSPR spectra with end-to-end assembly using the boundary element method. The BEM results revealed that by decreasing the gap spacing, the transverse LSPR peak blue-shifted to lower wavelengths while the longitudinal mode red-shifted to higher wavelengths. A similar team conducted another study on the side by side configuration coupled Ag nanorods (Fig. 26(a)).178 Ahmad179 used the boundary element method to simulate the effect of the core–shell size ratio of Au@Ag nanostructures. The far-field and near-field simulation revealed that the optimum core–shell size ratio for the maximum field enhancement was 50%. Several studies used the BEM to simulate the absorption and scattering spectra of individual or dimer plasmonic nanostructures in pure or alloyed compositions.180–183 Marcheselli et al.184 calculated the optical extinction of gold bipyramids using the BEM and proved that the BEM approach gave more accurate results than DDA in this specific geometry. Fig. 26(b) shows the experimental and computed LSPR absorption maxima of gold bipyramids. Dall’Osto et al.185 expanded the frequency domain BEM to include nanoparticles’ time-dependent polarization. Using this approach, it is possible to simulate the real-time dynamics of plasmonic resonances in nanoparticles. The obtained results were in good agreement with those of the conventional frequency domain BEM (Fig. 26(c)).
 Fig. 26  Panel (a) shows the Ag nanorod's electric field distribution (aspect ratio = 3) in different modes and different distances. Panel (b), the top row shows the experimental and numerical results obtained for gold nanobipyramids in different aspect ratios. The bottom row shows gold nanobipyramids with different geometrical features used for BEM simulations. Panel (c) shows optical extinction comparison between analytical and BEM results for Au nanospheres and Au nanoellipsoids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, 184 and 185. 
The main advantage of the BEM is the low computational cost needed for the simulation of optical cross-sections in the case of individual nanoparticles or nanodimers. Surface discretization provides the BEM with robustness for this kind of simulation. However, in complex problems, the surface parametrization is frustrating and reduces the applicability of this method.
5-2 Simulation of SERS and solar cell enhancement
Plasmonic nanostructures’ ability to enhance the absorption of solar energy for direct-absorption solar collector (DASC) applications was investigated using the BEM.186 Different geometries of SiO2@Ag with sharp edges (from two edges to six edges) were assessed for their absorption efficiency. It was revealed that the sharp edges play an important role in generating multiple absorption peaks. Also, the higher number of edges does not necessarily result in higher absorption efficiency. Pastorello and colleagues187 used the BEM to investigate the SERS activity of Au@Ag nanostructures. These rod-shaped core–shell nanostructures showed promising results for the SERS determination of 4-aminobenzothiol (4-ABT) even in low concentrations. Different configurations of Au@Ag rod-shaped nanostructures were investigated numerically using the BEM, and it was inferred that the symmetric structure resulted in more SERS enhancement compared with asymmetric nanostructures. A blended plasmonic nanofluid's ability to be used in a direct-absorption solar collector was numerically studied using the BEM.188 In this study, nanospheres, nanorods, and core–shell nanoparticles made from Ag, Au, and SiO2 were simulated to obtain an ideal recipe with a broad absorption cross-section (Fig. 27). Horak and colleagues189 studied the localized surface plasmon resonance of Ag–Hg alloyed nanoparticles using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). According to the obtained data, the longitudinal dipole, transverse dipole, and quadrupole resonance modes occurred at 1.77 eV, 2.8 eV, and 3.2 eV, respectively. The numerical studies using the BEM showed similar results for the LSPR peaks.
 Fig. 27  Panel (a) shows the spherical, core–shell, and rod-shaped geometries of metallic and dielectric nanostructures used for BEM simulations. The spectra show the absorption coefficient of the blended plasmonic nanofluid in comparison with the solar spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. 

Available packages for BEM simulation. 
Nearly all of the BEM simulations for optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures were performed using an open-source Matlab toolbox called MNPBEM, which offers a straightforward approach to plasmonic NP simulation.190–192

6 Other approaches
So far, DDA, FDTD, FEM, and BEM approaches were presented and discussed in this paper. It should be mentioned that there are also other methods for optical property simulation of plasmonic nanostructures; e.g. transition matrix (T-matrix) and methods of moments (MoM), to name a few. The principle of MoM as an integral equation model is based on the use of Green's functions to solve the surface or volume integrals on the surface of the system of interest. This means that the entire unknown volume is not taken into consideration and only the induced sources on the boundary of the desired object are studied. This methodology reduces the computation time and is highly efficient for scattering calculation in an anisotropic nanostructure. However, for the cases where Green's functions are not available such as anisotropic materials and complex problems this method is less efficient.193 T-matrix is based on the multipole expansions of the electromagnetic fields and was originally developed for simple shapes such as homogeneous spheroids.194 This method works efficiently for simulating the light scattering from the aggregated spherical particles and it has been extended to particles located near substrates, layered particles, and other complex particle clusters. The main drawback of this method is that the T-matrix method is limited to the spherical systems. A comprehensive review on the use of T-matrix in plasmonic nanostructures can be found here.195
7 Conclusion and future prospects
Analytical methods cannot capture nanostructures’ optical properties with arbitrary geometries; hence, different numerical approaches have been developed. In this review paper, the theory of FDTD, DDA, FEM, and BEM approaches was revisited, followed by the most recent applications of each simulation method in different fields. It is discussed how these simulation methods could be implemented in the pre-design process of a plasmon-enhanced solar-cell, photodynamic therapy, or SERS detection. From a comparison point of view, accurate results can be obtained from all of the mentioned methods if proper boundary conditions and discretization are used. However, the BEM has the advantages of being fast (less than 2 min for a spherical nanoparticle), low computational cost, and low storage demand even though the parametrization is complex in this method. The DDA approach is also privileged from being fast and simple. FEM and FDTD methods provide simple implementation by an appropriate graphical user interface but need a significant memory and time. As can be seen, all of these methods have their advantages and limits, but they have solid applications if used appropriately. Additional studies are needed to overcome these limitations; for instance, in specific geometries (with sharp edges), DDA does not converge, and the BEM is suggested.196 Also, the DDA method's involved parameters may play a crucial role in the convergence of the results. For example, appropriate dipole distance may overcome the convergence issues,197 or correct crystallographic structures as the input data198 may help obtain accurate results. Overall, the simulation of plasmonic nanostructures’ optical properties opens a new avenue for the accurate design of optoelectronic devices with optimal properties. Another important issue in practical application of computational electromagnetics is the non-ideal factors such as non-periodicity, size distribution, and non-perfect shapes. The final nanostructures received from a synthesis batch are not necessarily mono-dispersed in size/shape, so this should be considered for a perfect simulation of the system. One can easily address these factors by considering a weighted-average between the obtained results. For instance, the absorption spectrum of a nanostructure system with the size distribution can be modeled using a post-simulation weighted-average between the obtained absorbance values of each size. This strategy can be used in all of the discussed techniques; however, the efficiency and computational time of each method should be considered for such tasks. In this decade, plasmonic nanostructures face emerging applications in different optoelectronic devices; hence the simulation studies will become the center of attention. In order to compare the studied methods, the key advantages and disadvantages of each method are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 A comprehensive summary of the advantages and disadvantages of the discussed methods for the simulation of plasmonic nanoparticles’ optical properties




Method
Computation time for a simple spherical system
Advantages
Disadvantages




FDTD
Long – more than 180 minutes to cover all of the visible region wavelengths
• More adapted to spectroscopic studies
• The wavefront suffers from ‘stair casing’




• Useful for nonlinear materials and broadband simulations
• Time-consuming when the mesh is dense




• Useful for any arbitrary shaped structure




FEM
Long – the time highly depends on the mesh size but usually more than 2 minutes for each wavelength
• Useful for evaluating the scattered field distribution of any arbitrary shaped structure
• The whole volume is discretized






• Time-consuming


BEM
Rapid – only the boundary is discretized
• Low computational and storage demand
• Complex parameterization of the boundary elements


DDA
Moderate – the time highly depends on the number of dipoles but usually below 1 min for each wavelength
• Useful for any arbitrary shaped structure
• Not convenient to simulate periodic arrays of particles






• Unable to simulate high-aspect ratio or elongated structures




Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare. 
Acknowledgements
Amirmostafa Amirjani is thankful to Iran National Elites Foundation for the received fund. The Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) general support is gratefully acknowledged. The authors wish to dedicate this paper to Martyr Hasan Bagheri.
References
E. Frankel, Corpuscular Optics and the Wave Theory of Light: The Science and Politics of a Revolution in Physics, Social Studies of Science, 2016, 6(2), 141–184,  DOI:10.1177/030631277600600201 .

          G. Jaeger, Double-Slit Experiment (or Two-Slit Experiment), Compendium Quantum Phys.,  2009, pp. 174–178. DOI:10.1007/978-3-540-70626-7_56 .
A. Amirjani and D. F. Haghshenas, Facile and on-line colorimetric detection of Hg(2+) based on localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of Ag nanotriangles, Talanta, 2019, 192, 418–423,  DOI:10.1016/j.talanta.2018.09.079 .
A. Amirjani and D. H. Fatmehsari, Colorimetric detection of ammonia using smartphones based on localized surface plasmon resonance of silver nanoparticles, Talanta, 2018, 176, 242–246,  DOI:10.1016/j.talanta.2017.08.022 .
A. Amirjani, 
            et al., Colorimetric determination of Timolol concentration based on localized surface plasmon resonance of silver nanoparticles, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27(37), 375503,  DOI:10.1088/0957-4484/27/37/375503 .
A. Amirjani, 
            et al., Label-free surface plasmon resonance detection of hydrogen peroxide; a bio-inspired approach, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 227, 373–382,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2015.12.062 .
N. Namazi Koochak, 
            et al., Detection of Cobalt Ion Based on Surface Plasmon Resonance of L-Cysteine Functionalized Silver Nanotriangles, Plasmonics, 2020, 16(2), 315–322,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01289-2 .
S. Daneshvar e Asl and S. K. Sadrnezhaad, Gold@Silver@Gold Core Double-Shell Nanoparticles: Synthesis and Aggregation-Enhanced Two-Photon Photoluminescence Evaluation, Plasmonics, 2019, 15(2), 409–416,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-019-01041-5 .
Y.-C. Chen, 
            et al., Photocatalytic enhancement of hydrogen production in water splitting under simulated solar light by band gap engineering and localized surface plasmon resonance of ZnxCd1−xS nanowires decorated by Au nanoparticles, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104225,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.104225 .
X. L. Zhou, 
            et al., Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy: From Single-Molecule Sensing to Single-Cell Imaging, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(5), 1776–1785,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201908806 .
A. Amirjani, N. N. Koochak and D. F. Haghshenas, Synthesis of silver nanotriangles with tunable edge length: a promising candidate for light harvesting purposes within visible and near–infrared ranges, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 6(3), 036204,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/aaf624 .
A. Amirjani, 
            et al., (Invited) Plasmon Induced Near-infrared Fluorescence Enhancement of Single-walled Carbon Nanotubes, ECS Meeting Abstracts, 2020, MA2020-01(8), 743,  DOI:10.1149/MA2020-018743mtgabs .
R. Collette, 
            et al., Near field excited state imaging via stimulated electron energy gain spectroscopy of localized surface plasmon resonances in plasmonic nanorod antennas, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 12537,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-69066-z .
M. Bockova, 
            et al., Advances in Surface Plasmon Resonance Imaging and Microscopy and Their Biological Applications, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2019, 12(1), 151–176,  DOI:10.1146/annurev-anchem-061318-115106 .
C. Liu, 
            et al., A critical review of advances in surface plasmon resonance imaging sensitivity, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2017, 97, 354–362,  DOI:10.1016/j.trac.2017.10.001 .
A. Amirjani, N. N. Koochak and D. F. Haghshenas, Investigating the Shape and Size-Dependent Optical Properties of Silver Nanostructures Using UV-vis Spectroscopy, J. Chem. Educ., 2019, 96(11), 2584–2589,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00559 .
A. Amirjani and D. F. Haghshenas, Ag nanostructures as the surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-based sensors: a mechanistic study with an emphasis on heavy metallic ions detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1768–1779,  DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2018.07.089 .
A. Amirjani and E. Rahbarimehr, Recent advances in functionalization of plasmonic nanostructures for optical sensing, Mikrochim. Acta, 2021, 188(2), 57,  DOI:10.1007/s00604-021-04714-3 .
A. Amirjani, F. Firouzi and D. F. Haghshenas, Predicting the Size of Silver Nanoparticles from Their Optical Properties, Plasmonics, 2020, 15(4), 1077–1082,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01121-x .
A. Trugler, Optical Properties of Metallic Nanoparticles, Springer Ser. Mater. Sci., 2016 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-25074-8 .
Y. Kane, Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving Maxwell's equations in isotropic media, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 1966, 14(3), 302–307,  DOI:10.1109/tap.1966.1138693 .
C. Tira, 
            et al., Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) design of gold nanoparticle chains with specific surface plasmon resonance, J. Mol. Struct., 2014, 1072, 137–143,  DOI:10.1016/j.molstruc.2014.04.086 .
Y. Wu and P. Nordlander, Finite-Difference Time-Domain Modeling of the Optical Properties of Nanoparticles near Dielectric Substrates, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114(16), 7302–7307,  DOI:10.1021/jp908980d .
V. Devaraj, J. M. Lee and J. W. Oh, Distinguishable Plasmonic Nanoparticle and Gap Mode Properties in a Silver Nanoparticle on a Gold Film System Using Three-Dimensional FDTD Simulations, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(8), 582,  DOI:10.3390/nano8080582 .
G.-Y. Yao, Q.-L. Liu and Z.-Y. Zhao, Studied Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Effects of Au Nanoparticles on TiO2 by FDTD Simulations, Catalysts, 2018, 8(6), 236,  DOI:10.3390/catal8060236 .
R. J. Hermann and M. J. Gordon, Quantitative comparison of plasmon resonances and field enhancements of near-field optical antennae using FDTD simulations, Opt. Express, 2018, 26(21), 27668–27682,  DOI:10.1364/OE.26.027668 .
Z. Mu, 
            et al., FDTD modeling of photonic crystal-incorporated gold nanoparticles for enhancing the localized electric field, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(37), 9540–9544,  10.1039/c7tc03668j .
V. S. Gerasimov, 
            et al., Engineering mode hybridization in regular arrays of plasmonic nanoparticles embedded in 1D photonic crystal, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2019, 224, 303–308,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2018.11.028 .

          L. Zhang, FDTD Algorithm for Plasmonic Nanoparticles with Spatial Dispersion, MSc thesis, Ohio State University, 2016.
A. S. M. Mohsin and M. B. Salim, Probing the Plasmon Coupling, Quantum Yield, and Effects of Tip Geometry of Gold Nanoparticle Using Analytical Models and FDTD Simulation, IEEE Photonics J., 2018, 10(3), 1,  DOI:10.1109/jphot.2018.2825435 .
A. Gapska, 
            et al., Au-Si plasmonic platforms: synthesis, structure and FDTD simulations, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 2599–2608,  DOI:10.3762/bjnano.9.241 .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., FDTD simulation of the optical properties for a gold nanoparticle-over-nanosheet hybrid structure, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20(3), 391–399,  DOI:10.1016/j.cap.2019.12.005 .
J. Abed, 
            et al., Investigation of Broadband Surface Plasmon Resonance of Dewetted Au Structures on TiO2 by Aperture-Probe SNOM and FDTD Simulations, Plasmonics, 2018, 14(1), 205–218,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-018-0794-3 .
A. P. Betancourt, 
            et al., Scalable and stable silica-coated silver nanoparticles, produced by electron beam evaporation and rapid thermal annealing, for plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis, Catal. Commun., 2021, 149, 106213,  DOI:10.1016/j.catcom.2020.106213 .
S. Goetz, 
            et al., Ultrathin sputter-deposited plasmonic silver nanostructures, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2(2), 869–877,  10.1039/c9na00762h .

          I. I. Kon, A. Y. Zyubin and I. G. Samusev, FDTD simulations of local plasmonic fields for gold surfaces fabricated by femtosecond laser ablation method, 2020, vol. 11554 DOI:10.1117/12.2575387.
Y. Gao, 
            et al., Plasmon-Enhanced Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiency Beyond 21%: The Asynchronous Synergistic Effect of Water and Gold Nanorods, ChemPlusChem, 2021, 86(2), 291–297,  DOI:10.1002/cplu.202000792 .
L. Feng, 
            et al., Recent Advances of Plasmonic Organic Solar Cells: Photophysical Investigations, Polymers, 2018, 10(2), 123,  DOI:10.3390/polym10020123 .
G. Singh and S. S. Verma, Enhanced efficiency of thin film GaAs solar cells with plasmonic metal nanoparticles, Energy Sources, Part A, 2017, 40(2), 155–162,  DOI:10.1080/15567036.2017.1407840 .
G. Singh and S. S. Verma, Design and analysis of thin film GaAs solar cells using silver nanoparticle plasmons, Photonics and Nanostructures: Fundamentals and Applications, 2019, 37, 100731,  DOI:10.1016/j.photonics.2019.100731 .

          J. D. A. H. K. Rouf, Absorption Enhancement in Thin-Film Silicon Solar Cell using Plasmonic Nanoparticles, 2018, pp. 1–4 DOI:10.1109/IC4ME2.2018.8465486.
A. A. Tabrizi and A. Pahlavan, Efficiency improvement of a silicon-based thin-film solar cell using plasmonic silver nanoparticles and an antireflective layer, Opt. Commun., 2020, 454, 124437,  DOI:10.1016/j.optcom.2019.124437 .

          S. Sreeja, S. Prabhakaran and B. Pesala, Efficiency Enhancement of Betanin Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Using Plasmon-Enhanced Silver Nanoparticles, Advances in Energy Research,  2020, vol. 1 DOI:10.1007/978-981-15-2666-4_2 .
S. Sreeja and B. Pesala, Plasmonic enhancement of betanin–lawsone co-sensitized solar cells via tailored bimodal size distribution of silver nanoparticles, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 8240,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-65236-1 .
I. Vangelidis, 
            et al., Plasmonic Organic Photovoltaics: Unraveling Plasmonic Enhancement for Realistic Cell Geometries, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5(4), 1440–1452,  DOI:10.1021/acsphotonics.7b01390 .
S. Sreeja and B. Pesala, Efficiency Enhancement of Betanin–Chlorophyll Cosensitized Natural Pigment Solar Cells Using Plasmonic Effect of Silver Nanoparticles, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2020, 10(1), 124–134,  DOI:10.1109/jphotov.2019.2953399 .
A. Ciesielski, K. M. Czajkowski and D. Switlik, Silver nanoparticles in organic photovoltaics: Finite size effects and optimal concentration, Sol. Energy, 2019, 184, 477–488,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2019.04.015 .
S. Royanian, A. Abdolahzadeh Ziabari and R. Yousefi, Efficiency Enhancement of Ultra-thin CIGS Solar Cells Using Bandgap Grading and Embedding Au Plasmonic Nanoparticles, Plasmonics, 2020, 15(4), 1173–1182,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01138-2 .
R. Irandoost and S. Soleimani-Amiri, Design and analysis of high efficiency perovskite solar cell with ZnO nanorods and plasmonic nanoparticles, Optik, 2020, 202, 163598,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijleo.2019.163598 .
R. Rastogi, 
            et al., Analyte Co-localization at Electromagnetic Gap Hot-Spots for Highly Sensitive (Bio)molecular Detection by Plasmon Enhanced Spectroscopies, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(7), 9113–9121,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.0c17929 .
F. Bertó-Roselló, 
            et al., 3D-FDTD modelling of optical biosensing based on gold-coated nanoporous anodic alumina, Results Phys., 2018, 11, 1008–1014,  DOI:10.1016/j.rinp.2018.10.067 .
T. S. Sheena, 
            et al., Sensitive and label-free shell isolated Ag NPs@Si architecture based SERS active substrate: FDTD analysis and in-situ cellular DNA detection, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 145955,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.145955 .
X. Luo, 
            et al., Plasmonic Gold Nanohole Array for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection of DNA Methylation, ACS Sens., 2019, 4(6), 1534–1542,  DOI:10.1021/acssensors.9b00008 .
M. Kahraman, 
            et al., Tunable Plasmonic Silver Nanodomes for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering, Plasmonics, 2017, 13(3), 785–795,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-017-0573-6 .
W. Wei, 
            et al., Improving SERS hot spots for on-site pesticide detection by combining silver nanoparticles with nanowires, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(32), 8793–8803,  10.1039/c8tc01741g .
Lumerical, Lumerical Software, 2021, available from: https://www.lumerical.com/products/fdtd/.
MeeMeep Sofware, 2021, available from: https://meep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
OptiFDTD, OptiFDTD Software, 2021, available from: https://optiwave.com/optifdtd-overview/.

          O. Software, OmniSim Software, 2020, available from: https://www.photond.com/products/omnisim.htm.

          C. Studio, CST Studio, 2021, available from: https://www.3ds.com/products-services/simulia/products/cst-studio-suite/.

          S. Atlas, Silvaco Atlas, 2020, available from: https://www.silvaco.com/products/tcad/device_simulation/atlas/atlas.html.
E. M. Purcell and C. R. Pennypacker, Scattering and Absorption of Light by Nonspherical Dielectric Grains, Astrophys. J., 1973, 186, 705–714,  DOI:10.1086/152538 .
B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, Discrete-Dipole Approximation For Scattering Calculations, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1994, 11(4), 1491–1499,  DOI:10.1364/josaa.11.001491 .
G. Mie, Beiträge zur Optik trüber Medien, speziell kolloidaler Metallösungen, Ann. Phys., 1908, 330(3), 377–445,  DOI:10.1002/andp.19083300302 .
S. Roopak, 
            et al., Numerical Simulation of Broadband Scattering by Coated and Noncoated Metal Nanostructures Using Discrete Dipole Approximation Method, Plasmonics, 2015, 11(2), 425–432,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-015-0052-x .
H. Khadem and S. H. Tavassoli, The effect of size-asymmetry of plasmonic heterodimers in surface-enhanced Raman scattering, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114(25), 251901,  DOI:10.1063/1.5096430 .
A. Demchuk, 
            et al., The Computational Studies of Plasmon Interaction, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12(1), 273,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-017-2050-8 .
R. Sharma, N. K. Pathak and R. P. Sharma, Computational Study of Plasmon Interaction in Organic Media: a Comparison Between Analytical and Numerical Model for Dimer, Plasmonics, 2018, 13(5), 1775–1784,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-018-0691-9 .
X. B. Xu, 
            et al., Discrete Dipole Approximation Simulation of Nearly Touching Plasmonic Au Dimers and Influence of Particle Shape Assembly on Optical Response, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16(1), 562–569,  DOI:10.1166/jnn.2016.10649 .
T. Dasri and A. Chingsungnoen, Surface plasmon resonance enhanced light absorption and wavelength tuneable in gold-coated iron oxide spherical nanoparticle, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 456, 368–371,  DOI:10.1016/j.jmmm.2018.02.066 .
W. Zhang, H. Ma and J. Fan, Scaling Relations of Plasmon Resonance Peak in Au@Fe3O4 Core–Shell Nanohybrids Structure, Plasmonics, 2019, 14(5), 1123–1129,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-018-00901-w .
S. Catalan-Gomez, 
            et al., Tunable plasmonic resonance of gallium nanoparticles by thermal oxidation at low temperatures, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(40), 405705,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aa8505 .
Y. Hu, 
            et al., Synthesis, Study, and Discrete Dipole Approximation Simulation of Ag–Au Bimetallic Nanostructures, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 209,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-016-1435-4 .
P. Bhatia, S. S. Verma and M. M. Sinha, Optical Properties Simulation of Magneto-Plasmonic Alloys Nanostructures, Plasmonics, 2018, 14(3), 611–622,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-018-0839-7 .
P. Bhatia, S. S. Verma and M. M. Sinha, Tunable plasmonic properties of Ag–Fe nanoparticles, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1953, 060009,  DOI:10.1063/1.5032740 .
H. Lee, 
            et al., Discrete-dipole approximation for the optical properties with morphological changes of silver nanoprism and nanosphere via galvanic reaction, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 138–141,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2017.07.130 .
R. Lv, M. Feng and W. J. Parak, Up-Conversion Luminescence Properties of Lanthanide-Gold Hybrid Nanoparticles as Analyzed with Discrete Dipole Approximation, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(12), 989,  DOI:10.3390/nano8120989 .
S. Roopak, 
            et al., Numerical Simulation of Extinction Spectra of Plasmonically Coupled Nanospheres Using Discrete Dipole Approximation: Influence of Compositional Asymmetry, Plasmonics, 2016, 11(6), 1603–1612,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-016-0216-3 .
J. J. Wei, 
            et al., Collective Surface Plasmon Resonances in Two-Dimensional Assemblies of Au and Ag Nanocrystals: Experiments and Discrete Dipole Approximation Simulation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(25), 13732–13738,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03397 .
V. Amendola, Surface plasmon resonance of silver and gold nanoparticles in the proximity of graphene studied using the discrete dipole approximation method, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(3), 2230–2241,  10.1039/c5cp06121k .
M. Haiwei, 
            et al., Optical properties of local surface plasmon resonance in Ag/ITO sliced nanosphere by the discrete dipole approximation, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122(4), 419,  DOI:10.1007/s00339-016-9954-5 .
P. Bhatia, S. S. Verma and M. M. Sinha, Tunable optical properties of Ni–Ag and Ni–Au nanoparticles in magneto-plasmonic nanostructures, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2020, 52(11), 473,  DOI:10.1007/s11082-020-02596-y .
P. Bhatia, S. S. Verma and M. M. Sinha, Tunable plasmonic properties of elongated bimetallic alloys nanoparticles towards deep UV-NIR absorbance and sensing, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 241, 106751,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2019.106751 .
A. Siabi-Garjan, S. Fakhri-Mirzanagh and Y. Azizian-Kalandaragh, The effect of poly vinyl alcohol matrix on the light absorbance of Ag2S nanoparticles; experimental and discrete dipole approximation results, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2019, 222–223, 26–34,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2018.10.018 .
F. Sun, 
            et al., Optimal aspect ratio and excitation spectral region of individual Au Ag1− alloy nanobars for plasmonic sensing, Phys. Lett. A, 2020, 384(30), 126785,  DOI:10.1016/j.physleta.2020.126785 .
V. Amendola, 
            et al., Formation of alloy nanoparticles by laser ablation of Au/Fe multilayer films in liquid environment, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 489, 18–27,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcis.2016.10.023 .
S. Scaramuzza, S. Polizzi and V. Amendola, Magnetic tuning of SERS hot spots in polymer-coated magnetic–plasmonic iron–silver nanoparticles, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1(7), 2681–2689,  10.1039/c9na00143c .
A. Tymoczko, 
            et al., One-step synthesis of Fe–Au core–shell magnetic-plasmonic nanoparticles driven by interface energy minimization, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4(6), 1326–1332,  10.1039/c9nh00332k .
Y. Gutierrez, 
            et al., How an oxide shell affects the ultraviolet plasmonic behavior of Ga, Mg, and Al nanostructures, Opt. Express, 2016, 24(18), 20621–20631,  DOI:10.1364/OE.24.020621 .
H. Pathak, 
            et al., Resonant Broadband Field Enhancement in Cylindrical Plasmonic Structure Surrounded by Perovskite Environment, Plasmonics, 2016, 12(5), 1511–1522,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-016-0413-0 .
E. Ringe, Shapes, Plasmonic Properties, and Reactivity of Magnesium Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(29), 15665–15679,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c03871 .
J. A. Arzola-Flores and A. L. González, Machine Learning for Predicting the Surface Plasmon Resonance of Perfect and Concave Gold Nanocubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(46), 25447–25454,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c05995 .
N. Hadilou, 
            et al., An optimal architecture of magneto-plasmonic core-shell nanoparticles for potential photothermal applications, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22(25), 14318–14328,  10.1039/d0cp01509a .
E. A. Kwizera, 
            et al., Size- and Shape-Controlled Synthesis and Properties of Magnetic-Plasmonic Core–Shell Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(19), 10530–10546,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b00875 .
Y. Luo, 
            et al., Colloidal Assembly of Au-Quantum Dot-Au Sandwiched Nanostructures with Strong Plasmon-Exciton Coupling, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(7), 2449–2456,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c00110 .
D. Avşar, H. Ertürk and M. P. Mengüç, Absorption and plasmon resonance of Bi-metallic core-shell nanoparticles on a dielectric substrate near an external tip, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 241, 106684,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2019.106684 .
P. Bhatia, S. S. Verma and M. M. Sinha, Magneto-plasmonic Co@M (M = Au/Ag/Au–Ag) core–shell nanoparticles for biological imaging and therapeutics, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 251, 107095,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2020.107095 .
T. Bulavinets, 
            et al., Efficient NIR energy conversion of plasmonic silver nanostructures fabricated with the laser-assisted synthetic approach for endodontic applications, RSC Adv., 2020, 10(64), 38861–38872,  10.1039/d0ra06614a .
C. A. West, 
            et al., Plasmon Hybridization in Nanorhombus Assemblies, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(49), 27009–27016,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c08098 .
M. Shabaninezhad, A. Kayani and G. Ramakrishna, Theoretical investigation of optical properties of embedded plasmonic nanoparticles, Chem. Phys., 2021, 541, 111044,  DOI:10.1016/j.chemphys.2020.111044 .
Y. Ren, 
            et al., Localized surface plasmon resonance of nanotriangle dimers at different relative positions, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2017, 199, 45–51,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2017.05.003 .
R. Sharma, 
            et al., Numerical Simulation of Electromagnetic Wave Interaction with Spheroidal Core–Shell Nanoparticle: Dependence of Surface Plasmon Resonance on Core–Shell Composition, Plasmonics, 2017, 13(1), 335–343,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-017-0518-0 .
S. Catalan-Gomez, 
            et al., Plasmonic coupling in closed-packed ordered gallium nanoparticles, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 4187,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-61090-3 .
N. Gordillo, 
            et al., Spectrally broad plasmonic absorption in Ga and In nanoparticle hybrids, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(47), 475705,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/ab3c73 .
M. Lemos de Souza, D. Pereira dos Santos and P. Corio, Localized surface plasmon resonance enhanced photocatalysis: an experimental and theoretical mechanistic investigation, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(50), 28753–28762,  10.1039/c8ra03919d .
V. Siahpoush, S. Ahmadi-kandjani and A. Nikniazi, Effect of plasmonic coupling on photothermal behavior of random nanoparticles, Opt. Commun., 2018, 420, 52–58,  DOI:10.1016/j.optcom.2018.03.021 .
D. Avşar, H. Ertürk and M. P. Mengüç, Plasmonic responses of metallic/dielectric core-shell nanoparticles on a dielectric substrate, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6(6), 065006,  DOI:10.1088/2053-1591/ab07fd .
M. Honda, 
            et al., Near-UV plasmon resonances for enhanced TiO2 photocatalysis, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 59(4), 045001,  DOI:10.35848/1347-4065/ab809b .
T. Kim, 
            et al., Nanoparticle-Enhanced Silver-Nanowire Plasmonic Electrodes for High-Performance Organic Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(28), e1800659,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201800659 .
J. P. McClure, 
            et al., Plasmonic-Enhancement of the Electro-Oxidation of Ethanol in Alkaline Media with Au–Fe2O3 Thin Film, Embedded, Sandwich and Surface Configurations, MRS Adv., 2017, 2(55), 3397–3402,  DOI:10.1557/adv.2017.381 .
R. Lv, 
            et al., Plasmonic modulated upconversion fluorescence by adjustable distributed gold nanoparticles, J. Lumin., 2020, 220, 116974,  DOI:10.1016/j.jlumin.2019.116974 .
T. Dasri, Theoretical calculation of plasmonic enhancement of silver nanosphere, nanocube, and nanorod embedded in organic solar cells, Integr. Ferroelectr., 2016, 175(1), 176–185,  DOI:10.1080/10584587.2016.1204201 .
C. Sartorio, 
            et al., Donor–Acceptor Interfaces by Engineered Nanoparticles Assemblies for Enhanced Efficiency in Plastic Planar Heterojunction Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(47), 26588–26599,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b07302 .
G. Coletta and V. Amendola, Numerical Modelling of the Optical Properties of Plasmonic and Latex Nanoparticles to Improve the Detection Limit of Immuno-Turbidimetric Assays, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11(5), 1147,  DOI:10.3390/nano11051147 .

          B. T. D. S. P. J. Flatau, User Guide for the Discrete Dipole Approximation Code DDSCAT 7.2,  2012, https://arxiv.org/abs/1202.3424 Search PubMed .
V. L. Y. Loke, M. Pinar Mengüç and T. A. Nieminen, Discrete-dipole approximation with surface interaction: Computational toolbox for MATLAB, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2011, 112(11), 1711–1725,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2011.03.012 .
S. Talebi Moghaddam, H. Ertürk and M. P. Mengüç, Enhancing local absorption within a gold nano-sphere on a dielectric surface under an AFM probe, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2016, 178, 124–133,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2016.02.011 .
Z. R. Fathi, M. P. Menguc and H. Erturk, Plasmon coupling between complex gold nanostructures and a dielectric substrate, Appl. Opt., 2018, 57(30), 8954–8963,  DOI:10.1364/AO.57.008954 .
Y. Huang, 
            et al., Nanogap effects on near- and far-field plasmonic behaviors of metallic nanoparticle dimers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(43), 29293–29298,  10.1039/c5cp04460j .
Y. Huang, 
            et al., Nanoparticle-on-mirror cavity modes for huge and/or tunable plasmonic field enhancement, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(10), 105203,  DOI:10.1088/1361-6528/aa5b27 .
M. H. Rahaman and B. A. Kemp, Analytical model of plasmonic resonance from multiple core-shell nanoparticles, Opt. Eng., 2017, 56(12), 121903,  DOI:10.1117/1.Oe.56.12.121903 .
S. R. Johannsen, 
            et al., Up-conversion enhancement in Er3+ doped TiO2 through plasmonic coupling: experiments and finite-element modeling, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(5), 053101,  DOI:10.1063/1.4907415 .
J. Grand and E. C. Le Ru, Practical Implementation of Accurate Finite-Element Calculations for Electromagnetic Scattering by Nanoparticles, Plasmonics, 2019, 15(1), 109–121,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-019-01014-8 .

          E. Marlow, Investigating the plasmonic behaviour of gold nanostructured arrays with finite element method modelling for optical sensing applications, PhD thesis, Queen's University Belfast,  2020 .
N. Blommaerts, 
            et al., Unraveling Structural Information of Turkevich Synthesized Plasmonic Gold–Silver Bimetallic Nanoparticles, Small, 2019, 15(42), 1902791,  DOI:10.1002/smll.201902791 .
T. Cesca, 
            et al., Nonlinear absorption tuning by composition control in bimetallic plasmonic nanoprism arrays, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(29), 12411–12418,  10.1039/c5nr01715g .
S. P. Tiwari, 
            et al., LSPR-mediated improved upconversion emission on randomly distributed gold nanoparticles array, New J. Chem., 2020, 44(45), 19672–19682,  10.1039/c9nj06471k .
W. Ali, 
            et al., All-Solution-Processed Ultrahigh Broadband and Wide-Angle Perfect Absorber Based on Mxene–Gold Nanoparticles, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8(21), 2000447,  DOI:10.1002/adom.202000447 .
P. Tiwari, G. M. Das and V. R. Dantham, Optical Properties of Au-Ag Bimetallic Nanoparticles of Different Shapes for Making Efficient Bimetallic-Photonic Whispering Gallery Mode Hybrid Microresonators, Plasmonics, 2020, 15(5), 1251–1260,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01141-7 .
T. Xing, 
            et al., The synthesizing approach analysis of hollow Ag/Au nanoparticles in replacement reaction between silver nanoparticle and chloroauric acid, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 513, 145809,  DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.145809 .
M. Liang, 
            et al., Plasmonic responses of Cu–Ag bimetallic system: Influence of distinctiveness and arrangements, Opt. Mater., 2020, 100, 109655,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2020.109655 .
M. Chen, 
            et al., Transparent Display by the Scattering Effect of Plasmonic Au–Ag Nanoparticles, Plasmonics, 2020, 15(6), 1855–1861,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01194-8 .
İ. Şeker, 
            et al., A Systematic Study on Au-Capped Si Nanowhiskers for Size-Dependent Improved Biosensing Applications, Plasmonics, 2020, 15(6), 1739–1745,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-020-01195-7 .
J. J. Zhang, 
            et al., A three-dimensional numerical study of coupled photothermal and photoelectrical processes for plasmonic solar cells with nanoparticles, Renewable Energy, 2021, 165, 278–287,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2020.11.010 .
M. A. Masharin, 
            et al., Giant Enhancement of Radiative Recombination in Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes with Plasmonic Core–Shell Nanoparticles, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11(1), 45,  DOI:10.3390/nano11010045 .

          M. Jabeen, Design and Optimization of thin-film solar cell configuration structures using the Finite Element Method, Royal Holloway, University of London,  2020 Search PubMed .
Sachchidanand and D. P. Samajdar, Performance enhancement of Nanopyramid based Si hybrid solar cells utilizing the plasmonic properties of oxide coated Metal Nanoparticles, Opt. Mater., 2020, 107, 110166,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2020.110166 .
L. Q. Cao, 
            et al., Influence of Geometry of Metallic Nanoparticles on Absorption of Thin-Film Organic Solar Cells: A Critical Examination, IEEE Access, 2020, 8, 145950–145959,  DOI:10.1109/access.2020.3014817 .
Y. Chen, 
            et al., Plasmon nanoparticle effect to improve optical properties of perovskite thin film, Photonics and Nanostructures - Fundamentals and Applications, 2021, 43, 100888,  DOI:10.1016/j.photonics.2020.100888 .
M. Chen, 
            et al., Coupled plasmon resonances of Au thorn nanoparticles to enhance solar absorption performance, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 250, 107029,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2020.107029 .
K. Zarei and F. Emami, Absorption enhancement and efficiency improvement of an organic solar cell embedded with core–shell Au@ITO nanoparticles, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2020, 52(6), 275,  DOI:10.1007/s11082-020-02401-w .
F. Xia, 
            et al., Ultra-high sensitivity SPR fiber sensor based on multilayer nanoparticle and Au film coupling enhancement, Measurement, 2020, 164, 108083,  DOI:10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108083 .
L. Yuan, 
            et al., Morphology-Dependent Reactivity of a Plasmonic Photocatalyst, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(9), 12054–12063,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.0c05383 .
S. Scarano, 
            et al., Nano structures and polymers: Emerging nanocomposites for plasmonic resonance transducers, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 698, 137859,  DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2020.137859 .
Z. Xie, 
            et al., TiO2 nanorod arrays decorated with Au nanoparticles as sensitive and recyclable SERS substrates, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 861, 157999,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.157999 .
B. Tian, Y. Wu and G. Lu, Metal-free plasmonic boron phosphide/graphitic carbon nitride with core–shell structure photocatalysts for overall water splitting, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 280, 119410,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2020.119410 .
Y. C. Chau, 
            et al., Simultaneous realization of high sensing sensitivity and tunability in plasmonic nanostructures arrays, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 16817,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-17024-7 .
Y. Wei, 
            et al., The effect of silica shell on the surface enhanced Raman scattering and fluorescence with Ag nanoparticles: a three-dimensional finite element method investigation, Opt. Commun., 2018, 427, 426–432,  DOI:10.1016/j.optcom.2018.06.086 .
Y. Huang, 
            et al., Small morphology variations effects on plasmonic nanoparticle dimer hotspots, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(36), 9607–9614,  10.1039/c8tc03556c .
M. R. Hasan, 
            et al., Plasmonic Refractive Index Sensor Employing Niobium Nanofilm on Photonic Crystal Fiber, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2018, 30(4), 315–318,  DOI:10.1109/lpt.2017.2786475 .
J. G. Ovejero, 
            et al., Hybrid nanoparticles for magnetic and plasmonic hyperthermia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(37), 24065–24073,  10.1039/c8cp02513d .
S. Manrique-Bedoya, 
            et al., Multiphysics Modeling of Plasmonic Photothermal Heating Effects in Gold Nanoparticles and Nanoparticle Arrays, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(31), 17172–17182,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c02443 .

          O. Elhoussaine, E. Abdelaziz, M. Hicham and B. Abdenbi, Plasmonic Nanorods investigating for cancer cell imaging and photothermal therapy, 2020, pp. 1–4 DOI:10.1109/IRASET48871.2020.9092075.
H. Nie, 
            et al., Two-dimensional Au & Ag hybrid plasmonic nanoparticle network: broadband nonlinear optical response and applications for pulsed laser generation, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9(8), 2537–2548,  DOI:10.1515/nanoph-2020-0097 .
P. Xu, 
            et al., Efficient Hydrolysis of Ammonia Borane for Hydrogen Evolution Catalyzed by Plasmonic Ag@Pd Core–Shell Nanocubes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(33), 12366–12377,  DOI:10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c02276 .
A. Tomitaka, 
            et al., Magneto-plasmonic nanostars for image-guided and NIR-triggered drug delivery, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 10115,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-66706-2 .
D. T. Debu, 
            et al., Broad range electric field enhancement of a plasmonic nanosphere heterodimer, Opt. Mater. Express, 2020, 10(7), 1704–1713,  DOI:10.1364/ome.396449 .
M. Chen, 
            et al., Local Heating Control of Plasmonic Nanoparticles for Different Incident Lights and Nanoparticles, Plasmonics, 2019, 14(6), 1893–1902,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-019-00990-1 .
M. Chen, 
            et al., Numerically investigating the optical properties of plasmonic metallic nanoparticles for effective solar absorption and heating, Sol. Energy, 2018, 161, 17–24,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2017.12.032 .
S. Ghosh and B. M. A. Rahman, Evolution of Plasmonic Modes in a Metal Nano-Wire Studied by a Modified Finite Element Method, J. Light Technol., 2018, 36(3), 809–818,  DOI:10.1109/jlt.2017.2782710 .
S. E. Hosseininejad, N. Komjani and M. Talafi Noghani, A Comparison of Graphene and Noble Metals as Conductors for Plasmonic One-Dimensional Waveguides, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2015, 14(5), 829–836,  DOI:10.1109/tnano.2015.2449903 .
M. A. Butt, S. N. Khonina and N. L. Kazanskiy, Plasmonic refractive index sensor based on metal–insulator-metal waveguides with high sensitivity, J. Mod. Opt., 2019, 66(9), 1038–1043,  DOI:10.1080/09500340.2019.1601272 .
M. A. Butt, N. L. Kazanskiy and S. N. Khonina, Highly integrated plasmonic sensor design for the simultaneous detection of multiple analytes, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2020, 20(11), 1274–1280,  DOI:10.1016/j.cap.2020.08.020 .
M. F. O. Hameed, 
            et al., Label-Free Highly Sensitive Hybrid Plasmonic Biosensor for the Detection of DNA Hybridization, J. Light Technol., 2017, 35(22), 4851–4858,  DOI:10.1109/jlt.2017.2733720 .

          C. Multiphysics, COMSOL Multiphysics Reference Manual, available from: http://www.comsol.com/.

          J. Software, JCMSuite, available from: https://jcmwave.com/.

          A. H. Software, HFSS, available from: https://www.ansys.com/products/electronics/ansys-hfss.

          T. Software, TiberCAD, available from: http://www.tibercad.org/.
F. J. García de Abajo and A. Howie, Retarded field calculation of electron energy loss in inhomogeneous dielectrics, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65(11), 115418,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.65.115418 .

          A. Trügler, Personal Webpage, 2021, available from: https://atruegler.at/research/nano/.
U. Hohenester and A. Trügler, MNPBEM – A Matlab toolbox for the simulation of plasmonic nanoparticles, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2012, 183, 370–381 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Womiloju, 
            et al., Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Core–Shell Nanoparticles—Insights into the Growth of Different Geometries, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2020, 37(7), 2000019,  DOI:10.1002/ppsc.202000019 .
M. Shiri and K. Abbasian, 3D tomographical imaging of localized surface plasmon resonances of cylindrical and dimeric spherical nanocrescents, Opt. Commun., 2020, 475, 126232,  DOI:10.1016/j.optcom.2020.126232 .
M. S. Mousavi, 
            et al., Electron energy-loss spectroscopy of surface plasmon activity in wrinkled gold structures, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153(22), 224703,  DOI:10.1063/5.0031469 .
S. De Marchi, 
            et al., Pd nanoparticles as a plasmonic material: synthesis, optical properties and applications, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(46), 23424–23443,  10.1039/d0nr06270g .
J. Lyu, 
            et al., Two-step assembly kinetics of gold nanoparticles, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9(5), 1730–1739,  10.1039/d0tc05076h .
N. Fitria, M. Sujak and D. Djuhana, The influence of gap spacing in localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) spectra of Ag nanorod-coupled with end-to-end assembly using boundary element method, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 763, 012062,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899x/763/1/012062 .
N. Fitria, M. S. M. Kuddah and D. Djuhana, Investigation the exponential decay of LSPR Ag nanorod-coupled with side by side configuration using boundary element method, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 553, 012015,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899x/553/1/012015 .
M. Ahmad, Simulations of the Surface Plasmon Resonances of Au@Ag Core–Shell Nanocubes: Effect of Core–Shell Size Ratio, Plasmonics, 2017, 13(3), 981–990,  DOI:10.1007/s11468-017-0596-z .
M. H. Putra, 
            et al., A numerical study of the sensitivity of surface plasmon resonance bimetallic silver-gold alloys using boundary element method, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 188, 012016,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899x/188/1/012016 .
N. M. Saleh and A. A. Aziz, Simulation of Surface Plasmon Resonance on Different Size of a Single Gold Nanoparticle, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2018, 1083, 012041,  DOI:10.1088/1742-6596/1083/1/012041 .
M. Sofani, M. H. Putra and D. Djuhana, The sensitivity calculation of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) Au nanorod by applying a boundary element system simulation, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 763, 012076,  DOI:10.1088/1757-899x/763/1/012076 .
A. Dahiya and P. Senthil Kumar, Plasmonic gold-copper alloy dimer as ‘nanorulers’, AIP Conf. Proc., 2020, 2265, 030078,  DOI:10.1063/5.0017257 .
J. Marcheselli, 
            et al., Simulating Plasmon Resonances of Gold Nanoparticles with Bipyramidal Shapes by Boundary Element Methods, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2020, 16(6), 3807–3815,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00269 .
G. Dall'Osto, 
            et al., Real-time dynamics of plasmonic resonances in nanoparticles described by a boundary element method with generic dielectric function, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153(18), 184114,  DOI:10.1063/5.0022329 .
C. Qin, 
            et al., Absorption characteristics of nanoparticles with sharp edges for a direct-absorption solar collector, Renewable Energy, 2020, 145, 21–28,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2019.05.133 .
M. Pastorello, 
            et al., On the use of Au@Ag core-shell nanorods for SERS detection of Thiram diluted solutions, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 231, 118113,  DOI:10.1016/j.saa.2020.118113 .
J. Seo, 
            et al., Tailoring the Spectral Absorption Coefficient of a Blended Plasmonic Nanofluid Using a Customized Genetic Algorithm, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 8891,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-020-65811-6 .
M. Horák, 
            et al., Plasmonic Properties of Silver Amalgam Nanoparticles Studied by Analytical Transmission Electron Microscopy, Microsc. Microanal., 2020, 26(S2), 2650–2652,  DOI:10.1017/s1431927620022321 .
U. Hohenester, Simulating electron energy loss spectroscopy with the MNPBEM toolbox, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2014, 185(3), 1177–1187,  DOI:10.1016/j.cpc.2013.12.010 .
U. Hohenester and A. Trügler, MNPBEM – A Matlab toolbox for the simulation of plasmonic nanoparticles, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2012, 183(2), 370–381,  DOI:10.1016/j.cpc.2011.09.009 .
J. Waxenegger, A. Trügler and U. Hohenester, Plasmonics simulations with the MNPBEM toolbox: Consideration of substrates and layer structures, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2015, 193, 138–150,  DOI:10.1016/j.cpc.2015.03.023 .
Y. Shao, J. J. Yang and M. Huang, A Review of Computational Electromagnetic Methods for Graphene Modeling, Int. J. Antennas Propagation, 2016, 2016, 1–9,  DOI:10.1155/2016/7478621 .
L. Avakyan, 
            et al., Theoretical approach for calculation of dielectric functions of plasmonic nanoparticles of noble metals, magnesium and their alloys, Opt. Mater., 2020, 109, 110264,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2020.110264 .
N. G. Khlebtsov, T-matrix method in plasmonics: An overview, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2013, 123, 184–217,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2012.12.027 .
O. S. Vartia, 
            et al., On the applicability of discrete dipole approximation for plasmonic particles, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2016, 169, 23–35,  DOI:10.1016/j.jqsrt.2015.10.003 .
S. Bhardwaj, 
            et al., Near-field and far-field optical properties of magnetic plasmonic core-shell nanoparticles with non-spherical shapes: a discrete dipole approximation study, AIP Adv., 2019, 9(2), 025021,  DOI:10.1063/1.5087705 .
C. Boukouvala and E. Ringe, Wulff-Based Approach to Modeling the Plasmonic Response of Single Crystal, Twinned, and Core–Shell Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(41), 25501–25508,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b07584 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Amirmostafa Amirjani
	Amirmostafa Amirjani is a tenure-track assistant professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. He received his BSc and PhD at Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), Tehran, Iran. He entitled Iran's National Elites Foundation award for four years between 2014 and 2018. After graduation, he continued his research as a scientist at École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland between 2018 and 2020. His research interests include the size and shape-controlled synthesis of nanostructures, optical sensors, and plasmonics.

S. K. Sadrnezhaad
	Sayed Khatiboleslam Sadrnezhaad is a distinguished professor at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of the Sharif University of Technology. He received his PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1979 and his BSc from the Sharif University of Technology in 1974. He was entitled as 1% world's top scientists by ESI citation database from Thomson Reuters, 2015 and 2016. He is the holder of a research chair from the Iran National Science Foundation (INSF). His current interest is in the emerging bio–nano and SMA fields of the materials science and engineering discipline.
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of Yee cells for the discretization of magnetic and electric fields in space.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  The geometry and parameters of the designed nanoshell and the finite slab model in the FDTD method (a). Panel (b) shows the effect of different polarizations of the incident field on the extinction cross-section spectra of the gold nanoshell/dielectric slab structure: p-polarized (red), 45°-polarized (green), and s-polarized (blue). The individual nanoshell spectrum (black) is shown for comparison. The slab parameters are L = 320 nm, T = 80 nm, d = 2 nm, and εs = 6.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of organic solar cells embedded with plasmonic nanostructures in (a) an active layer, (b) charge carrier transport layer, and (c) photoactive layer. Modified reproduction with permission from ref. 38.	 

 	Fig. 4  Panel (a) shows the bimodal distribution of 20 nm and 60 nm AgNPs incorporated in the betanin–lawsone sensitized solar cell photoanode. Panel (b) shows the power absorption density map for the betanin and lawsone photoelectrode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 5  Panel (a) shows the FDTD electromagnetic field enhancement simulation of AgNPs in identical and non-identical sizes of 5 nm, 8 nm, and 12 nm. Panel (b) shows the schematic illustration of a plasmonic gold nanohole array for surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection of DNA methylation. Panel (c) and (d) show the schematic combination of AgNWs and AgNPs as hot spots in SERS substrates and the numerical simulation of maximum enhancement using FDTD, respectively. All of the figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 52, 53 and 55.	 

Lumerical©	2021	
56

Meep©	2021	
57

OptiFDTD©	2021	
58

OmniSim©	2020	
59

CST Studio Suite©	2021	
60

Silvaco ATLAS©	2020	
61

	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of how different geometries discretized to polarizable dipoles in discrete dipole approximation (DDA). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63.	 
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 7  Panel (a) shows the distribution of the electromagnetic field around homo and heterodimer AgNPs using DDA simulation. Panel (b) shows how the interparticle distance (D) and radius (r) of the silver nanoparticle dimers affect the extinction coefficient calculated using DDA. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 66 and 67.	 

 	Fig. 8  Panel (a) shows the theoretical absorbance spectra for Fe3O4 and core–shell Fe3O4@Au nanoparticles calculated using the DDA method. Panel (b) shows the extinction spectra of Au–Ag alloys with different Ag contents calculated using DDA. All figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 70 and 73.	 

 	Fig. 9  Panel (a) shows the graphical user interface of Crystal Creator software with the possibility to include twins and defects in the structure (Panel b). Panel (c) and (d) show the far-field and near-field simulation using the DDA method. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 10  Panel (a) shows the dipole array scheme mimicking a gold concave nanocube and the extinction spectra of the concave nanocube with different edge lengths (L). Panel (b) shows the comparison of numerical simulation (DDA) and experimental results for spherical and triangular silver nanostructures. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 92 and 98.	 

 	Fig. 11  The simulated extinction efficiency of gold nanotriangles with an edge length of 120 nm in different configurations. (a): side by side, (b): parallel along the prism axis, and (c): aligned bottom-to-bottom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101.	 

 	Fig. 12  Panel (a) shows the DDA calculated extinction spectra of Ga dimers as the interparticle distance increases from 2 to 40 nm. Panel (b) shows the local electric field distribution in-plane and out-of-plane for Ga NPs. Panel (c) shows the representative illustration of an NP-enhanced plasmonic Ag NW network and the electric field distribution of NWs and NWs decorated with Ag@SiO2 NPs using DDA. All figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 103, 104 and 109.	 
∇2E + k2E = 0	(8)
∇2H + k2H = 0	(9)

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of a meshed nanostructure before (left side) and after (right side) numerical simulation of electric field distribution using the FEM.	 
k2(r) = ω2ε(r)μ(r)/c2	(10)

 	Fig. 14  Panel (a) shows the FEM calculated local electric field (upper panel) and extinction cross-section (bottom panel) of 60 nm Ag nanospheres with the interparticle distance of ‘g’. Panel (b) shows the model's structure for the up-conversion enhancement in an Er3+ doped TiO2 thin film using plasmonic Ag nanostructures. The microscopy image shows the actual sample fabricated with the optimal values of parameters. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 119 and 121.	 

 	Fig. 15  Panel (a) shows the Ag–Au bilayered prismatic alloy designed geometry for the local field enhancement of electromagnetic field. Panel (b) shows the microscopy image of the configuration and the FEM results obtained for the maximum local field enhancement of the Ag0.5Au0.5 alloy. Panel (c) shows the effect of Au fraction on the intensity of dipole and quadrupole peaks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126.	 

 	Fig. 16  Panel (a) shows a schematic illustration from the designed absorber structure. Absorbance plots show the measured and calculated optical response of the heterostructure for absorbing the electromagnetic radiation in the range of 300–1800 nm. Panel (b) shows the electric field enhancement of Au–Ag bimetallic nanospheres, nanoshells, nanoprisms, and nanostars. The geometrical dimension for each structure is mentioned in each plot. There is three possible geometries for the products of the reaction between Ag and HAuCl4; case a: shell-to-core, case b: core-to-shell, and case c: off-center core-to-shell structure. Figures are reproduced with permission from ref. 128 and 130.	 

 	Fig. 17  Panel (a) shows the structural parameters and the optical properties of Au nanothorns compared with Au nanospheres. Panel (b) shows the modeled geometry of six and eighteen thorn nanoparticles and their absorption and scattering cross-sections calculated using the FEM. The bottom row shows the electric field enhancement of eighteen thorns at different wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140.	 

 	Fig. 18  Panel (a) shows the electric field enhancement of Al octopods (top row), Al nanocubes (middle row), and Al nanocrystals (bottom row) calculated using the FEM at 450 nm, 550 nm, and 750 nm excitation wavelengths. Panel (b) shows the variation of the electromagnetic field at hotspots in TiO2 nanorods decorated with AuNPs with different configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 and 145.	 

 	Fig. 19  Panel (a) shows the nanosphere/nanorod plasmonic nanostructures’ geometrical parameters designed for a refractive index sensor. Panel (b) shows the electric field intensity distribution in x–y and y–z planes using 670 nm excitation wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147.	 

 	Fig. 20  Panel (a) shows the designed geometry used in FEM studies and the obtained near-field enhancement generated at the excitation wavelength of 515 nm and 860 nm. Panel (b) shows the local electric field distribution (upper row) and local heating power distribution (bottom row) of Ag@Ag and Ag@Pd nanostructures obtained from FEM simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151 and 155.	 

 	Fig. 21  Panel (a) shows the FEM simulated absorption spectra of magneto-plasmonic nanostars and the charge distribution in a magneto-plasmonic nanostar at the resonance wavelength. Panel (b), the top row shows the local electric field distribution of Au–Ag heterodimers at the excitation wavelength of 660 nm, 470 nm, and 370 nm. The bottom row shows the charge distribution on the surface of NPs simulated using the finite element method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156 and 157.	 

 	Fig. 22  The boundary element method discretizing the boundary between the plasmonic nanostructure and the dielectric. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170.	 

 	Fig. 23  Calculated scattering cross-section of Au@Ag NPs using the BEM for spherical core–spherical core (top row), spherical core–prism shell (middle row), and prism–prism configurations (bottom row). Reproduced with permission from ref. 172.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of Ag nanodimer simulation using the BEM. Normalized radiative decay rate map of the x-oriented (otherwise mentioned) dipoles at different wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173.	 

 	Fig. 25  Simulated optical properties of Pd, Ag, and Au nanoparticles using the BEM. Panel (a) shows the extinction efficiency of Pd NPs in different sizes. Panels (b–d) show Pd, Ag, and Au nanoparticles’ optical cross-sections in 30 nm and 120 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175.	 

 	Fig. 26  Panel (a) shows the Ag nanorod's electric field distribution (aspect ratio = 3) in different modes and different distances. Panel (b), the top row shows the experimental and numerical results obtained for gold nanobipyramids in different aspect ratios. The bottom row shows gold nanobipyramids with different geometrical features used for BEM simulations. Panel (c) shows optical extinction comparison between analytical and BEM results for Au nanospheres and Au nanoellipsoids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, 184 and 185.	 

 	Fig. 27  Panel (a) shows the spherical, core–shell, and rod-shaped geometries of metallic and dielectric nanostructures used for BEM simulations. The spectra show the absorption coefficient of the blended plasmonic nanofluid in comparison with the solar spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188.	 

FDTD	Long – more than 180 minutes to cover all of the visible region wavelengths	• More adapted to spectroscopic studies	• The wavefront suffers from ‘stair casing’

	• Useful for nonlinear materials and broadband simulations	• Time-consuming when the mesh is dense

	• Useful for any arbitrary shaped structure	

FEM	Long – the time highly depends on the mesh size but usually more than 2 minutes for each wavelength	• Useful for evaluating the scattered field distribution of any arbitrary shaped structure	• The whole volume is discretized

	
	• Time-consuming
BEM	Rapid – only the boundary is discretized	• Low computational and storage demand	• Complex parameterization of the boundary elements
DDA	Moderate – the time highly depends on the number of dipoles but usually below 1 min for each wavelength	• Useful for any arbitrary shaped structure	• Not convenient to simulate periodic arrays of particles

	
	• Unable to simulate high-aspect ratio or elongated structures

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
