Conformal growth of nanocrystalline CdX (X = S, Se) on mesoscopic NiO and their photoelectrochemical properties   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP43613F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP43613F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4767-4774Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsConformal growth of nanocrystalline CdX (X = S, Se) on mesoscopic NiO and their photoelectrochemical properties†

        
          
            Fatemeh 
            Safari-Alamuti
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            James R. 
            Jennings
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Md. Anower 
            Hossain
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin Yue Lanry 
            Yung
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Qing 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, NUSNNI-NanoCore, National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore. E-mail: qing.wang@nus.edu.sg
bDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, National University of Singapore, 117576, Singapore
Received 
      12th October 2012
    , Accepted 5th February 2013First published on 5th February 2013AbstractSemiconductor-sensitized NiO photocathodes have been fabricated by successive ionic-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) deposition of CdS, CdSe and cascaded CdS/CdSe onto mesoscopic NiO films. Detailed morphological and structural characterization reveals that the growth of CdS and CdSe on mesoscopic NiO electrodes results in the formation of crystalline and conformal layers under ambient conditions. With a polysulfide redox electrolyte and a Pt counter electrode, CdX (X = S and Se)-sensitized p-NiO solar cells operating in a photocathodic mode are unambiguously demonstrated when NiO blocking layers are used, which are critical to prevent anodic photocurrent due to electron injection from CdX into the SnO2:F substrate. To decrease the recombination rate, a CdS barrier layer was deposited between NiO and a CdSe sensitizer which results in much enhanced cell performance. Front and rear spectral incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurements were used to investigate charge collection and separation in the cells. The measurements indicate that charge collection in this system is limited by a short hole diffusion length.
Introduction
Solar cells based on sensitization of p-type nickel oxide (NiO) have attracted significant interest in recent years.1–5 Since the first report of NiO-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs),3 many efforts have been made to improve the cell efficiency. Several studies revealed that the relatively low efficiency of p-type NiO-based DSCs stems from low Voc and jsc, with the former being due to the small potential difference between the valence band (VB) edge of NiO and the redox potential of the electrolyte,5,6 while the latter being caused by poor dye loading7 and an unfavourable dipole moment of dye molecules,8,9 thus impairing light absorption and hole injection into the VB of NiO. Recombination of injected holes with reduced dye molecules also leads to declined Voc and jsc.10,11 In addition, a small hole diffusion coefficient in the NiO film (∼10−8–10−7 cm2 s−1) and a short hole lifetime were observed, which gave rise to a short diffusion length of holes in the film and consequently inefficient charge collection.12 To further improve the cell efficiency, fabrication of high-quality NiO films with improved mechanical stability, transparency and transport properties has been attempted.13–15 In addition, designing a dedicated dye molecule has greatly enhanced the cell efficiency by promoting hole injection and slowing down recombination.13,16 Although the overall improvement is promising, the development of dye-sensitized nanocrystalline NiO solar cells still lags far behind that of TiO2-based photoanodic cells.6
One approach that potentially could overcome existing problems is replacing the molecular sensitizers with semiconductor nanocrystals in p-type cells. As shown in Fig. 1, upon illumination the semiconductor sensitizer (e.g. CdSe) absorbs light, which promotes electrons from the ground state to the excited state of the sensitizer. The holes left in the VB level of the semiconductor sensitizer will then inject into the VB of the NiO almost instantaneously. Meanwhile, electrons in the CB of the sensitizer are intercepted by acceptor species in the electrolyte resulting in efficient charge separation. Owing to quantum confinement effects, the band gap of semiconductor nanocrystals can be tuned by varying the particle size17,18 and thus favourable band alignment between the sensitizer and the underlying wide band gap metal oxide could feasibly be achieved for enhanced carrier separation. In addition, the high extinction coefficient19 of semiconductor nanocrystals makes efficient light absorption possible even with very thin electrodes.20 Furthermore, by generating multiple electron–hole pairs per photon through impact ionization in semiconductor-sensitized cells, the Shockley–Queisser limit could in theory be exceeded.21–23
 Fig. 1  A schematic diagram illustrating the working principle of CdSe-sensitized mesoscopic p-NiO solar cells. The kinetic processes occurring at the NiO/CdSe/electrolyte interface are: k1, excitation of CdSe upon illumination; k2, hole injection from VB of CdSe into VB of NiO; k3, sensitizer regeneration by acceptor species (Sx2−) in the electrolyte; k4, geminate recombination of holes in NiO with electrons in the CB of CdSe; k5, recombination of holes in NiO with donor species (S2−) in the electrolyte (dark current). 
While intriguing, only very few studies of semiconductor-sensitized photocathodes have been reported thus far, and the factors dictating device operation are far from being unambiguously investigated.24–26 In this regard, a comprehensive study was carried out in this paper, where synthetic procedures used to produce CdSe-sensitized mesoporous NiO electrodes and their morphological, structural, optical as well as electrical properties were systematically investigated.
In this study, it was observed for the first time that nanocrystalline CdS and CdSe could be conformally coated on mesoporous NiO with preferential orientations by a simple successive ionic-layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) deposition. To characterize the sensitized electrodes, j–V curves and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) were measured. Cells employing NiO synthesized using a modified triblock copolymer template exhibit an encouraging external quantum efficiency of ∼30%, being more than two times higher than previously reported values.26
Materials and methods
Preparation of mesoporous NiO electrode
Compact NiO blocking layers were deposited on FTO glass (TEC, 15 Ω □−1) by spray pyrolysis of a nickel precursor (0.02 M Ni(acac)2 in ACN) following a previously reported procedure.2,5 NiCl2 nanoparticles (Sigma Aldrich), F108 triblock copolymer (Sigma Aldrich), DI water and absolute ethanol were mixed to prepare the Ni(OH)2 paste according to the literature.5 Electrodes were prepared by screen-printing the prepared paste onto FTO glass coated by NiO blocking layers. The printed films were then sintered in oven at 500 °C for 1 hour. The printing process was repeated two times followed by sintering in order to achieve the desired film thickness. The film thickness measured by an Alpha-Step IQ surface profiler was ∼1.2 μm.
Material characterization
The NiO film morphology was characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Philips XL 30 FEG). The morphology of NiO and CdSe-sensitized NiO was determined by transmission electron microscopy (JEOL JEM 2010F) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). TEM samples were prepared by scrapping off the CdSe-sensitized NiO nanocrystals from the FTO substrate and dispersing in ethanol, followed by transferring one drop of the suspension onto a carbon-coated copper grid. Crystal structures of NiO and CdSe-sensitized NiO were determined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu KR1 radiation (λ = 0.154059 nm). Photoluminescence spectra were measured by using a spectrofluorophotometer (Shimadzu-RF5301). Optical densities of bare NiO, CdS–NiO, CdSe–NiO as well as cascade CdS/CdSe–NiO were measured using a Shimadzu UV-vis-NIR spectrometer (Solidspec-3700).
Preparation of CdS, CdSe and CdS/CdSe sensitized NiO electrodes
The SILAR method was used to deposit the sensitizer onto the NiO film as previously reported.27–29 To prepare the CdS-sensitized electrode, the NiO electrode was immersed in a solution of cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (0.02 M) (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O, Fluka, >99.0%) in methanol for 1 min to deposit Cd2+. The electrode was then rinsed with methanol for 1 min to remove excess Cd2+ and dried for 1 min under N2 stream. S2− was then deposited by immersing the dried film into the solution of sodium sulfide nonahydrate (0.02 M) (Na2S·9H2O, Sigma Aldrich) in the methanol and DI water mixture (1:1, v/v) for 1 min. The resulting film was then rinsed with methanol and dried for 1 min under N2 stream. This procedure was repeated 10 times in order to achieve desired CdS deposition.
To prepare the CdSe sensitized electrode, the NiO film was immersed in a solution of cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate (0.03 M) (Cd(NO3)2·4H2O, Fluka, >99.0%) in ethanol for 1 min. The film was then rinsed with ethanol for 1 min and dried. To prepare the Se2− solution, selenium dioxide (SeO2, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4, Sigma Aldrich) and ethanol were mixed following the literature procedure.28 The dried film was dipped in Se2− solution for 1 min followed by 1 min rinsing with ethanol and drying. Deposition was repeated 10 times to achieve appropriate absorption of CdSe into the film. Subsequently to fabricate the CdS/CdSe-sensitized electrode, CdS was firstly deposited onto the NiO electrode following the above procedure and repeating 3 and 5 times. CdSe was then deposited onto the resulted film using a similar procedure to that mentioned for CdS deposition. This step was also repeated 5 and 10 times to ensure appropriate loading of the sensitizer.
Solar cell fabrication and characterization
Platinum-coated FTO was used as a counter electrode.27 A small hole was drilled into the FTO prior to the Pt coating to inject the electrolyte. The electrolyte was composed of S (1 M), Na2S·9H2O (1 M), and NaOH in DI water (0.1 M). Working and counter electrodes were sealed in a sandwich form using a thin layer of polymer film (Surlyn, DuPont). The electrolyte was injected into the inter-electrode space using a vacuum pump.
Current–voltage characteristics were measured under simulated AM 1.5 illumination using a Keithley Source Meter with a Newport solar simulator. The light intensity was calibrated using a standard Si solar cell. The illuminated active area of the cells was 0.12 cm2. IPCE measurements were performed using a 300 W xenon lamp and a grating monochromator (Newport/Oriel). The incident photon flux was calibrated using a standard silicon photodiode (Newport/Oriel). Photocurrent was recorded under DC mode using an auto-ranging current amplifier (Newport/Oriel).
Results and discussion
Morphological and structural characterization
The morphology and structure of NiO colloidal particles were investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in Fig. 2(a), the as-prepared NiO film has a crack-free mesoporous structure with an average particle size of ∼25 nm. The TEM image in Fig. 2(b) shows that NiO nanoparticles scratched from the film have a polydisperse size distribution in the range of 15–50 nm, consistent with the SEM measurement. The high-resolution TEM image in Fig. 2(c) clearly reveals the lattice fringes of a nanocrystalline NiO particle with a d-spacing of 0.242 nm, corresponding to the (111) planes of the bunsenite phase.30
 Fig. 2  FESEM image (a) and TEM images (b and c) of the as-prepared colloidal NiO particles; TEM images (d and e) and high-resolution TEM image (f) of CdSe-sensitized NiO. The arrows in (f) mark the lattice fringes of deposited nanocrystalline CdSe. 
Several approaches for depositing semiconductor sensitizers onto mesoporous metal oxide films have been reported,27–29,31–32 among which the SILAR method is a widely used in situ method to deposit semiconductor sensitizers on various mesoscopic photoanodes.27,31 Besides the simplicity of the method, it provides high surface coverage and good controllability of the average size of deposited sensitizers by varying the number of deposition cycles. Due to the intimate contact between the deposited light absorber and the underlying mesoporous metal oxide, charge injection from the sensitizer into the wide band gap metal oxide is expected to be efficient.28 CdSe-coated NiO nanoparticles after 10 cycles of SILAR deposition were also characterized by TEM and the images are shown in Fig. 2(d) and (e). A uniform coating of CdSe with a thickness of ca. 4–5 nm was clearly observed on NiO nanoparticles. Interestingly, the as-deposited CdSe on NiO nanoparticles exhibits well-defined crystalline structure, as indicated by the oriented lattice fringes shown in Fig. 2(f), which is distinct from the amorphous CdSe deposition on mesoscopic TiO2 by the same SILAR method.28,29 The atomic ratio of Cd/Se was estimated by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic measurement to be ∼1.2, indicating that the as-deposited CdSe on NiO is Cd-rich. For comparison, CdS was also deposited on NiO by a similar SILAR method. Identical to CdSe, a conformal layer of nanocrystalline CdS was obtained on NiO nanoparticles (Fig. S1, ESI†), indicating a similar growth mechanism.
As shown in Fig. 3, the crystal structures of NiO and the deposited CdSe were further characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). In good agreement with the TEM measurement, NiO nanoparticles reveal good crystallinity from the XRD patterns with well-defined diffraction peaks at 37.20°, 43.20°, and 62.87°, being indicative of the (111), (200), and (220) planes of the bunsenite crystal structure of NiO (JCPDS No. 04-0835).16 The size of NiO crystal grains is determined to be ∼21 nm based on the Scherrer equation. After SILAR deposition of CdSe on NiO, extra peaks appear at 26.20°, 41.20°, and 49.87°, corresponding to the (111), (220), and (311) planes of cubic zinc-blende CdSe (JCPDS No. 19-0191).33 As mentioned above, by the same SILAR method the deposition on TiO2 generally leads to amorphous and less uniform CdSe. The drastic difference of deposited CdSe on NiO is plausibly induced by the peculiar surface chemistry and lattice structure of the substrate metal oxide, which presumably assists the crystalline growth of CdSe despite the large lattice mismatch, which has also been observed on the other substrates.34 Systematic study is required to further determine the growth mechanism while it is beyond the scope of this paper. After sintering at 200 °C, the diffraction peak intensity of CdSe on NiO remains identical to that of the as-deposited samples, suggesting that room temperature SILAR deposition has led to a high crystallinity of CdSe.
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) bunsenite NiO, (b) zinc-blend CdSe, (c) the synthesized NiO mesoporous thin film on the FTO substrate, (d) as-prepared CdSe-coated NiO thin film on FTO, and (e) sample after sintering at 200 °C. Peaks marked with stars are from the FTO substrate. 
Measurement of optical properties

Fig. 4 shows the optical density spectra of pristine, CdS- or CdSe-sensitized NiO electrodes. While the optical band gap of NiO is reported to be well above 3 eV, the bare NiO exhibits evident light absorption in the whole visible region due to the presence of O vacancies, consistent with the light grey colour of the film. After 10 cycles of SILAR deposition of CdS and CdSe, the absorption of sensitized NiO is greatly red shifted with much enhanced visible light response. The absorption onsets of CdS and CdSe-sensitized NiO are extended to 570 and 720 nm, respectively. The cascade structure – 3 layers of CdS followed by 10 layers of CdSe – on NiO (denoted 3CdS/10CdSe) was also characterized, which reveals an identical spectrum to that of the 10CdSe electrode, indicating the absorption is largely dominated by the CdSe layer. Recent studies on cascade CdS/CdSe-sensitized TiO2 have shown that the absorbance of CdS/CdSe-sensitized TiO2 is much greater and significantly red shifted compared with that of CdSe-sensitized TiO2 for the same number of SILAR deposition cycles as the CdS under layer facilitates the nucleation and subsequent growth of CdSe due to similar lattice structure and surface chemistry between CdSe and CdS.35 This is however not observed for NiO electrodes, given the spectrum of 10CdSe-sensitized NiO nearly resembles that of 3CdS/10CdSe especially in the long wavelength region.
 Fig. 4  UV-Vis optical density spectra (left) of pristine NiO, CdS-, CdSe- and CdS/CdSe-sensitized NiO, and photoluminescence spectra (right) of CdSe-sensitized Al2O3 and NiO. The excitation wavelength is 450 nm. 
Charge injection from CdSe into the mesoscopic NiO film upon illumination was examined by steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurement. For comparison, the same measurement was also made on a sensitized mesoporous Al2O3 electrode while both films were excited at 450 nm. Due to the wide energy gap of Al2O3, charge injection from the excited state of CdSe to Al2O3 is energetically unfavourable. Instead, excited electrons and holes radiatively recombine within the CdSe, resulting in the distinct emission at ∼630 nm in Fig. 4. In contrast, no emission peak was observed for CdSe-sensitized NiO electrodes, implying that the excited charge carriers in CdSe were completely quenched in the presence of NiO. Considering the band energy of NiO relative to that of CdSe,36 the quenching is deemed as a result of efficient hole injection from excited CdSe into the VB of NiO, which is essential for photovoltaic applications where efficient charge separation is desired.
Photoelectrochemical characterization
Photoelectrochemical cells based on CdSe-sensitized mesoscopic NiO photocathodes were fabricated to evaluate the photovoltaic performance. It has been observed in our previous study that, due to the sluggish hole transport in sensitized mesoscopic NiO, a compact layer of NiO under the mesoporous NiO on FTO is generally required for achieving photocathodic operation.18 In this study, a NiO compact layer was deposited on FTO glass by spray pyrolysis prior to screen printing the NiO mesoporous layer. Platinized FTO and a polysulfide electrolyte were used as the counter electrode and electron-transporting medium, respectively. The photovoltaic characteristics of sensitized NiO are presented in Fig. 5. The j–V characteristics in Fig. 5(a) were measured at 1 Sun illumination intensity and clearly show that in the presence of a NiO blocking layer, all the SSCs operate in photocathodic mode regardless of sensitizing materials (CdS, CdSe and cascade CdS/CdSe), implying that all the sensitizers are capable of injecting holes into the VB of p-type NiO upon illumination. The generated electrons in the CB of the sensitizers are captured by Sx2− in the electrolyte and further transferred to the counter electrode, while holes are collected from the mesoporous NiO electrode resulting in a cathodic photocurrent. The performance of SSCs incorporating different numbers of CdS and CdSe deposition cycles (5, 7, 10, and 15 cycles) has been scrutinized and the optimum conditions for both CdS and CdSe were found to be 10 SILAR deposition cycles. The Voc values of both CdS and CdSe cells are rather close, while CdSe cells exhibited much superior jsc to CdS cells as a result of much enhanced light absorption of long wavelength photons (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  
j–V Characteristics (a) and IPCE spectra (b) of CdS, CdSe and CdS/CdSe-sensitized NiO cells. The thickness of the electrodes is ∼1.2 μm. The inset of (b) shows the possible band alignments at the CdS/CdSe interface on the surface of mesoscopic NiO. 

Fig. 5(b) shows the IPCE spectra of these SSCs, from which it is evident that, for each sensitized electrode, the IPCE spectrum almost matches their respective optical density spectrum suggesting that the photoresponse of the SSCs originates from the light harvesting of sensitizers deposited on mesoporous NiO. As shown in the UV-Vis spectra (Fig. 4), photons with short wavelength were absorbed much more strongly compared with the long wavelength photons. As a result, most of the short wavelength photons are absorbed by the sensitizer close to the substrate and the generated holes are collected to the external circuit and showed relatively high quantum efficiency. In contrast, long wavelength photons must travel a longer distance before being absorbed by the sensitizer and due to the extreme short diffusion length of holes (discussed below), there is big loss of those generated holes in NiO. As a result, the external quantum efficiency for those photons is relatively low. Overall, the IPCE spectrum appears sharp in the short wavelength region.
The IPCE spectra of CdSe and CdS/CdSe cells are greatly red-shifted (onset wavelengths extending to ∼700 nm) compared to CdS cells (onset wavelength ∼530 nm). Interestingly, despite the almost identical optical spectra (Fig. 4) the cascade CdS/CdSe–NiO cell presents much higher IPCE than the CdSe–NiO cell, suggesting that the presence of CdS underneath CdSe is beneficial to the charge separation, charge collection, or both. The highest external quantum efficiency is observed for cascade structure with a peak IPCE of 30% at ∼400 nm.
Role of CdS in the NiO–CdS/CdSe cascade structure
The role of CdS in CdS/CdSe-sensitized TiO2 solar cells has been extensively investigated.35,37,38 It is generally believed that CdS promotes the growth of CdSe and could presumably facilitate charge separation due to a favourable type II band alignment.35 The situation for the NiO electrode seems rather different.
As shown previously by HRTEM and UV-Vis measurements, the growth of CdSe on NiO is identical to that of CdS, thus the presence of CdS on NiO is deemed not to further enhance the subsequent growth of CdSe or light absorption of the electrode. In addition, provided that a type II junction prevails at the CdS/CdSe interface (inset of Fig. 5(b)), hole injection from the VB of CdSe into the VB of NiO will be impeded and recombination of electrons in the CB of CdSe with holes in the VB of NiO will be enhanced, resulting in declined performance in CdS/CdSe–NiO. Thus, most plausibly, the thin CdS layer acts as a passivation layer in the CdS/CdSe–NiO electrode, which builds up an energy barrier between NiO and CdSe (type I junction), and hence hinders recombination between injected holes in NiO and electrons in CdSe and the electrolyte. To further examine the role of CdS, reverse cascade structures of CdSe/CdS were fabricated, which as expected, resulted in lower performance than both CdSe–NiO and CdS/CdSe–NiO (Fig. S2, ESI†), substantiating the above speculation. While it seems reasonable, a systematic study is required to unambiguously determine the detailed band structure and its correlation with the performance of SSCs.
Charge collection measurement
Although semiconductor sensitized photocathodic solar energy conversion has been successfully demonstrated, it is of paramount importance to understand the factors dictating the operation of the device. Compared with its dye-sensitized counterpart, the best CdS/CdSe-sensitized NiO cell still suffers from poor photovoltage and photocurrent. Table S1 (ESI†) shows the photocurrent predicted by IPCE measurements, which were calculated by integrating the overlap of the IPCE spectra with the AM 1.5 solar irradiance spectrum. It turns out to be 2–3 times as large as the measured jsc at simulated AM 1.5, 1 Sun illumination. As IPCE measurements were made under low intensity monochromatic illumination (cf. experimental section), the large deviation of photocurrent from linearity suggests that charge collection or charge separation is strongly light intensity dependent.39,40 As a control experiment, j–V characteristics of the cell were measured at 0.1 Sun as well, which resulted in much higher photocurrent when scaled to 1 Sun intensity for both CdSe and CdS/CdSe cells (Table S2, ESI†).
In order to better understand the device characteristics, impedance spectroscopy measurements were attempted to study charge collection in the cell but, unfortunately, severely overlapping spectral features made interpretation of the spectra very difficult. An alternative approach to investigate charge collection is to measure the spectral incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) with respect to the illumination direction. Based upon the ratio of the rear (counter electrode side) to front (photoelectrode side) IPCE, combined with optical measurements, the diffusion length and charge injection efficiency can be estimated by fitting using an expression based upon the well-known “diffusion model”.41Fig. 6 shows the results obtained with a 10CdSe cell, where a large difference between rear and front IPCE spectra can be observed indicating rather inefficient charge collection. In order to verify that the observed difference is not because of cell instability during the measurement, several cells were fabricated and some were illuminated first from the front and then from the rear, while others were illuminated first from the rear side. To further quantify the value of charge collection efficiency, the model41 was fitted to the IPCE ratio data and is presented in the inset of Fig. 6. As can be observed, the model fails to predict the experimental data for wavelengths between 350 and 450 nm if a wavelength-independent diffusion length is used. Ultimately, the value of the hole diffusion length obtained from this approach was a few hundred nanometers ranging between 150 and 300 nm, being much shorter than the film thickness. Using the estimated diffusion length, the collection efficiencies for photoelectrode side and counter electrode side illumination were calculated following the literature.41,42 The maximum front collection efficiency was 22% at 350 nm and declined almost linearly to 10% at 750 nm. The rear collection efficiency was only 1.6% at 350 nm and increased almost linearly to a maximum value of 6.8% at a wavelength of 750 nm.
 Fig. 6  Photocathode (front) side illumination and counter electrode (rear) side illumination IPCE spectra of a 10CdSe cell. The inset shows the experimental IPCE ratio and that fitted from diffusion model. 
The diffusion model assumes that the charge injection efficiency is independent of the illumination direction and the rear and front calculation must result in identical charge injection efficiency. As expected, calculation of charge injection efficiencies using the aforementioned model resulted in almost identical values for rear and front. Interestingly, the calculated charge injection efficiency was strongly wavelength dependent and followed the shape of the IPCE spectra. The value of the injection efficiency was ∼20% at 350 nm and increased to a peak of ∼100% at ∼400 nm and then gradually decreased to the value of 5% at 750 nm (Fig. S3, ESI†). It is noteworthy that the attained injection efficiency trend was reproducible for several identical cells tested.
Since an adequate fit of the entire IPCE ratio spectra with a single value of the hole diffusion length turns out to be difficult, it is possible that the wavelength dependence of the injection efficiency arises due to model inadequacies. These may occur if the recombination dynamics are not linear in hole density as assumed in the present model.42–44 Alternatively, assuming approximate validity of the model in the wavelength region where good fits could be obtained with a constant diffusion length, the size polydispersity of the deposited quantum-sized sensitizer and hot carrier injection could account for the apparent wavelength-dependent charge injection.
Conclusions
In summary, semiconductor-sensitized NiO solar cells were fabricated by conformally coating CdS, CdSe and cascade CdS/CdSe sensitizers onto mesoporous NiO films by the SILAR method. With polysulfide as the electron acceptor, for the first time NiO-based photocathodic SSCs were unambiguously demonstrated. Improved performance was achieved with cascade CdS/CdSe cells, indicating that the CdS layer deposited in between NiO and CdSe effectively suppresses the recombination and enhances the cell performance as compared to CdSe cells. While encouraging, these p-NiO based SSCs still suffer from low power conversion efficiency. It is revealed from front and rear IPCE measurements that the cells are constrained by inefficient charge collection as a result of a short hole diffusion length in the mesoscopic NiO film. This partly arises from the fast recombination of injected holes in NiO with electrons residing in CdSe and the electrolyte, as supported by the low Voc of the cells, as well as the fact that the cascade CdS/CdSe resulted in enhanced photocurrent and photovoltage. To improve cell performance, judicious interfacial engineering is desired in future studies to mitigate recombination and to further promote photovoltage and photocurrent. Furthermore, employment of an efficient redox electrolyte instead of polysulfide and optimization of NiO film could result in enhanced performance of p-SSC as its molecular dye sensitized counterpart.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by URC Grant No. R-284-000-075-112 and NRF CRP Grant No. R-284-000-079-592.
Notes and references
J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8940 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, E. A. Gibson, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1759 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizoguchi and S. Fujihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, K78 CrossRef CAS .
F. Odobel, L. c. Le Pleux, Y. Pellegrin and E. Blart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sumikura, S. Mori, S. Shimizu, H. Usami and E. Suzuki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 199, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17455 CAS .
A. Morandeira, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Hammarström, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19403 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y. B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bauerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, M. Linder, T. Brinck, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2993 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morandeira, J. Fortage, T. Edvinsson, L. Le Pleux, E. Blart, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, L. Hammarstrom and F. Odobel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1721 CAS .
S. Uehara, S. Sumikura, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 641 CAS .
S. Mori, S. Fukuda, S. Sumikura, Y. Takeda, Y. Tamaki, E. Suzuki and T. Abe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16134 CAS .
A. Nakasa, E. Suzuki, H. Usami and H. Fujimatsu, Chem. Lett., 2005, 428 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, G. H. Guai, C. Guo, Q. Song, S. P. Jiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang and C. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12209 CAS .
X. L. Zhang, F. Huang, A. Nattestad, K. Wang, D. Fu, A. Mishra, P. Bauerle, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4808 RSC .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Physica E, 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778 CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
A. Franceschetti, J. M. An and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2191 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713 CrossRef .
J. H. Rhee, Y. H. Lee, P. Bera and S. I. Seok, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 477, 345 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Chan, J. R. Jennings, M. A. Hossain, K. K. Z. Yu and Q. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, H733 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kang, K. Zhu, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10419 RSC .
M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, Z. Y. Koh and Q. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3172 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, J. Bang, J. Park, S. Kim and S.-M. Park, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5636 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hossain, G. Yang, M. Parameswaran, J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21878 CAS .
I. Hotovy, J. Huran and L. Spiess, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 2609 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, K. Pohl and H. Weller, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 174, 241 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, I. n. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4208 CAS .
M. B. Mohamed, D. Tonti, A. Al-Salman, A. Chemseddine and M. Chergui, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Nicolau, M. Dupuy and M. Brunel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2915 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604 CrossRef .
X. Wu and E. K. L. Yeow, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4390 RSC .
M. A. Hossain, J. R. Jennings, C. Shen, J. H. Pan, Z. Y. Koh, N. Mathews and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16235 RSC .
O. Niitsoo, S. K. Sarkar, C. Pejoux, S. Rühle, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 306 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, F. Li and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14665 CAS .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15109 CAS .
S. Soedergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1994, 98, 5552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and I. n. Mora-Seró, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 450 CrossRef .
J. Villanueva-Cab, H. Wang, G. Oskam and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 748 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes and B. C. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19134 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM and HRTEM images of CdS-coated NiO, photovoltaic parameters, and cell performance comparison for different cascades. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp43613fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic diagram illustrating the working principle of CdSe-sensitized mesoscopic p-NiO solar cells. The kinetic processes occurring at the NiO/CdSe/electrolyte interface are: k1, excitation of CdSe upon illumination; k2, hole injection from VB of CdSe into VB of NiO; k3, sensitizer regeneration by acceptor species (Sx2−) in the electrolyte; k4, geminate recombination of holes in NiO with electrons in the CB of CdSe; k5, recombination of holes in NiO with donor species (S2−) in the electrolyte (dark current).	 

 	Fig. 2  FESEM image (a) and TEM images (b and c) of the as-prepared colloidal NiO particles; TEM images (d and e) and high-resolution TEM image (f) of CdSe-sensitized NiO. The arrows in (f) mark the lattice fringes of deposited nanocrystalline CdSe.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) bunsenite NiO, (b) zinc-blend CdSe, (c) the synthesized NiO mesoporous thin film on the FTO substrate, (d) as-prepared CdSe-coated NiO thin film on FTO, and (e) sample after sintering at 200 °C. Peaks marked with stars are from the FTO substrate.	 

 	Fig. 4  UV-Vis optical density spectra (left) of pristine NiO, CdS-, CdSe- and CdS/CdSe-sensitized NiO, and photoluminescence spectra (right) of CdSe-sensitized Al2O3 and NiO. The excitation wavelength is 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  
j–V Characteristics (a) and IPCE spectra (b) of CdS, CdSe and CdS/CdSe-sensitized NiO cells. The thickness of the electrodes is ∼1.2 μm. The inset of (b) shows the possible band alignments at the CdS/CdSe interface on the surface of mesoscopic NiO.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocathode (front) side illumination and counter electrode (rear) side illumination IPCE spectra of a 10CdSe cell. The inset shows the experimental IPCE ratio and that fitted from diffusion model.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TEM and HRTEM images of CdS-coated NiO, photovoltaic parameters, and cell performance comparison for different cascades. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp43613f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
