Solvent vapour annealing of methylammonium lead halide perovskite: what's the catch?   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03023F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03023F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10943-10956Solvent vapour annealing of methylammonium lead halide perovskite: what's the catch?†

        
          
            Onkar S. 
            Game
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Joel A. 
            Smith
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tarek I. 
            Alanazi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Wong-Stringer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vikas 
            Kumar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Cornelia 
            Rodenburg
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nick J. 
            Terrill
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            David G. 
            Lidzey
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S3 7RH, UK. E-mail: o.game@sheffield.ac.uk; d.g.lidzey@sheffield.ac.uk
bDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S1 3JD, UK
cDiamond Light Source Ltd, Diamond House, Harwell Science & Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, UK
Received 
      16th March 2020
    , Accepted 12th May 2020First published on 13th May 2020AbstractSolvent vapour annealing (SVA) is a common post-processing technique used to increase the average grain size of lead halide perovskite films and thus enhance device performance. The prevailing wisdom is that large grain perovskite films lead to enhanced stability, however, we observed the reverse in CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) with dimethylformamide vapour treatment compared to non-SVA controls. Using a range of microstructural characterisation techniques, we reveal that SVA is not a chemically benign grain-growth process, but leads to substantial stoichiometric changes in the perovskite films. Intrinsic material degradation is investigated under external loading with in situ X-ray scattering, and combined with lifetime testing on full devices. We show that the operational stability of SVA devices greatly depends on the initial stoichiometry of the MAPbI3 with PbI2-excess compositions being least stable. However, the incorporation of excess organic-halides in the precursor solution helps to mitigate the deleterious effects of SVA on device stability. This work critically re-evaluates current thinking around grain structure and stoichiometry in achieving long-term stability for perovskite solar cells.
Introduction
The remarkable optoelectronic properties of hybrid lead halide perovskites (LHP), combined with their ease of processing via low-temperature solution routes have made LHPs one of the most promising new-generation photovoltaic materials.2–5 Recent progress in the development of deposition techniques, compositional engineering and passivation strategies have led to outstanding improvement in device power conversion efficiency (PCE), with perovskite single-junction devices reaching 25.2% and Si-perovskite monolithic tandem solar cells now at 28%.6 Although LHP solar cells have reached such efficiencies in a short period (∼7 years of focused research activity), their transition from lab to industrial scale still faces challenges such as developing appropriate device manufacture routes and enhancing operational stability to the level of established inorganic photovoltaic technologies.7
One of the most significant properties of LHP materials is their ability to be fabricated into thin films having a high degree of crystallinity, despite being processed from solution at low temperature (80–180 °C).8 Most processing routes used to create LHPs result in the formation of polycrystalline films having an average grain size that is smaller than the film thickness required to maximize light harvesting. Unfortunately, films composed of small crystalline grains contain a high density of grain-boundaries that can adversely affect the photovoltaic performance of the resultant device. This results from grain boundaries distributed along carrier transport pathways which cause resistive and recombination losses.9 Grain-boundaries within LHP films have also been shown to facilitate undesirable effects such as ion migration10,11 that result in hysteretic effects in the current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of photovoltaic (PV) devices. Interestingly, the extrinsic stability of LHPs may also depend on grain size, with grain-boundaries acting as diffusion pathways for the ingress of moisture and oxygen.12–14 Therefore, PV devices based on LHP thin films containing a low density of grain-boundaries are expected to have improved optoelectronic performance and enhanced extrinsic stability. It has been found that grain growth in LHP films following extended thermal annealing often occurs at the expense of compositional degradation.15 Furthermore, the use of process additives and compositional engineering strategies to enhance grain size can also result in the formation of secondary phases that may have detrimental effects on overall device performance.16,17
Researchers interested in controlling grain-size in LHPs have turned to the use of solvent vapour annealing (SVA).18–20 This commonly used post-processing technique has been shown to reduce grain-boundary density and form grains that extend continuously between the anode and cathode contacts in operational PV devices. The SVA process involves annealing LHP films in the presence of a polar-aprotic solvent vapour (e.g. dimethylformamide, DMF), resulting in a level of grain growth that is usually significantly greater than that can be achieved using thermal annealing or additive engineering methods.21 Due to the simplicity of the method and the presumption that material composition is unaffected, SVA has been used in fundamental studies that investigate the influence of grain size on stability22 and the optoelectronic properties of LHPs.23–26 There have been several literature reports describing the SVA mechanism, which usually report its beneficial effects on PV device efficiency.1,18–20 Indeed, in our recent study on multilayer encapsulation of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) based perovskite solar cells, we observed an improvement in photovoltaic parameters with SVA.27 However, despite effective device encapsulation, we found that SVA processed devices had a significantly lower intrinsic operational stability than comparable “small-grain” thermally annealed devices. This surprising finding stands in contrast to the general wisdom that suggests films having larger grains should be more robust towards extrinsic degradation processes.12
In this paper, we investigate the effect of the SVA process on the operational stability of LHP solar cells, and use photoconductive atomic force microscopy (pc-AFM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to understand the effects of SVA on phase and optoelectronic properties of MAPbI3 films. We show that annealing MAPbI3 films in the presence of DMF vapour results in compositional changes in the film, with the initial stoichiometry of the MAPbI3 precursor solution playing an important role in determining the relative rate of film and device degradation. Using in situ grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to monitor the degradation of thin-films subjected to stress (elevated temperature, humidity, illumination) together with continuous illumination lifetime testing on full devices, we demonstrate the deleterious effect of SVA. We ascribe the rapid loss in performance of SVA-treated perovskite solar cells to a loss of volatile organic halide species (MAI in the case of MAPbI3) caused by the acid–base interaction of (polar) DMF with the ammonium moiety of MA+. It is then shown that the incorporation of excess cationic species in the precursor solution helps to mitigate the detrimental effects of SVA on the operational stability of devices.
Although the primary focus of this study is an investigation into the effects of SVA, we can draw more general conclusions and insights into the effect of material stoichiometry on the long-term stability of MAPbI3-based solar cells. We expect our results can be generalised to other mixed-cation perovskite compositions that contain methylammonium cations or possibly formamidinium (HC(NH2)2), or to other SVA processes that involve the use of polar aprotic solvents that generate strong hydrogen bonding interactions.
Results and discussion
Influence of SVA on PbI2-excess MAPbI3 – insights from pc-AFM
We have studied SVA on MAPbI3 thin films deposited from methylamine-bubbled acetonitrile (ACN/MA) solutions.27–29 This solvent system was chosen to avoid repeated exposure of the films to common solvents used in the SVA process and therefore allowed us to study the influence of DMF exclusively during the vapour annealing stage. Details of film and device fabrication can be found in the Experimental methods section of the ESI.† Briefly, precursor solutions containing a mixture of MAI:PbI2 were bubbled with methylamine gas to ensure the complete dissolution of MAI and PbI2. Several reports on MAPbI3 and multi-cation perovskite films have shown that the excess lead iodide (PbI2) in precursor solutions and films results in passivation of grain-boundaries, leading to enhanced photovoltaic performance.30–33 However, in our earlier study, we observed accelerated degradation in devices with SVA-treated PbI2-excess stoichiometry.27 Therefore, to understand our previous results, we initially used ACN/MA ink having a PbI2-excess composition (PbI2:MAI = 1.06:1). Thin films were cast from the precursor solutions by spin coating. Following this, films were thermally annealed at 100 °C for 3 minutes after which they were SVA treated by exposure to a DMF vapour (also at 100 °C) for 7 minutes. Films were then thermally annealed for a further 5 minutes to remove any residual DMF. In all cases, non-SVA controls were also prepared.
To understand how SVA affects the physical morphology of perovskite films, we have imaged SVA films and their relevant controls using photoconductive AFM (pc-AFM). This technique creates simultaneous images of topography and photocurrent at nanoscale resolution, allowing morphological features (e.g. grain size/grain boundaries) to be correlated with the photo-response of the active layer.34,35 To record pc-AFM measurements, a series of perovskite films were prepared on ITO/SnO2 hole-blocking layers34 and imaged using a Pt–Ir coated AFM probe. This structure effectively acts as a PV device (albeit without a hole-transport layer), with the AFM probe acting as the device top contact. Such ‘devices’ were then illuminated through the ITO/SnO2 using a blue (448 nm) LED, with the photocurrent generated measured at zero applied bias to obtain a short-circuit current density map.

Fig. 1(a) shows the measured topography of 6% PbI2 molar excess MAPbI3 film that was not subjected to vapour annealing (henceforth referred to as Pb-NVA). We find that typical perovskite grains have a lateral size between 100 and 300 nm; a value typical for MAPbI3 made by the acetonitrile solvent route.28 Interestingly, we find that such films are characterised by a population of much larger crystallites (200 nm to 1 μm) that protrude from the film surface. We believe that such structures result from phase separation of the excess PbI2 from the MAPbI3 matrix. This finding is in contrast to several previous reports31,33 in which it was claimed that excess PbI2 crystalized uniformly along grain boundaries in MAPbI3, thereby resulting in a trap-passivation effect (see ESI Note 1†). Fig. 1(a) shows the corresponding photocurrent maps recorded from a Pb-NVA film in Fig. 1(b). Here, dark patches can be seen mostly at positions corresponding to the presumed PbI2 crystallites, suggesting that such PbI2 domains do not allow the extraction of photo-carriers. We have performed an analysis of the photocurrent recorded across a typical 3 × 3 μm photocurrent scan, and find the average photocurrent to be 350 pA.
 Fig. 1  Contact mode AFM (height profile) for (a) Pb-NVA and (c) Pb-VA films. Photocurrent maps for (b) Pb-NVA and (d) Pb-VA simultaneously acquired with topography using pc-AFM under blue (448 nm) LED illumination and short-circuit conditions. 
In Fig. 1(c) we plot an AFM topograph of a PbI2-excess film that had undergone solvent vapour annealing (henceforth denoted as Pb-VA). Here, we observe that the SVA process results in grain growth with the average grain size now being between 300 and 700 nm. Significantly, most of the grains in the Pb-VA film generate a higher photocurrent in the corresponding photocurrent map (see Fig. 1(d)) than was observed in the Pb-NVA film (Fig. 1(b)), with the average photocurrent being 670 pA. Comparing Fig. 1(b) and (d), we find that the area of dark-patches appears to have substantially increased in the Pb-VA film compared to Pb-NVA, with several large crystallites being almost completely dark (vide infra) in the photocurrent map in Fig. 1(d). For completeness, we plot a pixel frequency vs. current histogram for Pb-NVA and Pb-VA films in Fig. S1(a) and (b).† Here, we find a substantial increase in the number of pixels producing a photocurrent greater than 1 nA in the Pb-VA film, although there is still a significant fraction of pixels in the Pb-VA film that produce a near-zero photocurrent. We ascribe this apparent higher photocurrent in SVA films to a reduction in recombination losses at lateral grain boundaries (parallel to the plane of the substrate). In small grain Pb-NVA perovskite films, high recombination rates at lateral grain-boundaries are one of the major factors that limit out-of-plane charge transport and photocurrent generation in a PV device.36,37 In contrast, SVA-induced grain growth often creates grains that span the entire active layer thickness in a PV device; a process that reduces carrier recombination at the grain boundaries.
To investigate the nature of the photo-inactive phases in Pb-VA films, we have performed XRD and SEM-EDS measurements on SVA and non-treated films. This is shown in Fig. 2(a) where we plot XRD spectra of Pb-NVA and Pb-VA films. Here we find a small increase in the intensity of the PbI2 (001) peak (2θ = 12.6°) after solvent vapour annealing. This change in film composition suggests a change in the stoichiometry of the Pb-NVA film via loss of methylammonium iodide, which presumably occurs during and after the DMF solvent vapour annealing process. This conclusion is strengthened by SEM-EDS measurements performed on the same films as shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c). Here, PbI2 rich (or MAI deficient) crystallites in Pb-NVA film can be evidenced from the distinct contrast between stoichiometric MAPbI3 grains (which appear darker) and PbI2-rich grains (which appear brighter) due to their different electron densities.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD of PbI2-excess MAPbI3 before (Pb-NVA) and after (Pb-VA) solvent vapour annealing; (b) and (c) show SEM images of Pb-NVA and Pb-VA respectively. 
Similar well-defined bright features have been identified as being PbI2 using secondary electron hyperspectral imaging of MAPbI3 pellets prepared with 5% molar excess of PbI2.38 We have measured the proportion of the film area occupied by these PbI2-rich grains in the SEM images (total area ∼ 8.0 μm2) as shown in Fig. S2.† These occupy approximately 3% of the total area of the Pb-NVA SEM image in Fig. 2(b), a value that increases five-fold to 13% for the Pb-VA film in Fig. 2(c). Fig. S3(b)† shows an EDS spectrum recorded from one of the representative brighter gains (circled yellow) together with that from a darker gain (circled red) in a Pb-VA film. This measurement indicates that the brighter grains contain a greater fraction of Pb and I, and a relatively lower fraction of C and N than is observed in the darker grains. We conclude that the low MAI content in ‘bright’ grains results from a loss of MAI during the DMF vapour annealing; a result in accord with our XRD measurements recorded on bulk films (see Fig. 2(a)). Clearly, the SVA process results in a change in film stoichiometry, with such changes occurring predominantly at the top surface.
Mitigating loss of organic halides during SVA
To mitigate the loss of MAI during SVA, we have prepared films using solutions that contain an initial 3% stoichiometric excess of MAI (henceforth denoted as MA-NVA) and have explored their response to the SVA process. A typical AFM scan of an MA-NVA film is shown in Fig. 3(a), with the film having a uniform morphology and grains with an average size of 100 to 300 nm. Significantly, there is no evidence for the platelet/rod-shaped structures that were observed in PbI2-rich films (see Fig. 1). This suggests that the 3% MAI excess in solution prevents the formation of phase-separated PbI2 or PbI2-rich grains during film formation. Although there is again contrast between the photocurrent brightness of individual grains, there are no large grains that appear dark in photocurrent maps. This observation has been made over both large areas (10 μm × 10 μm) as shown in Fig. S4(b)† and over small areas (5 μm × 5 μm) as shown in Fig. 3(b).
 Fig. 3  Contact mode AFM (height profile) for (a) MA-NVA and (c) MA-VA films. Photocurrent maps (simultaneously acquired with topography) of (b) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA using pc-AFM under 1-sun equivalent LED illumination and short circuit conditions. 
When such MAI excess films were solvent vapour annealed (here termed as MA-VA) we observe an increase in average grain sizes to between 300 and 700 nm as observed in Fig. 3(c). Again, there is an absence of completely dark grains in the accompanying photocurrent map as shown in Fig. 3(d). This indicates that the excess-MAI stoichiometry prevents the formation of PbI2 rich grains even when the films are solvent vapour treated.
To further understand the observed photocurrent behaviour, we have performed a statistical analysis of the pc-AFM data for both compositions from their photocurrent histograms. Comparing Fig. S1(a) and S5(a)† we find that the photocurrent distribution in MA-NVA and Pb-NVA films is similar (except there is a higher fraction of zero photocurrent pixels in Pb-NVA). Interestingly, we find that the peak of the photocurrent histogram in the MA-VA film is shifted to a higher value (1.2 nA) than in MA-NVA (0.5 nA) (see Fig. S5(b)†) with a higher mean photocurrent also observed in MA-VA compared to MA-NVA (880 pA and 360 pA respectively). The number of pixels that produce a near-zero photocurrent was higher in MA-VA than MA-NVA; an effect that results from the grain boundary regions of MA-VA which appear photo-inactive (which is evident from the darker grain boundaries in the pc-AFM map of MA-VA compared with MA-NVA in Fig. 3). This indicates that the loss of MAI during solvent vapour annealing can at least be partially compensated for by the addition of excess MAI into the MAPbI3 precursor, although not eliminated.
To gain further insight into the effect of the solvent anneal process, we have used XRD to characterise the material phases present in the different stoichiometric samples. This is shown in Fig. 4(a) where we observe a two-fold increase in scattering intensity from the (110) plane for MA-NVA compared to Pb-VA films. However, we find that the scattering intensity from (310) planes at 2θ ∼ 31.9° in MA-NVA is similar to that from Pb-VA. As the average size of crystalline grains in MA-NVA and Pb-NVA films are very similar, this suggests that the two-fold increase in X-ray diffraction intensity of the (110)/(220) peaks observed in the MA-NVA films may result from an increased density of coherent scattering from domains oriented in the [110] direction. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the diffraction intensity of (110)/(220) peaks in the MA-VA film also increases by ∼2.5 times in comparison to the MA-NVA film. Note that we did not observe such coherent scattering along [110] in the XRD for non-annealed freshly spin-cast films (see Fig. S6a†) and thus we conclude that temperature, material composition and casting-environment may each play a role. Fig. S6(b)† also demonstrates that the FWHM of the (110) diffraction peak in the MA-VA film is narrower than its equivalent peak in MA-NVA (0.100 and 0.115° respectively). This finding is consistent with the larger apparent grain size of MA-VA films shown in the SEM image presented in Fig. 4(c) (MA-VA and MA-NVA films have an average grain size of 300–700 nm and 100–300 nm respectively). Importantly, no PbI2 diffraction peak is observed from MA-NVA or MA-VA films around 2θ ∼ 12.6° (see the inset of Fig. 4(a)). This finding is confirmed by the fairly uniform SEM image contrast observed in the MA-NVA and MA-VA films as shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c); a result implying a high degree of compositional homogeneity between the grains.38 This result is in accord with the pc-AFM maps of MA-NVA and MA-VA (see Fig. 3(b) and (d)) in which an absence of photo-inactive grains (dark regions) was observed. For the sake of comparison, Fig. S7(a) and (b)† shows the XRD and SEM of PbI2-excess and MAI-excess compositions both with and without solvent vapour annealing. Taken together, our results indicate that an excess MAI in the precursor solution has both suppressed the formation of phase-separated PbI2 crystallites (both with and without SVA) and has resulted in the formation of films in which crystalline grains form domains that scatter more efficiently in the [110] direction. Note however that enhanced scattering along [110] in MA-NVA or MA-VA is not on its own sufficient to indicate that perovskite grains undergo preferential orientation.
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns of Pb-VA, MA-NVA and MA-VA (vertically offset for comparison and clarity), inset shows a magnified view of XRD patterns, showing no PbI2 scattering at 12.6° for MA-NVA and MA-VA. Parts (b) and (c) show SEM images of MA-NVA and MA-VA respectively. 
To gain further insight into structural changes caused as a result of varying the solution stoichiometry or the SVA process, we have used lab-based ex situ grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) to characterise representative thin films. The 2D scattering patterns for all four samples are similar (see Fig. S8†), with the primary MAPbI3 (110)/(002) reflection at Q ≈ 1.01 Å−1 (equivalent to 2θ ≈ 14.2°) present in all films. We observed characteristic scattering from PbI2 at Q ≈ 0.9 Å−1 in both Pb-NVA and Pb-VA samples, which was not present in MAI excess samples (MA-NVA and MA-VA). Fig. S9(b)† plots 1D radial profiles after azimuthal integration of 2D patterns for all samples. We find that Pb-VA sample is characterised by enhanced scatter from PbI2 (Q ≈ 0.9 Å−1) compared to that from the Pb-NVA film, indicating the loss of organic species due to SVA. In contrast, radial line profiles from the MAI-excess samples show a complete absence of crystalline PbI2 and an increase in (110) scattering intensity; a trend that is also observed in the XRD patterns shown in Fig. 4(a). Significantly, we find that freshly prepared Pb-VA samples exhibited scattering from a set of low-intensity peaks at Q = 0.26, 0.44, 0.53 and 0.63 Å−1 (equivalent to 2θ = 3.7°, 6.2°, 7.5° and 8.9°), with scattering plots shown in Fig. S8 and S10.† We note that such features are comparable to the previously reported phase (MA)2(DMF)2Pb3I8 that contains (Pb3I8)2− octahedral chains that are intercalated with MA and DMF.39 This phase is formed as an intermediate when MAPbI3 is processed under PbI2-rich conditions (using DMF as the solvent) and has an orthorhombic structure (space group Pnnm) with expected reflections at 6.5° (110), 8.0° (020) and 9.5° (120). We have found that this phase is metastable and can be removed from the film upon prolonged exposure to ambient air/moisture or extended heat treatment (see Fig. S10(b)†). The significance of such intermediate DMF complexes is discussed later in the manuscript.
Influence of stoichiometry and SVA on device performance
To understand the effect of the initial stoichiometry of MAPbI3 films and SVA on photovoltaic performance a series of photovoltaic devices were fabricated having the general structure ITO/np-SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au. Fig. 5 plots J–V curves of the best devices fabricated using Pb-NVA, Pb-VA, MA-NVA and MA-VA films, with the corresponding device metrics listed in Table S1.† We find that in PbI2-rich films that have not undergone SVA (Pb-NVA), the peak PCE determined using a reverse-scan (Voc → Jsc) and a forward-scan (Jsc → Voc) were ∼16% and ∼12.3% respectively (a moderate degree of J–V hysteresis). On SVA, the reverse-scan PCE of the best performing Pb-VA device was found to be similar (∼15.8%) but the forward-scan efficiency was significantly reduced to 6.9%; a substantial increase in J–V hysteresis. We note that the reduction in fill factor (FF) in Pb-VA containing devices when measured using a forward-scan indicates shunt losses at one of the charge-extracting interfaces. We speculate that this effect results from a depletion of MAI at the perovskite top surface following solvent vapour annealing, thus adversely affecting carrier recombination at the MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interface.
 Fig. 5  
J–V curves of (a) Pb-NVA, (b) Pb-VA, (c) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA fabricated in planar n–i–p architecture (glass/FTO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au). 
On addition of excess MAI, we observe an improvement in all photovoltaic parameters in non-SVA films (see Table S1†), leading to higher reverse and forward-scan efficiencies of 17.8% and 16.2% respectively. On SVA, we find that devices based on MAI-excess films retain a high forward-scan efficiency of 15.9%. An improvement in interface quality in MAI-excess compositions is also evident from the low J–V hysteresis observed in MA-NVA and MA-VA based devices. For completeness, we have also explored perovskite films having a stoichiometric composition in PV devices, in which the MAI:PbI2 molar ratio was 1:1. Fig. S11 and Table S1† plot J–V curves and photovoltaic parameters of stoichiometric MAPbI3 devices with and without solvent vapour annealing, termed MAPI-VA and MAPI-NVA respectively. We find that both MAPI-NVA/VA films performed better in PV devices than corresponding PbI2-excess compositions but were lower performing than MAI-excess devices.
We summarise full device statistics obtained from 32 pixels per film preparation condition in Fig. S12.† We find that without solvent vapour-annealing, all photovoltaic parameters increase monotonically as film composition is tuned from being deficit in MAI to having an MAI excess. This trend of increased device metrics as MAI concentration is increased is also observed following solvent vapour annealing, albeit with lower statistical significance. Importantly, the negative effects of vapour-annealing on forward-scan metrics were found to reduce with the addition of MAI, with MAI-excess compositions being the least affected by this process. We conclude that MAI-excess compositions lead to both better device performance without SVA perovskite treatment, and appear to be least susceptible to the detrimental effects of SVA. Interestingly, we did not observe improvements in the device performance parameters after SVA in both PbI2-excess and MAI-excess compositions; a finding that is in contrast to previous reports.18,19 One of the main reasons for enhancements in photovoltaic efficiency following SVA includes healing of voids present at the substrate–perovskite interface in apparent smooth and compact perovskite films.19,40,41 Here, the ACN/MA process used in this paper resulted in films that were free of voids around the SnO2-perovskite interface (see the cross-sectional SEM image shown in Fig. S17(a) and (b)†). Therefore, in the devices reported here, we suspect that changes in stoichiometry following SVA likely play a dominant role in reducing the observed device performance.
Influence of SVA on material stability – in situ GIWAXS study
Although it is useful to determine the effect of material composition on initial device performance, the long-term operational stability of devices is equally important when considering the practical deployment of any photovoltaic technology. We have previously demonstrated that certain film-treatments and perovskite-compositions that seemingly improve initial device performance can result in reduced operational stability when devices are measured over extended timescales.27 We have found degradation to be stoichiometry-dependent and can result in different degradation pathways specific to local composition.22,38 We therefore studied the intrinsic material stability of the various perovskite compositions under accelerated stress factors (high-humidity, enhanced-temperature and intense optical illumination) using synchrotron radiation at Diamond Light Source I22 beamline. Here, GIWAXS scattering measurements were made on films placed in a humidity-controlled chamber incorporating a hot plate, while illuminated with a white light LED. Humidity was maintained by mixing moist air and dry-nitrogen using two mass flow controllers with an in-line feedback sensor at the point of mixing. Fig. S13† shows a photograph of the humidity-controlled chamber, with GIWAXS measurements typically at ∼40 ± 5% relative humidity, 50 °C hotplate temperature and 200 ± 10 mW cm−2 irradiation.
In these measurements, we have monitored time-dependent changes in the MAPbI3 (110) peak intensity to determine relative degradation rates under high stress (accelerated degradation) conditions. Our experiments confirm that perovskite composition strongly influences the rate at which MAPbI3 films undergo degradation. This is shown in Fig. 6(a), where we show NVA films containing an MAI-excess undergo degradation at a slightly slower rate than PbI2-excess when tested under identical conditions, with degradation being complete in both types of films after ∼1 hour. However, more significant differences in film stability were observed following SVA as shown in Fig. 6(b). Here, the perovskite phase in films containing a PbI2-excess (Pb-VA) were almost completely degraded after 35–40 minutes. Our results indicate that films containing an MAI-excess are more stable both with and without SVA; suggesting that PV devices based on this material composition should have enhanced operational lifetime.
 Fig. 6  Semi-log plots of normalised intensity of MAPbI3 (110) peak over time for (a) non-solvent vapour annealed and (b) solvent annealed MAI-excess and PbI2-excess composition. Panel (a) shows the influence of stoichiometry on accelerated degradation while panel (b) shows the degradation of solvent vapour annealed perovskite films with different stoichiometry (MAI-excess and PbI2-excess). 
Influence of SVA on device stability
To determine whether such findings can be translated to device lifetime, we have followed the operational performance of un-encapsulated PV devices under continuous 1-sun equivalent illumination for ∼120 hours, with J–V sweeps recorded every 20 min, and devices held at open-circuit between measurements. Specific details about the methodology used for device lifetime testing can be found in the experimental section. We note that the presence of an internal electric field and the flow of current (i.e. under short-circuit condition) or the accumulation of charged species (i.e. under open-circuit conditions) or both (under maximum power point conditions) has been shown to significantly affect the stability of photovoltaic devices.42
In Fig. 7, we plot the metrics of PV devices based on the four different perovskite conditions (Pb-NVA, Pb-VA, MA-NVA, MA-VA) over 120 hours. We find that device stability is strongly dependent on the composition of the active layer and the application (or not) of the SVA treatment. The most dramatic reduction in device efficiency during aging is seen in solvent vapour annealed PbI2-excess composition (Pb-VA). Here, a near exponential decrease in JSC is observed over time (see Fig. 7(b)) that results in a significant loss in PCE (see Fig. 7(d)). Interestingly, PbI2-excess films that were not subjected to SVA (Pb-NVA) underwent a slower (linear) reduction in JSC; a result that suggests that different degradation pathways may exist in such films. To determine whether such losses in JSC of Pb-VA devices result from an increased vulnerability of the perovskite layer to moisture/oxygen, we performed similar lifetime measurements on Pb-VA cells that had been encapsulated with 150 nm of SiO2. Significantly, we observed similar degradation rates in Pb-VA devices with SiO2 encapsulation (see Fig. S14†). This indicates that the degradation process intrinsic to the perovskite material, with the effects of illumination and J–V cycling being the primary mechanisms that cause such a loss in performance in encapsulated PV devices. The near-complete loss in performance of Pb-VA based devices at the end of lifetime testing is evident from the photograph of the aged device shown in Fig. 7. Here, the Pb-VA film has turned yellowish, rather than the strongly absorbing dark film expected for MAPbI3. The Pb-NVA devices appeared to have retained some of their optical density at the end of the testing period – consistent with their higher performance and operational stability. In all cases, the degradation of MAPbI3 will limit the ability of the device to absorb light, and will also alter the charge carrier extraction rate, recombination dynamics and hence shunt resistance.
 Fig. 7  Evolution of unencapsulated device (a) VOC, (b) JSC, (c) fill factor and (d) PCE (all normalized to initial values) under continuous illumination (∼120 h). Right side column shows photographs of rear side of devices after 120 h continuous illumination J–V testing. 
Significantly, devices based on an MAI-excess composition without solvent vapour annealing (MA-NVA) had the highest stability (see Fig. 7(d)). Here, the VOC of MA-NVA devices maintained 97% of its initial value over 120 h, although the fill factor decreased by ∼10% over this period. Notably, device JSC underwent a positive burn-in, increasing by 5–10% over the first 20 h and then maintaining this value over the rest of the testing period. We note that we have previously observed similar improvements in JSC (and decrease in FF) in fully-encapsulated inverted architecture (p–i–n) devices27 based on a PbI2-excess composition, indicating that material stoichiometry may not be the sole reason for these changes. We suspect that improvements in JSC over short periods (∼20 h) most likely result from favourable changes in interface structure caused by ion migration processes.
The beneficial effect of excess-MAI on the stability of unencapsulated MA-NVA devices can be seen in Fig. 7(d), with such devices retaining ∼90% of their original efficiency after 120 h of continuous illumination. Devices using MAI-excess films that had been SVA (MA-VA) also largely retained their initial VOC, demonstrated a short-time increase in JSC and underwent a decrease in FF. However, a reduction in VOC (∼95%), JSC (∼83%) and FF (∼77%) resulted in a final PCE of around 63% of its original level after 120 h testing. This loss in PCE under continuous illumination testing in MA-VA as compared to MA-NVA indicates that the loss of cationic species during solvent vapour annealing may not be completely mitigated by the excess MAI.
For completeness, we also compared the lifetimes of films made with stoichiometric solutions (MAI:PbI2 1:1) without (MAPI-NVA) and with (MAPI-VA) solvent vapour annealing. Fig. S15† shows that devices using MAI-excess (with or without SVA) had better stability than either PbI2-excess or stoichiometric perovskites. We conclude that the incorporation of excess cation (here MAI) in precursor solution can be used to both improve device performance metrics, device stability as well as to mitigate the loss of cationic species during solvent vapour annealing.
To further understand the dependence of material composition and solvent vapour annealing on device degradation, we recorded cross-sectional SEM images of selected PV devices after lifetime testing, with representative images shown in Fig. 8. Here, all devices were encapsulated with a 150 nm thick SiO2 encapsulation layer. We first compare device cross-sections containing Pb-NVA and MA-NVA perovskites (see Fig. 8(a) and (c) respectively). Here, the effect of excess MAI content is striking; after 120 hours of continuous illumination, the cross-section of the MA-NVA based device shown in Fig. 8(c) is characterised by a well-defined grain structure, indicating negligible changes in the microstructure of the perovskite phase despite J–V cycling and being held at open-circuit conditions. The initial device cross-section of Pb-NVA sample before subjecting to lifetime testing (Fig. S16†) had a similar appearance to the MAI-excess sample without SVA treatment in Fig. 8(c), with the grain boundary structure within the perovskite film being initially well-defined with grain size ranging from 100–300 nm. However, after the continuous illumination lifetime testing, the Pb-NVA device cross-section (see Fig. 8(a)) was characterised by a series of voids (marked with yellow circles in the Fig. 8) along with a less-distinct grain boundary structure. This evolution in grain-structure suggests both the degradation and dynamic reconstruction of the perovskite during device operation. It has been previously shown that PbI2 can undergo photodecomposition to metallic Pb and molecular iodine (I2) at temperatures relevant to solar cell operation (40–80 °C).43 Wang et al.44 have also demonstrated that the evolution of gaseous I2 from a perovskite film, combined with migration and accumulation of I− ions under illumination and open-circuit conditions, sets up a chain reaction that results in further perovskite phase degradation to gaseous methylamine (CH3NH2), I2 and H2. We illustrate this process using the reaction scheme shown in ESI Scheme S18.† Such a chain reaction would require vacancy-mediated migration of I− ions.45 As PbI2-excess films (Pb-NVA or Pb-VA) are deficient in MAI, they are expected to be more susceptible to the formation of vacancy defects (VI and VMA), with the density of such defects likely to increase during SVA for the PbI2-excess composition.
 Fig. 8  SEM cross-sections of encapsulated (150 nm SiO2) (a) Pb-NVA, (b) Pb-VA, (c) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA device after ∼300 h of continuous illumination lifetime testing. Yellow circles in (a) denote the voids induced by degradation in the Pb-NVA sample. All the scale bars are 500 nm. 
We expect that the density of MA+ and I− related vacancy defects in MAI-excess films to be lower than in PbI2-excess films.46 We suggest that this is likely to lead to a more stable perovskite phase under operational conditions. Excess-MAI will likely act as a “reservoir” that replenishes the loss of methylammonium and iodide, thereby limiting the formation of interface defects or degradation products during device operation. This conclusion is consistent with the observation of increased hysteresis in the J–V sweeps of PbI2-excess devices compared to those made with an excess of MAI in the precursor solution.
We now compare device cross-sections in which the perovskite was subjected to SVA treatment. Here, cross-section images of SVA treated PbI2-excess and MAI-excess films after lifetime testing are shown in Fig. 8(b) and (d) respectively. The catastrophic failure of the Pb-VA device compared to the MA-VA device is evident as a decomposed active layer. The aged Pb-VA device (Fig. 8(b)) is characterised by large voids and platelet-like structures that are likely PbI2 crystallites along with other hydrate phases;47 a conclusion that is consistent with the bleached appearance of Pb-VA devices after lifetime testing (see Fig. 7, Pb-VA). We also note that the SiO2 encapsulation layer has undergone a degree of deformation – a process likely driven by strain within the device resulting from the conversion from MAPbI3 to PbI2 (or other degradation products47,48). In contrast, the MA-VA device (Fig. 8(d)) is characterised by a continuous grain structure, with such grains being relatively large as a result of the SVA process. Here, the SiO2 encapsulation layer appears flat, indicating an absence of strain within the device caused by degradation induced phase transitions.
Proposed mechanism of observed stoichiometric changes following SVA
We now propose a general mechanism to explain our results. Our mechanism is based on work by Guo et al.49 who suggested that when processing MAPbI3 using DMF/DMSO solvents, nucleation and growth of crystal grains takes place via the formation of intermediate polymeric plumbates.
On heating, such intermediate phases lose solvent molecules and then crystallise into a perovskite phase. Petrov et al.39 then showed that the nature of such intermediate plumbates in DMF strongly depends on precursor stoichiometry. Specifically, it was proposed that (MA)2(DMF)2Pb3I8, (MA)2(DMF)2Pb2I6 and (MA)3(DMF)PbI5 would form under PbI2-rich, stoichiometric and MAI-rich conditions respectively. It is important to note that such intermediate phases act as dominant pathways that drive nucleation and growth when DMF (or DMSO) is used as the primary processing solvent.
We illustrate the SVA process in Fig. 9(a). Here, polar aprotic solvents (such as DMF or DMSO) are good solvents for PbI2 and organic-halide compounds such as CH3NH3I. As the amount of solvent used in SVA is usually low (∼10 μL), a complete dissolution of the film is unlikely to occur. Instead, the solvent vapours are likely to form a thin layer of the intermediate plumbate complexes at regions having a high interfacial energy (such as the film surface and grain boundaries) as shown in previous studies1,19 and illustrated in Fig. 9(b). The formation of such intermediate complexes involves structural transitions from a 3D MAPbI3 perovskite to the quasi-1D fibrous plumbate phases (e.g. (MA)2(DMF)2Pb3I8) in which MA+ molecules are extracted from between the PbI6 octahedral cages. The polar aprotic nature of DMF/DMSO plays an important role in this process, as they act as a base and remove the relatively acidic MA+ ions. Structurally, the incorporation of DMF in MAPbI3 involves hydrogen bonding50 between –COδ− of DMF and –H3Nδ+ of MA+, with this bond being stronger than the hydrogen bond of –H3Nδ+ with the Iδ− of the Pb–I octahedra. This allows an extraction of MA+ ions from between the PbI6 octahedral cages and helps the temporary formation of plumbate structures. We speculate that three factors are important in the removal of weakly bound MA+ ions; (1) the removal of MA+ from PbI6− perovskite cage by DMF, (2) the strong hydrogen bonding between the –COδ− (in DMF) and –H3Nδ+ (in MA+), and (3) the use of annealing temperatures of 100 °C. This process leads to the formation of MAI-deficient perovskite grains, possibly with PbI2 present on the surface of these grains as illustrated in Fig. 9(c).
 Fig. 9  Proposed schematic illustrating the effect of DMF-SVA on the stoichiometry of MAPbI3 films. In part (a), DMF molecules interact at high surface energy interfaces at the top-surface and grain boundaries. In part (b), SVA at 100 °C results in a temporary structural transition from 3D MAPbI3 to a plumbate complex (e.g. (MA)2(DMF)2Pb3I8 (ref. 1)) in a thin layer near the high-energy interfaces such as grain boundaries and free surfaces. Part (c) illustrates the interaction between DMF and MA+, which when combined with an annealing temperature of 100 °C leads to loss of MAI. This results in the formation of a MAI-deficient MAPbI3 perovskite, with PbI2 located at the grain surface. 
Our experiments further suggest that the presence of excess unbound MAI at grain boundary regions helps to replenish the SVA-induced loss of MA+ and I− from MAPbI3 that results from SVA. Note that excess-MAI in the form of a salt during SVA is unlikely to be strongly affected by this process due to the strong ionic-bond between MA+ and I−.
We speculate that this mechanism is likely to occur during SVA using other polar solvents such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and gamma-butyrolactone (GBL) which also have an electronegative –COδ− group. The conclusions drawn in this manuscript are also likely to apply when SVA is applied to mixed-cation perovskite compositions that contain MA cations, and may also apply to FA compositions. We note that a recent in situ synchrotron study on triple cation (FAMACs) perovskite devices concluded that the presence of MA+ leads to more thermodynamically stable structures than MA+ free FACs lead halide perovskites.51 The extent of loss of cationic species will thus depend on bonding strength between the cation and solvent, the nature of the SVA process solvent50 and the thermodynamic stability of the perovskite composition.52,53 MA+ loss during SVA is likely to be enhanced compared to FA+ as the cation is more polar, hence will likely interact more strongly with polar solvents. Indeed, the negative impact of the SVA process is expected to be more significant for MAPbI3 and mixed cation perovskites with MA+ cations due to the volatility of methylammonium.54–56
Finally, we expect the loss of cationic species due to solvent–solute interaction may well happen in cases where DMF/DMSO are used simply as process solvents, with films being fabricated by a standard thermal annealing route. However, the extent of this loss is far more severe during the SVA process than thermal annealing due to the larger excess of solvent vapours. We note that recent quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on perovskite precursor solutions and spin-cast films (without SVA) showed that the stoichiometry of thermally-annealed films is different to that of the precursor solution57 with a loss of cationic species observed during fabrication. We suggest that the influence of SVA on perovskite stoichiometry should be considered when exploring the effect of grain size effect on optoelectronic properties of hybrid perovskites, and this process cannot be considered as benign.23,25
Conclusions
In summary, we have studied the effect of annealing hybrid perovskite (MAPbI3) films in the presence of polar solvent vapours in a process known as solvent vapour annealing (SVA). We use a range of different characterisation techniques (pc-AFM, XRD, SEM-EDS) to show that films subjected to SVA are characterised by increased grain size that occurs at the expense of altered stoichiometry compared to the initial film. We show that SVA leads to a loss of organic halide species (MAI in case of MAPbI3) due to acid–base interactions between the MA+ cation and polar solvent such as DMF. Device lifetime measurements and accelerated degradation studies show that the loss of operational stability with SVA depends on the initial stoichiometry of the MAPbI3 film, with PbI2-excess compositions being the least stable. The results presented here are in agreement with previous reports on the poor stability of PbI2-excess MAPbI3 compositions, despite short-term improvements in the device performance parameters.58,59 We then demonstrate that the incorporation of excess organic halides into the precursor solution partially mitigates the deleterious effects of SVA. Our work highlights the importance of considering material stoichiometry, particularly when highly polar aprotic solvents are used to process perovskite solar cells. We emphasize that the conclusions drawn here are also likely to be relevant in other mixed cation perovskite compositions containing methylammonium cations and we speculate that similar effects may occur with formamidinium.
Experimental section
Materials and methods
MAPbI3 films for microstructure characterisation and devices were prepared using a protocol similar to Noel et al.28 All the chemicals were bought from commercial sources and used without purification. Specifically, lead iodide (PbI2, TCI 99.99% Product No. L0279) and methylammonium iodide (MAI 99.9%, Ossila UK) were mixed in acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma Aldrich, 99.8% anhydrous) with different PbI2/MAI molar ratios to get the solute weight percentage of 29% in ACN. Complete dissolution of MAI and PbI2 occurred after bubbling the methylamine gas generated from a methylamine solution using a setup as described in ref. 28. Three ACN/MA inks with different composition viz. PbI2-excess (PbI2:MAI = 1.06:1), stoichiometric (PbI2:MAI = 1:1) and MAI excess (PbI2:MAI = 1:1.03) were prepared. All the films were made by static spin coating at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds. Control samples with only thermal treatment were annealed at 100 °C for 15 min. For solvent vapour annealing, eight as-spin-coated films were placed equidistant (∼4 cm) from the centre of the hotplate and were first thermally annealed for 3 min at 100 °C. 15 μL DMF was then dropped at the centre of the hotplate and the substrates were immediately covered with a shallow Petri-dish to trap solvent vapours. The Petri-dish was removed after 7 minutes (after all the DMF was converted to vapour form and utilised in the SVA process). Thermal annealing at 100 °C was continued for five more minutes. The total time for which the substrates are heated at 100 °C in no vapour annealed (NVA) or solvent vapour annealed (SVA) cases was kept the same (15 min).
For perovskite solar cell fabrication, cleaned ITO (Ossila, 20 ohm per square, 8 pixel) substrates were spin-coated at 3000 rpm with SnO2 nanoparticle solution (Alfa Aesar, 15 wt% nanoparticle dispersion) diluted to 1:4 (volume) in de-ionised water. SnO2 coated ITO substrates were heated at 150 °C for 30 min followed by UV-Ozone treatment for 10 min. MAPbI3 films were spin-coated and subjected to thermal or solvent vapour annealing using the protocol outlined above. Spiro-MeOTAD (Ossila, 99.5% sublimed) hole-transport layer was spin-coated dynamically at 4000 rpm. The composition of the hole-transport layer solution included 86 mg spiro-MeOTAD in 1 mL chlorobenzene (Sigma-Aldrich) doped with LiTFSI (Sigma Aldrich, 20 μL from 500 mg mL−1 stock in ACN), FK (II) 209 PF6 (GreatCell Solar, 11 μL from 300 mg mL−1 stock in ACN) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (34 μL). The cells were left overnight in dry air for oxidation of the spiro-MeOTAD and then an 80 nm gold layer was deposited using thermal evaporation at up to 1 Å s−1. For encapsulation (where used), the devices were coated with 150 nm of SiO2 using e-beam evaporation at a rate of 1 Å s−1 grown in two steps to minimise sample heating.
Characterization

Microstructural characterization. 
X-ray diffraction patterns were collected on perovskite films using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer with Cu Kα source. SEM images of films and device cross-sections were acquired using FEI Helios NanoLab G3 UC and Carl Zeiss modified Raith Nanofabrication SEM at 1–1.5 kV accelerating voltage and an InLens detector at ∼2.5 mm working distance. Grain size analysis was performed using ImageJ through control of grain boundary contrast. EDS spectra were collected using an Oxford Instruments EDS spectrometer and AZtecEnergy spectral analysis software with the Helios NanoLab SEM.


Photoconductive AFM (pc-AFM). 
pc-AFM maps were acquired using an Asylum Research MFP-3D scanning probe microscope. Samples for pc-AFM were prepared in a similar way as for full devices but without spiro-OMeTAD and gold top electrodes. The HTL-free devices were illuminated from the ITO side using a blue LED (448 nm, LXML-PR02-A900) biased in constant current mode with 700 mA. Platinum–iridium coated conductive-AFM tips (Asylum Research Econo-SCM-PIC) with low spring constant (0.2 N m−1) were used in contact mode to probe topography and photocurrent maps simultaneously. The pc-AFM tip was connected to virtual ground. Photocurrent maps were acquired at zero applied bias to get short-circuit current maps under 448 nm illumination.


Device testing. 
Devices were tested for their photovoltaic performance under a Newport 92251A-1000 solar simulator calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a KG5 calibrated NREL silicon reference cell. J–V curves were captured at a 400 mV s−1 scan rate using a Keithley 237 source measure unit. The active area (0.0256 cm2) of devices was defined using a metal aperture mask.


Device lifetime-testing. 
Encapsulated/non-encapsulated devices were tested for their lifetime under continuous illumination using Atlas Suntest CPS+ (1500 W xenon source with quartz IR reducing filters and internal reflectors). The lamp spectrum and irradiance approximately matches the AM 1.5G. The performance parameters were determined using reverse sweep (1.2 V to 0 V at 0.5 V s−1) J–V curves after every 22 min. Devices were held at open circuit in between the consecutive J–V measurements. During operation, the temperature and relative humidity reached 42 ± 3 °C and 38 ± 6% respectively. Since devices were not masked with a metal aperture mask, the performance parameters were normalised to their initial value.


Grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). 

In situ GIWAXS was performed at the I22 beamline at Diamond Light Source with 10 keV X-rays incident on a controlled sample environment with a hotplate set at 50 °C, LED illumination (200 ± 10 mW cm−2 irradiation) and moisture control (∼40 ± 5% relative humidity). The X-ray beam (size: 80 × 300 μm, flux: ∼6 × 1012 photons per s) was attenuated through 0.2 mm Mo and incident at 0.3° on to the samples. Ambient moisture was controlled by passing N2 through two mass-flow controllers, with one output passing through a moisture bubbler and the second passing directly into a mixing valve before entering the sample chamber, as shown in Fig. S13.† Data reduction, analysis and perovskite peak integration for intensity monitoring was done using the DAWN software package.60Ex situ GIWAXS was performed using a Xeuss 2.0 (XENOCS) system with 9.243 keV X-rays produced using a Ga liquid MetalJet source (Excillum). Here, X-rays were directed onto the sample surface at 0.3–1.5°, under vacuum to reduce background scatter. Scattered X-rays were then incident on a PILATUS3R 1M 2D detector (DECTRIS), with a sample to detector distance of ∼330 mm. Ex situ GIWAXS data was corrected, reduced and reshaped using the GIXSGUI MATLAB toolbox.61

Conflicts of interest
D. G. L. is Chairman and co-director of the company Ossila Ltd that retail materials and equipment used in perovskite photovoltaic device research and development.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported through the Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF) through Science & Technology Facilities Council (STFC), grant number ST/R002754/1: Synchrotron Techniques for African Research and Technology (START) and by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) via grant EP/M025020/1 ‘High-resolution mapping of performance and degradation mechanisms in printable photovoltaic devices’ and via ‘Secondary electron emission microscopy for organics with reliable engineering-properties’ (EP/N008065/1). J. A. S. and M. S. thank the EPSRC for PhD studentships from the Centre for Doctoral Training in New and Sustainable PV, EP/L01551X/1 and T. A. thanks the Saudi Government for funding via a PhD studentship. GIWAXS studies at the Diamond Light Source were performed on I22 using beam-time allocation SM18563-1. We thank Dr Andrew J. Parnell for his help with Xeuss 2.0 instrumentation setup, and we are indebted to Xenocs for their ongoing help and support in the user program at The University of Sheffield.
References
M. Ke, W. Longlong, L. Zhou, W. Xiao, X. Qiaofei, H. Youdi, H. Sanfeng, L. Xiaolong, L. Tao and C. Gang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706401 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3193–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html,  2020, p. 20200406 Search PubMed.
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, A. Bera, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, T. Kirchartz, L. Kronik, R. Lovrincic, A. M. Rappe, D. R. Reichman and O. Yaffe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800691 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
J. S. Yun, J. Seidel, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Huang, J. Lau, N. J. Jeon, S. I. Seok, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706576 CrossRef PubMed .
A.-F. Castro-Méndez, J. Hidalgo and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901489 CrossRef .
T. Leijtens, K. Bush, R. Cheacharoen, R. Beal, A. Bowring and M. D. McGehee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11483–11500 RSC .
R. Xia, Z. Fei, N. Drigo, F. D. Bobbink, Z. Huang, R. Jasiūnas, M. Franckevičius, V. Gulbinas, M. Mensi, X. Fang, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. J. Dyson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902021 CrossRef .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Gao, X. He, Q. Ye, L. Ouyang, D. Zhuang, C. Liao, J. Mei and W. Lau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24008–24015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 868–875 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Yadavalli, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 63–64 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Ma, H.-J. Yan, M.-H. Li, J.-K. Sun, Y.-X. Chen, D. Wang and J.-S. Hu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7759–7765 RSC .
H. Khassaf, S. K. Yadavalli, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and A. I. Kingon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5321–5325 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Chin, J. W. Choi, H. C. Woo, J. H. Kim, H. S. Lee and C.-L. Lee, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5861–5867 RSC .
A. M. Zeidell, C. Tyznik, L. Jennings, C. Zhang, H. Lee, M. Guthold, Z. V. Vardeny and O. D. Jurchescu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800316 CrossRef .
W. Li, S. K. Yadavalli, D. Lizarazo-Ferro, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and R. Zia, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2669–2670 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wong-Stringer, O. S. Game, J. A. Smith, T. J. Routledge, B. A. Alqurashy, B. G. Freestone, A. J. Parnell, N. Vaenas, V. Kumar, M. O. A. Alawad, A. Iraqi, C. Rodenburg and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801234 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, B. Wenger, M. T. Klug, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, R. J. Nicholas, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 145–152 RSC .
A. J. Ramadan, N. K. Noel, S. Fearn, N. Young, M. Walker, L. A. Rochford and H. J. Snaith, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7737–7743 CrossRef CAS .
B.-w. Park, N. Kedem, M. Kulbak, D. Y. Lee, W. S. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Seo, G. Kim, K. J. Kim, T. J. Shin, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3301 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, G. Grancini, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 RSC .
T. Meier, T. P. Gujar, A. Schönleber, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, S. van Smaalen, F. Panzer, M. Thelakkat and A. Köhler, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7512–7519 RSC .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kutes, Y. Zhou, J. L. Bosse, J. Steffes, N. P. Padture and B. D. Huey, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3434–3441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Leblebici, L. Leppert, Y. Li, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, S. Wickenburg, E. Wong, J. Lee, M. Melli, D. Ziegler, D. K. Angell, D. F. Ogletree, P. D. Ashby, F. M. Toma, J. B. Neaton, I. D. Sharp and A. Weber-Bargioni, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16093 CrossRef CAS .
M. U. Rothmann, W. Li, J. Etheridge and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700912 CrossRef .
N. C. Halder and T. R. Williams, Solar Cells, 1983, 8, 201–223 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, J. Barbé, W. L. Schmidt, K. Tsevas, B. Ozkan, C. M. Handley, C. L. Freeman, D. C. Sinclair, I. M. Reaney, W. C. Tsoi, A. Dunbar and C. Rodenburg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23578–23586 RSC .
A. A. Petrov, I. P. Sokolova, N. A. Belich, G. S. Peters, P. V. Dorovatovskii, Y. V. Zubavichus, V. N. Khrustalev, A. V. Petrov, M. Grätzel, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20739–20743 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, R. Z. Qiu, Z. S. Yang, Y. X. Wang and Q. F. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 724–731 RSC .
A. Yi, S. Chae, H. Lee and H. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27267–27277 RSC .
M. V. Khenkin, K. M. Anoop, E. A. Katz and I. Visoly-Fisher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 550–558 RSC .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, M. Maeda, Y. Jiang, Z. Hawash and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9604–9612 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ambrosio, D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6882–6892 RSC .
B.-A. Chen, J.-T. Lin, N.-T. Suen, C.-W. Tsao, T.-C. Chu, Y.-Y. Hsu, T.-S. Chan, Y.-T. Chan, J.-S. Yang, C.-W. Chiu and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Fransishyn, S. Kundu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2127–2133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, K. Shoyama, W. Sato, Y. Matsuo, K. Inoue, K. Harano, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15907–15914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S.-G. Kim, D. Lee, H. Shin and N.-G. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 308–321 RSC .
L. T. Schelhas, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, A. Goyal, P. Kairys, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, K. H. Stone, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovic and J. J. Berry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341–1348 RSC .
A. Ciccioli and A. Latini, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3756–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, H. Tan, R. Fu, Q. Li, F. Lin, D. Yu, G. Walters, E. H. Sargent and Q. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14517–14523 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103–1111 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
C. Pareja-Rivera, A. L. Solís-Cambero, M. Sánchez-Torres, E. Lima and D. Solis-Ibarra, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2366–2367 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
T. P. Gujar, T. Unger, A. Schönleber, M. Fried, F. Panzer, S. van Smaalen, A. Köhler and M. Thelakkat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 605–614 RSC .
J. Filik, A. W. Ashton, P. C. Y. Chang, P. A. Chater, S. J. Day, M. Drakopoulos, M. W. Gerring, M. L. Hart, O. V. Magdysyuk, S. Michalik, A. Smith, C. C. Tang, N. J. Terrill, M. T. Wharmby and H. Wilhelm, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2017, 50, 959–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2015, 48, 917–926 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03023fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Contact mode AFM (height profile) for (a) Pb-NVA and (c) Pb-VA films. Photocurrent maps for (b) Pb-NVA and (d) Pb-VA simultaneously acquired with topography using pc-AFM under blue (448 nm) LED illumination and short-circuit conditions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD of PbI2-excess MAPbI3 before (Pb-NVA) and after (Pb-VA) solvent vapour annealing; (b) and (c) show SEM images of Pb-NVA and Pb-VA respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Contact mode AFM (height profile) for (a) MA-NVA and (c) MA-VA films. Photocurrent maps (simultaneously acquired with topography) of (b) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA using pc-AFM under 1-sun equivalent LED illumination and short circuit conditions.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns of Pb-VA, MA-NVA and MA-VA (vertically offset for comparison and clarity), inset shows a magnified view of XRD patterns, showing no PbI2 scattering at 12.6° for MA-NVA and MA-VA. Parts (b) and (c) show SEM images of MA-NVA and MA-VA respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  
J–V curves of (a) Pb-NVA, (b) Pb-VA, (c) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA fabricated in planar n–i–p architecture (glass/FTO/SnO2/MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD/Au).	 

 	Fig. 6  Semi-log plots of normalised intensity of MAPbI3 (110) peak over time for (a) non-solvent vapour annealed and (b) solvent annealed MAI-excess and PbI2-excess composition. Panel (a) shows the influence of stoichiometry on accelerated degradation while panel (b) shows the degradation of solvent vapour annealed perovskite films with different stoichiometry (MAI-excess and PbI2-excess).	 

 	Fig. 7  Evolution of unencapsulated device (a) VOC, (b) JSC, (c) fill factor and (d) PCE (all normalized to initial values) under continuous illumination (∼120 h). Right side column shows photographs of rear side of devices after 120 h continuous illumination J–V testing.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM cross-sections of encapsulated (150 nm SiO2) (a) Pb-NVA, (b) Pb-VA, (c) MA-NVA and (d) MA-VA device after ∼300 h of continuous illumination lifetime testing. Yellow circles in (a) denote the voids induced by degradation in the Pb-NVA sample. All the scale bars are 500 nm.	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed schematic illustrating the effect of DMF-SVA on the stoichiometry of MAPbI3 films. In part (a), DMF molecules interact at high surface energy interfaces at the top-surface and grain boundaries. In part (b), SVA at 100 °C results in a temporary structural transition from 3D MAPbI3 to a plumbate complex (e.g. (MA)2(DMF)2Pb3I8 (ref. 1)) in a thin layer near the high-energy interfaces such as grain boundaries and free surfaces. Part (c) illustrates the interaction between DMF and MA+, which when combined with an annealing temperature of 100 °C leads to loss of MAI. This results in the formation of a MAI-deficient MAPbI3 perovskite, with PbI2 located at the grain surface.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03023f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
