Bulk recrystallization for efficient mixed-cation mixed-halide perovskite solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA08351K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA08351K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25511-25520Bulk recrystallization for efficient mixed-cation mixed-halide perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Liangyou 
            Lin‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Jacob Tse-Wei 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Timothy W. 
            Jones
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mihaela 
            Grigore
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Andre 
            Cook
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dane W. 
            deQuilettes
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Roberto 
            Brenes
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Benjamin C. 
            Duck
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kenrick F. 
            Anderson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Noel W. 
            Duffy
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Bernard 
            Wenger
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Vladimir 
            Bulović
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Pu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Chi
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Henry J. 
            Snaith
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Gregory J. 
            Wilson
          
        
      *a
aCSIRO Energy, Newcastle Energy Centre, 10 Murray Dwyer Cct, Mayfield West, NSW 2304, Australia. E-mail: Greg.Wilson@csiro.au
bCenter for Fuel Cell Innovation, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: chibo@hust.edu.cn
cCSIRO Energy, 11 Julius Avenue, North Ryde 2113, Australia
dResearch Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
eCSIRO Energy Clayton Laboratories, Clayton, Vic 3168, Australia
fClarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK
Received 
      1st August 2019
    , Accepted 13th October 2019First published on 21st October 2019AbstractToday, the use of mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskite with a slight excess of lead iodide (PbI2) demonstrates the highest device performances in the literature. However, the presence of excess PbI2 in the film poses long-term stability concerns. Here, we propose a facile bulk recrystallization process by applying formadinium chloride (FACl) on perovskite to remove excess PbI2 in the formed crystal. We are able to demonstrate bulk recrystallization, proved and observed by the Grazing incidence XRD to analyze the crystal structure as a function of depth profiling. The reconstructed crystal displays improved optoelectronic qualities with reduced interfacial recombination as well as enhanced device stability. When measured under AM 1.5G spectral conditions the optimized champion device reached a maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20.2%.
Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous interest in the past few years due to their unique properties such as direct optical band-gap, high absorption coefficients, modest carrier mobility, and long charge-carrier diffusion length.1–3 A power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% was first demonstrated in 2009,4 with the most recent validated performance of 25.2% PCE for a single junction cell,5 and 28% efficiency for a tandem cell on silicon, achieved in 2018. Such rapid evolution makes PSCs the leading contender for next-generation thin-film and for combination with mainstream Si solar cells. The generic perovskite structure has a general chemical formula of ABX3, where A is usually occupied by monovalent cations such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+) or Cesium (Cs+), B can be divalent ions such as Pb2+ or Sn2+, and X is occupied by halide anions such as I−, Br− or Cl−.6–9 The state-of-the-art PSCs use mixed-cation and mixed-halide perovskite compositions due to the superior qualities over the archetypal MAPbI3.10 Adding Cs+ to perovskite has been shown to improve qualities including thermal stability, reproducibility, and reduction of phase segregation.11–13 In general, controlling the precise stoichiometry in a perovskite is critical for meeting its desired properties. However, it has been found purposely introduced excess PbI2 in the perovskite causes significant influence on the crystal growth and the intrinsic perovskite qualities. The few percent excess PbI2 predominantly facilitates the crystal growth, and is thought to reside at the grain boundaries, providing benefits of enhanced charge carrier injection, suppressed ion migration and hysteresis, leading to improved device performance.14–17 Hypotheses have been proposed to explain these beneficial effects, including improved energy level alignments, grain boundary passivation, and superior crystal quality and crystallinity.16–18 Nevertheless, there are also reports showing that the residual PbI2 can lead to degradation and fragile film structure with long-term device stability concerns.19–21 It may be the case, that the observed presence of PbI2 grains, is simply reflective of the bulk of the perovskite crystalline grains being at an optimized stoichiometry. i.e. the PbX2 is not explicitly known to play an active role, and may simply usually be present in the best quality perovskite films. Nonetheless, with most of the best performing cells still incorporating slight excess PbI2, it is important to investigate this characteristic for further improving device performance and stability.
Organic halides have been used as an effective additive or passivant to improve perovskite's crystal qualities, including alkyl halides22–24 and alkylammonium halides.25–30 Among them, alkylammonium halides could not only serve as the precursor for perovskite crystal formation but also being used as the passivant to reduce the surface defect densities after crystal formation. A study of FABr passivated FA|MA-based perovskite was reported by Cho et al.,25 it was claimed the device performance was improved via the formation of thin layer FAPbBr3−xIx on top of their pristine perovskite, but the passivated films also showed a ca. 30% reduction in photoluminescence (PL) emission and short carrier lifetime in bulk crystals, leaving the origin of the apparent enhanced optoelectronic properties unclear. On the contrary, employing similar alkylammonium halides, Xie et al.27 applied MACl on top of the FAPbI3 observing that the passivated perovskite had vertical recrystallization instead of the bilayer-perovskite formation as Cho and co-workers proposed.25 There is not yet a consensus on the mechanism behind the application of organic halides, but the effect on improving the device performance seems to be broadly applicable.
In this paper, we use the Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3 non-stoichiometric perovskite (with 7 molar percent excess PbI2) as a platform to demonstrate a simple yet effective recrystallization method with formamidinium chloride (FACl) as the recrystallized agent. The choice of using FACl has strategic logic: firstly, FA-based perovskite is generally more thermally stable than MA-based perovskite; secondly, the introduction of Cl− ions to the perovskite has been shown to result in a positive impact on the crystallization process as well as crystallite size, crystal morphology, and crystallinity.31–34 Surprisingly, we found not only the excess PbI2 in the film can be successfully removed, but we also demonstrate and prove the bulk recrystallization is realized, observing via grazing incidence XRD to analyze the crystal structure as a function of depth. The bulk crystallization induces enhanced PL emission/lifetime, charge collection efficiency, reduced defects at grain boundaries (GBs) as well as superior device performance and stability compared to the control device.
Results and discussions
The effect of FACl treatment on the perovskite's crystal qualities, was explored by varying the concentration of FACl deposition solution. Fig. 1a illustrates the deposition method, FACl was dissolved in an isopropanol (IPA) solution at given concentrations (1, 3, 5, and 10 mg mL−1), we deposit the FACl–IPA solution via dynamic spin coating method followed by short annealing at 100 °C. We found the remaining PbI2 on the surface is very sensitive and reactive upon contact with the FACl–IPA solution. Fig. S1† illustrates the effect of varying the FACl solution concentration deposited on the perovskite film over time and monitored in high humidity environment (ca. 65% RH). Up to 3 mg mL−1, no visible difference was observed between the control film and the FACl-treated films. However, with 5 mg mL−1 FACl loading on the film, readily observed degradation appears to start after 10 min with a visible yellow ring emerging at the edge of the substrate. A further increase in treatment concentrations (10 mg mL−1 FACl) resulted in the film changing color from dark brown (as-deposited perovskite) to yellow (degradation of perovskite structure) within a few minutes. Such rapid transformation suggests an optimal concentration for FACl loading is critical and above that threshold, the excess FACl has an observable negative impact on the perovskite structure in the presence of moisture as indicated by the change in color observed.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the FACl deposition method. XRD patterns of control and FACl-recrystallized (3 mg mL−1) perovskite films coated on FTO substrates acquired using Bragg–Brentano geometry (b) 1D diffraction scans (c) 2D diffraction scans and (d) grazing incidence X-ray diffraction scans. Top-view SEM images of (e) control and (f) FACl-recrystallized perovskite films. 
The structural effects with the concentration of FACl treatment were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD). In Fig. 1b and S2,† are the XRD patterns acquired using Bragg–Brentano (B–B) geometry for a series of films with different FACl loadings from 1 up to 10 mg mL−1. All the perovskite films crystallized in a typical black phase with signature (100) peak observed at ∼14° (2θ) as reported in the literature.35 The peak at 12.7° corresponds to PbI2.36,37 The intensity of the PbI2 peak decreased in the XRD patterns as the concentration of FACl increased. PbI2 was not observed in the films treated with 5 mg mL−1 FACl. However, new phases formed in these films and diffraction intensities were greater in the film treated with 10 mg mL−1 FACl. These films had quite limited stability under ambient conditions and led to accelerated film degradation. The XRD data indicates the optimum concentration of FACl for the treatment of the perovskite film is 3 mg mL−1. This finding further corroborates our previous observation depicted in Fig. S1,† where an excess amount of the FACl loading (from 5 mg mL−1 and above) is unfavorable for the film to stabilize in the black phase perovskite structure.
To reveal the crystallographic variation upon FACl addition, we performed the two-dimensional (2D) X-ray diffraction scans in series. The control was measured in the first scan, then FACl was deposited without annealing and a second scan performed (control + as-deposited FACl). Finally, a third scan was taken on the annealed sample (FACl-recrystallized), see Fig. 1c. As expected, all images display typical perovskite diffraction patterns. The intensity of PbI2 peak in the control sample was diminished upon FACl deposition. A few noticeable impurity phases between 10–14° in the as-deposited FACl sample were observed. However, the short thermal annealing promoted a dramatic increase in peak intensity and the subsequent increase in phase purity.
The exact reaction pathway of the addition of FACl to perovskite with PbI2 present in the film is not yet clear, however, we propose two likely scenarios: (i) forming a thin layer of FAPbI3−xClx on top of the existing perovskite layer (the previously reported, dual perovskite layer model); or (ii) recrystallizing throughout the entire perovskite crystals (bulk recrystallization). To differentiate between these two scenarios we performed depth profile analyses of both the control and the film treated with 3 mg mL−1 FACl by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD). This enabled identification of the recrystallization pathway and changes in the orientation of the perovskite crystals. GIXRD can analyze the perovskite layer at different depths and detect phases that are present in very low concentrations that cannot be confirmed by the XRD scans in B–B geometry.38Fig. 1d shows the GIXRD patterns acquired at different incident angles from ω = 0.2 to 1.2° (the penetration depth of the film by the X-ray beam increases with the incident angle). The peaks in GIXRD patterns are broader than those in the B–B patterns of the same film due to greater instrumental contribution. At low incident angles (ω = 0.2°), the top surface (∼70 nm depth) of the films is analyzed. Here, within the instrument's best resolution, we ruled out the presence of dual perovskite layers, FAPbI3−xClx would have slightly different diffraction patterns than Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3, and in turn a slightly different lattice spacing (d) and 2θ angles for both perovskite phases.39 The GIXRD scans of the FACl-recrystallized film at different incident angles show consistent and single phase detection. This suggests that FACl reacted with both PbI2 and perovskite and consequently the perovskite crystals in the treated film were recrystallized throughout the bulk of the film. The preferred orientation of perovskite crystals in the FACl treated film is stronger on the (100) and (200) reflection planes than that in the control sample. The FTO peaks become noticeable in the XRD scans at ω ≈ 0.8°, which indicates that the X-rays completely penetrated the perovskite film and reached the top of the FTO substrate.
One of the factors that affect the performance of the perovskite crystals is microstrain,21,40,41 which can be induced by lattice distortion and/or plane defects. We determined the average microstrain of perovskite crystals in the control film and FACl treated films using Williamson–Hall plots (Fig. S3†). The data in the Williamson–Hall plots show some degree of scatter. This could be explained by the presence of dislocations42,43 (edge and screw) in the perovskite crystals. The introduction of the low concentrations of FACl (<5 mg mL−1) reduced the microstrain of perovskite crystals. A minimum microstrain of 1 × 10−2 was determined for the 3 mg mL−1 FACl sample, which is 3 fold smaller than the control sample (3 × 10−2). Crystal microstrain increased for concentrations of FACl greater than 3 mg mL−1. This suggests that the introduction of low concentrations of FACl reduce the density of crystal defects in the as-prepared perovskite.
In Fig. 1e and f, we show top-view Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of the control and the 3 mg mL−1 FACl-recrystallized perovskite samples. The grain size of the perovskite crystals in the two samples seem to appear similar. However, small bright platelet-shaped crystals can be observed across the control samples. Based on the XRD data in Fig. 1b–d, we have confirmed the presence of PbI2 in the control sample, and due to their distinctive difference of crystal morphology (hexagonal-platelet), so we infer those bright platelet-shaped crystals to be PbI2 (see Fig. S4† for more details). These crystals were also observed in the cross-section SEM images of the control sample. On the contrary, the bright PbI2 crystals were not observed in the FACl-recrystallized sample, which is consistent with the XRD data presented above.
In order to investigate the surface morphology and surface potential homogeneity of the perovskite thin film with and without FACl treatment, we used Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). Depicted in Fig. 2 are the local topography maps, the FACl-recrystallized sample (Fig. 2b) has a lower root mean square (RMS) roughness of 20.98 nm than the control perovskite film (Fig. 2a) of 23.96 nm, which indicates the bulk recrystallization results in a smoother perovskite surface. In Fig. 2c and d, we show the contact potential difference (CPD) mapping at the same topography area of respective samples measured in the dark. In the control sample, we can easily distinguish between grain and grain boundaries (GBs), as defects such as vacancies and interstitials are more likely to be found at GBs, causing significant differences in the surface polarity at the GBs compared to the grains.44,45 However, in the FACl-recrystallized film, not only the average CPD is much smaller than the control (−37.5 mV vs. −107.9 mV), but the CPD variation between grains across the film is also less apparent, see Fig. 2e. As a result, we may infer the number of defects at GBs has been reduced and passivated after the recrystallization, where the lower average CPD value and smaller distribution is found.
 Fig. 2  Kelvin probe force microscopy images of perovskite on FTO. Topography images of (a) control and (b) FACl-recrystallized. Surface potential mapping at the same topography area of (c) control (d) FACl-recrystallized, and (e) their contact potential difference (CPD) line profiles measured in the dark. 
We further studied whether the structural improvement in the FACl-recrystallized samples translates to enhanced photophysical properties. Firstly, we measured the transmittance and reflectance spectra of the control and optimized FACl-recrystallized sample via ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy, which we show in Fig. 3a. A band gap (Eg) of 1.62 and 1.64 eV for the control and the optimized FACl-recrystallized sample were determined, respectively (see ESI for details†). The slightly larger Eg found in the FACl-recrystallized, observed as a blueshift of the main absorption band to a shorter wavelength, is further evidenced of facile restructuring of the perovskite film where the incorporation of a small concentration of Cl− ions or smaller halide ions in to the lattice have been shown to induce a blueshift and a wider bandgap.25,46,47 The ionization potential was derived using photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA), see Fig. S6 and Table S3.† Together with the optical band gap values derived from the UV-vis, the band edge position was estimated for the control and the passivated perovskites, see Fig. S6.†Fig. 3b depicts the steady-state PL spectra of the perovskite films, where the FACl-recrystallized sample has a slight blue-shift (commensurate with the UV-vis) and almost a two-fold increase in the steady-state PL intensity. The PL decays are shown in Fig. 3c, the slower decay component was fitted with a stretched exponential function to extract average lifetime, the FACl-recrystallized sample showed much longer PL lifetime of 36.3 ns (control sample exhibits PL lifetime of 20.7 ns), as the initial fast drop, can be attributed to the diffusion of carriers or fast non-radiative recombination within the films.25,46,48 The photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) of the respective perovskite films is shown in Fig. 3d The FACl-recrystallized perovskite film shows much higher efficiency across all excitation intensities. Additionally, we performed PL mapping of 10 μm × 10 μm areas of control and FACl-recrystallized films. The fluorescence maps, shown in Fig. 3e, present an increase in the average PL intensity after the recrystallization, which is consistent with a reduction in trap density. These results were verified over several different regions (see Fig. S8†) and collectively attest to the enhanced optoelectronic quality of the recrystallized perovskite film in terms of reduced energetic disorder and prolonged charge-carrier lifetime.
 Fig. 3  (a) Band-gap estimation from absorption coefficient; (b) steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite thin films; (c) time-resolved photoluminescence decay after excitation at 507 nm (pulsed at 200 kHz and a fluence of 30 nJ cm−2 per pulse); (d) photoluminescence quantum efficiency as a function of excitation power; and (e) fluorescence microscopy images (10 × 10 μm) of control and FACl-recrystallized perovskite films excited with a pulsed 532 nm laser (40 MHz, 100 nJ cm−2 per pulse) (experimental details are available in ESI†). 
With these encouraging results, we now employ a series of perovskite films in planar heterojunction structures (n–i–p) to assess the impact on photovoltaic performance from the FACl-treatment, see Fig. 4a for detailed device structure and cross-section. In Fig. 4b and S9,† we summarise the mean solar cell performance parameters for a batch of solar cells (n = 66) with a range of FACl concentrations, extracted from j–V curves measured under simulated AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2 irradiance. A clear trend of enhancement is evident in device performance upon FACl treatment on top of the as-prepared perovskite film up to concentrations of 3 mg mL−1 (see Fig. S10†), consistent with our previous observation. For devices fabricated from the control precursor solution, i.e. pristine Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(Br0.15I0.85)3, the mean average open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) are 1.13 ± 0.01 V and 73.8 ± 0.9%, respectively. With the addition of FACl, both the VOC and FF increase to mean values of 1.14 ± 0.01 V and 76.1 ± 1.1%. However, the average short-circuits current density (jSC) indicates no discernable difference between the control and FACl treated cells. However, the effect of FACl addition is still prominent. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) reaches a maximum at 3 mg mL−1, with a mean average PCE of 19.6 ± 0.3% (see Table S6†). In Fig. S11† we show our typical control and FACl-recrystallized devices with noticeably improved hysteresis-free behavior. The current-density voltage (j–V) curves for the most efficient control and FACl-recrystallized devices are shown in Fig. 4c (see Fig. S10† for the complete series), where the latter exhibits jSC = 22.7 mA cm−2, FF = 77.4%, and VOC = 1.15 V yielding a champion device of 20.2% PCE and exhibiting a steady-state power output (SPO) of 19.6% (see Fig. 4d). Compared to the control device, the observed significant improvement is due to increased FF and improved VOC. Here, the reduced defects at GBs (as shown in KPFM, Fig. 2c–e) and the improved interfaces between the perovskite crystals and the charge transport layers could be attributed to the increased FF, and the correlation can be evidenced from the observed smoother surface of recrystallized perovskite crystals as shown in the top-view SEM photos (Fig. 1e and f) and the AFM images (Fig. 2a and b). As for the improved VOC, it could be correlated to the observed change in band-edge positions where the optimized FACl recrystallized sample has better band alignment with the charge transport layers (the HOMO level of spiro-OMeTAD is ca. −5.3 eV), thus leading to a smaller offset of the quasi-split Fermi level which improves the VOC. In addition, device stability has also demonstrated improvement upon recrystallization.
 Fig. 4  (a) False-colored scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images depicting the cross-section of the control and optimized FACl-recrystallized perovskite devices. Photovoltaic performance under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation with an aperture size of 0.08 cm2. (b) The statistical distribution of photovoltaic parameters extracted from the j–V curves from 66 independent cells with/without FACl recrystallization; (c) best performing control and FACl-recrystallized devices; (d) stabilized power output of the control and FACl-recrystallized devices (unencapsulated); (e) long-term stability measurements of control and FACl-recrystallized devices (unencapsulated) under different operating condition. Top: devices measured under AM 1.5G continuous illumination by tracking the maximum power point at T ∼ 50 °C and RH ∼ 60%; bottom: devices were measured (under 1 sun) regularly and normally stored in the dark at in air T ∼ 25 °C and RH ∼ 20%. 
In Fig. 4e, we show the stability of the perovskite devices without encapsulation measured under AM 1.5G continuous illumination by tracking the maximum power point (testing conditions: T ∼ 50 °C and RH ∼ 60%). From this data, it is clear that FACl-recrystallized devices demonstrate a much slower rate of decay compared to the control devices. In addition, we measured the stability of devices stored in the dark (T ∼ 25 °C and RH ∼ 20%). The devices with FACl recrystallization show negligible degradation after 3 months of testing, while the control device has decreased to less than 90% of its initial performance in the meanwhile. This stability difference for the control versus FACl recrystallized devices supports our assertion that the removal of excess PbI2 prolongs the lifetime of device operation and the addition of FACl assists to recrystallize and stabilize the perovskite crystals. We note, it is expected further improved stability would be achieved with advanced encapsulation techniques for practical application of the perovskite solar cells, however this is not the focus of this study.
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for typical cells of each type (see Fig. S12†), display good incident photon-to-electron conversion and exhibit the same trend as observed in the j–V measurement. Integrating the EQE over the AM 1.5G solar spectrum at 100 mW cm−2 irradiance gives an estimated jSC of 21.1 mA cm−2 and 20.8 mA cm−2 for the control and FACl-recrystallized devices, respectively. The slight difference between the EQE-integrated jSC and the j–V measurement-extracted jSC is attributed to experimental uncertainties (see ESI for details†). Nevertheless, the difference between the control and the FACl-recrystallized cells in both EQE-integrated j and j–V extracted jSC are consistent and within the error of instrumental contributions. The optimized FACl-recrystallized cells displayed slightly lower jSC than the control cell, which can be attributed to a slightly wider band gap perovskite formed following the FACl-prompted recrystallization, consistent with the observed blueshift in the UV-vis and PL spectra in Fig. 3a and b.
To further understand the charge transport dynamics within the devices, we use impedance spectroscopy (IS) to characterize the movement of charges and their recombination behavior. The IS spectra for respective samples were recorded at room temperature in open circuit condition under illumination with different light intensity (see Fig. 5a and b). A frequency range of 1 MHz to 100 mHz with an AC perturbation signal of 10 mV was employed in all the IS measurements.49 The complete set of the Nyquist plots and fitting results can be found in Fig. S13.† A typical IS spectrum is normally formed by two consecutive arcs, one at high-frequency (low Z′) and another at low-frequency (high Z′). To fit the spectra, we adopt a simplified equivalent circuit which incorporates a constant phase element (CPE) instead of a pure capacitance following previous reports.50,51 An impedance element composed of a contact resistance R1 and a CPE in parallel, has been employed to fit the high-frequency regime in spectra, which is associated to selective contacts or the interfaces within the devices. The low-frequency regime is related to contribution from the recombination occurring at the perovskite and its interfaces, is fitted by an element consisting of recombination resistance R2 and a CPE in parallel. Series resistance (Rs) is generally contributed from contacts between interfaces, thus plays an important role and affects the device performance.52 The fitted Rs are plotted against VOC in Fig. 5c. A fairly monotonous but lower Rs is observed in FACl-recrystallized device than the control across different voltage. This suggests improved contact is formed in the recrystallized perovskite device, which translates to improved FF and directly observed in the operational photovoltaic cell as shown above. From fitting the lower-frequency regime, we can derive the recombination resistance (Rrec), and we show the variation of Rrecversus VOC for both devices in Fig. 5d. The Rrec in FACl-recrystallized device is much higher than the control indicating a lower recombination rate (inversely proportional to Rrec) in FACl recrystallized perovskite, which corroborates the higher VOC observed in the j–V measurement.53 These IS results confirms that FACl-treatment improves contact between interfaces and reduces charge carrier recombination, consistent with the observed enhanced FF and VOC for recrystallized cell in terms of series and recombination resistances.
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the control (a) and FACl-recrystallized (b) perovskite devices measured under illumination with different light intensity. Variation of recombination resistance (c) and series resistance (d) as a function of VOC obtained from the IS analysis. 
Conclusions
The addition of FACl to the triple-cation (FA/MA/Cs) perovskite has been demonstrated to recrystallize the bulk crystals throughout the film as observed and analyzed from GIXRD analysis for the first time. The recrystallized perovskite displays improved optoelectronic qualities, reduced interfacial recombination, and enhanced charge transport. When applying this technique of facile FACl recrystallization to planar (n–i–p) heterojunction devices, a PCE over 20% has been achieved. Hence, this work has identified a facile and effective method to recrystallize perovskite which has further passivated crystalline defects and impurities, resulting in improvement to device lifetime through the removal of PbI2 in the film. Thus, the present study represents an important advance in perovskite device formation and stability.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
L. L. acknowledged financial support from National Key Research and Development Project of China (2016YFE0126900). J. T.-W. W. would like to thank the CSIRO Research Office for the support of his postdoctoral fellowship. V. B., R. B., and D. W. D. acknowledge support for this project through the MIT-Tata GridEdge Solar Research Program, which is funded by the Tata Trusts. This work was supported through funding from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) as part of ARENA's Emerging Renewables Program via grant P159394. BW thanks the European Commission for Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions individual fellowship (706552-APPEL).
References
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, Photovoltaic Research, NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html Search PubMed.
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R. G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
X. Shai, J. Wang, P. Sun, W. Huang, P. Liao, F. Cheng, B. Zhu, S.-Y. Chang, E.-P. Yao, Y. Shen, L. Miao, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 117–127 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, P. Xu, J. Liu and X.-Z. You, Small, 2017, 13, 1603225 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. Roldán Carmona, G. Richardson, J. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
M. Deepa, M. Salado, L. Calio, S. Kazim, S. M. Shivaprasad and S. Ahmad, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4069–4077 RSC .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J. E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, G. Grancini, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 RSC .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. Il Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Cong, Y. Li, J. Bergstrand, H. Liu, B. Cai, A. Hajian, Z. Yao, L. Wang, Y. Hao, X. Yang, J. M. Gardner, H. Ågren, J. Widengren, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 405–414 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Z. Chu, P. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
W.-A. Quitsch, D. W. deQuilettes, O. Pfingsten, A. Schmitz, S. Ognjanovic, S. Jariwala, S. Koch, M. Winterer, D. S. Ginger and G. Bacher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2062–2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, P.-W. Liang and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9058–9062 RSC .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Chai, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7149–7155 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xie, C. Chen, Y. Wu, X. Li, M. Cai, X. Liu, X. Yang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1942–1949 RSC .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, Y. Wang, F. Li, X. Zhou, J. Yang, B. Lv, X. Wang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 7856–7865 RSC .
N. Guo, P. Schulz, M. Yang, K. Zhu, G. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, J. J. Berry, T. Zhang and D. H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 2–10 Search PubMed .
M. Long, T. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Zeng, F. Xie, Q. Li, Z. Chen, F. Zhou, K. S. Wong, K. Yan and J. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601882 CrossRef .
N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, T. Masuda, L. Han and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12081–12088 RSC .
F. X. Xie, D. Zhang, H. Su, X. Ren, K. S. Wong, M. Grätzel and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 639–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, M. Saliba, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606258 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, D. Liu, T. Zhang, L. Ji, X. Gu, Z. David Chen and S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yao, T. W. Jones, M. Grigore, N. W. Duffy, K. F. Anderson, R. B. Dunbar, K. Feron, F. Hao, H. Lin and G. J. Wilson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14673–14683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
J. T.-W. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Pathak, W. Zhang, D. W. deQuilettes, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, J. Huang, P. K. Nayak, J. B. Patel, H. A. Mohd Yusof, Y. Vaynzof, R. Zhu, I. Ramirez, J. Zhang, C. Ducati, C. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, D. S. Ginger, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892–2901 RSC .
T. W. Jones, A. Osherov, M. Alsari, M. Sponseller, B. C. Duck, Y.-K. Jung, C. Settens, F. Niroui, R. Brenes, C. V. Stan, Y. Li, M. Abdi-Jalebi, N. Tamura, J. E. Macdonald, M. Burghammer, R. H. Friend, V. Bulović, A. Walsh, G. J. Wilson, S. Lilliu and S. D. Stranks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 596–606 RSC .
D. Chateigner, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2006, 39, 925–926 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ungár, I. Dragomir, Á. Révész, A. Borbély and IUCr, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 1999, 32, 992–1002 CrossRef .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, A. Henning, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, Y. Rosenwaks, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Raga, M. C. Jung, M. V. Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Butler, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 228–231 RSC .
N. K. Noel, B. Wenger, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. B. Patel, T. Crothers, Z. Wang, R. J. Nicholas, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1233–1240 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, T. W. Jones, J. T.-W. Wang, A. Cook, N. D. Pham, N. W. Duffy, B. Mihaylov, M. Grigore, K. F. Anderson, B. C. Duck, H. Wang, J. Pu, J. Li, B. Chi and G. J. Wilson, Small, 2019, 1901466 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, R. Guo, K. Kadel, Y. Liu, K. O'Shea, R. Bone, X. Wang, J. He and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19616–19622 RSC .
T. Bu, X. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yi, X. Huang, L. Luo, J. Xiao, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Zhong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2509–2515 RSC .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. Wußler, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. Lakus-Wollny, E. Mankel, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 680–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yadav, M. I. Dar, N. Arora, E. A. Alharbi, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 3, 1701077 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08351k‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the FACl deposition method. XRD patterns of control and FACl-recrystallized (3 mg mL−1) perovskite films coated on FTO substrates acquired using Bragg–Brentano geometry (b) 1D diffraction scans (c) 2D diffraction scans and (d) grazing incidence X-ray diffraction scans. Top-view SEM images of (e) control and (f) FACl-recrystallized perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Kelvin probe force microscopy images of perovskite on FTO. Topography images of (a) control and (b) FACl-recrystallized. Surface potential mapping at the same topography area of (c) control (d) FACl-recrystallized, and (e) their contact potential difference (CPD) line profiles measured in the dark.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Band-gap estimation from absorption coefficient; (b) steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite thin films; (c) time-resolved photoluminescence decay after excitation at 507 nm (pulsed at 200 kHz and a fluence of 30 nJ cm−2 per pulse); (d) photoluminescence quantum efficiency as a function of excitation power; and (e) fluorescence microscopy images (10 × 10 μm) of control and FACl-recrystallized perovskite films excited with a pulsed 532 nm laser (40 MHz, 100 nJ cm−2 per pulse) (experimental details are available in ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) False-colored scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images depicting the cross-section of the control and optimized FACl-recrystallized perovskite devices. Photovoltaic performance under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation with an aperture size of 0.08 cm2. (b) The statistical distribution of photovoltaic parameters extracted from the j–V curves from 66 independent cells with/without FACl recrystallization; (c) best performing control and FACl-recrystallized devices; (d) stabilized power output of the control and FACl-recrystallized devices (unencapsulated); (e) long-term stability measurements of control and FACl-recrystallized devices (unencapsulated) under different operating condition. Top: devices measured under AM 1.5G continuous illumination by tracking the maximum power point at T ∼ 50 °C and RH ∼ 60%; bottom: devices were measured (under 1 sun) regularly and normally stored in the dark at in air T ∼ 25 °C and RH ∼ 20%.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of the control (a) and FACl-recrystallized (b) perovskite devices measured under illumination with different light intensity. Variation of recombination resistance (c) and series resistance (d) as a function of VOC obtained from the IS analysis.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta08351k
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
