Synthesis and applications of organic nanorods , nanowires and nanotubes  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3PC90002A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3PC90002A
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2013, 109, 211-239Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSynthesis and applications of organic nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes

        
          
            Chuang 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongli 
            Yan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Sheng Zhao
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jiannian 
            Yao
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: jnyao@iccas.ac.cn; yszhao@iccas.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-10-82616517;   Tel: +86-10-82616517
First published on 23rd April 2013AbstractOne-dimensional (1D) nanostructures, including nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes, etc., exhibit the quantum confinement effects in the other two dimensions. Nanomaterials with 1D coherence are more suitable for the construction of active nanodevices and interconnects rather than zero-dimensional (0D) amorphous nanoparticles. Inorganic 1D nanomaterials have been widely investigated and widely used as building blocks in many kinds of optoelectronic integrations, and it is very reasonable to assume that their organic counterparts can also play an important role in this field. During the past ten years, organic 1D nanomaterials constructed from small functional molecules have obtained more and more attention due to their unique optical and electronic properties as well as their potential applications in nanoscale devices. Their high structural tunability, reaction activity and processability provide great opportunities to miniaturized optoelectronic chips based on organic 1D nanostructures, since they are usually assembled from molecular units with weak intermolecular interactions, such as hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking and van der Waals force. These weak interactions allow for more facile and mild conditions in the fabrication of high quality organic 1D nanostructures rather than those in the construction of their inorganic counterparts. More importantly, very recent studies reveal that the diversity of energy/electron transfer processes in organic semiconductors brings new hopes to break the performance limitations of traditional photonic and electronic devices, thus allowing higher luminescence intensity, more efficient photon confinement, stronger exciton–photon coupling, and so on. Indeed, organic 1D nanomaterials have already emerged to play increasingly an important role in many optoelectronic applications, such as nanolasers, optical waveguides, light-emitting devices, solar cells and sensors. In the past two decades, people have not only witnessed but also taken for granted the rapid development of nanomaterial science, and here we would like to promote awareness of the significance of organic 1D nanomaterials in the field of nanotechnology and optoelectronic nanodevices. This report presents a comprehensive review about recent research in the preparation and applications of 1D nanomaterials from functional low-molecular-weight organic compounds, whose optical and electronic properties are fundamentally different from those of their inorganic counterparts. Here we try to summarize the important breakthroughs from the fabrication of organic nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes, to the application of these nanostructures in integrated photonic elements and optoelectronic nanodevices. We begin with a general summary of the construction strategies (liquid-phase assembly, vapor deposition and template methods) for achieving 1D nanostructures from small organic functional molecules, then provide an overview of the unique optoelectronic properties induced by molecular aggregation in the nanostructures. Special emphasis is put on the luminescent properties of low dimensional sizes that are different from those of the corresponding bulk materials. This offers the materials better photon confinement ability or charge carrier transport property, and hence better optoelectronic performances such as optical waveguiding, multicolor emission, low-threshold nanolasers, light-emitting devices, photon-detecting devices, etc., which are presented one by one in the following section. In the last part of this report, we conclude with our personal viewpoints of the future development of organic 1D nanomaterials and also their great potentials in highly integrated photonic and electronic devices and chips.
1. Introduction
Since 1980s, ever increasing studies have been concentrated on investigating new physical, chemical and biological phenomena in the nanomaterial systems—those functional materials composed of objects with at least one of the three dimensions in the range from less than one to several hundreds of nanometers.1 The accurate definition of nanomaterials is not just the limitation of their dimensions; however, the real meaning of their essential novelties should be their significant differences from the macroscopic structures. The nanomaterials are proved to exhibit unique properties superior to those of their bulk counterparts, owing to their surface effect,2 quantum size effect,3 macroscopic quantum tunneling effect,4 and also other size-dependent properties.5,6 The rapid developments in nanoscience and nanotechnology bring numerous effective routes to the construction of electronic and photonic devices with much higher efficiency but much smaller sizes.7–11 The unique size-dependent optoelectronic properties of nanomaterials has made them of significant use in many research areas, such as highly efficient catalysis,12–14 bio-labeling and functionalization,15–17 novel luminescent materials,18–20 nonlinear optics,21–23 chemical sensors,24–27 and super high density data storage.28,29
From the viewpoint of chemical composition, nanomaterials can be divided into inorganic nanomaterials,30,31 organic macromolecular nanomaterials,32,33 and those based on organic low-molecular-weight compounds,34,35 if those hybrids of different kinds of compounds36,37 are neglected. The inorganic division of nanomaterials has been most widely investigated from the very beginning of the rise of nanoscience.38 Zero-dimensional (0D) inorganic nanostructures, including nanoparticles, clusters, and quantum dots, have been well studied by researchers all over the world.39–42 The discovery of carbon nanotubes43 greatly encouraged people to extensively research on one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials in the following years.44,45 Therefore, various kinds of 1D nanomaterials, including nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes and nanobelts, have been attracting considerable attention during the past decade, because their two-dimensional quantum confinement effect46–48 makes them promising as building blocks for miniaturized devices, chemical sensors,7 light emitting diodes,49 field-effect transistors,50 solar cells,51 and so on.52–55 However, most of these relevant works have been focused on inorganic materials, whereas organic ones have been much less studied in this area although the organic functional molecules have played important roles in various optoelectronic applications.56–61
Inorganic 1D nanostructures have revealed their promising applications as building blocks for nanoscale devices, such as nanowire diodes, waveguides, lasers, and sensors. Many detailed reviews have been successively presented on the aspects of the fabrication and properties of inorganic 1D nanomaterials.62–65 Also, many of their research works on inorganic nanowires have provided great enlightenment to the improvement of functional nanodevices based on 1D nanomaterials.66–71
Besides these breakthroughs in inorganic nanomaterials, those composed of organic macromolecules (polymers, biomolecules, dendrimers, etc.) have also been investigated during the past couple of years.72–76 For instance, conductive polymers, such as polyaniline77,78 and polypyrrole,79 have been fabricated into 1D nanostructures and attracted growing attention because of their good electrical conductivity, redox properties, environmental stability, and potential applications in sensors, biomedicine, actuators, etc. Semiconductor conjugated polymers, such as polyfluorene,80,81 polythiophene,82–84 polyphenylenevinylene,85 are of great research interests in fabricating 1D nanostructures because of their many novel optoelectronic properties and applications such as field effect transistors, optically pumped lasers, photodetectors, and electroluminescent diodes. For above mentioned polymer 1D nanostructures, the most commonly adopted preparation methods include electrochemical deposition,86 electrospinning,87 and the template method.88,89 According to the development of supramolecular chemistry,90,91 some macromolecules other than polymers have also been used to form well-defined solid and even tubular 1D nanostructures by the self-assembly via intermolecular interactions.92,93 For example, DNA molecules were used not only to synthesize nanowires, but also to prepare and modify nanostructures of other materials.94 Ghadiri and coworkers pioneered the work of constructing hollow tubular structures from another kind of biomacromolecules, cyclopeptides, while Meijer and coworkers,95,96 as well as Grimsdale and Müllen97 studied the chemistry and electronic properties of the nanostructures prepared from a series of π-conjugated systems, especially graphene molecules, those molecules containing multi-acenes.
In comparison with the inorganic and macromolecular nanomaterials, functional nanomaterials based on small organic molecules have been the subject of research interest only in recent ten years,98–102 which may be ascribed to the following two factors. First, owing to their chemical and thermal instability, lower melting temperatures, as well as poorer mechanical properties, the facile routes for fabricating small organic compounds into nanostructures are still needed to develop and improve. The top-down strategies (e.g., photolithography, chemical etching, micromanipulation, etc.) for producing inorganic nanostructures is difficult to apply into most of organic material systems. Second, size-dependent optical and electronic properties in organic nanomaterials are fundamentally different from those in inorganic compounds, and have not been fully investigated due to the spatial complicacy of atom arrangements. Instead of Wannier excitons in inorganic semiconductors, the optoelectronic properties of organic crystals are determined by Frenkel excitons that are highly localized within several molecular units. However, in both of the two factors that have hindered the development of organic nanomaterials, great changes have occurred in past few years based on a deeper insight into organic materials.103–108
After the reprecipitation was first introduced by Nakanishi and coworkers as a facile method to prepare organic nanoparticles,109,110 more and more strategies have been developed for constructing organic nanostructures with different morphologies, crystallinities, and optoelectronic properties.111–116 It was noticed that many properties also exhibit an obvious size dependence in the aggregates of organic molecules during these processes.117 For instance, Chernyak and coworkers observed the size-dependence of Stokes shift in the spectra of molecular aggregates.118 Furthermore, because the intermolecular interactions in organic materials are of weak types, such as hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking, and van der Waals contacts, it was observed that the optical and electronic properties of organic nanomaterials are very unique, which are different from either those of inorganic materials or those of organic macroscopic materials. It was proved both theoretically and experimentally that the physical properties of organic nanocrystals is also size dependent. The limitation of molecular exchange interactions results in an increase of the nonlinear optical properties in organic aggregates.119 As a consequence of the variety, multifunctionality, designability, and tailorability of organic nanomaterials of low-weight molecules, ever more works are being carried out to extend the research on nanostructured materials into the small organic molecular category.120–125
In this report, we review significant research works that focus on 1D nanoscale materials based on functional small organic molecules, and describe the recent progress on the construction, unique optical and electronic properties of organic 1D nanomaterials, as well as their applications as building blocks in optoelectronic devices. People have not only witnessed but gradually taken for granted the vigorous development of inorganic nanomaterials in the past few decades, and here we aim to promote awareness of the importance of 1D nanomaterials in organic area. In Section 2, we review the strategies that have been developed for achieving organic nanostructures. The preparation methods for 1D organic nanostructures are discussed in detail. In Section 3, the unique optoelectronic properties of organic nanomaterials are introduced and more attention is paid to the novel luminescent behavior. This offers the materials better optoelectronic performances such as multicolor emission, tunable emission, optical waveguide, lasing, gas sensing, electroluminescence, etc. At the end, we provide a conclusion and our personal view of the future development of research in this research field.
2. Construction strategies for organic 1D nanostructures
The development of facile, mild and universal construction strategies is prerequisite to the further investigations of organic nanostructures. Most of the present approaches to inorganic nanomaterials are not applicable for organic ones due to the lower melting and sublimation points. However, some meaningful attempts have been made in this area during the past couple of years,126–131 and in this part, we demonstrate some successful examples for the achievements of organic 1D nanomaterials by dividing them into liquid and vapor phases based methods. Liquid phase synthesis is most widely applied among the synthesis techniques of 1D organic nanostructures, because it is a facile and reliable strategy under mild conditions.132,133 More importantly, composite nanostructures of organic materials can be readily achieved with this method,134 which provides a possibility to investigate the interactions between more than one compositions, for example, fluorescent resonance energy transfer and photoinduced electron transfer. Physical vapor deposition (PVD) has been proved to be a general method for the synthesis of organic 1D nanomaterials with high crystallinity.135,136 In addition, we introduce a universal method to construct 1D nanostructures by using templates,137 which can be applied in most of the organic molecular materials that can not form 1D structures though above liquid-phase or vapor-phase methods.
2.1 Liquid phase preparation
Self-assembly is a universal concept that almost everything has the inclination of aggregation into specific shapes only if there is a proper interaction. In liquid solutions, self-assembly of organic molecules is a key strategy for the fabrication of nanosized aggregates that involves designing molecules and supramolecular entities. The assembly of organic molecules into nanostructures with defined morphologies need the driving forces from the molecules themselves including hydrogen bond, π–π stacking, van der Waals contact etc. Sometimes the self-assembly process also requires the induction from surroundings like the interactions between the organic molecules and the solvents/surfactants.

2.1.1 Self-assembly of organic molecules. 
The single crystalline nano- and submicro-tubes of a small organic functional compound, 2,4,5-triphenylimidazole (TPI) was synthesized by rapid dispersing the TPI molecules from a good solvent into a non-solvent, water.138 The rapid change of the surroundings induced the self-assembly of TPI molecules. Tubes with high monodispersity and open-ended structures were obtained after the assembly of TPI at different temperatures. Each tube has well-defined 1D morphology and single crystalline structure. The length and diameter of the TPI tubs can be tuned by changing the assembly conditions. The characterization of temporal morphology evolution indicated that the tubes were obtained by the rolling and seaming of preorganized 2D lamellar structures. The results of NMR, XPS and absorption spectra revealed that the lamellar structures were constructed via the cooperation of three chemically orthoganol and spatially independent noncovalent intermolecular interactions, i.e., hydrogen bond, π–π interaction, and van der Waals contact as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation for the formation of TPI tubes: (a) optimized geometry of a single TPI molecule; (b, c) linear and curled motifs of TPI supramolecular hydrogen bonded chains; (d, e) flat and curled monolayer sheets from the two motifs of chains; (f) multilayer sheet by stacking of the monolayers; (g–i) sketch maps of the multilayer flat lamellar, curled lamellar, and tubular structures, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission of the American Chemical Society. 


2.1.2 Synthesis of organic 1D nanocomposites. 
Besides the 1D nanostructures of single composition, we demonstrated that the 1D composite nanomaterials including core–sheath and uniformly doped structures can also be achieved via the self-assembly in liquid phases.139 The core–sheath nanorods were prepared by a step-by-step assembly of 1,5-diphenyl-3-(naphthalene-4-yl)-1H-pyrazoline (DPNP) and 2,5-bis(2-(N-hexadecylpyridinium-4-yl)-vinyl)pyrrole iodide (I-Py). DPNP nanorods were prepared with solvent exchange, and after aging about 2 h the ethanol solution of I-Py was quickly added into the nanorod dispersion under stirring. The self-assembly of I-Py molecules on the surface of the DPNP nanorods was driven by the electrostatic interaction, and therefore, core–sheath structures were obtained after aging for about 3 h, as shown in Fig. 2a. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the core–sheath nanorods shown in Fig. 2b indicate that the contribution of I-Py composition at 590 nm increases on increasing the aging time at the expense of that of DPNP at 470 nm, which is resulted from the fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) from the DNPN core to the I-Py shell. Both the molecular and aggregate states of DPNP molecules in the core/diffuse–shell nanorod might be involved in the FRET process.
 Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of the core–sheath 1D nanostructures of DPNP and I-Py. (b) PL spectra of DPNP/I-Py core–sheath nanorods obtained at different aging intervals: (i) 5, (ii) 30, (iii) 60 and (iv) 180 min. 


2.1.3 Cooperative molecular assembly. 
The uniformly doped 1D composite nanostructures were further synthesized by a simultaneous reprecipitation with an electron donor compound, 1,3,5-triphenyl-2-pyrazoline (TPP) and an electron acceptor, 1,4-dicyanonaphthalene (DCN).140 Theoretical calculations confirm that photoinduced electron transfer (PET) occurs through an electron transition from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the excited TPP to that of the ground-state DCN as shown in Fig. 3a. Exciplexes were formed between TPP and DCN at the excited state in the composite nanostructures, through which the fluorescence of TPP was quenched and a new emission band of exciplexes emerged (Fig. 3b). The emission color of the nano-composites can be tuned by changing the doping content of DCN, which determines the molar ratio of TPP–DCN exciplexes.
 Fig. 3  (a) The energy level diagram representing the photoinduced electron transfer in the nanocomposites of TPP and DCN. (b) PL spectra of the 1D nanocomposite suspensions with different molar ratios in water: (i) pure TPP; (ii) TPP/DCN = 4:1; (iii) TPP/DCN = 2:1; (iv) TPP/DCN = 1:1; and (v) pure DCN. The excitation wavelength is 365 nm. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission of the American Chemical Society. 


2.1.4 Morphology engineering with molecular design. 
The spatial structure of organic molecules plays an important role in their aggregation behavior in the evaporating solutions. Therefore, it is possible to control the self-assembly process by introducing special substitute groups in the organic molecules. According to this reason, the facile fabrication of nanostructures with well-defined shapes from stilbazolium-like dyes was experimentally demonstrated.141 Stilbazolium-like dyes with different substituents were synthesized. The self-assembly of the target molecules were induced with solvent exchange. It was found that the change of substituents influenced the morphology of the aggregates significantly. Strong electron donor–acceptor interactions induces the 1D aggregation in one compound, while spherical structures were obtained with the other compound with non-planar structure and weak electron donor–acceptor interactions. Based on the influences of the substituent effects on the shape, the optical properties of the resulting nanostructures could be accordingly controlled.
Besides from derivatives with different substituents, nanostructures were also tuned between spheres, wires, and cubes via the self-assembly of three isomeric molecules of bis(iminopyrrole)benzene with same substituents on different positions.142 Although all the three isomeric precursors, o-, m- and p-bis(iminopyrrole) benzene, present similar strong multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions for molecular aggregation, distinctly shaped nanostructures were obtained as displayed in Fig. 4. The two iminopyrroles (IP) groups in the o-isomer are 60° open-armed, therefore two monomers can embed into each other to form a dimer via quadruple hydrogen bonds, which act as the basic units for the formation of spherical structures. In contrast, the configurations of m- and p-isomers, with two IP groups open-armed at an angle of 120° and 180°, respectively, determine that each molecule connects with other two via hydrogen bonds, forming chain-like structures. Also determined by molecular configurations, the chain of m-isomer is zigzag shape while that of p-isomer is almost linear. These chains are the actual building blocks for the solid states of the two isomers to form square wires, and cubes, respectively. It is the different interactions for aggregate stacking at supramolecular level caused by the isomeric molecular structures that is responsible for the different morphological evolution.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration for the formation processes of nanostructures from o-, m-, and p-bis(iminopyrrole) benzene, respectively. 


2.1.5 Composition engineering with controllable doping. 
The preparation of multi-segmented 1D nanostructures is crucial for the rational design of functional nanomaterials and devices with novel electronic and photonic functions, such as nanobarcodes, magnetism, and P–N junctions. Such nanostructures of metals, semiconductors, and conducting polymers have been prepared by template methods combined with electrochemical deposition techniques, while controlled assembly of block copolymers and peptides has been explored in the fabrication of striped cylindrical assemblies. Based on the successful preparation of single-component or bi-component organic 1D nanostructures, the spatially controllable doping along the longitude axis provides a promising approach to the composition engineering on multi-component nanostructures of functional organic molecules.
Recently, a template-free method via host–guest interactions was developed to construct 1D organic light-emitting heterostructures with axially tunable composition.143 In this system, 4,5-triphenylimidazole (TPI) was used to build 1D tubular host microstructures, and two kinds of guest molecules, 4,4′-bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA) and iridium(III) bis(2-phenyl benzothiozolato-N,C2′ ((BT)2Ir(acac)), were selected as the dopants. Fig. 5a displays that these small organic molecules could be assembled into orange–blue–orange triblocks and blue/green alternate multiblocks by utilizing specific intermolecular interaction strengths (hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking, and van der Waals force) between host and guest molecular units. The excitonic radiative properties along single heterostructures could be modulated by the energy transfer from TPI to both two kinds of guests, as shown in Fig. 5b and c. Therefore, the spatially controlled doping of guest molecules were profiled by the combination of PL imaging and PL lifetime imaging techniques. The spatial engineering of exciton species qualifies such heterostructures for photonic signal conversion.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration for the typical formation of heterogeneous TPI microtubes. PL images of (b) triblock (BT)2Ir(acac) and (c) multiblock BPEA doped TPI tubes with doping ratios of 1.0 mol%. The samples were excited with UV band (330–380 nm). Scale bars are 20 μm. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 

2.2 Physical vapor deposition
Vapor deposition is a feasible strategy for preparing numerous kind of nanomaterials, and has achieved great success in the synthesis of inorganic 1D nanomaterials,144 carbon nanotubes145 and graphene.146 When small organic molecules are used as deposition sources, a problem emerges that the monodispersity of the products is hard to control. It is known that for vapor deposition method, the degree of vapor-phase saturation is the predominant factor in controlling the morphology and dispersity of the products,147,148 and it should be possible to process most solid materials into 1D nanostructures by controlling the vapor saturation at a relative low level.

2.2.1 Adsorbent assisted deposition. 
Adsorbents such as neutral aluminium oxide or silica gel have been used widely in column chromatography. In our recent works,149,150 these adsorbents were introduced into the conventional PVD method to control the degree of saturation, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. This is mainly because the existence of an adsorption–desorption equilibrium between the adsorbents and the organic sources. The adsorbent-assisted PVD has been proved to be a general method for the synthesis of organic 1D nanomaterials with high crystallinity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the instrument used for the adsorbent-assisted PVD. (b, c) SEM images of the TPI nanowires, (d) TEM images of some typical TPI nanowires, and (e) the electron diffraction pattern of the TPI nanowire with the main diffraction spots indexed. The arrow indicates the direction of the wire. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 
Through this method, the single crystalline nanowires were first prepared from a chemiluminescent compound, TPI.151 The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the TPI nanowires displayed in Fig. 6b indicate that each nanowire has smooth surface and uniform width all through the entire length. The SEM images of some wires growing out of the substrate surface (Fig. 6c) show very flat and smooth end surfaces of the nanowires quadrangular cross sections. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 6d prove that the geometrical shape of the TPI nanostructures is a solid wire without obvious structural defects. The electron diffraction pattern (Fig. 6e) reveals that each single wire has single crystalline structure and grows along the b axis of the TPI crystal. The adsorbents decreased the sublimation temperature and slowed the weight loss of TPI, through which the degree of saturation was well controlled and the uniformity of the nanowires was remarkably improved.


2.2.2 Cooperative deposition of binary compounds. 
In the following work, we extended this adsorbent-assisted PVD method to binary doped systems.152 The uniformly doped crystalline nanowires were fabricated by adsorbent-assisted PVD from 1,3,5-triphenyl-2-pyrazoline (TPP) and rubrene, which were commonly used as blue and red dyes in organic light emitting devices. The doping content in final binary 1D nanostructures was tuned by changing the molar ratio of the two sources. Fig. 7a and b show the SEM and TEM images of the binary nanostructures with a TPP/rubrene molar ratio of 100:1. They indicate that the products are wire-like structures with high monodispersity, and each individual wire has a uniform diameter throughout the entire length. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern proves that the addition of rubrene dopant decreases the crystallinity of TPP to polycrystalline. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns shown in Fig. 7c describe the change of crystallinity with the increase of doping ratio in the binary nanowires. This indicates that the rubrene is also crystalline in the doped nanomaterials, but there is no formation of a co-crystal or superlattice-type composite crystal. These rubrene crystalline domains are almost uniformly dispersed in the crystalline matrices of TPP nanowires.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM (b) and TEM images of the binary nanostructures with a TPP/rubrene molar ratio of 100:1. Inset: SAED pattern of the nanowires. (c) XRD patterns of the 1D nanomaterials with TPP/rubrene molar ratios of 100:1 and 5:1, and also XRD patterns of TPP and rubrene powders. The stars indicate the diffraction peaks of rubrene. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 


2.2.3 Wire-on-wire vapor deposition. 
Vertical arrangement of nanowire materials has been found to be increasingly important in miniaturized devices, mainly because the high orientation and density of vertical nanowires enable better opto-electronic performance.153,154 The vapor deposition of organic molecules may provide a new road to organic vertical nanostructures, since they are composed of molecular building blocks with relatively weaker interactions, thus allowing highly flexible structural tunability. The direct growth of vertically aligned organic nanowires of 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) on solid surfaces was reported by Huang et al.155 It was found that during PVD, the vaporized organic molecules tend to nucleate preferentially and grow more rapidly on sites with smaller curvature radii and higher surface energies.156 Based on these results, we recently developed the wire-on-wire deposition method to create dendritic organic heterojunctions.157
First, aluminum tris(8-hydroxyquinoline) (Alq3) microwires was synthesized through the evaporation of the antisolvent around the Alq3 solution in substrate. Then, these microwires are used as seeds for the vertical growth of organic nanowires from DAAQ molecules. The small curvature radii and organic nature of Alq3 make the microwires the preferential sites for condensation of the DAAQ vapor. Therefore, DAAQ nucleated on the Alq3 microwire surface to form some isolated clusters, and the vapor diffusion was much faster than the self-nucleation of DAAQ clusters. Finally, the organic branched nanostructures of Alq3–DAAQ were obtained by the wire-on-wire vapor deposition on self-assembled microwires, as shown in Fig. 8a.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the Alq3–DAAQ dendritic heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission of the American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image of the BPEA–silver nanowire heterojunction area. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 
Meanwhile, the site-selected growth of BPEA molecules on the ends of silver nanowires was reported by our group.158 We used the site-specific secondary deposition of organic molecules for the two-step synthesis of organic–metal nanowire heterojunctions. The silver nanowires were firstly chemically synthesized and deposited onto the glass substrate, and then the BPEA molecules were evaporated for the epitaxial growth on the silver wires. The sharp tips of silver nanowires play the role of nucleus for the condensation of vaporized BPEA molecules, and the small curvature of the convexity at the tips allows for an overwhelming superiority in attracting the BPEA vapor. Therefore, most of the BPEA molecules could grow specifically adjacent to the ends of the silver nanowires, as displayed in the TEM image of a single BPEA–silver nanowire junction (Fig. 8b). The site selective nucleation and subsequent growth offers a general method to construct organic nanowires with high spatial precision and more complex organic 1D nanostructures.

2.3 Template methods
Although liquid-phase assembly and vapor-phase deposition have been successfully used to construct 1D structures in many organic molecular systems, all these methods greatly rely on the interaction within molecular units to drive the predominated growth of organic nanocrystals. One simple yet effective solution is to fill organic molecules into some 1D nanosized vacancies, which are often referred as “templates” in nanofabrication techniques. There are mainly two kinds of templates, soft templates159 (e.g., micelle solutions) and hard templates160 (e.g., porous membranes). Soft templates can usually induce the 1D growth of organic aggregates by the hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions with solvents and molecules. Therefore, highly crystalline structures could be obtained from soft template methods. In comparison, the hard template methods are more universal, but the rapid concentration of molecular units in hard templates often results in polycrystalline 1D structures. With the proper annealing treatments after the filling of molecules, the crystallinity could be largely improved though the re-arrangement of molecular units within the templates.

2.3.1 Soft-templated self-assembly. 
Although the self-assembly induced by changing the solvent surroundings provides a facile method for the fabrication of 1D nanomaterials from organic compounds, it often requires the relatively strong intermolecular interactions between molecular units, like hydrogen bonds or effective π–π stacking. For those molecules without such non-covalent interactions, the 1D molecular aggregations need to be directed via the external forces. Soft-template methods represent a straightforward route to fabricate nanostructures by inducing the target molecules to grow according to the shapes inside the templates.161
It is well known that micelles with different shapes, like spherical or rod-like, will be formed in surfactant solutions when the concentration reaches the critical micelle concentration. The rod-like micelles can be used as soft templates for the 1D assembly of organic molecules. The nanofibers of 1,3-diphenyl-2-pyrazoline (DP) was prepared through the self-assembly of DP molecules in a surfactant solution of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) micelles,162 as displayed in Fig. 9a. The CTAB tended to form spherical micelles at lower DP/CTAB molar ratios, while the increase of the DP amount will induce the sphere-to-rod transition of the micelles, which will act as the template to direct the growth of DP in 1D manner. The SEM morphology of the nanofibers (Fig. 9b) shows that as-prepared fibers are of uniform shape and size, which can be controlled by changing the molar ratio of DP/CTAB. This method was proved to be applicable to a variety of functional molecules.163–165
 Fig. 9  (a) Representation of the formation mechanism of the DP nanofiber. N is the molar ratio of DP/CTAB. (b) SEM image of the prepared DP nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.2 Hard template methods. 
The synthesis of nanostructures with hard templates has developed independently in various fields of nanotechnology and it has become one of the most applied methods in the fabrication of inorganic 1D nanomaterials. Possin was the first to propose this template technique to prepare very small diameter wires in the 1970s,166 and Martin extended this technique and first put forward the term “template synthesis” in the 1990s.167 Now the commonly used templates include but are not limited to ordered porous membranes prepared with anodized aluminum oxide (AAO), silica, nanochannel glass, and iontrack-etched polymers.
Our group presented the preparation of perylene and dibenzoylmethane (DBM) nanotubes by the dip-and-dry template method followed by heat treatment to increase the crystallinity.168Fig. 10a shows a SEM image of DBM nanotubes with 200 nm diameter. DBM nanotubes of different sizes were prepared by using alumina templates with different pore diameters. b-Diketones, of which DBM is an example, are of interest in different areas owing to their isomeric keto–enol interconversion. It is interesting to note that the conversion equilibrium was modulated by altering the size of the tube, that is, the ratio of the enol isomers increased with a decrease of the diameters of the nanotubes. The further filling of organic molecules in porous membranes could also lead to solid nanostructures. In this manner, the large area nanonet architecture from 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(p-chlorophenyl) porphyrin (TClPP) was synthesized using the AAO template as a substrate.169 The nanofibers could be well aligned according to the internal direction of AAO template, as displayed in the SEM image (Fig. 10b). The hard template methods provide a powerful tool to construct 1D nanostructures from organic compounds and also organic–inorganic hybrids,170,171 although the crystallinity remains a problem in many cases.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the typical top view of DBM nanotubes with diameters of 100 nm, prepared after the complete removal of the template by alkaline treatment. (b) SEM image of TClPP nanostructures cultivated on AAO templates (100 nm pores) at a pressure differential of 0.07 MPa. Reproduced from ref. 168 and ref. 169 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 

3. Optoelectronic applications of organic 1D nanostructures
One of the most important reasons why organic 1D nanomaterials have been attracting so much attention is that their optical and electronic properties are fundamentally different from their inorganic counterparts, because the intermolecular interactions in organic materials are basically of weak types. Besides the exploration of the synthetic strategies, much effort has also been made to investigate the unique optical and/or electronic properties of the organic nanomaterials obtained by molecular aggregation.172–174 As mentioned above, it was found that the optical and electronic properties of organic nanomaterials are fundamentally different from those of their inorganic counterparts, because the intermolecular interactions are basically of weak types in organic materials. The diversity of optical functionalities in organic 1D nanomaterials is attributed to the photo-physical and photo-chemical processes, including energy transfer, charge transfer, exciton coupling and diffusion. The 1D nanostructures of inorganic semiconductors and polymers have shown great possibilities in the fabrication of nanowire electronic, and more recently, nanowire photonic devices,175,176 while the organic analogy are surely reasonable to play an important role in this field.
In this section, we focus on our recent progress on the experimental demonstration of photonic nanodevices from 1D organic molecular and composite nanomaterials. We give an extensive description about 1D organic micro/nanocrystals used as light emitters, nanolasers, optical waveguides and microcavities. The participation of excitons in light propagation induces energy/electron transfer in organic composite structures and also photon–plasmon coupling in organic–metal hybrid structures. In this respect, we realized a series of functional nanophotonic devices, including photonic routers, diodes, transistors, multiplexers, logic gates, photoelectric converters and evanescent sensors, as a significant step to the prototype of functional photonic chips. Our findings provide enlightenment for novel organic photonic elements, and highlight the significance of organic micro/nanocrystals in the field of integrated nanophotonics.177
3.1 Optical waveguiding and lasing
The nanoscale waveguides178,179 and laser sources19,180,181 are essential to the integrated nanophotonic systems and are crucial for optical information processing. Inorganic semiconductor 1D nanomaterials have been adopted as optical pumped lasers,182,183 and the microcavity effects and optically pumped lasing in nanowires based on conjugated polymer or dye doped polymers were also studied.184,185 The optically flat surface enables the light transmission and amplification in such Fabry–Peröt type nanocavities. Organic nanomaterials are very promising lasing candidates over their inorganic counterparts,186 because of their high luminescence efficiency, tunable energy levels, and also large cross section for stimulated emission. The crystalline nanostructures consisting of organic luminescent molecules with low molecular weights are expected to work as (sub-)wavelength optical waveguides with distinguishing features.187–189 Although the organic ones often suffer from the relatively high optical loss in waveguiding, they are still of great possibilities for their diverse opto-electronic properties, tunable performance by simply doping and compositing. For example, the high optical gain and well-defined morphology ensures the fabrication of low-threshold lasers from organic dye crystals.190–192

3.1.1 Optical waveguiding in organic microtubes. 
The construction of 1D micro/nano structures has shown impressive progress in the control and management of the flow of light in micro/nanometer regime. The ability to manipulate pulses of light within sub-micrometer volumes is essential for highly integrated light-based devices and chips, which is often referred as nanophotonic circuits. A bottom-up route to integrated photonics is to assemble photonic units from a collection of nanowire elements. Nanowires have several features that make them good photonic building blocks that assume different functions, including light creation, routing, and detection. These features include inherent one-dimensionality, diversity of optical and electrical properties, good size control, low surface roughness, and, in principle, the ability to operate above and below the diffraction limit. An important step toward nanowire photonics is to develop a nanowire waveguide that can link these various elements and provide the flexibility in interconnection patterns that is needed to carry out complex tasks such as logic operations. Our group reported the use of organic 1D nanostructures in the manipulation of light at wavelength scale.
The tubular 1D sub-microstructures were synthesized from BPEA, a light-emitting dye with very high luminescence efficiency.193 The organic molecules were first exchanged into boiling water, where the molecules are dissolved, and then induced the self-assembly of the molecules by programmed cooling the whole system at different speeds. As shown in Fig. 11a, the PL microscopy image of the BPEA tubes on quartz substrates exhibited a characteristic green to yellow emission, with very bright luminescence spots at both tips of each tube and relatively weaker emission from the tube bodies, which is a typical characteristic of optical waveguide. Almost all of the observed tubes reveal this kind of waveguide behavior. Fig. 11b indicates that the 1D BPEA tubes can serve as active optical waveguides that allow the locally excited PL to propagate along the length of the 1D structures and out-couple at the tube tips. In addition, when the excitation light is input from one of the two crossed tubes, the emissions can be coupled to the other tube, as shown in Fig. 11c. The refractive index of the BPEA is ∼1.65, and that of the quartz substrates is ∼1.5 at the measured wavelength. The small difference between the two refractive indexes results in a considerable energy leakage in the case of the solid BPEA microrods. However, in the tubular structures here, the light can be propagated at the interface of BPEA and the air inside the tube, whose refractive index is ∼1, and therefore the optical loss was significantly eliminated.
 Fig. 11  (a) PL microscopy image of some isolated BPEA tubes excited with blue light (460–490 nm). Scale bars are 20 μm. (b) Bright-field image and microarea PL images obtained by exciting the identical tube at three different positions. Scale bar is 10 μm. (c) Bright-field and microarea PL images of two crossed tubes. Scale bar is 20 μm. The squares indicate the excited positions. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.2 Lasing from organic nanowires. 
The nanowire waveguides have been extended to the category of small organic molecules, and therefore lasers from such organic nanowires can also be expected as they may serve as nanolaser geometry. The TPI nanowires (already mentioned in Fig. 6) revealed obvious fluorescence narrowing spectra at room temperature.149 The single crystalline wires can behave as nanoscale active optical waveguides, and optically pumped lasing was also observed from single nanowires with the increase of the excitation power.151
The PL microscopy image of the TPI nanowires (inset of Fig. 12) shows that the wires reveal good waveguide property. An isolated single TPI nanowire was excited with a pulsed laser at 325 nm wavelength, and the emissions were collected from the tip area. Fig. 12a gives the power dependent PL spectra recorded from the tip of a wire with 400 nm width and a 15 μm length. It indicates that PL modulations emerge on the lower energy side of the emission band, which can be observed more clearly from the inset. The modes do not occur at the short wavelength side because of photon reabsorption. At low excitation power, the structure displays a broad and featureless emission at about 375 nm. Above a threshold, amplified spontaneous emission was observed, which is indicated by the appearance of sharp cavity modes above an onset power. The energy dependence of the luminescent intensity and full width at half maximum of the emission spectra reveals a nonlinear gain and a threshold characteristic of laser. Below the threshold, the PL intensity increases almost linearly with the excitation power, and once the critical pumped energy is reached, there emerges a kink in the power dependence of emission intensity, which results in a large increased gain.
 Fig. 12  (a) Power-dependent emission spectra recorded on the tip of a TPI wire (width: 400 nm, length: 15 μm). The expansion of the higher wavelength region shows well-resolved optical resonance modes. (b) Power-dependent emission spectra recorded on the tip of a TPI wire (width: 800 nm, length: 15 μm). The inset shows the PL microscopy image of TPI nanowires deposited onto quartz wafers. Scale bar is 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 
The transition from the spontaneous PL to the stimulated emission is significantly influenced by the size of the nanowires. For thinner wires with width of 200 nm, no emission was detected due to the lack of resonator property. On the other hand, if the wire length is too small, even when the width is large enough, the stimulated emission cannot be observed either, although the PL intensity is also enhanced on the increase of the pump energy. This is because the high degree of spontaneous emission coupling in small mode volume will result in a broad cavity mode. When both the length and the width of the wire are large enough, multimode lasing can be observed as shown in Fig. 12b.

3.2 Multicolor light emission

3.2.1 Multicolor emission from single compound. 
Multicolor emissions, especially red–green–blue (RGB) emissions are essential to display and flat screens. Generally, multicolor emissions are realized with the blends of dyes emitting red, green and blue lights respectively. We demonstrated multicolor emissions with the 1D nanostructures of a single organic compound.194 The selected model compound, 1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene (PPCP), is a blue light-emitting dye used in electroluminescence devices. After being fabricated to crystalline 1D nanostructures, PPCP displayed a multicolor emission property, i.e., blue, green, and red emissions were achieved, respectively, by exciting the same sample with appropriate wavelengths.
The deep blue emission was observed from PPCP monomers in ethanol solution at room temperature. The vibronic levels are well resolved in the low-temperature spectrum because of the decrease of the freedom degree of molecular vibrations as well as the increase of molecular orientation. It is interesting to note that the spectral narrowing can also be observed in the PPCP nanostructures even at room temperature. A more important result is the multicolor emission from the PPCP nanomaterials, as displayed in Fig. 13a–c. Three different emission colors of blue, green and red were achieved by exciting the nanostructures with UV, blue and green lights. The quantum yields of the blue, green and red emissions are 0.23, 0.15 and 0.08, respectively. The green and red emission spectra also present well resolved vibrational fine structures. The green and red emitting centers in the PPCP nanomaterials were induced by their crystallinity and the structural defect energy levels therein, which was testified by the comparison between the emissions from the crystalline nanostructure with those of the amorphous thin films. Meanwhile, the emission from each center can be further enhanced by the 1D structure of the nanomaterials by the self convergence along specific directions.
 Fig. 13  Fluorescence microscopy images of the PPCP nanoribbon assemblies excited with (a) UV light (330–380 nm), (b) blue light (460–490 nm), and (c) green light (520–550 nm). Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.2 Tunable emission from binary organic nanowires. 
Binary doped organic nanowires were prepared with the above mentioned adsorbent-assisted PVD method.152 The blue light emitter (TPP) and the good orange dye (rubrene) were chosen as a host–guest system of FRET, which were fabricated into uniformly doped crystalline nanorods with the adsorbent-assisted PVD. The doping content was tuned by changing the molar ratio of the two sources.
The energy transfer from TPP to rubrene allows for the tunability of light emission in these binary nanostructures. When a proper TPP/rubrene molar ratio (100:1) was adopted, white emission can be achieved from these 1D nanostructures. As displayed in Fig. 14a, the fluorescence microscopy image indicates the white light emission from the binary nanostructures with remarkably bright spots at both rod ends. The homogenous emission color from all of the nanorods testified that rubrene crystal grains were dispersed uniformly into the TPP matrices. The emission color evolves from blue to orange with the increase of rubrene content. The tunable emission between the blue light of TPP and the red light of rubrene can be evaluated from the evolution of fluorescence spectra of the nanostructures with the change of rubrene content, as shown in Fig. 14b.
 Fig. 14  (a) Fluorescence microscopy image of 1D nanomaterials with TPP/rubrene ratio of 100:1, excited with UV light (330–385 nm). Scale bar is 5 μm. (b) Emission spectra of the binary nanomaterials deposited onto quartz wafers with different TPP/rubrene molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 
The doped amorphous thin films were also prepared with co-evaporation technique. The colors of the doped films are not stable because of the oxidation of rubrene. In contrast, the emission colors of the binary nanowires are very stable, which was ascribed to the crystallinity of rubrene. Both the color stability and the incomplete quenching are essential to the realization of white-light emission. In the amorphous films, the emission of TPP can be quenched almost completely at 4% rubrene doping content, which is caused by the higher energy transfer efficiency. In contrast, the emission of TPP can not be quenched completely even when the dopant content was as high as 20% in the doped nanorods.

3.3 Optical waveguide modulators
Combining the optical waveguiding feature and the color-tunable emission in organic 1D nanostructures, we can further achieve the variation of guided photons during the light propagation based on the energy transfer process. Energy transfer provides a powerful tool for converting light wavelength in organic composite structures.107 The uniformly doped donor–acceptor 1D structures could alter the wavelength of light emission during the light guiding, showing potentials in the processing of light signals in active waveguide elements. In comparison with uniformly doped ones, the heterogeneous structures by selective doping along the longitude direction may offer more possibilities for multiple photonic applications. Thus, the design and fabrication of organic binary nanostructures of donors and acceptors are essential for the spatial control of light-emitting properties and the optical processing based on energy transfer.

3.3.1 Waveguide modulator from binary organic microtubes. 
We prepared the binary tubular structures with high crystallinity, in which perylene molecules are doped in the matrix of TPI.195 The hexagonal hollow tubes with lengths of ∼100 μm were obtained though the cooperative deposition of these two organic compounds. The air medium inside the tubes leads to spatial confinement of photons in two dimensions in the tube wall, which forms an annular microcavity. The traveling light around the annular cavity results in a much longer propagation length in the microtube than that in the solid structures. The waveguide modulation in the binary tube is a result of the re-absorption of the UV photon from the TPI matrix by the doped perylene component and subsequent re-emission of a green photon, which is a remote energy relay (RER) process (Fig. 15a).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the annular cavity of the binary microtube and energy diagrams for the IFRET and RER processes. (b) Spatially resolved PL spectra of out-coupled light for a single binary microtube recorded by excitation at a distance of 10–90 μm from the tip. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 
The out-coupled PL redistributes from short to long wavelengths during the propagation, making the microtube act as a waveguide modulator. The hollow structure is considered to be responsible for the waveguide modulation. The measurements of PL microscopy as well as the spatially resolved PL spectra of a single tube (Fig. 15b) indicate that the tubes present typical features of an optical waveguide, in which the PL of TPI at 402 nm shows a constant loss coefficient of 97 dB mm−1, which those from perylene as a result of intermolecular FRET reveal non-linear losses, and the optical loss at the longer wavelength is approximately zero.


3.3.2 Self-modulated white light outcoupling. 
As another important kind of inter-molecular energy transfer, triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTET, described as Dexter electron-exchange energy transfer) and the upconverted emission based on triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) have been paid research attention in mixed organic solutions and films.196,197 TTET–TTA upconversion systems are capable of generating short-wavelength radiation from long-wavelength light sources, with low driven power and high upconverted quantum yield, and independence on the coherence. We have used a metal-to-ligand charge-transfer triplet sensitizer (BT)2Ir(acac) as the triplet energy donor, and constructed core–shell nanostructures of (BT)2Ir(acac)@perylene with a microemulsion assisted chemical reaction method.198 The perylene shell can act as the triplet annihilator, and the upconverted blue emission from perylene was detected by exciting (BT)2Ir(acac) to its triplet with a 500 nm green light.
In general, white lights are generated by the incomplete quenching of donor emissions and the color mixing of donors and acceptors at given doping ratios. However, the color is supersensitive to the doping ratio in nanoscale systems, and a slight change of acceptor content by environmental heating, oxidation, or light irradiation will significantly influence the white light output. Inspired by the voltage stabilizer in electric circuits, we proposed a kind of optical modulator based on doped organic nanowire waveguides, which can output constant white light from the wire terminus despite the doping contents. We combined the FRET and TTET–TTA in a single organic waveguide system of 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) and (BT)2Ir(acac), in which excitons can be converted between two organic compounds accompanied by energy transfers.199 These optical waveguides can modulate different input colors in to white light outcoupling from wire tips, which results from the fluctuations of singlet and triplet excitons between two organic species during light propagation, as illustrated in Fig. 16a. When the nanowires are excited with a focused green laser, DPA and (BT)2Ir(acac) excitons can adjust their ratios through bidirectional energy transfers, and therefore self-modulated white light outcoupling can be achieved. The self-modulated equilibrium between the blue emission and the orange emission occurred in nanowire waveguides with either low or high doping ratios, as shown in Fig. 16b. As a result, the stable white light outcoupling could always be obtained after a propagation of tens of micrometers. This strategy of optical regulators might offers a comprehensive understanding of active optical waveguiding for the development of novel multi-component waveguide building blocks.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of light propagation and energy transfers in the nanowire waveguides. (b) The exponential relationship between the contribution ratio of blue to orange emission (n) and the propagation length in the nanowire waveguides with low (0.2%) and high (1%) doping ratios. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 

3.4 Chemical vapor sensors
Organic 1D nanomaterials, with advantages of high reaction activity, good processability, and high PL efficiency, offer great possibilities for sensing applications with the change of internal and external conditions. Specifically, planar aromatic molecules can usually self-assemble into 1D nanostructures, which exhibit uniaxial optical properties along the direction of molecular packing. These uniaxial optical properties with 1D coherence may produce a new generation of optical sensors that will potentially enable higher sensitivity. The long-range molecular arrangement also leads to the enhanced exciton migration in preferable direction along the longitude axis, which allows for the amplified fluorescence quenching by the surface adsorbed quenchers. For instance, gaseous analytes can be either selectively bound to their surface or diffused into the organic matrix, which might be difficult for other materials such as semiconductor nanowires or glass nanofibers.

3.4.1 HCl–NH3 sensors based on composite nanobelts. 
As already mentioned, the multicolor emission could be achieved by the efficient energy transfer between the donor and the acceptor molecules. The emission color can be altered a lot by a tiny change of the donor/acceptor ratios, which might offer a new possible way for chemical sensing. Our group reported a new kind of chemical sensor based on the nanobelts of DPA (a blue light emitting dye) doped with a very small amount of Nile red (a red light emitting dye that is sensitive to acid and basic chemical vapors).164 Tunable emission from blue to red could be realized by changing the molar ratio of DPA/NR. The FRET process from DPA to NR greatly improves the sensitive detection of acid and basic chemical vapors.
As displayed in Fig. 17a and b, the luminescence from binary nanobelts with a DPA/NR molar ratio of 200:1 changed accordingly, when exposed to the HCl and NH3 vapors. The red emission of Nile red decreased while the blue emission intensity of DPA increased very quickly (∼20 s) after the exposure to HCl vapor. The intensities of both blue and red emissions from the nanobelts can be restored in very short time by further exposing to NH3 vapor. The recovered nanobelt films show similar sensitivity when re-exposed to HCl vapor. The substantial alternation in luminescence spectra could also result in a more obvious change in visible colors of nanobelts under UV radiation, as shown in Fig. 17c. This kind of FRET enhanced chemical vapor sensors provides an effective approach for detecting both acid and basic chemical vapors in many biological and environmental systems.
 Fig. 17  (a) PL intensity at 600 nm (red) and 440 nm (blue) with time when the binary nanobelts were exposed to HCl vapor (15 ppm). (b) PL intensity at 600 nm (red) and 440 nm (blue) with time when the same sample was exposed to NH3 vapor (50 ppm). (c) Fluorescence microscopy images of the corresponding nanobelts on exposure to HCl and NH3 vapors. 


3.4.2. Organic core–sheath chemical sensors. 
There has been a move towards making miniaturized sensors with nanowires due to their high surface-to-volume ratios that facilitate the diffusion of gas molecules into the structures. Recently, the waveguiding single-nanowire has been demonstrated for gas sensing with fast response and high sensitivity with the evanescent coupling method.200–202 We reported a novel core–sheath organic nanowire system for the rapid and sensitive detection of H2O2 vapor,203 in which the single-crystalline BPEA nanowire was chosen as the core and the bis(2,4,5-trichloro-6-carbopentoxy-phenyl) oxalate (CPPO) was adopted as the chemo-reactive shell. The CPPO shell is influenced exclusively by H2O2 vapor, while the nanowire core is insensitive. The large aspect ratio of the nanocables allows for fast diffusion of the gaseous analyte molecules throughout the shell, leading to an instant capture of the vapor species and a waveguiding amplification of the evanescence coupling. Since the chemical properties of organic materials could be effectively tailored through rational molecular design, organic single-nanowire optical sensors for a variety of specimens can be realized on the basis of the above-mentioned optical detecting scheme.
As displayed in Fig. 18a, the chemiluminescence reactive CPPO layer is highly sensitive and selective to H2O2 vapors, and the evanescent coupling between the core and shell enables optical changes for spectral analysis in the visible region. The optical waveguide response of the nanowires exposed to the vapors is remarkably fast (35 ms). Once the gas mixture contains traces of H2O2, the output of the waveguide was drastically attenuated with the input luminous flux remaining unchanged, as shown in Fig. 18b. The corresponding spectra of the output light as a function of exposing time are shown in Fig. 18c, revealing a nearly 50% decrease after exposing to H2O2 vapor for 60 s. The monotonic decrease of the PL output with H2O2 exposure can be used for quantified H2O2 detecting. This cable-like optical waveguide sensing platform complements the present nanowire field-effect sensors with the ability to rapidly and specifically monitor the amplified optical variation across the wire waveguiding, showing that a single nanocable is very promising for developing optical probes to detect individual response on chip.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the measurement of the BPEA@CPPO waveguide sensor. (b) A series of PL images of a single wire waveguide sensor in the atmosphere of H2O2 vapor molecules. Scale bar is 5 μm. (c) Time dependent PL intensities of the output light signals on exposure to 6 ppm H2O2 vapor. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 

3.5 Electronic–photonic conversion
Organic opto-electronic devices are eagerly pursued for the ability to construct future communicating and computing systems with high speed and low cost. Two types of such devices, light emitting diodes and solar cells, are of essential importance, as they can bridge the gap between the regions of electronics and photonics. As devices have been fabricated at a ever decreasing scale, nanowire based light emitting diodes and solar cells have attracted attentions due to the significant enhancement in conversion efficiency. Moreover, these nanowire devices pave new roads to the signal conversion in future electronic–photonic hybrid chips, which could take advantages from both the high speed transport nature of photons and also the strong coulombic interactions of electrons. The hybrid integration, where interactive communications among photonic chips are fulfilled via electronic signal, would be a notable landmark in the progress of information technology.

3.5.1 Organic nanowire electroluminescence devices. 
Since the observation of strong electroluminescence with a low driving voltage was reported, Alq3 has played an important role in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). In our work, the Alq3 nanowires were prepared with the adsorbent-assisted PVD method, and the nanowires were then applied in OLED devices.150Fig. 19a displays the geometrical structure of Alq3 nanowire-based devices, and the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics indicate a typical diode-like behavior of the devices. The Alq3 nanowires with different diameters were used to prepare OLEDs, and their luminance–voltage characteristics shows an obvious size-dependent effect. As shown in Fig. 19b, the current efficiency of the device from Alq3 nanowires with diameter of 40 nm is obviously higher that those of the devices from nanowires 60 nm and 80 nm in diameter. In addition, the external quantum efficiencies at the driving voltage of 12.5 V of the devices based on nanowires with diameter of 40 nm, 60 nm and 80 nm are 0.90%, 0.58% and 0.28%, respectively. The performance of these nanowire devices is comparable to that of thin film ones, and more importantly, nanowire devices may provide possibilities to the realization of electrically pumped lasers for their confinement ability of photons.204
 Fig. 19  (a) Structure of the Alq3 nanowire OLEDs. (b) Efficiency–current-density characteristics of the OLEDs fabricated from Alq3 thin film and nanowires with diameters of 40, 60, and 80 nm. All the three nanowire samples are with the same average length of μm. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 


3.5.2 Organic nanowire heterojunction solar cells. 
Nanowire p–n junctions are attractive elements in modern electronics due to the excellent optoelectronic properties towards light-emitting devices,49 light-controlled diodes,170 photon detectors171 as well as solar cells.205 Since organic semiconductors have advantages in ease of molecular design and chemical compositing for property optimization, organic p–n junctions may provide an alternative way in broad applications for the next generation optoelectronic devices.206 The core–shell coaxial heterostructures can keep good connection between different compounds, which is helpful for enhancing the charge carrier mobility and exploring the practical optoelectronic devices.
By using vapor phase epitaxial growth, we synthesized single crystalline coaxial p–n junction nanowire arrays with two π-conjugated semiconductors.207 The p-type copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) nucleates selectively on the top of the vertically aligned n-type 5,10,15,20-tetra(4-pyridyl)-porphyrin (H2TPyP) hollow structures. The strong π–π stacking interactions assure good connections at the junction part and result in coaxial nanowire heterojunctions with great potentials in optoelectronic device. As shown in Fig. 20a, the asymmetrical (Au/Al) electrodes were employed to reduce the energy barrier between the electrodes and semiconductors and effectively facilitate the charge injection and collection. Fig. 20b illustrates the typical I–V curves under illumination of different light intensity. As expected, the CuPc–H2TPyP junction nanowire reveals typical diode characteristics and exhibits good rectifying property at room temperature. The large energy difference between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of H2TPyP and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of CuPc at the heterointerface allow for an high open-circuit voltage of ∼0.64 V. Owing to their unique cable-type structure, the nanowire p–n junctions shows better optoelectronic conversion performance than those of single component nanowires and thin films. The outstanding electrical response of incident lights in single nanowires may also lead to their further integration into electronic–photonic hybrid chips.
 Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of a single coaxial heterojunction nanowire device. The energy level diagram of a CuPc–H2TPyP nanowire device is also illustrated. (b) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristic of a single CuPc–H2TPyP junction in dark and under light illumination with different intensities. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission of Wiley-VCH. 

4. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, we reviewed some recent advances in the synthesis and optoelectronic properties of 1D nanomaterials based on small organic functional molecules. Compared with the 0D nanoparticles, the construction of 1D organic nanostructures used to be a challenge in materials science. In this aspect, we introduced some facile liquid and vapor phases based synthesis methods, which are suitable for the preparation of both solid and hollow nanostructures. Composite 1D nanomaterials including core–sheath and well controlled doped materials can also be achieved by improving the liquid or vapor phase methods. Furthermore, we presented the unique optical and electronic properties of as-prepared organic 1D nanostructures, including optical waveguide, lasing, multicolor emission, chemical sensing, and also opto-electronic devices. A emphasis was paid on the weak intermolecular interactions in their molecular crystal structures, and its relationships to the optical and electronic performance.
At present, the development of organic nanomaterials still lags far behind that of their inorganic counterparts, although considerable attentions have been paid in the past couple of years. Considering the vast number of organic species and the great variety of their microscopic structures, we believe there will be a brighter future for the organic category of 1D nanomaterials, especially in the application of optical, electronic and optoelectronic nanodevices. To achieve this goal, people still have heavy responsibilities for the exploration in this field. In the following research, more attentions and effects should be paid on the design and synthesis of novel functional molecules, the rational construction of complex nanostructures, and most importantly, the deep understanding in the structure–property relationship in organic molecular aggregates.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 21125315, 51073164, 91022022), the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2012YQ120060 and National Basic Research 973 Program).
References
C. M. Lieber, MRS Bull., 2003, 28, 486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ball and L. Garwin, Nature, 1992, 355, 761 CrossRef .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CAS .
J. R. Friedman, M. P. Sarachik, J. Tejada and R. Ziolo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 3830 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. J. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert, C. H. Xu, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert, G. E. Scuseria, D. Tomanek, J. E. Fischer and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1996, 273, 483 CAS .
S. A. Wolf, D. D. Awschalom, R. A. Buhrman, J. M. Daughton, S. von Molnar, M. L. Roukes, A. Y. Chtchelkanova and D. M. Treger, Science, 2001, 294, 1488 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q. Q. Wei, H. K. Park and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1289 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2003, 421, 241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. F. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Small, 2005, 1, 142 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, M. M. Ling, S. H. Liu, R. J. Tseng, C. Reese, M. E. Roberts, Y. Yang, F. Wudl and Z. N. Bao, Nature, 2006, 444, 913 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 2373 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Crooks, M. Q. Zhao, L. Sun, V. Chechik and L. K. Yeung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 181 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. W. Chan and S. M. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, D. Trau, H. Mohwald and R. Renneberg, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 1485 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976 RSC .
S. Fafard, K. Hinzer, S. Raymond, M. Dion, J. McCaffrey, Y. Feng and S. Charbonneau, Science, 1996, 274, 1350 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, T. Zentgraf, R.-M. Ma, C. Gladden, L. Dai, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nature, 2009, 461, 629 CrossRef CAS .
P. Michler, A. Kiraz, C. Becher, W. V. Schoenfeld, P. M. Petroff, L. D. Zhang, E. Hu and A. Imamoglu, Science, 2000, 290, 2282 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, K. P. Knutsen, H. Q. Yan, M. Law, Y. F. Zhang, P. D. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 197 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, H. Q. Yan, R. D. Schaller, P. B. Petersen, P. D. Yang and R. J. Saykally, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soljacic and J. D. Joannopoulos, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, H. Kind, B. Messer, F. Kim and P. D. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yan, J.-H. Park, Y. Choi, C.-J. Heo, S.-M. Yang, L. P. Lee and P. D. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, R. Gao, P. Xie, T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, H. S. Choe, B. Tian, X. Jiang and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 174 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xie, Q. Xiong, Y. Fang, Q. Qing and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 119 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2000, 287, 1902 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2006, 314, 1868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 2223 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Kim, G. Q. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zang, Y. K. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, A. D. Peng, Y. Ma, D. B. Xiao and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2859 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, R. C. Mucic and J. J. Storhoff, Nature, 1996, 382, 607 CrossRef CAS .
R. Elghanian, J. J. Storhoff, R. C. Mucic, R. L. Letsinger and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 1997, 277, 1078 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Mohwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Greytak, C. J. Barrelet, Y. Li and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 151103 CrossRef .
M. Law, D. J. Sirbuly, J. C. Johnson, J. Goldberger, R. J. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Science, 2004, 305, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Qian, J. Xiang and C. M. Lieber, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 18 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Gradecak, Y. Li, C. Y. Wen and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2287 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Z. H. Zhong, D. L. Wang, W. U. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. F. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. F. Duan, Y. Cui, L. J. Lauhon, K. H. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 294, 1313 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Gudiksen, L. J. Lauhon, J. Wang, D. C. Smith and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 415, 617 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 365 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Bredas, M. Logdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, T. Kawase, R. H. Friend, T. Shimoda, M. Inbasekaran, W. Wu and E. P. Woo, Science, 2000, 290, 2123 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. D. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 83 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolmakov and M. Moskovits, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 151 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, P. Werner and M. Zacharias, Small, 2006, 2, 700 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 841 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 851 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. Schotter, C. A. Kastle, N. Emley, T. Shibauchi, L. Krusin-Elbaum, K. Guarini, C. T. Black, M. T. Tuominen and T. P. Russell, Science, 2000, 290, 2126 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Lauhon, M. S. Gudiksen, C. L. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 420, 57 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Tang, N. A. Kotov and M. Giersig, Science, 2002, 297, 237 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, A. Majumdar and P. D. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Liu, J. Kameoka, D. A. Czaplewski and H. G. Craighead, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 671 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ghadiri, J. R. Granja, R. A. Milligan, D. E. McRee and N. Khazanovich, Nature, 1993, 366, 324 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brunsveld, B. J. B. Folmer, E. W. Meijer and R. P. Sijbesma, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 4071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pisignano, L. Persano, P. Visconti, R. Cingolani, G. Gigli, G. Barbarella and L. Favaretto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 2545 CrossRef CAS .
F. Di Benedetto, A. Camposeo, S. Pagliara, E. Mele, L. Persano, R. Stabile, R. Cingolani and D. Pisignano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 614 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Huang, Z. B. Wang, H. T. Wang, X. L. Cheng, A. Mitra and Y. S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 388 RSC .
D. Zhang and Y. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 134, 9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Berdichevsky and Y. H. Lo, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 122 CrossRef CAS .
D. O'Carroll and G. Redmond, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6501 CrossRef CAS .
D. O'Carroll, D. Iacopino and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1160 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, Y. D. Park, Y. Jang, S. Kim and K. Cho, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 834 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, B. Muls, L. Gence, D. A. Serban, J. Hofkens, S. Melinte, B. Nysten, S. Demoustier-Champagne and A. M. Jonas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3639 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5424 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kameoka, R. Ilic, D. Czaplewski, R. T. Mathers, G. W. Coates and H. G. Craighead, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2004, 17, 421 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Yun, N. V. Myung, R. P. Vasquez, C. S. Lee, E. Menke and R. M. Penner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 419 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, C. Wang and Y. Wei, Small, 2009, 5, 2349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Cheng, C. A. Ross, H. I. Smith and E. L. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. H. Lim, S. W. Chung and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2004, 303, 348 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1988, 27, 89 CrossRef .
J. M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1304 CrossRef .
T. Shimizu, M. Masuda and H. Minamikawa, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C. M. Li, A. J. Ryan and S. P. Armes, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1566 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Aldaye, A. L. Palmer and H. F. Sleiman, Science, 2008, 321, 1795 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Bosman, H. M. Janssen and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5592 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, T. Naddo, J. L. Huang, R. Oitker, M. Yen, J. C. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, X. Yang, S. Loser and L. Zang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2219 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Tang, L. Jiang, Y. H. Tong, H. X. Li, Y. L. Liu, Z. H. Wang, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2947 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takazawa, Y. Kitahama and Y. Kimura, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2272 RSC .
S. Hotta and D. R. Paul, Polymer, 2004, 45, 7639 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Li, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 529 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, H. L. Dong and W. P. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4994 RSC .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, A. D. Peng, Y. Ma, Q. Liao and J. N. Yao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 409 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9060 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 973 RSC .
Q. H. Cui, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4136 RSC .
H. Kasai, H. S. Nalwa, H. Oikawa, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, N. Minami, A. Kakuta, K. Ono, A. Mukoh and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 31, L1132 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kasai, H. Kamatani, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, H. Matsuda and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, L221 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fu, B. H. Loo, D. B. Xiao, R. M. Xie, X. H. Ji, J. N. Yao, B. W. Zhang and L. Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 962 CrossRef CAS .
T. Naddo, Y. K. Che, W. Zhang, K. Balakrishnan, X. M. Yang, M. Yen, J. C. Zhao, J. S. Moore and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6978 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, X. Fan, J. S. Jie, J. C. Chang, C. S. Lee, W. J. Zhang and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1716 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zhang, G. D. Yuan, Q. S. Li, B. Wang, X. H. Zhang, R. Q. Zhang, J. C. Chang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6945 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, H. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Z. Gao, Z. M. Su and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1631–1634 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Xiao, Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, Q. Zhang, F. Boey, H. Zhang and Q. C. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6926 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fu and J. N. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chernyak, T. Meier, E. Tsiper and S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 10294 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Spano and S. Mukamel, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1989, 40, 5783 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balakrishnan, A. Datar, W. Zhang, X. M. Yang, T. Naddo, J. L. Huang, J. M. Zuo, M. Yen, J. S. Moore and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Che, A. Datar, X. Yang, T. Naddo, J. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4332 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Q. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam, J. Sun, A. Qin, M. Haeussler, Y. P. Dong, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, H. S. Kwok and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 905 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, Y. Y. Fu, H. X. Li and W. P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3937 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, X. Yao, H. Li, Y. Fu, L. Chen, Q. Meng, W. Hu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 376 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. An, S. K. Kwon, S. D. Jung and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. An, D. S. Lee, J. S. Lee, Y. S. Park, H. S. Song and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10232 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kang, H. B. Fu, X. Cao, Q. Shi and J. N. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1895 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekhar and R. Chandrasekar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3556 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, H. B. Fu, C. Wang and J. N. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4942 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yoon, I.-C. Hwang, K. S. Kim and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Zhan, H. B. Fu, X. Li, X. Sheng, Y. Zhao, D. B. Xiao, Y. Ma, J. S. Ma and J. N. Yao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7635 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Peng, D. B. Xiao, Y. Ma, W. S. Yang and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2070 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balzer, V. G. Bordo, A. C. Simonsen and H. G. Rubahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 10 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balzer, V. G. Bordo, A. C. Simonsen and H. G. Rubahn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 67, 115408 CrossRef .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961 CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, W. S. Yang, D. B. Xiao, X. H. Sheng, X. Yang, Z. G. Shuai, Y. Luo and J. N. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6430 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Kang, Y. Chen, D. B. Xiao, A. D. Peng, F. G. Shen, X. Kuang, H. B. Fu and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2695 RSC .
F. Shen, A. Peng, Y. Chen, Y. Dong, Z. Jiang, Y. Wang, H. B. Fu and J. N. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Tian, Y. Chen, W. S. Yang, J. N. Yao, L. Y. Zhu and Z. G. Shuai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. B. Fu, A. Peng, Y. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1623 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. Yan, Y.-Y. Jing, Q. Shi, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kong, D. P. Yu, B. Zhang, W. Fang and S. Q. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 407 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, K. B. K. Teo, C. Ducati, N. L. Rupesinghe, G. A. J. Amaratunga, A. C. Ferrari, D. Roy, J. Robertson and W. I. Milne, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5308 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Dai, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 9 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, R829 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, D. B. Xiao, W. S. Yang, A. D. Peng and J. N. Yao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, C. A. Di, W. S. Yang, G. Yu, Y. Q. Liu and J. N. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1985 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, A. D. Peng, H. B. Fu, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, F. Q. Hu, A. D. Peng, W. S. Yang and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, M. Sun, K. Ding, M. T. Hill and C.-Z. Ning, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1646 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12653 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, J. S. Wu and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, P. Zhan, J. Kim, C. Sun and J. X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1630 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yan, X. Wang, Y. S. Zhao, J. Huang and J. N. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, J. N. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5681 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Sun and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Sui, D. R. Acosta, J. A. Gonzalez-Leon, A. Bermudez, J. Feuchtwanger, B. Z. Cui, J. O. Flores and J. M. Saniger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, H. P. Liang, L. J. Wan and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17090 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Fu, D. B. Xiao, J. N. Yao and G. Q. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Lei, Q. Liao, H. B. Fu and J. N. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1742 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zheng, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12935 RSC .
C. Zhang, C.-L. Zou, Y. Yan, R. Hao, F.-W. Sun, Z.-F. Han, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7276 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Possin, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1970, 41, 772 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhao, W. S. Yang, Y. Luo, T. Y. Zhai, G. J. Zhang and J. N. Yao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3773 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, Y. Liu, L. Kang, Y. Wang, H. B. Fu, Y. Ma, J. N. Yao and B. H. Loo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Q. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Hu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9198 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, H. Liu, X. Qian, S.-W. Lai, Y. Li, N. Chen, C. Ouyang, C.-M. Che and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 7749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Che, X. M. Yang, G. L. Liu, C. Yu, H. W. Ji, J. M. Zuo, J. C. Zhao and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Che, H. L. Huang, M. A. Xu, C. Y. Zhang, B. R. Bunes, X. M. Yang and L. Zang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1087 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yanagi and T. Morikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 187 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Pauzauskie and P. D. Yang, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 36 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Yan, D. Gargas and P. D. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 569 CrossRef CAS .
J. Clark and G. Lanzani, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 438 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrelet, A. B. Greytak and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1981 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Pan, D. Liu, R. B. Liu, F. F. Wang, X. Zhu and B. S. Zou, Small, 2005, 1, 980 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Yan, J. Johnson, M. Law, R. R. He, K. Knutsen, J. R. McKinney, J. Pham, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1907 CrossRef CAS .
F. Quochi, F. Cordella, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, F. Balzer and H. G. Rubahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 041106 CrossRef .
F. Qian, Y. Li, S. Gradecak, H.-G. Park, Y. Dong, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 701 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Pauzauskie, D. J. Sirbuly and P. D. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 143903 CrossRef .
G. Tsiminis, A. Ruseckas, I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 253304 CrossRef .
A. Camposeo, F. Di Benedetto, R. Stabile, A. A. R. Neves, R. Cingolani and D. Pisignano, Small, 2009, 5, 562 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takazawa, J. Inoue, K. Mitsuishi and T. Takamasu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 067401 CrossRef .
K. Takazawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8671 CAS .
K. Takazawa, Y. Kitahama, Y. Kimura and G. Kido, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ichikawa, R. Hibino, M. Inoue, T. Haritani, S. Hotta, K. Araki, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2073 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagawa, R. Hibino, S. Hotta, H. Yanagi, M. Ichikawa, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 544 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizuno, I. Ohnishi, H. Yanagi, F. Sasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, J. J. Xu, A. D. Peng, H. B. Fu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and J. N. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhao, H. B. Fu, F. Q. Hu, A. D. Peng and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3554 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, H. B. Fu and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4153 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Chen, C. Y. Hung, K. H. Wang, H. L. Chen, W. S. Fann, F. C. Chien, P. L. Chen, T. J. Chow, C. P. Hsu and S. S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4064 RSC .
R. R. Islangulov, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12652 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4959 RSC .
C. Zhang, J. Y. Zheng, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yoon, K. Kim, S. E. Baker, D. Heineck, S. C. Esener and D. J. Sirbuly, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1905 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Sirbuly, S. E. Letant and T. V. Ratto, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4724 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Sirbuly, N. O. Fischer, S.-C. J. Huang, A. B. Artyukhin, J. B. H. Tok, O. Bakajin and A. Noy, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zheng, Y. Yan, X. Wang, W. Shi, H. Ma, Y. S. Zhao and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, G. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Lin, L. Chernyak, J. Zhao, J. Kong, L. Li, J. Ren and J. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 506 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Garnett and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhang, H. L. Dong, Q. X. Tang, S. Ferdous, F. Liu, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, W. P. Hu and A. L. Briseno, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11580 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Cui, L. Jiang, C. Zhang, Y. S. Zhao, W. Hu and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2332 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation for the formation of TPI tubes: (a) optimized geometry of a single TPI molecule; (b, c) linear and curled motifs of TPI supramolecular hydrogen bonded chains; (d, e) flat and curled monolayer sheets from the two motifs of chains; (f) multilayer sheet by stacking of the monolayers; (g–i) sketch maps of the multilayer flat lamellar, curled lamellar, and tubular structures, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TEM images of the core–sheath 1D nanostructures of DPNP and I-Py. (b) PL spectra of DPNP/I-Py core–sheath nanorods obtained at different aging intervals: (i) 5, (ii) 30, (iii) 60 and (iv) 180 min.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The energy level diagram representing the photoinduced electron transfer in the nanocomposites of TPP and DCN. (b) PL spectra of the 1D nanocomposite suspensions with different molar ratios in water: (i) pure TPP; (ii) TPP/DCN = 4:1; (iii) TPP/DCN = 2:1; (iv) TPP/DCN = 1:1; and (v) pure DCN. The excitation wavelength is 365 nm. Reproduced from ref. 140 with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration for the formation processes of nanostructures from o-, m-, and p-bis(iminopyrrole) benzene, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration for the typical formation of heterogeneous TPI microtubes. PL images of (b) triblock (BT)2Ir(acac) and (c) multiblock BPEA doped TPI tubes with doping ratios of 1.0 mol%. The samples were excited with UV band (330–380 nm). Scale bars are 20 μm. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Sketch of the instrument used for the adsorbent-assisted PVD. (b, c) SEM images of the TPI nanowires, (d) TEM images of some typical TPI nanowires, and (e) the electron diffraction pattern of the TPI nanowire with the main diffraction spots indexed. The arrow indicates the direction of the wire. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM (b) and TEM images of the binary nanostructures with a TPP/rubrene molar ratio of 100:1. Inset: SAED pattern of the nanowires. (c) XRD patterns of the 1D nanomaterials with TPP/rubrene molar ratios of 100:1 and 5:1, and also XRD patterns of TPP and rubrene powders. The stars indicate the diffraction peaks of rubrene. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of the Alq3–DAAQ dendritic heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission of the American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image of the BPEA–silver nanowire heterojunction area. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Representation of the formation mechanism of the DP nanofiber. N is the molar ratio of DP/CTAB. (b) SEM image of the prepared DP nanofibers. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of the typical top view of DBM nanotubes with diameters of 100 nm, prepared after the complete removal of the template by alkaline treatment. (b) SEM image of TClPP nanostructures cultivated on AAO templates (100 nm pores) at a pressure differential of 0.07 MPa. Reproduced from ref. 168 and ref. 169 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PL microscopy image of some isolated BPEA tubes excited with blue light (460–490 nm). Scale bars are 20 μm. (b) Bright-field image and microarea PL images obtained by exciting the identical tube at three different positions. Scale bar is 10 μm. (c) Bright-field and microarea PL images of two crossed tubes. Scale bar is 20 μm. The squares indicate the excited positions. Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Power-dependent emission spectra recorded on the tip of a TPI wire (width: 400 nm, length: 15 μm). The expansion of the higher wavelength region shows well-resolved optical resonance modes. (b) Power-dependent emission spectra recorded on the tip of a TPI wire (width: 800 nm, length: 15 μm). The inset shows the PL microscopy image of TPI nanowires deposited onto quartz wafers. Scale bar is 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Fluorescence microscopy images of the PPCP nanoribbon assemblies excited with (a) UV light (330–380 nm), (b) blue light (460–490 nm), and (c) green light (520–550 nm). Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Fluorescence microscopy image of 1D nanomaterials with TPP/rubrene ratio of 100:1, excited with UV light (330–385 nm). Scale bar is 5 μm. (b) Emission spectra of the binary nanomaterials deposited onto quartz wafers with different TPP/rubrene molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the annular cavity of the binary microtube and energy diagrams for the IFRET and RER processes. (b) Spatially resolved PL spectra of out-coupled light for a single binary microtube recorded by excitation at a distance of 10–90 μm from the tip. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of light propagation and energy transfers in the nanowire waveguides. (b) The exponential relationship between the contribution ratio of blue to orange emission (n) and the propagation length in the nanowire waveguides with low (0.2%) and high (1%) doping ratios. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) PL intensity at 600 nm (red) and 440 nm (blue) with time when the binary nanobelts were exposed to HCl vapor (15 ppm). (b) PL intensity at 600 nm (red) and 440 nm (blue) with time when the same sample was exposed to NH3 vapor (50 ppm). (c) Fluorescence microscopy images of the corresponding nanobelts on exposure to HCl and NH3 vapors.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the measurement of the BPEA@CPPO waveguide sensor. (b) A series of PL images of a single wire waveguide sensor in the atmosphere of H2O2 vapor molecules. Scale bar is 5 μm. (c) Time dependent PL intensities of the output light signals on exposure to 6 ppm H2O2 vapor. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Structure of the Alq3 nanowire OLEDs. (b) Efficiency–current-density characteristics of the OLEDs fabricated from Alq3 thin film and nanowires with diameters of 40, 60, and 80 nm. All the three nanowire samples are with the same average length of μm. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) SEM image of a single coaxial heterojunction nanowire device. The energy level diagram of a CuPc–H2TPyP nanowire device is also illustrated. (b) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristic of a single CuPc–H2TPyP junction in dark and under light illumination with different intensities. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission of Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
