Textile triboelectric nanogenerators for self-powered biomonitoring  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02518J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02518J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19149-19178Textile triboelectric nanogenerators for self-powered biomonitoring

        
          
            John 
            Lama†
, 
      
        
          
            Andy 
            Yau†
, 
      
        
          
            Guorui 
            Chen†
, 
      
        
          
            Aditya 
            Sivakumar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xun 
            Zhao
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. E-mail: jun.chen@ucla.edu
Received 
      26th March 2021
    , Accepted 7th May 2021First published on 7th May 2021AbstractBiomonitoring has played an increasingly important role in improving the quality of healthcare in recent years, but limitations in power supply and wearability, as well as the rise of the Internet of Things (IoT) have called for the development of a new type of device to provide biomonitoring on a daily basis. While the introduction of triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) has begun to solve these issues by providing sustainably powered biomonitoring, textile-based TENGs (tTENGs) take a more pervasive approach by integrating this technology into commonly worn textiles. tTENGs are particularly unique as they offer an inexpensive alternative for biomonitoring; the high breathability, comfort, and scalability inherent to tTENGs' woven structures have made them increasingly convenient for human application. This review begins by highlighting novel material configurations of tTENGs and their advantages for biomonitoring. We then discuss various wearable tTENG devices that have been adapted for constant cardiovascular and respiratory monitoring, pertinent to those suffering from diseases in these organ systems. Transitioning into the biomechanical aspect of the human body, we explore tTENG configurations integrated for upper body and gait motion sensing. At the same time, with many people suffering from sleep disorders, we examine tTENGs that monitor the quality of sleep of an individual. Lastly, on a more molecular level, we examine the application of tTENGs for monitoring biochemical fluctuations, such as sweat. Finally, we discuss the future research directions for the field, in particular regarding personalized healthcare propelled by tTENGs.Jun ChenDr Jun Chen is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of California, Los Angeles. His research focuses on smart textiles, wearables, and body area networks. With an h-index of 75, his research is recognized by the 2020 Altmetric Top 100, Top 10 Science Stories of 2020 by Ontario Science Centre, IAAM Scientist Medal, 30 Rising Leaders in Life Science by Informa, ACS Nano Rising Stars Lectureship Award, Nanoscale Emerging Investigator Award, Okawa Foundation Research Award, Highly Cited Researchers 2020/2019 in Web of Science. He is an associate editor of Biosensors and Bioelectronics.
1. Introduction
Our more traditional power supply structure, started by Edison's power plant in 1882, may have worked in the past, but as society progresses to a more interconnected and less linear system of devices and power, we need to find a portable, pervasive, self-sustaining power supply.1,2 With batteries functioning as the main power source for many commonly used sensors and electronics, these systems are deemed inefficient, wasteful, and impractical.
By using remotely deployed sensors, the Internet of Things (IoT) has already changed our daily life in fundamental and meaningful ways.3 Despite a small power requirement for individual sensors, the rigid and bulky nature of battery systems prevent these devices from being practically used at skin interfaces,4–9 while the toxic and environmentally hazardous materials used to build batteries also present a significant environmental cost upon disposal.10–14 The limited lifespan of battery systems also limits their capability for continuous biomonitoring, especially for high-risk individuals who require constant physiological monitoring.15–19 Biomonitoring relays the health metrics of an individual in real-time, which can be very important in promoting health awareness for the detection and prevention of different diseases. Additionally, wide distribution of the sensors and high maintenance costs make batteries an insufficient solution. Powering the IoT would be impossible without making the sensors self-powered by harvesting energy from the working environment to ensure long-term operation.
Thermoelectric generators,20–22 biofuel cells,23–29 solar cells,30–48 and piezoelectric nanogenerators49–58 have been previously proposed as wearable energy harvesters. However, triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) offer a more versatile energy solution by converting mechanical energy into electrical energy. TENGs can harvest energy from large movements such as wind59–61 and water62,63 waves, to smaller movements such as human motion.64–66 The high flexibility and biocompatibility of TENGs have also promoted their use in self-powered devices.
TENGs convert mechanical energy into electrical energy through a combination of the triboelectric effect and electrostatic induction. As two triboelectric materials separate or move closer, their electron clouds at the material interface become increasingly separated or increasingly overlapped respectively. When the electron clouds are overlapped, the potential barrier for electron transitions is lowered. Electrons transfer from the material of lower electron affinity to the material of higher electron affinity upon contact, which induces a potential difference that can be harvested through an external circuit.67–71 The motion needed to move the materials can be harnessed from biomechanical motion. TENGs operate under four working modes: vertical contact-separation mode,72–76 in-plane sliding mode,77,78 single electrode mode,79–82 and free-standing triboelectric-layer mode,83–88 which allow small-scale biomechanical motion in multiple planes of motion to be harvested.
TENGs have been applied in biosensors to provide self-powered, continuous health monitoring. To do this, TENGs are able to harvest various forms of human biomechanical energy. Riemer et al. experimentally calculated that the human ankle theoretically could dissipate upwards of about 20 W of harvestable energy and the human footstep could dissipate about 67 W.89,90 Previous constructs of portable energy harvesters have focused on polymer, silicon, and even paper compositions. However, many of these materials are limited in their breathability, flexibility, and overall wearability for the user. With this in mind, textiles should be more widely utilized in this field as they overcome these limitations and are highly adaptable for general public use. Additionally, textiles are basic materials that have come to dominate the ability to provide everyday comfort and protection from the harsh environmental conditions, thus they are widely used, and devices capable of being integrated with textiles could show easy integration into everyday life. This has ultimately led to the introduction of textile-based TENGs (tTENGs). It is important to note that previous TENG technologies have been capable of promoting heart disease treatment,91,92 wound healing,93,94 bone cell differentiation,95 weight control,96 hair regeneration,97 drug delivery,98 and cancer treatment.99 Highlighting only some of the many applications of these nanogenerators, tTENGs have the opportunity to revolutionize this field by integrating biosensing technology into everyday clothes.
tTENGs are TENGs that are woven or knitted in nature and can be used as self-powered biosensors to provide continuous monitoring of physiological signals in a textile form, forming an independent body area network that fits into the Internet of Things (IoT) for personalized healthcare. Compared to conventional TENG configurations, tTENGs provide heightened breathability and wearability, and are more equipped to be easily integrated into everyday life. Specifically, textile integration into TENGs demonstrates increased breathability due to the natural fibrous pores within textile materials. Additionally, textile can be naturally soft and thus provide an integral component for these tTENGs as the goal is continuous monitoring of an individual's physiological functionality. Thus, the device would be constantly worn and should be comfortable. Lastly, textiles are found in many areas of everyday life, including home interiors (bedding, furniture), leisure items (bags, hats, toys), transportation vehicle interiors, and even medical materials themselves (bandages, sutures). Clearly, textiles capable of demonstrating triboelectrification can be easily integrated into tTENGs due to the plethora of everyday materials that are used. Being able to integrate textiles typically used in clothing, which is a main textile material that many devices would be fabricated with in the hopes for continuous monitoring, heightens the practicality of tTENG usage by all members of society. Textiles present obvious advantages to TENG devices as they can inherently withstand deformations, whether that be via bending, rolling, or folding, and are highly portable and lightweight. Thus, many researchers have sought out tTENG fabrication to make integration of these advanced devices into daily wearing more possible. It is important to note that TENGs have a wider range of materials choice, while tTENGs rely on more specific material types and manufacturing techniques to provide a high-performance, comfortable, and durable device.
It is important to discuss that the body area network is a self-powering and independent network where wearable and implantable devices can act as power sources, biosensors, and therapeutic devices. This self-powered body area network allows for physiological changes to be monitored and specific therapies to be remotely administered for patients. Specifically, tTENGs' versatility can be used in all three components of the body area network to further improve personalized preventative healthcare.3
The ability for tTENGs to be integrated into clothing and other commonplace textiles demonstrates a massive advantage over other TENG configurations, as they provide a minimally invasive, comfortable, and aesthetically appealing approach to monitoring physiological signals. Additionally, their lightweight nature also minimize any hindrance on the human body during motion.100,101 Another advantage tTENGs offer is their high mechanical strength. They are able to resist multiplanar deformation, allowing for greater device longevity when worn and washed.101 These intrinsic properties provide a more user-convenient alternative to other forms of nanogenerators, and general TENGs. Furthermore, integrating these devices into common clothing paves the way for quicker and personalized healthcare in today's society.
This review will discuss the advances in tTENGs for biomonitoring in the fields of cardiology, pneumatology, motion sensing, sleep monitoring, and biochemical monitoring (Fig. 1). We started with a summary of useful materials and designs in tTENGs, before launching a comprehensive discussion in tTENGs according to their specific biomonitoring applications. Finally, we evaluate the future research directions for the field, in particular regarding personalized healthcare propelled by tTENGs.
 Fig. 1  Textile-based triboelectric nanogenerator (tTENG) for versatile biosensing. tTENGs for continuous self-powered biomonitoring featuring high breathability, wearing comfort, and scalability are capable of being integrated into many different healthcare fields and ultimately provide the user with real-time information regarding their current biological processes. Constant cardiovascular and respiratory monitoring, upper body and gait motion sensing, sleeping monitoring, and biochemical fluctuation analysis can be performed via tTENGs, realizing personalized healthcare in the era of internet of things. 
2. Materials and designs
Choosing the most efficient and advantageous textile material when constructing tTENGs is a difficult decision for researchers, considering the plethora of triboelectric materials available. Integrating TENGs into textiles can be a daunting task, as the original flexibility and breathability of the textile need to be maintained throughout the fabrication process. Typically, metal wires or fibers are intertwined with conductive metals to act as the electrode, while dielectric polymer films act as the triboelectric layer.102–105 However, this methodology of constructing tTENGs can lead to many issues. For example, the conductive metal materials can detach from the yarns during the washing process. Exposed metal wires can lead to comfort and safety issues and polymer films coated onto textile substrates can reduce breathability.102–105 With these issues in mind, some researchers have designed specific materials and structures that demonstrated high efficiency, durability, flexibility, and other advantageous characteristics.
2.1. Biocompatible triboelectric materials
As previously discussed, triboelectrification is characterized by the electron flow between materials of different electron affinities. The material with the higher electron affinity will act as the electron acceptor while the other material as the electron donor, supplying the electrons during physical contact.67–71 The materials chosen for integration in a tTENG should differ in electron affinities as much as possible, as output performance increases as the difference in electron affinities of the materials increases. It is important to discuss the common types of materials that are used in tTENGs and their key characteristics. However, it is important to note that different applications of tTENGs require different functionalities, such as softness, thus the two materials with the largest electron affinity differences would not be necessarily employed. The common triboelectric materials with electron accepting capabilities for tTENGs are polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),106,107 polydimethyl-siloxane (PDMS),108,109 fluorinated ethylene propylene,110 metals (aluminum (Al), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), silver (Ag)),111 and Kapton.110,112 While the common electron donor materials for tTENGs are polyester,113 acrylics (PMMA),114,115 polyurethane,116 cellulose,117,118 silk,119 cotton,111 nylon,120,121 and so on. There is a vast array of materials that can be integrated into TENGs due to their triboelectrification abilities, thus making these devices extremely versatile (Fig. 2a). With the intention for integration of tTENGs as daily worn devices, it is important to consider the washability, stretchability, durability, and breathability when choosing materials. Subsequently, material combinations will dictate that purpose of the device, as some materials contribute greatly to device power output while others focus more on sensing capabilities. Thus, this section will focus on specific applications of biocompatible material combinations for use in continuous biosensing.
 Fig. 2  Textile TENGs consisted of typical functional materials and designs. (a) Typical functional materials used in textile TENGs, such as electron acceptor materials PTFE, PDMS, Kapton, and silicone; and electron donor materials Al, Cu, nylon, and silk. (b) SEM of the untreated cotton after seven days of growth in media with S. aureus, scale bars 10 μm. (c) SEM of omniphobic RF-textile after seven days of growth in media with S. aureus, scale bars 10 μm. (d) Output sensing signals generated by an RF-TENG embroidered on an elbow patch during elbow bending. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (e) Schematic and (f) working mechanisms of a textile TENG consisted of two woven fabrics as triboelectric layers. (g) Real-time detection of the pulse wave of the carotid artery by using the textile TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Discovering new triboelectric materials, especially those that possess increased electric charge density, biocompatibility and versatility, is an important factor in the development of novel tTENGs. Weaving fibers of opposite triboelectric polarities allows for the production of highly flexible and air permeable tTENGs, capable of implementation for a variety of biomonitoring applications. Unfortunately, due to the hygroscopic nature of many textiles, sweat and moisture from the environment have compromised the mechanical stability of these devices and even promoted bacterial proliferation.122 Along with bacterial growth, other real-world dangers to health, like radiation exposure or extensive heat loss, present other issues that tTENGs could potentially address. For example, epidemiological studies have shown that excessive exposure to electromagnetic radiation can cause adverse biological damage, thus presenting a potential application that a tTENG could protect against while it monitors physiological processes.123 Lastly, when choosing material combinations, it is important to consider that the radius of yarns often used in tTENGs are larger than the ones used in traditional embroidery, making them more difficult to manufacture using current technology. As such, future applications of tTENGs require scalability in the materials used.
Sala de Medeiros et al. demonstrated a simple and cost-effective method of creating a waterproof, breathable, and antibacterial textile that can be implemented into any fiber-based TENGs. Consisting of a combination of artistic embroidery and a spray-based deposit of fluoroalkylated organosilanes, omniphobic triboelectric nanogenerators (RF-TENGs) were constructed and incorporated into fiber-based TENGs.122 While relatively inexpensive to fabricate (<$0.04 per cm−2), and capable of demonstrating high mechanical deformation, RF-TENGs were shown to repel water, stains, and bacterial growth. Waterhouse et al. previously used the antibacterial properties of fluorinated materials as a foundation to establish the idea of incorporating antibacterial capabilities into the material.123 As seen in Fig. 2b, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was utilized to demonstrate antibacterial presence and capability of the RF-TENG, where S. aureus bacteria were cultured on the RF-TENG. Upon review of the SEM data collected after seven days of culturing, S. aureus bacteria were unable to proliferate on the RF-cotton material (Fig. 2c), contrary to their unhindered growth on untreated cotton. Additionally, the flexibility and stretchability of the RF-TENG allowed for its application onto an elbow patch, which generated an output voltage during elbow bending, as seen in Fig. 2d.
Knowing there are several everyday sources of potentially harmful electromagnetic radiation, Zhang et al. developed a textile-based electromagnetic shielding hybrid nanogenerator. The hybrid nanogenerator, which was composed of a TENG and a pyroelectric–piezoelectric nanogenerator, consisted of a layer of conductive anti-electromagnetic radiation fabric (AEMF) in between two layers of a rubber material and woven with Ag-coated fabric fiber.124 This material was not only comfortable and stretchable, but also shielded the wearer from over 99.9978% of electromagnetic waves at frequencies of 0 to 1.5 GHz. This was due to the unique ability of the AEMF to operate under the principles of reflecting and absorbing of the incoming electromagnetic waves.124,125 As seen, there have been countless revolutionary advances in the materials used and combinations engineered, which have led to an increase in the effectiveness and practicality of tTENGs for self-powered biosensing.
There are many other applications of dangers that individuals are constantly exposed to and thus future applications of material selection for tTENG fabrication should focus on versatility in its ability to act as a triboelectric material while also being able to protect the wearer from environmental dangers. Materials capable of triboelectrification and enhanced protection of wearer are extremely valuable and future research should be dedicated to finding and enhancing such materials.
2.2. Electrode materials
Beyond the triboelectric materials selected, another important aspect of the tTENG fabrication process is determining the electrode materials. The electrodes act as the electrical conductors where the process of electrostatic induction actually takes place. It is important to consider that poor electrical properties, such as low carrier mobility and free carrier density, negatively impact the performance output of the tTENG by leading to high energy losses within the device. For integration into tTENGs in particular, it is important that the electrodes are flexible and have good conductive properties that enable effective output throughout the lifespan of the device.
Metal electrodes can be easily attached to textiles using adhesive or double-sided tape.126,127 While the assembly can be prone to failure, and the thickness of the adhesive layer negatively impacts tTENG output performance, this electrode configuration possesses high electrical conductivity.128,129 Additionally, a metallic thin film can be integrated into a textile material using microfabrication processes, such as sputtering130 or evaporation,131 to create the electrode. However, it is important to note that these materials have high fabrication costs and lack mechanical durability.132
Another approach to integrating metal electrodes with textiles is through electroless plating, such as preparing a Ni-coated polyester fabric by submerging the polyester cloth in NiSO4 solution.133 Alternatively, nanoparticles and nanowires (NWs) can be used to integrate these metallic materials, though environmental concerns have arisen in light of the risk of particles detaching during washing.134 For their proposed tTENG, Lee et al. developed a polymer/Kevlar-based electrode coated with Ag nanoparticles, where the tTENG demonstrated a low electrical resistance of 0.15 Ω cm−1 and efficient mechanical stability after 3000 bending cycles.135 The stretchability of these materials was improved by covering a stretched surface with NWs to create a buckled conductive layer after the surface is released,136–138 or by adding an additional material like graphene139 or 3-aminipropyltriethoysilane140 to the NWs. Lastly, metal fibers can be used as electrodes by simply having them spun into yarns or woven into commercial yarns using standard processes, ultimately allowing for mass production of these tTENGs.141,142
Another revolutionary design that several researchers have studied includes the use of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon nanofibers, and graphene as electrodes in tTENGs. These carbon-based materials possess high carrier mobility (106 cm2 V−1 S−1), high electrical conductivity (104 S cm−1), and high elastic modulus (order of 1 TPa).143 Due to the relatively simple fabrication process and low fabrication cost, CNTs are efficient materials for electrodes but lack commercialization as they are difficult to scale up.132,144 A common fabrication technique for these electrodes is “dipping and drying”, where fabric145 or yarn146 is immersed in a conductive ink solution containing single or multi-walled CNTs. Graphene, on the other hand, was applied in a graphene-based tTENG by Chu et al., where the electrode was constructed using a sub-nanometer thick double-layered graphene to act as a self-powered touch sensor.147 Another configuration was developed by Zhu et al. and consisted of an electrode fabricated from nylon fabric coated with graphene ink.148
In an effort to address the limited stretchability of previous textile-based devices, Sim et al. designed a new type of stretchable triboelectric fiber with micro-scale dimensions, which can be woven, and functional via tensile deformation.149 The main benefit of this construct was the stretchable electrode, on which Ag-coated nylon yarns were wrapped around polyurethane (PU) fibers. Once the Ag-coated nylon/PU fiber was stretched, a gap was created between the wrapped Ag-coated nylon yarn around the PU fiber. Although this gap elongated the electrical pathway along the fiber, the electrical pathway along the Ag-coated nylon yarn was constant, thus creating a stretchable electrode. Ultimately, this engineered material provided a tTENG capable of withstanding stretches up to 50% in tensile direction and generating voltage outputs that were proportional to the applied tensile strain. Improving the wearability of the electrodes while maintaining efficiency is a research focus that can drastically improve the practicality of tTENG devices.
2.3. Encapsulation materials
The main purpose of encapsulating materials used in tTENGs ranges from protecting the metal, and sometimes toxic, materials from contacting the skin, to enhancing device stability under harsh environmental conditions such as humidity and sweat. When designing a tTENG, the outer encapsulating layers should be selected based on comfort and triboelectric properties that enhance electrostatic charge density at the contacting interfaces. The encapsulation process entails covering the underlying metal or toxic materials with a more biocompatible and comfortable material, with encapsulation materials ranging from conventional cloth and fibers150 to polymer coating layers,151 and many more. Some relevant issues with encapsulation include detachment of carbonaceous or conductive materials from yarn substrates during washing, the expensive nature of the manufacturing metal and polymer coatings on yarn materials, and the lack of breathability from coating textile substrates with polymer films.150
Preventing exposure of metal wires while also maintaining breathability and stretchability is highly dependent on the manner in which the tTENG is encapsulated. Yu et al. utilized core–shell yarns with core conductive fibers as the conductive material, and tightly wove conventional cloth fibers around the core conductive fibers as the building block for their tTENG.150 This tTENG design eliminated previous issues with tTENG manufacturing, as there were no exposed metal wires or polymer coatings. While being flexible, inexpensive, and lightweight, the core–shell yarn design was fabricated by encapsulating stainless-steel fibers in the core with dielectric, cotton fibers as the outer sheath. The material also possessed strong versatility in application, as it was compatible for use with various commercially available cloths, such as polyester, silk, and cotton. These properties also bolstered the aesthetic value of the tTENG, as this configuration was capable of integrating designs for fashion.150
Another tTENG configuration that adopted core–shell yarns with enhanced pressure sensitivity was proposed by Lou et al.151 Nylon filament was used as the positive layer, and PTFE filament was used as the negative layer. The inner electrode layer consisted of built-in helical stainless-steel yarn. Various combinations of the PTFE and nylon layers were woven and tested to determine which provided the greatest output voltage, which ultimately resulted in an optimal combination of the PTFE–nylon and nylon–PTFE (Fig. 2e). Through this encapsulation method and the working principle seen in Fig. 2f, both internal and external friction between the PTFE–nylon and nylon–PTFE fabrics were capable of generating triboelectric charges. This enhanced triboelectric quality enabled detection of extremely small pressure changes, ultimately enabling the device to monitor pulse signals on the neck, as seen in the current output in Fig. 2g.
Along with the ability to provide increased comfort and power outputs, encapsulation processes have been used to protect the inner mechanisms of the device from the harsh external environment. For example, Xiong et al. developed a skin-touch-actuated tTENG capable of harvesting voluntary and involuntary movements of the body.152 Specifically, the device was composed of black phosphorous (BP) that was encapsulated with hydrophobic cellulose oleoyl ester nanoparticles (HCOENPs), and demonstrated high durability and triboelectricity during extreme deformations, extensive washing, and extended environmental exposure. The waterproof HCOENPs were implemented to prevent the anticipated accelerated degradation and ultimate failure of the BP when exposed to ambient conditions such as moisture. Additionally, the HCOENPs were capable of providing enhanced roughness to the BP layer, improving triboelectric performance. Attempting to develop a more resilient tTENG, Nam Kim et al. utilized highly stretchable 2D fabrics to construct a tTENG capable of withstanding harsh environmental conditions.153 The fiber-structured nanogenerator consisted of a coaxial, fully sealed device, which contained an Al wire in the core and an encapsulating PDMS tube as the outer shell. More specifically, the Al wires were inserted into the encapsulating PDMS tube, and the resultant fiber was wrapped around a flexible Al film, which acted as one of the electrodes. While capable of being bonded to a waterproof fabric, the 2D fabric was capable of providing consistent energy outputs even with up to 25% stretching, which was deemed fit for smart clothing applications. This process of preventing future exposure of metal wires that make up these devices is paramount to maintaining user comfort over the duration of the device lifespan.
Some researchers have alternatively used encapsulating materials to improve the functionality of tTENG devices. With the intention of both biomonitoring and harvesting energy from reciprocating motion, mechanical in oscillations such as vibrations and human limb swinging, Jing et al. devised a case-encapsulated tTENG that operates under sliding electrification.154 Specifically, the case wrap that was tightly applied to the outer cylinder of the two-cylinder device allows the two cylinders to slide in a coaxial 1-D motion relative to one another, and operates under direct-applied forces and inertial forces. Another innovative textile material design was created by Chen et al. and consisted of a 3D double faced interlock fabric TENG (3DFIF-TENG) capable of increased breathability, stretchability, and electrical conduction via bending and stretching.155 The 3DFIF-TENG consisted of a two-system network of cotton yarn and polyamide (PA) composite yarn. The negatively charged PA composite yarn was a four-ply twisted PA yarn coated with Ag and silicone rubber. Using double needle bed flat knitting machine technology, the two-yarn system was knitted into a substrate-free 3DFIF-TENG capable of generating electricity through a contact separation mode. Prior to knitting with the three-ply cotton yarn, the PA composite yarn was fabricated by first coating the pristine PA yarn with Ag and then further coating it in rubber. While also providing comfort, this encapsulation method for the PA yarn allowed it to act as the conductive electrode due to the high conductivity of Ag and the silicone rubber also increased the textiles' flexibility and ability to gain electrons. Along with the ability to be stretched, sheared, or bent in any direction, the 3DFIF-TENG was also capable of withstanding arbitrary deformations like crimping.
Alternative to the approach adopted by Chen et al., Yuan et al. devoted a greater focus on structural stability and integrity, and incorporated CNTs and shear stiffening gel (SSG) onto a Kevlar fabric to create a tTENG known as the SSG-based TENG (SCK-TENG).156 Specifically, CNTs suspension and an SSG coat were dripped on the Kevlar surface, and then the SSG/CNTs/Kevlar device was assembled using Cu tape and wires. Encapsulating using SSG, which is a derivative of polyborondimethylsiloxane, makes the product inherently soft and capable of turning rigid under high impact, thereby improving the SCK-TENG's ability to protect the user from high impacts. Ultimately, the SCK-TENG demonstrated heightened triboelectric properties, flexibility, and increased impact force resistance, which was tested by dropping a 1.26 kg impactor from 30 cm.
Additionally, Guo et al. fabricated a highly stretchable and conductive fabric using nylon cloth and a solution of Ag NWs, which was capable of functioning as an efficient tTENG for wearable applications.126 The device was fabricated by encapsulating commercial nylon cloth coated in AgNWs with PDMS using a continuous and facile dip-coating method, generating a multilayer-coating on the nylon cloth. Capable of providing 8% more thermal insulation than regular nylon at 37 °C and directly raising body temperature, this device demonstrated good adhesion, and the PDMS served as a triboelectric material and a protectant for the AgNWs against oxidation or degradation when exposed to high temperatures and deformations.
Encapsulation methods are ever expanding, with more comfortable and biocompatible materials, that also offer increased charge density between interacting interfaces. Additionally, the encapsulation process protects the inner mechanism that powers the conversion of biomechanical energy into electrical energy. By doing this, device encapsulation not only reduces exposure to the potentially negative effects of humidity, but also reduces the corrosion that the outer part of the device may experience after many cycles of deformation. However, a significant limitation of many encapsulating materials is the unintended decrease in the breathability of the textile material being incorporated into the tTENGs, as the encapsulating layer surrounding the device is often impermeable to air. Also, for the later mentioned application of biochemical sensing, inner device protection via encapsulation may inhibit device capability to be useable in this case. Thus, creating a universalized encapsulation method that can use various materials in a wide range of applications and with unique advantages while maintaining textile breathability and stretchability, should be a focus for the future field advancement. Additionally, many applications of tTENGs are curved and abnormally shaped in a manner that increases their ability to provide dependable biomonitoring, thus it is important for future research to enhance the encapsulation process so that the encapsulating layers are able to completely cover the unique surface of textiles and fibers incorporated into tTENGs.
With a wide range of materials capable of demonstrating the triboelectric effect, researchers have countless material combination possibilities that can improve the wearability, effectiveness, and longevity of tTENGs. Equally important to the triboelectric materials used, the electrode and encapsulation construction improved the output performance and practicality of tTENG devices. These devices also possessed new properties and capabilities through these variations in materials used for constructing tTENGs. While many of these tTENG configurations are capable of remarkable human physiological sensing, they are limited in their application due to minimal testing in real-world settings. The harshness of the environment combined with the repetitive use and cleaning from the wearer present rigorous hurdles that tTENGs must overcome in order to be adopted successfully in everyday life. Upscaled manufacturing and distribution were also rarely addressed in these applications and should be considered for future research studies.
3. Applications of physiological monitoring
3.1. Cardiovascular monitoring
Wearable sensors have become increasingly popular to provide continuous sensing of pulse and blood pressure, specifically monitoring heart conditions and abnormalities such as arrhythmias. The use of these wearable devices has also been applied in sports training to gauge cardiac effort levels. However, current wearable technologies are limited by the need for a sustainable power source to eliminate the need for constant electrical charging or changing of batteries. Current products that perform cardiovascular monitoring, such as smartwatches and fitness bands, also lack breathability and user convenience, and can be inaccurate if not worn properly.157–164 This calls for the introduction of a self-powered, breathable, and comfortable cardiovascular monitoring device: tTENGs provide a better solution for these requirements compared to traditional TENGs, as they can be easily integrated into breathable textiles to provide accurate, self-powered cardiovascular monitoring regardless of application site. Compared to the complex and expensive materials that are typically used in other TENGs, textiles offer a simple, low-cost, and easily accessible material that can reliably function within the nanogenerator while also being able to provide this technology for a wider population. Accordingly, it is important to reduce manufacturing cost as much as possible to maximize its accessibility to all levels of society. Since cardiovascular health metrics, such as heart rate, can be measured by converting pulse wave motion into a voltage waveform, tTENGs can be applied on different skin sites where arterial pulses can be detected. These sites include the carotid artery at the neck, radial artery at the wrist, and the posterior tibial artery at the ankle. This greater choice in application site provides another level of comfort and convenience for users. However, as the pulse motion is smaller at some sites compared to others, such as the wrist compared to the neck, different application sites also call for different sensitivity requirements to provide adequate sensing. This section will discuss the advances made by these studies based on the different application sites of tTENG devices.

3.1.1. Neck-based monitors. 
Considering the large amplitude of the arterial pulse at the carotid artery, tTENGs can be conveniently placed on the neck for effective monitoring of cardiovascular health. Specifically, Lou et al. investigated a tTENG device using core–shell yarn structures with different material configurations.151 A simple twisting-and-weaving process was used to create a sensing textile patch, which improved breathability by eliminating the need for adhesive agents or dense metal films for mechanical support, while providing an improved strength and durability through the helix structure of the yarn. Stainless steel yarns were used as the core and the electrode layer, and nylon and PTFE filaments were used as sheath materials to wrap around the steel core layer, while also acting as the positive and negative layers respectively; the use of nylon and PTFE provided high abrasion resistance and dimensional stability. The easily dyeable nature of nylon yarn also improved the aesthetic appeal for textile applications. A positive fabric made of PTFE weft yarns and nylon filament warp yarns was used in conjunction with a negative fabric using nylon filament weft yarns and PTFE warp yarns. The 4 × 4 cm2 textile exhibited strong stability as output performance was unaffected after 4 hours of washing and 4200 continuous cycles. The sensing textile was applied on the neck for pulse monitoring, where the number of output current peaks corresponded to pulse. Although the device sensitivity was not as high as other conventional nanogenerators and sensors, this sensing textile provided a great advantage over other TENG sensors in wearing comfort and breathability, while retaining the high mechanical stability and durability for sustainable long-term use.
Working to enhance the durability of tTENGs, Lou et al. explored a second tTENG for pulse monitoring which used a conductive PU fabric.165 Electrospinning provided an all-fiber structure for the sensing textile, which was composed of a polyvinyl fluoride/silver (PVDF/Ag) NW nanofibrous membrane (NFM) and an ethyl cellulose NFM as the working layers, and two layers of the conductive PU fabric as the electrode layers (Fig. 3a). The use of NWs increased the sensitivity of the textile by improving the surface charge potential and charge trapping of induced triboelectric charges. High sensitivities of 1.67 V kPa−1 from 0–3 kPa and 0.20 V kPa−1 from 3–32 kPa were recorded. The composite sensing textile was applied onto a PDMS substrate mold of size 30 × 30 mm2, where output performance was tested. The textile displayed high stability over 7200 cycles with no measurable degradation in output performance, outperforming the previously mentioned tTENG by 3000 cycles.151,165 Similar to the core–shell yarn structured tTENG, the PU-based textile provided real-time detection of the carotid artery pulse by counting the number of output voltage peaks over time (Fig. 3b). However, this textile also harvested data on pulse pressure by the amplitude of peak P1, and the reflected wave pressure produced from the hand was also determined at peak P2. Further data analysis also provided a metric of arterial elasticity in the radial artery augmentation index (AIr).166 This sensing textile not only provided a more detailed level of cardiovascular sensing by displaying information on metrics of cardiovascular health, but also produced a more robust configuration with the use of a PDMS substrate to contain the textile.
 Fig. 3  Textile TENGs for self-powered cardiovascular biomonitoring. (a) Structural design of the textile pressure sensor. Scale bar, 2 μm (top) and 1 μm (bottom). (b) Pulse waveform acquired by the textile pressure sensor, which could distinguish two different peaks in waveforms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) A textile TENG with arbitrary stitch patterns for pulse wave monitoring. (d) Variation in the pulse waveform acquired by the textile TENG before and after physical exercise. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic of a textile TENG with a woven structure. (f) The woven textile TENG directly worn at the fingertip and ear for real-time human pulse wave measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
Beyond its durability, another factor that contributes to the integrability of tTENGs in the textile industry is its ability to be mass produced using commonly used fabrication techniques. Focusing on this, Shin et al. explored a PVDF fiber-based tTENG sensor based on the contact-separation mode for cardiovascular sensing,167 utilizing a sewing machine stitching method to fabricate programmable textile patterns. A dry-jet wet-spun PVDF fiber was used to provide the mechanical strength needed for stitching by sewing machine, which in turn allowed for the novel PVDF fibers to be sewn in arbitrary patterns, promoting its aesthetic appeal for different designs and vastly improving its marketability compared to previously discussed tTENGs. The innate properties of biocompatibility and spinnability of PVDF were also maintained. A tensile strength of 0.24 GPa and tensile modulus of 4.08 GPa were recorded for the multi-ply PVDF fibers fabricated through this method, improving greatly upon that of conventional PVDF fibers. The 3 × 10 mm2 stitched sensor provided a sensing range of 326 Pa – 326 kPa with sensitivities of 6.23 mV kPa−1 and 1.12 mV kPa−1 at pressures below and above 16.3 kPa respectively. Compared to the PU-based tTENG proposed by Lou et al., this PVDF-based tTENG provided not only a greater sensing range, but also greater sensitivity. The sensor also displayed good washability and stability for everyday use, as the current retention ratio was maintained at 97% after 50 washes, 95% after repeated folding, and 91% after repeated twisting. For cardiovascular sensing, the sensor was applied on the neck for arterial pulse monitoring (Fig. 3c), and successfully extracted systolic and diastolic pressures. Arterial elasticity metrics such as AIr and the round-trip time of a reflected wave from the hand periphery were also found from data analysis. The device also delineated between user cardiac activity states, as seen in Fig. 3d, where a clear increase in current after exercise was indicative of increased cardiac output. This research provided a novel fabrication method to tTENG-based sensors utilizing pre-existing manufacturing technology in sewing machines, while maintaining the desirable material properties of PVDF. This method has unlocked great potential in providing aesthetically desirable, mechanically stable, and biocompatible biosensors for continuous everyday biomonitoring. However, the device performance over long-term use was not investigated, warranting further examination of the device longevity compared to other neck-based monitors.


3.1.2. Wrist-based monitors. 
Another possible application site for cardiovascular monitoring via tTENGs is over the radial artery at the wrist. Focusing on developing the aesthetic potential of continuous heart monitors, Meng et al. proposed a wireless biomonitoring system (WBS) to perform sleep monitoring and cardiovascular monitoring, specifically for diagnosing conditions such as obstructive sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).168 An Ag-coated polyester fabric was used as both the triboelectric and electrode layer, while a dielectric nylon yarn was sewn in a circular shape at the substrate center to provide support and improve sensitivity. A 3-ply-twisted polyester–metal hybrid fiber acted as a triboelectric layer and electrode and was stitched into the shape of six flower petals around the nylon circle before embossed onto the coated fabric, improving sensitivity and aesthetic appeal through the flower-shaped design. The device exhibited strong durability as the open-circuit voltage (VOC) remained constant over 80000 cycles of continuous use. The textile also displayed good thermal stability for human use, maintaining a constant output voltage from 10–40 °C, and had a high sensitivity of 3.88 V kPa−1. Large amplitude body movements and small body fluctuations did not interfere with sensing performance due to the drastic differences in amplitude and frequency, which allowed it to be easily separated from true signals from cardiovascular activity. The textile was applied on a wristband for cardiovascular monitoring and tested over 12 hours, where the systolic pressure, inflection point, and diastolic pressure were obtained through analysis of the amplitude of the output voltage signal, while the duration and peaks of the cardiac cycle helped determine the pulse period and pulse wave amplitude. The textile was worn at five wrist positions and demonstrated no large distortion in the output waveform, providing accurate sensing while granting greater versatility in application sites, promoting greater user convenience compared to neck-based monitors. This versatility in application site is also useful for detecting OSAHS, as placement on sensitive areas such as the neck can cause discomfort during sleep. This research provided a noninvasive and more user-friendly alternative to comprehensively diagnosing OSAHS over current methods such as polysomnography and opened the door for making diagnostic technologies for cardiovascular diseases more accessible. However, the relatively small, tested temperature range of 10–40 °C may indicate that extreme climates can negatively impact sensing performance, which warrants further research of a more thermally robust tTENG.


3.1.3. Monitors with multiple application sites. 
In order to maximize the versatility and practicality of tTENGs that provide cardiovascular monitoring, they must be able to maintain high output performance at multiple application sites. For example, Meng et al. proposed another tTENG for cardiovascular monitoring which provided continuous measurement of pulse wave velocity and blood pressure at multiple sites: the fingertips, wrist, ear, and ankle.169 The flexible, wearable, and foldable sensor had a thickness of 1 mm, and as shown in Fig. 3e, was composed of a bottom layer of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) as an electrification layer with indium–tin oxide as the back electrode, with a second electrification layer of PTFE strips with interlaced woven structure placed above the PET; a final 70 μm thick PDMS film was used as a protective layer above the PTFE strips. Vertically aligned polymer NWs were plasma etched onto the PTFE surface to increase contact area. The sensor displayed a short response time of 5 ms and sensitivities of 46.7 mV Pa−1 and 10.6 mV Pa−1 at pressures below and above 0.71 kPa respectively. A minimum detectable pressure of 25 Pa was recorded, which was strong enough to detect the pressure of a human hair. Sensitivity is a strong factor for the performance of such versatile tTENGs, as the ability to provide accurate pulse monitoring on various sites on the body, where arterial pulses can be weaker, is dependent on being able to detect small pressure changes. Strong durability was also shown as there was no performance degradation after 40000 cycles of continuous use, and the sensor output demonstrated good stable under high frequency excitation of 45 Hz. The device was worn at the fingertip and ear (Fig. 3f), and the high device sensitivity allowed for successful measurement of pulse, as well as the identification of the systolic and diastolic points of the pulse waveform. Further data analysis also provided metrics of arterial compliance and total peripheral resistance, offering greater insight on cardiovascular health. Through this research, Meng et al. provides a highly sensitive and versatile tTENG configuration, which can be further applied for subtle, lightweight applications of pulse sensors on many locations on the body.
Research of tTENG-based cardiovascular monitoring devices has provided a variety of subtle, accurate, and comfortable configurations to perform real-time monitoring. The intuitive implementation of these devices allows patients with heart conditions and their families to help collect important data to monitor their respective conditions, improving the quality of patient healthcare. Future research into cardiovascular monitors should also investigate properties of environmental resilience, such as sweat resistance, in order to enhance sensor performance under all cardiac activity states.

3.2. Respiratory monitoring
Being able to monitor respiratory status is a very valuable attribute and is being more frequently utilized to predict potential respiratory diseases and dysfunctions that can be caused by the likes of cystic fibrosis.170 In the realm of realizing personalized health care, due to limitations in accuracy and wearability, most previous respiratory monitors have been unable to provide continuous monitoring.170,171 Thus, due to the high efficiency and wearability, many researchers have turned towards tTENGs to monitor people's respiratory activities, such as breath frequency, intensity, and persistency.170–174 As respiratory monitoring is typically performed by the measurement of the motion of the ribcage during breathing, various device structures for tTENGs have been investigated to provide different characteristics. The mechanical deformations experienced by sensors during the breathing cycle expose the inherent advantages in flexibility and comfort that textiles offer to the field. Compared to typical TENGs, which can produce irritation on the skin during long periods of application, textiles offer a guaranteed level of comfort and a surface for electrode/triboelectric layer to integrate onto. Fabric-based tTENGs offer great versatility and integration with conventional fabrics, as fabrics can act as a substrate for a tTENG to be implemented upon, or directly as the triboelectric material, and can be more easily fabricated due to the pre-existing manufacturing techniques used. The use of pre-existing fabrics as substrates also offers greater breathability and wearing comfort. Fiber-based tTENGs, however, offer novel yarns and fibers such as core–shell yarn structures, which can exist as single or multiple fibers that function as TENGs, and can then be interwoven into fabrics. Fiber-based tTENGs provide great customizability in both function and design, as single fibers can provide triboelectric output, and can be integrated into conventional fabrics with various designs.175,176 This section discusses the various research conducted in furthering respiratory monitoring based on the tTENG structure.

3.2.1. Fiber based tTENG. 
Looking to combat the mechanical fixtures needed for previous wearable electronics and poor air permeability, Fan et al. proposed a triboelectric all-textile sensor array (TATSA) that was integrable into clothing for continuous physiological monitoring, including respiratory and pulse wave monitoring.171 The TATSA was composed of commercial nylon yarn and a conductive yarn, which were interwoven using a full cardigan stitch to improve output performance. The conductive yarn, which acted as both the electrification surface and conducting electrode, had a diameter of 0.2 mm and was composed of a core stainless steel fiber with several 1-ply terylene yarns twisted around it. The nylon yarn, which had a diameter of 0.15 mm, served as the second electrification surface. Both yarns exhibited high tensile strength, which allowed for them to be woven while maintaining uniform sensing performance, which is shown in Fig. 4a. An optimum combination of 3-ply 210 D (D, denier) conductive yarn and 6-ply 210 D nylon yarn at a stitch density of 180 loops displayed the highest electrical output, at 7.5 V, and sensitivity, which were 7.84 mV Pa−1 and 0.31 mV Pa−1 at pressures below and above 4 kPa respectively. The TATSA was applied on a chest-mounted strap for respiratory monitoring, as seen in Fig. 4b, and exhibited well-behaved linear variation in the output voltage with pressure sensitivity. It was also shown to deform with the expansion and contraction of the ribcage, creating a signal with an amplitude of 1.8 V and a frequency of 0.5 Hz which corresponded to inhalation and exhalation motions. As shown in Fig. 4c, the output data from the TATSA was separable into both respiratory and pulse waveforms, indicating its good accuracy for respiratory monitoring. The TATSA also displayed high stability, durability, and washability, with negligible output voltage change after being washed 40 times and undergoing 100000 loading–unloading cycles of 1 kPa at a frequency of 5 Hz. The TATSA was very small and lightweight at 3 × 3 cm2 by 0.85 mm and 0.28 g respectively, which granted greater compatibility and subtlety for application onto clothes and standalone use. This versatility was further improved through the use of easily dyeable nylon yarns to compose the device, as well as the high softness and ductility of the TATSA. The ability of this device to provide superior breathability while maintaining good performance provides hope for future development of respiratory monitoring wearables. However, when applied at the wrist, sensing performance was only tested with slow wrist motion, which indicates a point of further development of this device for application during exercise, as fast body motion can interfere with sensing performance.
 Fig. 4  Textile TENGs for self-powered respiratory monitoring. (a) Schematic of a machine-knitted textile TENG array. The right inset is the enlarged demonstration of the knitted structure. (b) The textile TENG array placed on the chest for respiration sensing. (c) Sensing signals collected by the textile TENG array consist of the heartbeat and the respiratory waveforms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of the building yarns of a woven textile TENG. (e) Textile TENG-based chest strap for respiratory monitoring. (f) Raw respiratory signals from the textile TENG-based chest strap. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. 
For real-time respiratory monitoring, Zhao et al. fabricated a tTENG by directly weaving copper coated polyethylene terephthalate (Cu-PET) and polyimide coated Cu-PET yarns (PI-Cu-PET), as displayed in Fig. 4d.172 This tTENG reported a maximum short-circuit current (ISC) density of 15.50 mA m−2 and was integrated into a chest strap to monitor human respiration, where performance was evaluated through tapping and bending the device to simulate everyday wear conditions. When tapped at a constant velocity of 10 cm s−1, the tTENG outputted 4.98 V; when bent under a radius of curvature from 4.0 to 1.8 cm at a velocity of 15 cm s−1, an output voltage of 4.60 V was achieved. For real-time respiratory monitoring, the tTENG was stitched with a white non-elastic chest strap at two ends and secured around the chest of an individual. The respiratory rate was observed in deep, shallow, rapid, and slow breathing rates, and the reading accurately reflected each breathing state when compared to previous data held by the researchers. Washability was tested through the American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists Test Method 135, and linear resistance was maintained after being washed 20 times. Although there were no observable cracks, some untwisting of yarn and <2% of shrinkage was reported. This tTENG is unique in its usage of yarns, making it easily manufacturable and easily integrated into everyday clothing, providing a subtle form factor for continuous respiratory monitoring.


3.2.2. Fabric based tTENG. 
When considering the task of upscale manufacturing and distribution, using ordinary and widely available fabrics is becoming of increasing importance for researched in the tTENG field. Subsequently, Qiu et al. reported a tTENG based on ordinary fabrics with polymerized polyaniline (PANI) and polycaprolactone (PCL).173 This tTENG was created by electrospinning PA6 and PVDF nanofibers to create multiple layers and displayed excellent softness. The tTENG reached an output of 200 μA and 1000 V under a frequency of 2.5 Hz.173 The tTENG also displayed good stability, as ISC did not decrease after 5500 cycles. Utilizing these properties, the researchers collected output signals of the tTENG in cases of normal, deep, and rapid breathing; when the output signal was below a preset apnea threshold and the apnea time exceeded 10 seconds, the program issued an early warning signal, providing it to be an effective health monitoring and prevention tool. Its material composition of polymerized fabrics also allows it to be easily integrated into traditional clothes.
Self-powered respiratory biosensors that can be easily integrated into commonly worn textiles offers a revolutionary approach to providing continuous monitoring of the user's respiratory health. tTENGs have been shown to record a wide range of respiratory activities, from extremely shallow to deep breaths, and thus capable of accurately providing real time respiratory monitoring. This highly sensitive technology can potentially be further developed to provide instant information that is understandable to the user, especially during activity, and even relayed to a physician in case of emergencies.

3.3. Upper body motion sensing
The introduction of TENGs revolutionized the ability to generate usable electrical energy for powering biosensors by using previously wasted biomechanical energy. However, designing these kinds of sensors/harvesters to function as everyday wearable devices requires the incorporation of textiles. Specifically, when monitoring upper limb functionality such as the elbow or wrist, a flexible, wearable, and soft device that can functionally bend and stretch with the wearer is needed. This resulted in research on textile device configurations for integration into consumer clothing. Prior to creating tTENGs, researchers were limited in their ability to continuously monitor upper extremity movements, as maintaining functionality and providing comfort during movements were difficult to balance. Textiles, which are commonly worn on upper extremities, offer a solution to the limited practicality of other TENGs and sensors. Focusing on the upper extremities, researchers have developed revolutionary tTENGs capable of providing continuous biomonitoring.

3.3.1. Sensing under bending and stretching. 
Bending and stretching are two of the most common activities experienced by upper body extremities and many researchers, subsequently, have focused their device monitoring and powering on these biomechanical movements. Materials capable of being constantly deformed while maintain comfortability of the user are required, thus textiles were the main focus of material combinations for device fabrication. As mentioned previously, Chen et al. developed a 3DFIF-TENG, seen in Fig. 5a, which functioned as an elbow bending and hand pressure sensor.155 The 3DFIF-TENG was capable of generating electricity via bending and stretching, and was able to monitor bending degrees of 45°, 90°, and 128° when attached to the inside of the elbow, as seen in Fig. 5b. Under the bend–stretch mode, the 3DFIF-TENG saw an increase from 0.4 V to 8 V in VOC and an increase of 0.22 nC to 2.52 nC in the short-circuit charge transfer when elongated from 33% to 300%, while the stretch-only mode displayed similar behavior. The ISC remained relatively constant under both modes. When attached to the surface of a robot palm, the 3DFIF-TENG was able to delineate between the weights of an empty, half full, and full water bottle. The 3DFIF-TENG was incorporated with a pre-existing tTENG and was able to record accurate force and position readings when touched. This discovery opens the opportunity to provide an artificial sense of touch for patients with decreased sensory abilities.
 Fig. 5  Textile TENGs for self-powered upper body motion sensing. (a) Structure of a 3D double-faced interlock textile TENG as a tactile sensor. (b) The output voltage of the 3D textile TENG as a bending sensor when arm bend 45°, 90° and 128°. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Textile TENGs for elbow bending angle monitoring. (d) The sensing results (dτ/dt curves and voltage peak curves) of the textile TENG with a tapping frequency of 3 Hz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Output voltage and (f) current during finger touching and releasing on textile pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (g) Integrating the yarn-based stretchable sensor arrays with a glove. (h) Apply the sensing glove to monitor the finger movement and generate output voltage signals corresponding to five bending states. (i) Applying the yarn-based stretchable sensor arrays to monitor the mouth opening. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications. 
With an alternative approach focusing on self-powered capacitance sensing scenarios and increased focus on withstanding environmental factors, Liu et al. explored a switchable tTENG (S-TENG) which was unaffected by environmental factors like humidity and temperature.177 Rather than decoding output voltage while measuring elbow angle, as seen in Fig. 5c, the S-TENG uniquely measured the time constant (τ), which referred to the instantaneous capacitance of the device (Fig. 5d). During the cycle, the switch was closed only when the device was being fully pressed and the spacing of the device reaches its minimum value, and released when the spacing reaches its maximum value. The closing of the switch induced a resistor–capacitor (RC) discharge event and generated an exponential voltage waveform. This working mode was used to create a τ vs. bending angle graph, exhibiting its heightened sensing capabilities.
Able to operate and monitor under multiple different movement modalities, Yu et al. developed a core–shell yarn tTENG that was capable of transmitting electrical output upon placement under the subject's arm.150 Specifically, when the arm was sliding or being patted, the tTENG was able to power a capacitor using its single electrode working mode.150 The tTENG was configured to function on different working modes, with the single-electrode mode demonstrating a VOC of 75 V and an ISC of 1.2 μA, while the contact-separation mode demonstrated VOC of 19 V and a ISC of 0.3 μA. To demonstrate the versatility of the device performance, researchers tested the tTENG with various textiles, including cotton, wool, polyester, and polyacrylonitrile. After plotting the data recorded with the device under the arm, the current density was shown to decrease with increased external resistance, with a peak power density at 60 mW m−2 at 200 MΩ of external resistance, showing constant current output capabilities.
With an increased focus on stretchability, Zhu et al. developed a stretchable all-rubber-based thread-shaped TENG (SATT) consisting of silicone rubber-coated stretchable conductive thread (SCT) and a silver-coated glass microspheres rubber as the other SCT.178 The highly stretchable SATT, capable of functioning via the stretch–release and contact separation working modes, was then attached to the index finger of the subject. By monitoring the output voltage peaks during the bending process, researchers were able to correctly identify the five bending–releasing motion states tested, thus confirming the device's ability to monitor finger bending. To demonstrate the bending angle tracking capability, the tTENG was then placed on the elbow joint, with flexion and extension behaviors of the elbow resulting in alternating electrical signals via the two intrinsic working modes. With the high device elasticity, a VOC of 105 V and a response output current of 0.73 μA was recorded at the maximum bending angle of the elbow. Similarly, the previously mentioned SCK-TENG, developed by Yuan et al., was placed on the thumb of a subject and studied during various hand motions such as grabbing, pressing, tapping, and spatting. With respective output voltages of 0.74, 1.83, 3.32, and 12.40 V, along with the ability to monitor thumb bending angles, the SCK-TENG was shown to be capable of self-powered motion sensing of the thumb and potentially other similar appendages.156 Being able to stretch, deform, and continue to operate is an important task that tTENGs must be capable of providing for integration into consumer usage. Thus, researchers should continue to improve the ability of tTENGs to easily deform when needed and provide reliable and accurate biomonitoring.
Evaluating motion under bending and stretching has been very successful for many researchers desiring to design devices capable of monitoring upper body extremities. While these motions provide information that the devices then interpret and relay, they also provide a source of energy on which these tTENGs can sustainably operate. Future research under these biomechanical motions should focus on defining the smallest possible movements that are capable of being monitored, as this is a potential limitation of these devices.


3.3.2. Pressure sensing. 
Alternatively, some researchers have sought pressure sensing as another modality of monitoring and operating. Considering that pressure sensing relies on contact between the skin and the device, materials that are soft and deformable, while also being capable of effective sensing, are preferable, thus prompting researchers to focus on textile triboelectric materials. As discussed previously in Section 3.1.1, the tTENG proposed by Lou et al. provided pressure sensing of the armpit, elbow, and hand.151 A positive correlation between the electrical output of the device and the bending speeds and angles was discovered, where output current increased from 14 nA to 24 nA when the subject's hands moved from slow to fast relative to one another. Similarly, an output current increase from 75 nA to 103 nA was recorded in the elbow trials when the elbow was moved upward and backward at different speeds. Lastly, the armpit trials of the device functionality observed an increase of 80 nA to 126 nA in the output current when the underarm was moved upward at different bending speeds. With the ability to accurately record an individual's movements due to variations in the output current, this tTENG can help to screen potential movement disorders in patients.
Attempting to increase the application of pressure sensing tTENGs capable of operating under environmental factors, Lai et al. developed a waterproof fabric-based TENG (WPF-MTENG) capable of generating electricity ranging from tiny impacts, such as rain drops, to larger scale human motions.179 In order to test its pressure sensing capabilities, a fabric-based keyboard composed of five WPF-MTENGs was attached to the arm of the subject and further capable of relaying information to a wireless music player system. The corresponding output voltage was recorded in Fig. 5e and current was recorded in Fig. 5f. When the subject pressed on a specific region of the WPF-MTENG smart keyboard, such as the region indicated as “play,” contact between the two active fabrics in the device would generate electricity and relay the message to the music player system, informing it to “play” the music. While not only demonstrating mechanical stability and a link between the human–machine interface, the WPF-MTENGs being resistant to the potential detrimental effects of water shows researchers newfound focus on improving the practicality and usability of these textile TENGs. Pressure sensing has thus been shown to be a very feasible modality for tTENG biomonitoring and self-powering when applied to upper body extremities. Furthermore, being able to monitor magnitude and location of pressures could potentially increase the versatility and applications for which tTENGs can be applied as they can offer additional abilities, as seen in the example of pausing and playing music.


3.3.3. Relative motion sensing. 
Many researchers are conscious of the efficiency declination in TENGs due to exposure to water in the form of humidity or possible sweat. Accordingly, Wen et al., using a facile coating approach to assemble CNTs/thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs) onto textile, developed a superhydrophobic tTENG with anti-sweat capabilities and increased efficiency in moist environments.180 The sensing textile was fabricated by spray coating a suspension composed of multi-walled CNTs and TPEs on a textile before ethanol etching. This layer acted as both the positive triboelectric layer and charge collecting electrode, while the negative layer was produced by pouring Ecoflex onto a lotus leaf mold to mimic the hydrophobic microstructure of the positive layer. The textile had a strong anti-humidity property, where VOC retention rate remained at 22.3% in 85% relative humidity and was able to recover 7 times faster than pristine textiles at 20.75 s. The textile was attached under the subject's armpit and the friction between the triboelectric layers in the device generated output voltage peaks. Depending on how fast the subject was moving during the one hour running test, the time intervals between the voltage peaks were unique. Using these unique time intervals and known step distance of 37 cm, Wen et al. was capable of recording the speed of the individual.180 Lastly, with the known weight of the subject and the formula for burned calories, researchers were able to record the number of calories burned by the subject during the testing period. Exposure to moisture is a likely factor that many tTENGs are subjected to and thus their ability to continually operate uncompromised is paramount for future applications to become realities.


3.3.4. Hand gesture sensing. 
Expanding the ability to monitor upper body extremities, some researchers have sought to provide an alternative methodology of communication using hand gesture recognition and interpretation. For example, Wen et al. continued their research through the creation of a word gesture recognition sensing glove that consists of 10 arch-shaped superhydrophobic tTENGs fastened to the 10 fingers of the subject.180 Rather than focusing on alphabet or number gesture recognition, Wen et al. utilized artificial intelligence to create a device capable of work gesture recognition to reduce the communication barrier experienced by deaf and mute people.
To improve upon the shortcomings of the tTENG proposed by Wen et al., such as potential discomfort and reduced finger dexterity from the device, Chiu et al. developed a smart glove for gesture recognition.181 The smart glove consisted of three self-powered tTENG sensors placed on the tendons of the thumb, index, and little finger on the backside of the hand. The placement of the three sensors on each hand allowed for up to 64 combinations of different gestures, which sufficiently allows for detection of all 26 letters in the english alphabet.181 By sensing the displacement of the tendons in the hands, this smart glove was able to accurately serve as a sign language translator by converting gestures into words. Additionally, Shin et al. stitched their PVDF-based sensor into the knuckle region of a textile glove to fabricate a tTENG smart glove capable of hand gesture recognition.167 While also capable of distinguishing Morse code via integrated pressure sensors, this smart glove, which operates under the single-electrode triboelectric working mode, generated intrinsic output currents for each gesture that were then discriminated by the smart glove as gesture signals for different numbers.
Integrating machine learning, Zhou et al. designed a wearable sign-to-speech translation system consisting of yarn-based stretchable sensor arrays (YSSAs) and a wireless printed circuit board.182 The YSSA was stitched into a hand glove surface (Fig. 5g), and the output voltages for a sensor on the index finger was recorded for five different motion statuses (Fig. 5h). The YSSA demonstrated good strain sensitivity of 2.47 V over a wide strain range of 90%. Using machine-learning, this system analyzed over 660 sign language hand gesture recognition patterns and demonstrated a recognition rate of 98.63%, with a recognition time of less than 1 s. Additionally, as seen in Fig. 5i, the YSSA was worn against the eyebrow and mouth, and was able of generating output voltages that were in response to facial expression changes.
Using tTENGs for upper body motion sensing has been shown to effectively and comfortably record usable data. Additionally, many of these devices are capable of a wide range of interpretation of that data, from measuring bending angles to converting finger gestures into spoken word, offering a unique and sustainable modality for relaying information about the body back to the user. Additionally, these tTENG applications have even provided a means of non-verbal communication between individuals. Thus, future research can focus on providing warnings or feedback signals to inform the wearer of the biomechanical status of their body.

3.4. Gait motion sensing
The monitoring and detection of the gait of an individual is a useful element of injury rehabilitation and sports training, allowing for medical professionals and coaches to determine points of improvement for the user. Gait motion monitoring also provides another metric for step counting and other daily fitness goals for people, as seen with modern day smartphone and smartwatch technologies. However, these sensing technologies are often limited by inaccuracies or lack comfort and breathability for everyday use.183–187 Additionally, considering that gait motion sensing is using the increased friction and high loads, textiles can better fulfill this need compared to other traditional materials while maintaining high biocompatibility. Textiles are typically found in contact with the knee and foot in everyday life, which are two integral device locations for gait motion sensing, making tTENGs a more intuitive choice for this application. The development of tTENG-based sensors allows for the direct implementation of sensors onto the lower extremities for accurate and comfortable real-time gait motion monitoring.

3.4.1. Foot pressure sensing. 
The distribution of pressures across the foot of an individual during different movements elicits a plethora of information on the physiological status of the lower body. The foot, primarily when wearing footwear, is a high moisture environment due to sweat secretions and closed space, thus textiles present an obvious advantage due to their inherent breathability from their porous state offering an innate permeability to moisture and ability to function under increased humidity, as will be discussed later. Additionally, choosing footwear that provides heightened comfortability is a critical characteristic for many people, thus tTENG integration, which can meet the comfortability standards that are inherent in everyday life, for foot pressure monitoring would be a more practical choice. The previously discussed S-TENG proposed by Liu et al. also provided footstep monitoring.177 As its performance was unaffected by environmental factors, the S-TENG output performance was also unaffected by contact-separation speed. The S-TENG was composed of nitrile rubber and EcoFlexTM-00-30 layers for the positive and negative triboelectric layers respectively, while single side conductive Ni tapes were used as electrodes. The S-TENG was integrated into a shoe for footstep detection, and the impact frequency was tested at 2 Hz and 4 Hz to improve the resolution of the waveform. Although an increase in frequency improved the sensing resolution, tests at frequencies above 20 Hz at 40 Hz and 80 Hz resulted in deterioration of resolution, as the reduction in peak voltage amplitude made the desired data less discernible with noise. As the time constant of each RC discharge was determined by identification of the exact peak of each waveform, a very high fs resulted in a deterioration in accuracy as the peak voltage became less discernible. This limitation meant that detection of light footsteps was less accurate, as the already-low voltage amplitude further reduced sensing accuracy. Although this novel technique of improving the reliability of triboelectric output is an important step in providing accurate continuous healthcare monitoring in all environmental conditions, accurately detecting small scale motions requires further development.
Ma et al. proposed a self-powered sensor composed of a PDMS and chitosan film, with a conductive fabric as the electrode and PU film as a flexible substrate.188 When applied for footstep monitoring at the heel and toe, the device reached a maximum output voltage of 30 V with the presence of the PU substrate. Durability tests showed that the device was able to experience contact-separation motion for 800 s, and exhibited strong stability. The device also operated with a response time of 6 ms, which allowed the device to be used for real-time motion sensing. The high flexibility and simple manufacturing process of the sensor allowed it to be applied for self-powered sensing, though the current bulky size of the device warrants for application in shoes rather than directly on the skin surface.
Due to the relatively large amount of wear experienced during motions such as walking, the durability of foot motion monitors should be substantial to provide good sensing performance over long durations. Utilizing a novel braided structure to improve the flexibility, mechanical stability, and robustness of the tTENG, Dong et al. proposed a 3D braided TENG for gait monitoring.189 The tTENG was composed of a commercial Ag-plated nylon yarn, a low-cost and easily accessible material which acted as the electrode, and a PDMS elastomer, which acted as the dielectric material. A multiaxial winding method was used to form the braid of nylon yarns, which improved the electrical conductivity and mechanical robustness of the electrode (Fig. 6a), while the PDMS was evenly coated on the braid. The tTENG operated in a contact-separation mode, and displayed good durability, as the compression resilience coefficient reached ∼60% when fully compressed for 10 seconds, while VOC and ISC showed no significant reduction over a month of cyclic loading. The sensor also demonstrated strong washability with no significant degradation in output performance after 20 washes. The sensor also offered a high sensitivity, as it was able to detect mass variations of less than 0.1 g. When compared to other devices such as the tTENGs proposed by Ma et al. and Liu et al., this 3D braided TENG provides stronger durability and stability under everyday wear conditions. However, in order to prevent environmental interference on performance, the braided TENG was applied in a rubber-encapsulated sole, where it successfully detected stepping motion, and determined the total step number based on the number of peaks. Voltage outputs for walking and running were recorded in Fig. 6b and c, where the frequency of the stepping motion and length of steps were used to determine the motion state of the user, with running motions displayed a shorter interval period of 6 seconds compared to the 12 second interval when walking. Dong et al. further suggested the use of this 3D braided TENG in conjunction with a braided TENG-based identity recognition carpet for security purposes. Although this novel fabrication method for tTENGs offers a plethora of applications for large-scale textiles, the effects of environmental interference have yet to be investigated, thereby requiring use of an external layer to seal the braided TENG, which may not be suitable for more lightweight and subtle applications of tTENG-based sensors. Future developments into providing greater environmental resilience to the device, such as the work proposed by Liu et al.,177 can allow the great physical properties of the braided structure to be fully demonstrated.
 Fig. 6  Textile TENGs for self-powered gait motion sensing. (a) Structural diagram of the ten-axial winding yarn for 3D textile TENG. (b) 3D textile TENG for walking sensing, indicating a 12s interval period of each step. (c) 3D textile TENG for running sensing, indicating a 6s interval period of each step. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications. (d) Intelligent socks embedded with a textile TENG. (e) Participant worn an intelligent sock can perform different motions (leap, run, slide, jump, and walk) with different output signals (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications. 
Although the previously discussed devices provided novel form factors for foot motion sensing, integration into everyday necessities such as clothing can further improve the pervasiveness of tTENGs for providing everyday biomonitoring. Zhang et al. investigated a triboelectric smart sock which integrated deep learning for gait analysis and virtual reality applications.190 The tTENG sensor was composed of 4 functional layers, including a nitrile thin film, a silicone rubber film with patterned frustum structures, and two conductive textiles attached to the back of the two films to seal the device on the outer surface. The patterned frustum structures allowed for heightened spacing and enlarged contact areas, improving the pressure sensing range to 210 kPa and increasing the voltage output by threefold. The sensor was attached to the bottom of a sock for gait analysis (Fig. 6d), where it delivered greater output performance under higher impact frequency and force. The smart sock was also capable of energy harvesting to power a bluetooth module, which was used to wirelessly transmit gait data to a computer for analysis. Unlike previously discussed tTENGs for gait motion monitoring, this device provided a self-powered solution to communicating with other devices, allowing the user to view their gait data in real time. Different motions such as leaping, running, sliding, jumping, and walking (Fig. 6e), were determined based on the triboelectric output from the movements (Fig. 6f), and through a one-dimensional convolutional neural network-based method, successfully identified at a 96.67% recognition accuracy. This deep learning method for recognition opens the door for long-term monitoring and diagnosis of chronic movement disorders and other biomechanical conditions, as well as applications for virtual reality, where user motion can be accurately recognized in real time in a lightweight form.
Utilizing more commonly used textile materials such as cotton, Zhu et al. applied a TENG-based cotton sock for sweat and self-powered gait motion monitoring.191 The electrical output allowed for pressure and force mapping at the ball and heel of the foot and delineated between jumping and stepping motions. The sock also had a sensing range of up to 12 N or 480 kPa, which was suited for daily use as normal human pressure range spanned from 10 to 380 kPa; the sock achieved a sensitivity of 0.6 V·N−1. The triboelectric output waveforms from the cotton sock were processed through machine learning to determine the walking patterns and change of speed of the user, and further applied for the monitoring of Parkinson's disease patients, where it continuously monitored patient movement at home. Unlike shoe-integrated tTENGs, the form factor of a triboelectric sock provides another benefit for those who have biomechanical ailments, as motion can be continuously monitoring inside and outside the home with a singular sensor. The use of cotton over the materials used in the sock from Zhang et al. also promotes greater integrability into current textile manufacturing, while the self-powered nature of the device also provided a more user-friendly sensing device without compromising the comfort and functionality of the original sock.
Another TENG configuration which utilized commercial textiles was proposed by Jao et al., who proposed a chitosan-based TENG (cTENG) for foot monitoring.192 The cTENG was composed of a chitosan–glycerol film combined with a commercial textile, and applied as a sock-insole triboelectric pair, where electrical output was induced by the contact-separation between the cTENG on the sock and a PTFE insole. Four cTENGs were placed at the big toe, forefoot and heel area, which were used to determine the walking patterns of the user based on the voltage outputs of each cTENG. This research provided a comprehensive pressure mapping of the foot, which can be applied for rehabilitating patients as well as athletes for injury reduction and performance improvements.


3.4.2. Knee motion monitoring. 
Although foot motion monitoring provides a plethora of information on the biomechanical health of an individual, other sensors placed at the knee and hip can also shed insight on the health of other joints. The constant bending of these joints requires a material capable of offering decreased irritation during device deformation throughout its lifespan, thus highlighting another advantage that a comfortable textile would have over other materials. As discussed in Section 3.3.1., the all-rubber based thread shaped TENG proposed by Zhu et al. was used to monitor knee bending.178 A SATT of size 5 × 7 cm2 was fixed around the kneecap and was able to reach a maximum output voltage of 116.7 V and output current of 0.89 μA. The stretchable and self-powered nature of the SATT allows it to be applied as a rehabilitative tool for patients to track activity.
Another multifunctional sensing textile that was applied for gait motion monitoring was the nylon and PTFE based tTENG proposed by Lou et al., which was mentioned previously in Sections 3.1.1 and 3.3.2.151 The textile was applied on clothes behind the knee to detect knee bending motion, where slow and fast knee bending displayed current amplitudes of 43 nA and 66 nA respectively. Although the individual sensing textiles did not reflect much useful data, the combination of multiple sensors, such as the knee sensor and the armpit sensor, were able to provide a more comprehensive picture of the biomechanical status of an individual.
The detection of single joint the movement provides good information in an isolated space. However, many dynamic movements are characterized by changes in joint angles at the hip and knee, which calls for integrated sensing of multiple joints to provide a comprehensive picture of the biomechanical health of an individual. He et al. proposed a PEDOT:PSS-based tTENG-based sensor which was applied at the elbow, underarm, hip, and knee to form a full-body motion detection system, where the sensors at the hip and knee were relevant to gait motion monitoring.193 The textile was applied in a 4 × 4 cm2 area and demonstrated high durability with almost no output degradation after 7200 continuous cycles. The textile also demonstrated adequate washability, and maintained 81% of its output voltage after 5 tests of washing with ascending wash strength. When applied for gait motion monitoring, the tTENGs at the knee and hip were attached to an arched PET confinement structure, where kneeling, standing, walking, and running motions were detected. The speed of movements such as kneeling or standing was reflected through the amplitude of the peak due to the large change in joint angles. For continuous movements such as walking and running, the frequency of the output voltage waveform determined the speed of the user, where a higher frequency indicated a greater walking speed. The integration of a full-body motion system by He et al. elicits the potential for applications in physical therapy, or directly onto clothes for self-powered continuous healthcare monitoring, though integration with foot-based monitors can provide even more information on the biomechanical health of an individual.
Each group has proposed novel methods to provide cost-effective, comfortable, and accurate alternatives to current gait monitoring devices. Self-powered configurations and use of strong and readily available materials with facile fabrication processes have tapped into the mass distribution of these durable monitoring devices to help provide continuous gait monitoring for the public. Future research should aim to improve upon diagnosis of unhealthy joint and walking angles, as to prevent further joint degradation and improve long-term joint health.

3.5. Sleep monitoring
With high stretchability194,195 and versatility in material choices, tTENGs have been very useful in traditional biosensing roles, healthcare monitoring, smart prosthetics, human-machine interaction and biomechanical energy generation.196–208 Researchers have begun to experiment with the technology for sleep monitoring and full-body sensing.209–211 Sleep monitoring is essential for those suffering from sleeping disorders, which can be a major threat to human health.209 Although sensing methods such as polysomnography (PSG) provide a comprehensive understanding on the health of a sleeping individual, they often require trained specialists to collect and interpret the data collected, increasing the resources required to perform high-accuracy monitoring, and reducing the accessibility to sleep monitoring for those who need it.212–216 PSG is a comprehensive measure of sleep based on simultaneous recording of cortical, submental muscles, and electro–ocular activity using scalp surface electrodes.216 The ability to identify motionless sleep using PSG and actigraphy has resulted in a specificity of data in healthy participants ranging from 26.9% to 77% (ref. 217–226) and from 32.5% to 80% (ref. 225–227) in groups containing a variety of patient groups, with accuracy being based on overall ability to detect true wake and sleep.228–230 However, using this PSG methodology in multisensory wearable devices to monitor sleep, researchers have reported higher performance in classifying “light sleep” and random eye movement sleep.231–233 Due to the unique desirable features exhibited by tTENGs, such as high sensitivity, fast response time, durability, and water resistance, the smart tTENGs are a perfect candidate to use in collaboration with other arrays to effectively monitor different health conditions during sleep.209 Other researchers are using tTENGs as self-powered sensors to quantify full-body motion, monitor pulse signals, and detect the breathing state of its users.151,211 These unique applications of textile TENGs and the results of the experiments promise a bright future in personalized healthcare.

3.5.1. Full body sleep monitoring. 
Full body sleep monitoring refers to the ability of a device to monitor body movements during sleep, and use the collected data to provide the user with updated information about their sleep behaviors. More specifically, this is reflected in the body movements throughout the night and varying degrees of pressures applied on the body in different sleeping positions. In the case of full body sleep monitoring, Lin et al. created a bedsheet, seen in Fig. 7a, out of the smart textile with three layers: the top and bottom layers are sheets of conductive fibers and the middle layer is a wavy PET film.209 Considering that the bedsheet is a typical household item that individuals use while they sleep and are often chosen based on comfort, using textiles over other materials have the potential to provide sleep monitoring while maintaining the inherent comfort of the bedsheet. When an external force was applied to the sheet, triboelectrification occurred and an electrical potential difference was created. This 2 × 1.5 m2 sheet was tested to monitor sleeping behavior using a mechanical shaker to create impact. The textile exhibited a linear response with pressure sensitivity of 0.77 V Pa−1. The PET models of the sheet were also tested in a flat and a wave form, where the flat model was far less pressure sensitive than the waveform model, indicating the necessity of the wave form. An excellent response time of 80 ms was recorded and displayed good durability and washability as output performance remained constant after 10000 contact cycles and 20 minutes of wash time. To capture more detailed information, a unique software algorithm was used alongside a 4 × 4 sensor array to track movement and force on top of the sheet. As seen in Fig. 7b, this allowed for the recording of real time sleeping behavior, and the further implementation of alarms if individuals experienced falls from the sheet to the floor.209 The bedsheet is an easy to use, reliable source of sleep monitoring that can definitely be utilized in households and even further improved upon through research so that even more sleeping illnesses are monitored and software integration is achieved. This application of a smart bedsheet, capable of reliable and accurate monitoring, demonstrates seamless integration of tTENGs into commonly used textile materials.
 Fig. 7  Textile TENGs for self-powered sleep monitoring. (a) Structure design of the textile TENG for self-powered sleep monitoring. (b) Time-sharing histogram of active sensing nodes during the sleeping period and the correspondingly generated sleep quality report. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) A textile TENG with a two-layer configuration to diagnose obstructive sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). (d) Pulse waveforms from OSAHS participants exhibit two distinct mutations occurring at about 4 s and 28 s marked by the blue dotted line, indicating the obstructive respiratory events. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) A textile TENG with 61 sensing units for sleep monitoring. Scale bar is 10 cm. (f) Respiratory signals for an OSAHS participant, which clearly indicates a distinct apnea lasting for 11 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.5.2. Sleep apnea diagnosis. 
An application of respiratory monitoring is sleep apnea monitoring, where breathing rates are directly measured. Numerous individuals in today's society suffer from sleep apnea and researchers are finding new, innovative methods of monitoring sleep apnea tendencies and helping diagnose patients. With future prospects of diagnosing sleep monitoring disorders, this section will discuss the recent advances in tTENG integration for sleep apnea monitoring in particular. For example, Meng et al. fabricated a versatile textile-based sensor (TS) with a two-layer configuration, as seen in Fig. 7c, capable of being integrated for sleep monitoring.168 The device was tested on two groups: healthy individuals and individuals with obstructive sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). Specifically, the device was engineered to monitor pulse wave amplitude and pulse period. As seen in Fig. 7d, the device recorded two distinct mutations at 4 and 28 seconds for OSAHS patients, which were indicative of obstructive respiratory events. This was possible because the decrease in pulse wave amplitude following apnea and occurs for a certain period of time.
To replace the highly complex, uncomfortable, and expensive polysomnography (PSG) device that is commonly used for sleep monitoring, Zhou et al. developed a single-layered, ultra-soft, smart textile for versatile physiological monitoring during sleep.210 As seen in Fig. 7e, the smart textile is composed of 61 sensing units. Capable of high-pressure sensitivity, 10.79 mV Pa−1, good stability, and a wide working frequency bandwidth of 0 to 40 Hz, this smart textile is capable of real-time detection and tracking of changes in sleep posture and subtle respiration and ballistocardiograph monitoring. The device was again tested on healthy versus OSAHS individuals, and the airflow into and out of the lungs was stable, with a normal respiratory rate, for the healthy individual. However, when the OSAHS patient's soft tissue began to block air from passing through their trachea and instigating OSAHS events, the device recorded abnormal respiratory rates and a clear apnea of 11 seconds seen in Fig. 7f. Clearly, this device has potential clinical applications in its ability to diagnose the severity of OSAHS and prevent sudden death by providing timely intervention during sleep. Countless individuals around the world suffer from sleep apnea like conditions and being able to sustainably and continuously monitor these patients, with potential warning systems for emergencies, could save countless lives.
tTENGs have provided an efficient and reliable method of tracking user sleep via motion and respiratory rhythm sensing, providing a source of continuously updated physiological data. It is important to note for the future, that other studies have combined consumer sleep-trackers and smartphone apps to provide an extra level of feedback beyond sensing, with treatments such as internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy or to assess the efficacy of sleep therapies.234–238 With this in mind, tTENGs can potentially play a pivotal role in sleep monitoring by acting as an active channel of information between user and physician, while being able to not only diagnose sleep disorders but also prevent emergency events.

3.6. Biochemical monitoring
tTENGs have also been utilized to track sweat and temperature parameters through the utilization of sensors and bluetooth chips to continuously monitor the body's condition.191,192 Although current wearable biochemical sensors have provided analysis of different chemical biomarkers, they are limited in their external energy source requirement, inability to monitor multiple samples simultaneously, as well as their poor ability to collect sweat.239–243 tTENGs seek to overcome this, with recent research being able to provide accurate and non-invasive biochemical monitoring. Textiles, for integration into biochemical monitoring devices demonstrate superior breathability and, as will be discussed, maintain efficiency under moisture rich environments. In everyday life, we have come accustomed to sweat being absorbed into our outer clothing to be washed later, thus textiles offer a seamless transition into constant biochemical monitoring via tTENGs. We will take a deeper look at the specifics behind each closed loop system and its importance in the development and treatment of various health concerns.
As mentioned previously in Section 3.4.1, the cotton sock proposed by Zhu et al. also offered detection of chemical signals and utilized both triboelectric and piezoelectric elements.191 As shown in Fig. 8a, the cotton sock was coated in poly (3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly (styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), and was integrated with a 20 μm thick lead zirconate titanate (PZT) piezoelectric sensor bonded with a 50 μm copper substrate. The use of PEDOT:PSS improved sensing performance greatly, as output voltage increased from 55 V without coating to 196 V, and output current increased from 2.3 μA to 4.5 μA. The effect of humidity and temperature on sensing performance was also tested, where output amplitude decreased by 20% when relative humidity increased from 50% to 90% and decreased by 10% when temperature dropped from 50 °C to 10 °C. The force sensing PZT chips were applied at the heel, the ball of the foot, and the big toe (Fig. 8b). The sock was applied for sweat sensing, where the output voltage decreased as the amount of sweat increased, and output performance dropped by 80% when 0.9 g of sweat was absorbed into the textile during both walking (Fig. 8c) and jumping (Fig. 8d). Since sweating is a slow and continuous process, the tTENG was able to maintain a certain level of performance for a short time period before decreasing, thereby offering sweat information for the user. However, the inconsistencies in force experienced by the foot due to different activities, such as in walking (Fig. 8c) and jumping (Fig. 8d), the output voltage of the sensors was different and required a reference sensor in the form of the humidity-resistant PZT chip. Conclusively, the cotton sock sensor had a large advantage over typical insole-based gait motion sensors through its utilization of hybrid piezoelectric and triboelectric mechanisms, as it allowed for the potential of continuous monitoring inside and outside of the home without using multiple sensors. The self-powered nature of the device also provided a more user-friendly sensing device without compromising the comfort and functionality of the original sock.
 Fig. 8  Textile TENGs for self-powered biochemical monitoring. (a) PEDOT:PSS coated triboelectric sock integrated with PZT force sensors. (b) Schematic of embedded PZT force sensors, labelled as “PA”, “PB”, “PC”, and “PD”. Triboelectric socks for NaCl sensing. The output performance under increasing amount of 0.9 wt% NaCl solution delivered through spray (0.1 g per spray), generated from walking (c) and jumping (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Photograph of the self-powered textile sweat sensor. Scale bar, 1 cm. (f) Output voltages of the self-powered textile sweat sensor under various concentrations of NaCl solution absorption. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Briefly discussed in Section 3.4.1, the sensing textile developed by Jao et al. also provided biochemical sensing capabilities.192 The chitosan–glycerol film acted as both the triboelectric material and the conductive electrode (Fig. 8e). The cTENG was tested for its stability, and resistance was shown to be unchanged at different bending angles and at human body temperature of 37 °C. A maximum output voltage of 130 V was reached by the cTENG at an area of 5 × 3 cm2. Output performance was unaffected from 20% to 80% relative humidity, though the cTENG was combined with another chitosan–glycerol film, which acted as a humidity-dependent resistor, to form a sweat sensor, where it was integrated onto a PDMS substrate that attached to clothes. As the voltage across the chitosan-based resistor dropped as relative humidity increased, the sweat sensor was able to output a drop from 26 V to 12.5 V with an increase in NaCl concentration from 0 M to 1 M (Fig. 8f). This detection of salt and electrolyte loss during activity can be further implemented to alert athletes to rehydrate and help to mitigate fatigue or overworking.
These devices have exhibited the ability to track sweat excretion quantity and warn the user of possible dehydration. The ability to maintain sensing performance with reduced negative effects from external humidity and temperatures paves the way for new tTENG technologies that monitor the composition of the human body excretions and provide feedback on human health. Continuously monitoring biochemical compounds produced and used by the body is a revolutionary field that tTENGs can be instrumental in providing a more complete picture of the health of an individual. However, detection of other biochemical markers such as pH and electrolytes can be incorporated into future research to provide more comprehensive information regarding the biochemical processes of the user.
4. Conclusion and outlook
This review has systematically analyzed and summarized the recent research in textile TENGs for biosensing purposes, including cardiovascular, respiratory, body motions, sleep and biochemical sensors to provide a vast range of continuous health monitoring methods. The discussed applications of tTENGs have not only exhibited vast improvements in sensing performance, but have also made significant advancements in becoming more closely integrated with commonplace textiles and everyday clothing items. Table 1 displays a comparison between various tTENG-based sensors in their respective performances, as well as their material configurations. This combined with the self-powered nature of tTENGs sheds great potential on revolutionizing the wearable electronics industry, especially as technology transitions to an IoT era. However, from the applications discussed, there are various facets of the technology that must be further investigated and improved upon to ensure its viability in healthcare. Moreover, stability, materials, interface engineering, and the many others shown in Fig. 9, indicate areas where future research should improve upon.
Table 1 : Performance comparison of textile TENGs for continuous physiological monitoring




Materials
Application
Sensitivity
Detection range
Durability (cycles)

V
OC (V)

I
SC (μA)
Ref.




CNT, PDMS
Move status
—
—
170000
200
0.6

145



Nylon, PTFE
Foot motion
—
—
—
3.5
0.28

148



Nylon, PTFE, stainless steel
Motion/pulse
1.33 V kPa−1
1.95–4.61 kPa
4200 (wash)
2.17
0.126

151



Ag-coated polyester, nylon
Sleep/pulse
3.88 V kPa−1
0.1–9.8 kPa
80000
7.5
—

168



Nylon, stainless steel–terylene
Respiratory/pulse
7.84 V kPa−1
0.1–4 kPa
100000
7.5
0.009

171



PEDOT:PSS PZT
Foot motion/sweat
0.0057 V kPa−1
480 kPa
—
196
0.0045

191



PEDOT:PSS PTFE
Foot motion
—
10–160% strain
7200
49.7
0.797

193



Ag, PET
Sleep
0.77 V Pa−1
—
10000
3.5
0.015

209





 Fig. 9  Conclusion and future perspectives on textile TENGs for self-powered biomonitoring. Textile TENGs featuring high breathability, comfort, and stretchability have been widely used in self-powered biomonitoring, including cardiovascular monitoring, respiratory monitoring, biochemical monitoring, upper body monitoring, and gait motion monitoring. In the future, more research efforts are highly desired in optimizing the stability, materials, surface modifications, devices structural design, aesthetic, and mass production of textile TENG. With the assistance of the sensitive, stable, convenient, and comfortable textile TENGs, individual physiological status can be continuously monitored. These acquired signals can be wirelessly transmitted to nearby terminals, e.g., smart phones, for further clinical-level analysis. Artificial intelligence and machine learning based predictive algorithms in the cloud would extract features associated with the potential diseases from these signals, providing streams of data for physicians to diagnose the disease even before patient being conscious of it. 
4.1. Stability
Textile TENGs are capable of providing continuous biomonitoring for the individuals when worn, however, they must be capable of withstanding harsh environmental weathers and conditions depending on where the individual is located and their level of activity. For example, Nam Kim et al. utilized a humidifier to expose their tTENG to extreme humidity, 95% relative humidity to be exact, and found that their device remained sealed and resistant.153 Additionally, Meng et al. reported their tTENG provided consistent output voltages at temperatures ranging from 10–40 °C.168 With the intention of providing tTENGs to all individuals, regardless of geographical location, all environmental characteristics need to be taken into account. While this shows some progress in testing tTENGs for real world applications, there still needs to be further testing that includes various environmental conditions, ranging from extreme cold to extreme heat.
As is highly applicable in wearable tTENGs, washing presents another external factor that devices must be able to maintain stability and effectiveness throughout their lifetime. Particularly, the tTENGs physical and chemical stability dictates whether or not it will be able to withstand the harsh chemicals used in washing detergents. These toxic and damaging chemicals in the water during washing can compromise the encapsulating layers and even penetrate deeper into the device, thereby rendering it non-functional. Thus, future research that tests the physical and chemical environments that textiles are subjected to while in washing machines is necessary to improve the ability of tTENGs to be widely used in everyday life.
4.2. Materials
As seen in Section 2, there are a wide variety of materials that can be used to construct highly-efficient and versatile tTENGs. The main criteria when choosing materials for a tTENG is that two oppositely charged materials, capable of contacting one another and providing a large enough electron affinity difference, are needed for the triboelectric effect to be appreciable. It is important to note that materials with similar triboelectrification properties may not produce a large enough electron affinity difference to produce charge movement. Thus, it is crucial that researchers understand the triboelectric properties of materials during the selection process, as well as manufacture costs for future upscale and distribution. Additionally, when new material combinations using existing materials are tested or when new triboelectric materials are discovered, researchers could quantify and report electron affinity differences to contribute to higher-performance tTENGs in the future.
Another important aspect of improving the tTENG for biosensing field is to enhance the biocompatibility and sustainability of the materials used, in order to reduce waste and produce the environmentally-conscious nanogenerators of the future. Additionally, in anticipation of the future manufacturing and distribution of these devices, researchers need to make sure, via further testing, that implementation of the tTENGs into clothing for wearable applications will not alter the intrinsic characteristics of the clothing material, such as breathability,244 and wearability.151,245 Ultimately, researchers must continually consider the complexity, cost-effectiveness, scalable manufacturing, and efficiency of future.
Surfaces of materials selected can be modified, using physical, chemical, biological, and hybrid approaches, to enhance their triboelectric characteristics and charge densities. In terms of physical modifications, introduction of surface nanostructures of different dimensions or extra surface charges to increase the charge density can be implemented via various methods such as photolithography templates,246 nano/micro etching technology,247,248 and incorporating nanomaterials and nanofibers,249–255 block copolymer templating,256,257 laser printing,258,259 mechanical abrasion,260,261 pre-friction treatments,262 and many others. Another methodology of surface enhancement involves introducing a polymer matrix, particularly in nanocomposites, onto the surface of the textile. This matrix acts as a trapping net for the transfer of electron charges between triboelectric layers, enhancing electrical output of the device.263 However, it is important to note that all surface modifications can possibly compromise the inherent roughness and feel of the textile itself and thus researchers should ensure that textile properties such as comfort remain intact after being processed.
Other researchers have sought chemical processes that enhance the triboelectric properties of the materials and thereby directly increase output performance. Specifically, these chemical modifications enhance the ability of the triboelectric material to lose or gain electrons and improve output performance. Recent advances in chemical modifications via ion manipulation of materials to enhance and regulate charge densities include ion beam etching or doping.254,255 Alternatively, functional chemical groups that accept or donate electrons can be incorporated into selected materials through chemical coating,264,265 plasma etching,148 UV treatment,266–268 low energy ion irradiation,269 self-assembled monolayers,270–274 wet chemical reactions,275,276 and many more.
Biological modification, via biotechnology, can be incorporated into tTENG fabrication to improve the biocompatibility and biodegradability of the devices, while also improving device performance. For example, genetic engineering can be used to fabricate a special protein sequence of materials, such as recombinant silk,277 capable of achieving optimal charge density. Lastly, hybrid modifications, which combine physical, chemical, and biological modifications, can be utilized to enhance surface charge density, improve the dielectric property of the contact area, and introduce additional bio-functionality into the tTENG devices. This modification methodology is characterized by implementing larger surface areas, increased capability of charge donation or attraction, and extra biological properties using step-by-step278–286 or one-step287–297 fabrication processes. Since surface enhancements for selected materials are extremely effective at improving output performance, they are widely sought after and adopted by researchers. Incorporating previously used surface modifications for TENGs into tTENG devices and discovering new physical, chemical, biological, or hybrid modifications should be a focus in the future. Thus, it is desirable to promote further comprehensive testing of new surface enhancements that have not been previously used.
4.3. Interface engineering
It is important to discuss the shortcomings of using polymer coatings on textiles being incorporated into tTENGs, for encapsulation or surface modification purposes. Textiles inherently have a natural roughness and a high density of chemically diverse functional groups, which, if harnessed correctly, leads to desirably high surface charge densities and output.105 However, polymer coatings cover and thereby inhibit this inherent enhancement, and post fabrication processes to re-establish this natural roughness are costly and not scalable. Thus, future research should focus on the interfacing engineering between textile substrates and functional layers, which is expected to utilize the inherent natural roughness of textiles and enhance tTENG output.
4.4. Structural design
In addition to interface engineering, particular fiber/fabric structural designs can be implemented to further improve charge density and, subsequently, output performance. Some of these recent advancements in structure include using rough fibers,105 stretchable fabrics,298 3D fabrics with larger surface areas,148,211,299,300 multiple stacked fabric,301 increasing yarn or stich density,302,303 and many more. Furthermore, the motion parameters of the triboelectric layers can be manipulated to enhance electrostatic induction and thereby improve output performance. Recent advances in this field include increasing frequency of material contacting events,304–306 applying adequate contact forces on surfaces,307,308 controlling the thickness of fabric layers,76,170,211 and many more. Manipulating the structural design or structure of the materials used is applicable to many tTENG devices and thus exploring more avenues to enhance the structural design of tTENGs should be continued in the future.
4.5. Mass production
Most tTENG configurations discussed in this paper were produced with functionality in mind, rather than device producibility. However, in order for biosensing tTENGs to be widely used, it must be easily and readily manufactured in an industrial setting. Some research has already taken steps to address this by utilizing pre-existing machine-based fabrication methods, such as machine-stitching by sewing machine165 or knitting.153 Other extrusion techniques, such as wet-spinning and electrospinning,165,167 have also been utilized in converting triboelectric material fibers into yarns. Techniques for providing nanoscale properties to tTENGs, such as soft lithography and nano-etching,247,248,309 are also often expensive, hard to reproduce in large quantities, and lack control over the dimensions of the fabricated material.310 On the other hand, cheaper and simpler fabrication methods in spray-coating and screen printing have also been extensively researched for providing nanoscale properties.311,312 Spray-coating utilizes air pressure methods to deposit nanoparticles directly onto textiles, which grants a high yield in the manufacturing of large-scale and flexible tTENGs.310 Screen printing involves applying a nanolayer through a patterned screen onto textiles, and has exhibited strong flexibility and stability in fabricated tTENGs.313 Optimizing the combination of both the solvent used to suspend the triboelectric nanoparticles and the choice in spray-coating method can vastly improve the manufacturing efficiency of tTENGs while keeping costs relatively low. As spray-coating and screen printing are highly mechanizable and thereby highly precise fabrication methods, they can also ensure a consistent level of quality in device performance. However, future research into these pre-existing fabrication methods for manufacturing tTENGs must ensure that other textile properties remain uncompromised to ensure a smooth transition from the lab-scale to industry.
This calls for more research into developing more efficient and cheaper fabrication processes, especially for inducing surface properties to improve TENG performance. The economic viability of the manufacturing of the different types of tTENG, such as the core–shell yarn or sandwiched fiber-based TENG, is another element that must be investigated, as to maximise the commercial success of tTENGs as biosensors.150,151,177,200,314
4.6. Aesthetic
The commercial success of a consumer product is dependent on the aesthetic value of that product, which calls for the creation of designable tTENGs that can provide both functionality and aesthetic appeal. The woven nature of tTENGs provides an advantage in this area compared to non-textile counterparts, such as the PVDF fiber-based sensor proposed by Shin et al., where the PVDF fibers were sewn in arbitrary patterns, which unlocks the potential for a plethora of unique designs through sewing patterns alone.167 Individual triboelectric fibers can also be dyed during manufacturing to improve the aesthetic appeal.314,315 A combination of both pattern and color variability can help improve the subtleness of integrating localised sensing devices into everyday clothing, such as pressure sensing at the elbow or armpit.153,177 Although current research heavily prioritises functionality of tTENGs over the aesthetic value of these devices, future works about tTENGs that provide good aesthetic variability while maintaining strong sensing performance and durability would give a massive boost to the marketability and pervasiveness of tTENGs in the healthcare and textile industries.
When considering the application of these tTENGs for future public use, comfortability and aesthetic are two very important qualities for consumers, however, this could potentially entail limitations to the efficiency per unit area for the device. Accordingly, future prospects could expand the concept of constantly wearable forms and instead focus on integrating the tTENGs into indirect wearable forms. For example, incorporating tTENGs into items that are indirectly contacting the body such as backpack straps,315 helmets or hats, keyboards,124 and even shoes. Additionally, to improve the aesthetic of the tTENGs, future research should focus on seamlessly incorporating them within clothing, allowing for stylistic variation in design, and preventing limitations to the efficiency of the device.
4.7. Wireless connectivity
Other than being able to continuously record health data and detect physiological phenomena, tTENGs must also be able to communicate with other devices to analyse and present the data to both user and physician in real time. With the rise of 5G wireless networks, this capability becomes especially pertinent in this IoT era, as it can help improve the quality of healthcare by providing more information more quickly to physicians,3 while also being able to independently update users on different health metrics without need of human intervention.316,317 Security can also be benefitted by IoT connectivity, as patient data can be stored securely online.318 While the tTENG configurations discussed, such as the smart sock developed by Zhang et al.,190 were able to provide good connectivity to display sensing data via self-powered bluetooth modules, 5G-enabled tTENG configurations for direct communication with healthcare providers can be further explored, as to overcome the limitation of connectivity range with bluetooth technology. Improved connectivity through 5G can also provide access to more powerful computers, where the measured data can be analysed at a high level. This can be further applied with machine learning and predictive algorithms to provide preventative healthcare guidance for individuals based on different physiological indicators of disease, providing crucial information to physicians to tackle life-threatening diseases in their early stages.
Author contributions
J. C. initialized and supervised the project. J. L., A. Y., G. C., and J. C. have coordinated the writing of this review. X. Z. helped with the figure design. J. L., A. Y., and G. C. contributed equally to this work. All the authors contributed to discussion and revised the manuscript at all stages.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Henry Samueli School of Engineering & Applied Science and the Department of Bioengineering at the University of California, Los Angeles, for the startup support. J. C. also acknowledges the 2020 Okawa Foundation Research Grant.
References
S. Kumar, P. Tiwari and M. Zymbler, J. Big Data, 2019, 6, 111 Search PubMed .
N. Zhang, F. Huang, S. Zhao, X. Lv, Y. Zhou, S. Xiang, S. Xu, Y. Li, G. Chen, C. Tao, Y. Nie, J. Chen and X. Fan, Matter, 2020, 1260–1269 Search PubMed .
X. Xiao, G. Chen, A. Libanori and J. Chen, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 279–290 Search PubMed .
R. Chen, Y. Zhang, T. Liu, B. Xu, Y. Lin, C. Nan and Y. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9654–9661 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, B. Son, S. Mukherjee, N. Schuppert, A. Bates, O. Kwon, M. Choi, H. Chung and S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 299–322 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Ren, Y. Shen, S. Zhao, Y. Lin and C. Nan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 349–357 Search PubMed .
O. Ruiz, M. Cochrane, M. Li, Y. Yan, K. Ma, J. Fu, Z. Wang, S. Tolbert, V. Shenoy and E. Detsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801781 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Gong, D. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 363–386 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Lai, Y. Gong, Y. Hu, J. Liu, C. Sun and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34309–34316 Search PubMed .
J. Fu, Z. Cano, M. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 2017(29), 1604685 Search PubMed .
S. Xu, X. Liang, X. Wu, S. Zhao, J. Chen, K. Wang and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5810 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 Search PubMed .
M. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 Search PubMed .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 Search PubMed .
C. Yan, W. Deng, L. Jin, T. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Chu, H. Su, J. Chen and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41070–41075 Search PubMed .
T. Tat, A. Libanori, C. Au, A. Yau and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 171, 112714 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Fang, X. Zhao, T. Tat and J. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 175–176 Search PubMed .
S. Shen, X. Xiao, X. Xiao and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2021 10.1039/D1CC02091A .
Y. Su, C. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Yang, G. Chen, X. Zhao, W. Li, Q. Gong, G. Xie, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Tai, Y. Jiang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010962 Search PubMed .
Q. Wu and J. Hu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 45037 Search PubMed .
Z. Cao, M. Tudor, R. Torah and S. Beeby, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2016, 63, 4024–4030 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, A. Aliev, J. Bykova, M. de Andrade, D. Kim, H. Sim, X. Lepró, A. Zakhidov, J. Lee, G. Spinks, S. Roth, S. Kim and R. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5038–5044 Search PubMed .
A. Bandodkar, I. Jeerapan, J. You, R. Nuñez-Flores and J. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 721–727 Search PubMed .
L. Halámková, J. Halámek, V. Bocharova, A. Szczupak, L. Alfonta and E. Katz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5040–5043 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, G. Salvatore, H. Araki, A. Chiarelli, Z. Xie, A. Banks, X. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. Lee, K. Jang, S. Y. Heo, K. Cho, H. Luo, B. Zimmerman, J. Kim, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600418 Search PubMed .
K. MacVittie, J. Halamek, L. Halamkova, M. Southcott, W. Jemison, R. Lobel and E. Katz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 81–86 Search PubMed .
R. Reid, S. Minteer and B. Gale, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 142–148 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Yin, J. Lv, A. Gross, M. Le, N. Gutierrez, Y. Li, I. Jeerapan, F. Giroud, A. Berezovska, R. O'Reilly, S. Xu, S. Cosnier and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905785 Search PubMed .
Y. Ogawa, K. Kato, T. Miyake, K. Nagamine, T. Ofuji, S. Yoshino and M. Nishizawa, Adv. Healthc. Mater., 2015, 4, 506–510 Search PubMed .
M. Bernechea, N. Miller, G. Xercavins, D. So, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 521–525 Search PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071–9104 Search PubMed .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 Search PubMed .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174–179 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, X. Zhou, P. Li, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, M. Su, W. Ren, F. Li, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703236 Search PubMed .
H. Jinno, K. Fukuda and X. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 780–785 Search PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. Głowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, L. Leonat, D. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. Scharber, M. White, N. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 Search PubMed .
B. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Lee, H. Shin, G. Han, J. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. Ahn, Y. Joo and K. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Wu, J. Ryu, Z. Liu, M. Meitl, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. Rogers, Small, 2012, 8, 1851–1856 Search PubMed .
R. Li, X. Xiang, X. Tong, J. Zou and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3831–3835 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293 Search PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 Search PubMed .
J. Nam, Y. Lee, W. Choi, C. Kim, H. Kim, J. Kim, D. Kim and S. Jo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601269 Search PubMed .
J. Peet, A. Heeger and G. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1700–1708 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. Welch, W. Leong, C. Takacs, G. Bazan and A. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 44–48 Search PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. Blancon, C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. Ajayan, M. Bedzyk and M. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 Search PubMed .
Z. Wu, P. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800031 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, B. Kan, F. Liu, G. Long, X. Wan, X. Chen, Y. Zuo, W. Ni, H. Zhang and M. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 35–41 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15027 Search PubMed .
S. Song and K. Yun, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 045008 Search PubMed .
D. Matsouka, S. Vassiliadis and D. Bayramol, Mater. Res.
Express, 2018, 5, 10 Search PubMed .
A. Almusallam, Z. Luo, A. Komolafe, K. Yang, A. Robinson, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 146–156 Search PubMed .
K. Park, J. Son, G. Hwang, C. Jeong, J. Ryu, M. Koo, I. Choi, S. Lee, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2514–2520 Search PubMed .
K. Ramadan, D. Sameoto and S. Evoy, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 033001 Search PubMed .
S. Won, M. Sheldon, N. Mostovych, J. Kwak, B. Chang, C. Ahn, A. Kingon, I. Kim and S. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 202901 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 Search PubMed .
B. Yang and K. Yun, Sens. Actuators, A, 2012, 188, 427–433 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, S. Zhou, J. Zu and D. Inman, Joule, 2018, 2, 642–697 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zhu, H. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Zhong, Z. Lin, Y. Su, P. Bai, X. Wen and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9461–9468 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Jin, W. Deng, J. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Pan, M. Zhu, W. Yang and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1650–1656 Search PubMed .
B. Dudem, D. Kim and J. Yu, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 1–13 Search PubMed .
T. Jiang, L. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Han, W. Tang, C. Zhang, L. Xu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12562–12572 Search PubMed .
T. Jiang, Y. Yao, L. Xu, L. Zhang, T. Xiao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 560–567 Search PubMed .
T. Hou, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 856–862 Search PubMed .
M. Ha, J. Park, Y. Lee and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3421–3427 Search PubMed .
A. Proto, M. Penhaker, S. Conforto and M. Schmid, Trends Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 610–624 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and A. C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 34–51 Search PubMed .
G. Zhu, B. Peng, J. Chen, Q. Jing and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 126–138 Search PubMed .
Y. Zi, S. Niu, J. Wang, Z. Wen, W. Tang and Z. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8376 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9533–9557 Search PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Chen and J. Yang, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 1–24 Search PubMed .
P. Bai, G. Zhu, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Q. Jing, W. Yang, J. Ma, G. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6361–6366 Search PubMed .
S. Park, H. Kim, M. Vosgueritchian, S. Cheon, H. Kim, J. H. Koo, T. R. Kim, S. Lee, G. Schwartz, H. Chang and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7324–7332 Search PubMed .
F. Fan, L. Lin, G. Zhu, W. Wu, R. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3109–3114 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Su, Q. Jing, Z. Li, F. Yi, X. Wen, Z. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1316–1326 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, W. Ko, Y. Oh, J. Lee, G. Baek, Y. Lee, J. Sohn, S. Cha, J. Kim, J. Park and J. Hong, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 410–418 Search PubMed .
G. Zhu, J. Chen, Y. Liu, P. Bai, Y. Zhou, Q. Jing, C. Pan and Z. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2282–2289 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Xie, Q. Jing, S. Niu and Z. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2226–2233 Search PubMed .
S. Niu, Y. Liu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3332–3340 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Cheng, Z.-H. Lin, J. Yang, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 323–332 Search PubMed .
B. Meng, W. Tang, Z.-H. Too, X. Zheng, M. Han, W. Liu and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3235–3240 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Chen, Q. Jing, Y. Zhou, X. Wen and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7342–7351 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2818–2824 Search PubMed .
H. Guo, J. Chen, M. Yeh, X. Fan, Z. Wen, Z. Li, C. Hu and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5577–5584 Search PubMed .
L. Lin, S. Wang, S. Niu, C. Liu, Y. Xie and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3031–3038 Search PubMed .
H. Guo, Q. Leng, X. He, M. Wang, J. Chen, C. Hu and Y. Xi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 3031–3038 Search PubMed .
Z. Lin, G. Cheng, X. Li, P. Yang, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 256–265 Search PubMed .
T. Jiang, X. Chen, C. Han, W. Tang and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2928–2938 Search PubMed .
M. Shorten, J. Biomech., 1993, 26, 41–51 Search PubMed .
R. Riemer and A. Shapiro, J. Neuroeng. Rehabilitation, 2011, 8, 22 Search PubMed .
H. Ouyang, Z. Liu, N. Li, B. Shi, Y. Zou, F. Xie, Y. Ma, Z. Li, H. Li, Q. Zheng, X. Qu, Y. Fan, Z. Wang, H. Zhang and Z. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1821 Search PubMed .
K. Meng, J. Chen, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Fan, Z. Zhou, Q. He, X. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806388 Search PubMed .
Y. Long, H. Wei, J. Li, G. Yao, B. Yu, D. Ni, A. Gibson, X. Lan, Y. Jiang, W. Cai and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12533–12540 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, H. Feng, Q. Zheng, H. Li, C. Zhao, H. Ouyang, S. Noreen, M. Yu, F. Su, R. Liu, L. Li, Z. Wang and A. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 390–399 Search PubMed .
W. Tang, J. Tian, Q. Zheng, L. Yan, J. Wang, Z. Li and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7867–7873 Search PubMed .
G. Yao, L. Kang, J. Li, Y. Long, H. Wei, C. Ferreira, J. Jeffery, Y. Lin, W. Cai and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5349 Search PubMed .
G. Yao, D. Jiang, J. Li, L. Kang, S. Chen, Y. Long, Y. Wang, P. Huang, Y. Lin, W. Cai and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12345–12356 Search PubMed .
P. Song, S. Kuang, N. Panwar, G. Yang, D. Tng, S. Tjin, W. Ng, M. Majid, G. Zhu, K. Yong and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605668 Search PubMed .
C. Zhao, H. Feng, L. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Zou, P. Tan, H. Ouyang, D. Jiang, M. Yu, C. Wang, H. Li, L. Xu, W. Wei and Z. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808640 Search PubMed .
Y. Hao, L. Peng, H. Lu, M. Hassan and A. Alamri, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1602 Search PubMed .
K. Dong, X. Peng and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902549 Search PubMed .
C. Dagdeviren, P. Joe, O. Tuzman, K. Park, K. Lee, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and J. Rogers, Extreme Mechanics Letters, 2016, 9, 269–281 Search PubMed .
F. Fan, Z. Tian and Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 Search PubMed .
T. Zhou, C. Zhang, C. Han, F. Fan, W. Tang and Z. Wang, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14695–14701 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Yu, G. Eyer, G. Suo, L. Kozik, M. Fairbanks, X. Wang and T. Andrew, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600147 Search PubMed .
D. Jiang, B. Shi, H. Ouyang, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang, Z. Chen and Z. Lou, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16, 100386 Search PubMed .
D. Jiang, B. Shi, H. Ouyang, Y. Fan, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6436–6448 Search PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Xie, S. Wang, W. Wu, S. Niu, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8266–8274 Search PubMed .
B. Meng, X. Cheng, X. Zhang, M. Han, W. Liu and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 103904 Search PubMed .
J. Luo, Z. Wang, L. Xu, A. C. Wang, K. Han, T. Jiang, Q. Lai, Y. Bai, W. Tang, F. R. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5147 Search PubMed .
W. Paosangthong, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Nano Energy, 55, 401–423 Search PubMed .
M. Xu, Y. Wang, S. L. Zhang, W. Ding, J. Cheng, X. He, P. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Extrem. Mech. Lett., 2017, 15, 122–129 Search PubMed .
F. Fan, Z. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 Search PubMed .
F. Xing, Y. Jie, X. Cao, T. Li and N. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 138–142 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Npj Flex Electron., 2017, 1, 10 Search PubMed .
S. L. Zhang, Y. Lai, X. He, R. Liu, Y. Zi and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606695 Search PubMed .
C. Qian, L. Li, M. Gao, H. Yang, Z. Cai, B. Chen, Z. Xiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103885 Search PubMed .
C. Yao, a. Hernandez, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 103–108 Search PubMed .
H.-J. Kim, J.-H. Kim, K.-W. Jun, J.-H. Kim, W.-C. Seung, O. H. Kwon, J.-Y. Park, S.-H. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502329 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Wen, T. C. Hou and Z.
L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1563–1568 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Xie, Q. Jing, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2226–2233 Search PubMed .
M. Sala de Medeiros, D. Chanci, C. Moreno, D. Goswami and R. V. Martinez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904350 Search PubMed .
A. Waterhouse, D. C. Leslie, K. Lightbown, D. Antonoff, S. Lightbown, N. Dimitrakakis, J. B. Hicks-Berthet, C. N. Leslie, M. Super, D. E. Ingber and M. B. Ackerman, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 420–424 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Q. Liang, Z. Zhang, Z. Kang, Q. Liao, Y. Ding, M. Ma, F. Gao, X. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703801 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. C. Gupta, K. L. Dudley and R. W. Lawrence, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2131–2134 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, K. Li, C. Hou, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4676–4683 Search PubMed .
N. Cui, J. Liu, L. Gu, S. Bai, X. Chen and Y. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18225–18230 Search PubMed .
S. Niu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Liu, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3576–3583 Search PubMed .
S. Niu, Y. Liu, S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6184–6193 Search PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Zhong, J. Zhong, X. Cheng, B. Wang, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14912–14916 Search PubMed .
G. Song, Y. Kim, S. Yu, M. O. Kim, S. H. Park, S. M. Cho, D. B. Velusamy, S. H. Cho, K. L. Kim, J. Kim, E. Kim and C. Park, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4749–4755 Search PubMed .
V. Kaushik, J. Lee, J. Hong, S. Lee, S. Lee, J. Seo, C. Mahata and T. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2015, 5, 1493–1531 Search PubMed .
X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 98–105 Search PubMed .
R. B. Reed, T. Zaikova, A. Barber, M. Simonich, R. Lankone, M. Marco, K. Hristovski, P. Herckes, L. Passantino, D. H. Fairbrother, R. Tanguay, J. F. Ranville, J. E. Hutchison and P. K. Westerhoff, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 4018–4026 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, H. Kwon, J. Seo, S. Shin, J. H. Koo, C. Pang, S. Son, J. H. Kim, Y. H. Jang, D. E. Kim and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2433–2439 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, X. Lu, K. Hoe Chan, R. Wang, Z. Cao, J. Sun and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 511–518 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Hu, Y. Shen, X. Zhou and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3090–3094 Search PubMed .
F. Xu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5117–5122 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, T. W. Kim, F. Li and T. Guo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6449–6457 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, G. Song, C. Park and K. S. Yun, Sensors, 2017, 17, 2582 Search PubMed .
A. Yu, X. Pu, R. Wen, M. Liu, T. Zhou, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12764–12771 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang, H. Zou, R. Liu, C. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16138 Search PubMed .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X. M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 Search PubMed .
X. Pu, L. Li, H. Song, C. Du, Z. Zhao, C. Jiang, G. Cao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2472–2478 Search PubMed .
M. Shi, H. Wu, J. Zhang, M. Han, B. Meng and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 479–487 Search PubMed .
X. He, Y. Zi, H. Guo, H. Zheng, Y. Xi, C. Wu, J. Wang, W. Zhang, C. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604378 Search PubMed .
H. Chu, H. Jang, Y. Lee, Y. Chae and J. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 298–305 Search PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, W. S. Ng, J. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Hu and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 439–446 Search PubMed .
H. Sim, C. Choi, S. Kim, K. Kim, C. Lee, Y. Kim, X. Lepró, R. Baughman and S. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35153 Search PubMed .
A. Yu, X. Pu, R. Wen, M. Liu, T. Zhou, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhai, W. Hu and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12764–12771 Search PubMed .
M. Lou, I. Abdalla, M. Zhu, X. Wei, J. Yu, Z. Li and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19965–19973 Search PubMed .
J. Xiong, P. Cui, X. Chen, J. Wang, K. Parida, M.-F. Lin and P. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4280 Search PubMed .
K. Nam Kim, J. Chun, J. Woong Kim, K. Young Lee, J. Park, S. Kim, Z. Wang and J. Baik, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6394–6400 Search PubMed .
Q. Jing, G. Zhu, P. Bai, Y. Xie, J. Chen, R. Han and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3836–3842 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Wu, H. Guo, W. Yu, Z. Du and Z. Wang, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 84–93 Search PubMed .
F. Yuan, S. Liu, J. Zhou, X. Fan, S. Wang and X. Gong, Smart Mater. Struct., 2020, 29, 125007 Search PubMed .
R. Lee and S. Mittal, Heart Rhythm, 2018, 15, 287–295 Search PubMed .
E. Fung, M. Järvelin, R. N. Doshi, J. S. Shinbane, S. K. Carlson, L. P. Grazette, P. M. Chang, R. S. Sangha, H. V. Huikuri and N. S. Peters, Front. Physiol., 2015, 6, 149 Search PubMed .
G. W. Albers, R. A. Bernstein, J. Brachmann, J. Camm, J. Donald Easton, P. Fromm, S. Goto, C. B. Granger, S. H. Hohnloser, E. Hylek, A. K. Jaffer, D. W. Krieger, R. Passman, J. M. Pines, S. D. Reed, P. M. Rothwell and P. R. Kowey, J. Am. Heart Assoc., 2016, 5, e002944 Search PubMed .
M. Etiwy, Z. Akhrass, L. Gillinov, A. Alashi, R. Wang, G. Blackburn, S. M. Gillinov, D. Phelan, A. M. Gillinov, P. L. Houghtaling, H. Javadikasgari and M. Y. Desai, Cardiovasc. Diagn. Ther., 2019, 9, 262–271 Search PubMed .
D. R. Seshadri, B. Bittel, D. Browsky, P. Houghtaling, C. K. Drummond, M. Desai and A. M. Gillinov, IEEE J. Transl. Eng. Health Med., 2019, 8, 2700204 Search PubMed .
M. A. Al-Alusi, E. Ding, D. D. McManus and S. A. Lubitz, Curr. Cardiol. Rep., 2019, 21, 158 Search PubMed .
B. W. Nelson and N. B. Allen, JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 2019, 7, e10828 Search PubMed .
M. Falter, W. Budts, K. Goetschalckx, V. Cornelissen and R. Buys, JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, 2019, 7, e11889 Search PubMed .
M. Lou, I. Abdalla, M. Zhu, J. Yu, Z. Li and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1597–1605 Search PubMed .
K. Kohara, Y. Tabara, A. Oshiumi, Y. Miyawaki, T. Kobayashi and T. Miki, Am. J. Hypertens., 2005, 18, 11S–14S Search PubMed .
Y. Shin, J. Lee, Y. Park, S. Hwang, H. Chae and H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22879–22888 Search PubMed .
K. Meng, S. Zhao, Y. Zhou, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, Q. He, X. Wang, Z. Zhou, W. Fan, X. Tan and J. Yang, Matter, 2020, 2, 896–907 Search PubMed .
K. Meng, J. Chen, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Fan, Z. Zhou, Q. He, X. Wang, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806388 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Hu, W. Xuan, S. Dong and J. Luo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 354 Search PubMed .
W. Fan, Q. He, K. Meng, X. Tan, Z. Zhou, G. Zhang, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay2840 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhao, C. Yan, Z. Liu, X. Fu, L. Peng, Y. Hu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10267–10274 Search PubMed .
H. Qiu, W. Song, X. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Fan, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y. Long, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 536–542 Search PubMed .
K. van Loon, L. M. Peelen, E. C. van de Vlasakker, C. J. Kalkman, L. van Wolfswinkel and B. van Zaane, Can. J. Anaesth., 2018, 65, 1324–1332 Search PubMed .
W. Paosangthong, R. Torah and S. Beeby, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 401–423 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu and Z. Zheng, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 16–24 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Wang, T. He, S. Dong and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104462 Search PubMed .
J. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Xing and J. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 247 Search PubMed .
Y. Lai, Y. Hsiao, H. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801883 Search PubMed .

          F. Wen, T. He, Q. Shi, T. Zhang and C. Lee, presented in part at 2020 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS),  Jan, 2020, pp. 582–585 Search PubMed .
C. Chiu, S. Chen, Y. Pao YP, M. Huang, S. Chan and Z. Lin, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2019, 20, 964–971 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, K. Chen, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhou, K. Meng, C. Sun, Q. He, W. Fan, E. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Tan, W. Deng, J. Yang and J. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 571–578 Search PubMed .
S. R. Simon, J. Biomech., 2004, 37, 1869–1880 Search PubMed .
D. T. H. Lai, R. K. Begg and M. Palaniswami, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., 2009, 13, 687–702 Search PubMed .
M. Akhtaruzzaman, A. A. Shafie and M. R. Khan, J. Mech. Med. Bio., 2016, 16, 1630003 Search PubMed .
S. L. Colyer, M. Evans, D. P. Cosker and A. I. T. Salo, Sports Med. – Open, 2018, 4, 24 Search PubMed .
A. Michelini, A. Eshraghi and J. Andrysek, Prosthetics and Orthotics International, 2020, 44, 245–262 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, W. Wang and D. Yu, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 2000164 Search PubMed .
K. Dong, X. Peng, J. An, A. C. Wang, J. Luo, B. Sun, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2868 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, T. He, M. Zhu, Z. Sun, Q. Shi, J. Zhu, B. Dong, M. R. Yuce and C. Lee, npj Flexible Electron., 2020, 4, 29 Search PubMed .
M. Zhu, Q. Shi, T. He, Y. Zhiran, Y. Ma, B. Yang and C. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1940–1952 Search PubMed .
Y. Jao, P. Yang, C. Chiu, Yu. Lin, S. Chen, D. Choi and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 513–520 Search PubMed .
T. He, Q. Shi, H. Wang, F. Wen, J. Ouyang and C. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 57, 338–352 Search PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 Search PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. Xiao, J. Song, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2108–2124 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Xu, Y. Duan and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9881–9919 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 Search PubMed .
J. J. Park, W. J. Hyun, S. C. Mun, Y. T. Park and O. O. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6317–6324 Search PubMed .
S. Jung, J. Lee, T. Hyeon, M. Lee and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6329–6334 Search PubMed .
C. Choi, J. M. Lee, S. H. Kim, S. J. Kim, J. Di and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7677–7684 Search PubMed .
S. Ryu, P. Lee, J. B. Chou, R. Z. Xu, R. Zhao, A. J. Hart and S. G. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5929–5936 Search PubMed .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296–301 Search PubMed .
B. U. Hwang, J. H. Lee, T. Q. Trung, E. Roh, D. I. Kim, S. W. Kim and N. E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8801–8810 Search PubMed .
C. Larson, B. Peele, S. Li, S. Robinson, M. Totaro, L. Beccai, B. Mazzolai and R. Shepherd, Science, 2016, 351, 1071–1074 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, M. Lee, H. J. Shim, R. Ghaffari, H. R. Cho, D. Son, Y. H. Jung, M. Soh, C. Choi, S. Jung, K. Chu, D. Joon, S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. H. Choi, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5747 Search PubMed .
Y. Cheng, R. Wang, H. Zhai and J. Sun, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3834–3842 Search PubMed .
S. Jung, J. H. Kim, J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Lee, I. Park, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4825–4830 Search PubMed .
S. Lim, D. Son, J. Kim, Y. B. Lee, J. K. Song, S. Choi, D. J. Lee, J. H. Kim, M. Lee, T. Hyeon and D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 375–383 Search PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Wei, J. Liu, J. Chen and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704112 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Padgett, Z. Cai, G. Conta, Y. Wu, Q. He, S. Zhang, C. Sun, J. Liu, E. Fan, K. Meng, Z. Lin, C. Uy, J. Yang and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 155, 112064 Search PubMed .
K. Dong, J. Deng, Y. Zi, Y. Wang, C. Xu, H. Zou, W. Ding, Y. Dai, B. Gu, B. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702648 Search PubMed .
T. Blackwell, S. Redline, S. Ancoli-Israel, J. L. Schneider, S. Surovec, N. L. Johnson, J. A. Cauley and K. L. Stone, Sleep, 2008, 31, 283–291 Search PubMed .
A. J. Campbell and A. M. Neill, J. Sleep Res., 2011, 20, 207–213 Search PubMed .
P. A. Deutsch, M. S. Simmons and J. M. Wallace, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2006, 2, 145–153 Search PubMed .
J. B. Pietzsch, A. Garner, L. E. Cipriano and J. H. Linehan, Sleep, 2011, 34, 695–709 Search PubMed .
V. K. Kapur and S. D. Sullivan, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2006, 2, 154–155 Search PubMed .
B. Rotenberg, C. George, K. Sullivan and E. Wong, Can. Respir. J., 2010, 17, 170–174 Search PubMed .
R. B. Berry, R. Budhiraja, D. J. Gottlieb, D. Gozal, C. Iber, V. K. Kapur, C. L. Marcus, R. Mehra, S. Parthasarathy, S. F. Quan, S. Redline, K. P. Strohl, S. L. D. Ward and M. M. Tangredi, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2012, 8, 597–619 Search PubMed .
M. È. Bélanger, A. Bernier, J. Paquet, V. Simard and J. Carrier, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2013, 9, 701–706 Search PubMed .
L. de Souza, A. A. Benedito-Silva, M. L. Pires, D. Poyares, S. Tufik and H. M. Calil, Sleep, 2003, 26, 81–85 Search PubMed .
G. Jean-Louis, D. F. Kripke, R. J. Cole, J. D. Assmus and R. D. Langer, Physiol. Behav., 2001, 72, 21–28 Search PubMed .
G. Jean-Louis, D. F. Kripke, W. J. Mason, J. A. Elliott and S. D. Youngstedt, J. Neurosci. Methods, 2001, 105, 185–191 Search PubMed .
L. J. Meltzer, C. M. Walsh, J. Traylor and A. M. Westin, Sleep, 2012, 35, 159–166 Search PubMed .
L. J. Meltzer, P. Wong, S. N. Biggs, J. Traylor, J. Y. Kim, R. Bhattacharjee, I. Narang and C. L. Marcus, Sleep, 2016, 39, 1219–1224 Search PubMed .
J. Paquet, A. Kawinska and J. Carrier, Sleep, 2007, 30, 1362–1369 Search PubMed .
C. P. Pollak, W. W. Tryon, H. Nagaraja and R. Dzwonczyk, Sleep, 2001, 24, 957–965 Search PubMed .
M. Quante, E. R. Kaplan, M. Cailler, M. Rueschman, R. Wang, J. Weng, E. M. Taveras and S. Redline, Nat. Sci. Sleep, 2018, 10, 13–20 Search PubMed .
J. L. Martin and A. D. Hakim, Chest, 2011, 139, 1514–1527 Search PubMed .
C. A. Kushida, A. Chang, C. Gadkary, C. Guilleminault, O. Carrillo and W. C. Dement, Sleep Med., 2001, 2, 389–396 Search PubMed .
M. Marino, Y. Li, M. N. Rueschman, J. W. Winkelman, J. M. Ellenbogen, J. M. Solet, H. Dulin, L. F. Berkman and O. M. Buxton, Sleep, 2013, 36, 1747–1755 Search PubMed .
T. M. Ward, M. Lentz, G. M. Kieckhefer and C. A. Landis, J. Sleep Res., 2012, 21, 113–121 Search PubMed .
M. de Zambotti, A. Goldstone, S. Claudatos, I. M. Colrain and F. C. Baker, Chronobiol. Int., 2018, 35, 465–476 Search PubMed .
M. de Zambotti, L. Rosas, I. M. Colrain and F. C. Baker, Behav. Sleep Med., 2019, 17, 124–136 Search PubMed .
J. D. Cook, S. C. Eftekari, E. Dallmann, M. Sippy and D. T. Plante, J. Sleep Res., 2019, 28, e12789 Search PubMed .
J. D. Cook, M. L. Prairie and D. T. Plante, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2018, 14, 841–848 Search PubMed .
S. G. Kang, J. M. Kang, S. J. Cho, K. P. Ko, Y. J. Lee, H. J. Lee, L. Kim and J. W. Winkelman, J. Clin. Sleep Med., 2017, 13, 633–640 Search PubMed .
A. I. Luik, P. Farias Machado and C. A. Espie, npj Digital Med., 2018, 1, 3 Search PubMed .
I. C. Dunican, D. T. Martin, S. L. Halson, R. J. Reale, B. T. Dawson, J. A. Caldwell, M. J. Jones and P. R. Eastwood, J. Strength Cond. Res., 2017, 31, 2832–2839 Search PubMed .
Z. Sonner, E. Wilder, J. Heikenfeld, G. Kasting, F. Beyette, D. Swaile, F. Sherman, J. Joyce, J. Hagen, N. Kelley-Loughnane and R. Naik, Biomicrofluidics, 2015, 9, 031301 Search PubMed .
W. Jia, A. J. Bandodkar, G. Valdés-Ramírez, J. R. Windmiller, Z. Yang, J. Ramírez, G. Chan and J. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 6553–6560 Search PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, D. Molinnus, O. Mirza, T. Guinovart, J. R. Windmiller, G. Valdés-Ramírez, F. J. Andrade, M. J. Schöning and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 54, 603–609 Search PubMed .
M. Chung, G. Fortunato and N. Radacsi, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2019, 16, 20190217 Search PubMed .
D. R. Seshadri, R. T. Li, J. E. Voos, J. R. Rowbottom, C. M. Alfes, C. A. Zorman and C. K. Drummond, npj Digital Med., 2019, 2, 72 Search PubMed .
X. Guan, B. Xu, M. Wu, T. Jing, Y. Yang and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105549 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Miao, H. Guo, H. Chen, Y. Song, Z. Su and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 203902 Search PubMed .
B. Dudem, Y. H. Ko, J. W. Leem, S. H. Lee and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20520–20529 Search PubMed .
W. Seung, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, K. Shin, J. Lee, T. Y. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lin, J. H. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3501–3509 Search PubMed .
C. K. Jeong, K. M. Baek, S. Niu, T. W. Nam, Y. H. Hur, D. Y. Park, G. Hwang, M. Byun, Z. Wang, Y. S. Jung and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7031–7038 Search PubMed .
S. Cheon, H. Kang, H. Kim, Y. Son, J. Y. Lee, H. Shin, S. Kim and J. H. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1703778 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Gong, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and J. Brugger, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 152–160 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Zhu, J. Shen, Q. Qiu, J. Yu and B. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908411 Search PubMed .
L. Ma, M. Zhou, R. Wu, A. Patil, H. Gong, S. Zhu, T. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Shen, K. Dong, L. Yang, J. Wang, W. Guo and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4716–4726 Search PubMed .
K. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, Z. Yuan, G. Zheng, K. Dai, L. Mi, C. Pan, C. Liu and C. Shen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104546 Search PubMed .
G. Zhu, C. Pan, W. Guo, C. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. Yu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4960–4965 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Su, L. Cheng, N. Cui, L. Gu, Y. Qin, R. Yang and F. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26824–26829 Search PubMed .
C. K. Jeong, K. M. Baek, S. Niu, T. W. Nam, Y. H. Hur, D. Y. Park, G. Hwang, M. Byun, Z. L. Wang, Y. S. Jung and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7031–7038 Search PubMed .
D. Kim, S. Jeon, J. Y. Kim, M. Seol, S. O. Kim and Y. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 331–338 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Fu, G. Liu, S. Xu, X. Li, C. Zhang and L. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 638–644 Search PubMed .
D. Kim, I. Tcho, I. K. Jin, S. Park, S. Jeon, W. Kim, H. Cho, H. Lee, S. C. Jeoung and Y. Choi, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 379–386 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, Q. Zheng, H. Ouyang, H. Li, L. Yan, B. Shi and Z. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 172–178 Search PubMed .
M. B. Neagoe, Y. E. Prawatya, T. Zeghoul and L. Dascalescu, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 174, 012003 Search PubMed .
X. Wei, D. Yu, Z. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Song and B. Ding, Vacuum, 2014, 107, 83–89 Search PubMed .
D. Wook Kim, J. H. Lee, J. K. Kim and U. Jeong, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 6 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Han, R. Wang, B. Meng, F. Zhu, X. Sun, W. Hu, W. Wang, Z. Li and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 123–131 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. K. Debeli and J. S. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13082–13091 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fan, J. Luo, W. Tang, C. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Tian and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13219–13225 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, B. K. Yun, J. H. Jung and J. Y. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 133901 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, K. Panda, J. Choi and J. Y. Park, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6120–6128 Search PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Fan, H. Chen, J. Nie, Y. Liang, X. Tao, J. Zhang, X. Chen, E. Fu and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 896–907 Search PubMed .
S. Shin, Y. H. Kwon, Y. Kim, J. Jung, M. H. Lee and J. Nah, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4621–4627 Search PubMed .
G. Song, Y. Kim, S. Yu, M. Kim, S. Park, S. M. Cho, D. B. Velusamy, S. H. Cho, K. L. Kim, J. Kim, E. Kim and C. Park, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4749–4755 Search PubMed .
S. Shin, Y. E. Bae, H. K. Moon, J. Kim, S. Choi, Y. Kim, H. J. Yoon, M. H. Lee and J. Nah, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6131–6138 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Zi, Y. S. Zhou, S. Li, F. Fan, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3728–3734 Search PubMed .
K. Byun, Y. Cho, M. Seol, S. Kim, S.-W. Kim, H. Shin, S. Park and S. Hwang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18519–18525 Search PubMed .
B. K. Yun, J. W. Kim, H. S. Kim, K. W. Jung, Y. Yi, M. Jeong, J. Ko and J. H. Jung, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 523–529 Search PubMed .
C. Yao, X. Yin, Y. Yu, Z. Cai and X. Wang, Adv. Func. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700794 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, L. Sun, Z. Liu, X. Xia and T. H. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805722 Search PubMed .
Y. Feng, Y. Zheng, S. Ma, D. Wang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 48–57 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Han, R. Wang, B. Meng, F. Zhu, X. Sun, W. Hu, W. Wang, Z. Li and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 123–131 Search PubMed .
S. Jin, Y. Wang, M. Motlag, S. Gao, J. Xu, Q. Nian, W. Wu and G. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705840 Search PubMed .
H. Chu, H. Jang, Y. Lee, Y. Chae and J. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 298–305 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Guo, X. Fan, Z. Wen, M. Yeh, C. Yu, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2983–2991 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, L. Miao, Z. Su, H. Chen, Y. Song, X. Chen and H. Zhang, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2017, 3, 16074 Search PubMed .
Z. Qin, Y. Yin, W. Zhang, C. Li and K. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12452–12459 Search PubMed .
S. Paria, S. K. Si, S. K. Karan, A. K. Das, A. Maitra, R. Bera, L. Halder, A. Bera, A. De and B. B. Khatua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3979–3991 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Jiang, F. Xu and S. Gong, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 69–77 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, B. Meng, X. Chen, M. Han, H. Chou, Z. Su, M. Shi and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 229–236 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Li, L. Su, S. H. Kuang, C. F. Pan, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5691–5697 Search PubMed .
C. Park, M. Koo, G. Song, S. M. Cho, H. S. Kang, T. H. Park, E. H. Kim and C. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 755–766 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, Z. Song, L. Miao, H. Guo, Z. Su, Y. Song and H. Zhang, J. Microelectromech., 2018, 27, 106–112 Search PubMed .
W. Kim, T. Okada, H. Park, J. Kim, S. Kim, S.-W. Kim, S. Samukawa and D. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25066–25077 Search PubMed .
S. Park, M. Seol, D. Kim, S. Jeon and Y. Choi, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 258–264 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Kim, H. S. Kim and J. H. Jung, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2016, 69, 1720–1723 Search PubMed .
N. Lim, D. Hong, C. Kim, J. Jeong, H. W. Lee and K. Kwon, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 637, 27–31 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, C. Feng, B. Deng, B. Yin and M. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 620–627 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Kim, K. Jun, J.-H. Kim, W. Seung, O. Kwon, J. Park, S. Kim and I. K. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502329 Search PubMed .
S. A. Graham, B. Dudem, A. R. Mule, H. Patnam and J. S. Yu, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 505–516 Search PubMed .
S. S. Kwak, H. Kim, W. Seung, J. Kim, R. Hinchet and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10733–10742 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, R. Richardson, K. Potter, A. Koutsomitopoulou, J. van Duijneveldt, S. Vincent, N. Wanasekara, S. Eichhorn and S. Rahatekar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 4545–4553 Search PubMed .
S. Pyo, M. Kim, D. Kwon, W. Kim, J. Yang, H. S. Cho, J. H. Lee and J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2020, 29, 055026 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Ko, G. Nagaraju and J. S. Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 6437–6442 Search PubMed .
T. Huang, J. Zhang, B. Yu, H. Yu, H. Long, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and M. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 375–383 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Yu, G. Eyer, G. Suo, L. A. Kozik, M. Fairbanks, X. Wang and T. L. Andrew, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600147 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Guo, X. Pu, X. Wang, Y. Xi and C. Hu, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 536–543 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, H. Guo, L. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Pu, W. Yu, F. Wang, Z. Du and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4585–4594 Search PubMed .
J. Gong, B. Xu, X. Guan, Y. Chen, S. Li and J. Feng, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 365–374 Search PubMed .
W. Gong, C. Hou, J. Zhou, Y. Guo, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 868 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. Askari and J. Chen, Joule, 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2021.03.013 .
S. Zhang, M. Bick, X. Xiao, G. Chen, A. Nashalian and J. Chen, Matter, 2020, 4, 845–887 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Li, L. Che, S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 359–366 Search PubMed .
K. S. Sadanandan, A. Bacon, D. Shin, S. F. R. Alkhalifa, S. Russo, M. F. Craciun and A. I. S. Neves, J. Phys: Mater., 2020, 4, 014004 Search PubMed .
E. Jubete, O. A. Loaiza, E. Ochoteco, J. A. Pomposo, H. Grande and J. Rodriguez, J. Sensors, 2009, 2009, 842575 Search PubMed .
R. Cao and Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5190–5196 Search PubMed .
S. D. Gunawardhana, N. D. Wanasekara and I. G. Dharmasena, iScience, 2020, 23, 101360 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Chen, G. Zhu, J. Yang, P. Bai, Y. Su, Q. Jing, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11317–11324 Search PubMed .
S. M. Riazul Islam, D. Kwak, H. Kabir, M. Hossain and K. S. Kwak, IEEE Access, 2015, 3, 678–708 Search PubMed .
N. Lopez-Barbosa, J. D. Gamarra and J. F. Osma, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 2827–2837 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, C. Au and J. Chen, Trends Biotechnol., 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.12.011 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Jun Chen	Dr Jun Chen is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of California, Los Angeles. His research focuses on smart textiles, wearables, and body area networks. With an h-index of 75, his research is recognized by the 2020 Altmetric Top 100, Top 10 Science Stories of 2020 by Ontario Science Centre, IAAM Scientist Medal, 30 Rising Leaders in Life Science by Informa, ACS Nano Rising Stars Lectureship Award, Nanoscale Emerging Investigator Award, Okawa Foundation Research Award, Highly Cited Researchers 2020/2019 in Web of Science. He is an associate editor of Biosensors and Bioelectronics.

 	Fig. 1  Textile-based triboelectric nanogenerator (tTENG) for versatile biosensing. tTENGs for continuous self-powered biomonitoring featuring high breathability, wearing comfort, and scalability are capable of being integrated into many different healthcare fields and ultimately provide the user with real-time information regarding their current biological processes. Constant cardiovascular and respiratory monitoring, upper body and gait motion sensing, sleeping monitoring, and biochemical fluctuation analysis can be performed via tTENGs, realizing personalized healthcare in the era of internet of things.	 

 	Fig. 2  Textile TENGs consisted of typical functional materials and designs. (a) Typical functional materials used in textile TENGs, such as electron acceptor materials PTFE, PDMS, Kapton, and silicone; and electron donor materials Al, Cu, nylon, and silk. (b) SEM of the untreated cotton after seven days of growth in media with S. aureus, scale bars 10 μm. (c) SEM of omniphobic RF-textile after seven days of growth in media with S. aureus, scale bars 10 μm. (d) Output sensing signals generated by an RF-TENG embroidered on an elbow patch during elbow bending. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (e) Schematic and (f) working mechanisms of a textile TENG consisted of two woven fabrics as triboelectric layers. (g) Real-time detection of the pulse wave of the carotid artery by using the textile TENG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Textile TENGs for self-powered cardiovascular biomonitoring. (a) Structural design of the textile pressure sensor. Scale bar, 2 μm (top) and 1 μm (bottom). (b) Pulse waveform acquired by the textile pressure sensor, which could distinguish two different peaks in waveforms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) A textile TENG with arbitrary stitch patterns for pulse wave monitoring. (d) Variation in the pulse waveform acquired by the textile TENG before and after physical exercise. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic of a textile TENG with a woven structure. (f) The woven textile TENG directly worn at the fingertip and ear for real-time human pulse wave measurement. Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Textile TENGs for self-powered respiratory monitoring. (a) Schematic of a machine-knitted textile TENG array. The right inset is the enlarged demonstration of the knitted structure. (b) The textile TENG array placed on the chest for respiration sensing. (c) Sensing signals collected by the textile TENG array consist of the heartbeat and the respiratory waveforms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic of the building yarns of a woven textile TENG. (e) Textile TENG-based chest strap for respiratory monitoring. (f) Raw respiratory signals from the textile TENG-based chest strap. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Textile TENGs for self-powered upper body motion sensing. (a) Structure of a 3D double-faced interlock textile TENG as a tactile sensor. (b) The output voltage of the 3D textile TENG as a bending sensor when arm bend 45°, 90° and 128°. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Textile TENGs for elbow bending angle monitoring. (d) The sensing results (dτ/dt curves and voltage peak curves) of the textile TENG with a tapping frequency of 3 Hz. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Output voltage and (f) current during finger touching and releasing on textile pressure sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (g) Integrating the yarn-based stretchable sensor arrays with a glove. (h) Apply the sensing glove to monitor the finger movement and generate output voltage signals corresponding to five bending states. (i) Applying the yarn-based stretchable sensor arrays to monitor the mouth opening. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications.	 

 	Fig. 6  Textile TENGs for self-powered gait motion sensing. (a) Structural diagram of the ten-axial winding yarn for 3D textile TENG. (b) 3D textile TENG for walking sensing, indicating a 12s interval period of each step. (c) 3D textile TENG for running sensing, indicating a 6s interval period of each step. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications. (d) Intelligent socks embedded with a textile TENG. (e) Participant worn an intelligent sock can perform different motions (leap, run, slide, jump, and walk) with different output signals (f). Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publications.	 

 	Fig. 7  Textile TENGs for self-powered sleep monitoring. (a) Structure design of the textile TENG for self-powered sleep monitoring. (b) Time-sharing histogram of active sensing nodes during the sleeping period and the correspondingly generated sleep quality report. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) A textile TENG with a two-layer configuration to diagnose obstructive sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). (d) Pulse waveforms from OSAHS participants exhibit two distinct mutations occurring at about 4 s and 28 s marked by the blue dotted line, indicating the obstructive respiratory events. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) A textile TENG with 61 sensing units for sleep monitoring. Scale bar is 10 cm. (f) Respiratory signals for an OSAHS participant, which clearly indicates a distinct apnea lasting for 11 s. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Textile TENGs for self-powered biochemical monitoring. (a) PEDOT:PSS coated triboelectric sock integrated with PZT force sensors. (b) Schematic of embedded PZT force sensors, labelled as “PA”, “PB”, “PC”, and “PD”. Triboelectric socks for NaCl sensing. The output performance under increasing amount of 0.9 wt% NaCl solution delivered through spray (0.1 g per spray), generated from walking (c) and jumping (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Photograph of the self-powered textile sweat sensor. Scale bar, 1 cm. (f) Output voltages of the self-powered textile sweat sensor under various concentrations of NaCl solution absorption. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

CNT, PDMS	Move status	—	—	170000	200	0.6	
145

Nylon, PTFE	Foot motion	—	—	—	3.5	0.28	
148

Nylon, PTFE, stainless steel	Motion/pulse	1.33 V kPa−1	1.95–4.61 kPa	4200 (wash)	2.17	0.126	
151

Ag-coated polyester, nylon	Sleep/pulse	3.88 V kPa−1	0.1–9.8 kPa	80000	7.5	—	
168

Nylon, stainless steel–terylene	Respiratory/pulse	7.84 V kPa−1	0.1–4 kPa	100000	7.5	0.009	
171

PEDOT:PSS PZT	Foot motion/sweat	0.0057 V kPa−1	480 kPa	—	196	0.0045	
191

PEDOT:PSS PTFE	Foot motion	—	10–160% strain	7200	49.7	0.797	
193

Ag, PET	Sleep	0.77 V Pa−1	—	10000	3.5	0.015	
209


 	Fig. 9  Conclusion and future perspectives on textile TENGs for self-powered biomonitoring. Textile TENGs featuring high breathability, comfort, and stretchability have been widely used in self-powered biomonitoring, including cardiovascular monitoring, respiratory monitoring, biochemical monitoring, upper body monitoring, and gait motion monitoring. In the future, more research efforts are highly desired in optimizing the stability, materials, surface modifications, devices structural design, aesthetic, and mass production of textile TENG. With the assistance of the sensitive, stable, convenient, and comfortable textile TENGs, individual physiological status can be continuously monitored. These acquired signals can be wirelessly transmitted to nearby terminals, e.g., smart phones, for further clinical-level analysis. Artificial intelligence and machine learning based predictive algorithms in the cloud would extract features associated with the potential diseases from these signals, providing streams of data for physicians to diagnose the disease even before patient being conscious of it.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
