Quantum dots derived from two-dimensional materials and their applications for catalysis and energy  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00811E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00811E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2239-2262Quantum dots derived from two-dimensional materials and their applications for catalysis and energy

        
          
            Xuewan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gengzhi 
            Sun
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Peng 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, 637457, Singapore. E-mail: ChenPeng@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      27th October 2015
    First published on 5th February 2016AbstractQuantum dots (QDs) derived from the atomically-thin two-dimensional (2D) sheets (graphene, transition metal dichalcogenide, graphitic carbon nitride, hexagonal boron nitride, and phosphorene) are emerging extraordinary zero-dimensional materials. Covering a broad spectrum of interesting optical, catalytic, electronic, chemical and electrochemical properties, these 2D-QDs promise a wide range of novel applications including imaging, sensing, cancer therapy, optoelectronics, display, catalysis, and energy. In this article, we discuss the synthesis methods and the properties of these 2D-QDs and emphasize their applications in electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, supercapacitors, batteries, and photovoltaics.
Xuewan Wang
Xuewan Wang received his BS from Yantai University (China) in 2008 and MS from Zhejiang University (China) in 2011. He is currently a 4th year PhD student in Prof. Peng Chen’s group in Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). His main research focus is on the synthesis of graphene materials and their applications for energy storage and conversion, and sensing.
Peng Chen
Dr Peng Chen is currently a full Professor in School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). He completed his PhD in the University of Missouri (Columbia) in 2002. This was followed by a period of postdoctoral research at Harvard University. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, biosensors, and bionanotechnology, which has resulted in ∼150 publications.
1 Introduction
In the past decade, graphene has created tremendous impacts in many fields.1–3 Its success has triggered or reignited great interests on other two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, including hexagonal diatomic boron nitride (h-BN), graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, e.g. MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2), and monoatomic buckled crystals (e.g. a black phosphorus atomic layer which is also known as phosphorene).4–6 In the bulk forms, these materials are all characterized by strong covalent intralayer bonds and weak van der Waals interlayer interactions. Their atomically-thin 2D forms (single or few-layer) can hence stably exist and demonstrate distinct properties to their bulk counterparts. In spite of a similar 2D structure, these materials cover a wide range of electronic, optical, catalytic, chemical, thermal, and magnetic properties, offering a rich arsenal for a plethora of applications.
When these 2D materials transform to 0D (i.e., lateral sizes being reduced to typically <20 nm), improved or new properties arise due to prominent edge and quantum confinement effects, and at the same time, some inherent merits of the 2D parents are still preserved. As compared with their native 2D forms, these new classes of 0D materials (quantum dots) offer even larger surface-to-volume ratio, better solubility in both aqueous and nonaqueous solvents, higher tunability in physiochemical properties, better amenability to hybridize with other nanomaterials, and more ease to be doped and functionalized. For instance, when a 2D graphene sheet shrinks to 0D (graphene quantum dots – GQDs), it starts to fluoresce. With the combination of several key merits (widely tunable photoluminescence properties, high chemical and photo stability, molecular size, nontoxicity, and high solubility), GQDs often outshine or complement conventional organic fluorophores and semiconductor quantum dots in bioimaging, optical sensing, and photovoltaics.7–9 Other than serving as fluorophores, GQDs have also demonstrated unique advantages in other applications, particularly, in energy storage and conversion.10,11
GQDs have added a new dimension to graphene research and stimulated the high expectation on the potentials of quantum dots derived from other 2D materials (2D-QDs). For example, it has been shown that MoS2 edges have hydrogen absorption energy close to precious Pt-group metals and the catalytic activity of MoS2 towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is proportional to the number of edge sites.12,13 Therefore comparing to their 2D counterparts, MoS2 QDs and WS2 QDs are better HER electrocatalysts.14 As another example, although g-C3N4 sheets are active towards oxygen reduction and water splitting, their applications are largely limited by their poor electrical conductivity. In comparison, g-C3N4 QDs have more abundant catalytically moieties (pyridinic N, graphitic N and edge amine groups) and can be easily hybridized with conducting nanomaterials for effective charge transfer.15
The research on quantum dots derived from 2D materials (2D-QDs) is at its infant stage. Their properties are still poorly understood and potentials are largely unexploited. Although several excellent review articles on the synthesis, properties and applications of GQDs have been published in recent years,7,10,16–20 a comprehensive and comparative review on the 2D-QD family is currently missing. In this article, the current synthesis methods are briefly reviewed and compared. Subsequently, we discuss the properties of these 2D-QDs and underscore their similarities and differences with the 2D counterparts and other 2D-QDs. With a wide range of extraordinary properties, 2D-QDs promise a huge variety of novel applications. Here, we place the emphasis on catalysis and energy applications and highlight their unique advantages over other nanomaterials.
2 Synthesis methods
A variety of synthetic routes have been devised to synthesize GQDs,7 which can be well extended to prepare other 2D-QDs (Table 1). In general, 2D-QD synthesis methods fall into two broad groups: top-down and bottom-up approaches. As the properties of 2D-QDs are extremely sensitive to lateral size, thickness, edge configuration, chemical groups and dopants introduced during the synthesis, developing scalable and controllable synthesis methods is the key to the widespread use of 2D-QDs.
Table 1 Synthetic routes for 2D-QDs




Methods
QDs
Precursors and treatment
Size (nm)
Height (nm)
Yield (wt%)
Ref.




Chemical etching
GQDs
Carbon black, HNO3 oxidation
15
<0.7
44.5

21



g-C3N4 QDs
Bulk g-C3N4, H2SO4 treatment and DMF/H2O hydrolysis
2–4
N/A
N/A

46







Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods
GQDs
GO sheets, hydrothermal in H2O2/NH3·H2O
2.0
1.6
70

23



2.1
1.6
72


2.1
1.6
58


GQDs
Pyrene, nitration and hydrothermal in alkaline solution
2.6–3.8
1–2
45–63

52



g-C3N4 QDs
Bulk g-C3N4, H2SO4/HNO3 treatment, hydrothermal treatment in NH3·H2O and sonication
2–6
0.35
N/A

42



h-BN QDs
Bulk h-BN, sonication-solvothermal method
<5
<3
∼30

29



MoS2 QDs
Bulk MoS2/WS2, sonication assisted
3.3
1.2
13

14



WS2 QDs
2.5
1.2
18


MoS2 QDs
Ammonia molybdate, thiourea, N-acetyl-L-cysteine
1.5–2.5
<0.9
N/A

61







Electrochemical scissoring
GQDs
3D graphene electrode in ionic liquid
3
1.25
N/A

22



MoS2 QDs
Bulk MoS2 electrode in ionic liquid
2.5–6
0.8–1.5
N/A

41



MoS2 QDs
MoS2 nanosheets, electro-Fenton reaction
3–8
<2
N/A

40







Li/K intercalation
GQDs
MWCNT, K
18.5
0.9
23

24



h-BN QDs
h-BN flake, K
10
0.9
2.1

27



MoS2 QDs
MoS2 nanoparticles, Li
10–20
0.7
N/A

36







Ultrasonication
GQDs
Graphene sheets, sonication in H2SO4/HNO3
3–5
N/A
N/A

25



MoSe2 QDs
Bulk MoSe2, tip sonication with F-127
1.6–3
0.7–2.1
N/A

33



Phosphorene QDs
Black phosphorus powder, grinding and sonication
3.3–6.5
1–2.8
N/A

47



Phosphorene QDs
Black phosphorus powder, tip and bath sonication
0.8–4.4
0.9–2.1
N/A

49







Thermal/microwave carbonization
GQDs
Citric acid, 200 °C for 30 min
4.2
1–2
N/A

54



g-C3N4 QDs
Thiourea and citric acid, 200 °C for 2 h
2.78
N/A
N/A

60



g-C3N4 QDs
Guanidine and EDTA, microwave (595 W, 12 s)
3.2–6.5
1.7
N/A

58





2.1 Top-down approaches
The raw 3D bulk materials or exfoliated 2D sheets can be broken down into 2D-QDs using chemical, electrochemical, or physical means. As comprehensively reviewed in several recent articles,7,18,19 GQDs have been synthesized using chemical etching,21 electrochemical scissoring,22 hydrothermal/solvothermal cutting,23 lithium/potassium intercalation,24 ultrasonic treatment,25 and ball-milling.26 Some of these synthetic routes can be readily employed to make other types of 2D-QDs. For instance, single-layered h-BN QDs have been fabricated by a method previously used for the high-yield production of GQDs, which involves potassium intercalation, subsequent de-intercalation via short exposure to air, and final exfoliation via reaction with ethanol–H2O under ultrasonication.24,27 The sonication-assisted solvothermal technique has been applied for the synthesis of h-BN QDs.28,29 It has been found that temperature, filling factor, and reaction time exert significant influence on the size distribution and surface chemistry of h-BN QDs. Because of the weak van der Waals force between TMD layers, ultrasonication, sometimes with the assistance of grinding or solvothermal treatment, can be used to conveniently obtain TMD-QDs (e.g. MoS2, WS2, ReS2, TaS2, MoSe2, WSe2 and NbSe2 QDs).14,30–34 The Li or K intercalation method has also been used to produce WS2 and MoS2 QDs taking advantage of the large interlayer distance of these TMD materials (d = 0.615–0.618 nm, much larger than that of graphite).35–37 Alkali metal intercalation can only be conducted under air and water free conditions. Alternatively, H2SO4 or Na+ ion intercalation can be used to synthesize MoS2 or WS2 QDs under ambient and aqueous conditions.38,39 Like for GQDs, electrochemical etching in ionic liquid and electrochemically induced Fenton reaction have also been found to be efficient for mass-production of MoS2 QDs.40,41 As compared with other 2D materials, g-C3N4 has relatively stronger interlayer interaction because of hydrogen bonding between polymeric melon units with NH/NH2 groups.42 Chemical etching (strong acids or a mixture of ammonia and hydrogen peroxide) and hydrothermal treatments are more effective to exfoliate g-C3N4 QDs.42–46 Considering the air- and water-sensitive nature of phosphorene QDs, a combination of grinding and sonication under inert gas protection is utilized for their synthesis.47,48 Recently, highly-oxidized phosphorene QDs have been synthesized under ambient conditions via ultrasonciation.49
2.2 Bottom-up approaches
2D-QDs can be chemically assembled by smaller building blocks or transformed from precursors of comparable sizes. GQDs have been precisely synthesized using stepwise organic synthesis, albeit with low-throughput and difficulty to prevent aggregation caused by strong pi–pi interaction.50,51 But similar realization may not be possible for other 2D-QDs. GQDs can also be produced by pyrolysis/carbonization or the hydrothermal/solvothermal reaction of small organic molecules.52–54 In such processes, heteroatoms may be inherited from the precursor molecules thus conveniently achieving interesting doping effects.55,56 For example, N-doped GQDs have been synthesized under hydrothermal conditions with citric acid as the carbon source and urea/hexamethylene tetraamine/diethylene amine/ethanol-amine/ethylene diamine as the nitrogen source.56 The N-doping concentration and fluorescence quantum yield (QY) largely depends on the chosen N-precursor. As another example, hydrothermal treatment of fructose in the presence of sulphuric acid produced monodispersed crystalline S-doped GQDs.57
Although also made of carbon and nitrogen, the structural and physiochemical properties of g-C3N4 QDs are significantly different from N-doped GQDs. By a microwave pyrolysis approach, g-C3N4 QDs with a high QY of 35% were synthesized with guanidine hydrochloride and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid as the precursors.58 The synthesis of QDs and compositing with other functional nanomaterials can be simultaneously attained. Using CH2N2, Bi(NO3)5 and NaH2PO4 as the precursors, Li et al. prepared g-C3N4 QDs/BiPO4 nanocrystal composites by combining sonochemical and thermal annealing processes.59 Conceivably, g-C3N4 QDs are thermally grown from CH2N2 molecules adsorbed on the surface of BiPO4 nanocrystals. Lu et al. have reported a solid-phase thermal treatment (200 °C, 4 h) of citric acid and thiourea mixture to produce oxygen (O) and sulfur (S) co-doped g-C3N4 QDs with narrow size distribution.60
Huang et al. synthesized water-soluble MoS2 QDs by a facile, one-pot hydrothermal approach, wherein ammonium molybdate and thiourea were used as molybdenum and sulfur precursors, respectively.61N-Acetyl-L-cysteine was added as the capping agent to confine the hydrothermal growth of monolayer MoS2 QDs. The resultant MoS2 QDs are uniform in size (∼90.7% in the range of 1.5–2.5 nm) and single-layered (thickness < 0.9 nm). Using sodium molybdate and L-cysteine as the precursors, Wang et al. prepared MoS2 QDs (average thickness ∼ 1.79 nm) by a similar hydrothermal route.62 Ren et al. hydrothermally synthesized monolayer MoS2 QDs with an average size of 3.6 nm using sodium molybdate and dibenzyl disulfides as the molybdenum and sulfur source, respectively.63 MoS2 QDs have also been made by a colloidal solvothermal route using ammonium tetrathiomolybdate as the precursor and oleylamine as the reducing and stabilizing agent.64 The size of MoS2 QDs (2–7 nm) can be tuned by controlling the amount of oleylamine and reaction time. A MoS2 QD–graphene–TiO2 composite has been synthesized by a simple one-pot solvothermal approach, wherein sodium molybdate, thiocarbamide, and TiO2 powder were reacted with graphene oxide (GO) dispersion in dimethylacetamide/H2O mixed solvent.65 It should be noted that solvents used in solution chemistry based syntheses may block the active sites of QDs.
3 Properties
The family of 2D materials covers a wide range of physicochemical properties. For example, their electronic characteristics vary from semi-metallic (graphene) to insulating (h-BN) (Fig. 1).66 Being sensitive to size-dependent quantum confinement, edge configurations, defects, chemical functionalities, and heteroatom dopants, the property range of 2D-QDs is further extended in terms of, e.g., light adsorption and emission profile and mechanism, catalytic activities, and electrochemical characteristics.
 Fig. 1  Band structures of 2D crystalline materials. Adapted and modified with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group. 
3.1 Graphene quantum dots (GQDs)
GQDs are single or few layered graphene with lateral size typically <20 nm, which often bear defects in graphitic lattice, chemical moieties, and heteroatom dopants (Fig. 2a). In contrast to zero-bandgap semimetallic 2D pristine graphene sheets, GQDs are fluorescent and semiconductive with size-dependent bandgaps due to quantum confinement. With the diameter varying from 0.46 to 2.31 nm, pristine GQDs emit from UV (bandgap of 6.81 eV) to infrared (bandgap of 1.64 eV) (Fig. 2b).67 In addition to the prominent size-dependence, the photoluminescence (PL) properties of GQDs can also be sensitively modulated by chemical groups, heteroatom dopants, defects, geometry, and edge configurations. The PL properties are intriguingly governed by the combination or competition between intrinsic and defect state emission. The former derives from quantum confinement, edge effects (zigzag or armchair edge), and radiative recombination of localized electron–hole pairs, while the latter is induced by energy trap states because of chemical groups, dopants or vacancy defects. The high tunability makes it challenging to synthesize GQDs with homogeneous properties. On the other hand, it also endows GQDs a wide range of interesting properties. For example, heteroatom doping is able to enhance fluorescence quantum yield56,68 and confer interesting upconversion properties on GQDs attributable to an anti-Stokes transition or a multiphoton active process.69–71
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of heteroatom doped GQDs. (b) Calculated emission wavelength (nm) as a function of the diameter of GQDs. (b) adapted and modified with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As compared with the conventional organic fluorophores and widely used semiconductor quantum dots, GQDs are superior for various applications owing to their unique combination of several key merits, including wide coverage of emission wavelength, high photostability, molecular size, good dissolvability in both aqueous and organic solvents, ease to be covalently or non-covalently conjugated with a wide range of molecules, and high chemical inertness.
In the UV-vis absorption spectrum of GQDs, two characteristic absorption peaks are often observed, specifically, a peak between 200–270 nm due to π–π* transition and another peak between 270–390 nm due to n–π* transition from CO functional groups introduced during the synthesis processes.10,18 GQDs with other functional groups can extend their adsorption from the UV to visible region. For example, a single crystalline amine-functionalized GQD exhibits additional excitonic absorption peaks between 400–500 nm.52 This GQD offers a large molar extinction coefficient of ∼106 M−1 cm−1 within the visible region, which is larger than the semiconductor QDs and other widely used light absorbers in solar cells (e.g., ruthenium complexes). GQDs with upconversion properties are able to absorb NIR.72
The possible wide-range absorption and emission profile of GQDs makes them attractive for designing efficient solar cells and photocatalysis systems. It has been reported that GQDs have two orders of magnitude slower hot carrier cooling rate (100–300 ps) than that in bulk graphene, and significantly less fast hot carrier relaxation pathways (e.g. surface trap states) than that in semiconductor QDs (e.g. CdSe, PbSe), thereby enabling more efficient hot charge carrier harvesting in solar energy conversion.73 TiO2 is widely used as a photocatalyst and a light-harvesting inorganic semiconductor. But it can only utilize UV light (a small fraction of energy contained in solar light) due to its wide bandgap and it is also blamed for its low photocatalytic activity because of the fast charge recombination rate. GQDs can serve as a sensitizer to significantly extend the absorption range of TiO2.25 In addition, both theoretical and experimental evidence suggests that chemical bonding between the oxygen functional groups of GQD and TiO2 enables ultrafast hot electron injection from photoexcited GQDs to the conduction band of TiO2 (<15 fs, much faster than its electron–hole recombination rate of >80 fs).74,75 It means that GQDs can significantly enhance the hot charge carrier capture capability of TiO2.
It has been shown that GQDs are multivalent redox species with discrete single-electron transfer behavior.76 Electron transfer between different oxidation states of GQDs may endow them with interesting electrochemical and catalytic properties. The edge sites, chemical groups, defects, and heteroatom dopants on GQDs dictate the electrochemical and catalytic properties of GQDs.2,7,10 Interestingly, GQDs with oxygenated groups exhibit high peroxidase-like activity.77 Taking advantage of their ability to catalyze the decomposition of H2O2 to a hydroxyl radical (˙OH), GQDs have been utilized to improve wound disinfection.78 Experimental and theoretical studies have shown that –CO groups and OC–O groups on GQDs serve as the catalytically active sites and H2O2 binding sites, respectively.79
Because of their low oxidation potential (0.48 V) and strong electrostatic interaction with positively charged ions, graphene oxide (GO) sheets are effective reducing agents for precious metal ions which have higher reduction potentials (e.g., 1.5 V for Au3+).80,81 GQDs which usually bear oxygenated groups or other functionalities shall have the same or even better ability in this regard because of the smaller size as well as higher fraction of edge sites and functional moieties. Chemical groups with electron donating or withdrawing groups, vacancy defects, and heteroatom dopants can modulate the redox potentials of GQDs (thus their catalytic properties) and act as active sites (e.g. to promote the anchoring and nucleation of metal nanoparticles).81–83 Photoexcited GQDs exhibit excellent electron donating capability, therefore facilitating fast reduction of metal ions and subsequent formation of metal nanoparticles (NPs). For example, N-doped GQDs have been used as efficient photocatalysts for photochemical synthesis of Ag NPs onto g-C3N4.84
Co-doping of p-type and n-type heteroatoms on a GQD may lead to the formation of photochemical diodes which are desired for the separation of photogenerated charges. Such co-doped GQDs have been found to be useful as photocatalysts for water splitting.85 GQDs may act as co-catalysts instead. For instance, it has been shown that the defects on GQDs are able to enhance the catalytic activities of Pt NPs for oxygen reduction by promoting charge transfer from the NPs, dissociative adsorption of oxygen molecules, and binding of reaction intermediates on the metal surface.86
3.2 Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) QDs
An atomic sheet of g-C3N4 can be regarded as an N-substituted graphene framework. Although sharing a similar 2D structure and a delocalized π-conjugated electronic structure, g-C3N4 sheets and graphene sheets differ significantly in physicochemical properties and so do their QD forms. g-C3N4 sheets are composed of tri-s-triazine units bridged by amino groups, with periodic vacancies in their lattices (Fig. 3a).87 Such a “poly(tri-s-triazine)” framework is highly defective and disorder in nature. The abundant graphitic or pyridinic N atoms in the sp2 plane and amine groups (–NH or –NH2) on the terminating edges may give rise to interesting catalytic and other properties.
 Fig. 3  Schematics of (a) g-C3N4 sheets and (b) g-C3N4 QDs with 3 tri-s-triazine units and chemical functionalities. (c) UV-vis absorption (red), PL excitation (dashed line), and PL emission (solid line) of g-C3N4 QDs synthesized via hydrolysis of bulk g-C3N4 in DMF and H2SO4 mixture solution. (d) PL spectra of g-C3N4 QDs at different excitation wavelengths. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
According to DFT calculations, the bandgap of an infinite g-C3N4 sheet is 2.1 eV and it opens to 3.5 eV in tri-s-triazine molecule (the smallest g-C3N4 QD).87 And g-C3N4 QDs bear a high percentage of amine edges as well as oxygenated groups inevitably introduced into the synthesis (Fig. 3b).46,88 The strong quantum confinement in g-C3N4 QDs causes blue shift in UV-vis and PL spectra.44,46 Similar to GQDs, the UV-vis absorption spectrum of g-C3N4 QDs gives two characteristic peaks due to the π–π* transition of s-triazine rings and the n–π* transition of carbonyl groups with the adsorption tail extending to the visible region.58,60,89 Despite the existence of amine groups, the synthesized g-C3N4 QDs are negatively charged because of introduced oxygenated groups.43,58,89
g-C3N4 QDs (∼4.5 nm in size) synthesized by a low-temperature solid-phase method emit bright blue fluorescence with a high QY of 42%.89 Remarkably different from the g-C3N4 QDs synthesized using other methods, g-C3N4 QDs (∼3 nm) obtained from hydrolysis of bulk g-C3N4 in acidic solution emit excitation-independent UV light (peaking at 367 nm) with a high QY of 46% (Fig. 3c and d).46 The authors proposed that the electronic transition of aromatic sp2 C–N (i.e., from the n nonbonding orbital of the nitrogen atom to the π antibonding orbital of sp2-carbon) dictates the PL properties of these QDs instead of their hydroxyl and amine groups (Fig. 3c). Upconversion PL phenomena on the basis of the multiphoton active process have been observed in g-C3N4 QDs.42 Single-layered g-C3N4 QDs have been theoretically and experimentally shown to have two-photon upconversion properties (adsorption of two near-infrared photons leads to emission of green PL) due to π–π* charge-transfer.45 It is speculated that, similar to GQDs, the adsorption and emission profiles of g-C3N4 QDs can be widely tuned by size, chemical modification, and heteroatom doping. For example, blue shift may be caused by sulfur doping and red shift may be resulted from boron or fluoride doping.90 It has been shown that a heteroatom dopant (S) can be inherited from the precursor molecule during thermal annealing.60
g-C3N4 sheets have rich surface moieties that are catalytically active, such as pyridinic and graphitic N, Bronsted basic functionalities, and H-bonding amine groups.91 They have been identified as a promising metal-free electrocatalyst or photocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).92 g-C3N4 is superior to TiO2 (the commonly used photocatalyst) for the HER and OER in the sense that the water oxidation and reduction potentials are better engulfed by its valence band and conduction band.90 Wang et al. reported that g-C3N4 is capable of photo-splitting water under neutral, acidic or basic conditions.87,93 Theoretical calculations showed that N atoms in g-C3N4 are the preferable oxidation sites for H2O to O2 conversion, whereas C atoms provide the reduction sites for H+ to H2 conversion.87 g-C3N4 QDs, which have more enriched catalytic sites, higher quantum yield, larger specific surface area, prominent quantum and edge effects, are expected to outperform bulk g-C3N4 in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.
3.3 Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) QDs
2D h-BN sheets may be depicted as a graphene layer with C atoms fully substituted by alternating B and N atoms (Fig. 4a). In the honeycomb arrangement, covalently bonded B–N is isostructural and isoelectronic like C–C in graphene. Therefore unsurprisingly, h-BN sheets have almost identical lattice parameters as graphene sheets, and comparable in-plane mechanical strength and thermal conductivity. Also similar to graphene, the h-BN layer is attractive for its exceptional chemical and thermal stability. On the other hand, in contrast to the C–C bond, the covalent B–N bond also exhibits ionic characteristics due to the electronegativity difference between B and N atoms. This makes the electronic, magnetic and chemical properties of h-BN significantly different from that of graphene. For example, the h-BN sheet is an insulator or a wide-gap (5.0–6.0 eV) semiconductor in contrast to zero-gap semi-metallic graphene.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of h-BN. (b) Schematic of C-doped h-BN QDs. (c) PL-excitation and PL spectra of synthesized h-BN QDs (insets are the photographs of h-BN QDs with and without UV illumination). (d) Luminescence diagrams of different luminescent centers of h-BN QDs. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2014) Wiley Publishing Group. 
New properties arise in h-BN QDs, the low-dimensional siblings of h-BN sheets (Fig. 4b). Like GQDs, the electronic, magnetic and optical properties of h-BN QDs are highly tunable by shape, size, doping, and edge sites.94–96 Edge hydrogenation thermo-dynamically stabilizes h-BN QDs and significantly diminishes their magnetic ground states caused by spin polarization of unpaired electrons on edges.96 In contrast to GQDs, h-BN QDs with fully hydrogenated edges are spin-unpolarized and have a bandgap of ∼4.85 eV which is not sensitive to QD size. Edge hydroxylation of h-BN QDs is even more energetically favorable and causes more reduction in the electronic bandgap.94 As h-BN QD is the hybrid of two elements, the variation of its edge configurations is much richer than that of GQDs.
Carbon, the neighboring element to both B and N, is an energetically favored dopant to h-BN QDs. The B–C–N networks, a ternary semiconductor, with adjustable B, C and N content and arrangements are able to offer rich composition and structure dependent electronic, magnetic and surface properties.97,98 It has been theoretically shown that the C atom energetically prefers to replace the minority element (B or N) in the inner region of h-BN QDs.99 A h-BN QD has a larger HOMO–LUMO gap than a GQD of the same size,100 and C doping (more significant at edge sites) decreases the bandgap of h-BN QDs thereby extending the absorption wavelength from UV to the visible spectrum.95,99
Bandyopadhyay et al. theoretically investigated the effects of charge transfer on the properties of h-BN QDs and GQDs using tetracyanoquinodimethane and tetrathiafulvalene as the molecular dopants.100 Unlike GQDs, h-BN QDs can only weakly interact with these dopants because h-BN lacks the π surface for strong π–π interaction. Despite the weak interaction, the bandgap of h-BN QDs (4.03 eV) can however be reduced by more than 50% after physisorption of the molecular dopants. According to theoretical calculations, an external electric field is also capable of dramatically reducing (even fully closing) the HOMO–LUMO gap of h-BN QDs.94
Monolayered h-BN QDs (lateral size ∼10 nm) have been exfoliated and disintegrated from h-BN flakes.27 The chemical composition of the resultant h-BN QDs are characterized to be BNC0.12O0.21 with the existence of N–B–O, O–B–O and C–N/C–B species. The C dopants are likely obtained from the solvent used. This h-BN QD, with a wide direct bandgap of 6.51 eV, shows strong UV absorption (<350 nm) and weak blue fluorescence (QY ∼ 2.5%) probably arisen from carbon-replaced N vacancy point defects, the carbene structure at zigzag edges and BOx− (x = 1 and 2) species (Fig. 4c and d). The PL lifetimes from these three luminescent centers are all in nanoseconds, which is an advantageous feature for optoelectronic and bio-imaging applications. Blue PL emission (maximum at 442 nm) is also observed from the h-BN QDs (diameter ∼ 3.3 nm and thickness ∼ 2.5 nm) prepared by a sonication-assisted solvothermal approach at 140 °C.28 The size, surface chemistry and hence optical properties of h-BN QDs can be controllably tailored by adjusting solvothermal conditions. h-BN QDs (∼3.46 nm) solvothermally prepared at 200 °C, a filling factor of 67% and a reaction time of 24 h exhibit excitation-dependent PL emission (peaking at 395.5 nm) with a high QY of 19.5%.29 Stengl et al. synthesized poly-dispersed h-BN and BCN QDs (<40 nm) by solvothermal refluxing BN and BCN sheets, which exhibit strong blue luminescence.101
3.4 Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) QDs
A single-layered TMD (formulated as X–M–X) is a plane of transition metal atoms (M) covalently sandwiched by two hexagonal planes of chalcogen atoms (X). Unlike graphene, layered TMDs are non-centrosymmetric. To obtain QDs, it is necessary to break the intra-plane X–M–X bonds and consequently abundant edge atoms (M and X) are produced (Fig. 5a). Theoretical calculations showed that monolayer MoS2 QDs are metallic because of the coordinative-unsaturated Mo atoms at the edges.102 Contradictorily, experimentally synthesized TMD QDs are found to be dominantly 2H phase in their crystal structure, indicating the semiconductive nature.14,30,35,40 Such discrepancy can be attributed to the passivation of metal dangling bonds (e.g. forming metal oxide or hydroxide)14,31 or to the fact that the TMD-QDs are mostly terminated by chalcogen atoms instead of metal atoms.35,40 In comparison with their 2D sheets, the bandgaps of TMD QDs open up due to quantum confining effects. For example, WS2 QDs (8–15 nm in size) synthesized by Lin et al. exhibit a larger direct bandgap of 3.16 eV compared to that of their bulk sheets (2.1 eV).35 Similarly shown in another study, MoS2 QDs with a lateral size of ∼2.1 nm has a widened direct bandgap of 3.96 eV compared to that of monolayered 2D sheets (1.89 eV).61 In addition to the size-dependent quantum confinement, the bandgap is also strongly influenced by defects, functional groups, dopants, etc. introduced into the synthesis. This explains why a larger monolayer MoS2 QD (∼3.6 nm) has a higher bandgap of 4.96 eV.63
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of WS2 QDs. (b–e) Diagram of the band structure, UV-vis absorption spectra, PL spectra and time resolved PL decay profile (emission at 461 nm and excitation at 360 nm) of WS2 QDs. Inset of (d) is the photograph of WS2 QDs with and without UV illumination. (b–e) Adapted and modified with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
Inversion symmetry is absent in monolayered TMD sheets, leading to novel spin-valley coupled band structures. As compared to 2D WS2 sheets, a significantly enhanced spin-valley coupling has been observed from WS2 QDs (570 vs. 400 meV) (Fig. 5b).35 This is evidenced by the broadening of excitonic absorption peak A (393 nm)–B (333 nm) splitting in the UV-vis spectra, wherein peaks A and B are generated by the direct bandgap transition at K point with energy split from valence band spin–orbit coupling (Fig. 5c). In UV-vis spectra, another characteristic absorption peak C (∼277 nm) can also be observed, which is due to the optical transition between the density of state peaks in the valence and conduction bands. Because of large spin–valley coupling WS2 QDs demonstrate multiple PL emission peaks in the blue-green region with lifetimes in a nanosecond scale (Fig. 5d and e).35 Compared with WS2 sheets, the QDs have blue-shift in the UV-vis absorption and PL emission, as well as improved QY (∼4%).
Similarly, MoS2 QDs synthesized from an one-pot hydrothermal method using N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) as the capping agent exhibit a large spin–valley coupling of 700 meV and a characteristic absorption peak A at 380 nm, peak B at 313 nm and peak C at 264 nm.61 With excitation at 380 nm, multiple PL emission peaks (strongest at 480 nm, QY ∼ 2%) are observed. Interestingly, NAC-capped MoS2 QDs show unusual upconversion PL with strongest emission also at 480 nm at an excitation wavelength of 780 nm. The origin of upconversion may be attributed to the energy transfer from NIR absorption by the NAC shell to the MoS2 QD core.61 Just like other 2D-QDs, the impurities introduced during the synthetic routes and the QD size have strong influences on the properties of TMD QDs. The monolayered MoS2 QDs synthesized by a combination of sonication and solvothermal treatment on MoS2 powders give only one prominent UV absorption peak and an excitation-dependent PL behavior.14 MoS2 QDs (both 2H and 1T phases) prepared by Li intercalation and exfoliation of MoS2 nanoparticles have an excitation-independent PL peak at 415 nm.36 It has been demonstrated that ion intercalation in an alkaline environment can significantly increase the QY of the MoS2 QDs (4.84% at an excitation of 440 nm) prepared via ultrasonication of MoS2 powder.39 Interestingly, the MoS2–ZnS hybrid QD possesses two PL emission centers (at 380 and 450 nm).103 Owing to the size-dependent bandgap opening, the colloidal MoS2 QDs obtained from a bottom-up solvothermal method emit from blue (430 nm) to red (600 nm) while increasing the size from 2 to 7 nm.64 Gan et al. synthesized MoS2 QDs via ultrasonic exfoliation and found that both the photoluminescence excitation (PLE) peak position and the absorption band edge red-shift with increasing particle diameter.32
Gopalakrishnan et al. electrochemically etched MoS2 QDs from bulk MoS2 in ionic liquid solutions.41 To explain a peculiar observation that size reduction leads to red-shift in PL emission, they proposed that the surface trap states resulting from the uncompensated sulfide ions and metal ions increase with the increasing surface-to-volume ratio (or decreasing size). MoS2 QDs exfoliated from their parental sheets via the electro-Fenton reaction exhibit a strong pH-dependent PL behavior, i.e., strong emission under alkaline conditions and being almost completely quenched under acidic conditions.40 The transformation of semiconducting MoS2 (2H) QDs to the metallic MoS2 (1T) QDs caused by H+ intercalation may be responsible for the PL quenching. In comparison, the PL of NAC-capped MoS2 QDs is pH insensitive, suggesting that intrinsic state emission is dominating and defect state emission is suppressed by NAC.61 WS2 QDs recently fabricated by combining physical grinding, H2SO4 intercalation and ultrasonication show strong UV and NIR absorption (increasing with decreasing QD size).38 Such NIR harvesting ability confers WS2 QDs (∼3 nm) a high photothermal conversion efficiency of 44.3% at 808 nm. Similarly, MoSe2 QDs (2–3 nm) prepared by tip-ultrasonication has an extinction coefficient of 17.4 L g−1 cm−1 and a photothermal conversion efficiency of 46.5% measured at 785 nm.33 Distinct to other 2D-QDs, these MoSe2 QDs have no PL emission.
TMD-based nanomaterials (e.g., MoS2 and WS2 nanosheets) have interesting electrocatalytic properties. For example, nanoparticulate MoS2 is a promising precious-metal-free nanocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) because its hydrogen binding energy is close to that of platinum-group metals.12 The electrocatalytic performance of MoS2 toward HER (overpotential, current density and Tafel slope) can be improved with the increase of active edge sites and decrease of particle size.12 Wang et al. found that small MoS2 QDs (∼2 nm) demonstrate better HER and ORR performance than larger MoS2 particles.13 Electronic structure calculation and the partial charge analysis suggested that MoS2 QDs with armchair edges may have better catalytic ability than those with zigzag edges.104
MoS2 sheets are effective for charge storage because they allow easy intercalation of foreign ions (e.g. H+, Li+, Na+ and K+),105,106 and exhibit pseudo-capacitance behavior because Mo can transit between different valence states (+2 to +6).105,107 For MoS2 QDs, ion intercalation is even easier. Other TMD QDs (specifically, ReS2, TaS2, WSe2 and NbSe2 QDs) have been successfully prepared by a combination of a grinding and sonication process.30 But their optical, catalytic, electrochemical properties have not yet been characterized.
3.5 Atomic black phosphorus (phosphorene) QDs
Phosphorene is an atomically-thin layer of black phosphorous (BP) crystal (Fig. 6a), in which each phosphorus (P) atom is covalently bonded with three others forming a puckered honeycomb structure.47 Free-standing monolayered phosphorene is a semiconductor with an inherent direct bandgap theoretically predicted to be 0.8–1.5 eV, which fills the gap between graphene and dichalcogenides (Fig. 1).66,108 The charge-carrier mobility of few-layer quasi-2D phosphorene is measured up to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.109 The relatively small direct bandgap and high mobility make phosphorene desirable in many applications in optoelectronics and energy.108–111 Phosphorene QDs (diameter ∼ 4.9 nm and thickness ∼ 1.9 nm) have been produced from BP powders via sonication, which can be stably dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (Fig. 6b).47 Their absorption profile well-extends to the visible light region (absorption edge >700 nm) (Fig. 6c). Despite being the least reactive allotrope of phosphorus, phosphorene and its QDs are sensitive to water and air. Such susceptibility imposes challenges to synthesize, characterize, and apply pristine phosphorene QDs. But pristine phosphorene QDs can be used in the energy devices which operate under the conditions free of water and oxygen, such as lithium or sodium ion batteries. And on the other hand, oxidation provides the opportunity to tailor the electronic and optical properties of phosphorene QDs for different application purposes. For example, oxidized phosphorene QDs have better water solubility and NIR adsorption, which are desirable, e.g., for photothermal therapy.49 Wang et al. theoretically predicted the stable existence of 2D phosphorene oxide, an analogue to graphene oxide.112 However, the synthesis and understanding of their properties are yet to be demonstrated.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of bulk black phosphorus. (b) TEM images of phosphorene QDs. Inset: HRTEM images of phosphorene with different lattice fringes. (c) UV-vis absorption spectrum of phosphorene QDs. Inset: Photos of the phosphorene QDs and their Tyndall effect. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2015) Wiley Publishing Group. 
4 Catalysis applications
4.1 Electrocatalysis

4.1.1 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
The cathodic ORR is the rate-limiting factor for fuel cells and metal–air batteries. Heteroatom doping can transform graphene sheets to state-of-the-art noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for the ORR. Doping effects are usually more prominent in 0D GQDs. Li et al. demonstrated that N-doped GQDs (N/C atomic ratio of ca. 4.3%, synthesized by a facile electrochemical etching approach) have the desired four-electron transfer pathway in the ORR and remarkable methanol tolerance.113 A theoretical study proposed that pyridinic and graphitic N dopants on GQD are the most active sites for the ORR.114 Favaro et al. showed that co-doping of electron-rich N and electron-poor B on GQDs can produce synergistic effects to improve ORR performance.115 Furthermore, removal of oxygen functional groups by simple chemical reduction can change the catalytic activity of N,B co-doped GQDs from a two-electron pathway to the ideal four-electron pathway.
Through the strong π–π interaction, GQDs can readily be hybridized with other graphene materials (pristine graphene, graphene oxide – GO, reduced graphene oxide – rGO, graphene nanoribbons, 3D graphene foam, etc.). Good ORR performance with positively shifted onset and peak potential has been obtained from N,S co-doped rGO/GQD hybrid (with N/C = 4.74% and S/C = 1.76%).116 The charge polarization and spin density induced by N and S dopants synergistically improve ORR performance. B,N co-doped rGO/GQD hybrid (13.6 at% B and 18.3 at% N) prepared from coal and graphite has been reported as an excellent electrocatalyst for ORR, which gives more positive onset potential, higher diffusion-limited current density and larger kinetic current density than commercial Pt/C catalysts (Fig. 7a and b).117 The inferior performance of bare B,N co-doped rGO suggests the pivotal roles of doped GQDs.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Illustration of the fabrication procedure for B,N co-doped GQD/rGO composite and the ORR polarization curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 900 rpm in O2 saturated 0.1 KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c and d) Synthetic protocol of g-C3N4 QD/rGO composite and the ORR polarization curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 1200 rpm in O2 saturated 0.1 KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Because of their small sizes and attached functional groups, GQDs may be easily composited with other nanomaterials. For example, PtCu@GQD capsules obtained by a simultaneous reduction and assembly strategy offer a 110 mV more positive onset potential and 1.3 times higher mass activity than that of bare PtCu capsules.118 GQD decorated Pt nanoparticles (NPs) which are solvothermally synthesized provide a 70 mV more positive onset potential, 9 times higher current density, and much improved stability as compared to commercial Pt/C catalysts.119 It is believed that the defective GQDs facilitate the binding of an oxygen molecule and its intermediates on the surface of Pt NPs.
g-C3N4 QDs are also promising catalysts for the ORR due to the high content of pyridinic and graphitic N, a large surface area and abundant edge amine sites. However, their poor intrinsic conductivity is the major obstacle for electrocatalytic applications. Considering the excellent electrical conductivity of graphene and its structural similarity with g-C3N4, Wang et al. prepared a g-C3N4 QDs/rGO composite as the efficient catalyst for the ORR (Fig. 7c).15 The homogeneous and intimate interaction between g-C3N4 QDs and graphene produced a catalyst rivaling performance of the commercial Pt/C catalyst in terms of catalytic current density and half-wave potential (Fig. 7d).
h-BN is not able to act as an electrocatalyst because it is an insulator with a wide bandgap and is chemically inert.120 But heteroatom or molecular dopants may endow h-BN with electrocatalytic properties. A theoretical study suggests that nitrogen doped h-BN (lattice B atoms substituted by N atoms) has catalytic activity towards the ORR and the adsorption energy of O2, O, OH, OOH, and H2O on its surface is similar to that on the Pt(111) surface.121
Using a simple two-step drop-casting process, Wang et al. coated MoS2 QDs (≤2 nm) on a gold nanoparticle (AuNP) film.122 Such an electrode demonstrates a direct four-electron ORR pathway with large limiting current density and small onset overpotential, comparable to a commercial Pt/C catalyst modified electrode. The enhanced performance takes the advantages of the small onset overpotential of AuNP film and promoted second oxygen reduction step by MoS2 QDs. The composite outperforms the commercial Pt/C catalysts in terms of long term stability and methanol tolerance. Du et al. confined hydrothermally synthesized MoS2 QDs in 3D porous N-doped graphene as effective ORR catalysts.123 Well-exposed active sites of MoS2 QDs and good conductivity of 3D graphene enable a prominent positive shift in both onset potential (to 0.95 V) and peak potential (to 0.82 V), and a four-electron-transfer pathway with an even higher current density than the commercial Pt/C catalysts.


4.1.2 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Producing clean fuel by water electrolysis (i.e., hydrogen evolution reaction) is a promising solution for both energy and environment crises. Ren et al. employed hydrothermally synthesized MoS2 QDs as HER electrocatalysts, with an onset overpotential of ∼160 mV, a Tafel slope of 59 mV dec−1, and ∼14 times more current density than the bulk MoS2 powders at the overpotential of 400 mV.63 The enhanced performance of MoS2 QDs could be ascribed to the abundant active edge sites and faster electron transfer between QDs because of a low interlayer potential barrier between these monolayer structures. Gopalakrishnan et al. prepared a heterodimensional catalyst system by interspersing MoS2 QDs in few-layered MoS2 sheets via a liquid exfoliation technique.31 It shows a good HER activity with an onset overpotential of ∼190 mV, a Tafel slope of ∼74 mV dec−1 and a large exchange current density of 3.2 × 10−5 A cm−2. Similarly, Xu and coworkers prepared a QD/nanosheet composite of MoS2 or WS2 by a sonication and solvothermal process (Fig. 8a).14 The obtained heterodimensional catalyst system based on MoS2 (or WS2) gives an onset overpotential of ∼120 mV (or ∼180 mV), much smaller than that of the nanosheet based systems (>350 mV) (Fig. 8b). The MoS2 (or WS2) based heterodimensional catalyst also exhibits a smaller Tafel slope of 69–75 mV dec−1 than that of commercially available MoS2 (115 mV dec−1) or WS2 (138 mV dec−1) catalysts (Fig. 8c). In addition, the MoS2 based catalyst is remarkably stable as evidenced by the almost identical polarization curves before and after 2000 cycles. The improvement brought by incorporation of MoS2 and WS2 QDs is due to the facts that the electrocatalytic activity is linearly correlated with the number of edge sites,12 and QDs carry rich edge sites. Qiao et al. recently exfoliated differently-sized MoS2 nanosheets from bulk MoS2 using a repetitive Li intercalation process.37 HER tests showed that monolayer MoS2 QDs (diameter 2–10 nm) are much superior to MoS2 nanosheets (lateral size 100–800 nm), in terms of a much lower onset potential (120 vs. 371 mV), smaller Tafel slope (69 vs. 181 mV per decade), larger exchange current density (17.9 vs. 3.9 μA cm−2) and higher turnover frequency (0.048 vs. 0.010 s−1). This study clearly demonstrates the advantages of TMD QDs over their 2D sheets for electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of a heterodimensional catalyst system consisting MoS2 (or WS2) QDs and MoS2 (or WS2) nanosheets. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of the QD/nanosheet composite of MoS2 or WS2. Adapted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright (2015) Wiley Publishing Group. 
Metal-free 2D-QDs (GQDs, h-BN QDs, g-C3N4 QDs, phosphorene QDs) have been largely unexplored as HER catalysts. Qiao’s group found that coupling of g-C3N4 with N-doped graphene leads to highly active HER catalysts, wherein the former provides active sites for hydrogen adsorption and the latter facilitates the electron transfer for proton reduction.124 This study suggests the potential of g-C3N4 QDs. Sim et al. prepared N-doped GQDs by nitrogen plasma treatment of CVD-grown graphene sheets.125 A glassy carbon electrode (GCE) modified with these N-doped GQDs exhibits an onset HER potential of −0.22 V in 1 M perchloric acid solution, positively shifted by 0.1 V relative to that of pristine graphene. Moreover, a Tafel slope of 45 mV per decade and an exchange current density of 7.1 × 10−5 A cm−2 have been obtained, which are far superior to that of pristine graphene.

4.2 Photocatalysis
Semiconductor QDs have been widely used as narrow-bandgap sensitizers to harvest solar energy. However, these traditional QDs (such as CdX: X = S, Se, Te and PbS) usually suffer from many surface traps, which hinder efficient charge separation and transfer. In addition, they degrade over time due to reaction with some electrolytes or because of photo-oxidation under prolonged illumination. And semiconductor QDs made of heavy metals are toxic and thus environmentally hazardous.
2D-QDs are attractive alternatives for photocatalysis because of their excellent photochemical robustness, low-toxicity, unique and tunable optical and catalytic properties. Using GQDs with upconversion properties, Zhuo et al. designed a TiO2/GQD complex photocatalyst which is able to harness the visible spectrum of sunlight.25 97% degradation of methylene blue (MB) under 1 h visible light illumination indicates the high photocatalytic activity of rutile TiO2/GQDs. Pan et al. prepared GQD-sensitized TiO2 nanotube-arrays (GQD-TNAs) as a heterojunction photoelectrocatalyst. Under visible light, its photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) activity is 5.7 times larger than bare TNA and its efficiency towards MB degradation is 2 times higher than CdS QD sensitized TNA.126 Moreover, GQD-TNAs are much superior to CdS/CdSe QD-TNAs in terms of cycling stability. Li et al. synthesized g-C3N4 QD/BiPO4 as a visible light-induced photocatalyst for methyl orange (MO) degradation, which can achieve an efficiency of 92% within 3 h (much better than 75% efficiency with g-C3N4 powder) (Fig. 9a).59 Because the conduction band and the valence band of g-C3N4 QDs are more negative than those of BiPO4, the separation and transport of photo-generated electron–hole pairs are enhanced at the interface. In addition, g-C3N4 QDs give much larger specific surface area than its powder form.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of charge separation at the g-C3N4 QD/BiPO4 interface and the photocatalytic activity of a g-C3N4 QD/BiPO4 hybrid for MO degradation. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Photo to current conversion efficiency spectra of a GQD@ZnO NW photoelectrode-based device and its schematic of the photoelectrochemical water splitting process. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2013) Wiley Publishing Group. 
Liu et al. prepared MoS2 QD (diameter of ∼10 nm and thickness of ∼5 nm) modified TiO2 nanobelts (TiO2–MoS2) by a two-step hydrothermal method.127 Evaluated by photodegradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) under visible light irradiation, the TiO2–MoS2 is ∼4 times more active than bare TiO2. The introduction of MoS2 QDs is believed to increase the charge separation, visible-light absorption, specific surface area, and photochemical active reaction sites. Making use of the reducing effect of photogenerated electrons from TiO2 particles, Ho et al. prepared MoS2 (or WS2) QDs/TiO2 hybrids by in situ photoreduction deposition followed by thermal annealing.128 The MoS2 (or WS2) QD photosensitizers can extend the absorption edge of TiO2 from the UV region (<420 nm) to 700 (or 620) nm. Conversely to the absence of photocatalytic activity of pure TiO2 or composites of TiO2 and MoS2 (or WS2) powder under visible light, MoS2 (or WS2) QDs/TiO2 hybrid demonstrates high catalytic activity for the photodegradation of MB (∼40% in 4 h) and 4-chlorophenol (∼50% in 4 h). Gao et al. synthesized a MoS2 QD–graphene–TiO2 composite, which can effectively photo-catalyze rhodamine B (80% in 80 min, much better than Ag–graphene–TiO2 composite) with excellent photochemical stability.65
Although phosphorene can adsorb visible light because of a small bandgap, it is highly sensitive to humidity and oxygen and thus not suitable to act as a photocatalyst independently. Lee et al. have demonstrated that BP@TiO2 hybrid photocatalysts have excellent photocatalytic activity and stability.129 It has also been shown that h-BN can greatly enhance the photo-degradation activity of TiO2 for RhB and MB because the negatively charged h-BN promotes the immigration of photogenerated holes to the surface of TiO2.130 Presumably, phosphorene QDs and h-BN QDs shall interact more intimately with TiO2 nanoparticles and create better synergy in photocatalysis.
Guo et al. used GQDs as the visible light absorbers to sensitize ZnO nanowire arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting (Fig. 9b inset).131 GQD coating leads to a larger open circuit voltage (Voc, 0.15 V vs. 0.08 V), short circuit current density (Jsc, 0.064 mA cm−2vs. 0.008 mA cm−2) and photo-to-current efficiency (PCE) (ca. 0.42% vs. 0.05%) (Fig. 9b). The improvement is because of GQD-enhanced visible light absorption, electron–hole pair generation, charge separation, and charge transport. Hong group reported the enhanced photoelectrochemical HER activity of a Si electrode after being decorated by N-doped GQDs.132 Under the simulated sunlight (AM1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), N-doped GQD coating positively shifts the onset potential of the planar Si electrode by ca. 0.29 V. Later, the same group further improved the HER performance (PCE of 2.29%) by coating N-doped GQDs on the Si nanowire photoelectrode.125 Doping by multiple heteroatom species can introduce both p- and n-type domains on a single GQD, which may form photochemical diodes whereby conferring GQDs the ability to act as a photocatalyst independently. For example, Teng and co-workers prepared N,O co-doped GQDs for visible light-driven water splitting.85 The co-existence of a N-induced n-type domain and an O-induced p-type domain facilitates the electron–hole separation during the photocatalytic reaction. The same group further improved the HER performance (an apparent quantum yield of 12.8% under 420 nm light) by depositing Pt on N,O co-doped GQDs as a co-catalyst and suppressor to electron transfer from GQDs to solution.133 Wang et al. employed g-C3N4 QDs with upconversion PL behavior as the energy donor to enhance the visible-light-driven (λ > 600 nm) photocatalytic activity of bulk g-C3N4 toward the HER.42 They also showed that g-C3N4 QD decoration on TiO2 can bring 51.8 times enhancement on H2 production under visible light irradiation.
Due to the large bandgap (∼5.5 eV), h-BN itself is not suitable for photocatalysis. But aromatic C doping can significantly reduce the bandgap of h-BN to 2.72 eV and make the resultant h-BCN capable for efficient photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction.98 Moreover, B-hydrogenated h-BN has been theoretically predicted to have a bandgap of 2.24 eV and hence a potential metal-free photocatalyst for water splitting under visible-light.134 Sa et al. theoretically found that the desirable bandgap (1.52 eV) and band edge alignment make phosphorene a potential photocatalyst for water splitting.135 h-BN QDs and phosphorene QDs may be more attractive due to better water solubility and higher catalytic activities.
5 Energy storage and conversion
5.1 Supercapacitors
2D materials have been widely used for supercapacitors.2,106,136,137 Their QD derivatives are expected to be even better in many cases because of larger specific surface area, more electrochemically active sites, ease to be integrated with other nanomaterials, and being more amenable to solution-based processes. By electrophoretic deposition of GQDs on the interdigital Au finger microelectrodes, Liu et al. assembled a GQD-based symmetric micro-supercapacitor and obtained a high rate performance, fast power response, and good cycling stability (97.8% retention after 5000 cycles) (Fig. 10a).138 At the current density of 15 μA cm−2, a specific capacity of 534.7 μF cm−2 with an energy density of 0.074 μW h cm−2 and a power density of 7.5 μW cm−2 was obtained. Changing an aqueous electrolyte to an ionic liquid electrolyte gave a further seven times higher power and energy density.
 Fig. 10  (a) Fabrication of a symmetric microsupercapacitor by electrophoretic deposition of GQDs on an interdigital finger electrode and its CV curve at 1000 V s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2013) Wiley Publishing Group. (b) Fabrication of a supercapacitor based on a GQD/CNT composite film and its galvanostatic charge–discharge curve at 700 μA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2013) IOP Publishing Group. 
In order to increase the potential window, asymmetric micro-supercapacitors have been fabricated with one electrode coated with GQDs and another functionalized with highly pseudocapacitive nanomaterials (e.g., MnO2, PANI).138,139 Hu et al. made a GQD/CNT composite film which exhibits a capacitance of 44 mF cm−2 (double the capacitance of the bare CNT film) (Fig. 10b).140 Chen et al. developed a 3D graphene/GQD composite as an additive-free monolithic electrode for supercapacitors.141 Surprisingly, introduction of GQDs brought 10 times increment in the conductivity of the 3D graphene structure. A specific capacity of 268 F g−1 was achieved, representing >90% improvement over bare 3D graphene. By chemical oxidation of aniline in the presence of GQDs, Mondal et al. synthesized GQD-modified polyaniline nanotubes with a high aspect ratio and a surface-to-volume ratio, and obtained a high specific capacity of 1044 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1.142 It has been shown that the specific surface area of GQDs can be further increased (by a factor of six) via KOH activation.143 Rich zigzag edges and ultra-fine pores (<1 nm) are formed on activated GQDs, leading to a 200% increase in capacitance (236 F g−1) which is much larger than that of activated graphene (172 F g−1). The better capacitive behavior of GQDs as compared with graphene sheets resulted from their much more abundant ion-interacting edge, defect, and chemical moiety sites.
g-C3N4 should have large capacity for charge storage because of rich graphitic N and pridinic N active sites, and abundant exchangeable protons attached to amine edges and oxygenated functional groups. Moreover, the intrinsically porous poly(tri-s-triazine) structure of g-C3N4 is advantageous for electrolyte transport and penetration. Therefore, bulk g-C3N4 materials and composites have been employed for supercapacitor development.137,144,145 The aforementioned advantages of g-C3N4 should be more prominent for g-C3N4 QDs. However, g-C3N4 QDs can only work well by compositing with conducting materials (e.g., graphene) due to their poor conductivity.
In h-BN, the difference in electronegativity of B and N makes the B–N bond partially ionic.146 Therefore, B and N atoms have different oxidation states giving h-BN inherent pseudocapacitive properties.147 The pseudocapacitance of h-BN QDs should be higher resulting from the abundant B and N active edge sites. BxCyNz with adjustable B, C and N content and arrangement offers a wide range of electrochemical properties and good supercapacitive behavior.148 BxCyNz QDs shall fill the gap between GQDs and h-BN QDs.
Edge-oriented MoS2 films with sponge-like morphologies (via the reaction of sulfur vapor with anodically formed Mo oxide sponge-like films) show good supercapacitive performance contributed by abundant active edges, cation intercalation into the inter- and intra-layer of MoS2, and the redox reaction between different valence states of Mo.149 Acerce et al. showed that chemically exfoliated 1T phase of MoS2 nanosheets have favorable electrochemical properties for supercapacitors, such as intrinsic hydrophilicity, high electrical conductivity, permission for efficient cation intercalation (e.g. H+, Li+, Na+ and K+), and amenability for high-voltage (3.5 V) operation in non-aqueous organic electrolytes with excellent stability.106 However, the potential of TMD QDs in supercapacitor applications are yet to be explored.
5.2 Batteries
Fan and co-workers have synthesized a GQD-anchored VO2-nanobelt array on 3D graphene as the cathode material of Li-ion batteries (LIBs) (Fig. 11a–c).150 This electrode gives a high specific capacity of 421 mA h g−1 at the current density of 1/3 C (1 C = 300 mA g−1), ≥99% Coulombic efficiency, and good rate performance (reversible capacity of 151 mA h g−1 at 120 C), outperforming the 3D graphene/VO2 electrode without GQDs (Fig. 11d). Moreover, the GQD-anchored electrode shows greatly enhanced stability (94% retention after 1500 cycles at 60 C), in contrast to the poor cyclability of other VO2 based electrodes. Such an electrode also well-performs as the cathode for sodium-ion batteries (306 mA h g−1 at 1/3 C and 88% retention after 1500 cycles at 60 C). And at a high charge–discharge rate of 120 C, the electrode attains a power density of 42 kW kg−1 with a high energy density (>100 W h kg−1) (Fig. 11e). The same group has also similarly prepared CuO + Cu + GQD (CCG) triaxial nanowire arrays as the anode material for LIB, which offers a larger specific capacity (780 mA h g−1 at 1/3 C and 330 mA h g−1 at 30 C) than that of the CuO + Cu (CC) electrode.151 In both studies, the GQD enhanced performance arises from several reasons. First, the GQD layer protects the active materials from forming a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) film (especially in the first cycle), which ensures a high Coulombic efficiency. Second, conformal wrapping of GQDs on the surface of active nanomaterials improves the charge collection efficiency and conductivity of the electrode, which is crucial for high rate performance. Moreover, GQDs confer the electrode a rough surface, leading to a large surface area for metal ion storage. Finally, GQDs act as a stabilizer to suppress the agglomeration and dissolution of electrode active materials, which is important for long cycling life of the electrode.
 Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication of a 3D graphene supported GQD-coated VO2 nanobelt array (GVG). (b and c) SEM and HRTEM images of the hybrid structure. (d) Rate performance of the as-fabricated electrodes without (GV) or with (GVG) GQD coating. Inset is AC impedance plots. (e) Ragone plot of the GVG electrode for Li and Na ion batteries (based on the total mass of the whole electrode). Adapted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
MoS2 and its composites have been proved to be a highly desirable material for LIBs. For example, a high reversible capacity of 1290 mA h g−1 has been reported for the MoS2/graphene anode.152 But the performance of MoS2 batteries is generally compromised by substantial volume expansion, pulverization and aggregation of MoS2 materials.153 This is even more severe for sodium ion batteries because Na+ is larger than Li+. MoS2 QDs should be less susceptible to these problems. In addition, due to the small sizes of QDs, the interfacial storage, insertion and conversion processes of Li+ or Na+ ions become highly reversible. Furthermore, MoS2 QDs can be more easily and uniformly dispersed in the conducting matrix. Zhu et al. synthesized single-layered MoS2 QD (diameter ∼ 4 nm) embedded carbon nanofibers (diameter ∼ 50 nm) using electrospinning and thermal annealing (Fig. 12a).154 LIB anodes based on such material shows the remarkable rate performance and discharge capacity (1007 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1 A g−1; 661 mA h g−1 even after 1000 cycles at 10 A g−1) (Fig. 12b). This electrode is also outstanding for sodium ion storage. Li atoms or ions can well disperse on g-C3N4 and can readily pass through the intrinsic pores of g-C3N4 with low energy barrier.144,155 Liu et al. demonstrated that oxygenated g-C3N4 (O 21.52 wt% and N 14.47 wt%) can be used as a sulfur host for Li–S batteries because the intrinsic porous nature of oxygenated g-C3N4, graphitic N, ether O, and carboxylic O on carbon nitride sheets favor trapping and the reaction of polysulfide.156
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of a single-layered MoS2 QD embedded carbon nanofiber. (b) Cycling performance of the MoS2 QD-carbon nanofiber composite for lithium batteries. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2014) Wiley Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of Li adsorption and diffusion on the surface of phosphorene. (d) Energy profiles of Li diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions of phosphorene. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
Phosphorene is believed to be a promising anode material in batteries. DFT calculations show that Li atoms stably interact with phosphorus atoms in phosphorene.157,158 Due to the low energy barrier, Li atoms are able to diffuse in an ultrafast speed along the zigzag direction of phosphorene (Fig. 12c and d), which is estimated to be 102 or 104 times faster than that on MoS2 or graphene sheets, respectively.157–159 Interestingly and desirably, Li intercalation changes phosphorene from semiconducting to metallic. Furthermore, phosphorene is able to operate at high voltages (up to ∼2.9 V). Phosphorene is also theoretically predicted to be promising for Na-ion batteries, with the high theoretical capacity of 865 mA h g−1 with the sodiation form of NaP or 433 mA h g−1 with the sodiation form of NaP2.159 A sandwiched phosphorene–graphene hybrid has been prepared as the cathode for Na-ion batteries, which gives a high specific capacity of 2440 mA h g−1 (calculated using the mass of phosphorene only) at a current density of 0.05 A g−1 with good cycling stability (83% capacity retention after 100 cycles).160 In view of the interesting progress for these 2D sheets (MoS2, g-C3N4, and phosphorene), the possible applications of their QD forms for batteries are appealing. As compared to 2D sheets, the 2D-QDs should be more electrochemically active and the mechanical stress induced by ion intercalation and binding should be much reduced, therefore possibly leading to improved capacity and cycling stability for Li-ion or Na-ion batteries.
5.3 Photovoltaics
Taking the advantages of certain electronic or optical (adsorption and emission) properties, 2D-QDs may serve in different components for photovoltaics, including active layers, hole transport layers, sensitizers, catalysts or co-catalysts for counter electrodes. For example, Gao et al. fabricated a Si/GQD heterojunction solar cell using GQDs as the active layer, which promotes electron–hole separation and suppresses charge recombination (Fig. 13a).161 The device shows a photo conversion efficiency (PCE) of 6.63%, much higher than that of the bare Si device (2.26%) or the device using GO sheets as the active layer (3.99%). In a GQD/ZnO nanowire bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solid-state solar cell, the electron injection from GQDs to ZnO nanowires can boost the short-circuit current density (Jsc) by 75 times as compared with the bare ZnO nanowire based device.162 However, limited GQD contacts with the hole transporting layer in this solar cell cause a low hole collection efficiency and consequently a low PCE. Tavakoli et al. prepared quasi core/shell PbS QD/GQD hybrids via a hot injection approach (Fig. 13b).163 In comparison with the commonly used capping molecules (e.g. oleic acid and 3-mercaptopropionic acid) that hinder charge carrier transport in PbS QD films, the incomplete surface passivation of PbS QDs by an ultrathin layer of GQDs decreases the amount of trap states and promotes faster charge carrier extraction. The BHJ solar cells with PbS QD/GQDs as the active layer deliver a higher current density (13.4 mA cm−2), open voltage (0.58 V) and PCE (3.6%) than the devices based on the organic molecule capped PbS QDs (Fig. 13b).163 The PCE of the PbS QD/GQD device can be further improved to 4.1% by doping PbS QDs with Cd.
 Fig. 13  (a) The J–V curve of CH3–Si/GQD heterojunction solar cells under AM1.5G. The inset shows its band diagram. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic model of GQD-wrapped PbS QDs and the J–V curves of PbS-based solar cells under AM1.5G. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of the Cl-GQD based photovoltaic device and its working mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device with hydrothermally reduced GQDs in the BHJ layer and GQDs in the HTL. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell (left), schematic of its working mechanism (middle) and the J–V curves of the device with or without GQDs (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Using GQDs as the electron acceptor, Qu and coworkers developed BHJ polymer solar cells with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:GQD/Al.164 In the P3HT:GQD active layer, numerous p–n junctions are formed, which facilitate the dissociation of photogenerated excitons and electron transfer. Theoretically, the introduction of GQDs can improve the open circuit voltage (Voc) from 0.5 V to 0.8 V. The actual device can achieve a PCE of 1.28% with a Voc of 0.67 V and a Jsc of 6.33 mA cm−2. Zhao et al. prepared Cl-doped GQDs by a liquid exfoliation method and showed that the addition of these QDs to the P3HT active layer increases the charge carrier concentration of the polymer solar device by 30% and decreases the depletion layer width of the device (the working mechanism of the device is shown in Fig. 13c).165 Gupta et al. used aniline functionalized GQDs (ANI–GQDs) as the uniformly-dispersed filler of organic polymers (P3HT) for a photovoltaic device.166 The device with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:ANI–GQDs/LiF/Al gives a PCE of 1.14%, superior to that of the control device with a P3HT:ANI–graphene sheet as the active layer (PCE of 0.65%). Because of the larger size of graphene sheets than GQDs (a few μm vs. a few nm), a P3HT:ANI–graphene mixture film is much rougher than a P3HT:ANI–GQD film suggesting the large-scale phase separation exceeding the diffusion length of excitons, hence, its inferior performance. By adding GQDs with different abundance of oxygenated groups to the PTB7:PC71BM active layer of a BHJ solar cell, Kim et al. found that the improvement of optical absorptivity by rich oxygen functional groups of GQDs can lead to a considerably enhanced Jsc, while the efficient charge carrier extraction benefited from the better conductivity of less-oxidized GQDs can enhance fill factors (FFs).167 By balancing these two aspects, a maximum PCE of 7.6% has been achieved. The same group also found that the incorporation of GQDs into the PEDOT:PSS hole transporting layer (HTL) improved the Jsc of the BHJ device from 15.6 mA cm−2 to 17.3 mA cm−2, which can be attributed to the improved carrier conductance in the ITO/PEDOT:PSS due to the interaction between positively charged PEDOT and negatively charged GQDs.168 To realize the synergistic effects, GQDs and hydrothermally reduced GQDs were added, respectively, to the PEDOT:PSS HTL and the PTB7:PC71BM active layer (Fig. 13d) and an largely enhanced PCE (8.67%) was achieved.
Li et al. reported that the GQD film with homogenous morphology, good conductivity and well-matched work function (4.9 eV) with the HOMO level of P3HT (5.0 eV) can be used independently as the efficient HTL for organic solar cells.169 Compared with the device with graphene oxide (GO) sheets as the hole transport layer, the GQD-based device offers an enhanced FF (66.3% vs. 55.4%) and PCE (3.51% vs. 2.27%). Although the conventional solar cells based on PEDOT:PSS have similar performance, their performance often quickly degrades because of the high acidity and hygroscopic properties of PEDOT:PSS. The same authors have also demonstrated the use of the GQD film as the HTL in a small-molecule solar cell with DR3TBDT as the donor and PC71BM as the acceptor, which has achieved a high PCE of 6.82% along with good stability.169 Similarly, Ding et al. reported that GQD HTL outperforms PEDOT:PSS and the GO layer in the polymer solar cell device with PTB7:PC71BM or PCDTBT:PC71BM as an active layer.170 The improved performance can be attributed to better transmittance of the GQD layer than the PEDOT:PSS layer and better Ohmic contact between GQDs and donor polymers because of the higher work function of GQDs than GO.
Yan et al. have used chemical-group-free GQDs made using a bottom-up organic synthesis approach to sensitize the TiO2 photoanode in solar cells.50 However, the low binding affinity of GQDs with TiO2 causes a Jsc two-order of magnitude lower than the dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) based on the ruthenium complex photosensitive dye. But we speculate that the performance will be greatly improved if GQDs with oxygen groups, which can interact well with TiO2, are used.74,75 Fang et al. used GQDs as the co-sensitizer together with conventional N719 dye for TiO2 photoanodes and observed the increase of PCE from 4.9 to 6.10% and the increase of Jsc from 9.72 to 14.07 mA cm−2.171 Similarly, Mihalache et al. increased Jsc and PCE of the DSSC device using N-doped GQDs as the co-sensitizer with N3 Ru–dye.172 The enhanced performance can be attributed to the enhanced charge separation, suppressed electron recombination to the redox couple in the electrolyte, and overlapped PL spectrum of GQDs with the absorption spectrum of N3 Ru–dye. Lee et al. deposited GQDs with upconversion PL onto TiO2 to increase the amount of light being utilized by DSSCs, making the PCE of the device increasing from 7.28 to 9.2%.173
Instead of taking the advantages of GQD’s optical properties, Chen et al. improved the PCE of a DSSC by making the polypyrrole counter electrode highly porous after introduction of GQDs (comparable to that of the Pt counter electrode-based device).174 In a recently reported perovskite solar cell with the structure of CH3NH3PbI3/GQDs/TiO2, the introduction of an ultrathin layer of GQDs improves the PCE from 8.81to 10.15% and Jsc from 17.07 to 15.34 mA cm−2 (Fig. 13e).175 The improved performance is due to a nearly 3 times faster electron extraction (90–106 ps), which ensures an enhanced photon-to-current conversion in the visible-NIR regions and 75% PL quenching of the perovskite-TiO2 film.
Phosphorene shows promise for optoelectronic applications due to its high hole mobility (up to 1000 cm2 V−1 S−1), narrow direct bandgap (0.3–1.5 eV depending on the number of layers), and bipolar characteristics.176 Deng et al. fabricated an electrically-tunable p–n diode for photovoltaic energy conversion based on the heterojunction between p-type few-layer phosphorene and n-type monolayer MoS2, with a PCE of 0.3%.177 Reducing the thickness of few-layer phosphorene to double-layer has been theoretically predicted to increase the PCE of a p–n diode to 18%.176 On the basis of the bipolar feature of few-layer phosphorene, Buscema et al. fabricated a p–n heterojunction on a single phophorene sheet with two regions differently biased through two h-BN dielectric gates.110 The photovoltaic effect is extended to the NIR region (up to 940 nm). In terms of electrical properties, phosphorene fills the gap between graphene and TMDs. Therefore, phosphorene QDs shall fill the application gap between GQDs and TMD-QDs.
6 Summary and perspectives
Quantum dots derived from the atomically-thin two-dimensional sheets are emerging zero-dimensional materials. Complementing with each other, these 2D-QDs cover a wide range of interesting physicochemical properties (optical, catalytic, chemical, electrochemical, electronic, etc.). While inheriting some unique structural and physicochemical properties of their 2D counterparts, 2D-QDs often gain additional advantages for certain applications due to their lower dimension. First, their properties are more sensitively tunable by size, thickness, edge configurations, defects, chemical functionalities, covalently incorporated heteroatom dopants, or adsorbed molecular dopants. This could lead to the rise of new properties. Their properties are also more sensitive to local minute perturbations or interactions. This is desirable for sensor development. In addition, these QDs have better solubility, thus better amenability for solution-based processes. Moreover, it is often easier to hybridize them with other functional nanomaterials. Finally, small size is a key advantage if these QDs are to be used as the fluorescent tags on molecular targets for imaging purposes because the dynamics and functions of the targets may be altered by large tags.
Equipped with a wide range of extraordinary properties, 2D-QDs hence promise a broad spectrum of novel applications. Although this article places the emphasis on catalysis and energy applications, 2D-QDs are also promising for bioimaging, optical sensing, drug delivery, photodynamic therapy, electrochemical sensors, display, optoelectronics, etc. The biological applications of GQDs have been comprehensively reviewed in our recent article.7 Particularly to be mentioned, with unique combination of several key merits (including high photostability, highly tunable PL, molecular size, biocompatibility, ease to be conjugated with biomolecules), GQDs are superior to the conventional organic fluorophores and widely used semiconductor QDs for various bio-imaging purposes.7,178,179 For example, Zheng et al. have used insulin-functionalized GQDs to visualize the distribution and dynamics of insulin receptors in live adipocytes.180 Although GQDs for bio-imaging have been demonstrated by many laboratories, the potentials of other 2D-QDs have not yet been extensively explored. Non-specific cellular imaging in a number of cell types has been demonstrated using MoS2 QDs, WS2 QDs, or h-BN QDs, suggesting their potentials in bio-imaging.14,27–29,35 Zhang et al. demonstrated that single-layered g-C3N4 QDs can emit stable and strong two-photon fluorescence, and can effectively penetrate into and be trapped in the nuclei of HepG2 cells due to the interaction with chromatin whereby allowing selective two-photon imaging of cellular nucleus.45
Recently, Wang and co-workers showed that MoSe2 QDs can be used for photothermal therapy due to their small size, strong NIR adsorption, high photothermal conversion efficiency, good biocompatibility, colloidal stability and photostability.33 Yong et al. found that WS2 QDs can serve simultaneously as the photothermal agent as well as the radiosensitizer for synergistic radiation and photothermal therapy both in vitro and in vivo.38 Moreover, the strong NIR absorption and X-ray attenuation make WS2 QDs the desirable contrast imaging agent to visualise biological tissues via photoacoustic imaging and X-ray computed tomography. Sun et al. reported the outstanding photothermal performance of phosphorene QDs.49
GQDs have been employed for various sensitive optical sensors.22,181,182 Several studies have also demonstrated the potential of other 2D-QDs. For example, g-C3N4 QDs and its O,S co-doped derivatives have been used as effective fluorescent probes for label-free detection of Cu2+, Fe3+ or Hg2+ based on PL quenching upon strong binding of these metal ions with N, O and/or S functional groups of g-C3N4 QDs.44,60 Zhou et al. attributed the PL quenching of g-C3N4 QDs by Fe3+ to the unique redox potential of Fe3+ lying between the valence and conduction band of g-C3N4 QDs which facilitates the photo-induced electron transfer from g-C3N4 QDs.46 Tang et al. designed an interesting chemiluminescence (CL) sensor for selective detection of free chlorine in water which induces strong emission from g-C3N4 QDs.58 Using MoS2 QDs as the PL probes, Wang et al. demonstrated sensitive and selective detection of 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP).62
GQDs have demonstrated good potential for electronics and optoelectronics.19,183 Song et al. fabricated GQD-based light-emitting diodes (LEDs).184 Zhang et al. have shown that TMD QDs (e.g. MoSe2, WS2 and NbSe2 QDs) and phosphorene QDs can be mixed with polyvinylpyrrolidone as the active layer for memory devices, which exhibited a nonvolatile write-once-read-many behavior with a high ON/OFF ratio and good stability.30,47 Zhou and coworkers demonstrated that g-C3N4 QDs can be utilized as a photoconductor in an all-solid-state device.46
The family of 2D materials is still growing. Similar to phosphorene, silicene, germanene and stanene have also attracted research interest.185 The poor stability of these bulk 2D materials still remains as the greatest challenge for practical applications.186 But it can be improved after being hydrogenated. Recently, Gogotsi and coworkers have synthesized a class of 2D materials, specifically, early transition metal carbides and carbonitride (MXenes, where M is the early transition metal and X is C or N), such as Ti3C2, Ti2C, Nb2C, V2C, (Ti0.5Nb0.5)2C, (V0.5,Cr0.5)3C2, Ti3CN, and Ta4C3.187 The electronic properties of these MXenes can be tuned by changing their elemental composition and/or surface terminations. Very recently, the Yang group reported the solution-phase growth of atomically thin two-dimensional organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites. The continuous growth of the 2D family naturally increases the variety of 2D-QDs.188
Despite the great progress that has been made, the research on 2D-QDs is still at the early stage and many challenges are waiting to be tackled. Considering that the properties of 2D-QDs are highly sensitive to size, edge configurations, chemical functionalities and heteroatom dopants, developing synthetic methods to precisely control these parameters are much needed. However, this ambition has to be balanced by the needs for large-scale and low-cost production in often cases. The understanding on the catalytic, electrochemical, optical, and electrical properties of 2D-QDs is still much limited and sometimes even controversial because of the large heterogeneity of currently synthesized QDs and because of the lack of experimental studies to characterize them at a single particle level. The practical use of 2D-QDs requires careful consideration of their chemical and electrochemical stability. But the studies in this regard are limited. Phosphorene QDs are easily oxidized in air and water. TMD-QDs (particularly MoTe2 QD) can also be oxidized in air to various extents.189 In addition, when TMD-QDs are used as electrocatalysts, it should be noted that they are fully stable only within a small potential window.190 When 2D-QDs are used as the fluorescent reporters, their relatively low quantum yield and broad emission band could be problematic as compared with the conventional fluorophores. The former may be tackled by reducing the surface traps, and introducing the passivation layer, dopants, or chemical functionalities. The latter issue can be eliminated by synthesizing QDs with narrow property distribution. We hope this article will stimulate the development of this emerging and exciting field.
Acknowledgements
We thank the support from Ministry of Education of Singapore under an AcRF Tier 2 grant (MOE2014-T2-2-003, ARC31/14).
References
Y. X. Liu, X. C. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
X. W. Wang, G. Z. Sun, P. Routh, D. H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. H. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Y. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. X. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Xu, T. Liang, M. M. Shi and H. Z. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Wang, H. D. Zeng and L. Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1157–1165 RSC .
H. J. Sun, L. Wu, W. L. Wei and X. G. Qu, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Zhang, J. Zhang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8869–8890 CAS .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686–3699 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Wang, D. L. Gao, J. Q. Zhuo, Z. W. Zhu, P. Papakonstantinou, Y. Li and M. X. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 11939–11948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Xu, D. Li and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Wang, L. X. Wang, F. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, Z. P. Zhang, S. L. Chen, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3035–3042 RSC .
L. P. Lin, M. C. Rong, F. Luo, D. M. Chen, Y. R. Wang and X. Chen, Trends Analyt. Chem., 2014, 54, 83–102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, B. S. Li and L. S. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2254–2262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, G. H. Wu, G. H. Yang, J. Peng, J. W. Zhao and J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4015–4039 RSC .
M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 415–428 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Zhu, Y. B. Song, X. H. Zhao, J. R. Shao, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Dong, C. Q. Chen, X. T. Zheng, L. L. Gao, Z. M. Cui, H. B. Yang, C. X. Guo, Y. W. Chi and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8764–8766 RSC .
A. Ananthanarayanan, X. W. Wang, P. Routh, B. Sana, S. Lim, D. H. Kim, K. H. Lim, J. Li and P. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3021–3026 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, S. H. Noh, J. H. Lee, W. J. Lee, J. Y. Jaung, S. G. Lee and T. H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Lin and S. W. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10177–10179 RSC .
S. J. Zhuo, M. W. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Chen, Y. L. Lu, C. X. Liu and W. S. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Lin, Y. X. Xu, S. W. Zhang, I. M. Ross, A. C. M. Ong and D. A. Allwood, Small, 2014, 10, 60–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Lei, S. J. Xu, J. X. Wan and P. Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18902–18907 RSC .
H. Li, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, X. Zhen and E. H. Teo, Small, 2015, 11, 6491–6499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. C. Lai, Z. D. Liu, C. L. Tan, Y. Huang, B. Li, M. T. Zhao, L. H. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5425–5428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gopalakrishnan, D. Damien and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5297–5303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Gan, L. Z. Liu, H. Y. Wu, Y. L. Hao, Y. Shan, X. L. Wu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 233113 CrossRef .
L. H. Yuwen, J. J. Zhou, Y. Q. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Shan, Z. M. Luo, L. X. Weng, Z. G. Teng and L. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2720–2726 RSC .
V. Stengl, J. Tolasz and D. Popelkova, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 89612–89620 RSC .
L. Lin, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, I. M. Ross, A. C. Ong and D. A. Allwood, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8214–8223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Ha, D. J. Han, J. S. Choi, M. Park and T. S. Seo, Small, 2014, 10, 3858–3862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qiao, S. M. Yan, X. Y. Song, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Chen, W. Zhong and Y. W. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97696–97701 RSC .
Y. Yong, X. J. Cheng, T. Bao, M. Zu, L. Yan, W. Y. Yin, C. C. Ge, D. L. Wang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12451–12463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Wu, X. Y. Zhang, X. D. Ma, Y. P. Qiu and T. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95178–95182 RSC .
B. L. Li, L. X. Chen, H. L. Zou, J. L. Lei, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9831–9838 RSC .
D. Gopalakrishnan, D. Damien, B. Li, H. Gullappalli, V. K. Pillai, P. M. Ajayan and M. M. Shaijumon, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6293–6296 RSC .
W. J. Wang, J. C. Yu, Z. R. Shen, D. K. L. Chan and T. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10148–10150 RSC .
X. J. Bai, S. C. Yan, J. J. Wang, L. Wang, W. J. Jiang, S. L. Wu, C. P. Sun and Y. F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17521–17529 CAS .
S. W. Zhang, J. X. Li, M. Y. Zeng, J. Z. Xu, X. K. Wang and W. P. Hu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4157–4162 RSC .
X. D. Zhang, H. X. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. F. Xie, Y. P. Tian, J. Wang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4438–4443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. M. Xie, Z. D. Liu, C. L. Tan, Z. M. Luo, H. Li, J. D. Lin, L. Q. Sun, W. Chen, Z. C. Xu, L. H. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3653–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sofer, D. Bousa, J. Luxa, V. Mazanek and M. Pumera, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1563–1566 RSC .
Z. B. Sun, H. H. Xie, S. Y. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. N. Guo, J. D. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Y. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526–11530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. S. Li and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. M. Dai and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. L. Wang, T. Xu, H. B. Liao, C. J. Yao, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Z. W. Chen, D. Y. Pan, L. T. Sun and M. H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Lin, M. C. Rong, S. S. Lu, X. H. Song, Y. X. Zhong, J. W. Yan, Y. R. Wang and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1872–1878 RSC .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qu, Z. C. Sun, M. Zheng, J. Li, Y. Q. Zhang, G. Q. Zhang, H. F. Zhao, X. Y. Liu and Z. G. Xie, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, L. G. Zhang, H. F. Zhao, Z. G. Xie, X. B. Jing, R. E. Haddad, H. Y. Fan and Z. C. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5294 CAS .
X. M. Li, S. P. Lau, L. B. Tang, R. B. Ji and P. Z. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5323–5328 RSC .
Y. R. Tang, Y. Y. Su, N. Yang, L. C. Zhang and Y. Lv, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Li, B. L. Li, S. H. Peng, D. H. Li, S. Y. Yang and Y. P. Fang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35144–35148 RSC .
Y. C. Lu, J. Chen, A. J. Wang, N. Bao, J. J. Feng, W. P. Wang and L. X. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 73–78 RSC .
H. Huang, C. C. Du, H. Y. Shi, X. Feng, J. Li, Y. L. Tan and W. B. Song, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and Y. N. Ni, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Ren, L. Q. Pang, Y. X. Zhang, X. D. Ren, H. B. Fan and S. Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10693–10697 CAS .
H. H. Lin, C. X. Wang, J. P. Wu, Z. Z. Xu, Y. J. Huang and C. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8492–8497 RSC .
W. Y. Gao, M. Q. Wang, C. X. Ran and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1709–1712 RSC .
H. O. Churchill and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 330–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sk, A. Ananthanarayanan, L. Huang, K. H. Lim and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6954–6960 RSC .
J. Sun, S. W. Yang, Z. Y. Wang, H. Shen, T. Xu, L. T. Sun, H. Li, W. W. Chen, X. Y. Jiang, G. Q. Ding, Z. H. Kang, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 434–440 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ananthanarayanan, Y. Wang, P. Routh, M. A. Sk, A. Than, M. Lin, J. Zhang, J. Chen, H. D. Sun and P. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8159–8165 RSC .
J. H. Shen, Y. H. Zhu, C. Chen, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2580–2582 RSC .
Q. Feng, Q. Q. Cao, M. Li, F. C. Liu, N. J. Tang and Y. W. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013111 CrossRef .
M. Li, W. B. Wu, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng, N. J. Tang, W. Zhong and Y. W. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 103107 CrossRef .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, B. Dragnea and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 56–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 579–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L. S. Li and X. Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Shinde and V. K. Pillai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2482–2485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. X. Zheng, Z. X. Cong, J. R. Wang, J. Li, H. H. Yang and G. N. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 519–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Sun, N. Gao, K. Dong, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6202–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Sun, A. D. Zhao, N. Gao, K. Li, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Chen, G. H. Wu, J. M. Chen, X. Chen, Z. X. Xie and X. R. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3693–3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yin, H. J. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Gao and Z. Y. Tang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8288–8297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, B. S. Li, X. Cui, Q. S. Wei, K. Tajima and L. S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1119–1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ju and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 1903–1910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Y. Chu, J. Liu, J. Wan and M. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16163–16171 RSC .
T. F. Yeh, C. Y. Teng, S. J. Chen and H. S. Teng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song and S. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14050–14060 CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Cao, J. Ma, Y. P. Lin, B. X. Yao, F. M. Li, W. Weng and X. C. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 151, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8605–8607 RSC .
X. C. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Zhu, P. Xiao, H. L. Li and S. A. C. Carabineiro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16449–16465 CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 CAS .
X. C. Wang, K. Maeda, X. F. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. D. Hou, X. Z. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Krepel, L. Kalikhman-Razvozov and O. Hod, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21110–21118 CAS .
S. S. R. K. C. Yamijala, A. Bandyopadhyay and S. K. Pati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23295–23304 CAS .
Y. Xi, M. W. Zhao, X. P. Wang, S. J. Li, X. J. He, Z. H. Wang and H. X. Bu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17743–17749 CAS .
N. Kumar, K. Moses, K. Pramoda, S. N. Shirodkar, A. K. Mishra, U. V. Waghmare, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5806–5821 CAS .
C. J. Huang, C. Chen, M. W. Zhang, L. H. Lin, X. X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7698 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xi, X. Y. Zhao, A. Z. Wang, X. P. Wang, H. X. Bu and M. W. Zhao, Physica E, 2013, 49, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandyopadhyay, S. S. R. K. C. Yamijala and S. K. Pati, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13881–13887 RSC .
V. Stengl, J. Henych and M. Kormunda, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2014, 6, 1106–1116 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Loh, R. Pandey, Y. K. Yap and S. P. Karna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1565–1574 CAS .
R. M. Clark, B. J. Carey, T. Daeneke, P. Atkin, M. Bhaskaran, K. Latham, I. S. Cole and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16763–16772 RSC .
P. Liang, T. Shen, H. B. Shu and S. Xing, Solid State Commun., 2015, 218, 25–30 CrossRef .
L. J. Cao, S. B. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. J. Gong, L. L. Ma, G. Shi, S. D. Lei, Y. H. Zhang, S. T. Zhang, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2013, 9, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. D. Firmiano, A. C. Rabelo, C. J. Dalmaschio, A. N. Pinheiro, E. C. Pereira, W. H. Schreiner and E. R. Leite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301380 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. F. Xu, D. Tomanek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Li, Y. J. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Q. Ge, X. D. Ou, H. Wu, D. L. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. B. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang and Y. C. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CAS .
G. X. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 524–531 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Saidi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4160–4165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Favaro, L. Ferrighi, G. Fazio, L. Colazzo, C. Di Vaentin, C. Durante, F. Sedona, A. Gennaro, S. Agnoli and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 129–144 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Luo, D. L. Yang, G. Q. Qi, J. Z. Shang, H. P. Yang, Y. L. Wang, L. H. Yuwen, T. Yu, W. Huang and L. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20605–20611 CAS .
H. L. Fei, R. Q. Ye, G. L. Ye, Y. J. Gong, Z. W. Peng, X. J. Fan, E. L. G. Samuel, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10837–10843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Wang, C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, F. Zhao, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Carbon, 2014, 74, 170–179 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. He, Y. Song, K. Liu, A. Walter, S. Chen and S. W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi and K. Uosaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13755–13761 RSC .
A. Lyalin, A. Nakayama, K. Uosaki and T. Taketsugu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2809–2820 RSC .
T. Y. Wang, J. Q. Zhuo, Y. Chen, K. Z. Du, P. Papakonstantinou, Z. W. Zhu, Y. H. Shao and M. X. Li, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Du, H. Huang, X. Feng, S. Y. Wu and W. B. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7616–7622 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. H. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. J. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
U. Sim, J. Moon, J. An, J. H. Kang, S. E. Jerng, J. Moon, S. P. Cho, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1329–1338 CAS .
D. Y. Pan, C. Xi, Z. Li, L. Wang, Z. W. Chen, B. Luc and M. H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3551–3555 CAS .
H. Liu, T. Lv, C. K. Zhu, X. Su and Z. F. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 396, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Ho, J. C. Yu, J. Lin, J. G. Yu and P. S. Li, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5865–5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Lee, S. C. Lee, J. G. Won, B. C. Son, S. H. Choi, Y. S. Kim, S. Y. Park, H. S. Kim, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Fu, Y. F. Hu, Y. G. Yang, W. Liu and S. F. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 244, 102–110 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Guo, Y. Q. Dong, H. B. Yang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moon, J. An, U. Sim, S. P. Cho, J. H. Kang, C. Chung, J. H. Seo, J. Lee, K. T. Nam and B. H. Hong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3501–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Yeh, S. J. Chen and H. S. Teng, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 476–485 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Li, J. Zhao and J. L. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1858 Search PubMed .
B. S. Sa, Y. L. Li, J. S. Qi, R. Ahuja and Z. M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26560–26568 CAS .
G. Z. Sun, J. Q. Liu, X. Zhang, X. W. Wang, H. Li, Y. Yu, W. Huang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12576–12580 CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. K. Huang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6761–6766 CAS .
W. W. Liu, Y. Q. Feng, X. B. Yan, J. T. Chen and Q. J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Liu, X. B. Yan, J. T. Chen, Y. Q. Feng and Q. J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6053–6062 RSC .
Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. W. Lu, N. Chen, Z. P. Zhang, H. Li, H. B. Shao and L. T. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 195401 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, Y. Hu, C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Z. P. Zhang, H. B. Shao and L. T. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19307–19313 RSC .
S. Mondal, U. Rana and S. Malik, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12365–12368 RSC .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chen and V. G. Gomes, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988–11994 RSC .
Y. T. Gong, M. M. Li and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 931–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wen, P. W. Gong, J. F. Sun, J. Q. Wang and S. R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13874–13883 CAS .
A. Pakdel, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 934–959 RSC .
S. Saha, M. Jana, P. Khanra, P. Samanta, H. Koo, N. C. Murmu and T. Kuila, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14211–14222 CAS .
E. Iyyamperumal, S. Y. Wang and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5259–5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. L. Fei, G. D. Ruan, C. S. Xiang and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8163–8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Chao, C. R. Zhu, X. H. Xia, J. L. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Y. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Zhu, D. L. Chao, J. Sun, I. M. Bacho, Z. X. Fan, C. F. Ng, X. H. Xia, H. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen, G. Q. Ding and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400499 Search PubMed .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 CAS .
Y. J. Gong, S. B. Yang, Z. Liu, L. L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3979–3984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Zhu, X. K. Mu, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2152–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9318–9323 CAS .
J. H. Liu, W. F. Li, L. M. Duan, X. Li, L. Ji, Z. B. Geng, K. K. Huang, L. H. Lu, L. S. Zhou, Z. R. Liu, W. Chen, L. W. Liu, S. H. Feng and Y. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5137–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Li, Y. M. Yang, G. Zhang and Y. W. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. S. Yao, C. X. Huang, Y. B. Yuan, Y. Z. Liu, S. M. Liu, K. M. Deng and E. J. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6923–6928 CAS .
S. J. Zhao, W. Kang and J. M. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19046–19052 CAS .
J. Sun, H. W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. T. Yuan, G. Y. Zheng, Y. M. Sun, Y. Z. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, K. Ding, Y. Wang, K. Q. Ruan, S. L. Diao, Q. Zhang, B. Q. Sun and J. S. Jie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5164–5171 CAS .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127–20131 CAS .
M. M. Tayakoli, H. Aashuri, A. Simchi, S. Kalytchuk and Z. Y. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18886–18895 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. E. Deng, Y. B. Hou and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zhao, L. B. Tang, J. Z. Xiang, R. B. Ji, Y. B. Hu, J. Yuan, J. Zhao, Y. J. Tai and Y. H. Cai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 29222–29229 RSC .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Kim, M. J. Park, S. J. Kim, D. H. Wang, S. P. Cho, S. Bae, J. H. Park and B. H. Hong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7207–7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Kim, S. J. Kim, M. J. Park, S. Bae, S. P. Cho, Q. G. Du, D. H. Wang, J. H. Park and B. H. Hong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Li, W. Ni, B. Kan, X. J. Wan, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, G. K. Long, Y. Zuo and Y. S. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18973–18978 RSC .
Z. C. Ding, Z. Hao, B. Meng, Z. Y. Xie, J. Liu and L. M. Dai, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Fang, M. Y. Li, K. M. Guo, J. Li, M. C. Pan, L. H. Bai, M. D. Luoshan and X. Z. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 634–638 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mihalache, A. Radoi, M. Mihaila, C. Munteanu, A. Marin, M. Danila, M. Kusko and C. Kusko, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 306–315 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, J. Ryu and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9995–9997 RSC .
L. J. Chen, C. X. Guo, Q. M. Zhang, Y. L. Lei, J. L. Xie, S. J. Ee, G. H. Guai, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2047–2052 CAS .
Z. L. Zhu, J. A. Ma, Z. L. Wang, C. Mu, Z. T. Fan, L. L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Z. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1289–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Song, S. J. Zhu and B. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27184–27200 RSC .
Z. T. Fan, S. H. Li, F. L. Yuan and L. Z. Fan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 19773–19789 RSC .
X. T. Zheng, A. Than, A. Ananthanaraya, D. H. Kim and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6278–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Xu, J. Q. Liu, C. L. Gao and E. K. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, X. W. Wang, J. Chen, L. Sun and P. Chen, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 034018 CrossRef .
K. Hola, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, R. Zboril and A. L. Rogach, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 590–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Song, M. H. Jang, J. Chung, S. H. Jin, B. H. Kim, S. H. Hur, S. Yoo, Y. H. Cho and S. Jeon, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. L. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. N. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L. W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. D. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jaegermann and D. Schmeisser, Surf. Sci., 1986, 165, 143–160 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chia, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11941–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xuewan Wang
	Xuewan Wang received his BS from Yantai University (China) in 2008 and MS from Zhejiang University (China) in 2011. He is currently a 4th year PhD student in Prof. Peng Chen’s group in Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). His main research focus is on the synthesis of graphene materials and their applications for energy storage and conversion, and sensing.

Peng Chen
	Dr Peng Chen is currently a full Professor in School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). He completed his PhD in the University of Missouri (Columbia) in 2002. This was followed by a period of postdoctoral research at Harvard University. His current research focuses on nanomaterials, biosensors, and bionanotechnology, which has resulted in ∼150 publications.

Chemical etching	GQDs	Carbon black, HNO3 oxidation	15	<0.7	44.5	
21

g-C3N4 QDs	Bulk g-C3N4, H2SO4 treatment and DMF/H2O hydrolysis	2–4	N/A	N/A	
46



Hydrothermal/solvothermal methods	GQDs	GO sheets, hydrothermal in H2O2/NH3·H2O	2.0	1.6	70	
23

2.1	1.6	72
2.1	1.6	58
GQDs	Pyrene, nitration and hydrothermal in alkaline solution	2.6–3.8	1–2	45–63	
52

g-C3N4 QDs	Bulk g-C3N4, H2SO4/HNO3 treatment, hydrothermal treatment in NH3·H2O and sonication	2–6	0.35	N/A	
42

h-BN QDs	Bulk h-BN, sonication-solvothermal method	<5	<3	∼30	
29

MoS2 QDs	Bulk MoS2/WS2, sonication assisted	3.3	1.2	13	
14

WS2 QDs	2.5	1.2	18
MoS2 QDs	Ammonia molybdate, thiourea, N-acetyl-L-cysteine	1.5–2.5	<0.9	N/A	
61



Electrochemical scissoring	GQDs	3D graphene electrode in ionic liquid	3	1.25	N/A	
22

MoS2 QDs	Bulk MoS2 electrode in ionic liquid	2.5–6	0.8–1.5	N/A	
41

MoS2 QDs	MoS2 nanosheets, electro-Fenton reaction	3–8	<2	N/A	
40



Li/K intercalation	GQDs	MWCNT, K	18.5	0.9	23	
24

h-BN QDs	h-BN flake, K	10	0.9	2.1	
27

MoS2 QDs	MoS2 nanoparticles, Li	10–20	0.7	N/A	
36



Ultrasonication	GQDs	Graphene sheets, sonication in H2SO4/HNO3	3–5	N/A	N/A	
25

MoSe2 QDs	Bulk MoSe2, tip sonication with F-127	1.6–3	0.7–2.1	N/A	
33

Phosphorene QDs	Black phosphorus powder, grinding and sonication	3.3–6.5	1–2.8	N/A	
47

Phosphorene QDs	Black phosphorus powder, tip and bath sonication	0.8–4.4	0.9–2.1	N/A	
49



Thermal/microwave carbonization	GQDs	Citric acid, 200 °C for 30 min	4.2	1–2	N/A	
54

g-C3N4 QDs	Thiourea and citric acid, 200 °C for 2 h	2.78	N/A	N/A	
60

g-C3N4 QDs	Guanidine and EDTA, microwave (595 W, 12 s)	3.2–6.5	1.7	N/A	
58


 	Fig. 1  Band structures of 2D crystalline materials. Adapted and modified with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of heteroatom doped GQDs. (b) Calculated emission wavelength (nm) as a function of the diameter of GQDs. (b) adapted and modified with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of (a) g-C3N4 sheets and (b) g-C3N4 QDs with 3 tri-s-triazine units and chemical functionalities. (c) UV-vis absorption (red), PL excitation (dashed line), and PL emission (solid line) of g-C3N4 QDs synthesized via hydrolysis of bulk g-C3N4 in DMF and H2SO4 mixture solution. (d) PL spectra of g-C3N4 QDs at different excitation wavelengths. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of h-BN. (b) Schematic of C-doped h-BN QDs. (c) PL-excitation and PL spectra of synthesized h-BN QDs (insets are the photographs of h-BN QDs with and without UV illumination). (d) Luminescence diagrams of different luminescent centers of h-BN QDs. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright (2014) Wiley Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of WS2 QDs. (b–e) Diagram of the band structure, UV-vis absorption spectra, PL spectra and time resolved PL decay profile (emission at 461 nm and excitation at 360 nm) of WS2 QDs. Inset of (d) is the photograph of WS2 QDs with and without UV illumination. (b–e) Adapted and modified with permission from ref. 35. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of bulk black phosphorus. (b) TEM images of phosphorene QDs. Inset: HRTEM images of phosphorene with different lattice fringes. (c) UV-vis absorption spectrum of phosphorene QDs. Inset: Photos of the phosphorene QDs and their Tyndall effect. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright (2015) Wiley Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Illustration of the fabrication procedure for B,N co-doped GQD/rGO composite and the ORR polarization curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 900 rpm in O2 saturated 0.1 KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c and d) Synthetic protocol of g-C3N4 QD/rGO composite and the ORR polarization curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotating speed of 1200 rpm in O2 saturated 0.1 KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 15. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of a heterodimensional catalyst system consisting MoS2 (or WS2) QDs and MoS2 (or WS2) nanosheets. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of the QD/nanosheet composite of MoS2 or WS2. Adapted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright (2015) Wiley Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of charge separation at the g-C3N4 QD/BiPO4 interface and the photocatalytic activity of a g-C3N4 QD/BiPO4 hybrid for MO degradation. Adapted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Photo to current conversion efficiency spectra of a GQD@ZnO NW photoelectrode-based device and its schematic of the photoelectrochemical water splitting process. Adapted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright (2013) Wiley Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Fabrication of a symmetric microsupercapacitor by electrophoretic deposition of GQDs on an interdigital finger electrode and its CV curve at 1000 V s−1. Adapted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2013) Wiley Publishing Group. (b) Fabrication of a supercapacitor based on a GQD/CNT composite film and its galvanostatic charge–discharge curve at 700 μA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2013) IOP Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Fabrication of a 3D graphene supported GQD-coated VO2 nanobelt array (GVG). (b and c) SEM and HRTEM images of the hybrid structure. (d) Rate performance of the as-fabricated electrodes without (GV) or with (GVG) GQD coating. Inset is AC impedance plots. (e) Ragone plot of the GVG electrode for Li and Na ion batteries (based on the total mass of the whole electrode). Adapted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of a single-layered MoS2 QD embedded carbon nanofiber. (b) Cycling performance of the MoS2 QD-carbon nanofiber composite for lithium batteries. (a and b) Adapted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2014) Wiley Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of Li adsorption and diffusion on the surface of phosphorene. (d) Energy profiles of Li diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions of phosphorene. (c and d) Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The J–V curve of CH3–Si/GQD heterojunction solar cells under AM1.5G. The inset shows its band diagram. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic model of GQD-wrapped PbS QDs and the J–V curves of PbS-based solar cells under AM1.5G. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of the Cl-GQD based photovoltaic device and its working mechanism. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of an organic photovoltaic device with hydrothermally reduced GQDs in the BHJ layer and GQDs in the HTL. Adapted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2015) Nature Publishing Group. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell (left), schematic of its working mechanism (middle) and the J–V curves of the device with or without GQDs (right). Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
