Perovskite precursor solution chemistry: from fundamentals to photovoltaic applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00656C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00656C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011-2038Perovskite precursor solution chemistry: from fundamentals to photovoltaic applications

        
          
            Minsu 
            Jung
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sang-Geun 
            Ji
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gwisu 
            Kim
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sang Il 
            Seok
          
          
        
      *
      Perovtronics Research Center, Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, South Korea. E-mail: seoksi@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      9th August 2018
    First published on 3rd January 2019AbstractOver the last several years, inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites have shown dramatic achievements in photovoltaic performance and device stability. Despite the significant progress in photovoltaic application, an in-depth understanding of the fundamentals of precursor solution chemistry is still lacking. In this review, the fundamental background knowledge of nucleation and crystal growth processes in solution including the LaMer model and Ostwald ripening process is described. This review article also highlights the recent progress in precursor-coordinating molecule interaction in solution along with the role of anti-solvent in the solvent engineering process to control nucleation and crystal growth. Moreover, chemical pathways from precursor solution to perovskite film formation are given. This represents identification of the intermediate phase induced by precursor-coordinating molecule interaction and responsible intermediate species for uniform and dense perovskite film formation. Further to the description of chemical phenomena in solution, the contemporary progress in chemical precursor composition is also provided to comprehend the current research approaches to further enhance photovoltaic performance and device stability. On the basis of the critical and comprehensive review, we provide some perspectives to further achieve high-performance perovskite solar cells with long-term device stability through precisely controlled nucleation and crystal growth in precursor solution.
Minsu Jung
Minsu Jung received his BS and MS degrees in Chemistry from Yonsei University, South Korea, in 2003 and 2005. Prior to commencing his PhD, he worked at LS Cable as Senior Researcher. He has been awarded a University International Postgraduate Award in 2011 and completed his PhD from University of New South Wales, Australia, in 2015. Afterwards, he moved to Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea, for his postdoctoral research with Prof. Sang Il Seok. He is currently a Research Assistant Professor and focuses on the study of the fundamental properties of inorganic–organic perovskites and their photovoltaic applications.
Sang-Geun Ji
Sang-Geun Ji obtained his BS degree in Energy Engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2017. He is currently a Master Research student under the supervision of Prof. Sang Il Seok at School of Energy Engineering, UNIST. His research interests include inorganic charge transporting materials and semi-transparent perovskite solar cells.
Gwisu Kim
Gwisu Kim obtained his BS degree in Energy Engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2017. He is currently a Combined MS-PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Sang Il Seok at School of Energy Engineering, UNIST. His research focuses on the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells and low bandgap mixed lead/tin perovskite solar cells.
Sang Il Seok
Sang Il Seok is currently a Distinguished Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Korea. Before he joined UNIST in 2015, he served as the principle investigator of Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology and as a professor at the Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University. He obtained his BS and PhD degrees from Kyungpook National University and Seoul National University, Korea, respectively. His current research focuses on developing functional inorganic–organic-hybrid materials and energy devices including perovskite solar cells.
1. Introduction
Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites have shown a significant advance in photovoltaics, featuring a certified efficiency of 23.3% comparable to commercialised thin-film solar cell technologies.1–5 Since the pioneering work on the intermediate phase induced by precursor-coordinating molecule interaction and the introduction of anti-solvent in 2014,6 it has been one of the primary factors to the significant progress in photovoltaic application. A large number of studies have put emphasis on the perovskite film formation by the solvent engineering process enabling uniform and dense surface morphology, large grain size, perovskite crystal phase purity and crystallinity, which could influence reproducible photovoltaic performance and long-term device stability. However, the level of in-depth understanding of fundamental solution chemistry such as nucleation, crystal growth, precursor-coordinating molecule interaction, and chemical pathways to final perovskite film formation did not catch up with the rapid advance in the high performance of solution-processed perovskite solar cells. In addition to spin-coating method, there are several solution-processed deposition techniques such as methylamine gas vapour annealing,7 vapour-assisted solution process8 and gas-assisted solution process.9 Therefore, for solution-based deposition of perovskite films, in-depth understanding of precursor solution chemistry with physical aspects is essential as it plays a significant role in controlling nucleation and crystal growth in connection with film morphology and subsequently device performance.
In this review, an overview of the established nucleation and crystal growth mechanisms will be summarised. We then move on to the description of precursor-coordinating molecule interaction in solution pertaining to the nature of the intermediate phase depending on various coordinating molecules such as dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), acetonitrile and urea in combination with the role of anti-solvent in the solvent engineering process. Subsequently, chemical pathways from precursor solution to perovskite film formation are dealt with for identifying the structure of the intermediate phase and understanding clearly chemical reactions during the precursor to perovskite transition. The recent progress in chemical precursor composition is also reviewed to control nucleation and crystal growth affecting surface morphology, grain size, defect passivation, crystal phase purity, phase stability, and crystallinity. On the basis of the understanding of the fundamentals of solution chemistry with physical aspects and current research approaches, we provide important perspectives on the development of high-performance perovskite solar cells with long-term device stability.
2. Fundamentals of nucleation and crystal growth
An in-depth understanding of nucleation and crystal growth processes in solution is expected to possess infinite potential for perovskite-based optoelectronic applications such as light-emitting diodes, photodetectors and resistive memory devices as well as photovoltaics. In this section, we outline the backgrounds of the fundamental processes including nucleation and crystal growth from the solution.
2.1. Classical nucleation
Before describing the backgrounds of classical nucleation in this section, recalling the term surface energy is important due to the fact that the formation of surface energy of solids in liquids, or solid–liquid interfacial energy is based on the fundamentals of nucleation and crystal growth.10,11 Surface energy or interfacial energy is one of the most fundamental quantities in the elementary process of particle formation such as nucleation, particle growth, Ostwald ripening, coagulation and so on. A monomer corresponds to the minimum subunit of a particle and a cluster consists of n monomers. In the solution phase, some of the monomers could be present in different forms such as complexes or dissociated ions. The term monomer also indicates a monomeric species in the molecular form without dissociation or complexation. Nucleation is a step in the localised formation of a distinct thermodynamic phase. The nucleation of fine particles is initiated when the concentration of the solute is sufficiently higher than the solubility of the solid. In other words, the solution must be in a supersaturated state. Nucleation without preferential nucleation sites is the so-called homogeneous nucleation, where nuclei form uniformly throughout the parent phase. The process of homogeneous nuclei formation can be considered thermodynamically by examining the total free energy, ΔG, of a spherical particle defined as the sum of the surface free energy (ΔGs), i.e. free energy between the particle surface and the bulk of the particle, and the bulk free energy (ΔGv), i.e. free energy between a very large particle and the solute in solution.11–13 As shown in Fig. 1a, ΔGs is a positive quantity proportional to r2. In a supersaturated solution, ΔGv is a negative quantity proportional to r3. Their relationship can be defined as given by eqn (1) (1)where r is a spherical particle with a radius and γ is the surface energy or the interfacial energy between the crystalline surface and the supersaturated solution. The bulk free energy (ΔGv) in eqn (1) is dependent on the temperature T, Boltzmann's constant kB, the molar volume of the nucleus v, and the degree of supersaturation in the solution S, which is defined as S = C/Cs with C as the solute concentration and Cs as the solubility limit (C > Cs). Thus, the bulk free energy ΔGv can also be defined as given by (2)Taking into account positive surface free energy (ΔGs) and negative bulk free energy (ΔGv), the formation of nuclei in solution is strongly dependent on the critical radius (r*). In other words, nuclei with radii smaller than the critical radius (r*) dissolve back into the solution, while bigger nuclei with radii greater than r* are thermodynamically stable and they will grow further. The critical nuclei radius indicates the minimum size at which a particle can grow further in solution without being redissolved.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the classical free energy diagram for homogeneous nucleation as a function of particle radius. ΔG is the free energy change, which is the sum of the surface energy change (ΔGs) and the bulk free energy change (ΔGv) and is a function of the nucleus radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation. ΔG* is the nucleation barrier for solidification and r* is the critical size of the particle in equilibrium with the liquid. (b) Illustration of the contact angle (θ) for heterogeneous nucleation. (c) Ratio of free energies of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation as a function of the contact angle (θ). 
In contrast to homogeneous nucleation, heterogeneous nucleation normally occurs much easier at nucleation sites (i.e. suspended particle or substrate) on surfaces contacting the liquid (Fig. 1b) as a stable nucleating surface is present.14 As described in eqn (1), interfacial energy (or surface energy in homogeneous nucleation) γ is one of the significant parameters affecting the nucleation process. Fig. 1b illustrates an interfacial energy diagram for three phases of two solids and a liquid in contact.11,15,16 The terms γcl, γsl, and γcs represent interfacial energies between the crystalline phase and the liquid, the solid surface and the liquid, and the crystalline phase and the solid surface, respectively. If θ ≤ π, nuclei and active centres have a high affinity and as a result, the nucleation barrier (ΔGhetero*) is dramatically lowered due to effective reduction in the interface energy. Thus, the free energy for heterogeneous nucleation is corrected by introducing Φ, which is a factor dependent on the contact angle θ, to make it equivalent to the counterpart of homogeneous nucleation as expressed in eqn (3). ΔGhetero* = ΦΔGhomo*(3)To determine the factor Φ as expressed in eqn (3), cosθ can be defined as eqn (4) (4)Thus, the factor Φ in eqn (3) can be expressed as eqn (5) (5)when θ = 180°, cosθ = −1 and Φ = 1, ΔGhetero* = ΔGhomo*(6)when θ = 0°, cosθ = 1 and Φ = 0, ΔGhetero* = 0(7)As described above, the relationship between Φ and θ indicates that heterogeneous nucleation readily occur at a lower saturation. In order to grow uniform films, it is important to form heterogeneous nuclei of high density on the substrate rather than homogeneous nucleation or heterogeneous nucleation on colloidal particles.
2.2. Classical growth
The growth of particles in solution occurs through two processes, i.e. one is the diffusion of the monomers from the bulk solution to the particle surface and the other is the reaction of the monomers on the particle surface. Particles suspended in a liquid randomly move around due to Brownian motion (Fig. 2a). As a result, at the boundary between the two phases of solid–liquid, a diffusion layer is formed which is some static fluid layer around individual particles and a bulk liquid phase outside the static layer as shown in Fig. 2b.10,11,17 Firstly, the monomer diffusion is described by Fick's first law as (8)where J, r, D, C and x represent the total flux of monomers, the particle radius, the diffusion coefficient, and the monomer concentration at a distance (x), and the distance from the surface, respectively. In the case of particles in solution, δ is the distance from the particle surface to the bulk concentration (Cb) of monomers in solution, and Ci indicates the concentration of the solute at the particle/solution interface (Fig. 1b). Thus, eqn (8) can be rewritten as (9)Considering the case of diffusion-controlled growth, the total flux of monomers (J) is constant irrespective of the distance (x) due to the steady state of the solute diffusion (x = r + δ). Thus, the total flux of monomers (J) at the surface of the particles can be expressed by J = 4πDr(Cb − Ci)(10)As described at the beginning of this section, the particle growth occurs by the monomer reaction on the particle surface as well as the monomer diffusion. In the case of the surface reaction, the total flux of monomers (J) is equivalent to the monomer consumption rate at the particle surface by the particle growth. The relationship can be expressed as J = 4πr2k(Ci − Cr)(11)where k is the rate of surface reaction and Cr denotes the solubility of the spherical particle with a radius (r). Eqn (11) implies that the rate of the surface reaction is independent of particle's size. On the basis of eqn (10) and (11), either the diffusion reaction or the surface reaction can be the rate-determining step of the overall growth process. The three plausible particle growth modes according to the favourable reaction process of diffusion or surface reaction are illustrated in Fig. 2c–e.18,19 However, considering that the mononuclear-layer growth (Fig. 2e) is a special growth mode in the initial stage of particle growth, the significant mode to understand the particle growth process in solution is the diffusion-controlled growth (Fig. 2c) and the polynuclear-layer reaction-controlled growth (Fig. 2d). The diffusion-controlled growth promotes the formation of uniform size particles due to the steady state diffusion of the solute in solution. Conversely, the attachment of solutes through surface reaction is so slow that monomer concentration at the particle surface reaches values that are nearly the same as in the bulk solution as shown in Fig. 2b. As described in Section 2.1, when nuclei radius is larger than the critical nuclei radius, stable heterogeneous nuclei are formed and then they will grow further. In addition to the particle growth in solution, classical growth models involving thin film formation are also illustrated schematically in Fig. 3.20 In the Volmer–Weber process (Fig. 3a), small clusters are nucleated directly on the substrate surface and then grow into islands of the condensed phase. This occurs when the monomers deposited are more strongly bound to each other than to the substrate as the surface free energy of the substrate is larger than the sum of the surface free energy of the film and the free energy of the film–substrate interface.21 In contrast to the island growth model, the layer growth mechanism also known as the Frank–van der Merwe model, as shown in Fig. 3b, exhibits the opposite characteristics. The condensing particles are more strongly bound to the substrate than to each other and then a monolayer is formed on the substrate surface. The last of the three film growth mechanisms, the layer plus island-shaped growth, which is also known as the Stranski–Krastanov model (Fig. 3c), is an intermediate case. After forming the first monolayer (ML) or a few ML on the substrate surface, islands are subsequently formed on the top of the layer. The film growth processes described above have been used to support the mechanism of perovskite film formation and its morphologies such as surface coverage, film uniformity and grain growth. For instance, the Volmer–Weber growth mechanism has been cited to be related to the formation of perovskite thin films by Zheng et al., who suggested that island-shaped perovskite films are first formed and subsequently coalesce into dense films.22 Roghabadi et al. have reported that full surface coverage of the perovskite layer is achieved via the Stranski–Krastanov film growth process.23
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the diffusion model and particle growth modes in the condition of supersaturation. (a) Particles suspended in a liquid phase. (b) The particle concentration profiles of diffusion- and reaction-controlled growth modes. c and x indicate monomer concentration in solution and distance from the surface, respectively. Cb is the uniform concentration of solute, Ci is the concentration of the solute at the solid–liquid interface, and Cr is the solubility of the particle. Schemes of (c) diffusion-controlled growth and (d) polynuclear layer growth and (e) mononuclear layer growth. Panels (d) and (e) are the so-called reaction-controlled growth modes. 
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of classical growth modes of thin films: (a) Volmer–Weber model (island), where the interface energy is relatively large, and hence discrete nuclei form and grow before a layer is completed by infilling. (b) Frank–van der Merwe model (layer). Here the interface energy is relatively low and layers form readily from nearly any size nuclei. (c) Stranski–Krastanov model (layer plus island), where the interface energy is comparable to the island interaction energy, and hence layer formation competes with nuclei formation. θ represents the coverage in monolayers (ML). 
2.3. LaMer mechanism
In this section, the LaMer model will be discussed for the formation of classic colloids from a single monomer. The LaMer model has been reported for presenting the formation process of monodispersed hydrosols.24,25 Since then, it has been thought to be a classical theory for understanding the formation of uniform colloidal particles. The processes of nucleation and growth through the LaMer diagram consist of three stages as shown in Fig. 4. In the first (I) step (pre-nucleation), the monomeric species are initially accumulated in solution. Thus, no appreciable nucleation happens, although the monomer concentration exceeds the solubility level (Cs) of the bulk solid. In the second step (minimum or critical supersaturation), the monomer concentration reaches a critical level (Cmin*) for nucleation and subsequently the nucleation occurs albeit at a very slow rate. In the third step (maximum supersaturation), the nucleation is dramatically accelerated as the monomer concentration reaches the maximum level (Cmax*). At this stage, the accumulation of the monomers and their consumption is balanced by both nucleation and growth. When the concentration of the monomers is lower than the critical supersaturation level, no further nucleation occurs due to the low concentration of the monomers. Afterwards, the particle growth is terminated when the concentration of monomers is close to the solubility level (Cs) of the bulk solid. Therefore, it can be deduced from the understanding of the basic processes that for the particle preparation, the nucleation step should be as short as possible and the re-nucleation in the growth process should be inhibited as the nucleation and growth processes both complement each other.
 Fig. 4  LaMer diagram for monodispersed particle formation (homogeneous nucleation). Cs is the solubility, Cmin* is the minimum concentration for nucleation, i.e. the minimum supersaturation level for homogeneous nucleation, and Cmax* is the maximum concentration for nucleation. The regions I, II, and III represent pre-nucleation, nucleation and growth stage, respectively. 
2.4. Ostwald ripening
Another fundamental theory to explain the growth mechanism was put forth in the form of Ostwald ripening which is a phenomenon describing the dissolution of small particles and the re-deposition of the dissolved species on the surface of larger particles.17,26,27 On the basis of the Gibbs–Thomson relation indicating that smaller particles have a higher chemical potential, the Ostwald ripening process results from a difference in the solubility of nanoparticles dependent on their size. Small-sized particles have a tendency to dissolve and redeposit onto the surface of larger particles due to their high solubility and surface energy. As a result, larger particles with lower surface energy grow further over time, whereas the smaller particles disappear. Therefore, the particle and solute concentrations are generally decreased in the Ostwald ripening process, while the average size of the particles increases. As will be described in the following section, the Ostwald ripening mechanism has been used to elucidate the grain growth in perovskite thin films via coalescence,28–33 even if contradictory work has also been reported to distinguish Ostwald ripening from coalescence.34
3. Solution chemistry
Solution-processed inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells have shown remarkable achievements in photovoltaic efficiency from 3.8% in 2009 to a recently certified 23.3%. One of the important contributions to the great advance involves the establishment of fundamental solution chemistry particularly the ‘solvent engineering technique’ which has been proved as a significant key to control the nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskites as well as to achieve uniform and pinhole-free surface morphology, influencing the photovoltaic performance. Therefore, fundamental solution chemistry in solution-processed inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells is very important to understand comprehensive phenomena in perovskite precursor solution for achieving highly efficient perovskite solar cells. The classical nucleation and growth processes as described in the previous section will be combined with the formation of the perovskite film in this section.
3.1. Perovskite precursor–solvent interaction in solution
A polar solvent such as dimethylformamide (DMF),35–39 γ-butyrolactone (GBL),40–43 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)44 and N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA)45 in perovskite precursor solution deposited on a substrate is removed by thermal annealing on a hot plate or drying in an air or inert atmosphere after the spinning process, causing supersaturation in the film for nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskites. This method is a facile and simple approach to evaporate solvent for perovskite deposition. With regard to nucleation and crystal growth, the interaction of the perovskite precursor with the deposition solvent of DMF will be reviewed first followed by that of DMSO, NMP, acetonitrile and urea. Furthermore, associated factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells in relation to the type of deposition solvent and anti-solvent






Factors affecting perovskite crystallinity

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




Deposition solvent type
DMF
18.9
0.92
63
11

46



DMF
20.82
1.01
72
15.14

33



DMF/DMSO
19.64
1.11
74.2
16.15

6



DMSO
20.71
1.02
64
13.5

44



DMF/DMSO
23.83
1.086
76.2
19.71

51



DMF/DMSO
20.2
0.83
60.3
10.11

52



DMF/DMSO
22.96
1.08
76.61
19.01

53



DMF/DMSO
21.77
1.088
78
18.47

54



DMF/DMSO
21.67
1.1
74
17.64

55



DMF/DMSO
24.7
1.06
77.5
20.2

56



DMF/NMP
24.5
1.07
74.5
19.5

57



DMF/NMP
23.98
1.095
76.9
20.19

58



DMF/acetonitrile
22.69
1.15
75.33
19.68

59



Acetonitrile/methylamine
22.2
1.1
77
19

60



DMF/DMSO/urea
21.68
1.092
78
18.55

61



DMF/1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone (DMI)
21.05
1.02
67.72
14.54

62



DMF/DMI
20.9
1.09
77.6
17.6

63



Dimethylacetamide (DMA)
21.47
1.024
63.4
13.9

45



DMF/DMA
22.49
1.02
70
16.05

64



Hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA)/DMSO
22.53
1.08
80.1
19.5

65



2ME
18.9
0.972
81.6
15.32

67







Anti-solvent type
Chlorobenzene
21.1
1.04
74
16.2

70



Toluene
21.1
0.98
68.5
14.1

72




n-Hexane
19.5
0.93
65
11.7

73



Iodobenzene
21.66
0.919
68.8
13.67

75



Iodobenzene
21.4
0.92
75.6
14.89

76




sec-Butanol
20.5
0.98
70.7
14.2

77



Anisole
22.78
1.10
77.52
19.42

82



Ethyl acetate
20.263
1.096
74.89
16.64

83



Ethyl acetate
22.89
1.123
75.6
19.43

84



Methyl acetate
22.21
1.05
70
16.3

86



Mixed IPA/CB
24.47
1.13
69.36
19.22

87



Mixed ethyl ether/n-hexane
22.06
1.091
70.99
17.08

88






3.1.1. DMF. 
Wakamiya et al. reported that the structure of PbI2 crystals obtained after cooling PbI2 solution in DMF from 70 °C to room temperature was proved to be one-dimensional (1D) PbI2·DMF crystals by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis.46 The conversion of PbI2·DMF crystals to three-dimensional (3D) perovskites was initiated by the addition of CH3NH3I (MAI) in isopropanol (IPA) solution, resulting in the substitution of DMF molecules in PbI2·DMF. Subsequently, the formation of MAI·PbI2·DMF intermediates was reported by Guo et al., who identified the MAI·PbI2·DMF intermediate phases different from that of the PbI2–DMF complex as shown in Fig. 5a.47 The addition of MAI weakens the interaction between DMF and PbI2 by intercalation into a closer position to the PbI2 framework. The interaction of DMF with MAI·PbI2 was verified by confirming the variation in the stretching vibration of the CO bond at 1665 cm−1 using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The formation of the intermediate phase was induced even after thermal annealing between 40 and 80 °C, indicating its thermodynamically and kinetically metastable nature. Beyond the temperature, the annealing of the film at 100 °C converted the intermediates into the perovskite film. The distinguished MAI·PbI2·DMF complex also exhibits a lower bandgap energy of 2.01 eV than 2.05 eV for PbI2·DMF due to the MA+ interaction in the complexed structures. Recently, Cao et al. suggested that DMF in the intermediates induces the dissolution–recrystallisation process based on the Ostwald ripening model during thermal annealing of the precursor-deposited substrate, resulting in an increase in the grain size.33 The small grains are dissolved by the DMF molecules due to their high chemical potential, inducing gradient concentration of dissolved colloids between small and large grains. The gradient concentration accelerates mass transportation according to Fick's first raw as described in Section 2.2 Thus, the small grains are dissolved and subsequently re-deposited onto the large grains.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of (a) the formation of MAI·PbI2·DMF intermediates and (b) the solvent engineering process to control nucleation and crystal growth for uniform and dense perovskite film deposition. (c) Crystal structure of (MA)4PbI6 intermediates in DMF/DMSO mixed solvent to convert to MAPbI3 perovskites. (d) Schematic illustration of FAPbI3 perovskite crystal growth by direct intermolecular exchange of DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). The DMSO molecules are intercalated into edge-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral layers. Schematic illustration of (e) DMSO- and NMP-intermediate structures for perovskite formation, (f) PbI2–DMF formation by the addition of acetonitrile, and (g) comparison of activation energy required for crystallisation, and grain size of the perovskite films with and without urea in the precursor solution. 
Despite the studies on the importance of the DMF-intermediate phase in perovskite precursor solution, inconsistent studies have also been introduced. Perovskite films from neat DMF appeared to show fibre-like surface morphology with a high degree of pinholes, acting as shunt pathways which are detrimental to photovoltaic performance.48 Hao et al. also observed similar phenomena of film morphology and crystal growth, but achieved controllable grain size and small surface roughness of the perovskite films by avoiding the formation of the CH3NH3PbI3·DMF intermediates with the aid of a vapour-assisted solution process.49 The drawbacks of using DMF were formation of perovskite films with a rough and uncovered pinhole surface due to uncontrolled nucleation and crystal growth.


3.1.2. DMSO. 
The primary obstacle to enhancing further photovoltaic efficiency was overcome by us via the so-called ‘solvent engineering’ process.6 The aim of the solvent engineering process is to control nucleation and crystal growth to achieve smooth and compact perovskite film morphology with full surface coverage as shown in Fig. 5b. The process is related to the addition of an anti-solvent which can extract the precursor solvent of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and the reduction in the solubility of the precursor solute, simultaneously. The DMSO in perovskite precursor solution acts as a coordinating molecule, retarding the fast interaction between the organic halide (MAI) and lead halide (PbI2). It leads to the formation of an intermediate phase of PbI2–DMSO–MAI prior to its conversion to crystalline perovskite structures. DMSO molecule has also been reported to have a stronger interaction with PbI2 compared to DMF. The DMF solvent was proved to be coordinated with Pb with a Pb–O bond length of 2.431 Å,46 while the Pb–O bond length was determined to be 2.386 Å in the coordination between PbI2 and DMSO.50 The decreased Pb–O bond length indicates that DMSO has a stronger coordination with PbI2 compared to DMF, indicating its retardant potential for the crystallisation of PbI2. We verified the feasibility of the solvent engineering technique by achieving a certified world record efficiency of 16.2%. Similar studies by others shortly after our reported work have further reinforced the importance of the solvent engineering process for preparing uniform and dense perovskite films correlating with high reproducibility and high photovoltaic performance. With regard to the DMSO–perovskite intermediate phase, Han et al. reported that the use of DMSO instead of the commonly used DMF is advantageous for uniform and dense perovskite film preparation, resulting from the retardation of perovskite crystallisation due to the stronger interaction between Pb2+ and DMSO compared to DMF, and its low volatility.44 The beneficial features of the deposition of high quality perovskite films due to a stronger interaction of DMSO with Pb2+ was also reported by Park et al., who probed the formation of a Lewis base–acid adduct, which is an identical terminology to the intermediate phase, by confirming the change in the stretching frequency of SO using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).51 Important progress in identifying the structure of the perovskite precursor–DMSO intermediates has been made by Rong et al., who suggested (MA)2Pb3I8·2DMSO as a crystal intermediate structure in the conversion of perovskites as shown in Fig. 5c.52 The identification of the intermediate structure is in accordance with subsequent work by other research groups.28,53–55 The chemical pathways from precursor solution to perovskites will be reviewed in more detail in Section 3.4. Further to the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediates by the solvent engineering process, with the aid of “intermolecular exchange” process we have stepped forward to increase the uniformity of the FAPbI3 films, which have an advantage of high light absorption due to their narrower bandgap energy than MAPbI3 (Fig. 5d).56 It is suggested that DMSO intercalated into PbI2 is replaced by formamidinium iodide (FAI) due to its higher affinity with PbI2via intramolecular exchange featuring a certified world record efficiency of 20.1%.


3.1.3. NMP. 
Further attempts have been focused on alternative coordinating molecules to DMSO to compare film morphology, grain size and crystallinity which can influence photovoltaic performance. For instance, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) has also been reported as an alternative to coordinating molecules (DMSO) in PbI2/DMF solution. Jo et al. claimed that the addition of NMP into PbI2/DMF solution induced the formation of the PbI2·NMP complex as shown in Fig. 5e.57 Its presence was proved by the occurrence of an XRD peak at 8.1°, compared to the PbI2·DMSO counterpart from DMF/DMSO solution at 9.8° and PbI2 from pure DMF solution at 12.7°, respectively. The downshifted diffraction peak was due to an increase in the interlayer space in between the PbI2 layered structure by the intercalation of NMP, which has a larger molecular size compared to DMSO. The FAPbI3 perovskite films converted from the PbI2·NMP intermediate phase showed much increased grain size up to approximately 1 μm and prolonged charge carrier lifetime, resulting in enhanced photovoltaic efficiency compared to the PbI2·DMSO-mediated analogue. Most recent work has suggested the potential of NMP as a coordinating molecule to form an intermediate phase with PbI2.58 The FAI·PbI2·NMP intermediate phase was found to have a stronger coordinative interaction individually than that of the DMSO complex as evidenced by FTIR spectroscopy. Assuming that the structure of the intermediate phase is (FA+)·(PbI3−)·(coordinating molecule), the interaction energy of the NMP complex was calculated to be −2.413 eV, which is higher than that of the DMSO counterpart. The unstable FAI·PbI2·DMSO complex with a weak interaction energy induced heterogeneous nucleation, causing poor coverage and inhomogeneous morphology of perovskite films.


3.1.4. Acetonitrile. 
As an alternative to DMSO with a strong interaction with PbI2, a weak coordinating molecule of acetonitrile (ACN) was studied to mediate the nucleation and grain growth of the perovskite using a two-step solution process (Fig. 5f).59 The observation of fast perovskite crystallisation and film formation from ACN-mixed precursor solution was attributable to the rapid vaporisation of ACN. ACN's low boiling point of 82 °C induced a porous PbI2 film with enhanced crystallinity, where PbI2 reacts readily with MAI due to its porous geometry. In contrast, the stronger PbI2–DMSO interaction suppresses PbI2 crystallisation due to slow DMSO vaporisation induced by its high boiling point of 189 °C. Subsequent progress was made by Snaith et al., who suggested a low boiling solvent system mixed with acetonitrile and methylamine to enhance the PbI2 solvating capability of acetonitrile without the use of strongly coordinating aprotic solvents, enabling room temperature crystallisation of perovskite films.60


3.1.5. Urea. 
A urea molecule as a coordinating additive has also been used to form compact perovskite films. For instance, Lee et al. reported that adding urea into MAPbI3 precursor solution from DMSO/DMF induced large grain size of perovskite films due to increased activation energy as illustrated in Fig. 5g.61 A cyclic urea molecule, 1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone (DMI) with low volatility due to a high boiling point of 225 °C, has also been used to form compact perovskite films. The DMI with a lone electron pair on the O atom of the carbonyl functional group can form PbI2–DMI intermediate phases by interacting with PbI2. Zhi et al. introduced DMI into PbI2/DMF solution and proved the presence of the PbI2·DMI intermediate phase by observing the downshift of CO stretching vibration using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR).62 Moreover, less weight loss of PbI2·DMI up to approximately 180 °C showed that DMI interacts more stably with PbI2 compared to DMF. The introduction of DMI into MAPbI3 precursor solution has also been found to induce weak coordination with PbI2 compared to DMSO with a stronger coordination ability.63
In addition to the coordinating molecules described above, dimethylacetamide (DMA)45,64 hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA),65 γ-butyrolactone (GBL),66 2-methoxyethanol,67 and mixed solvents such as DMSO/chlorobenzene68 and DMF/chlorobenzene/acetonitrile69 have also been used as coordinating molecules for the preparation of perovskite films with good surface morphology and high crystalline properties.

3.2. Role of anti-solvent
Further to the importance of the perovskite precursor–solvent interaction to understand the nature of an intermediate phase in the solvent engineering process, an anti-solvent also plays a significant role in the surface morphology and crystalline properties of the perovskite films. In this section, the role of the anti-solvent in the solvent engineering process will be described. The requirement of the anti-solvent (non-polar solvent) is the miscibility with the deposition solvents in perovskite precursor solution, and insolubility of perovskites in the anti-solvent. The introduction of the anti-solvent onto the precursor solution films deposited on a substrate can induce fast supersaturation and precipitation of the perovskite precursor film by removing solvents from the precursor solution. Cheng et al. reported that dropping chlorobenzene on a perovskite precursor film during the spinning process induces a uniform perovskite film with good reproducibility.70 The function of the added solvent was suggested to readily decrease MAPbI3 solubility in deposited precursor solution, promoting fast nucleation and crystal growth. Cohen et al. studied the relationship between anti-solvent (toluene) treatment and electronic properties of the perovskite films as well as surface morphology.71 With the anti-solvent treatment, excess halide and MA ions after the two-step process for the perovskite film deposition are removed from the perovskite surface, leading to a net positive charge on the Pb atoms. Sakai et al. reported that dropping toluene anti-solvent on the perovskite precursor deposited film during the spin-coating step influences the early stage of nucleation and grain growth, depending on the chemical composition of the precursor solution.72 The use of non-toxic anti-solvents to toxic chlorobenzene and toluene has also been reported by using n-hexane,73 diethyl ether,51 α,α,α-trifluorotoluene,74 iodobenzene,75,76sec-butanol,77,78 anisole (or methoxybenzene),79–82 ethyl acetate,83–85 and methyl acetate.86 In addition to single anti-solvents, the use of mixed anti-solvents has been studied in the hope of achieving uniform surface morphology and high crystalline properties of the perovskite films. For instance, Wang et al. suggested that the use of chlorobenzene (CB) mixed with weakly coordinating iso-propyl alcohol (IPA) could readily remove residual CB, increasing the grain size of the perovskite and in turn leading to a drop in the number of defect density.87 The use of mixed anti-solvents of ethyl ether and n-hexane by Yu et al. has also been reported to achieve high nucleation density and slow down the perovskite formation, resulting in improved grain orientation and a smooth surface.88 The anti-solvent treatment improves the surface morphology and promotes the crystal growth of perovskite films depending on their boiling point and polarity in relation to volatility and low solubility of perovskites compared to strong polar solvents. The associated factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells are summarised in Table 1. Furthermore, the use of a more environmentally friendly anti-solvent alternative to toxic chlorobenzene and toluene is highly desirable to minimise health risk from its toxicity. For the purpose of selecting greener anti-solvents, we provide an overview of anti-solvents with boiling point and polarity in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  (bottom) Schematic illustration of anti-solvent treatment to control nucleation and crystal growth of perovskites. (top) Graph of boiling point (°C) as a function of dipole moment (D) of toxic and non-toxic solvents. 
3.3. Impact of precursor solution aging
As discussed in the previous sections, both the perovskite precursor–solvent interaction and the use of anti-solvent dictate the formation of perovskites from precursor solution by controlling nucleation and crystal growth processes. Further understanding of the correlation between the nucleation process in the precursor solution and how it influences the crystal growth of the perovskite film is also very important as the majority of the perovskite films are fabricated using a solution-based process. The compelling evidence for precursor solution with dispersed colloids, rather than a pure solution, was provided by Yan et al., who suggested that the size of the colloidal particles and morphology can be tuned by varying the ratio of organic to inorganic component in the precursor solution.89 Therefore, important attempts have been focused on the impact of precursor solution aging on film morphology and crystalline properties and their correlation with device performance.90–93 For instance, Tsai et al. reported that the degree of 3D perovskite conversion and the film crystallinity are strongly influenced by the precursor solution aging time.90 They prepared perovskite precursor solution with lead iodide (PbI2) and an equal molar of MACl in DMF under stirring at 70 °C for various times from 1 to 48 h in an argon-filled glove box and performed dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments on the precursor solution to confirm the change in the colloidal size. It was found that the size of the seeds in the precursor increases from 190 nm for 1 h aged solution to above 500 nm for the 48 h analogue. The observed increase in the colloidal size is well correlated with the Ostwald ripening process as described in Section 2.4, where small-sized clusters dissolve and redeposit on larger clusters due to their high solubility and surface energy. The cluster growth stage in precursor solution is consistent with the previous work of the MABr solution-induced Ostwald ripening process in MAPbI3.30 They suggested that the grain growth of the perovskite films from aged precursor solution with large colloids is strongly correlated with the LaMer diagram as discussed in Section 2.3. It involves the process of nucleation and growth in the precursor solution film via three distinct stages: pre-nucleation, minimum or critical supersaturation, and maximum saturation. The optimised aging time was found to be 48 h showing an average efficiency of 15.22% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 20.92 mA cm−2, 0.94 V, and 77.58%. Furthermore, McMeekin et al. reported that the introduction of hydrohalic acids, specifically hydroiodic (HI) and hydrobromic (HBr) acids as additives, into the precursor solution in DMF with aging time affects the kinetic crystallisation of FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.2I0.8)3 perovskites via manipulation of the colloidal concentration in the precursor solution.91 DLS intensity distribution of the precursor solution after the addition of the hydrogalic acid as a function of aging time indicated a loss in large colloid distribution with aging time. The drop in the average colloid size is in accordance with UV-visible absorption spectra of the corresponding films showing the disappearance of the black perovskite absorption onset. Hydrohalic acids initiate the dissolution of the lead polyhalide colloids such as [PbX3]1−, [PbX4]2−, [PbX5]3−, and [PbX6]4−, which can act as nucleation centres in the formation of perovskite thin films. From a classical perspective of nucleation theory, heterogeneous nucleation appears to be the dominant process in perovskite films as nucleation occurs on a foreign surface and/or via nuclei. As described in eqn (1), the interfacial energy in heterogeneous nucleation, γ, is one of the significant parameters affecting the nucleation process. They suggested that the interfacial energy (γ) can be tuned by controlling the content of lead polyhalide colloidal dispersion, serving as nucleation sites during the crystallisation process. As a result, the perovskite thin films from solutions with large colloids undergo rapid crystallisation due to the higher nucleation site density, while films from the precursor solution with little to no colloids induce a slow crystal growth attributable to the presence of fewer nucleation sites. Subsequent progress in the relationship between precursor solution aging and precursor–additive interaction was made with regard to the stabilisation of perovskite precursor solution to suppress the degradation of aged precursor solutions, which cause the formation of a yellow δ-phase in the films. For instance, Qin et al. demonstrated the fused-ring electron acceptor ITIC-Th (3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(5-hexylthienyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene) as a stabiliser for perovskite precursor solution.93 They suggested that ITIC-Th stabilises [PbI6]4− in the precursor solution during aging due to a strong interaction of sulfur with lead by Lewis base carbonyl (CO) and cyano (CN) in the ITIC-Th, suppressing the formation of the undesirable yellow perovskite δ-phase. In contrast to additive-free perovskite films based on precursor solution with increasing aging time containing less MA+ or Br− as evidenced by smaller bandgap energy, perovskite films with ITIC-Th did not show the significant change in bandgap energy. It was suggested that the presence of ITIC-Th in the precursor solution retains MA cations during precursor solution aging. On the basis of the review on the research topic in this section, the impact of perovskite precursor solution aging time on the colloidal size distribution and the grain size of the resultant perovskite films is illustrated in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the impact of perovskite precursor solution aging time on the colloidal size distribution and the grain size of the resultant perovskite films. 
3.4. Chemical pathways from precursor solution to perovskite formation
Despite the importance of precursor solution chemistry pertaining to the precursor–solvent interaction (intermediate phase) and the anti-solvent in nucleation and crystal growth processes, an in-depth understanding of the correlation between the nucleation process in the precursor solution and the formation of the resultant perovskite thin film is of significant importance. As described in Section 2.1, the colloidal particles can function as heterogeneous nucleation sites and can grow further into bulk structures in solution, which can influence perovskite film morphologies and crystalline properties. In this section, important progress in relation to chemical pathways from the precursor solution to perovskite formation will be described to understand fundamental chemistry in perovskite precursor solution. Chemical pathways of perovskite formation from the lead iodide-coordinating solvent complex have been studied by others.28,94–100 For instance, Guo et al. identified an intermediate structure of (MA)2Pb3I8·2DMSO in precursor solution,28 which is in accordance with the results of other research groups52–55 as reviewed in Section 3.1. They isolated 1D fibrous intermediates (Fig. 8b) in the perovskite formation process and then suggested DMF or DMSO-mediated pathways by determining their crystal structure as shown in Fig. 8a. For instance, a fibrous plumbate synthesised in DMSO loses the solvent molecules on thermal annealing at 100 °C to convert to crystal perovskites. However, when exposed to solvent vapour at room temperature, it returns to the previous fibrous plumbate due to solvent's basicity to remove MAI molecules from the crystal perovskites. The repeated dissolve–redeposit process, Ostwald ripening described in Section 2.4, accounts for the growth of 1-D fibres to larger crystals. In contrast to the DMF-mediated complex, which is a dinuclear plumbate (MA+)2(PbI3−)2·DMF, the DMSO-induced complex was proved to be a trinuclear plumbate (MA+)2[(PbI3−)2PbI2]·(DMSO)2. The chemical composition of the intermediates in DMSO results in different processes of formation of 3D perovskites when compared to DMF-induced reaction. Upon reaction of DMSO-induced intermediates [(PbI3−)2PbI2] with one additional MAI molecule, intermediates-4 is formed, followed by loss of two DMSO molecules to produce 3D perovskites via intermediates-5 (steps vii–ix in Fig. 8a). The distinction in the chemical composition of the intermediates depending on the coordinating solvent implies the importance of in-depth understanding of precursor–solvent interactions in perovskite precursor solution. Rahimnejad et al. studied the relationship between coordination capability of the coordinating solvents and the formation of the chemical species present in perovskite precursor solution.96 Pb2+ in PbI2 undergoes complexation to produce soluble PbI3−, PbI42−, and higher coordinated plumbate species in the presence of excess iodide ions from MAI.95,101 A strong coordinating solvent, DMSO, readily coordinates with Pb producing primary PbI2S4 species (S represents a coordinating solvent) with a low number of iodide ions. In DMF as a moderate coordinating solvent, PbI2S4 and PbI3S3− are found to be dominantly present. However, the comparable portions of PbIS5+, PbI2S4 and PbI3S3− are observed for GBL with a less coordination ability. They also suggested that the formation of PbI64− and 1D (Pb2I4)n for perovskite crystallisation can be controlled by the use of high precursor concentrations and high temperature, albeit without further evidence of a direct connection between individual iodoplumbate species and photovoltaic performance. Despite the important progress in exploring the chemical pathways, the knowledge of which intermediate species is responsible for high quality perovskite film formation is still lacking. The research topic has been studied by Cao et al., who found that (MA)2Pb3I8·2DMSO is not a significant species because it could further react with MAI to convert completely to perovskites due to its I-deficient nature.53 They suggested that I-rich (MA)4PbI6 is beneficial for highly efficient solar cells if unreacted (MA)4PbI6 impurities after MAPbI3 conversion are removed by IPA washing as illustrated in Fig. 8c. The effect of solvent evaporation rate and chemical constituent diffusion on nucleation and growth pathways from precursor solution to perovskite formation has also been studied by Hu et al. with the aid of in situ synchrotron-based grazing incident X-ray diffraction and in situ FTIR.100 In mixed Pb(Ac)2 and MAI solution from DMF, solvent evaporation at room temperature leads to the formation of Pb-centred ion-cages [PbI6]4− in (MAI)x·PbI2·(DMF)y, which are in close contact (Fig. 8d). However, upon thermal annealing at high temperature, perovskite crystals with much less PbI2 and MAI by-products were formed due to the rapid decomposition of the intermediates.
 Fig. 8  (a) Chemical reaction from precursor solution to perovskite formation in DMSO. The bold arrows represent dominant pathways in the chemical reaction; reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical image of 1D fibre intermediates; reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of crystal growth processes from the [PbI6]4− cage to intermediates and perovskites; reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The assembly model of the perovskite from the precursor solution to the crystal perovskites, and the decomposition during thermal annealing; reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature. 
4. Chemical precursor composition
Further to the solvent engineering technique including precursor–solvent interaction in solution and dropping anti-solvent onto perovskite films, tremendous attempts have been focused on introduction of chemical additives into the perovskite precursor solution to control the nucleation and crystal growth process for perovskite films with uniform and pinhole-free surface morphology and high crystallinity. The use of excessive organic and lead components including halides, pseudo-halides and non-halides as chemical additives can lead to control of the crystallisation kinetics, showing an accompanying effect on optoelectronic properties such as defect density of perovskite films. The significant progress in structural evolution in relation to perovskite dimensionality using long organic cations will also be reviewed in this section in the hope of achieving a balance between photovoltaic performance and long-term stability of the device.
4.1. Non-stoichiometric precursor chemistry
In this section, high concentrated precursor solution chemistry of organic and lead components will be reviewed to understand the relationship between precursor non-stoichiometry and nucleation/crystal growth processes affecting photovoltaic performance and device stability. Moreover, the significant factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells are summarised in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells in relation to chemical additives






Factors affecting perovskite crystallinity

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




AX2 type
Organic halide
Methylammonium iodide
23.69
1.113
77.3
20.4

103



Methylammonium chloride
20.36
1.023
58.1
12.1

104



Methylammonium chloride
21.45
1.077
77.57
17.91

105



Ammonium chloride
14.08
0.88
80.11
9.93

107



Ammonium chloride
21.45
0.94
77
15.6

108



Organic pseudo-halide
Guanidinium thiocyanate
21.6
1.077
70.4
16.37

32



Methylammonium thiocyanate
22.33
1.085
77.43
18.76

110



Ammonium thiocyanate
17.88
0.93
68.75
11.44

111



Ammonium thiocyanate
22.55
1.103
78.2
19.44

112



Organic non-halide
Methaylammonium acetate
22.9
1.0
79
18.09

113



Ammonium acetate
22.91
1.1
67.6
17.02

114







BX2 type
Lead halide
Lead iodide
19.8
0.924
66.3
12.1

116



Lead iodide
22.75
1.15
76.9
20.1

119



Lead chloride
19.24
0.73
54
7.51

129



Lead pseudo-halide
Lead thiocyanate
22.44
1.11
78.2
19.45

132



Lead thiocyanate
22.25
1.09
80.85
19.57

133



Lead thiocyanate
22.28
1.03
73.47
16.9

134



Lead thiocyanate
18.53
1.25
78.95
18.27

135



Lead non-halide
Lead acetate
21.7
0.97
72.0
15.2

136



Lead acetate
21.5
1.09
79.0
18.5

137



Lead acetate
22.87
0.96
66.2
14.5

138






4.1.1. Excess of AX in ABX3 structure. 
Much efforts have been made on the introduction of excessive AX (in ABX3 perovskite structure) in the perovskite precursor solution as a chemical additive approach to enhance crystalline properties and surface morphology. The additional AX components include organic halides (i.e. methylammonium iodide,102,103 methylammonium chloride,104–106 ammonium chloride107–109), organic pseudo-halides (i.e. methylammonium thiocyanate,110 guanidinium thiocyanate,32 ammonium thiocyanate111,112) and organic non-halides (i.e. methylammonium acetate,113 ammonium acetate114). In the case of MAI, Etgar et al. found from two-step deposition of the perovskites that when excess MAI is present in the dipping solution, unreacted MAI remains on the perovskite surface causing a drop in the current density possibly due to reduced conductivity of the perovskites.102 In contrast to a negative effect of excess MAI, its advantages have also been studied by Son et al., who found that adding a small excessive amount of MAI into precursor solution induces MAI film at grain boundaries (GBs) suppressing non-radiative recombination.103 In relation to MACl addition, Zhao et al. reported that the addition of MACl into MAI and PbI2 perovskite precursor solution can retard the MAPbI3 crystal growth process, resulting in an increase in the crystallinity or the preferred orientation of the perovskites.104 Upon the introduction of MACl, an intermediate phase of MAI·PbI2·MACl forms and subsequently suppresses MAPbI3 crystallisation. The presence of the intermediate structure was suggested to disappear with prolonged thermal annealing time to form crystal MAPbI3 perovskites. The crystalline properties were observed for both mesostructured and planar solar cells, albeit with distinctly different features in the voltage dependence of Rrec. The MACl-assisted MAPbI3 planar solar cells showed an efficiency of 12.1% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 20.36 mA cm−2, 1.023 V, and 58.1%. Chen et al. demonstrated an attempt to decouple the impact of chlorine incorporation using MACl in MAPbI3 perovskites on crystallography and film morphology from device performance.105 Chlorine-incorporated MAPbI3 perovskites showed similar crystallinity and pinhole-free film morphology to neat perovskites, but apparent distinction with regard to photovoltaic performance. The addition of MACl was observed to improve the carrier transport properties across the heterojunction interfaces between perovskite and hole conductor layers, rather than in the perovskite films as evidenced by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), Kelvin-probe force microscopy (KPFM), transient photovoltage decay and capacitance–voltage (CV). The optimised device with a MACl/MAI weight ratio of 1:10 exhibited an efficiency of 17.91% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 21.45 mA cm−2, 1.077 V, and 77.57%. The morphology- and crystallinity-controllable perovskite films by the addition of MACl were also reported in the area of photovoltaic scale-up.106 Furthermore, the impacts of adding ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) into the perovskite precursor solution on the crystallinity and surface morphology of the perovskite films have also been studied. For instance, Zuo et al. demonstrated that NH4Cl-introduced perovskite solar cells show higher crystallinity and improved morphology compared to neat and MACl-added analogues in the absence of further justification for the distinct features.107 Further progress has been made by Rong et al., who reported that when both NH4+ and moisture are present in the precursor solution, PbI64− colloids convert to PbI3−, bonding with the two molecules in the form of CH3NH3X·NH4PbX3(H2O)2 (X = I or Cl).108 Subsequently, the deprotonation of ammonium (NH4+) in the intermediates by water molecules induces the formation of NH3 and HI/HCl until volatile NH4+ is completely decomposed during thermal annealing, facilitating MAPbI3 crystallisation. The NH4Cl-assisted perovskite solar cells show an efficiency of 15.6% with a Jsc of 21.45 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.94 V, and an FF of 77%. Organic pseudo-halides as an alternative to organic halides such as MAI, MACl, and NH4Cl have also been used to control nucleation and crystal growth processes. Pham et al. demonstrated guanidinium thiocyanate (GUTS)-mediated Ostwald ripening treatment to reduce GBs and to passivate the GBs and the surface of perovskite films.32 Taking into account the Ostwald ripening process described in Section 2.4, GUTS solution in IPA dropped onto MAPbI3 films dissolves partially a small portion of perovskite crystals with high surface energy, which are re-deposited onto the surface of large crystals for further growth. The dissolution/de-nucleation rate depending on the solubility of deposition solvent is relative to the growth rate coefficient of stable large perovskite crystals. They performed comparative studies of the favourable Ostwald ripening process using their GUTS/IPA and the previously reported MABr/IPA. GUTS was found to be more responsible for larger and more uniform grain growth as the SCN− anion has a stronger interaction with the Pb2+ cation compared to the I− anion. However, the addition of MABr causes unavoidable competition between its intercalation into bulk perovskite and I/Br exchange reaction, suppressing the dissolution reaction.


4.1.2. Excess of BX in ABX3 structure. 
Supasai et al. reported that surface enrichment of PbI2 formed by thermal decomposition of MAPbI3 was evidenced by modulated surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPV).115 The excess PbI2 was suggested to passivate the defects of perovskite surface, albeit without providing photovoltaic performance. The role of excess PbI2 induced by MAPbI3 thermal decomposition has also been reported by Chen et al.38 The PbI2 released from MAPbI3 due to prolonged thermal annealing was suggested to be present at the GBs and interface between mp-TiO2 and perovskite layers, and perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD layers where the charge recombination was significantly reduced at both interfaces. Moreover, they found with the aid of scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) that the perovskite film without thermal annealing shows higher surface potential at the GBs than that at the grain interior. However, the surface potential at the GBs after thermal annealing is lower than that of the bulk. With the experimental findings, they suggested that the presence of the PbI2 phase within the GBs of MAPbI3 perovskite films can tailor energy band bending of the GBs from downward to upward, reducing charge carrier recombination. The solar cells based on the perovskite layer annealed at 150 °C for 60 min showed a power conversion efficiency of 12.0% with Voc, Jsc, and FF of 0.959 V, 18.05 mA cm−2, and 69.32%, respectively. In addition to the thermal annealed PbI2, the benefit of incompletely converted PbI2 during the two-step perovskite deposition process has also been studied for highly efficient perovskite solar cells.36,116–118 However, the GB passivation approach by both the thermal degraded PbI2 and the unreacted PbI2 by the formation of perovskite during the two-step deposition process restricts its feasibility to further improve photovoltaic performance, because controlling the amount of the excess PbI2 present at the GBs is very challenging due to the intrinsic nature of its induction (Fig. 9a and b). We have successfully demonstrated an efficient passivation approach via well-controllable PbI2 concentration by introducing an additional amount of PbI2 into stoichiometric perovskite solution from a DMF/DMSO mixture (Fig. 9c).119 The presence of crystalline PbI2 as a segregated form due to the excessive amount of PbI2 in perovskite solution shows higher contact potential difference (CPD) at the GBs than grain interiors, as evidenced by Kelvin force probe microscopy (KFPM) under illumination. An increase in CPD at the GBs indicates enhanced charge separation due to faster ion migration, resulting in the passivation of the GBs by PbI2 and in turn an increase in Voc of PbI2-incorporated MAPbI3 from 0.93 V to 1.01 V. The (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite-based solar cells with an excess PbI2 amount of 5.7 mol% exhibited a Jsc of 22.75 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.15 V, and an FF of 76.9%, corresponding to a PCE of 20.1% with negligible hysteresis behaviours. In addition to the spatial distribution of PbI2 with a segregated form at the GBs, the beneficial function of the PbI2-incorporated perovskite could be due to its p-type characteristics. The explanation of the effect of p-type materials on the photovoltaic performance is further reinforced by others, who have reported co-deposited perovskites with a p-type hole conductor of CuSCN120 or Cu(thiourea)I.121 Bi et al. reported that a small excess PbI2 suppresses non-radiative charge carrier recombination at the perovskite and mesoporous TiO2 interfaces, and results in intense electroluminescence.122 Moreover, Voc is also monitored as a function of Jsc proportional to light intensity due to the strong dependence of the absorption coefficient on wavelength such as blue (460 nm) and red (630 nm) light. For stoichiometric perovskites, Voc is lower for blue light illumination which is a distinct characteristic compared to excess PbI2-based perovskites, indicating its higher defect density close to mesoporous TiO2. The observation in PL decay and monochromatic Voc study indicates that trap density at the perovskite and mesoporous TiO2 interfaces in excess PbI2-based perovskites is more reduced. They achieved a maximum power conversion efficiency of 20.8% with a Jsc of 24.6 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.16 V and an FF of 73%. Jacobsson et al. studied the influence of PbI2 deficiency in perovskites as well as that of excess PbI2.123 The PbI2-deficient perovskites showed low efficiencies under 15% with significantly reduced photocurrent densities due to the accumulation of organic species of MA at the GBs, causing low charge carrier mobility and decreased electron injection into the TiO2, albeit with high crystallinity, longer charge carrier lifetimes, and high photoluminescence. However, the perovskite solar cells with a small amount of excess PbI2 showed improved efficiency of 18.0% with a Jsc of 22.73 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.11 V and an FF of 71%, respectively. Despite the significant progress in the definite advantages of excess PbI2, detrimental effects on device stability124–127 and photovoltaic efficiency128 have also been studied by others. For instance, Liu et al. found that the enhanced photovoltaic efficiency of perovskites with excess PbI2 induced by thermal decomposition of the perovskites during prolonged thermal annealing appears to be 15.1% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 21.3 mA cm−2, 1.03 V and 69% due to defect passivation at the GBs of the perovskites as reported earlier.124 However, they also demonstrated that unlike the PbI2-free device, the presence of residual PbI2 caused device instability showing film degradation when exposed to light even under an inert atmosphere as evidenced by XRD, possibly due to PbI2 photodecomposition. However, both encapsulated devices with and without excess PbI2 show similar photostability under the same testing conditions. In addition to photoinstability of PbI2-rich perovskite devices, Shuklas et al. studied the relationship between excess PbI2 and their humidity stability.125 They found that a photovoltaic efficiency of 17.48% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 19.88 mA cm−2, 1.10 V and 79.68% was achieved for the device with PbI2 in excess due to the high quality of film morphology with smoothness and free of pinholes, and increased grain size. But the device instability against humidity has been observed as an adverse effect of excess PbI2 as evidenced by XRD and UV-vis absorption spectroscopy, albeit without further investigation on the origin of the degradation. Gujar et al. prepared a PbI2-free MAPbI3 film using a MAI vapour-assisted method under a nitrogen atmosphere and then annealed the film at 165 °C with increasing time in the same atmosphere to induce residual PbI2.126 They found that perovskite solar cells with a small amount of excess PbI2 show a slightly higher efficiency of 11.0%, with Jsc, Voc and FF of 17.22 mA cm−2, 0.94 V and 68%, compared to the PbI2-free analogue. But an increase in current density–voltage hysteresis and a drop in device stability were also found as undesirable effects. The device instability under humid conditions (50% relative humidity) was suggested to be attributed to most probably a non-reversible reaction (4) releasing the volatile species of CH3NH2.(CH3NH3PbI3)n + PbI2 → [(CH3NH3PbI3)n−y(PbI2)y+1(HI)y] + yCH3NH2(g)
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of three pathways of PbI2 evolution by (a) perovskite thermal degradation, (b) incomplete MAI or FAI diffusion during the two-step perovskite deposition process, and (c) excessive PbI2 addition into stoichiometric perovskite precursor solution during the one-step deposition process. 
Most recently, the effect of excess PbI2 has been studied from the point of view of phase transition behaviours. Meier et al. reported that crystalline PbI2 present at the GBs as a segregated phase has negligible impact on the electronic structure of MAPbI3, using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS).127 They also found a decrease in the critical temperature and a concomitant smearing out of the tetragonal–orthorhombic phase transition as a function of excess PbI2. In addition to PbI2, the excessive BX2 (in ABX3 perovskite structure) components are also introduced in the precursor solution as a chemical additive approach by adding lead chloride,129–131 lead pseudo-halides,132–135 lead non-halides (i.e. lead acetate136–138 and lead nitrate139) and mixed lead precursors (i.e. lead chloride/lead acetate140).

4.2. Multi-dimensional perovskites
Inorganic–organic hybrid perovskites have shown a rapid advance in photovoltaic applications, achieving a certified efficiency of 23.3%.5 Despite their significantly improved achievements, perovskites have been suffering from long-term instability, which is a major obstacle prior to commercialisation. The lack of environmental stability could be attributed to the low formation energy of MAPbI3,141 hygroscopic nature of MA cations142 and weak Pb–I interactions.143 To overcome the instability of the perovskites, significant progress has been made in low-dimensional hybrid perovskites using long organic cations with hydrophobicity, which have a strong moisture tolerance. In this section, the evolution of multi-dimensional perovskites will be described to understand the principles of material design for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells. Furthermore, the significant factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells and their device stability are summarised in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells and their device stability in relation to multi-dimensional composition






Long organic cation source

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCF (%)
Stability
Ref.




PEAI: phenethylammonium iodide; BAT: butylammonium iodide; BdA: 1,4-diaminobutanc ammonium; HAI: hexylammonium iodide; PPA: pyrene-O-propylammonium; IEAI: iodoethylammonium iodide; AVA: ammoniumvaleric add; OAT: octylammonium iodide; PEYI: pyreneammonium iodide; PZPY: 2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine.




Layered 2D (n < 10)
PEAI
6.72
1.18
60
4.73
No change in XRD in 52% RH for 46 d

144



BAT
9.42
0.929
46
4.02
No degradation in 40% RH for 2 months

145



BAT
16.76
1.01
74.13
12.5
70% under light illumination for 2050 h

146



BdA
2.89
0.87
43
1.08
No phase transition in DSC up to 205 °C

150



iso-BA
16.54
1.2
53.54
10.6
No change in optical absorption at 20 °C, 60% RH for 840 h

147



HAT
2.86
0.635
54.6
1.03
No change in XRD at 25 °C, 40–50% RH for 4 months

148



PPA
2.43
1.02
46
1.38
Less change in XRD after 5 min of water immersion

149



PEAT
14.44
0.59
69
5.94
96% in a glove box for 100 h

151



BAT
24.1
0.229
45.7
2.5
93% in air for 1 month with encap.

152







Mixed 2D/3D perovskites
PEAT
19.12
1.09
73.7
15.3
76% under 55% RH for 2 weeks

153



PEAI
22.08
1.04
77
17.7
Less change in XRD at RT under 40% RH for 30 d

155



TEAT
14.88
0.883
69
9.03
91% at 25 °C, 70–80% RH for 4 d

154



BAT
22.7
1.14
80
20.6
Slightly improved stability in PCE under light illumination, 45% RH for 1005 h

159



AVAT
18.84
1.025
75.5
14.6
>10000 h stability under light illumination at 55 °C in air with carbon electrode and encap.

156



PEAT
25.5
0.92
61
14.3
Slightly improved stability in PCE under light illumination, 50–60 °C, 40–50% RH for 205 h with encap.

157



PEAI
21.7
1.07
74.2
17.2
83% at RT, 70% RH for 1200 h 80% under light illumination, RT, 55% RH for 250 h 80% at 85 °C in air for 768 h

160



OAT
22.6
1.11
81.5
20.6
90% at 25 °C, 65% RH for 342 h 70% under light illumination at 25 °C in N2 for 75 h

161



PEYT
21.15
1.05
66.1
14.7
No change in PCE under 60% RH for 400 h

164







Graded 2D/3D perovskites
PEAI
20.53
1.11
75
16.8
Less PCE loss at RT, 75% RH for 19 d

165



PEAT
21.8
1.17
78
19.9
60% at RT, 20–30% RH for 30 d

166



PEAT
22.89
1.11
73
18.5
90% at RT, 60% RH for 1000 h

167



PEAT
22.73
1.14
76.3
20.1
90% under light illumination, 50 °C. 30–60% RH for 800 h with encap.

168



AVAT
22.3
1.06
76
18
90% in an Ar-filled glove box for 32 d 72% at 25 °C, 40% RH for 20 d

169



PEAT
23.6
1.14
74
20.1
88% RT, 38% RH for 80 d

170







1D
PZPY
21.7
1.08
77
18.1
Thermal cycling stability from 25 to 85 °C under 55% RH for 15 h

171






4.2.1. Layered 2D perovskites. 
Karunadasa et al. demonstrated layered (PEA)2(MA)2(Pb3I10) (PEA = phenethylammonium) perovskites with enhanced stability against moisture of 52% relative humidity for 46 days due to the hydroscopic nature of the long organic cation PEA as evidenced by XRD during humidity testing.144 The 2D hybrid perovskite solar cells show a power conversion efficiency of 4.73% with an open-circuit voltage of 1.18 V, a short-circuit current of 6.72 mA cm−2 and a fill factor of 60.0%. The high Voc value of 1.18 V could be attributed to larger bandgap energy than 3D perovskites. Since then, the study of 2D hybrid perovskite solar cells has attracted great attention due to the high moisture stability by the presence of a hydrophobic long organic cation. Subsequently, Kanatzidis et al. reported a series of 2D (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (BA = n-butylammonium = C4H9NH3+, n = 1, 2, 3, 4) with high surface coverage.145 The bandgap energy (Eg) in the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 films was found to increase with decreasing n values, which is the thickness of the inorganic slabs, from 1.60 eV for MAPbI3 (n = ∞) to 2.32 eV for BA2PbI4 (n = 1) due to quantum confinement effects from the reduced dimensionality of the perovskite. They achieved a maximum efficiency of 4.02% yielding a Jsc of 9.42 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.929 V and an FF of 46%. They confirmed the change in XRD patterns of fresh and aged (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 films under 40% relative humidity for 2 months, indicating no PbI2 peak at approximately 12.6°. The moisture-resistant tolerance of 2D perovskites is further confirmed by their photographs showing no change in film colour compared to 3D MAPbI3 films. Tsai et al. also used BA as a long organic cation and demonstrated inverted structured 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite solar cells with a maximum efficiency of 12.52% using a hot-casting technique.146 In contrast to the conventional one-step spin coating method, perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated on a preheated FTO/PEDOT:PSS substrate at 150 °C, resulting in compact films with highly oriented perovskite crystals. The highly oriented 2D perovskite solar cells achieved superior long-term photostability under constant AM 1.5G light illumination and humidity stability under 65% relative humidity due to the presence of long and bulkier hydrophobic organic components compared to the 3D MAPbI3 counterpart. The distinctive characteristics such as remarkable optoelectronic properties and tuneable crystal structures, and significantly improved stability of the perovskite stimulated a number of researchers to focus on the Ruddlesden–Popper structured 2D perovskites with n < 10 values (Fig. 10e and f) using iso-butylammonium,147 hexylammonium,148 aromatic-containing ammonium149 or diammonium150 cations based on lead perovskites, and PEA151 or BA152 cations for lead-free tin perovskites. As reviewed above, 2D Ruddlesden–Popper structured perovskites demonstrate superior water tolerance, but poor photovoltaic efficiency due to inferior charge carrier generation and slow charge carrier transport due to increased bandgap energy and intrinsic 2D structures consisting of an insulating organic part and an inorganic slab, respectively. Thus, further progress has been focused on achieving a balance between stability and photovoltaic performance by tuning the amount of long organic cations, AX components, and BX2 components in ABX3 structures.
 Fig. 10  Schematic crystal structures of perovskite materials with a dimensionality ranging from 3D to 0D. (a) Conventional 3D perovskites. Long organic cation-introduced perovskites; (b) long organic cation-wrapped 3D perovskites without the presence of layered 2D structures, (c) mixed 2D/3D perovskites, and (d) graded 2D/3D perovskites. Ruddlesden–Popper ((RNH3)2An−1BnX3n+1) structured 2D perovskites with (e) n = 1 and (f) n = 2. (g) Fibre-shaped 1D perovskites, and (h) 0D quantum dot perovskites. 


4.2.2. Mixed 2D/3D perovskites. 
Despite the enhanced humidity stability of Ruddlesden–Popper structured 2D perovskites, their photovoltaic efficiency is still too low compared to 3D perovskite counterparts (Fig. 10a) showing over 23%. The study on achieving a balance between the stability and the photovoltaic performance has been reported by Sargent et al., who focused on quasi-2D perovskites.153 They combined the advantages of layered 2D perovskites with enhanced stability and 3D perovskites with favourable optoelectronic properties such as low bandgap energy and long-range charge carrier diffusion by the choice of stoichiometry in materials synthesis. They demonstrated that intercalation of phenylethylammonium between perovskite layers induces quantitatively appreciable van der Waals interactions using density functional theory (DFT). With increasing n values, the interactions lead to an increased formation energy and in turn improved material stability under a low humidity condition. The photovoltaic performance of the quasi-2D perovskite solar cells exhibited a certified efficiency of 15.36% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 19.12 mA cm−2, 1.09 V and 73.75%. The device stability against 55% relative humidity was also improved compared to 3D perovskite solar cells. The multi-dimensional strategy to achieve a balance between photovoltaic performance and device stability has widely been implemented by others.154–158 In spite of significant progress in highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, there is still a lack of interest in the identification of mixed dimensional perovskite structures. In 2017, Snaith et al. proposed that the long organic cation BA is present at the GBs of 3D perovskites shaping a layered 2D structure with the aid of GIWAXS as illustrated in Fig. 10c.159 This notion has made good progress in distinguishing long organic cation-mixed perovskite's structure because the presence of periodically separated quasi-2D perovskites has widely been believed. Their BA-modified perovskite solar cells with a SnO2 electron transporting layer show slightly improved photostability retaining 80% of the ‘post burn-in’ values after 1000 h as well as 20.6% efficiency with Jsc, Voc and FF of 22.7 mA cm−2, 1.14 V and 80%. The demonstration of 2D structures present at the GBs of 3D perovskites has further been supported by others who reported GB passivation of PEA-added (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskites with a small amount of excessive PbI2.160 Our most recent work has further demonstrated an important step forward in the structural identification.161 As reported in the previous literature, we also observed that BA is existent at the GBs inducing a layered structure. Moreover, the layered structure was also found even upon adding PEA cations with a similar length to BA. Interestingly, longer octylammonium (OA) cations than BA and PEA, which are naturally believed to form layered structures, did not induce a layered structure but only wrapped 3D perovskite crystal domains with highly preferential orientation as shown in Fig. 10b. The distinct structural features enabled one to strike a balance of two desirable but incompatible features between shielding individual grains against stimuli from the outside and maintaining charge transport properties across the grains. The simultaneous achievements could originate from the induction of highly preferential orientation with strong attractive interactions. Our OA-armoured perovskite solar cells achieved a stabilised efficiency of 20.1% due to highly preferential orientation suppressing non-radiative recombination. In addition to the impressive photovoltaic performance, their structural features led to considerably enhanced thermal stability at 85 °C in an ambient atmosphere retaining 80% of initial efficiency after 760 h without any encapsulation. Furthermore, the thermal degradation of MAPbI3 by heat or an in situ electron beam was found to be initiated at the GBs and OA cations present at the GBs act as a protective covering. The additional armouring effect of OA-modified perovskites was probed via the humidity stability test at 25 °C and 65% relative humidity without any encapsulation, showing 90% retention of the initial efficiency following 430 h. In addition to long organic cations of BA, PEA and OA, diammonium cations of iodoethylammonium154 and octane-1,8-diammonium,162 as well as alternative monoammoniums of iBA (iso-butylammonium),163 AVA (ammoniumvaleric acid)156 and PEY (pyreneammonium)164 have also been used to improve photovoltaic performance and device stability. As described above, organic cations with long alkyl chains are introduced into perovskite precursor solution for the preparation of Ruddlesden–Popper structured perovskites and mixed 2D/3D perovskites.


4.2.3. Graded 2D/3D dimensional perovskites. 
In addition to mixed 2D/3D perovskites described above, graded 2D/3D dimensional perovskites have also been reported by others who deposited long organic cation-containing precursor solution on top of the as-prepared 3D perovskite layer.165–170 The advantages of the alternative approach are that the 2D perovskite top layer could serve as a selective charge extraction layer reducing interfacial charge recombination and a moisture-resistant barrier. For instance, Hu et al. demonstrated a graded 2D/3D dimensional perovskite (Fig. 10d) by depositing mixed PEAI and MAI precursor solution in IPA onto the 3D MAPbI3 layer, aiming for efficient light absorption and charge generation by 3D perovskites, and selective charge extraction and moisture resistance by 2D layered perovskites.165 The graded PEAMAPbI3/MAPbI3 perovskites were found to have highly preferred crystal orientation compared to neat 3D MAPbI3 perovskites. They suggested that the distinct features could be attributed to the presence of the long organic cation (PEA+) acting as a template for the anisotropic growth of layered perovskites. The graded dimensional perovskite/perovskite solar cells showed an efficiency of 14.94% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 18.63 mA cm−2, 1.08 V and 73% and improved moisture stability at room temperature and 75% relative humidity for 19 days without any encapsulation. Furthermore, the modified interface energy level has been reported as a characteristic of graded 2D/3D perovskites by Bai et al., who prepared them by dripping PEAI solution in toluene on the 3D MAPbI3 layer for solvent engineering prior to thermal annealing.166 Based on the UPS results of the graded 2D/3D perovskites with an upshifted work function (WF) of 4.13 eV from 4.48 eV for 3D MAPbI3, they claimed that the graded PEA2Pb2I4/MAPbI3 perovskites with the upshifted LUMO level facilitate charge transfer to PC61BM and suppress charge recombination, preventing the back transfer of electrons from PC61BM to the perovskite layer. The graded perovskite device exhibited an efficiency of 19.89% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 21.80 mA cm−2, 1.17 V and 78%. In addition to efficient photovoltaic performance of the graded 2D/3D perovskites by the modified interface energy level, their moisture stability at 80% relative humidity without encapsulation for one week was also improved due both to the presence of hydrophobic PEA+ at the interface between the perovskite and PC61BM layers, and the suppression of I− ion diffusion from the perovskite layer to Ag.


4.2.4. Other mixed dimensional perovskites. 
A study extending from 2D to 1D (Fig. 10g) perovskites has been reported by Fan et al., who demonstrated that adding a small amount of 2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine (PZPY) into perovskite precursor solution induces 1D–3D hetero-structured perovskites.171 The XRD findings exhibited the presence of 1D/3D structured PbBr2–PZPY and FAI–PbI2–PZPY intermediates, suggesting the transition of the intermediates to final 1D/3D perovskites as a function of thermal annealing time. The 1D/3D perovskites showed a PCE of 18.1% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 21.7 mA cm−2, 1.08 V and 77% as well as improved device stability during thermal cycling testing from 25 to 85 °C under 55% relative humidity for five cycles compared to 3D control devices. They suggested that high efficiency and thermal stability are attributed to a block of the ion migration channels of the A-site by the flexible 1D perovskite with a less densely close-packed structure. Zhang et al. demonstrated that multi-dimensional perovskites based on 0D CsPbBrI2 quantum dots (Fig. 10h), 1D CsPbBrI2 nanosheets and 3D CsPbBrI2 films exhibit an efficiency of 12.39% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 12.93 mA cm−2, 1.19 V and 80.5%.172 The multi-dimensionality of the perovskites is responsible for multi-graded energy alignment between CsPbBrI2 and organic hole conductor (PTAA) enhancing hole transfer with a drop in interfacial recombination. The 0D–2D–3D multi-graded CsPbBrI2 perovskite devices showed improved storage stability at 25 °C under 25–35% RH for 60 days.

4.3. Effect of impurity in precursor solution
Precursor purity in solution is also considered to affect the characteristics of the perovskite films such as crystal growth, charge carrier recombination dynamics, and electron/hole diffusion length. A comprehensive understanding of impurity impact in the precursor solution on material properties is essential to further improve the photovoltaic performance. The impacts of PbI2 impurity with a purity of 98.0% in comparison to highly pure PbI2 (99.999%) have been reported to show low crystallinity and a drop in charge carrier lifetime and diffusion length as the impurities in the bulk film could act as recombination centres by impurity-induced traps, reducing photovoltaic performance.173,174 The experimental studies suggested the importance of the use of PbI2 precursor with a very high purity on the photovoltaic performance of the perovskite solar cells, despite recent work from a practical perspective on the preparation of perovskite powders using inexpensive PbI2 with a purity of 99.0% in acetonitrile.175 A chemical study of impurities present in hydroiodic acid (HI) as a reactant to synthesise MAI by reacting with methylamine has been performed by Zhang et al., who reported an enhancement in the optoelectronic properties in perovskite films by introducing hypophosphorous acid (HPA), known to a stabilizer of the HI, in a lead acetate-based MAPbI3 precursor solution. The addition of HPA induces the reduction of the oxidised I2 back into I−, achieving the balance of I/Pb stoichiometry.176 Subsequently, Levchuk et al. reported that H3PO2 (HPA) can react with methylamine during MAI preparation and subsequently forms PbHPO3 detrimental to crystal growth as the side product could act as an undesirable nucleation centre.177 Nayak et al. reported that the intentional addition of a small amount of formic acid, which is one of the impurities as a side-product of DMF decomposition, accelerates the perovskite crystallization.178 They suggested that its presence increased the dissolution of the colloids, resulting in facilitation of supersaturation responsible for rapid crystallization. Subsequently, this work has inspired the use of formic acid as an accelerator for the fast growth of MAPbI3 single crystals.179
5. Solution chemistry for scale-up perovskite solar cells
As reviewed in the previous sections, the majority of current studies on perovskite solar cells focus on their fabrication via spin coating, which is already verified to achieve excellent thin films with pinhole-free uniformity and well-controlled crystal growth. However, the spin coating is limited to the fabrication of non-scalable solution-processed perovskite solar cells. In this section, we will describe representative four scalable deposition technologies of spray coating, slot-die coating, doctor-blade coating, and inkjet printing pertaining to perovskite precursor solution chemistry to stress its importance. Furthermore, the significant factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells from the point of view of precursor solution chemistry are summarised in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of factors influencing the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells in relation to scalable deposition techniques






Factors affecting perovskite crystallinity
Active area (cm2)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.





a Four cells F4-TCNQ: 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane.





Spray coating
Solvent type (DMF)
0.025
16.8
0.92
72
11.1

180



Precursor ratio and substrate temperature
0.15
20.7
1.06
74
16.2

182



Precursor ratio
0.13
20.1
0.96
71
15.7

183



3.8a
20.4
0.83
70
11.7


Substrate temperature
0.1
20.27
1.047
75.5
16.03

184



1
18.59
1.032
68.2
13.09


Solvent type (mixed DMF and GBL)
0.16
21.4
1.1
77.6
18.3

185



40
N/M
N/M
70.16
15.5






Slot-die coating
Gas blowing
0.1
19.35
0.96
63
11.6

186



Gas blowing
0.1
20.38
0.98
59.88
11.96

187



Substrate temperature and gas blowing
0.0625
16.8
0.73
75.6
9.2

188



Substrate temperature and gas blowing
0.1
17.21
1.1
67.25
12.73

190



NH4Cl additive
0.1
19.79
1.02
77.15
15.57

191



MACl additive
0.06
21.5
1.1
76
18

192







Blade coating
Substrate temperature and gas blowing
0.1
18.9
1.0
70.5
13.3

193



10.1
N/M
N/M
N/M
10.4


100
N/M
N/M
N/M
4.3


1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) additive
0.1
16.73
0.96
65
10.44

194



Substrate temperature and MAI purification
0.0725
21.8
1.05
N/M
15.1

195



MACl additive and Solvent type (mixed DMF and NMP)
0.12
22.53
1.097
77.1
19.06

106



1.2
21.38
1.111
72.9
17.33


12.6
N/M
N/M
N/M
13.3


MACl additive
N/M
23.1
1.09
77
19.5

196



F4-TCNQ and MACl additives
0.08
22.7
1.1
81
20.2

197







Ink jet printing
Substrate temperature and MACl additive
0.04
19.55
0.91
69
12.3

199



Vacuum annealing
0.09
18.4
1.0
56
11.3

200



Vacuum-assisted thermal annealing
0.04
22.71
1.08
69.58
17.04

201



4.0
20.40
1.04
62.57
13.27




5.1. Spray coating
Spray coating is one of the scalable solution-processing techniques for fabricating perovskite solar cells. The deposition process involves some primary steps including nebulisation of the solution and transportation of the droplet to the reaction surface by an inert carrier gas, and solvent evaporation by elevated substrate temperature (Fig. 11a). Therefore, the quality of spray-coated perovskite film is strongly related to precursor solution variables such as boiling point of the solvent, the amount of precursor solution, the precursor ratio of organic and lead halide components, the amount of intermediate phases, substrate temperature, as well as processing parameters including spray speed and droplet size. In this section, associated precursor solution chemistry will be introduced for understanding the various factors affecting film morphology and crystal growth for spray-coated perovskite solar cells. For instance, Lidzey et al. demonstrated an ultrasonic spray coating technique to prepare perovskite thin films from precursor solution containing MAI and PbCl2 under ambient conditions, suggesting the importance of boiling point of the casting solvent.180 Spray solution with too low boiling point (i.e. chloroform, 61.2 °C) can dry before reaching the substrate, causing poor surface morphology with a number of pinholes and non-uniform thickness. However, casting solvent with relatively high boiling point (i.e. DMSO, 189 °C) results in the formation of large-area thickness variations or shrinkage/de-wetting of the casting solution due to the prolonged drying times of spray-coated films. The solar cells with perovskite films spray-coated from precursor solution in DMF with a lower boiling point (153 °C) than DMSO showed 11.1% efficiency yielding Jsc, Voc and FF of 16.8 mA cm−2, 0.92 V and 72%. In their subsequent work, all layers including PEDOT:PSS and PCBM as charge transporting materials are spray-coated under ambient conditions to fabricate perovskite devices showing an efficiency of 9.9% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 16.7 mA cm−2, 0.87 V and 70%.181 Xia et al. reported that high crystalline perovskite films without pinholes can be prepared by controlling the amount of MAI solution and substrate temperature during MAI spray-coating on spin-coated PbI2 films.182 When a small amount of MAI-containing solution is sprayed, less crystalline perovskite films with non-uniform crystal grains are formed. However, MAPbI3 crystal grains exhibit a polyhedral shape with a number of pinholes with excess MAI solution. Moreover, a low substrate temperature of 40 °C caused incomplete MAPbI3 conversion from PbI2 and MAI, showing the presence of unreacted PbI2 after the spray coating process. Under optimised conditions at 80 °C, the device with spray-coated MAPbI3 films showed 16.2% efficiency yielding 20.7 mA cm−2 in Jsc, 1.06 V in Voc and 74% in FF. The relationship between the precursor ratio of PbAc2/MAI and PbCl2/MAI mixtures and the formation of highly crystalline perovskite films without pinholes was studied by Tait et al. using a simultaneously pumped ultrasonic spray coating technique.183 The optimal ratio to have pinhole free surface morphology was found to be 75 mol% PbAc2 with PbCl2 yielding an efficiency of 15.7% for small area and 11.7% for 3.8 cm2 aperture area modules. They also tuned the bandgap energy of perovskite films by pumping precursor solutions of PbCl2/MAI and PbBr2/MABr at different rates. A two-step ultrasonic spray coating process was used by Huang et al., who prepared thick and smooth PbI2 films using DMSO solvent that can strongly interact with PbI2 compared to DMF.184 They suggested that the amount of the PbI2(DMSO)x intermediate complex tuned by substrate temperature can influence the degree of MAPbI3 film conversion from PbI2 film. When MAI solution is spray-coated on PbI2 film with the appropriate amount of the PbI2(DMSO)x complex, resulting from heating the substrate at 60 °C, PbI2 film can be completely converted to MAPbI3 film. However, the decreased amount of the PbI2(DMSO)x complex by high substrate temperature of 80 °C can cause low coverage of perovskite film. They showed an efficiency of 16.03% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 20.27 cmA cm−2, 1.047 V, and 75.5% for the device with an active area of 0.1 cm2, and 13.09% efficiency yielding Jsc, Voc and FF of 18.59 mA cm−2, 1.032 V, and 68.2% for the large area (1 cm2) cell. The crystal growth of MAPbI3−xCl3 films was studied by Im et al. in relation to a controlled ratio of perovskite deposition solvents of DMF and GBL during the spray coating process.185 When an inward flux (Fin) of the spray solution is much smaller than an outward flux (Fout) of the evaporating solvent (i.e. DMF:GBL = 10:0), fast crystal growth occurs by relatively rapid DMF evaporation in comparison with GBL. However, deposited perovskite precursor solution film does not completely dry and then is dewetted with an increasing volume of GBL indicating higher Fin than Fout. When the state of the flux is balanced (i.e. DMF:GBL = 8:2), crystalline perovskite films with small grains are formed by fast solvent evaporation in the initial stage of the spray coating process. Subsequently, as-deposited perovskite grains can further grow by redissolution and recrystallisation under continuous spray of perovskite precursor solution. Under balanced inward and outward flux, they showed spray-coated perovskites yielding 18.3% and 15.5% efficiencies for small-area cells and modules with an active area of 40 cm2, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Schematics of representative solution deposition techniques for fabricating large-scale perovskite films using (a) spray coating, (b) slot-die coating, (c) doctor-blade coating, and (d) inkjet printing. 
5.2. Slot-die coating
Slot-die coating uses perovskite precursor solution ink reservoir in the slot-die coating head made from stainless steel. The deposition process involves transportation of the precursor solution from the coating head to the substrate, forming a continuous solution meniscus in between (Fig. 11b and c). The meniscus liquid edge of precursor solution moves to spread the solution film across the substrate. Therefore, the quality of slot-die coated perovskite film is strongly related to heating the substrate at high temperature and gas blowing during the coating process to control crystal growth by drying coated solution. Furthermore, the use of chemical additives such as NH4Cl and MACl is also responsible for inducing a high degree of crystallinity and a wider processing window time between perovskite deposition and anti-solvent dipping. For instance, Vak et al. reported that for slot-die coating of perovskite film, PbI2 film was coated using slot-die and then was converted to MAPbI3 by dipping the PbI2 film in MAI solution.186 In contrast to the spin coating process with the drying step during spinning and post thermal annealing, the slot-die deposition technique involves wet and slow drying under ambient conditions. This processing condition can cause uncontrolled crystal growth and a number of pinholes in PbI2 film. To overcome the drawbacks, additional gas was blown during the slot-die process where the drying step of the PbI2 film is fast showing uniform and pinhole-free perovskite films following the dipping process. The perovskite device based on slot-die coated PbI2 showed an efficiency of 11.6% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 19.35 mA cm−2, 0.96 V and 63%. In their subsequent work, perovskite solar cells were fabricated with the deposition of all layers of ZnO nanoparticles, perovskites and P3HT by the slot-die coating technique, yielding an efficiency of 11.96% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 20.38 mA cm−2, 0.98 V and 59.88%.187 Krebs et al. reported that flexible perovskite solar cells were fabricated using the slot-die coating technique for the deposition of all layers and printing for the back electrode.188 The carbon electrode ink was selected due to suppression of electrode degradation resulting from the interaction of iodide with silver. However, its drawback was induction of damage of the underneath perovskite layer by solvent used in carbon ink. As an alternative, a solvent-free UV curable Ag-based ink was used and the resultant flexible device showed an efficiency of 4.9% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 10.9 mA cm−2, 0.9 V and 50%. The influence of substrate temperature and air-knife blowing during the slot-die coating process was studied by Watson et al. aiming for controlling the drying rate of deposited perovskite precursor solution film.189 Preheating the substrate at 65 °C with air-knife blowing was carried out to facilitate fast drying dynamics and crystal growth similar to the spin coating process. As a consequence, perovskite precursor solution is rapidly dried and subsequently, precursor concentration is increased, triggering heterogeneous nucleation over the warm surface. The cold air-knife blowing with preheating the substrate at high temperature subtracts a larger amount of thermal energy and induces a stronger temperature gradient between the upper and lower region of the coated solution film. Under the conditions, the perovskite crystal growth is well controlled due to a stronger flattening effect. The slot-die coated perovskite film-based device showed an efficiency of 9.2% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 16.8 mA cm−2, 0.73 V and 75.6%. The effect of gas blowing and heat treatment of the substrate on crystal growth in relation to drying of perovskite precursor solution was also studied by Vak et al., who yielded an efficiency of 12.73% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 17.21 mA cm−2, 1.1 V and 67.25%.190 Gao et al. reported that adding NH4Cl into MAPbI3 precursor solution induces uniform and compact grains with high crystallinity.191 The intermediate phases resulting from the introduction of NH4+ and Cl− ions were supposed to influence the degree of crystallinity. The MAPbI3 solar cells with 10 mg mL−1 NH4Cl additive yielded 15.57% efficiency with a Jsc of 19.79 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V and an FF of 77.15%. Whitaker et al. reported scalable slot-die coating perovskites for photovoltaic applications using a perovskite precursor solution with the addition of methylammonium chloride (MACl).192 The precursor solution showed good stability and robustness for 8 min during device fabrication, indicating a broad processing window time between perovskite deposition and anti-solvent dipping. In contrast to the spin coating process, the increased processing window time is critical in scale-up deposition techniques due to the inherent delay between the coating station and a secondary station for anti-solvent dipping or thermal annealing. On optimising the coating speed, perovskite precursor solution concentration and flow rate, gap height between the slot-die head and substrate, the slot-die coated perovskite solar cells yielded an efficiency of 18% with Jsc, Voc and FF of 21.5 mA cm−2, 1.1 V and 76%.
5.3. Doctor-blade coating
Doctor-blade coating is a scalable solution-processing technique similar to slot-die coating. In this coating process, a blade is used to spread loaded precursor solution along a moving substrate to form wet solution films as shown in Fig. 11c. As reviewed in the previous section, the quality of blade-coated perovskite film is also dependent on substrate temperature and gas flow to control crystal growth by drying coated solution. Furthermore, the use of chemical additives such as 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) and MACl, and the purification of the organic halide component, is also responsible for inducing a high degree of crystallinity. For instance, S. Razza et al. reported a scale-up process for two-step sequential deposition of MAPbI3 perovskite films, where PbI2 film is coated by a blade coating.193 In order to quickly evaporate the deposition solvent for controlling the crystallisation of the PbI2 films, an air blow system at 100 °C is applied. The smooth and compact PbI2 layer by air flow was converted to the perovskite by dipping in a MAI solution in IPA. The optimal dipping time was found to be longer than for spin-coated samples possibly due to more compactness of the PbI2 films. The blade-coated perovskite solar cells with an active area of 0.1 cm2 showed an efficiency of 13.3% with a Jsc of 18.9 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.0 V, and an FF of 70.5%. They also demonstrated series-connected modules with 10.4% and 4.3% PCEs for 10.1 cm2 and 100 cm2 active area, respectively. Z. Yang et al. fabricated fully printable perovskite solar cells with a configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbIxCl3−x/PC61BM/bis-C60/Ag using a blade coating technique, except for the Ag electrode.194 For the preparation of fully printable perovskite solar cells, PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution with high surface tension is diluted with IPA at a volume ratio of 1:3 to reduce the surface tension as IPA has lower surface energy (21.7 dyn cm−1) than water (71.97 dyn cm−1). To deposit the light absorber layer, perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving MAI and PbCl2 (3:1 molar ratio) in DMF with 1 wt% 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) as an additive to improve the precursor solubility. In the blade coating process, elongated solvent drying times of 1 h at 90 °C and then another 1 h at 100 °C compared to the spin coating process retard the crystallisation rate of the perovskite films. The drying step is responsible for the formation of homogeneous and highly crystalline perovskite films. In addition to the solvent vaporisation, the extent of relative humidity (RH) such as 15–25%, 40–50%, and 60–70% is suggested to be a significant factor affecting the nucleation and crystallisation of the perovskite precursor solution films. The coverage and homogeneity of the perovskite films are significantly improved when the relative humidity is decreased to 15–25%. As a result of optimisation, the fully printable blade-coated perovskite solar cells exhibited an efficiency of 10.44% with a Jsc of 16.73 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.96 V, and an FF of 65%. Y. Deng et al. introduced uniform, smooth and pinhole-free perovskite films with large grains by heating the substrate at high temperature during the blade coating of the MAPbI3 perovskite film.195 When the ITO substrate was heated at a temperature (100 °C) much lower than the boiling point of DMF (153 °C), the resultant perovskite films were found to be non-uniform, very rough and discontinuous. However, the perovskite films deposited at a substrate temperature of 125 °C are smooth and continuous. Beyond the optimised condition, higher substrate temperature can cause fast MAPbI3 decomposition. In addition to the importance of substrate temperature, MAI purification is also suggested to be responsible for the formation of smooth perovskite films. The colour of precursor solution including PbI2 and non-purified MAI becomes visibly cloudy possibly due to the presence of insoluble Pb(H2PO3)2 particles resulting from the reaction of Pb2+ with H2PO2− induced by a stabiliser to prevent HI decomposition, H3PO2 or its reactive product (MAH2PO3) with MA. In contrast to non-purified MAI present in between the large domains of the resulting perovskite film, precursor solution from PbI2 and purified MAI by recrystallization appears to be completely clear. The corresponding perovskite films based on the purified MAI do not show gaps between the large domains and the crystal domains were continuously connected. The optimised perovskite device fabricated via the blade-coating process showed 15.1% efficiency with a Jsc of 21.8 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 1.05 V. The addition of MACl and the solvent engineering technique to control perovskite film morphology and enhance its crystallinity were applied to the doctor blade deposition process by M. Yang et al., who introduced an additional 30% MACl in MAI and PbI2 (1:1 molar ratio) in mixed N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) and DMF solvent.106 The blade-coated perovskite precursor solution film was transferred into a diethyl ether bath to extract the deposition solvent. In order to retard a wet-state of MAPbI3 precursor film, as an alternative to DMSO, NMP with low vapour pressure and high viscosity was mixed with DMF for perovskite deposition. The processing time was found to be extended up to 8 min without any change in appearance. The blade-coated perovskite device showed an efficiency of 19.06% for a small area of 0.12 cm2, and a stabilized efficiency of 17.5% for a large active area of 1.2 cm2. S. Tang et al. introduced compositional engineering in (MAPbI3)0.6(FAPbI3)0.4 precursor solution to lower substrate temperature during blade deposition.196 Adding a small amount of Cs+ (less than 5 mol%) and Br− (2.5 mol%) into the perovskite precursor solution was found to improve phase purity at a lower blade temperature of 120 °C. In addition to composition engineering in the perovskite precursor solution, 5 mol% of excess MACl was added into the precursor solution to enhance film coverage and remove pinholes, resulting from the retardation of the crystallisation. The MACl incorporation induces Cl-rich intermediate phases in perovskite films and then the phases are converted to Cl-poor phases after the MACl evaporation during thermal annealing. The blade-coated perovskite solar cells exhibited an efficiency of 19.5% with a Jsc of 23.1 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.09 V, and an FF of 77%. In their subsequent work, the molecular doping approach was applied to improve the film conductivity and electronic contact with the conductive substrate by directly blade-coating the perovskite precursor solution on the ITO/glass substrate.197 As a p-type dopant, 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ) was added into MACl-containing MAPbI3 precursor solution in DMF/methylammonium hypophosphite (MHP) by mixing separately prepared F4-TCNQ solution in DMF. The blade-coated perovskite films were then annealed under a vapour of mixed DMSO/CBZ solvent at 100 °C for 30 min. In common HTL-free perovskite solar cells, carrier transfer is suppressed due to undesirable energy barrier induced by work function mismatch between ITO and perovskite material. However, the introduction of F4-TCNQ into MAPbI3 perovskites imparts more p-type feature to the MAPbI3, facilitating the hole transfer to ITO. This is supported by surface potential measurements showing an increase in WF by approximately 0.1 to 0.2 eV. The bladed-coated perovskite device with a HTL-free configuration of ITO/MAPbI3:F4-TCNQ/C60/BCP/Cu showed an efficiency of 20.2% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 22.7 mA cm−2, 1.10 V, and 81%.
5.4. Inkjet printing
Inkjet printing uses a nozzle to drop the perovskite precursor solution ink from a piezoelectric-driven inkjet head with a motorised xyz stage (Fig. 11d). Considering that the inkjet printing process disperses droplets of the ink on the substrate, the use of anti-solvent is not applicable to this process. To overcome the issue, some attempts including interfacial engineering, vacuum annealing for slow solvent evaporation, printing table temperature and MACl additive have been made to control film morphology and crystal growth. For instance, Wei et al. demonstrated scalable inkjet printing for fabricating perovskite solar cells with a configuration of FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/carbon using two-step deposition with spin-coated PbI2 film and subsequently inkjet-printed MAI/carbon ink.198 The resultant perovskite solar cells based on the mixed MAI/carbon ink showed remarkably reduced charge recombination due to improved interfacial contact between MAPbI3 and the carbon layer compared to the counterpart based on infiltrated MAI on FTO/TiO2/PbI2/carbon ink. The inkjet-printed perovskite solar cells exhibited an efficiency of 11.60% with a Jsc of 17.20 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.95 V, and an FF of 71%. Li et al. reported the impact of printing table temperature and MACl additive in precursor solution on crystal growth correlating with photovoltaic performance.199 The inkjet-printed perovskite solar cells yielded an efficiency of 12.3% with a Jsc of 19.55 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.91 V, and an FF of 69%. In order to surmount the drawback of intrinsically inapplicable anti-solvent during inkjet printing, Mathies et al. performed vacuum annealing after the printing process, optimising the number of printed sublayers and the distance between printed drops.200 They suggested that considering the increased relaxation time of the perovskite to form a dense and uniform film during the printing process, the vacuum annealing step for slow solvent evaporation compared to thermal annealing is responsible for achieving good film morphology and improved crystallinity. The vacuum annealed device showed an efficiency of 11.3% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 18.4 mA cm−2, 1.00 V and 56%. Subsequent progress in controlling the crystallinity of perovskite has been made by Liang et al., who combined vacuum-assisted thermal annealing post-treatment and optimised solvent composition with mixed DMSO and GBL.201 The resultant perovskite solar cells showed an efficiency of 17.04% with Jsc, Voc, and FF of 22.71 mA cm−2, 1.08 V, and 69.58%.
In addition to the four scalable deposition techniques described in Section 5, screen printing has been reported to be suitable for depositing thicker films such as mesoporous TiO2, ZrO2 and the carbon counter electrode in perovskite solar cells.202–205
6. Summary and outlook
In summary, this review covered the critical and comprehensive studies from fundamental solution chemistry pertaining to nucleation and crystal growth, to solution-processed photovoltaic applications focusing on mostly non-scalable spin-coating and scalable deposition techniques. Further to classical nucleation and growth processes as described in the initial part, recent progress in the development of alternative coordinating molecules such as NMP, acetonitrile and urea to DMSO was presented, although the majority of researchers in this field have been using the DMSO molecule. Taking into account the importance of precursor-coordinating molecule interaction in solution, the development of alternative coordinating molecules to DMSO is essential to achieve further improved high-performance solar cells via precise control of volatility and the degree of the precursor-coordinating molecule interaction which influence the nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskites. In addition, the use of a more environmentally friendly anti-solvent alternative to toxic chlorobenzene and toluene is highly desirable from a safety perspective. In order to minimise health risk from the toxicity of anti-solvents, we provided a green anti-solvent selection guide with their boiling point and polarity in Fig. 6. Following that, chemical pathways from precursor solution to perovskite formation to understand and elucidate the whole processes were described. Some promising results reported so far indicate that exploring the chemical pathways and identifying intermediate species in perovskite precursor solution are of great significance. Therefore, further studies are prominently required, as the reversibility and stability of the intermediate phase induced by precursor-coordinating molecule interaction could impact surface morphology, grain size, crystal phase purity and crystallinity of the perovskite layer in connection with the irreproducibility of device performance and a lack of device stability. Chemical precursor composition has also been described in the hope of achieving further improved photovoltaic performance and device stability. In contrast to an initial strategy of controlled perovskite dimensionality by adding long organic cations to achieve superior humidity stability at the expense of high performance,144 most recent studies by us and others have shown great achievements to keep a balance of the two desirable but incompatible features with much improved thermal stability as well as humidity stability. In spite of some promising results reported so far, the studies on the design of mixed dimensional perovskites are still in preliminary stages. Therefore, further in-depth understanding is strongly required in relation to the mechanism of highly preferred orientation, and the relationship between the corresponding crystal orientation and defect passivation by long organic cations with different alkyl chain lengths, correlating with precursor solution chemistry, i.e. the structure and size distribution of iodoplumbate clusters. Furthermore, it is necessary to consider not only the chemical factors of the precursor solution but also the physical properties of the coating solution such as viscosity, evaporation rate of solvents, the wettability and penetration onto substrates, as the majority of the perovskite solar cells are fabricated by a solution-based deposition process. In particular, for the production of scalable modules using commercial solution coating equipment, the integration of solvent engineering and chemical additives with physical aspects in the precursor solution is highly required. From an industrial point of view, these comprehensive considerations will apply directly to scalable solution-processed coating techniques such as doctor blade coating, slot die coating, spray coating, inkjet printing and screen printing, described in the review.
The review will become a helpful guide to understand natural phenomena pertaining to nucleation and growth processes in perovskite solution and outlines the recent progress in this field. Expanding the fundamentals of precursor solution chemistry will be able to produce a rationale to resolve the existing and prospective problems in the fabrication process of perovskite solar cells, as well as to achieve further improved photovoltaic performance and device stability.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant from the Korean government (MSIT) (2018R1A3B1052820, 2011-0031565, 2015M1A2A2056542). This work was also financially supported by a brand-project (1.180043.01) of UNIST. M. Jung acknowledges NRF Research Fellowship funded by the Ministry of Education (NRF-2016R1A6A3A11930303).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, as of 4th August 2018.
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Pang, D. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9705–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Sugimoto, Monodispersed Particles, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2001 Search PubMed .

          J. W. Mullin, Crystallization, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,  2001 Search PubMed .
R. Strey, P. E. Wagner and Y. Viisanen, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7748–7758 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Gu and H. Taeghwan, Small, 2011, 7, 2685–2702 CrossRef PubMed .
P. G. Vekilov, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2346–2357 RSC .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego,  1990 Search PubMed .

          T. A. Ring, Fundamentals of ceramic powder processing and synthesis, Academic Press, San Diego,  1996 Search PubMed .
T. Sugimoto, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1987, 28, 65–108 CrossRef CAS .

          A. E. Nielsen, Kinetics of Precipitation, Pergamon, Oxford,  1964 Search PubMed .
T. Sugimoto, Hyomen, 1991, 29, 978 CAS .
J. A. Venables, G. D. T. Spiller and M. Hanbucken, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1984, 47, 399 CrossRef .
C. Teichert, Phys. Rep., 2002, 365, 335–432 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zheng, S. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5116–5121 CrossRef CAS .
F. Arabpour Roghabadi, V. Ahmadi and K. Oniy Aghmiuni, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 112677–112685 RSC .
V. K. LaMer and R. H. Dinegar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847–4854 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. L. Mer, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1952, 44, 1270–1277 CrossRef .
W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., Stoechiom. Verwandtschaftsl., 1900, 34, 495 Search PubMed .
A. Baldan, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 2171–2202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, K. Shoyama, W. Sato, Y. Matsuo, K. Inoue, K. Harano, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15907–15914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, O. S. Game, S. Pang and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4827–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, T. Zhang, P. Schulz, Z. Li, G. Li, D. H. Kim, N. Guo, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, B. Puthen-Veettil, F. Haque, M. Wright, C. Xu, A. Pivrikas and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Pham, V. T. Tiong, D. Yao, W. Martens, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 476–487 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 868–875 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roose, A. Ummadisingu, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, A. Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, U. Steiner and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. Lee, J. H. Noh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19087–19090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 490–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef .
A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 711–713 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, C. McCleese, C. Kolodziej, A. C. S. Samia, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 3806–3813 RSC .
Y.-J. Jeon, S. Lee, R. Kang, J.-E. Kim, J.-S. Yeo, S.-H. Lee, S.-S. Kim, J.-M. Yun and D.-Y. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, Z. Liu, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16411–16419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Miyamae, Y. Numahata and M. Nagata, Chem. Lett., 1980, 663–664 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, Z. Tang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhong, S. Venkatesan, H. Graham, M. Patton, Y. Jing, A. M. Guloy and Y. Yao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10595–10599 RSC .
J. Cao, X. Jing, J. Yan, C. Hu, R. Chen, J. Yin, J. Li and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9919–9926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, Q. Li, Y. Yang, K. S. Wong, H. Chen and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 58–68 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shuang, B. Yang, M. Xiangyue, Z. Teng, C. Haining, Z. Xiaoli, H. Chen, Q. Yongquan and Y. Shihe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jo, K. S. Oh, M. Kim, K. H. Kim, H. Lee, C. W. Lee and D. S. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500768 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T.-H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh, D. Di Carlo, J. H. Ko, H. D. Maynard and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, C. Yihua, L. Zonghao, C. Qi, W. Xindong and Z. Huanping, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, B. Wenger, M. T. Klug, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, R. J. Nicholas, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 145–152 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, Y.-T. Hsieh, N. De Marco, M. Wang, P. Sun and Y. Yang, Chem, 2017, 3, 290–302 CAS .
L. Zhi, Y. Li, X. Cao, Y. Li, X. Cui, L. Ci and J. Wei, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 632 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xie, A.-N. Cho, N.-G. Park and K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9390–9397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, Y. Yao, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32868–32875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Gao, E. Oveisi, Y. Lee, Q. Jeangros, G. Grancini, S. Paek, Y. Feng and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14380–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Fateev, A. A. Petrov, V. N. Khrustalev, P. V. Dorovatovskii, Y. V. Zubavichus, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5237–5244 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Hendriks, J. J. van Franeker, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. A. Anta, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2346–2354 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, W. A. McMaster, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31959–31967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Junnian, G. Lin, Z. Fuwei, L. Huiqiao, S. Jizhong, Z. Haibo and Z. Tianyou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2390–2394 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Manda, H. Fuzhi, H. Wenchao, D. Yasmina, Z. Ye, E. Joanne, G.-W. Angus, B. Udo, C. Yi-Bing and S. Leone, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
B.-E. Cohen, S. Aharon, A. Dymshits and L. Etgar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, S. Pathak, H.-W. Chen, A. A. Haghighirad, S. D. Stranks, T. Miyasaka and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4464–4471 RSC .
N. Lin, J. Qiao, H. Dong, F. Ma and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22839–22845 RSC .
S. Paek, P. Schouwink, E. N. Athanasopoulou, K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, F. Stellacci, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, S. H. Chang, L.-C. Chen, C.-L. Tsai, H.-M. Cheng, W.-C. Huang, W.-N. Chen, Y.-C. Lu, Z.-L. Tseng, K. Y. Chiu, S.-H. Chen and C.-G. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 583–589 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chang, W.-C. Huang, C.-C. Chen, S.-H. Chen and C.-G. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 445, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Lian, J. Song, Y. Hao, P. Zeng and H. Niu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3438–3445 RSC .
L. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Hao, Q. Sun, Z. Li, H. Wang, Y. Cui and F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2360–2367 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pellaroque, N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, Y. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2044–2050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yavari, M. Mazloum-Ardakani, S. Gholipour, M. M. Tavakoli, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, N. Taghavinia, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800177 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, Z. Wang, B. Zhou, X. Jia, Q. Ma, N. Yuan, X. Zheng, J. Ding and W.-H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700213 CrossRef .
M. Yin, F. Xie, H. Chen, X. Yang, F. Ye, E. Bi, Y. Wu, M. Cai and L. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8548–8553 RSC .
T. Bu, L. Wu, X. Liu, X. Yang, P. Zhou, X. Yu, T. Qin, J. Shi, S. Wang, S. Li, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, F. Huang, Q. Meng, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Zhong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700576 CrossRef .
J. Troughton, K. Hooper and T. M. Watson, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, G. Kapil, P. Zhang, Z. Hu, M. A. Kamarudin, T. Ma and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16482–16489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, D. Liu, T. Zhang, L. Ji, X. Gu, Z. David Chen and S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, S. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Cao, J. Shao, S. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3667–3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, Y.-H. Lin, J. C. Blancon, S. Tretiak, J. Even, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602159 CrossRef .
D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, W. Rehman, F. Pulvirenti, J. B. Patel, N. K. Noel, M. B. Johnston, S. R. Marder, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Boonmongkolras, D. Kim, E. M. Alhabshi, I. Gereige and B. Shin, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 21551–21557 RSC .
Q. Minchao, C. Jie, Z. Tiankai, M. Jiangquan, L. Tsz-Ki, Z. Shu, Z. Yang, W. Jiayu, H. Yao-Jane, Z. Ni, X. Jianbin, Z. Xiaowei and L. Xinhui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703399 CrossRef .
B. Wang, K. Young Wong, X. Xiao and T. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10557 CrossRef PubMed .
K. G. Stamplecoskie, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 208–215 RSC .
R. Sara, K. Alexander, F. S. Martí, A. Clara and G. Antonio, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2795–2798 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Barrows, S. Lilliu, A. J. Pearson, D. Babonneau, A. D. F. Dunbar and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4934–4942 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Aguiar, S. Wozny, T. G. Holesinger, T. Aoki, M. K. Patel, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. Al-Jassim, W. Zhou and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2372–2382 RSC .
C.-Y. Chang, Y.-C. Huang, C.-S. Tsao and W.-F. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26712–26721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, K. Gao, D. Luo, Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, C. Zhu, E. Schaible, A. Hexemer, C. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, M. Grätzel, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sharenko, C. Mackeen, L. Jewell, F. Bridges and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS .
B.-E. Cohen, S. Gamliel and L. Etgar, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081502 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T.-B. Song, H.-H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, Z. Li, M. O. Reese, O. G. Reid, D. H. Kim, S. Siol, T. R. Klein, Y. Yan, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17038 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9935–9938 RSC .
Y. Rong, X. Hou, Y. Hu, A. Mei, L. Liu, P. Wang and H. Han, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14555 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Oku, Y. Ohishi and N. Ueoka, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10389–10395 RSC .
Q. Han, Y. Bai, J. Liu, K.-Z. Du, T. Li, D. Ji, Y. Zhou, C. Cao, D. Shin, J. Ding, A. D. Franklin, J. T. Glass, J. Hu, M. J. Therien, J. Liu and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2365–2371 RSC .
S. Yang, W. Liu, L. Zuo, X. Zhang, T. Ye, J. Chen, C.-Z. Li, G. Wu and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9430–9436 RSC .
H. Dong, Z. Wu, J. Xi, X. Xu, L. Zuo, T. Lei, X. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Hou and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704836 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, C. Ran, Y. Chen, Q. Li, N. Jiang, C. Li, Y. Pan, T. Li, J. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3193–3202 RSC .
Q. Wu, P. Zhou, W. Zhou, X. Wei, T. Chen and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15333–15340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Supasai, N. Rujisamphan, K. Ullrich, A. Chemseddine and T. Dittrich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183906 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, Q. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, R. Tao, J. Shao, R. Xia, C. Song, L. Hu and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6600–6608 RSC .
D. Bi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
Y. Senyun, R. Haixia, Y. Weibo, L. Yunlong, S. Weihai, P. Haitao, L. Zhiwei, B. Zuqiang, L. Yongfang and H. Chunhui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9648–9654 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. Correa Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J.-E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
S. Shukla, S. Shukla, L. J. Haur, S. S. H. Dintakurti, G. Han, A. Priyadarshi, T. Baikie, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3804–3809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Gujar, T. Unger, A. Schönleber, M. Fried, F. Panzer, S. van Smaalen, A. Köhler and M. Thelakkat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 605–614 RSC .
T. Meier, T. P. Gujar, A. Schönleber, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz, S. van Smaalen, F. Panzer, M. Thelakkat and A. Köhler, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7512–7519 RSC .
W. Hao-Yi, H. Ming-Yang, H. Jun, Y. Man, Q. Yujun, Z. Pu, G. Zhi-Xin, A. Xi-Cheng and Z. Jian-Ping, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 3986–3992 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lv, S. Pang, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, H. Hu, L. Wang, X. Zhou, H. Zhu, L. Zhang, C. Huang and G. Cui, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19206–19211 RSC .
S. Chen, X. Yu, X. Cai, M. Peng, K. Yan, B. Dong, H. Hu, B. Chen, X. Gao and D. Zou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 648–655 RSC .
M. Bouchard, J. Hilhorst, S. Pouget, F. Alam, M. Mendez, D. Djurado, D. Aldakov, T. Schülli and P. Reiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7596–7602 CrossRef .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Wang, C. R. Grice, N. Shrestha, J. Chen, D. Zhao, W. Liao, A. J. Cimaroli, P. J. Roland, R. J. Ellingson and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3288–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chiang, M.-H. Li, H.-M. Cheng, P.-S. Shen and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2403–2409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Wang, C. R. Grice, N. Shrestha, D. Zhao, W. Liao, L. Guan, R. A. Awni, W. Meng, A. J. Cimaroli, K. Zhu, R. J. Ellingson and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1177–1182 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Singh and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4784–4787 RSC .
Y. Chen, A. Yerramilli, Y. Shen, Z. Zhao and T. Alford, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 478–484 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. Aldibaja, L. Badia, E. Mas-Marzá, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9194–9200 RSC .
F. Wu and L. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
R. Hamaguchi, M. Yoshizawa-Fujita, T. Miyasaka, H. Kunugita, K. Ema, Y. Takeoka and M. Rikukawa, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4366–4369 RSC .
J. V. Passarelli, D. J. Fairfield, N. A. Sather, M. P. Hendricks, H. Sai, C. L. Stern and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7313–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safdari, P. H. Svensson, M. T. Hoang, I. Oh, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15638–15646 RSC .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T.-B. Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 982–990 CrossRef .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, V. Shanmugam, J. Schlipf, L. Oesinghaus, P. Müller-Buschbaum, N. Ramakrishnan, V. Swamy, N. Mathews, P. P. Boix and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3653–3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, T. Qiu, F. Bai, W. Ruan and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703620 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jung, T. J. Shin, J. Seo, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2188–2197 RSC .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. Deng, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
F. Yang, P. Zhang, M. A. Kamarudin, G. Kapil, T. Ma and S. Hayase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1804856 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, J. Schlipf, M. Wussler, M. L. Petrus, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, P. Müller-Buschbaum and P. Docampo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5999–6007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo, J. Park, J. Jang, S. Paek, G. Garcia-Belmonte and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
T. Ye, A. Bruno, G. Han, T. M. Koh, J. Li, N. F. Jamaludin, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and W. L. Leong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801654 CrossRef .
Y. Lv, Y. Shi, X. Song, J. Liu, M. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Feng, S. Jin and C. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31755–31764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, Y. Ma, C. Zhang, C. Liu, W. Li, R. E. I. Schropp and Y. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703421 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
J. Chang, H. Zhu, B. Li, F. H. Isikgor, Y. Hao, Q. Xu and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 887–893 RSC .
J. Yao, L. Yang, F. Cai, Y. Yan, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 436–443 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S.-G. Kim, D.-K. Lee and N.-G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1813–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad and V. M. Burl, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levchuk, Y. Hou, M. Gruber, M. Brandl, P. Herre, X. Tang, F. Hoegl, M. Batentschuk, A. Osvet, R. Hock, W. Peukert, R. R. Tykwinski and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600593 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, D. T. Moore, B. Wenger, S. Nayak, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Fineberg, N. K. Noel, O. G. Reid, G. Rumbles, P. Kukura, K. A. Vincent and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lv, Z. Lian, Q. Li, J.-L. Sun and Q. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1049–1052 RSC .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
D. K. Mohamad, J. Griffin, C. Bracher, A. T. Barrows and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600994 CrossRef .
X. Xia, H. Li, W. Wu, Y. Li, D. Fei, C. Gao and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16907–16912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Tait, S. Manghooli, W. Qiu, L. Rakocevic, L. Kootstra, M. Jaysankar, C. A. Masse de la Huerta, U. W. Paetzold, R. Gehlhaar, D. Cheyns, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3792–3797 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Shi, L. Zhu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, M. H. Lee, M. H. Jang and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17636–17642 RSC .
D. Vak, K. Hwang, A. Faulks, Y.-S. Jung, N. Clark, D.-Y. Kim, G. J. Wilson and S. E. Watkins, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401539 CrossRef .
K. Hwang, Y.-S. Jung, Y.-J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Schmidt, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. E. Carlé, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500569 CrossRef .
G. Cotella, J. Baker, D. Worsley, F. De Rossi, C. Pleydell-Pearce, M. Carnie and T. Watson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
J.-E. Kim, Y.-S. Jung, Y.-J. Heo, K. Hwang, T. Qin, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo, D. Vak, D. Angmo, L. Ding and M. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Whitaker, D. H. Kim, B. W. Larson, F. Zhang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2442–2449 RSC .
S. Razza, F. Di Giacomo, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. L. Palma, S. Casaluci, P. Cameron, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, A. Reale, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 286–291 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500328 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 RSC .
S. Tang, Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Dong, H. Wei and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700302 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Lu, Y. Liu, T. Li, Z. Yang, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1625 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-G. Li, K.-J. Jiang, M.-J. Su, X.-P. Cui, J.-H. Huang, Q.-Q. Zhang, X.-Q. Zhou, L.-M. Yang and Y.-L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9092–9097 RSC .
F. Mathies, T. Abzieher, A. Hochstuhl, K. Glaser, A. Colsmann, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and A. Quintilla, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19207–19213 RSC .
C. Liang, P. Li, H. Gu, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song, G. Shao, N. Mathews and G. Xing, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700217 CrossRef .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, S. Si, A. Mei, Y. Rong, H. Liu, X. Li and H. Han, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1600019 CrossRef .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
F. De Rossi, J. A. Baker, D. Beynon, K. E. A. Hooper, S. M. P. Meroni, D. Williams, Z. Wei, A. Yasin, C. Charbonneau, E. H. Jewell and T. M. Watson, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 1800156,  DOI:10.1002/admt.201800156 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Minsu Jung
	Minsu Jung received his BS and MS degrees in Chemistry from Yonsei University, South Korea, in 2003 and 2005. Prior to commencing his PhD, he worked at LS Cable as Senior Researcher. He has been awarded a University International Postgraduate Award in 2011 and completed his PhD from University of New South Wales, Australia, in 2015. Afterwards, he moved to Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea, for his postdoctoral research with Prof. Sang Il Seok. He is currently a Research Assistant Professor and focuses on the study of the fundamental properties of inorganic–organic perovskites and their photovoltaic applications.

Sang-Geun Ji
	Sang-Geun Ji obtained his BS degree in Energy Engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2017. He is currently a Master Research student under the supervision of Prof. Sang Il Seok at School of Energy Engineering, UNIST. His research interests include inorganic charge transporting materials and semi-transparent perovskite solar cells.

Gwisu Kim
	Gwisu Kim obtained his BS degree in Energy Engineering from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2017. He is currently a Combined MS-PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Sang Il Seok at School of Energy Engineering, UNIST. His research focuses on the long-term stability of perovskite solar cells and low bandgap mixed lead/tin perovskite solar cells.

Sang Il Seok
	Sang Il Seok is currently a Distinguished Professor at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Korea. Before he joined UNIST in 2015, he served as the principle investigator of Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology and as a professor at the Department of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University. He obtained his BS and PhD degrees from Kyungpook National University and Seoul National University, Korea, respectively. His current research focuses on developing functional inorganic–organic-hybrid materials and energy devices including perovskite solar cells.
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the classical free energy diagram for homogeneous nucleation as a function of particle radius. ΔG is the free energy change, which is the sum of the surface energy change (ΔGs) and the bulk free energy change (ΔGv) and is a function of the nucleus radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation. ΔG* is the nucleation barrier for solidification and r* is the critical size of the particle in equilibrium with the liquid. (b) Illustration of the contact angle (θ) for heterogeneous nucleation. (c) Ratio of free energies of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation as a function of the contact angle (θ).	 
ΔGhetero* = ΦΔGhomo*	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
ΔGhetero* = ΔGhomo*	(6)
ΔGhetero* = 0	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
J = 4πDr(Cb − Ci)	(10)
J = 4πr2k(Ci − Cr)	(11)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the diffusion model and particle growth modes in the condition of supersaturation. (a) Particles suspended in a liquid phase. (b) The particle concentration profiles of diffusion- and reaction-controlled growth modes. c and x indicate monomer concentration in solution and distance from the surface, respectively. Cb is the uniform concentration of solute, Ci is the concentration of the solute at the solid–liquid interface, and Cr is the solubility of the particle. Schemes of (c) diffusion-controlled growth and (d) polynuclear layer growth and (e) mononuclear layer growth. Panels (d) and (e) are the so-called reaction-controlled growth modes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of classical growth modes of thin films: (a) Volmer–Weber model (island), where the interface energy is relatively large, and hence discrete nuclei form and grow before a layer is completed by infilling. (b) Frank–van der Merwe model (layer). Here the interface energy is relatively low and layers form readily from nearly any size nuclei. (c) Stranski–Krastanov model (layer plus island), where the interface energy is comparable to the island interaction energy, and hence layer formation competes with nuclei formation. θ represents the coverage in monolayers (ML).	 

 	Fig. 4  LaMer diagram for monodispersed particle formation (homogeneous nucleation). Cs is the solubility, Cmin* is the minimum concentration for nucleation, i.e. the minimum supersaturation level for homogeneous nucleation, and Cmax* is the maximum concentration for nucleation. The regions I, II, and III represent pre-nucleation, nucleation and growth stage, respectively.	 

Deposition solvent type	DMF	18.9	0.92	63	11	
46

DMF	20.82	1.01	72	15.14	
33

DMF/DMSO	19.64	1.11	74.2	16.15	
6

DMSO	20.71	1.02	64	13.5	
44

DMF/DMSO	23.83	1.086	76.2	19.71	
51

DMF/DMSO	20.2	0.83	60.3	10.11	
52

DMF/DMSO	22.96	1.08	76.61	19.01	
53

DMF/DMSO	21.77	1.088	78	18.47	
54

DMF/DMSO	21.67	1.1	74	17.64	
55

DMF/DMSO	24.7	1.06	77.5	20.2	
56

DMF/NMP	24.5	1.07	74.5	19.5	
57

DMF/NMP	23.98	1.095	76.9	20.19	
58

DMF/acetonitrile	22.69	1.15	75.33	19.68	
59

Acetonitrile/methylamine	22.2	1.1	77	19	
60

DMF/DMSO/urea	21.68	1.092	78	18.55	
61

DMF/1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone (DMI)	21.05	1.02	67.72	14.54	
62

DMF/DMI	20.9	1.09	77.6	17.6	
63

Dimethylacetamide (DMA)	21.47	1.024	63.4	13.9	
45

DMF/DMA	22.49	1.02	70	16.05	
64

Hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA)/DMSO	22.53	1.08	80.1	19.5	
65

2ME	18.9	0.972	81.6	15.32	
67



Anti-solvent type	Chlorobenzene	21.1	1.04	74	16.2	
70

Toluene	21.1	0.98	68.5	14.1	
72


n-Hexane	19.5	0.93	65	11.7	
73

Iodobenzene	21.66	0.919	68.8	13.67	
75

Iodobenzene	21.4	0.92	75.6	14.89	
76


sec-Butanol	20.5	0.98	70.7	14.2	
77

Anisole	22.78	1.10	77.52	19.42	
82

Ethyl acetate	20.263	1.096	74.89	16.64	
83

Ethyl acetate	22.89	1.123	75.6	19.43	
84

Methyl acetate	22.21	1.05	70	16.3	
86

Mixed IPA/CB	24.47	1.13	69.36	19.22	
87

Mixed ethyl ether/n-hexane	22.06	1.091	70.99	17.08	
88


 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of (a) the formation of MAI·PbI2·DMF intermediates and (b) the solvent engineering process to control nucleation and crystal growth for uniform and dense perovskite film deposition. (c) Crystal structure of (MA)4PbI6 intermediates in DMF/DMSO mixed solvent to convert to MAPbI3 perovskites. (d) Schematic illustration of FAPbI3 perovskite crystal growth by direct intermolecular exchange of DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). The DMSO molecules are intercalated into edge-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedral layers. Schematic illustration of (e) DMSO- and NMP-intermediate structures for perovskite formation, (f) PbI2–DMF formation by the addition of acetonitrile, and (g) comparison of activation energy required for crystallisation, and grain size of the perovskite films with and without urea in the precursor solution.	 

 	Fig. 6  (bottom) Schematic illustration of anti-solvent treatment to control nucleation and crystal growth of perovskites. (top) Graph of boiling point (°C) as a function of dipole moment (D) of toxic and non-toxic solvents.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the impact of perovskite precursor solution aging time on the colloidal size distribution and the grain size of the resultant perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Chemical reaction from precursor solution to perovskite formation in DMSO. The bold arrows represent dominant pathways in the chemical reaction; reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Optical image of 1D fibre intermediates; reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of crystal growth processes from the [PbI6]4− cage to intermediates and perovskites; reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright © 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The assembly model of the perovskite from the precursor solution to the crystal perovskites, and the decomposition during thermal annealing; reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright © 2017, Springer Nature.	 

AX2 type	Organic halide	Methylammonium iodide	23.69	1.113	77.3	20.4	
103

Methylammonium chloride	20.36	1.023	58.1	12.1	
104

Methylammonium chloride	21.45	1.077	77.57	17.91	
105

Ammonium chloride	14.08	0.88	80.11	9.93	
107

Ammonium chloride	21.45	0.94	77	15.6	
108

Organic pseudo-halide	Guanidinium thiocyanate	21.6	1.077	70.4	16.37	
32

Methylammonium thiocyanate	22.33	1.085	77.43	18.76	
110

Ammonium thiocyanate	17.88	0.93	68.75	11.44	
111

Ammonium thiocyanate	22.55	1.103	78.2	19.44	
112

Organic non-halide	Methaylammonium acetate	22.9	1.0	79	18.09	
113

Ammonium acetate	22.91	1.1	67.6	17.02	
114



BX2 type	Lead halide	Lead iodide	19.8	0.924	66.3	12.1	
116

Lead iodide	22.75	1.15	76.9	20.1	
119

Lead chloride	19.24	0.73	54	7.51	
129

Lead pseudo-halide	Lead thiocyanate	22.44	1.11	78.2	19.45	
132

Lead thiocyanate	22.25	1.09	80.85	19.57	
133

Lead thiocyanate	22.28	1.03	73.47	16.9	
134

Lead thiocyanate	18.53	1.25	78.95	18.27	
135

Lead non-halide	Lead acetate	21.7	0.97	72.0	15.2	
136

Lead acetate	21.5	1.09	79.0	18.5	
137

Lead acetate	22.87	0.96	66.2	14.5	
138

(CH3NH3PbI3)n + PbI2 → [(CH3NH3PbI3)n−y(PbI2)y+1(HI)y] + yCH3NH2(g)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of three pathways of PbI2 evolution by (a) perovskite thermal degradation, (b) incomplete MAI or FAI diffusion during the two-step perovskite deposition process, and (c) excessive PbI2 addition into stoichiometric perovskite precursor solution during the one-step deposition process.	 


Layered 2D (n < 10)	PEAI	6.72	1.18	60	4.73	No change in XRD in 52% RH for 46 d	
144

BAT	9.42	0.929	46	4.02	No degradation in 40% RH for 2 months	
145

BAT	16.76	1.01	74.13	12.5	70% under light illumination for 2050 h	
146

BdA	2.89	0.87	43	1.08	No phase transition in DSC up to 205 °C	
150

iso-BA	16.54	1.2	53.54	10.6	No change in optical absorption at 20 °C, 60% RH for 840 h	
147

HAT	2.86	0.635	54.6	1.03	No change in XRD at 25 °C, 40–50% RH for 4 months	
148

PPA	2.43	1.02	46	1.38	Less change in XRD after 5 min of water immersion	
149

PEAT	14.44	0.59	69	5.94	96% in a glove box for 100 h	
151

BAT	24.1	0.229	45.7	2.5	93% in air for 1 month with encap.	
152



Mixed 2D/3D perovskites	PEAT	19.12	1.09	73.7	15.3	76% under 55% RH for 2 weeks	
153

PEAI	22.08	1.04	77	17.7	Less change in XRD at RT under 40% RH for 30 d	
155

TEAT	14.88	0.883	69	9.03	91% at 25 °C, 70–80% RH for 4 d	
154

BAT	22.7	1.14	80	20.6	Slightly improved stability in PCE under light illumination, 45% RH for 1005 h	
159

AVAT	18.84	1.025	75.5	14.6	>10000 h stability under light illumination at 55 °C in air with carbon electrode and encap.	
156

PEAT	25.5	0.92	61	14.3	Slightly improved stability in PCE under light illumination, 50–60 °C, 40–50% RH for 205 h with encap.	
157

PEAI	21.7	1.07	74.2	17.2	83% at RT, 70% RH for 1200 h 80% under light illumination, RT, 55% RH for 250 h 80% at 85 °C in air for 768 h	
160

OAT	22.6	1.11	81.5	20.6	90% at 25 °C, 65% RH for 342 h 70% under light illumination at 25 °C in N2 for 75 h	
161

PEYT	21.15	1.05	66.1	14.7	No change in PCE under 60% RH for 400 h	
164



Graded 2D/3D perovskites	PEAI	20.53	1.11	75	16.8	Less PCE loss at RT, 75% RH for 19 d	
165

PEAT	21.8	1.17	78	19.9	60% at RT, 20–30% RH for 30 d	
166

PEAT	22.89	1.11	73	18.5	90% at RT, 60% RH for 1000 h	
167

PEAT	22.73	1.14	76.3	20.1	90% under light illumination, 50 °C. 30–60% RH for 800 h with encap.	
168

AVAT	22.3	1.06	76	18	90% in an Ar-filled glove box for 32 d 72% at 25 °C, 40% RH for 20 d	
169

PEAT	23.6	1.14	74	20.1	88% RT, 38% RH for 80 d	
170



1D	PZPY	21.7	1.08	77	18.1	Thermal cycling stability from 25 to 85 °C under 55% RH for 15 h	
171


 	Fig. 10  Schematic crystal structures of perovskite materials with a dimensionality ranging from 3D to 0D. (a) Conventional 3D perovskites. Long organic cation-introduced perovskites; (b) long organic cation-wrapped 3D perovskites without the presence of layered 2D structures, (c) mixed 2D/3D perovskites, and (d) graded 2D/3D perovskites. Ruddlesden–Popper ((RNH3)2An−1BnX3n+1) structured 2D perovskites with (e) n = 1 and (f) n = 2. (g) Fibre-shaped 1D perovskites, and (h) 0D quantum dot perovskites.	 


Spray coating	Solvent type (DMF)	0.025	16.8	0.92	72	11.1	
180

Precursor ratio and substrate temperature	0.15	20.7	1.06	74	16.2	
182

Precursor ratio	0.13	20.1	0.96	71	15.7	
183

3.8a	20.4	0.83	70	11.7
Substrate temperature	0.1	20.27	1.047	75.5	16.03	
184

1	18.59	1.032	68.2	13.09
Solvent type (mixed DMF and GBL)	0.16	21.4	1.1	77.6	18.3	
185

40	N/M	N/M	70.16	15.5


Slot-die coating	Gas blowing	0.1	19.35	0.96	63	11.6	
186

Gas blowing	0.1	20.38	0.98	59.88	11.96	
187

Substrate temperature and gas blowing	0.0625	16.8	0.73	75.6	9.2	
188

Substrate temperature and gas blowing	0.1	17.21	1.1	67.25	12.73	
190

NH4Cl additive	0.1	19.79	1.02	77.15	15.57	
191

MACl additive	0.06	21.5	1.1	76	18	
192



Blade coating	Substrate temperature and gas blowing	0.1	18.9	1.0	70.5	13.3	
193

10.1	N/M	N/M	N/M	10.4
100	N/M	N/M	N/M	4.3
1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) additive	0.1	16.73	0.96	65	10.44	
194

Substrate temperature and MAI purification	0.0725	21.8	1.05	N/M	15.1	
195

MACl additive and Solvent type (mixed DMF and NMP)	0.12	22.53	1.097	77.1	19.06	
106

1.2	21.38	1.111	72.9	17.33
12.6	N/M	N/M	N/M	13.3
MACl additive	N/M	23.1	1.09	77	19.5	
196

F4-TCNQ and MACl additives	0.08	22.7	1.1	81	20.2	
197



Ink jet printing	Substrate temperature and MACl additive	0.04	19.55	0.91	69	12.3	
199

Vacuum annealing	0.09	18.4	1.0	56	11.3	
200

Vacuum-assisted thermal annealing	0.04	22.71	1.08	69.58	17.04	
201

4.0	20.40	1.04	62.57	13.27

 	Fig. 11  Schematics of representative solution deposition techniques for fabricating large-scale perovskite films using (a) spray coating, (b) slot-die coating, (c) doctor-blade coating, and (d) inkjet printing.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
