Electrochemical behavior and passivation of current collectors in lithium-ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM04353B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04353B
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9891-9911Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrochemical behavior and passivation of current collectors in lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Seung-Taek 
            Myung
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yashiro 
            Hitoshi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yang-Kook 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *cd
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Iwate University, 4-3-5 Ueda, Morioka, Iwate 020-8551, Japan. E-mail: smyung@iwate-u.ac.jp; smyung@sejong.ac.kr;  Fax: +81 19 621 6345;   Tel: +81 19 621 6345
bDepartment of Nano Engineering and Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Republic of Korea
cDepartment of WCU Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: yksun@hanyang.ac.kr;  Fax: 82 2 2282 7329;   Tel: +81 2 2220 0524
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic of Korea
Received 
      13th December 2010
    , Accepted 29th March 2011First published on 4th May 2011AbstractThis paper examines several metals that are commonly employed as current collectors of positive and negative electrodes for rechargeable lithium batteries. Current collectors must be electrochemically stable when in contact with the cell component during the potential operation window of an electrode. Various electrochemical techniques have been used to investigate the corrosion of current collector materials. In practice, continued corrosion of current collectors leads to a gradual increase in the internal resistance of cells, which causes the capacity to fade gradually. Corrosion of the current collector may induce a short-circuit, affecting its safety. Thus, the formation of thick and compact, protective passive film on the metal surface is highly important so as to ensure battery performance and safety. Depending on the salts and additives, different types of protective films are formed. The solubility of these surface layers in the electrolyte is a determining factor in the overall stability of the current collector. In this review, we introduce the electrochemical behavior and protective film formation processes of various metallic current collectors in representative electrolytes.Seung-Taek MyungSeung-Taek Myung is an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at Iwate University, Japan. He received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Iwate University, Japan, in 2003. In 2003, he joined VK Corporation as a principal researcher, developing large format Li-ion batteries for vehicle application. He moved to 3M Korea as a senior researcher in 2006 and worked on the development of Li-ion battery materials until March 2007. His current research is focused on development of electro-active materials and corrosion of current collectors of Li-ion batteries.Hitoshi YashiroHitoshi Yashiro is a full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Bioengineering at Iwate University in Morioka, Japan. He earned his bachelor's (1982) and doctoral (1994) degrees from Tohoku University. He was an international fellow at SRI International in 1991–1992. His research covers variety of corrosion problems from that in lithium ion battery to nuclear power plants. He served as an Editor-in-Chief for Japan Society of Corrosion Engineering in 2009–2011.Yang-Kook SunYang-Kook Sun obtained his PhD degree from Seoul National University, Republic of Korea, and now a Professor of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University, Republic of Korea. His research interests include metalfluoride-coated cathode, lithium transition metal oxide, olivine-related cathodes and core-shell with concentration-gradient materials for advanced lithium ion battery, and lithium-metal free, lithium sulfur and lithium air batteries.
1. Introduction
Rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) are a fast-growing technology already being used in portable electronics due to their light weight and high power. Usually, LIBs are composed of positive and negative electrodes that are electrically insulated by a porous polypropylene membrane separator in a non-aqueous, organic electrolyte containing lithium salt (Fig. 1). The active materials, which have a diffusion channel of de-/intercalate Li+, are applied on the current collectors, Al for the positive electrode and Cu for the negative electrode (bottom of Fig. 1). During charging, the difference in electrochemical potential between the positive and negative electrodes drives the Li+ to move from the positive electrode to the negative electrode through the electrolyte. The reverse process occurs during discharging.
 Fig. 1  
          Cell structure of typical lithium-ion battery and the electrochemical processes in charging and discharging (up); SEM image of negative electrode (left bottom) and positive electrode (right bottom). 
Recent environmental concerns have stressed the reduction of carbon dioxide release so as to delay global warming. Moreover, crude oil prices severely fluctuate. These problems have accelerated the development of battery powered vehicles, renewable energy conversion, and storage systems. Rechargeable LIB systems are currently employed as power-assisting or power sources in automotive applications such as electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (P-HEVs). Furthermore, rechargeable LIBs are considered to be the most promising energy storage system for renewable energy systems operating on intermittent energy sources, such as wind power plants and solar cells. However, the batteries for HEVs have to provide high energy in order to achieve the 40 mile electric drive range within the volume and weight limitations, last for 15 years, endure 5000 charge-depleting cycles, and provide 300000 pulse cycles for acceleration and regenerative charging. These challenging requirements make it difficult for conventional material chemistries to be adopted in HEVs. Long-term sustainability is also necessary for the power backup systems that are adopted in renewable energy backup systems.1–3
However, the degradation of each element in the battery systems is inevitable over long-term use. Commercial LIBs contain LiPF6 salt in their electrolyte solution, which contains water as an impurity below tens of ppm level. Although the quantity of the water is negligible, it accelerates the decomposition of the LiPF6 salt at elevated temperatures (>40 °C) and at high potentials (>4 V vs.Li/Li+). When the salt is decomposed, it produces HF as a byproduct.4 The formed HF reacts with the positive electrode materials, which results in the formation of water molecules and it thus ceaselessly decomposes the LiPF6 salt. Unfortunately, this reaction continues to occur until the water molecules completely disappear. This is one cause of the cell performance degradation.
The formed HF also reacts with metallic current collectors. Although metallic current collectors are passivated under alkyl carbonate solutions containing LiPF6 salt (electrolyte), the current collectors corrode during the lifetime of the cells due to their reaction with HF (Fig. 2). In this paper, we review the electrochemical behavior and passivation of current collectors in lithium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 2  (a) Macrophotographs of corrosion that occurred in Al current collectors with LiMn2O4 positive electrode material, (b) SEM of severe corrosion that occurred at the edge of the Al current collector of cells (JP6-1 of Fig. 1a), (c) low magnification SEM of Al current collectors after extensively cycled LiFePO4 material (reproduced with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2005, The Electrochemical Society); (d) SEM images of a hybrid pit in Al (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) that was cycled for 4 weeks at 45 °C and (e) SEM image of cracked corrosion products filling a corrosion pit in Al with a crack propagating to the Al current collector (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) that was cycled for 4 weeks at 45 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2007, The Electrochemical Society). 
2. 
        Al
      
2.1. Electrochemical behavior of Al in LiPF6 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution

2.1.1. Corrosion of Al. 
For high voltage (>3.5 V vs.Li/Li+) LIBs, Al is the material of choice. It is used extensively with lithiated transition metal oxides up to 5 V vs.Li/Li+. In air and aqueous solutions, Al can be protected by a thin and dense oxide passive layer, Al2O3. Its low price and good electric conductivity due to a high purity of Al metal expand the application potential for lithium batteries. However, the Al current collector does experience pitting corrosion after extensive cycling (Fig. 2). Severe corrosion occurs, not only with LiMn2O4 (Fig. 2b), but also with LiFePO4 (Fig. 2c), which shows a potential plateau at 3.5 V vs.Li/Li+. However, the corrosion resistivity of the Al current collector is better with LiFePO4 because the operation voltage is lower than that of LiMn2O4. It is likely that decomposition of the LiPF6 salt is facilitated at higher potentials, resulting in greater amounts of HF formation in the electrolyte solution. The formed HF then reacts with the electrode and the corrosion, in turn, rapidly progresses in the higher potential electrode. Thus, a higher operation voltage deteriorates the Al current collector more severely during extensive cycling.
This is also related to the self-discharge of the lithium battery. Zhang et al.6 found that the corrosion of the Al current collector plays a significant role in the self-discharge of the Li/LiMn2O4 cell with an Al positive electrode substrate. Cycling at elevated temperatures (45 °C) shows a pit within a pit (Fig. 2d, 18650 Gen2 cell). Obviously, the dissolved Al content derived from the corrosion should be detectable by ICP. Hyams et al.7 reported that the Al contents in the electrolyte solution that were cycled at 25 °C for 52 and 68 weeks were 2529 and 2669 ppm, respectively, and was 2793 ppm for a calendar-life measurement of 16 weeks at 45 °C. Crack propagation was also observed (Fig. 2e), as was a detachment of the active materials. An energy dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) analysis proved that the corrosion products were composed mainly of Al, O, F, and P.7


2.1.2. 
            Passivation of Al. 
A typical cyclic voltammogram curve is exhibited in Fig. 3. No cathodic reactions, such as the formation of SEI and Li2O on the Al, occurred from OCP to 0.3 V vs.Li/Li+ (see inset, bottom). Lowering the potential close to 0 V vs.Li/Li+ induced a high cathodic current density, leading to an Li–Al alloying process induced by the deposition of dissolved Al3+ from the air-formed surface layer of the Al foil.9 This hinders the use of an Al foil as a current collector for negative electrodes because the formation of alloys always results in volume expansion. Alternatively, a high anodic current appeared during the anodic scan at approximately 0.6 V vs.Li/Li+, ascribing to the de-alloying process, as did oxidations of the deposited Li and Al metals to oxide on the surface of the Al substrate. Consequently, the resulting current reached close to “0” from 1.5 V vs.Li/Li+ and the lower current retained its 3 V vs.Li/Li+, after which the current density slightly increased and two small anodic peaks were observed at 3.7 V and 4.7 V vs.Li/Li+. However, the reaction was irreversible (inset (top) of Fig. 3). Thus, the passive film of the Al metal was formed at this potential, and the corresponding anodic current was maintained at a very low level (≤15 μA), up to 5 V vs.Li/Li+.
 Fig. 3  
              Cyclic voltammograms of Al metal: scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier). 


2.1.3. Identification of passive film. 
Kanamura et al.10 initially examined the surface of the polarized Al at 5.5 V vs.Li/Li+ in LiPF6 in propylene carbonate (PC) by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to determine the composition of the surface film. There were no traces of Al metals; however, Al–O binding energy was found (Fig. 4a). This indicates that the surface was fully covered with Al-related compounds. In addition, a binding energy related to aluminium fluoride was observed (Fig. 4b). Furthermore, the molar ratios did not change with Ar ion sputtering (Fig. 4c). From these results, we can assume that the whole surface film was covered with a thick layer consisting of Al2O3 and AlF3. Braithwaite et al.11 also conducted a surface analysis with a heavily pitted Al electrode using an Auger spectrometer (Fig. 4d–f). They confirmed the presence of Al, AlOx and F, but they concluded that the corrosion resistance of Al may simply originate from its native oxide layer, Al2O3.
 Fig. 4  
XPS spectra of (a) Al (2p), (b) O (1s), and (c) depth profiles of O, Al, F elements in the surface film of an Al electrode polarized at 5.5 V vs.Li/Li+ for 1 h in LiPF6/PC (reprinted from ref. 10, Copyright 1995, with permission from Elsevier); Auger maps of distribution of primary species identified on Al current collectors that had undergone 690 cycles in LiPF6/PC:DEC electrolyte: (d) Al, (e) AlOx, and (f) F. The map size is 0.86 mm across the edge (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 1999, The Electrochemical Society); (g) XPS spectrum (Al 2p) of Al current collector (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) after anodic polarization from open-circuit voltage to 7 V vs.Li/Li+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2006, The Electrochemical Society). 
According to Wang et al.,12 various compounds containing F− ions are the main products of LiPF6 decomposition in the presence of moisture. Therefore, the aluminium corrosion inhibition of LiPF6 may be attributed to a protection film containing AlF3 with high electrical resistivity resulting from the following reaction: Al + 3F− → AlF3. The problem with this hypothesis is that they did not consider the presence of the air-formed layer, Al2O3, that exists on the surface of Al metal.
Zhang et al.13 investigated an Al surface film during anodic polarization up to 7 V vs.Li/Li+ using an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM). The resulting mass continued to increase as the potential was raised, where anodic peaks appeared. As seen in the XPS spectrum (Fig. 4g), the anodically polarized Al foil exhibited binding energies for Al bonded with O and F, Al2O3 and AlF3. Al metal was also detected. The Al2O3 binding energy can be attributed to the air-formed film. The newly observed AlF3 layer was located on top of the air-formed oxide. Furthermore, the film had a mass per equivalent charge (mpe) of 18.0 g F−1, as calculated by the EQCM. The mpe of 18.0 g F−1 was close to the mpe of AlF3, which was 19.0 g F−1. The combination of the mpe of 18.0 g F−1 and the AlF3 spectrum confirms that the oxidation of Al forms a film of AlF3. Namely, there is an air-formed surface layer of Al2O3 on the Al metal, and AlF3 is present on the Al2O3 layer. Zhang et al. further investigated factors, such as varying LiPF6 salt and water concentrations in the electrolyte solution, that influence the formation of AlF3 passive film on Al.12 Despite the differences in the LiPF6 salt and water content, the same amount of AlF3 formed. The most crucial factor in the thickening of the passive layer was raising the applied potential. Hence, a much thicker passive film (2 nm) was obtained when the anodic polarization was done at 6 V vs.Li/Li+.
The aforementioned studies that focused on understanding how the Al metal passivates in LiPF6-containing electrolyte were done in the presence of an air-formed surface layer, Al2O3, the thickness of which reached approximately 10 nm. These circumstances are not indicative of a gradual process for passivation because it is difficult to follow the observed Al2O3 layer that either originated from a series passivation process or is simply an air-formed surface layer. Due to this, the aforementioned describe the presence of AlF3 as a passive film formed during the anodic polarization; however, no specific descriptions are found for the Al2O3 layer.
Thus, it was hypothesized that, if the air-formed layers were completely reduced to a metallic state through a cathodic polarization up to 0 V vs.Li/Li+, one could expect a passivation process of the Al during anodic polarization. However, such electrochemical elimination of the air-formed passive layer is not easy. To form a new oxide-free surface, the remaining oxide passive layer was mechanically scratched using a diamond polishing tip with 100 rpm in a specially designed H-type cell (Fig. 5a).14 As soon as the new surface was exposed to the electrolyte at 5 V vs.Li/Li+, the resulting current abruptly decreased, within 10 s. This indicates that a new passive film was immediately formed on the new surface at that potential. After a fast decay of the transient current, the current remained very low. Thus, as soon as the whole surface was covered by a passive film, the current, which is necessary to maintain the passivation, decreased. This retention of the current at a lower level during polarization clearly indicates the growth of a passive film without critical defects, which can be caused by corrosion on the scratched film. If the passive film was not stabilized, the resulting transient current would fluctuate or increase due to a breakdown of the passive film.
 Fig. 5  (a) Time and current (i–t) curves of the Al metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ measured at 40 °C, (b) optical microscopic image, (c) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Al metal after scratch test; ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (d) 0 s, (e) 10 s, (f) 100 s, (g) 300 s, and (h) 1000 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 

Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) gives the available information for the scratched surface, because it is able to produce an ion beam (Ga+) less than 12 μm × 12 μm. In the as-polarized scratch part (Fig. 5b and c), AlO+ and AlF+ fragments were detected (Fig. 5d). Sputtering by the Ga+ ion increased the relative intensity of the AlF+ fragment, whereas the AlO+ fragment, shown in Fig. 5d and e, is negligible. Further sputterings (300 and 1000 s) of the scratched surface reduced the AlF+ intensity, but the AlO+ intensity increased (Fig. 5f and g). Indeed, the HF content in the electrolyte solution is usually less than 50 ppm. HF is generated from the decomposition of the electrolytic salt, LiPF6, and is facilitated at elevated temperatures (40 °C in this experiment) and at higher potentials (5 V vs.Li/Li+). From the ToF-SIMS results it is apparent that the passive film was composed of Al–O and Al–F components. The higher AlF+/AlO+ ratio was due to the thicker passive AlF3 film. The strong intensity of the AlF+ fragment gradually reduced with sputtering time (Fig. 5h). Alternatively, the AlO+ fragment became slightly higher with increasing sputtering time (Fig. 5g and h). This suggests that the outer part of the film consists of an Al–F compound (probably AlF3) and that the Al–O compound (probably Al2O3) resides on the inner surface; both together constitute the passive film on the surface of Al metal. The electrochemical behavior of Al in an alkyl carbonate solution containing LiPF6 is depicted in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic drawings of passivation for Al under a non-aqueous alkyl carbonate solution containing LiPF6 salt. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 
Similar tendencies were also demonstrated viaToF-SIMS in previous studies of amphoteric, oxide-coated, electroactive, positive electrode active materials for lithium batteries.15,16 We previously suggested that an intentionally generated AlF3 surface layer on the positive electrode material is effective enough to protect the active material from HF attack during long-term electrochemical cycling. Therefore, successful passivation achieved by the formation of AlF3 on the Al2O3 surface of the Al metal enables it to be widely used as a positive electrode current collector for lithium-ion batteries, where the Al metal is continually exposed to HF contained in an alkyl carbonate solution.


2.1.4. Application of AlF3 passive layer. 
When positive electrode materials are charged and discharged to 5 V vs.Li/Li+ in non-aqueous electrolytes containing LiPF6 salt, some undesirable phenomena may occur at the positive electrode. The most common reactions are the oxidation of the non-aqueous electrolyte and the corrosion of the current collector and cell case. Thus, the rechargeability of positive electrodes with high voltage electrode materials is influenced by such undesirable reactions. A good example was given by Kanamura et al.17 They compared two kinds of current collectors, Ti and Al mesh (100 mesh) and Al foil, for high voltage applications. A drastic capacity fading was recorded for the electrode using the Ti mesh (Fig. 7a). However, the capacity retention was better when the Al mesh was used (Fig. 7b), and the retention was further improved by employing an Al foil as the current collector (Fig. 7c). For the electrode using the Ti mesh, the ac-impedance abruptly increased with the cycles. However, such a tendency was not found for the Al mesh or the foil employed cell. A possible reason for this is that the Ti current collector was oxidized and dissolved into the electrolyte during cycling at a higher potential. After analyzing the Li metal counter electrode following the first cycle, Kanamura et al.17 concluded that Ti was present on the surface of the Li metal. This fact was further proven, as the scratched surface of the Ti metal polarized at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ (Fig. 7d). This abrupt decay of the current, within 10 s, is a clear indication of passive film formation. Following the initial 10 s current decay, the resulting current remained constant throughout the polarization. Normally, the formation of a stabilized passive layer tends to exhibit a gradual decrease in the current (Fig. 4b). The emergence of the constant current indicates that the formed passive film may not be stabilized or that the passive film is still being formed on the new scratched surface. Compared to the Al metal, the Ti metal did not induce alloy formation with Li at a lower potential, and the passive layer for Ti seems to be inferior to Al at a higher potential. These results are consistent with the results of Kanamura et al.17 Thus, the most likely reason for the drastic capacity fading of the 5 V class spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 during the initial several cycles is the corrosion of the Ti current collector. Therefore, the presence of the stable AlF3 passive layer on the Al2O3 surface layer makes possible the use of Al foil as the positive electrode current collector for rechargeable lithium batteries.
 Fig. 7  Charge and discharge curves of (a) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Ti mesh current collector, (b) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Al mesh current collector, (c) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Al foil current collector (reproduced with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2002, The Electrochemical Society); (d) time and current (i–t) curves of the Ti metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ measured at 40 °C (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier). 

2.2. Electrochemical behavior of Al in LiN(CF3SO2)2 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution
Electrolyte containing LiPF6 (lithium hexafluorophosphate) is the most common, with good conductivity, electrochemical stability and corrosion resistance due to the formation of Al2O3 and AlF3 passive film on the Al surface. LiPF6, however, suffers from both thermal and hydrolytic instability, reacting with water molecules to resulting in HF, and thermally decomposing to LiF and PF5.18–21
Among the many kinds of lithium salts, lithium bistrifluoromethylsulfonyl imide (LiTFSI, LiN(SO2CF3)2) seems to be the most promising. LiTFSI has good conductivity,22 and is stable to lithium metal. In addition, it shows good durability in terms of moisture and temperature.23 However, practical applications using LiTFSI have not yet been realized because the corrosive salt readily corrodes the Al positive electrode current collector. When the process is ongoing, the resulting electric conductivity with active materials worsens, leading to a degradation of battery performance. In the following section, we review the stability, the passivation process and the improvement of corrosion resistance of the Al current collector for positive electrodes.

2.2.1. Stability of Al in LiN(CF3SO2)2 contained electrolyte. 
To understand the reaction of the current collector with electrolytes, a scratching test is used to determine how the metal surface is being passivated during cathodic or anodic polarization. The scratched and unscratched surfaces were compared in 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2 in PC electrolyte at room temperature. For the unscratched electrode, the current remained small throughout the cycle (Fig. 8a). However, for the scratched electrode, the current increased abruptly at potentials above 4 V vs.Li/Li+ and persisted during the negative sweep down to 3.5 V vs.Li/Li+ (Fig. 8a). It is noteworthy that the hysteresis of the cyclic voltammogram was generally indicative of the corrosion of the electrode. The scratched sample showed severely corroded pits (Fig. 8c) under the presence of carbonate solution compared to its state prior to the experiment (Fig. 8b). Yang et al.24 suggested that Al[N(CF3SO2)2]3 would precipitate and would form a nonprotective film on the surface of Al, in contrast to the protective film, AlF3, which formed when LiPF6 was used.
 Fig. 8  
              Cyclic voltammograms for (a) an unscratched and scratched aluminium electrode in 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (scan rate: 50 mV s−1); SEM images of a line of scratch done by tweezers on aluminium surface (b) before and (c) after the cyclic voltammetry between 2 and 4.5 V in 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright 2000, The Electrochemical Society. 


2.2.2. 
            Passivation of Al in LiN(CF3SO2)2 contained electrolyte. 
The stability of the passivation film on the Al metal in a non-aqueous solution is a key factor in the corrosion of Al. However, a LiTFSI salt lowers the stability of the passivation film. This is related to the acid–base nature of the electrolytic salt, the stereochemistry of the anion, and other factors. Once more, the Al foil showed that the active dissolution of Al occurred to form many pits on the Al surface (Fig. 9a). Conversely, when a small amount of HF was added to the electrolyte, the formation of pits on the Al electrode was suppressed (Fig. 9b). In a similar manner, when LiN(CF3SO2)2 was used as an electrolyte salt, a small amount of HF was effective in suppressing the dissolution of Al. It is likely that the added HF facilitates the formation of the passive film.
 Fig. 9  
              Scanning electron micrographs of Al electrode surfaces after anodic polarization at 6.0 V vs.Li/Li+ in (a) 1 M LiCF3SO3/PC, (b) 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (with addition of small amount of HF); XPS spectra (Al 2p) for Al electrode after anodic polarization at 6.0 V vs.Li/Li+ in (c) 1 M LiCF3SO3/PC, (d) 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (with addition of small amount of HF). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2002, The Electrochemical Society. 
The XPS analyses of the anodically polarized Al up to 6 V vs.Li/Li+ showed that the native, air-formed Al2O3 layer remained after the polarization, although a small shoulder of AlF3 binding energy was found (Fig. 9c). Thus, it is most likely that the surface film on the Al was not stabilized in this electrolyte, leading to the anodic dissolution of Al with the formation of pits. These results support the results suggested by Yang et al.;24 the imide salt is strongly adsorbed on the Al surface, but it is not a protective layer.
On the contrary, a small amount of HF addition into the LiTFSI/PC electrolyte changed the passivation state of Al. The chemical composition of the passivation film changed from Al2O3 to AlF3 and AlOF in the XPS spectra (Fig. 9d). This change was independent from a type of electrolyte salt when HF was added to non-aqueous electrolytes, indicating that the chemical composition change of the passivation film was not related to electrolyte salt, but rather HF. The formation of AlF3 and AlOF can be understood by the acid–base reaction between the native Al2O3 layer and HF, similar to the passivation in LiPF6 salt-contained carbonate electrolytes. These results suggest that LiN(CF3SO2)2 salt, LiTFSI, cannot be used alone in an alkyl carbonate solution; however, additives such as HF, LiPF6 or LiBF4 used to form HF after the decomposition of these salts, or non-carbonate solvents, are necessary to produce a protective passive film.


2.2.3. Improvement of passivation by addition of inorganic salts. 
To form a protective passive film under the LiN(CF3SO2)2 salt environment, as suggested by Kanamura et al.,25 the addition of HF, LiPF6 or LiBF4 appeared promising. LiBF4/EC–DME electrolytes show better battery performance with high water contents and elevated temperatures than cells using LiPF6 salts.9 The low conductivity of the electrolyte can be compensated by using the less moisture-sensitive LiTFSI salt, which exhibits good thermal stability.
Song et al.26 investigated the effect of a LiBF4 addition in the imide electrolyte, LiN(CF3SO2)2/EC–DME. Cyclic voltammograms (Fig. 10a) showed that the presence of LiBF4 in an LiTFSI electrolyte significantly reduced the corrosion current, and that almost no corrosion occurred when the molar ratio of LiBF4 and LiTFSI was 1:1. Apparently, Al corrosion in the presence of LiBF4 was suppressed. Moreover, Al might have been completely protected by a passive film, indicating that passivation is predominant over corrosion. Mass accumulation during the anodic scan when the molar ratio of LiBF4 and LiTFSI was 1:1 was almost larger than that of LiBF4/EC–DMC (Fig. 10b). These data suggest that a great amount of film is formed on the surface of Al and that this film protects Al from further corrosion (Fig. 10c). After polarization, the number of corroded pits decreased with increasing amounts of LiBF4 salt (Fig. 10d–f). It is apparent that the non-pitted parts of the Al were covered by the protective passive film, more likely AlF312 than Al(BF4)3. FT-IR spectra also suggested the nonprotective Al[N(SO2CF3)2]3−y(OH)y as the major corrosion product.
 Fig. 10  Comparative plots of cyclic voltammograms (a) and the corresponding mass increase (b) for aluminium at the first cycle in 1 M LiTFSI/EC + DMC (), 0.8 M LiTFSI + 0.2 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (…) and 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (); sweep rate = 5 mV s−1; scanning electron microscopic images of aluminium after CV–EQCM in (c) 1 M LiTFSI/EC + DMC, (d) 0.8 M LiTFSI + 0.2 M LiBF4/EC + DMC, (e) 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M LiBF4/EC + DMC, and (f) 1 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (reprinted from ref. 26, Copyright 2004, with permission from Elsevier); (g) CVs of the 5th cycle for aluminium disk electrode (0.3 cm in diameter) in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2 + LiPF6/EC + DME (1:1) electrolyte at 50 mV s−1, and (h) aluminium corrosion potential against the content of inorganic salt additives of LiPF6, LiBF4, LiSbF6 in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2 :EC + DME (1:1) electrolyte obtained from CV measurements (reprinted from ref. 12, Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier). 
Wang et al.12 reported that a similar tendency was also observed when a part of the LiTFSI was substituted by LiPF6. The anodic current density decreased with the LiPF6 content (Fig. 10g), suppressing the corrosion of the Al current collector. The effect of other inorganic salt additives was also compared (Fig. 10h). Although the Al corrosion potential became positive with the LiSbF6 and LiBF4 additions, the magnitude of the Al corrosion inhibition for LiSbF6 and LiBF4 was smaller than that of LiPF6. To maintain an Al corrosion potential up to 4.5 V vs.Li/Li+, it was necessary to add approximately 30 mol% for LiPF6. These results indicate that, although LiPF6 is sensitive to moisture and is thermally unstable compared to LiTFSI, the salt is essential to improve corrosion resistance at higher potentials. Water sensitivity is the most significant drawback of the LiPF6 salt; however, the HF derived from the presence of water molecules into the electrolyte is indispensable in the formation of the stable and protective AlF3 passive film on Al.


2.2.4. Improvement of passivation by substitution of solvents. 
Another attempt was made to evaluate the effects of solvent on the oxidation stability of the Al electrode in the presence of LiTFSI. The oxidation stability of Al is strongly dependent on the solvent (Fig. 11a) The corrosion in the LiN(SO2CF3)2/EC electrolyte was much more serious than in the other ether electrolytes. This difference in Al corrosion behavior may be attributed to the dielectric constant of the various solvents. According to the metal corrosion theory, in order to inhibit the pitting corrosion of metal, the initial corrosion products must precipitate on a metal surface and block the active reaction.27 Since carbonate solvents such as EC possess high dielectric constants, the initial corrosion products are easily solvated and diffused into bulk electrolytes from the Al surface. As a result, the repassivation of the Al surface fails and the pitting corrosion of Al occurs. Meanwhile, the solvents with low dielectric constants maintain good protection film formation and inhibit Al corrosion.
 Fig. 11  (a) CVs of the 5th cycle for aluminium disk electrode (0.3 cm in diameter) in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2:EC, DME, DMG, THF and 2-MeTHF 50 mV s−1 and (b) cycling performances of Li:LiCoO2 coin cells with 1 M Li iN(SO2CF3)2:EC + THF electrolyte. Current density: 0.6 mA cm−2; cutoff potentials: 4.2 and 2.5 V. Reprinted from ref. 12, Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier. 
The electrolyte, 1 M LiTFSI/EC–THF varying EC content, was applied to the Li/LiCoO2 cell. Without the EC, the retained capacity remained high throughout the cycling. However, the addition of EC caused a severe decline in the discharge capacity (Fig. 11b).
Kawamura et al.28 reported the potential of methyl difluoroacetate (MFA, CHF2COOCH3) for the purpose of inhibition of Al corrosion in the presence of LiTFSI salt in the electrolyte. MFA has a low dielectric constant and does not readily dissolve materials. Furthermore, MFA is a fluorinated solvent and may lead to a passive film composed of AlF3 on the surface of Al. A cyclic voltammogram (Fig. 12a) showed the corrosion potential of aluminium to be 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at the first cycle and 4.9 V vs.Li/Li+ at the second cycle. The corrosion potential of aluminium at the fifth cycle was 4.46 V vs.Li/Li+, which was higher than that of the LiN(SO2CF3)2/EC + DMC (1:1 in vol) electrolyte by approximately 0.7 V vs.Li/Li+. Moreover, the maximum corrosion current decreased markedly when using MFA, compared to earlier reports.12,25,26 The SEM image after the anodic polarization showed that pitting corrosion was usually observed for the LiTFSI/EC–DMC electrolyte and was greatly improved by employing an MFA solution instead of the EC–DMC composition solution (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) CV profiles of Al/Li two-electrode coin cells in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte; (b) SEM images after polarization in LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte, held at 4.2 V for 3 h; XPS spectra of (c) Al 2p and (d) C 1s after polarization in LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte, held at 4.2 V for 3 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2005, The Electrochemical Society. 

XPS analysis shows that there was no peak in the as-polarized electrode. When the surface had been etched for 2 min, a small peak was observed at the same peak position of fresh Al foil. This clearly indicates that the aluminium surface was covered with a certain protective film, and that this film inhibited aluminium corrosion. Thus, the inhibition of aluminium corrosion achieved by MFA was not obtained by AlF3. The binding energy at C 1d orbital indicates that the passivation film that inhibited the aluminium corrosion was an organic compound consisting of F, O, S, N, and the film was thereby an {Al[N(SO2CF3)2]x}3−x complex on the Al current collector. As previously mentioned, an organic layer such as this that adheres to the surface of Al is not likely to provide as much stable corrosion resistance as AlF3 in the LiTFSI salt electrolyte. However, the thicker layer on the surface of the native Al2O3 layer was, most likely, strongly adhered, and it thereby would lead to the high corrosion resistance in the LiTFSI salt electrolyte.
Censo et al.29 used acetonitrile instead of an EC–DME composite solution. The features of the cyclic voltammograms for the acetonitrile solvent are substantially different than the EC–DME composite solution. The characteristic hysteresis is absent and the current during the backward direction of the cycle is lower than that during the forward. This suggests a surface deactivation, which is consistent with the formation of a protective film. This behavior mirrors that of the non-corrosive salts, such as LiPF6 and LiBF4. Although the surface film was unknown, it was fairly effective in inhibiting Al corrosion in lithium batteries.
Gel electrolytes (poly(ethylene glycol)dimethylether, PEG-dm) are also used to reduce the oxidation current during anodic polarization in the presence of LiTFSI salts.30 The current density for the gel electrolyte was smaller (below 20 μA cm−2) than for liquid electrolytes. The high viscosity (∼5 × 102 Pa s at a stress of 103 Pa) of the gel electrolyte makes the gel electrolytes less fluid and assists in immobilizing the pitting corrosion reaction product. However, further efforts are needed to improve the conductivity of the electrolyte so that it would be as high as that of a liquid electrolyte.
In ionic liquid solvents, Al corrosion is greatly reduced because the Al–TFSI compounds are insoluble in ionic liquids.31–34 As seen in Fig. 13a, when the LiTFSI/PMPyr–TFSI solvent was used as an electrolyte, there was no significant oxidation current in the temperature range of 55 °C.35 At 65 °C, however, an oxidation current appeared at around 4.8 V vs.Li/Li+, the intensity of which steadily increased with cycling. This steady increase in the oxidation current is in stark contrast with the observation made at 55 °C, which can be ascribed to the occurrence of pitting corrosion on the Al surface, partially forming an AlF3 layer (Fig. 13b). Therefore, electrolytes containing LiTFSI as a salt are highly corrosive against Al. The most feasible way to improve the passivation is to replace with a solvent that has a low dielectric constant or pre-passivation using HF, LiBF4, LiPF6 as additives in the LiTFSI-contained electrolyte. Stable capacity retentions have been observed only in those cases.12,28,35
 Fig. 13  (a) Cyclic voltammograms obtained with the Al/Li cells in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2/PMPyr–TFSI solvent. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1 and (b) XPS spectra of Al 2p after the polarization at 65 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society. 

2.3. Electrochemical behavior of Al in LiN(SO2C2F5)2 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution
Although LiN(SO2CF3)2 has good conductivity, durability against moisture, and temperature, its inherent corrosive character against Al inhibits its application to lithium batteries. LiN(SO2C2F5)2, lithium bisperfluoroethylsulfonyl imide (LiBETI) is known to have a corrosion inhibition character. This was proven by Krause et al.36 (Fig. 14a). Under a potentiostatic polarization at 4.2 V vs.Li/Li+, the resulting current for LiTFSI was very high, indicating the occurrence of corrosion. Surprisingly, the current density for LiBETI was very low, which is comparable to the LiPF6 electrolyte. The expansion of the perfluoroalkyl group from –CF3 to –C2F5 brought about a four orders of magnitude effect on the current density during the polarization test. Morita et al.37 reported that the SEM image after polarization in the LiBETI solution showed an anodic corrosion of Al (Fig. 14c) compared to its state prior to testing (Fig. 14b), but that the extent of the corrosion was much better than observed in the LiTFSI solution (Fig. 9a and 10a). Similar to LiTFSI, the addition of LiPF6 significantly suppressed pit corrosion on the Al (Fig. 14d). The XPS spectra after polarization at 6 V vs.Li/Li+ indicates that the majority of the outer surface is composed of Al–F (AlF3) and Al–O (Al2O3) thin films (Fig. 14e). The cycling properties of the LiBETI were confirmed using a LiCoO2/coke cell (Fig. 14f). The good capacity retention proves that the cycling was not affected by Al corrosion, and the better performance was obtained using the LiBETI electrolyte.
 Fig. 14  (a) Al corrosion density at 4.2 V vs.Li/Li+ in 1 M PC solutions of various lithium salts showing a difference between the perfluoromethyl and perfluoroethylsulfonyl imides (reprinted from ref. 36, Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier); SEM image of Al electrode surface (b) before polarization and (c) after polarization in 1 M LiBETI/EC:DMC electrolyte and (d) 0.9 M LiBETI + 1 M LiPF6/EC:DMC electrolyte and (e) XPS spectra of Al 2p after polarization (cutoff: 6 V vs.Li/Li+, scan rate: 10 mV s−1) (reprinted from ref. 37, Copyright 2022, with permission from Elsevier); (f) cycling results of 1225 coin cells with Al positive electrode current collector, 1 M solvent (EC–DMC, 1:1 v/v) (reprinted from ref. 36, Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier). 
2.4. Electrochemical behavior of Al in LiB(C2O4)2 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution
Recently, LiBOB (LiB(C2O4)2) has been introduced as a possible candidate to replace the LiPF6 salt.38–41 Since LiBOB is composed of Li, B, C, and O elements, the formation of toxic and corrosive products is not expected, although the salt decomposes at a higher potential. Xu et al.42 and Zhang and Devine43 reported that Al passivates in a 1 M LiBOB-containing EC:EMC solution.

          Cyclic voltammograms of the Al foil polarized in the LiBOB electrolyte indicate that the Al foil does not show the alloy and de-alloy processes, which are always observed in the presence of a LiPF6 salt (Fig. 3).8 A broad cathodic peak appeared in the μA cm−2 scale in the potential range, which was a result of the reduction processes of the air-formed Al-oxide, the electrolytic solvents, and the formation of a solid electrolytic interphase. There are some metals (e.g.Cu, Ti, Cr, Fe, type 304 stainless steel) which do not undergo the alloy formation process even in the LiPF6 salt-containing electrolyte.8,14 Under potential deposition (UPD) of Li is commonly observed for the metal surfaces in the LiPF6 salt-containing electrolyte.8,14 However, this process is difficult to observe for the LiBOB-containing electrolyte, and the reverse reaction as well (Fig. 15a), providing evidence for the absence of the UPD process, because the reaction always occurs reversibly. It is likely that, although the air-formed film, Al2O3, is somehow reduced, the Al2O3 layer might not be completely reduced to an Al metal in the presence of a LiBOB salt. However, a corrosive fluorine element contained in the LiPF6 salt seemed to facilitate the elimination of the air-formed layer at a lower potential, so that the alloy formation of Al with Li readily occurred in LiPF6-containing electrolyte solutions.
 Fig. 15  (a) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms of Al foil polarized in 0.8 M LiBOB in EC–DMC (1:1 in volume). Scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C; (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the Al foil after the scratching test at 3, 4, and 5 V vs.Li/Li+ polarized in 0.8 M LiBOB in EC–DMC (1:1 in volume); ToF-SIMS fragments of Al2O+ after the scratch test at (c) 3 V, (d) 4 V, (e) 5 V vs.Li/Li+ and Al2B+ after the scratch test at (f) 3 V and (g) 5 V vs.Li/Li+. Insets in (c–e) present optical microscopic images (left) and total secondary ion mapping images (right). ToF-SIMS spectra shown as insets are for the unscratched parts. The scale bar denotes 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 45, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier. 
For the anodic scan, no oxidation peak was seen up to 3 V. This indicates that no Li layer was formed as a result of the UPD process and that Al did remain passivated, which supports the hypothesis that the air-formed Al2O3 layer was not reduced to an Al metal under the LiBOB-presenting environment. Raising the potential resulted in a gradual increase in the anodic current to 5 V, at which the resulting peak current was retained at a lower level, approximately 20 μm cm−2. The reaction would be related to the oxidation of the electrolyte. It is most likely that the absence of the fluorine element in the LiBOB salt keeps the surface of Al passivated, even at 0 V, and that this prevents the Li–Al alloy formation.
For the in situ scratch at 3, 4, and 5 V (Fig. 15b), the resulting optical microscopic images are shown in insets of Fig. 15a–c, the resulting currents abruptly decreased, meaning that a new passive film was immediately formed on the scratched surface. After the fast decay of the transient current, the current was retained at a low level. This suggests that the Al metal readily forms a stable passive film under the LiBOB environment, verifying the observations of Xu et al.42 and Zhang and Devine43
The ToF-SIMS results of the newly made scratched surfaces after the polarization show Li2B+, LiO+, B2O+, and LiC+ fragments that constitute LiBOB salt on the surface. The Al2O+ fragment was observed from 3–5 V vs.Li/Li+ and became much stronger at 5 V (Fig. 15c–e), indicating that the newly formed Al metal surface was covered with a passive layer in this potential range. Other evidence of passivation was that the resulting anodic currents gradually became greater as the potential was raised to 5 V from 3 V (Fig. 15b). However, the Al2B+ fragment was not observed at 3 V or even at 5 V (Fig. 15f and g). Recently, Zhang and Devine43 suggested that a passive film of Al in the LiBOB electrolyte is aluminium borate, AlBO3, by means of an electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance. Markovsky et al.44 suggested that LiBOB may decompose at anodic potentials, thus forming passive films comprising B2O3 and metal–oxalate species on the aluminium electrodes polarized to 4.50–5.30 V vs.Li/Li+. The ToF-SIMS results illustrate that the passive film of the Al was not composed of the AlBO3 compound in the LiBOB environment, because the chemical bond of Al and B was not detected by the ToF-SIMS (Fig. 15g). However, that of an Al–O complex was found in the passivation region (Fig. 15c–e). The chemical composition of LiBOB is LiB(C2O4)2. Although its detailed decomposition process is unknown, several byproducts, such as Li2O, B2O3, Li2CO3, CO or CO2, and O2, are likely formed. The clear ToF-SIMS signal of the AlO+ fragment supports the hypothesis that the generated oxygen would adhere to the surface of the newly formed Al metal such that the surface was oxidized to the AlIII–O compound, forming a passive film on the outermost surface of the scratched surface. Therefore, the AlIII–O layer, most likely Al2O3, is the passive layer for the Al metal in the LiBOB-containing alkyl carbonate solution.
3. Electrochemical behavior of Cu in LiPF6 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution
Almost all commercial, rechargeable lithium batteries use carbonaceous materials applied to a copper foil substrate as the negative electrode. As lithium ions, which are released from the positive electrodes, are intercalated to the carbonaceous negative electrode materials, the resulting potential reaches between 0.25 and 0.01 V vs.Li/Li+. In this state, the negative electrode materials, the Cu current collector, and the electrolyte are electrochemically reduced. It is questionable whether or not the Cu current collector is stable without protection films in such a reduced environment. An earlier study by Aurbach and Cohen46 suggested that Cu at an open-circuit state (ca. 3 V vs.Li/Li+) is not completely inert and contaminants may oxidize the Cu in a LiAsF6/PC environment. Dissolution of Cu should be avoided, because it will plate on the negative electrode surface during the first Li+ intercalation into carbonaceous materials, causing safety concerns due to short-circuiting.
Conversely, if a LIB cell is over-discharged, that is, the negative electrode itself reaches a high potential, Cu corrosion is inevitable. Thus, an understanding of the anodic behavior of Cu in the electrolyte is crucial so as to secure the battery safety.
As seen in Fig. 16a, decomposition of the HF contained in the electrolyte was seen at approximately 3.1 V vs.Li/Li+ during polarization in the cathodic direction.47 In a range of 1.5–3 V vs.Li/Li+, then, a large cathodic peak was observed, which corresponds to the reduction process of the air-formed Cu oxide film to metal, the electrolytic salt formation of Li2O, the reduction of the solvent and the formation of the solid electrolytic interphase (SEI) layer on the Cu metal surface.47,48 A further scan to 0.6 V vs.Li/Li+ gave rise to the under potential deposition (UPD) of Li on the Cu metal (see inset of Fig. 16a). The reverse reaction appeared at 0.7 V vs.Li/Li+ on the anodic scan. The formation of the Li–Cu alloy had not progressed in this system, since no apparent redox peaks appeared near 0 V vs.Li/Li+ (Fig. 16a). This allowed Cu to be used as the negative electrode current collector. In addition, no anodic reactions were found up to 3 V vs.Li/Li+. The polarization to further noble potential resulted in an abrupt increase in the current at 3.6 V vs.Li/Li+, which was primarily due to the oxidation and dissolution of Cu into the electrolyte. After dissolution, almost all of the pits were similarly shaped, having a hole with a squared area (Fig. 16b). Even the solid corrosion product was not observed on the surface. These results imply that the general corrosion occurred on the Cu substrate after anodic polarization at a higher potential.
 Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Cu metal, scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier); (b) SEM image of Cu after polarization (reprinted from ref. 49, Copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier); (c) time and current (i–t) curves of the Cu metal after scratching test at 3 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C, (d) optical microscopic and (e) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Cu metal after scratch test at 3 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C, ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (f) 0 s, (g) 10 s, and (h) 30 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier). 
Subsequent to the Cu passivation, when the electrochemical cell potential reached 3 V vs.Li/Li+, the electrode surface was immediately scratched with a diamond tip to remove possible oxide layers on the electrode surface (Fig. 16c). The scratching led to a cathodic current; however, no fluctuation in the current was seen in its decay curve. The as-scratched surface (Fig. 16d and e) showed weak signals of CuO+ and CuF+ fragments (Fig. 16f). However, sputtering the surface with Ga+ ions resulted in the absence of other layers on the scratched surface. This indicates that no substantial passive layer was formed during the electrochemical polarizations, which is in accordance with the results of Kawakita and Kubayashi49 and Zhao et al.:50 Cu → Cu+ + e−.(1)
Thus, the Cu metal surface is likely to reduce the electrolyte at the potential, 3 V vs.Li/Li+, generating the cathodic current (Fig. 16c). Because of this, Cu metal is stable at a lower narrow potential range and is generally acceptable for negative electrode current collectors.
4. Electrochemical behavior of other metals (Fe, Cr, Ni, and stainless steel) in LiPF6 salt containing alkyl carbonate solution
4.1. 
          Fe
        

          Fe is an inexpensive metal and is abundant in nature; thus, adopting Fe or a Fe-based metal as a current collector is lucrative in terms of cost. During polarization in the cathodic direction, no remarkable cathodic peak was observed up to 2 V vs.Li/Li+ (Fig. 17). In the voltage range of 1.5–2.0 V vs.Li/Li+, the small cathodic peak that appeared can be ascribed to the reduction of the air-formed Fe oxide film to metal, the electrolytic salt formation of Li2O, and the formation of a solid electrolytic interphase (SEI) layer on the Fe metal. A further shift of the potential in the cathodic direction resulted in the UPD of Li on the Fe surface, after which the Li–Fe alloying process was not observed at 0 V vs.Li/Li+. An oxidation of the deposited Li was seen at approximately 1 V vs.Li/Li+, as was another oxidation process from Fe metal to oxide around 2.2 V vs.Li/Li+. Subsequently, a decrease in the current was observed, indicating the formation of a passive film. The formed oxide layer below 3 V vs.Li/Li+ served as a good passive layer and was relatively stable (≤20 μA cm−2, see inset of Fig. 17). With a further shift of the potential in the noble direction, the resulting current became notably higher, bringing about an anodic dissolution of Fe2+, similar to the results of Iwakura et al.51 In addition, Fe2+ is considered to be a poison in lithium batteries during electrochemical reactions.52 Thus, Fe has been used only with low voltage positive electrode materials, namely, metal sulfide.53 Therefore, Fe can possibly be used with low voltage electrode materials.
 Fig. 17  
            Cyclic voltammograms of Fe metal: scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 
4.2. 
          Cr
        

          Cr also provides a general protective layer and is often electroplated due to its hardness. Similarly, the cyclic voltammogram of the Cr metal presents an SEI formation process at approximately 1.4 V vs.Li/Li+ (Fig. 18a). Lowering the potential induces the UPD and a partial reduction of the air-formed Cr oxide to Cr metal. In an aqueous system, this reduction does not readily occur. However, it is possible in a non-aqueous system, as reported by Liet al.54 The reverse reaction appears at approximately 1 V vs.Li/Li+, which can be ascribed to the oxidation of the deposited Li and the Cr metal to Cr-oxide, probably Cr2O3. No significant variation in the current indicates that the Cr2O3 layer protects the substrate up to 4 V vs.Li/Li+. A small increase in the current density in the range of 4–4.7 V vs.Li/Li+ can be attributed to the further oxidation of the Cr2O3 layer. A sharp increase in the current from 4.7 V vs.Li/Li+ potentially stems from the slow dissolution of hexavalent Cr from the passive film.
 Fig. 18  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Cr metal measured by scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the Cr metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+. All measurements were carried out at 40 °C; (c) optical microscopic image, (d) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Cr metal after scratch test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C; ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (e) 0 s, (f) 10 s, (g) 100 s, (h) 300 s, and (i) 1000 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 
To understand passivation in the transient mode, the anodically polarized Cr surface at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ was scratched (Fig. 18b), then the formed passive film was removed and the resulting surface appeared (Fig. 18c and d). In consideration of the smaller scratch area with Cr, the resulting current appeared to be relatively high than for Al and Ti electrodes (Fig. 5a and 7d, respectively). These results reflect the dissolution of hexavalent Cr from the formed passive layer. Myung et al.55 proved that trivalent Cr could be oxidized to hexavalent Cr at a higher potential by X-ray absorption spectroscopy.
The CrO+ and CrF+ fragments showed similar integrated intensities in ToF-SIMS analysis (Fig. 18e–i). The CrF+ fragment intensity increased by the elimination of the air-contaminated layer using the Ga+ ion for 10 s (Fig. 18f). We described the possibility of Cr6+ dissolution as CrO42− at a higher potential (ca. 5 V vs.Li/Li+), inferred from the abrupt increase in current and high current flowing on the scratched surface. The dissolved CrO42− ions can be deposited on the outermost surface of the Cr electrode. This complex layer may cover the Cr-fluoride layer resulting in a decrease in the intensity of the CrF+ fragment. Increasing the sputtering time caused the resulting intensities of CrO+ and CrF+ to decrease (Fig. 18g–i). Conversely, the CrF+/CrO+ ratio gradually decreased with increasing sputtering time. After sputtering for 1000 s, the ratio was significantly reduced, suggesting that the Cr-oxide related compound began to occupy a majority of the passive film. The Cr-fluoride compound layer was present on the surface of the Cr-oxide layer; therefore, the fact that the remainder of the Cr2O3 air-formed layer remained at a lower potential and the CrO42− ions dissolved at a higher potential indicates that the appropriate usage of the Cr foil is below 4 V vs.Li/Li+. In conclusion, Cr was found to be markedly stable in the potential range of 2.5–4 V vs.Li/Li+.56
4.3. 
          Ni
        

          Ni is widely available in many forms, including foil, grid, felts, etc.Ni has been used as a current collector for negative electrodes, and it is generally assumed that Ni is stable up to 4.5 V vs.Li/Li+, after which the dissolution of Ni begins.57 However, the details of the passivation process and passive film have not yet been clarified. Further investigation is necessary because Ni is usually used as a negative electrode current collector.
4.4. Stainless steel (type 304)
Stainless steels have been widely used because their air-formed films are based on the formation of (Cr, Fe)-oxides on their surface, which protect the metal bulk from general corrosion. The passivation mechanism of stainless steels in aqueous solutions has been extensively studied.58–60 Passive films are believed to be oxides/hydroxides containing water molecules, especially when formed in aqueous solutions. Cathodic polarization treatments are commonly adopted prior to anodic polarization in order to approximate the surface to a bare state, although not all of these oxide films can be reduced to metals in aqueous solutions. Increasing the potential causes the active dissolution of the metal ingredients to form (Cr, Fe)-oxides on the surfaces of metal bulk. The resulting oxide layer is the passivation film. Fe-oxides are selectively soluble at lower pHs; thus, the Cr-oxides are the major constituents of the film. Alternatively, Cr-oxides are preferentially dissolved at a higher pH and potential, and the outer layer of the stainless steel is mainly composed of a Fe-oxide layer. Passivation in such a manner provides a significant corrosion resistance to stainless steel. However, most non-aqueous organic solutions will not allow passivation this way due to the lack of water molecules in the electrolyte.
It is questionable whether stainless steel is really applicable to rechargeable lithium batteries because the steel is an alloy of Fe (more than 70 mass% for type 304 stainless steel) with Cr and Ni. Fe is not as promising for high voltage applications due to Fe dissolution at higher voltages (≥4 V vs.Li/Li+) (Fig. 17). Furthermore, Ni and Cr are susceptible to dissolution when the potential is higher than 4.5 V vs.Li/Li+.
As observed in the linear sweep (Fig. 19a), a cathodic peak between 1 and 2 V vs.Li/Li+ was assumed to be due to the reduction of the air-formed Fe and/or Cr-oxide films, the electrolytic salt formation of Li2O, and the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase layer.61 A distinct cathodic peak near 0.5–0.7 V vs.Li/Li+ can be assigned to the UPD of Li on the stainless steel surface. In the anodic direction, the anodic peak appearing at 1.1–1.3 V vs.Li/Li+ resulted from the oxidation of the deposited Li. The UPD and the corresponding Li oxidation were also progressive at a lower potential, although the redox potential shifted slightly. Another anodic peak was observed at 2 V vs.Li/Li+, which was assumed to result from the oxidation process of the Cr metals. In the range of 2.8–3.8 V vs.Li/Li+ to the noble potential, a small anodic peak was observed due to the oxidation of Fe0 and/or CrIII. This implies that the passive film on the stainless steel was formed at this potential. The anodic current was maintained at a very low level (≤15 μA) up to 5 V vs.Li/Li+ (see the inset of Fig. 19a), indicating that the passive films were further stabilized. No significant change appeared in the current near 5 V vs.Li/Li+ during repetitive CV scanning.
 Fig. 19  (a) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms of type 304 stainless steel. Scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C; (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the stainless steel after scratching tests at 3, 4, and 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C; (c) optical microscopic image, (d) total secondary-ion mapping image, (e) ToF-SIMS fragments of as-received, (f) after Ga+ ion beam etching for 10 s, (g) 30 s, (h) 100 s, and (i) 1000 s. After scratch test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ (40 °C). Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 14, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. 
The current and time curves of the scratched electrodes polarized at 3, 4, and 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C are shown in Fig. 11b. The abrupt decay of the current in the early state (within 30 s) and its retention at a lower level during polarization clearly indicate the formation and growth of a passive layer for all cases without critical defects, which can be caused by corrosion on the scratched film. Then, the current maintained a very low level, meaning that the whole surface was well covered by the passive film.
The ToF-SIMS results indicate that the intensity of the secondary ions of the scratched parts was very high (Fig. 19c and d). It is clear that the new surface was well passivated with (Fe, Cr)-oxides and (Fe, Cr)-fluorides. The formation of these fluoride layers on the surface indicates that the newly formed surface reacted with the LiPF6-contained electrolyte. The (Cr, Fe)-oxides' components of the passive layer reacted with the generated HF into the electrolyte. Subsequently, the byproducts were detected as fragments with Fe–F and Cr–F bonding, assuming the following reactions: Cr2O3 + 6HF → 2CrF3 + 3H2O(2) Fe2O3 + 6HF → 2FeF3 + 3H2O(3)The intensity ratios of CrO+vs.CrF+ and FeO+vs. FeF+ increased due to the Ga+ ion beam etching for 300 and 1000 s; therefore, the oxide layers were located beneath the fluoride layer and the outer passive oxide layer slowly transformed to a metal fluoride layer at a higher potential by reacting with HF.
For type 304 stainless steel, we did not observe the formation of an alloy with Li metal near 0 V vs.Li/Li+. Furthermore, the presence of Fe-fluoride and Cr-fluoride on the surface of stainless steel also played an important role in passivating the stainless surface, which significantly improved the corrosion resistance. Therefore, type 304 stainless steel is stable enough to be used as a current collector of positive electrodes for lithium-ion batteries, similar to Al. Furthermore, no formation of the stainless steel–Li alloy is desirable when employing stainless steel as a current collector of negative electrodes and cell cases for lithium-ion batteries.
5. Conclusions
Recent understanding about electrolytes in lithium-based rechargeable cells revealed that the chemical composition of electrolytes profoundly affects the cell performance in many aspects, from lithium cycling efficiency to rate capability, and from capacity retention at various temperatures to tolerance. Electrolyte stability is the interaction between an electrolyte and the commonly used positive and negative electrode in lithium ion cells, in which current collectors support cell structure and provide electron pathways. These metals always possess an air-formed surface layer, which protects the metals from general corrosion. During an electrochemical reaction in a wide potential window, these metal current collectors are subjected to passivation in the anhydrous electrolyte. The passivation process is mainly dependent on the upper cut-off voltage and used salt. Compact and thick protective passive layers are formed on the surface of the native surface film at a higher potential, resulting in metal fluorides when inorganic salts, such as LiPF6 and LiBF4, were used. Raising the upper cut-off voltage also resulted in a thick metal fluoride surface film. These metal fluoride passive films are highly protective against corrosive electrolytes, thus providing good battery performance during long-term cycling. Meanwhile, imide-based electrolytes form a nonprotective surface film and this, in turn, gives rise to the severe corrosion of a current collector. Although a fluorine-based surface layer is created, the thin layer is not likely protective against the corrosive electrolyte because of its thinness. Concerning battery safety when the cell is overdischarged, a Cu current collector should be replaced with an electrochemically stable metal, because no protective layer on the Cu at a higher potential can induce the dissolution of Cu. Subsequently, this leads to a short-circuiting of the cell. We recommend the use of other metals that do not form alloys with lithium as alternative negative electrode current collectors for the substitution of Cu, although further systematic studies are necessary.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 2009-0092780), the Human Resources Development of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government Ministry of Knowledge Economy, and Priority Research Centers Program (2010- 0020207) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.
References
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Sun, S.-T. Myung, B.-C. Park, J. Prakash, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 320 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 906 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Winget, M. Doeff, J. W. Evans and T. M. Devine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, B448 Search PubMed .
S. S. Zhang, M. S. Ding and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 16 Search PubMed .
T. C. Hyams, J. Go and T. M. Devine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, C390 Search PubMed .
S.-T. Myung, Y. Sasaki, S. Sakurada, Y.-K. Sun and H. Yashiro, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 288 Search PubMed .
S. S. Zhang and T. R. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 458 Search PubMed .
K. Kanamura, T. Okagawa and Z. Takehara, J. Power Sources, 1995, 57, 199 Search PubMed .
J. W. Braithwaite, A. Gonzales, G. nagasubramanian, S. J. Lucero, D. E. Peebles, J. A. Ohlhausen and W. R. Cieslak, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 448 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, E. Yasukawa and S. Mori, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2677 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang and T. M. Devine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, B344 Search PubMed .
S.-T. Myung, Y. Sasaki, T. Saito, Y.-K. Sun and H. Yashiro, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5804 Search PubMed .
S.-T. Myung, K. Izumi, S. Komaba, Y.-K. Sun, H. Yashiro and N. Kumagai, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3695 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Myung, K. Izumi, S. Komaba, H. Yashiro, H. J. Bang, Y.-K. Sun and N. Kumagai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4061 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, W. Hoshikawa and T. Umegaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A339 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atanasoski, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 320 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Behl and E. J. Plichta, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 132 Search PubMed .
C. G. Barlow, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 362 Search PubMed .
H. S. Choe, B. G. Carroll, D. M. Pasquariello and K. M. Abraham, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 369 Search PubMed .
A. Webber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2586 CAS .
W. K. Behl and E. J. Plichta, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 132 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, K. Kwon, T. M. Devine and J. M. Evans, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4399 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, T. Umegaki, S. Shiraishi, M. Ohashi and Z. Takahara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A185 Search PubMed .
S.-W. Song, T. J. Richardson, G. Zhuang, T. M. Devine and J. W. Evans, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1483 Search PubMed .

The Passivity of Metal, R. P. Frankenthal and J. Kruger, The Electrochemical Society,  1978, p. 175 Search PubMed .
T. Kawamura, T. Tanaka, M. Egashira, I. Watanabe, S. Okada and J. Yamaki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A459 Search PubMed .
D. D. Censo, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1000 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and P. S. Fedkiw, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2471 Search PubMed .
J. Goldman and A. McEwen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 501 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, L. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Tachibana and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, L. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Tachibana, Y. Yang and S. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4764 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, L. Yang, S. Fang, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Tachibana, Y. Yang and S. Zhao, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2010, 40, 653 Search PubMed .
J. Mun, T. Yim, C. Y. Choi, J. H. Ryu, Y. G. Kim and S. M. Oh, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A109 Search PubMed .
L. J. Krause, W. Lamanna, J. Summerfield, M. Engle, G. Korba, R. Loch and R. Atanasoski, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 32 Search PubMed .
M. Morita, T. Shibata, N. Yoshimoto and M. Ishikawa, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 2787 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Q. Lu, J. Liu and K. Amine, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3322 Search PubMed .
L. Larush-Asraf, M. Biton, H. Teller, E. Zinigrad and D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 400 Search PubMed .
K. Amine, Q. Wang, D. R. Vissers, Z. Zhang, N. A. A. Rossi and R. West, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 429 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Chen, S. Busking, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 852 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Zhang, T. R. Jow, W. Xu and C. A. Angell, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A26 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and T. M. Devine, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, B365 Search PubMed .
B. Markovsky, F. Amalraj, H. E. Gottlieb, Y. Gofer, S. K. Martha and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A423 CrossRef .
S.-T. Myung, H. Natsui, Y.-K. Sun and H. Yashiro, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8297 Search PubMed .
D. Aurbach and Y. Cohen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3355 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, J. J. Cho, J. Kim and H.-J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1193 Search PubMed .
D. Aurbach and Z. Zaban, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 393, 43 Search PubMed .
J. Kawakita and K. Kubayashi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 101, 47 Search PubMed .
M. Zhao, S. Kariuki, H. D. Dewald, F. R. Lemke, R. J. Staniewicz, E. J. Plichta and R. A. Marsh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2874 Search PubMed .
C. Iwakura, Y. Fukumoto, H. Inoue, S. Ohashi, S. Kobayashi, H. Tada and M. Abe, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 301 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, A. Mauger, F. Gendron and C. M. Julien, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 16 CrossRef CAS .

          A. C. Gay and F. S. Martino, US Pat., 3933520,  1975 .
J.-T. Li, V. Maurice, J. Swiatowska-Mrowiecka, A. Seyeux, S. Zanna, L. Klein, S.-G. Sun and P. Marcus, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3700 Search PubMed .
S.-T. Myung, S. Komaba, N. Hirosaki, N. Kumagai, K. Arai, R. Kodama and I. Nakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1569 Search PubMed .

          O.-K. Chang, J. C. Hall, J. Philips and L. F. Silvester, US Pat., 4892796,  1988 .
I. Geoffroy, P. Willimann, K. Mesfar, B. Carre and D. Lemondant, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2019 Search PubMed .
H. H. Uhlig and S. S. Lord, Jr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1953, 100, 216 Search PubMed .
H. H. Uhlig and A. Geary, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1954, 101, 215 Search PubMed .
H. P. Leckie and H. H. Uhlig, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1966, 113, 1262 CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. D. Levi, E. Levi and A. Schechter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2195 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Seung-Taek Myung	Seung-Taek Myung is an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at Iwate University, Japan. He received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from Iwate University, Japan, in 2003. In 2003, he joined VK Corporation as a principal researcher, developing large format Li-ion batteries for vehicle application. He moved to 3M Korea as a senior researcher in 2006 and worked on the development of Li-ion battery materials until March 2007. His current research is focused on development of electro-active materials and corrosion of current collectors of Li-ion batteries.
Hitoshi Yashiro	Hitoshi Yashiro is a full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Bioengineering at Iwate University in Morioka, Japan. He earned his bachelor's (1982) and doctoral (1994) degrees from Tohoku University. He was an international fellow at SRI International in 1991–1992. His research covers variety of corrosion problems from that in lithium ion battery to nuclear power plants. He served as an Editor-in-Chief for Japan Society of Corrosion Engineering in 2009–2011.
Yang-Kook Sun	Yang-Kook Sun obtained his PhD degree from Seoul National University, Republic of Korea, and now a Professor of Energy Engineering at Hanyang University, Republic of Korea. His research interests include metalfluoride-coated cathode, lithium transition metal oxide, olivine-related cathodes and core-shell with concentration-gradient materials for advanced lithium ion battery, and lithium-metal free, lithium sulfur and lithium air batteries.

 	Fig. 1  
          Cell structure of typical lithium-ion battery and the electrochemical processes in charging and discharging (up); SEM image of negative electrode (left bottom) and positive electrode (right bottom).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Macrophotographs of corrosion that occurred in Al current collectors with LiMn2O4 positive electrode material, (b) SEM of severe corrosion that occurred at the edge of the Al current collector of cells (JP6-1 of Fig. 1a), (c) low magnification SEM of Al current collectors after extensively cycled LiFePO4 material (reproduced with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2005, The Electrochemical Society); (d) SEM images of a hybrid pit in Al (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) that was cycled for 4 weeks at 45 °C and (e) SEM image of cracked corrosion products filling a corrosion pit in Al with a crack propagating to the Al current collector (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) that was cycled for 4 weeks at 45 °C (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2007, The Electrochemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 3  
              Cyclic voltammograms of Al metal: scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  
XPS spectra of (a) Al (2p), (b) O (1s), and (c) depth profiles of O, Al, F elements in the surface film of an Al electrode polarized at 5.5 V vs.Li/Li+ for 1 h in LiPF6/PC (reprinted from ref. 10, Copyright 1995, with permission from Elsevier); Auger maps of distribution of primary species identified on Al current collectors that had undergone 690 cycles in LiPF6/PC:DEC electrolyte: (d) Al, (e) AlOx, and (f) F. The map size is 0.86 mm across the edge (reproduced with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 1999, The Electrochemical Society); (g) XPS spectrum (Al 2p) of Al current collector (with LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 material) after anodic polarization from open-circuit voltage to 7 V vs.Li/Li+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2006, The Electrochemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Time and current (i–t) curves of the Al metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ measured at 40 °C, (b) optical microscopic image, (c) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Al metal after scratch test; ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (d) 0 s, (e) 10 s, (f) 100 s, (g) 300 s, and (h) 1000 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic drawings of passivation for Al under a non-aqueous alkyl carbonate solution containing LiPF6 salt. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Charge and discharge curves of (a) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Ti mesh current collector, (b) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Al mesh current collector, (c) Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4cell with Al foil current collector (reproduced with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2002, The Electrochemical Society); (d) time and current (i–t) curves of the Ti metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ measured at 40 °C (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  
              Cyclic voltammograms for (a) an unscratched and scratched aluminium electrode in 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (scan rate: 50 mV s−1); SEM images of a line of scratch done by tweezers on aluminium surface (b) before and (c) after the cyclic voltammetry between 2 and 4.5 V in 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, Copyright 2000, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  
              Scanning electron micrographs of Al electrode surfaces after anodic polarization at 6.0 V vs.Li/Li+ in (a) 1 M LiCF3SO3/PC, (b) 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (with addition of small amount of HF); XPS spectra (Al 2p) for Al electrode after anodic polarization at 6.0 V vs.Li/Li+ in (c) 1 M LiCF3SO3/PC, (d) 1 M LiN(CF3SO2)2/PC (with addition of small amount of HF). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, Copyright 2002, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparative plots of cyclic voltammograms (a) and the corresponding mass increase (b) for aluminium at the first cycle in 1 M LiTFSI/EC + DMC (), 0.8 M LiTFSI + 0.2 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (…) and 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (); sweep rate = 5 mV s−1; scanning electron microscopic images of aluminium after CV–EQCM in (c) 1 M LiTFSI/EC + DMC, (d) 0.8 M LiTFSI + 0.2 M LiBF4/EC + DMC, (e) 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M LiBF4/EC + DMC, and (f) 1 M LiBF4/EC + DMC (reprinted from ref. 26, Copyright 2004, with permission from Elsevier); (g) CVs of the 5th cycle for aluminium disk electrode (0.3 cm in diameter) in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2 + LiPF6/EC + DME (1:1) electrolyte at 50 mV s−1, and (h) aluminium corrosion potential against the content of inorganic salt additives of LiPF6, LiBF4, LiSbF6 in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2 :EC + DME (1:1) electrolyte obtained from CV measurements (reprinted from ref. 12, Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CVs of the 5th cycle for aluminium disk electrode (0.3 cm in diameter) in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2:EC, DME, DMG, THF and 2-MeTHF 50 mV s−1 and (b) cycling performances of Li:LiCoO2 coin cells with 1 M Li iN(SO2CF3)2:EC + THF electrolyte. Current density: 0.6 mA cm−2; cutoff potentials: 4.2 and 2.5 V. Reprinted from ref. 12, Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) CV profiles of Al/Li two-electrode coin cells in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte; (b) SEM images after polarization in LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte, held at 4.2 V for 3 h; XPS spectra of (c) Al 2p and (d) C 1s after polarization in LiN(SO2CF3)2/MFA electrolyte, held at 4.2 V for 3 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2005, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Cyclic voltammograms obtained with the Al/Li cells in 1 M LiN(SO2CF3)2/PMPyr–TFSI solvent. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1 and (b) XPS spectra of Al 2p after the polarization at 65 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Al corrosion density at 4.2 V vs.Li/Li+ in 1 M PC solutions of various lithium salts showing a difference between the perfluoromethyl and perfluoroethylsulfonyl imides (reprinted from ref. 36, Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier); SEM image of Al electrode surface (b) before polarization and (c) after polarization in 1 M LiBETI/EC:DMC electrolyte and (d) 0.9 M LiBETI + 1 M LiPF6/EC:DMC electrolyte and (e) XPS spectra of Al 2p after polarization (cutoff: 6 V vs.Li/Li+, scan rate: 10 mV s−1) (reprinted from ref. 37, Copyright 2022, with permission from Elsevier); (f) cycling results of 1225 coin cells with Al positive electrode current collector, 1 M solvent (EC–DMC, 1:1 v/v) (reprinted from ref. 36, Copyright 1997, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms of Al foil polarized in 0.8 M LiBOB in EC–DMC (1:1 in volume). Scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C; (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the Al foil after the scratching test at 3, 4, and 5 V vs.Li/Li+ polarized in 0.8 M LiBOB in EC–DMC (1:1 in volume); ToF-SIMS fragments of Al2O+ after the scratch test at (c) 3 V, (d) 4 V, (e) 5 V vs.Li/Li+ and Al2B+ after the scratch test at (f) 3 V and (g) 5 V vs.Li/Li+. Insets in (c–e) present optical microscopic images (left) and total secondary ion mapping images (right). ToF-SIMS spectra shown as insets are for the unscratched parts. The scale bar denotes 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 45, Copyright 2010, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Cu metal, scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier); (b) SEM image of Cu after polarization (reprinted from ref. 49, Copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier); (c) time and current (i–t) curves of the Cu metal after scratching test at 3 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C, (d) optical microscopic and (e) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Cu metal after scratch test at 3 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C, ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (f) 0 s, (g) 10 s, and (h) 30 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm (reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier).	 
Cu → Cu+ + e−.	(1)

 	Fig. 17  
            Cyclic voltammograms of Fe metal: scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of Cr metal measured by scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the Cr metal after scratching test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+. All measurements were carried out at 40 °C; (c) optical microscopic image, (d) total secondary-ion mapping images of the Cr metal after scratch test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C; ToF-SIMS fragments after Ga+ ion beam etching for (e) 0 s, (f) 10 s, (g) 100 s, (h) 300 s, and (i) 1000 s. Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 8, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Three consecutive cyclic voltammograms of type 304 stainless steel. Scanning started from OCP in the cathodic direction with a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1 at 40 °C; (b) time and current (i–t) curves of the stainless steel after scratching tests at 3, 4, and 5 V vs.Li/Li+ at 40 °C; (c) optical microscopic image, (d) total secondary-ion mapping image, (e) ToF-SIMS fragments of as-received, (f) after Ga+ ion beam etching for 10 s, (g) 30 s, (h) 100 s, and (i) 1000 s. After scratch test at 5 V vs.Li/Li+ (40 °C). Scale bar indicates 100 μm. Reprinted from ref. 14, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier.	 
Cr2O3 + 6HF → 2CrF3 + 3H2O	(2)
Fe2O3 + 6HF → 2FeF3 + 3H2O	(3)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
