Morphological and opto-electrical properties of a solution deposited platinum counter electrode for low cost dye sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP52944D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP52944D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19799-19806Morphological and opto-electrical properties of a solution deposited platinum counter electrode for low cost dye sensitized solar cells†Gopala Krishna V. V. Thalluri*a, Marc Décultotb, Catherine Henrist*ac, Jennifer Dewalquea, Pierre Colsona, Serge Habrakenb, Donato Spoltored, Jean Mancade and Rudi Cloots*acaGroup of Research in Energy and Environnement from Materials (GREEnMat), University of Liège, Chemistry Institute B6, Allée de la Chimie 3, Liège, 4000, Belgium. E-mail: vvgk.thalluri@ulg.ac.be; r.cloots@ulg.ac.be; catherine.henrist@ulg.ac.be;  Fax: +32 43663413;   Tel: +32 43663436bHoloLab, University of Liège, Physics Department, Liège, 4000, BelgiumcCenter for Applied Technology in Microscopy (CATμ), University of Liège, Chemistry Institute B6, Allée de la Chimie 3, Liège, 4000, BelgiumdInstitute for Materials Research (IMO), Hasselt University, Wetenschapspark 1, Diepenbeek, 3590, BelgiumeIMEC-IMOMEC, vzw, Wetenschapspark 1, Diepenbeek, 3590, BelgiumReceived 17th July 2013, Accepted 25th September 2013First published on 21st October 2013AbstractAlthough platinum (Pt) is a rare and very expensive material, Pt counter electrodes are still very commonly used for reaching high efficiencies in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). The use of alternative cheaper catalyst materials did not yet yield equivalent efficiencies. In this work, we tried to understand how to reduce the amount of deposited Pt-material and simultaneously deliver higher DSC performances. We systematically compared the properties of Pt-counter electrodes prepared by simple solution deposition methods such as spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing with reference to the Pt-electrodes prepared by sputtering onto fluorine doped-tin oxides (FTOs). The morphological and structural characterizations of the deposited Pt-layers were performed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The composition of Pt-material was quantified using SEM electron dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping measurements which were further compared with optical transmission measurements. Also contact angle and sheet resistance measurements were performed. By taking Pt-layers composition, morphology and structural factors into account, 9.16% efficient N3 dye based DSCs were assembled. The DSCs were subjected to various opto-electrical characterization techniques like current–voltage (I–V), external quantum efficiency (EQE), cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and transient photo voltage (TPV) measurements. The obtained experimental data suggest that the Pt counter electrodes prepared by solution deposition methods can also reach high DSC device performances with a consumption of very little amount of Pt material as compared with sputtered Pt-layers. This process also proves that higher DSC performances are not limited to the usage of sputtered Pt-layer as counter electrode.1. IntroductionDye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) technology was introduced two-decades ago by the pioneer work of Grätzel and O'Regan.1 The power conversion efficiencies and performances of DSCs are gradually raised from relatively low to world recordable 12.3%.2 This technology can be considered for specific applications as a serious competitor for other kinds of solar cell technologies.3 Several attempts were made to improve the DSC efficiencies, primarily working on photo-anode electrode (TiO2/dye), liquid electrolyte and counter electrodes, as shown in (Fig. 1).3,4 Fig. 1  Working schema of a dye sensitized solar cell (DSC) with Pt-counter electrode prepared by solution deposition or sputtering. The photo-anode absorbs the incoming photons and the counter electrode plays a significant role in reduction of liquid electrolyte i.e. iodine to triiodide.5 The redox behavior of iodide to triiodide system is successful in the DSCs due to the slow recombination of generated electrons between TiO2/oxidized dye and redox iodide leading to longer electron lifetimes.6 The slower recombination and faster dye regeneration rates of the redox electrolyte and the transfer of electrons from the counter electrode during the reduction of iodide also results in higher DSC performances which has been proven for several dyes.3,6b,7 The route to lower recombination is to optimize electrical conductivity,8 catalytic activity4a,9etc. of the counter electrode. The major barriers for commercialization of efficient DSCs are cost, ease of manufacturing and large area production.10 In practice, it is hard to reduce the amount of expensive materials used for DSCs preparation.The platinum (Pt) counter electrodes are very inexorable materials used for attaining high efficiencies in DSCs.2,4a,8,9 This is due to high catalytic activity, chemical stability to acid–base and high conductivity.2,4a,8,9 Sputtered Pt-layer on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) electrodes showed higher conductivity, but the charge transfer to liquid electrolyte is limited due to the low surface-to-volume-ratio,11 whereas the Pt-nanoparticle layers could provide higher electrochemical-catalytic activity by increasing the surface-to-volume-ratio with electrolyte.9a,12 Pt is the rarest and most expensive material used in DSCs as a counter electrode.13 The sputtered Pt-layered counter electrode uses more amounts of material and implies high production cost for vacuum processing.14 There is a need to find cost effective, easy roll-to-roll solution processing methods of Pt-counter electrodes to produce efficient commercial DSCs.10 Attempts have been reported to replace Pt with emerging carbon based materials in a pure form15 or in a hybrid system combining Pt–carbon16 and also Pt-nanoparticle layers with different shapes17 as counter electrodes in DSCs. This replacement uses complex methods of synthesis and depositions. Binary and organic compounds like tantalum,18 nickel sulfide19 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)20 materials as counter electrodes in DSCs are also interesting candidates.In this study we report successful solution deposition and formation of Pt-nanocluster layers onto FTO as counter electrodes. The Pt solution depositions were performed using spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing and are compared with a sputtered Pt-layer deposited according to a previously published work by our group.21 The morphological, structural and composition characterizations of the deposited Pt-layers were performed using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The contact angle between the Pt-layers and liquid electrolyte and the sheet resistance of Pt-layers were measured. The composition of deposited Pt-material was quantified using SEM electron dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping measurements and compared with optical transmission measurements. The N3 dye based DSCs were prepared from different Pt-counter electrodes and liquid iodide electrolyte. Efficiencies of 7.3% were obtained with spray-coated Pt-layer, 7.7% with a dip-coated Pt-layer, 9.16% with a brushed Pt-layer and 6.76% with a sputtered Pt-layer. By using opto-electrical characterization techniques such as external quantum efficiency (EQE), transient photo voltage (TPV), cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) the electrocatalytic activity of different Pt-layered counter electrodes in N3-DSCs were measured. These measurements were useful to study the electrocatalytic activity of different Pt-layered counter electrodes in N3-DSCs.2. Results and discussionIn the operation of DSCs, the optical transmittance of a TiO2 electrode layer (mesoporous TiO2 + scattering TiO2) in the range of 300–1000 nm was very poor and also well-known in the literature.22 The dye sensitized TiO2 layer; liquid electrolyte and counter electrode are the main materials for generation of charge carriers in DSCs, as shown in (Fig. 1). The energy level between the integrated Pt-counter electrode and liquid electrolyte work-function to the intrinsic Fermi-level of TiO2 is responsible for attaining DSC device performances. The critical parameter in DSCs is the interface between Pt-counter electrode/liquid electrolyte for the reduction of liquid electrolyte and this depends on the catalytic activity of Pt-layer. The functionality of Pt-layer in DSCs depends on the morphology and ordering of the Pt-nanoclusters.2.1. Morphological, ordering and composition propertiesThe depositions of Pt-layers were performed using different techniques like spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing and sputtering. Due to the high surface roughness (grains) of the FTO substrates it was tedious to study the morphological, ordering and composition properties of deposited Pt-layers. Therefore the morphological studies were performed on the Pt-layers deposited on Si substrates. The Pt-layers formation on Si substrates might be different from FTO substrates. This could be due to the tuning of the wetting property between Pt-solution to Si (atomically flat) as compared with FTO substrates. An experimental attempt was made to correlate the formation of Pt-layers on Si and FTO substrates and is described in this section.AFM morphological characterization images were recorded on deposited Pt-layers (ESI,† Fig. S1). It can be clearly seen that the Pt-layers deposited by spray-coated, dip-coated and brushed layers resulted in the formation of nanoclusters. The formed nanoclusters had different physical sizes ranging from 50–200 nm, whereas the sputtered Pt-layer was flat. The AFM measurements also depict the spatial distribution of nanoclusters for spray-coated, dip-coated and brushed Pt-layers on Si substrates. A larger Pt clusters’ size was observed for brushed layers when compared to spray-coated and dip-coated layers. The thickness of the solution processed nanoclustered Pt-layers could not be determined; however the size and shape could only be measurable. The SEM morphology characterizations were also performed on the same Pt-layers on Si (ESI,† Fig. S2). From this figure it can also be seen that Pt-layers deposited by spray-coated and brushed methods result in the formation of nanoclusters and were distributed. In the case of a spray-coated Pt-layer, the substrates were pre-heated (at 330 °C for several minutes) and spraying was performed in regular intervals. During the process, Pt solution (Pt ions or atoms or molecules were completely dissolved in the solution) evaporation takes place rapidly and the amount of solution present for Pt dissolution gets concentrated. This causes excess Pt solute to gather into clusters and to crystallize, resulting in distributed clusters during the formation of Pt-layers. For the brushed Pt-layers on the substrates, the Pt-solution was drop-cast and uni-directionally brushed. The brushed Pt solution layer was completely dried in open-air and heat treated (at 450 °C for 30 min) finally resulting in larger nanoclusters. For the dip-coated Pt-layer, nanoclusters were homogenously distributed onto substrates after heat treatment; this was due to the constant rate of vertical dipping and drying of the solution. The short time of sputtered Pt-layers from a target is vacuum processing and uses a huge amount of Pt to cover completely the rough FTO grains, resulting in smooth and flat substrates. For the various deposited Pt-layers, AFM roughness on FTO substrates is presented in Table S1, ESI.† The result of SEM characterization for the brushed Pt-layer also reveals larger nanoclusters and each nanocluster was again constructed as a two-dimensionally porous oriented template structure (ESI,† Fig. S3). This type of structural Pt-nanocluster development using a simple brushing technique from a solution processing is reported here for the first time, to the best of our knowledge.With the assistance of SEM-energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping measurements the composition of Pt-material deposited using spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing and sputtering techniques was quantified and depicted in Fig. 2. These values are obtained with the k ratio of Pt M line from the EDX spectrum and were proportional to the Pt-concentration. The EDX composition measurements clearly demonstrated that the Pt-layers formed from a solution use smaller (minimum) amounts of Pt-material than sputtered Pt-layer. Fig. 2  Relative amount of Pt deposited by various techniques quantified using SEM-energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra on Si substrates. 2.2. Optical propertiesThe optical transmission spectra for all the four Pt-layer deposition methods (spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing and sputtering) employed on FTOs were recorded from 300–1000 nm as shown in Fig. 3. The transmission spectra for all the samples were corrected with the transmission spectrum of bare FTO. Transmission tends to decrease from spray-coated to sputtered Pt-layers which identifies the amount of Pt presence on FTOs, i.e. a bigger amount of Pt by sputtering and a smaller amount of Pt by other deposition techniques. These optical measurements were in agreement with the SEM-EDX mapping results. The optical transmission characteristics of Pt-layered counter electrodes in DSCs has no effect on the absorption of photons, but has an influence on the electron change transfer mechanism. Fig. 3  Transmission optical spectra tend to decrease from spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered () Pt layers indicating the amount Pt present of FTO. 2.3. Resistance and contact angle measurementsThe sheet resistances were calculated on different Pt-electrodes (ESI,† Table S1). The sheet resistance values were affected by the morphology of the Pt-layers, if the surface has larger clusters then resistance increases and if the surface is flat then resistance decreases. It can be observed that the sheet resistance was higher for a brushed Pt-layer when compared to other Pt-layers irrespective of their thickness. This type of behaviour was also elucidated on different films elsewhere.23 The wetting properties between the counter Pt-electrodes and liquid iodide electrolyte are determined using contact angle measurements (presented in ESI,† Table S1). The contact angle decreases with increasing in smoothness of the layers. The higher contact angle was measured for the brushed Pt-layer when compared to the other Pt-layers. If the surface roughness is higher, then the contact angle (between electrode/electrolyte) is higher. For the brushed Pt-layer the sheet resistance and contact angle were higher and correspond to the AFM and SEM measurements which showed that larger nanoclusters were formed with brushed Pt-layers.The results obtained by SEM, AFM on Pt-layers deposited on Si substrates are in good agreement with the results obtained by optical transmission, contact angle and sheet resistance measurements of Pt-layers deposited on FTO substrates. The formation of Pt-layers above FTO is schematically depicted in (Fig. 4). The Pt-solution deposition techniques replace a small amount of Pt when compared to the higher mass of carbon based compounds and sputtered Pt-layers. The major limitations of carbon materials are acceptable complexity in dimensions, preparing them in large quantities and the costs are to be addressed.24 The spray-coated Pt-layer on FTO results in the formation of medium sized Pt-clusters. The dip-coated Pt-layer on FTO effects in the development of smaller size Pt-clusters with good spatial distributions. The excavated structure formation of brushed Pt-layer could provide a better surface-area-to-volume-ratio for a liquid electrolyte. The sputtered Pt-layer is a conformal deposition method which completely covers the grains of FTOs, resulting in a smooth and flat film. Fig. 4  Schematic representation of Pt-layer formation on FTO substrates (a) spray-coated, (b) dip-coated, (c) brushed and (d) sputtered, based on the morphological, optical and structural properties. 2.4. Opto-electrical characterizationsThe N3 dye based DSCs were prepared with different Pt-layered counter electrodes. The recorded I–V measurement curves (ESI,† Fig. S4) are summarized in Table 1. According to the morphological and structural characterizations as discussed above, larger Pt-nanoclusters were obtained for brushed layers and then continued to decrease in size from spray-coated to sputtered layers. The DSCs I–V performances also followed the same trend with a highest efficiency of 9.16% obtained for Pt-brushed layers, then the efficiencies decreased from spray-coated to sputtered layers. It is clearly seen that the currents obtained with brushed and spray-coated Pt-layers were higher than for dip coated and sputtered Pt-layers. Due to the better catalytic process of larger Pt-clusters (brushed layer) with electrolyte there was an increase in the currents and this type of behaviour with altered hollow Pt structures was also observed elsewhere.25
Table 1 Summarized I–V performances of different N3 DSCs at ∼0.67 suns where Jsc is the short circuit current density, Voc is the open circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor, η is the efficiency, Rs is the series resistance and Rsh is the shunt resistance

Counter electrode layerJsc (mA cm−2)Voc (V)FF (%)η (%)Rs (Ω)Rsh (Ω)Spray-coated10.30.69657.35723kDip-coated8.310.75787.73916kBrushed10.060.75769.163235kSputtered8.290.68756.763321kWith different Pt-layered counter electrodes the positive/negative shifts with a redox energy level of the electrolyte could also be related to a change in the Voc's from these devices and associated with eqn (1). (1)where Nc is the density of states in the TiO2 conduction band, iinj is the current density of photogenerated electrons, q is the number of electrons involved in the charge-transfer process to the oxidized species of concentration c with transfer rate ket and elementary charge e, K is the molar gas constant, T is the temperature, and Eref6a,26 is the difference between the TiO2 conduction band edge (Ec) and the redox potential of the electrolyte (Eredox). Consequently, the positive shift of the redox energy level of the electrolyte results in a decrease of Voc and a negative shift of the redox energy level electrolyte results in the increase of Voc in these different DSCs.25 The redox energy level of the electrolyte depends on the catalytic performance of Pt-counter electrode. The catalytic performance depends on the nanocluster size and theoretical performances of variously sized Pt clusters, as studied elsewhere.27 The electrocatalytic activity of different Pt-layered counter electrodes was measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and cyclic voltammograms were recorded (ESI,† Fig. S5). The brushed Pt-layered electrode yields a higher current density with a larger peak area in the cyclic voltammogram curve when compared to other Pt-layered electrodes. This also exhibited the highest cathodic peak and therefore it is capable of better electrocatalytic activity. The Nyquist plots under sunlight illumination were obtained using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (ESI,† Fig. S6 and Table S2). The ohmic serial resistance (Rh) and charge transfer resistance (Rct1) are derived according to an equivalent circuit fitting in the inset of Fig. S6 (ESI†). The Rh and Rct1 obtained from the brushed Pt-layer electrode were smaller (7.26 and 0.58 Ω cm2, respectively) when compared to other Pt-layered electrodes. This indicates enhanced electrocatalytic activity between the Pt-brushed electrode and the electrolyte by providing a larger active surface-area-to-volume-ratio. From these electrocatalytic measurements it can be elucidated that when the brushed Pt-layered counter electrode is used in DSCs, larger current densities could be obtained during the I–V measurements.The electrical characterization differences in these DSCs by different Pt-counter electrodes with liquid electrolyte can be possibly elucidated by taking the Butler–Volmer equation (eqn (2)) into the account. This (eqn (2)) describes the occurrence of charge transfer between the metal counter electrode and the electrolyte simultaneously.28 The external current density iext is characterized by a charge transfer exchange current iex and overpotential difference (V) between the electrode potential and equilibrium potential. (2)where β is the symmetry factor and z is the charge transfer valence. The complete current density in the DSC device id is derived from the redox process of the electrolyte at the interface of Pt-cathode electrode (where the electrons are injected from the cathode to the electrolyte), Vmax is the over-voltage charge transfer, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature and e is the electronic charge. Apart from the internal resistive currents from the mass transport and contact resistances at the electrode, there is external series resistance to be accounted for from FTOs and TiO2 shunt resistances due to the internal leakage currents. The external current density iext and the external voltage Vext are described as eqn (3) and (4) (3) Vext = Vint − Rshiext(4)where Rs means the series resistance and Rsh is the shunt resistance. Rs has an influence on the complete electrochemical processes and higher Rsh has a negligible impact within the DSCs. The higher Rs influenced for lower FF in the spray-coated Pt-layered DSC when compared to other DSCs.The internal resistance due to mass transport and contact resistances of the electrodes could also affect the external and internal current densities in DSCs. From eqn (2), the charge transfer exchange current (iex) is responsible for variations in the current in these devices. In the Pt spray-coated and brushed counter electrode DSCs could have higher iex, whereas in the Pt dip-coated and sputtered counter electrode DSCs may have lower iex. The higher and lower iex, in these DSCs are explained in the next section. The experimentally obtained electrical I–V characteristic curves of different Pt-counter electrode DSCs were in accordance with the theoretically predicted Butler–Volmer relation analysis results, presented elsewhere.28The photocurrent absorption contributions from the N3 dye with respect to the various counter electrodes were determined using external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The EQE spectra of the DSCs are shown in Fig. 5. It can be observed from the figure that the EQE spectra of the DSC devices resemble closely the absorption spectrum of the N3 dye sensitized TiO2 layer. The photocurrent EQE spectra attained with brushed/spray-coated and dip-coated/sputtered Pt-counter electrode N3 DSCs were analogous and with the same order of the current that was obtained from I–V measurements. The EQE in the range of 350–750 nm was higher for the brushed Pt-layered counter electrode than that of other Pt-layered counter electrodes. This can be ascribed to the more effective electron charge separation and collection in the device. The higher charge separation and collection is due to the better catalytic activity of the brushed Pt-layers with larger clusters. Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement curves of N3 DSCs recorded on different deposited Pt-counter electrodes spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered (). For measuring the electron lifetime and recombination under open-circuit voltage (Voc) conditions, numerous techniques are used.29 It is well-understood that the recombination and charge carrier transport in solar cells have a strong relation with Voc.30 The different Pt counter-electrodes can influence the catalytic mechanism of iodide reduction during DSCs operation and could also have an impact on the electron lifetime. The electron lifetime also depends on recombination. The higher catalytic activity could induce effectively a bigger charge transfer current (iex). A complementary technique for understanding the catalytic behavior of the counter electrode and to quantify the electron lifetime with different Pt-layered N3 DSCs at different Voc values, is the transient photo-voltage (TPV) technique.30 In TPV experiments with increasing the light intensity, the Voc of the devices is varied. Then using a small perturbation of laser pulse, the lifetime of the electrons in DSCs could be obtained as shown in (Fig. 6). The DSC devices exhibit an electron lifetime of ∼0.15 s at lower light and ∼1 ms at higher light intensities. The electron lifetime decreases with increasing Voc which is consistent with a power-law relationship.31 The longer lifetime of the electrons was attained in brushed Pt-layer DSC when compared to other DSCs. The longer lifetime of electrons suppresses the loss of recombination in DSC devices. The larger nanoclustered Pt-layers could pave a better path for reduction of the liquid electrolyte. It can be confirmed that the brushed Pt-layer (structural data) showed the highest catalytic activity towards the reduction of the electrolyte with a longer lifetime of the electrons. This longer lifetime of electrons describes the higher iex obtained with a brushed Pt-counter electrode and is in agreement with the electrical measurements. Fig. 6  Transient photovoltage (TPV) electron lifetime measurements at different Voc's of N3 DSCs recorded on different deposited Pt-counter electrodes spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered (). 3. ConclusionsIn summary, solution based Pt-counter electrode layers were successfully prepared using spray-coating, dip-coating, brushing, and were compared with a sputtered Pt-layer. The morphological, optical, structural properties and the amount of deposited Pt-layers were studied with a variety of techniques. In DSCs the Pt-layered counter electrode acts as a catalyst and the brushed Pt-layer has proven to be impressive for the reduction of the iodide electrolyte, as discussed by opto-electrical measurements. The usage of these different Pt-layered counter electrodes resulted in an economical photovoltaic performance with the highest efficiency of 9.16% with a brushed Pt-layer electrode. By this solution preparation technique the amount of Pt material can be decreased, which could reduce the overall complete cost of DSCs and is also useful for easy processing of commercial applications.4. Experimental4.1. Device preparationFluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were supplied from dyesol with (15 Ω per sq). The cleaned FTO substrates (by ultrasonication in a soap solution for 30 min, rinse with deionized water, again ultrasonication in acetone for 10 min and then in hot boil isopropanol for 10 min) were treated with 40 mM TiCl4 solution at 60 °C for 30 min. These treated FTO–TiCl4 substrates were dried and calcined at 500 °C for 30 min, using TiO2 (T/SP) paste (solaronix) with the doctor blade technique, films were deposited on to FTO–TiCl4 substrates and again calcined at 500 °C for 30 min, which resulted in 10–11 μm mesoporous thick layers. Then, a scattering TiO2 layer from Ti-Nanoxide R/SP paste (supplied from solaronix) was also doctor bladed onto mesoporous TiO2 layers and calcined at 500 °C for 30 min with the formation of 2–3 μm. Then, complete TiO2 electrodes (mesoporous + scattering layers) were treated with 40 mM TiCl4 solution at 60 °C for 30 min and sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 electrodes were dipped in 0.4 mM concentration of N3 dye in ethanoic solution for 4 h. The Pt-counter electrode layers were prepared on to cleaned FTOs by various deposition techniques. From the commercial Pt solution (Solaronix) the Pt-layers were formed on FTOs by spray-coating, dip-coating and brushing. For spray-coating, the Pt-solution was diluted in 400 μl with 10 ml of isopropanol and onto pre-heated (330 °C) FTO/Si substrates the Pt-solution was spray-coated with air brush, as reported elsewhere.32 This was repeated twice and finally calcined at 450 °C for 30 min. The dip-coating of FTO/Si substrates was performed in a homemade dip-coater and dipping was pursued at a rate of 2 mm s−1 in Pt solution. After complete drying, a final calcination was performed at 450 °C for 30 min. The brushed Pt-layers on FTO/Si substrates were obtained by drop casting less than 100 μl of Pt solution and brushed unidirectional to completely dry. Finally, these substrates were calcined at 450 °C for 30 min. The sputtering of Pt layers on to FTO/Si substrates was performed according to the literature.21 The Pt was sputtered from a target distance of 3 cm for 80 s at 30 mA, resulting in 30 nm layer (measured by Veeco 150 Dektak). The N3 dye sensitized layer TiO2 layered substrates and Pt-layered substrates were sealed together using a 25 μm thermoplastic film (Solaronix), using spring pressure clips and the cell was placed at 100 °C for 30 min, filled with homemade liquid iodide electrolyte (prepared according to Zhang et al., literature33) from a drilled hole using vacuum suction, and the hole was sealed with a thin glass plate and thermoplastic film.4.2. Opto-electrical and morphological characterizationsThe transmission measurements of various methods of Pt–FTO electrodes were performed using a Perkin Elmer UV-Vis Spectrometer Lambda 14 P. The contact angle surface wettability measurements was evaluated between the liquid iodide electrolyte and Pt–FTO electrodes using a GBX-DGD Fast/60 contact angle meter and the software provided with the instrument was used to estimate the contact angle. A liquid electrolyte droplet of 15 μl was deposited on the Pt–FTO surfaces and after 30 s the contact angles were measured. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) morphology and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping measurements on the Pt–Si substrates were performed on a FEG-ESEM XL30 (FEI) with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV under high vacuum. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements on Pt–FTO's and Pt–Si's were performed using Multimode SPM Veeco instrument. The catalytic performances of different deposited Pt-layered counter electrodes were measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The potentiostat/galvanostat BioLogic SP200; Princeton Applied Research – EG&G Instruments 263A was used for CV and EIS measurements. For CV, the three electrode system consists of a Pt-layered working electrode, a Pt wire as a counter electrode, and Ag/Ag2+ served as a reference electrode. Comparative cyclic voltammograms were recorded in 5 mM LiI, 0.1 M LiClO4 and 0.05 mM I2 in acetonitrile solution under N2 purged environment. The data were recorded from −1 V to 1 V with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 on an active area of 0.28 cm2. EIS measurements were performed in a frequency range of 100 mHz to 100 kHz under 0.68 sunlight with a voltage perturbation of 10 mV on an active area of 0.2064 cm2. Photovoltaic I–V performances of these various methods of deposited Pt-counter electrodes N3-DSCs were evaluated by a class A solar simulator purchased from Newport Spectra Physics coupled with a Keithley 2400 Source meter. Current–voltage (I–V) curves were measured under simulated 0.67 sun illumination (filter AM 1.5) at ∼25 °C. The electrode active area was set to 0.2064 cm2 with a mask. The efficiencies were calculated using equation  where Voc is the open circuit voltage (V), Jsc is the current density (mA cm−2), FF is the fillfactor (%) and Pin is the incident power i.e. 0.67 suns in this work. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were performed on the complete DSC devices. For this, the monochromator was supplied as a Kratos model GM 252, the lamp was also a Kratos model LH 151 N. The power meter with Si photo detector was purchased from Thorlabs. Transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements were performed on the DSCs devices and were connected to 1 MΩ input terminal of a digital oscilloscope (Tektronix, TDS, 620B). From an adjustable intensity halogen lamp the measurements were performed by varying the light intensities ∼0.1–1.5 suns for obtaining different Voc's. The photovoltage for these measurements was driven by a tunable pulsed laser of wavelength 520 nm. This was used as a small optical perturbation which resulted in a voltage transient with an amplitude ΔV0 ≪ Voc. The intensity of the laser pulse was attenuated as it was necessary to have ΔV0 ≤ 10 mV, where no external current could flow through the external circuit. The generated charge carriers were maintained to remain in the bulk of the device or in the vicinity of the electrodes. The decay of the photovoltage signals was recorded using an oscilloscope.AcknowledgementsV.V.G.K.T would like to thank the Belgian Service Public de Wallonie and the University of Liege for a project grant on “Guide2dye” CN 1117449. Thanks are due to Gilles Sponks and Dafini Chatzikyriakou for assistance in SEM and CV analysis. V.V.G.K.T would also like to thank the University of Hasselt Interreg for “ORGANEXT” project grant.References
  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630 RSC .A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) N. Papageorgiou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Sun, B. Fan and J. Ouyang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4237 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Clifford, E. Martinez-Ferrero, A. Viterisi and E. Palomares, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1635 RSC .
  (a) S. Y. Huang, G. Schlichthörl, A. J. Nozik, M. Grätzel and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2576 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. n. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Giménez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278 CrossRef CAS .S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
  (a) X. Fang, T. Ma, G. Guan, M. Akiyama, T. Kida and E. Abe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 570, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) N. Papageorgiou, W. F. Maier and M. Grätzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 876 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. J. Cho and J. Ouyang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8519 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. B. Baxter, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2012, 30, 020801 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 RSC .B.-K. Koo, D.-Y. Lee, H.-J. Kim, W.-J. Lee, J.-S. Song and H.-J. Kim, J. Electroceram., 2006, 17, 79 CrossRef CAS .T. C. Wei, C. C. Wan and Y. Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 103122 CrossRef .A. Serov and C. Kwak, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) J.-C. Hierso, R. Feurer and P. Kalck, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 390 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) O. Paschos, P. Choi, H. Efstathiadis and P. Haldar, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 3796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) S. Roy, R. Bajpai, A. K. Jena, P. Kumar, N. kulshrestha and D. S. Misra, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7001 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Wang and Y. H. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8182 RSC ; 
  (c) X. Li, L. Liu, G. Liu, Y. Rong, Y. Yang, H. Wang, Z. Ku, M. Xu, C. Zhong and H. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3344–3352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. Xu, D. Huang, K. Cao, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Das, P. Sudhagar, V. Verma, D. Song, E. Ito, S. Y. Lee, Y. S. Kang and W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3729 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) V. Josef, J. M. Attila, L. Dan, O. David, W. Gordon, B. Ray and Z. Anvar, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085201 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (g) D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) V.-D. Dao, S. H. Ko, H.-S. Choi and J.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14023 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Xiao, J. Wu, J.-Y. Lin, S.-Y. Tai and G. Yue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1289 RSC ; 
  (c) R. Bajpai, S. Roy, P. Kumar, P. Bajpai, N. Kulshrestha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) H.-Y. Chen, J.-Y. Liao, B.-X. Lei, D.-B. Kuang, Y. Fang and C.-Y. Su, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) I. J. Hsu, D. V. Esposito, E. G. Mahoney, A. Black and J. G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8307 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L.-Y. Chang, C.-P. Lee, R. Vittal, J.-J. Lin and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12305 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Somik, R. Balavinayagam, G. Lauren, H. Steven, A. B. Gary, F. Phil, S. Shramik and G. Shubhra, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 485405 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) L.-L. Li, C.-W. Chang, H.-H. Wu, J.-W. Shiu, P.-T. Wu and E. Wei-Guang Diau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6267 RSC .S. Yun, M. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Shi, X. Lin, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Sun, D. Qin, S. Huang, X. Guo, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2630 CAS .
  (a) S. Nagarajan, P. Sudhagar, V. Raman, W. Cho, K. S. Dhathathreyan and Y. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1048 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Pang, X. Chen, S. Dong, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Han, X. Wang and G. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Dewalque, R. Cloots, F. Mathis, O. Dubreuil, N. Krins and C. Henrist, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7356 RSC .F. Huang, D. Chen, X. L. Zhang, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1301 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. K. Kulkarni, K. H. Schulz, T. S. Lim and M. Khan, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 345, 273 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. Marom and M. Eizenberg, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 123705 CrossRef .X. Cai, S. Hou, H. Wu, Z. Lv, Y. Fu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Kafafy, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 125 RSC .V.-D. Dao, S.-H. Kim, H.-S. Choi, J.-H. Kim, H.-O. Park and J.-K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25529 CAS .M. Durr, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 061110 CrossRef .S. Dobrin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 12122 RSC .J. i. Muto and M. Suzuki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 79, 265 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Bailes, P. J. Cameron, K. Lobato and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15429 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X.-R. Xiao and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. Zhu, E. A. Schiff, N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 685 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. N. M. Green, E. Palomares, S. A. Haque, J. M. Kroon and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12525 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) Z. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. C. O'Regan, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21818 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) B. C. O'Regan, S. Scully, A. C. Mayer, E. Palomares and J. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. C. O'Regan, K. Bakker, J. Kroeze, H. Smit, P. Sommeling and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Han, A. Islam, H. Chen, C. Malapaka, B. Chiranjeevi, S. Zhang, X. Yang and M. Yanagida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6057 CAS .G. K. V. V. Thalluri, J.-C. Bolsée, A. Gadisa, M. Parchine, T. Boonen, J. D'Haen, A. E. Boyukbayram, J. Vandenbergh, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. Manca, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhang, Z. B. Xie and J. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 505602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: AFM and SEM characterizations on Pt layers. A table of resistance and contact angle measurements. I–V, CV and EIS curves and the table of estimated impedance data are shown. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52944dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Working schema of a dye sensitized solar cell (DSC) with Pt-counter electrode prepared by solution deposition or sputtering.	 

 	Fig. 2  Relative amount of Pt deposited by various techniques quantified using SEM-energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra on Si substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transmission optical spectra tend to decrease from spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered () Pt layers indicating the amount Pt present of FTO.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of Pt-layer formation on FTO substrates (a) spray-coated, (b) dip-coated, (c) brushed and (d) sputtered, based on the morphological, optical and structural properties.	 

Spray-coated	10.3	0.69	65	7.3	57	23k
Dip-coated	8.31	0.75	78	7.7	39	16k
Brushed	10.06	0.75	76	9.16	32	35k
Sputtered	8.29	0.68	75	6.76	33	21k
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Vext = Vint − Rshiext	(4)

 	Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement curves of N3 DSCs recorded on different deposited Pt-counter electrodes spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered ().	 

 	Fig. 6  Transient photovoltage (TPV) electron lifetime measurements at different Voc's of N3 DSCs recorded on different deposited Pt-counter electrodes spray-coated (–), dip-coated (), brushed () and sputtered ().	 

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: AFM and SEM characterizations on Pt layers. A table of resistance and contact angle measurements. I–V, CV and EIS curves and the table of estimated impedance data are shown. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52944d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
