Enhancement in lifespan of halide perovskite solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE02852D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02852D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 865-886Enhancement in lifespan of halide perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Qiong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nga 
            Phung
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Diego 
            Di Girolamo
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Paola 
            Vivo
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Antonio 
            Abate
          
          
        
      *ade
aHelmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, Kekuléstraße 5, 12489 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: antonio.abate@helmholtz-berlin.de
bDepartment of Chemistry, Sapienza University of Rome, 00815 Rome, Italy
cLaboratory of Chemistry and Bioengineering, Tampere University of Technology, P.O. Box 541, FI-33101 Tampere, Finland
dInstitute of Advanced Energy Materials, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China
eDepartment of Chemical, Materials and Production Engineering, University of Naples Federico II, Piazzale Tecchio 80, 80125 Fuorigrotta, Naples, Italy. E-mail: antonio.abate@unina.it
Received 
      28th September 2018
    , Accepted 7th December 2018First published on 7th December 2018AbstractWhile perovskite solar cells have skyrocketed in recent years to power conversion efficiencies competitive with those of silicon and thin-film photovoltaics, the lagging behind stability stands in the way of commercialisation. In this review, we discuss the reasons and factors that induce the degradation in photovoltaic performance of perovskite solar cells, and furthermore, we summarise the most promising strategies to enhance the lifespan. We show that each component of the device, including the charge selective contacts, perovskite layer, and electrodes, can be engineered to reduce the influence of heat, UV light, oxygen, moisture and their synergetic effect on the operating lifetime of devices. We conclude that inorganic contacts and inorganic perovskite compositions are the most promising direction toward stable perovskite solar cells.
Qiong Wang
Qiong Wang is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Young Investigator Group lead by Dr Antonio Abate at Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. Her research interests include developing stable perovskite solar cells, understanding the working mechanisms of perovskite solar cells and exploring new perovskite compounds. Before joining Dr Antonio Abate's group, she worked as a research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State University in 2016–2017 after she obtained the PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Queensland.
Nga Phung
Nga Phung is currently a PhD student in the Young Investigator Group Active Materials and Interfaces for stable perovskite solar cells at Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin focusing on the stability of halide perovskite solar cells. Her focus is on the intrinsic property of the perovskite absorber layer. Before joining Prof. Dr Antonio Abate's group, she obtained her MSc degree at Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands where she was a scholarship holder of the Global Sustainable Electricity Partnership.
Diego Di Girolamo
Diego Di Girolamo is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry, University of Rome La Sapienza, under the supervision of Prof. Danilo Dini. He obtained a BSc in Chemistry and MSc in Physical and Inorganic Chemistry from the same university. His research focuses on the application of inorganic p-type semiconductors in perovskite solar cells. He is currently visiting the Young Investigator Group led by Dr Antonio Abate at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin.
Paola Vivo
Paola Vivo is a Senior Research fellow at Tampere University of Technology (TUT), Finland. After pursuing her PhD in Chemistry, she received the Academy of Finland fellowship for postdoctoral research in 2013–2017. She currently leads the Hybrid Solar Cells research team at the Laboratory of Chemistry and Bioengineering (TUT). Her research interests include developing novel organic materials and hybrid organic–inorganic systems for third generation solar cells, with current emphasis on hybrid perovskite photovoltaics.
Antonio Abate
Antonio Abate is a Team Leader at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin in Germany, Associate Professor at the University of Naples Federico II in Italy and Visiting Professor at Fuzhou University in China. His research aims at stable perovskite solar cells via interface engineering and novel materials. Before becoming part of the faculty, he led the solar cell research at Adolphe Merkle Institute within the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. He was a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Felow at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). He worked for four years as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a young photovoltaic technology have experienced fast development in the power conversion efficiency, with a world record efficiency of over 23%, highly competitive with that of silicon solar cells and thin-film photovoltaics (PVs). However, the operational lifetime of PSCs lags far behind compared to the well-established PVs. Therefore, enhancing the lifespan of PSCs has been one of the focuses of the perovskite PV community. To improve the lifetime of PSCs, an establishment of a standard protocol that can be used to evaluate the lifetime of PSCs and provides a figure of merit to allow comparison between different PVs is the first step. An accelerated ageing test has been suggested to be the widely adopted protocol that provides a T80 – the time that it takes for one device to degrade to 80% of its initial efficiency – to be used to quantify the lifespan of PSCs. The stability of a PSC is highly influenced by its working environment, such as moisture, temperature and ultra violet light irradiation via their interaction with electron/hole selective contacts, perovskite compounds, and metal contacts. All inorganic PSCs are believed to lead this PV technology towards long operational lifetime and future commercialization.

1. Introduction
Halide perovskite semiconductors exhibit outstanding optoelectronic properties,1 such as high absorption coefficient,2,3 sharp band edge,4,5 tuneable optical band gaps spanning from the visible to near-infrared wavelength range,6,7 high defect tolerance,8 and low exciton binding energy.9 The application of halide perovskites goes from photovoltaics,10 light emitting diodes,11 photo-detectors,12 and memory devices13 to solar batteries.14 Furthermore, halide perovskites can be processed by almost all standard thin film deposition techniques, including thermal evaporation,15 spin-coating,16–18 dip-casting,19 atomic layer deposition (ALD),20 screen printing,21,22 inject printing,23 and roll-to-roll printing.21,24,25 The outstanding optoelectronic properties in combination with the flexible processing make halide perovskites one of the most attractive materials for the electronic industry of the future.
The pioneering work was conducted by Miyasaka et al. in 2009 who applied methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) as sensitisers in dye-sensitised solar cells.26 The breakthrough in the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of perovskite solid-state solar cells was made in 2012, going beyond 10%.27,28 The value of PCE for perovskite solar cells (PSCs) quickly increased to over 20%,29 with the current world record of 23.3% certified by NREL (National Renewable Energy Laboratory in the USA).30 The low cost, highly efficient, and scalable PSCs are the most promising candidates to enter the photovoltaic market, which is currently dominated by silicon and thin-film solar cells. Although the overall efficiency of PSCs has increased over the years, the poor device stability is a major impediment to the commercialisation of PSCs.31Fig. 1 summarises the growth in efficiency of PSCs as well as the lifetime evaluated from TS80,32,33i.e. the corrected T80 for PSCs taking into consideration the reversible loss during the day/night cycling – the time that it takes for the PCE to drop to 80% of its initial value – and energy generation during the lifespan of PSCs based on the analysis of the literature data published from the year of 2013 to 2018. It clearly shows that the lifetime of PSCs is limited to 3000 hours, which is far from that of standard solar cells, i.e. up to 25 years of operational lifetime. In other words, it is urgent to enhance the lifespan of PSCs to meet the high expectations for a newly emerging PV.
 Fig. 1  Summary of literature data published from the year of 2013 to 2018 related to PCE80 (top panel), TS80 (middle panel), and generated energy of PSCs (bottom panel).32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
We will review the measurement methods for the assessment of the operational stability of PSCs. Then we will discuss the most promising materials, devices, and interface engineering approaches to extend the operational lifetime of PSCs.
2. Lifetime evaluation
Most of the studies on the stability of PSCs report the performance measured periodically for a prolonged time using a single current–voltage measurement or JV scan. In between two consecutive JV scans, the devices were either stored in the dark or kept under continuous illumination at open circuit, the so-called “light soaking” test. For organic photovoltaics, the stability testing of devices stored in the dark and measured periodically is referred to as the shelf life testing – ISOS-D-1 protocol.34 However, a testing protocol similar to ISOS-D-1 would not provide a reliable estimation of the PSC stability. Indeed, the efficiency of PSCs as extracted from the JV scan can be different from the actual power output extracted from the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) after a prolonged light soaking or dark storage. The difference between the JV and the MPPT is mainly due to the presence of hysteresis, i.e. the difference in JV curves under forward (from low bias to high bias) and reverse (from high bias to low bias) scans in PSCs and device degradation under continuous illumination.35 In particular, in our recent publication,33 we demonstrated that the lifetime could be overestimated or underestimated depending on the device architecture.
Based on the above discussion, we believe that it is necessary that the research community adopts a standard protocol for stability testing of PSCs. We33 proposed a testing protocol that includes MPPT measurement for at least 150 hours under illumination and testing after dark resting for several hours. The significance of this protocol is that it includes consideration for: (i) the hysteresis in PSCs that makes the JV scans rather ineffective to estimate the actual power output after prolonged ageing. (ii) The “burn-in” time, i.e. non-recoverable permanent degradation occurring at the beginning of the device operation. It is important to note that the “burn-in” time is considered in the ageing protocols of organic solar cells and silicon solar cells as well. (iii) The “reversible losses or gain”, i.e. the efficiency gains or losses that can be obtained by re-measuring the device after resting in the dark. The “reversible losses” in PSCs are widely observed in regular structured PSCs (n-i-p architectures). (iv) A figure of merit for stability, such as the TS80 that provides the time at which the device has degraded to 80% of its initial efficiency. After that, the device should be replaced as more serious degradation mechanisms may start kicking in. The T80 value is well-established for silicon solar cells and thin-film solar cells. This parameter provides accessible information for comparison between different technologies.
Also, Tiihonen et al.36 pointed out the worrying practice that most of the studies in the literature reported data from a single device to conclude about stability – with a lack of statistical analysis. Nevertheless, we are also aware that testing the stability for a statistically significant number of PSCs may be rather impractical on a lab scale. Therefore, we recommend careful consideration before providing the conclusive data from a non-statistical number of devices.
3. Each component in PSCs matters
A highly efficient PSC is generally composed of an effective electron and hole selective contact, and a compact and dense perovskite film. PSCs can be classified into regular (“n-i-p”) and inverted (“p-i-n”) architectures based on the sequence of layers comprising the device. Regular architectures are made by transparent conductive glass (TCO)/electron selective contact (ESC)/perovskite film/hole selective contact (HSC)/metal contact, while inverted structures employ TCO/HSC/perovskite/ESC/metal contact. Under illumination, photo-generated electrons are injected from the perovskite film to the bottom ESC in regular PSCs (“n-i-p”) or the top ESC in inverted PSCs (“p-i-n”). Regular PSCs can be further classified into “mesoporous”, containing a mesoporous ESC, and “planar”, containing a compact ESC. The schematics and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of regular and inverted PSCs are given in Fig. 2.37,38
 Fig. 2  Schematics (top panel) and cross-sectional SEM images (bottom panel) of planar regular PSCs, regular mesoporous PSCs, and planar inverted PSCs with a scale bar of 200 nm.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society. 
3.1 Electron selective materials (ESMs)
An efficient electron selective material (ESM) should meet several criteria, such as high electron mobility, low concentration of deep trap states, good energy alignment with other components in the device, and ideally being inexpensive in production. ESMs can be inorganic semiconductors or organic molecules.

3.1.1 Inorganic electron selective materials. 
Inorganic electron selective materials (ESMs), such as metal oxides, are intrinsically more stable than organic ESMs under the influence of temperature, humidity, oxygen, and UV light. Inorganic ESMs, which normally need high-temperature annealing and processing with polar solvents, are broadly used in “n-i-p” PSCs that allow the deposition of ESMs ahead of the perovskite film. One of the most commonly used inorganic ESMs is titanium dioxide (TiO2).39 In the most efficient configuration, the TiO2 contact is constituted by stacking compact (c-TiO2) and mesoporous (m-TiO2) films.40 There are several ways to deposit the c-TiO2 film, such as spin-coating, spray pyrolysis, or atomic layer deposition (ALD). TiO2 mesoporous film (m-TiO2) is normally deposited from a TiO2 paste, where TiO2 nanoparticles are mixed with solvents, such as ethanol and terpineol and organic linkers, such as ethyl cellulose pre-dissolved in ethanol. In most cases, both c-TiO2 and m-TiO2 need to be annealed at 450 °C to get anatase phase TiO2. A low-temperature deposited TiO2 planar film has also been reported in a few cases.41,42 However, due to the low conductivity in intrinsic TiO2, planar PSCs employing a TiO2 ESM present a huge hysteresis. In contrast, the mesoporous structured PSCs that employ TiO2 mesoporous films enlarge the interface area between the TiO2 nanoparticles and perovskite film, showing significant suppression of the hysteresis.43 Chemical doping, such as with lithium ions (Li+), can enhance the electron conductivity of TiO2,44 which promoted the efficiency of PSCs from 17% for the pristine TiO2 to over 19% for the Li+ doped TiO2 mesoporous film. To date, one of the highest reported efficiencies of 22.1% was achieved by regular PSCs containing m-TiO2.40
However, Leijtens et al.45 found that TiO2 could bring some negative effects to the stability of PSCs under the illumination of UV light. TiO2, with an energy band gap of around 3.2 eV, shows a strong absorbance in the short-wavelength range and is a UV photocatalyst. This led to the oxidation of the absorbed oxygen into oxygen radicals that were highly oxidative, hence resulting in the decomposition of the adjacent perovskite layer.46 One recent study introduced a plant sunscreen material, i.e. sinapoyl malate, between the TiO2 layer and the perovskite film as a scavenger for the oxygen radicals, resulting in a significant enhancement of the PSC stability under UV light exposure.47
In the last two years, another inorganic ESM, i.e. tin oxide (SnO2 or SnOx), was introduced into the PSC system. SnO2 has been applied as an ESM in dye-sensitised solar cells (DSCs) before and has demonstrated its excellent electronic property in a DSC system.48 In 2015, Correa-Baena et al.49 introduced an ALD-prepared SnO2 planar layer in PSCs, and they observed a substantial suppression in the hysteresis compared to TiO2-containing PSCs. Later, Roose et al.50 introduced a Ga-doped SnO2 mesoporous layer (m-SnO2) into PSCs. They measured the stability of the PSCs with periodic “light-soaking” under full spectrum illumination (AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) inside an N2 filled glove box. They found that both m-SnO2 and m-TiO2 based PSCs had a “burn-in” time, showing a rapid drop to 80% within the first 100 hours of “light soaking”. After the “burn-in” time, the m-SnO2 based PSCs stabilised at around 70% of the initial PCE for up to 1000 hours. In contrast, m-TiO2 based PSCs left only 20% of the initial value. After ∼1000 hours of illumination, they stored PSCs in the dark for 200 hours, and then tested the JV curves of these devices again. Differently from the reported “self-healing” of PSCs after dark storage,51 they did not observe any notable recovery in the efficiency, which brings questions regarding the long-term photo-stability (up to 1000 hours continuous illumination) of perovskite compounds and HSCs during the “light soaking” process.


3.1.2 Organic electron selective materials. 
As mentioned above, organic compounds are not as stable as inorganic metal oxides. In most cases, organic compounds need to be stored inside an N2-filled glove box in the dark. Decomposition of organic materials can be triggered by UV light radiation, oxidation in air, and moisture absorption. Because organic ESMs can be processed at low temperatures and dissolved in solvents, such as chlorobenzene, that have a negligible influence on the perovskite films, they are mainly used in inverted (“p-i-n”) structured PSCs, where the ESMs are deposited on top of the perovskite.
Fullerene and its derivatives are the most commonly used organic ESMs because of their well-known excellent electronic conductivity. They are efficient ESMs in organic photovoltaics and are commercially available. Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) and C60 are the most popularly used derivatives of fullerene. PCBM can be deposited from a solution via spin-coating, and C60 can be deposited via thermal evaporation. Both of them have a relatively high hydrophobicity. Some studies replaced fullerene-based ESMs with polymeric ESMs,52 or fluorine functionalized graphene53 that had a stronger hydrophobic property and resulted in enhanced moisture stability for devices stored in the dark in a controlled humid environment and in the “light-soaking” measurement. The most efficient inverted PSC reported so far is based on C60 ESM, with a record of 21.4%.54

3.2 Perovskites
Halide perovskite is the key component in PSCs with a common formula of ABX3, where A is a monovalent cation placed in the octahedral cage consisting of shared corners BX6, B being a divalent metal and X a halide. Methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) based PSCs have achieved extraordinarily high efficiency reaching more than 20%55,56 in recent years. However, they suffer from degradation caused by external factors such as moisture,57 heat,58 oxygen,59 and light.60 Moreover, the synergetic effect of oxygen, heat and photo-illumination speeds-up the process of moisture-induced degradation.61 Using a mixture of halides instead of pure iodide results in more robust moisture stability in the compound.13,62 This is partially because when perovskite is exposed to moisture, the formation energy of the H–I bond is much smaller than that of H–Br and H–Cl, which breaks down the bonding of Pb–I in the crystal structure of the perovskite.63 Moreover, the poor thermal stability of MAPbI3 is mostly attributed to the organic cation, i.e. MA+.64,65 Alloying A-site cations, particularly inorganic cations, i.e. Cs+ (caesium) and Rb+ (rubidium), are found to significantly enhance the thermal stability of the perovskite compounds.29,66 The influence of cations and halides on the intrinsic thermal and moisture stability of perovskites is illustrated in Scheme 1. In this section, we will discuss the large family of perovskites of mixed halides and cations, mainly focusing on their vulnerability to photo-induced phase segregation, and thermal and moisture-induced composition degradation, and present a critical review on the mechanisms that cause degradation in perovskite and efforts made towards the enhancement of the intrinsic stability of perovskite materials.
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the intrinsic stability and bandgap of ABX3 against moisture and heat influenced by cations and halides. The trends are extrapolated from the literature discussed in the main text. Selected references as the representative of each perovskite composition are labelled on the guidelines. 

3.2.1 Halide-mixed perovskite. 
As we discussed at the beginning of this section, perovskites of mixed halides exhibit better moisture stability than iodide only perovskites. Also, the optical bandgap of perovskites can be easily tuned by adjusting the halide ratio (i.e. I−, Br−, Cl−) (Fig. 3). This is because the conduction and valence band positions of perovskites are largely determined by the hybrid orbitals of lead and halide. Thus, the changes in radii and the electron properties of halides from I− to Cl− can bring significant changes in the bandgap of the compounds.69Fig. 3a–e shows the systematic studies of the dependency of the bandgap of MAPbX3 (where X is I/Br/Cl) on halide ratios, ranging from 1.54 eV (MAPbI3) to 2.44 eV (MAPbCl3).67 More importantly, in the broad range of bandgaps, all the mixed halide perovskites present a sharp absorption onset with a strong emission peak, which indicates the direct semiconductor nature of perovskites at room temperature with a high absorption coefficient. The superior optoelectronic properties of mixed halide perovskite were recently identified to be determined by the iodine chemistry in perovskite compounds. It was found that in the prototype of MAPbI3, the less abundant iodine defects and MA defects were identified as the source of photochemically active deep electron and hole traps in MAPbI3.70–72 Bromine and chlorine doping of MAPbI3 helped to inactive hole traps. Mixed halide perovskites have been demonstrated successfully in photovoltaic applications as well as other optoelectronic devices, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs).73
 Fig. 3  (a) Digital photos; (b) absorption spectra; (c) absorption coefficients; (d) steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films with mixed I/Br/Cl halides; (e) dependence of the bandgap extracted from (b–d) on the ratio of halides (I/Cl) of mixed halide perovskites.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015, American Society of Chemistry. (f) PL spectra of MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite films over 45 s in 5 s increments under 457 nm, 15 mW cm−2 light at 300 K; (g) normalised PL spectra of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 films with x ranging from 0 to 1 after illuminating for 5–10 minutes with 457 nm light at the intensity of 10–100 mW cm−2.68 Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although mixed halide perovskites present superior stability to iodide only perovskites, the mixed halides composition brings a risk of halide segregation under continuous light illumination.68Fig. 3f shows the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite over 45 s in 5 s increments under 457 nm, 15 mW cm−2 light at 300 K.68 The decrease in the intensity of the emission peak assigned to mixed halide perovskite and the appearance of the emission peak assigned to MAPbBr3 perovskite are clearly observed. Phase segregation induced by halide segregation generates new defects in the bulk of perovskite films and leads to fast degradation in photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Although the phase segregation can be recovered after storing in the dark for some minutes, it largely reduces the output power of PSCs, mostly due to the loss of Voc. Fortunately, as shown in Fig. 3g, Br content of less than 20% in MAPb(IxBr1−x)3 does not show phase segregation after illuminating for 5–10 minutes with 457 nm light at the intensity of 10–100 mW cm−2, whereas a Br content of over 20% resulted in a second emission peak located in the shorter wavelength range of higher band gap.68 As discussed in the following sections, the mixed halide ratio will be adjusted in conjunction with the mixed cations to stabilize the perovskite phase and to reach the ideal band gap in perovskite compounds.68
Meanwhile, the origin of halide segregation in the mixed halide perovskites is still under debate. It was suggested by Brivio et al.74 that halide segregation was induced by photo-illumination, while Bischak et al.75 found that the interaction between the photo-generated charge carriers and the polarons induced lattice strains that might promote halide segregation in the film. They observed that compared to the organic cations, such as MA+; the less polarised Cs+ in the A-site showed a better photo-stability in mixed halide CsPbX3 material.75 Even the mixed cation of Cs/MA in Br-rich perovskite, i.e. Cs0.39MA0.61Pb(I0.15Br0.85)3 was reported not to experience any phase segregation.76 Another work reported that a significant bulk strain was found in the mixed halide MAPb(IxBr1−x)3,77 which led to the thermodynamically preferred segregation states.77,78 This observation was then supported by the pronounced mismatch in lattice between cubic MAPbBr3 and tetragonal MAPbI3.79 It was also found that perovskite films with irregularity in the microstructure, i.e. non-compact and non-dense films were more likely to experience halide segregation, especially those with a large abundance of grain boundaries.
Grain boundaries are preferable sites for halide segregation for two possible reasons: (i) defects at the boundary can be an easy pathway for halide migration,77,80 and (ii) lattice mismatch between iodide and bromide-rich material takes place only at the grain boundary where the energy cost is lower than in bulk.81 Advanced imaging techniques, such as PL mapping82 and cathodoluminescence (CL) topology mapping overlaying with an SEM image75 showed more pronounced halide clusters near the grain boundaries. After that, it has been reported that the improvement of the crystal quality of the film suppresses this phenomenon.81,83 However, the halide segregation was also observed in single crystals by Hoke et al.68 They concluded that the abundance of defects and grain boundaries was not a prerequisite for halide segregation.68 In contrast, several studies reported that defect reduction helped to enhance the photostability.80,83 Single crystals are also found to be more stable in regards to photo-induced phase segregation.82 This could be related to the fact that ion migration occuring in single crystals required higher activation energy than in polycrystalline films.84


3.2.2 Cation-mixed perovskite. 

Fig. 4a shows the scheme of the crystal structure of ABX3 with the molecular structure of the three most commonly used monovalent cations, i.e. Cs+, methylammonium (MA+), and formamidinium (FA+). Fig. 4b shows the Goldschmidt tolerance factor of a series of monovalent cations in the A site of the APbI3 perovskite. Goldschmidt tolerance factor (denoted as t) depends on the effective radii of A, B, and X in the crystal structure (Fig. 4a), and is often used to assess the possible formation of a three dimensional (3D) ABX3 perovskite crystal. It can be expressed as eqn (1). (1)Cations that show a tolerance factor in the range of 0.8–1 are expected to be able to form a 3D perovskite crystal. As shown in Fig. 4b, Cs+, MA+, and FA+ have the right radius for APbI3 3D perovskite, but Rb+ is beyond the minimum limit of this parameter. Indeed, it was found that CsPbI3 could be formed by annealing at a relatively high temperature of 300 °C.87–89 In contrast, RbPbI3 perovskite did not exist in practice; annealing at high temperatures melted the material (Fig. 4b).86
 Fig. 4  (a) Scheme of the crystal structure of ABX3 perovskite, where the A site can be Cs+, MA+ or FA+.85 Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Tolerance factor plot for a range of monovalent cations at the A site in APbI3, with the digital photos of CsPbI3 and RbPbI3 films at temperatures of 28 °C, 380 °C and 460 °C.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Influence of Cs+ in (c) the crystal structure and (d) optical bandgap extracted from absorption spectra and steady-state PL spectra of FAMA-double perovskite, i.e. FA0.83MA0.17PbI0.83Br0.17.29 Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Science. (e) MPP tracking of quadruple cation perovskite, RbCsFAMA devices measured at 85 °C in an inert atmosphere.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
(i) Double cation perovskite. 
Although the organic cation has no direct contribution to the valence band and conduction band of the material, its shape and size affect the size of a unit cell and the bond angle of Pb–I that in turn influences the bandgap. Indeed, FAPbI3 perovskite has a smaller bandgap of 1.48 eV85 than that of MAPbI3 (around 1.55 eV), and it is closer to the optimal bandgap set by the Shockley–Queisser limit for single junction solar cells.90 Unfortunately, FAPbI3 transforms into a yellow, non-photovoltaic phase (δ-phase) at room temperature from the active photovoltaic phase (α-phase) annealed at 160 °C.91 The thermodynamic instability in α-phase FAPbI3 perovskite is due to the large strain in the α-phase crystal structure that promotes the phase transition to the strain-free δ-phase structure. Experimentally, it has been found that introducing smaller cations, such as MA+ or Cs+ relaxed the strain and stabilised the α-phase.66,92 This was then supported by theoretical calculations on Cs+ doped FAPbI3.93 Due to the large difference in atomic arrangement and volume of the unit cells, it was difficult for δ-phase CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 to accommodate each other in one crystal structure, whereas their α-phases shared a similar value of the sizes of unit cells and thus were thermodynamically suitable for mixing.94 In particular, CsFA-double cation perovskite, i.e. FA0.83Cs0.17PbI0.83Br0.17 exhibits a suitable bandgap of ∼1.74 eV and robust thermal stability and photo-stability and has been a good choice for the “top cell” in a stack with silicon solar cells.95
(ii) Triple cation perovskite. 
The stabilisation of α-phase FAPbI3 by MA+ and Cs+ inspired the triple cation system. Saliba et al.29 developed the triple cation perovskite CsFAMA-PSC (Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3). Fig. 4c and d show the enhanced crystallinity and slightly increased optical band gap under the influence of Cs+ in the triple cation perovskite. Moreover, compared to the double cation perovskite, the triple cation perovskite exhibited a largely enhanced thermal stability and moisture stability due to the presence of the inorganic cation. Furthermore, the triple cation perovskite deposited by the anti-solvent method showed high crystallinity and facile formation of monolithic grains. Adopting the triple cation perovskite system, Saliba et al.29 achieved a stabilised PCE of over 21% with a better reproducibility compared to MAFA-devices. The deposition of the MAFA-double cation perovskite is found to be sensitive to the fabrication conditions. A small vibration in the temperature of the glove box can bring a huge impact on the final quality of perovskite films. Integrating Cs+ into the system pushes black phase perovskite formation into a new energy-favourable equilibrium. Moreover, CsFAMA-PSCs exhibited a significant enhancement in device stability, holding 90% of its initial efficiency after 250 hours of constant illumination in MPPT measurement, while MAFA-PSCs degraded to less than 50% of its initial value after 100 hours of constant illumination in the MPPT measurement conducted at room temperature and in a N2 atmosphere.29
(iii) Quadruple cation perovskite. 
As shown in Fig. 4b, only Cs+, MA+ and FA+ can form the 3D perovskite structure of APbI3. Other cations of smaller radius, such as Rb+ and K+ (potassium), cannot form the APbI3 structure. However, these cations are demonstrated to be beneficial for the suppression of hysteresis in photovoltaic devices of a CsFAMA-triple cation perovskite and contribute to the enhanced thermal stability and photo-stability of perovskite compounds. Saliba et al.86 first developed the quadruple cation system by incorporating Rb+ as the fourth cation in the RbCsFAMA-quadruple cation perovskite. In comparison to the CsFAMA-triple cation perovskite, the quadruple cation perovskite exhibited a higher PCE and better thermal stability with a T80 of 2500 hours for the MPPT measurement conducted at 85 °C and N2 atmosphere (Fig. 4e). Abdi-Jalebi et al.96 incorporated potassium as the fourth cation into the KCsFAMA-quadruple cation perovskite system. They observed a significant enhancement in the luminescence yields of the perovskite films. In the case of both RbCsFAMA- and KCsFAMA-quadruple cation perovskites, the hysteresis of the devices were considerably suppressed,97–100 suggesting their impact on ion migration and trap filling.43
Although the introduction of Rb+ and K+ cations into CsFAMA-triple cation perovskite leads to high stability in the compounds and devices, the position of these cations in the crystal structure of a perovskite compound is still under debate. A recent study by Cao et al.100 using density functional theory (DFT) showed that Rb+ could occupy both the A site and interstitial site in the ABX3, as schematically shown in Fig. 5b and d, respectively. The formation energy for Rb+ to be at the A site and interstitial sites was about the same, whereas smaller alkali cations, i.e. K+, Na+, and Li+ were more preferred to be at the interstitial sites. Fig. 5c shows that the energy cost of the interstitial occupancy depends on the concentration of the dopants. Fig. 5e shows the computer calculation results based on DFT that interstitial K+ cations increased the energy barrier for iodide migration. They were speculated to block the iodide diffusion path, alter the FA+ cation orientation, and increase the formation energy for iodine vacancies. Blocking iodide migration was found to reduce hysteresis in the device significantly. In good agreement, Son et al.99 calculated that interstitial K+ cations decreased the electron accumulation and prevented the formation of Frenkel pair defects of iodide, which contributed to the suppression of hysteresis. Furthermore, MAPbI3 with K+ cations was found to have a lower trap density, which resulted in a great reduction in hysteresis.99
 Fig. 5  Thermodynamic and kinetic properties of alkali cation incorporation (Cs+, Rb+, K+, Na+, and Li+) in FAPbI3. (a) Illustration of the possible locations of these cations in FAPbI3: (b) at the A site substitution and (d) at the interstitial site. (c) The formation energy of the alkali cation to be at the A site substitution and an interstitial site. (d) Illustration of iodide diffusion pathways, using K+ at an interstitial site of FAPbI3 perovskite as an example. (e) Diffusion barriers for iodide migration in FAPbI3 with (red line) and without (black line) interstitial K+.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 
However, several recent studies found that Rb+ and K+ were segregated at the grain boundaries96 and surface101,102 of the perovskite films. They helped to passivate defects101–103 and facilitate effective charge transport.98,104 Based on the temperature dependent solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) result, Kubicki et al.103 discovered a strong interaction between Cs+ and [PbI6]4− during temperature variation, implying Cs at the A site of the halide perovskite 3D structure. Also, the depth probe Hard X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) found that Rb+ had a higher concentration at the surface of the perovskite film rather than in the bulk.101,102 Abdi-Jalebi et al.96 suggested that K+ cations had an interaction with bromide in the film, particularly surrounding the grains. More specifically, K+ depleted bromine from the perovskite structure and increased the I/Br ratio inside the bulk of the material. Besides, using KI in the precursor led to an iodide-rich environment before final film formation, which resulted in fewer halide vacancies,80 reductions in the non-radiative recombination, and suppression in halide migration.96 Similar results were observed in iodide only perovskites as well.99,105


3.2.3 Inorganic perovskite CsPbX3. 
(i) CsPbI3. 
Although the efficiency of PSCs with the state-of-the-art perovskite, i.e. CsFAMA-triple cation perovskite has skyrocketed to over 20%,86 the thermal stability of PSCs at 85 °C – the industrial evaluation temperature for mature photovoltaic technologies – is still very poor, with fast degradation in photovoltaic performance. Part of the reason is due to the decomposition of perovskites that contain organic cations, especially MA+.58 In contrast, inorganic perovskite, CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 exhibits excellent thermal stability.109 In the pioneering work of Eperon et al.,110 they found that although the photovoltaic phase of CsPbI3 was stable in an inert atmosphere at room temperature, moisture exposure transformed the material into a non-photoactive δ-phase.110,111
Nonetheless, several strategies have been developed to stabilise the α-phase (cubic phase) of CsPbI3. One example is to mix poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) with a CsPbI3 precursor before film deposition. As shown in Fig. 6a, PVP is proposed to interact with CsPbI3 nuclei, which increases the surface charge, and reduces the surface tension of the CsPbI3 nanocrystals.106 The non-encapsulated PVP-CsPbI3-PSCs retained 75% of its initial PCE after 500 hours in the ambient air with the relative humidity (RH) at 45–55%. Swarnkar et al.112 used methyl acetate (MeOAc) as a ligand for CsPbI3 quantum dots, which were stable for more than one month under ambient conditions. Also, small crystals also stabilise the α-phase of this material. Using the sulfobetaine zwitterion in the perovskite precursor results in 30 nm stable α-CsPbI3 crystals thanks to the hindrance of the formation of the δ-phase at room temperature before the annealing step (Fig. 6b).107 Devices using this method reached more than 11% efficiency and maintained 85% of the initial efficiency after storage in air for 30 days. Another novel method is to employ 2D perovskite utilising 2.5% bication ethylenediamine cations (EDA2+) in the CsPbI3 system to stabilise its α-phase.113 The (110) layer of EDAPbI4 acted as a separator of the crystal units and resulted in a nearly 12% efficient device, retaining 80% of its initial efficiency after storage in a dry air box for one month. Recent work by Wang et al.108 demonstrated that high quality α-CsPbI3 films stable for two months in a dry environment (Fig. 6c) could be realised by reducing the evaporation rate of the solvent in the precursor (in this case dimethyl sulfoxide). Using this solution-controlled growth method, they reported 14.7% efficiency in CsPbI3 devices.
 Fig. 6  Strategies to stabilise photoactive α-phase CsPbI3. (a) Surface passivation via PVP:106 (i) interaction of CsPbI3 with acylamino groups in PVP, (ii) PbI2 (blue shape) and Cs (purple ball) assembled around PVP to form a metastable state, (iii) after the assembly, the CsPbI3 nanocrystals attached around PVP, and (iv) PVP at the surface reduced the surface tension of the CsPbI3 crystal to stabilise the α-CsPbI3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. CC BY 4.0. (b) Reducing crystal sizes by sulfobetaine zwitterion:107 (i–iii) without zwitterion, the δ-phase formed rapidly after spin coating at room temperature, and (iv–vi): the zwitterion induced the amorphous phase before annealing, which induced the formation of small nanocrystals of 30 nm with the cubic phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The CsPbI3 perovskite preserved its α-phase in a dry atmosphere for two months, prepared by using a solution-controlled growth method to reduce the evaporation rate of the solvent.108 Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. CC BY 4.0. 
As regard to the crystal phase of CsPbI3 perovskite at room temperature, more recent studies showed that the photovoltaic phase of CsPbI3 at room temperature was an orthorhombic phase or β-phase rather than a cubic phase or α-phase.114 More interestingly, the titled orthorhombic phase of CsPbI3 perovskite was found to be thermodynamically stable at room temperature. This discovery will help to promote the development of highly stable CsPbI3 devices.
(ii) CsPb(IxBr1−x)3. 
It has been shown that mixing bromide with iodide in the inorganic perovskite CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 can also stabilise the photovoltaic phase of the material. This is possible because bromide of smaller ionic radius extends the tolerance factor for CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 compounds to stay in the cubic crystal structure. Moreover, the commonly used CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite with the molar ratio of iodide to bromide at 2:1 exhibited good stability against moisture.115–117 To investigate the influence of bromide on the phase stability of CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskite, our recent work conducted a systematic study on a broad range of bromide contents. We found that compounds with a bromide content of at least 40% exhibited strong phase stability during the test for storage in ambient atmosphere for over 100 hours.118 Compounds with a bromide content of less than 40%, in spite of maintaining the α-phase in the first ten hours, transformed to the δ-phase after storage in ambient atmosphere for 100 hours. By using the stable composition, i.e. CsPb(I0.6Br0.4)3, our devices achieved over 10% efficiency. In addition to the phase stability, Beal et al.119 studied the photo-induced halide segregation in CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskites. They found that CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskites with x < 0.4 showed negligible halide segregation under 1 sun illumination. The higher tolerance against halide segregation compared to MAPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskites is due to the low polarizability of Cs+ at the A site in APbI3, as discussed in Section 3.2.1.76 Yet, ion migration in particular halide migration still exists in CsPb(IxBr1−x)3,120 which could lead to hysteresis43 and reversible losses,121 as reported in the hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite photovoltaics.
(iii) CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 of mixed compositions. 
Considering the tolerance factor, incorporating the A+ site cation of larger ionic radius size and B+ site cation of smaller ionic radius can be a route to enhance the phase-stability in inorganic CsPb(IxBr1−x)3 perovskites. Hu et al.122 partially substituted lead with bismuth, which boosted the tolerance factor from 0.81 of α-CsPbI3 to 0.84 of α-CsPb1−yBiyI3. This increase in tolerance factor promoted the phase stability. By optimising the ratio, the efficiency of CsPb0.96Bi0.04I3 PSCs reached more than 13% and 68% of the initial PCE was retained after 168 hours measured under ambient conditions (RH ≈ 55%).


3.2.4 2D perovskites and 2D/3D perovskites. 
In addition to developing resilient 3D perovskite materials, another approach is to employ 2D perovskites. The evolution of 2D perovskites to 3D perovskites is illustrated in Fig. 7a using an example of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (BA: n-butylammonium, C4H9NH3; n = 1, 2, 3, 4) perovskite family. This type of perovskite was reported by Stoumpos and Cao et al.,83 and they found that 2D perovskites exhibited superior moisture stability over 3D MAPbI3 perovskite. The band gap of the layered perovskite family can be tuned from 2.43 eV (n = 1), to 2.17 eV (n = 2), to 2.03 eV (n = 3), to 1.91 eV (n = 4). However, as the value of ‘n’ increases, it gets difficult to collect pure 2D perovskite phase. In another work,125 they applied the 2D perovskite for the n = 3 compound in solar cells and obtained an initial PCE of 4.02%.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the crystal structure of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite family.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) GIWAXS maps for (i) polycrystalline room-temperature-cast and (ii) near-single-crystalline hot-cast (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films and (iii) schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (1) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal.123 Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure.124 Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Similarly, Smith et al.126 reported (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (PEA: C6H5(CH2)2NH3+) perovskite and got a PCE of 4.73%. One reason behind the low efficiency of 2D perovskite devices is the relatively large band gap of the 2D perovskite. The second reason is the non-favoured crystal orientation of 2D perovskite. Ruddlesden–Popper phase layered perovskites, (RNH3)2(A)n−1BnX3n+1, where RNH3 are large alkyl ammonium cations, tend to form a layered structure parallel to the contacts in planar cells. The non-favoured crystal orientation inhibits the charge transport by the large organic cations that act like insulating spacing layered between the conducting inorganic slabs. To solve this problem, Tsai et al.123 developed a hot casting method that resulted in the crystallographic planes of the inorganic perovskite component along the (202) facet that had a strongly preferential out-of-plane alignment concerning the contact. The GISAXS (grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering) measurement showed that the perovskite film behaved similar to single crystals (Fig. 7b). This method helped to promote the PCE to 12.52%. Later, Zhang et al.127 adopted the hot-cast method for 2D perovskite deposition and doped the compound with Cs+, which led to a PCE of 13.7%. Chen's group developed another method to control the crystal orientation of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite.128 They found that the addition of a small amount of ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) in the precursor solution resulted in the vertically orientated highly crystalline 2D perovskite using the one-step spin-coating method. In this study, the PCE of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 PSCs was pushed to 11%.
The device application of another type of layered perovskite, expressed as (RNH3)2(MA)nPbnI3n+2 was reported by Wang et al.129 Different from (RNH3)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites, this type of perovskite exhibited preferred crystal orientation along the (002) facet, which indicated the growth of crystals along the Pb2I8 inorganic bones. Thus, it provides the chance for efficient charge transport with suppressed influence caused by the long organic cation. Pb2I8 perovskite annealed at 100 °C for 15 min leads to a very stable film as characterised by XRD. However, Pb2I8 perovskite deposited on TiO2 planar film exhibited a severe bulk recombination. The employment of TiO2 mesoporous film showed a significant suppression of bulk recombination and helped to promote the efficiency to over 5%. The relatively low efficiency of the Pb2I8 perovskite with the favoured crystal orientation could be partially attributed to the strongly bound excitons that were reported in the layered perovskite.130
While in early reports, 2D perovskites demonstrated robust stability measured by UV-Vis and XRD spectroscopy, until recently, the device stability of 2D perovskites has not been fully discussed. This is because of the low efficiency in 2D PSCs and the hysteresis presented in their JV scans. Tsai et al.123 examined the stability of their highly efficient 2D perovskite devices by storing them at 1 sun constant illumination for the photo-stability test and under RH of 65%. They found that, under constant illumination, the efficiency of MAPbI3 perovskite devices with and without encapsulation dropped to 40% of their initial value in approximately 10 hours. In the humidity test, the MAPbI3 devices with and without encapsulation degraded even faster. In contrast, the non-encapsulated 2D perovskite devices maintained 60% of their initial value, while no degradation in efficiency was observed in the encapsulated 2D perovskite devices for over 2000 hours constant illumination.
A rational design of 2D/3D heterostructured perovskites demonstrated a successful mixture of 2D and 3D perovskites. Wang et al.124 introduced BA+ cations into BAx(FA0.83Cs0.417)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite (Fig. 7c). They found that the ratio between the long organic cation (BA+) and small cations (FA+, Cs+) had a significant influence on the final morphology of the perovskite films. The large presence of BA+ cations in the compound led to plate-like crystals in the film. Moreover, they conducted a quantitative analysis of the device stability by fitting the post “burn-in” section of the PCE to a straight line and extrapolated the curve back to zero time. They calculated that T80 was 1005 h for 2D/3D mixed devices, which was about 1.5 times that of FACs-double cation devices.

3.3 Hole selective materials (HSMs)
HSMs are key constituents of high-performance PSCs, since they ensure an efficient charge extraction from the perovskite layer, and prevent the direct contact between perovskite and the metal electrode in regular structured devices. HSMs are also intrinsically affecting the device stability of PSCs. Designing low-cost, efficient, and stable HSMs represents a challenge to be urgently addressed.131

3.3.1 Inorganic HSMs. 
The choice of inorganic HSMs is restricted to good energetic interfacing to halide perovskites. Narrowing down to the state-of-the-art halide perovskite compositions, i.e. MAPbI3 and CsFAMA, this criterion translates into a valence band level close to −5.4 eV.132–134 A deeper valence band would result in an energetic barrier for hole extraction, while a shallower one would decrease the device built-in potential impacting surface recombination.135
Among eligible materials there are binary transition metal oxides (NiOx, CuOx, CrOx, CoOx), tertiary oxides (LiCoO2, NiCoO4, delafossite p-type TCO), and copper-based materials (CuI and CuSCN).136,137 Graphene-like (2D) materials, such as graphene oxide (GO), reduced GO (rGO), and MoS2 have been reported as excellent anodic interlayers. Extended application of inorganic HSMs in n-i-p architecture is still limited by obvious difficulties in processing these materials on top of perovskite layers, due to solvents or processing temperature incompatibility. Therefore, p-i-n architecture remains the platform of choice for testing implementation of inorganic HSMs, with efficiencies now competitive with n-i-p architecture.138,139
(i) Interface chemical stability. 
The primary requirement for choosing a selective contact is its chemical compatibility with metal halide perovskite. Generally, the p-type conductivity of inorganic materials is associated with their defect chemistry and the consequent mixture of oxidation states into the crystal lattice.141 This characteristic makes these materials chemically and electrochemically reactive. We believe that more efforts are needed to understand the interfacial chemistry at the HSM/perovskite interface. It is experimentally challenging given the nature of the buried interface in p-i-n PSCs. Computer simulation represents a powerful tool to gain insights into this buried interface. An oxygen-rich MAPbI3−2xOx phase has been suggested through simulation, and also evidenced from XPS depth profiling investigation at MAPbI3/NiO.140,142 More recently the occurrence of Ni–I bonds was calculated140 (Fig. 8a). Similar Ti–I–Pb bonds were reported at the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface.143,144 This kind of interfacial interaction could affect surface charge accumulation that could induce hysteresis and jeopardise stability.145,146 A detailed investigation through XPS analysis on films with thickness ranging from 1.5 Å to a few nanometres found Mo4+ at the interface between CH3NH3PbI3 and MoOx,147 although the native electronic structure of MoOx is constituted by Mo6+ and Mo5+ oxidation states. The formation of MoO2 at the MAPbI3/MoO3 interface negatively affected device operation and a chemical decoupling through a Spiro-OMeTAD interlayer (MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3) was needed to overcome the occurrence of interfacial redox. Acik et al.148 investigated chemistry reaction at the interface of GO and the perovskite precursor solution. They reported a chemical reduction of GO through halides. The process affected the properties of GO as substrates for halide perovskite growth and lead to possibly detrimental oxygen-induced defects at the GO/perovskite interface. Understanding these interactions is an essential condition for the advancement of research in halide perovskite photovoltaics, and can reveal otherwise hidden degradation mechanisms.
 Fig. 8  (a) Ni–I bonds at the interface region of NiO/MAPbI3 calculated from DFT (red sphere stands for O, grey for Ni, purple for I, light blue for N, brown for C, and pink for H). (b) Scheme for Li–NiO based p-i-n structured devices. (c) Energy diagram for each component in the device and (d) Jsc time evolution of the MAPbI3/LiNiO device measured at different light intensities.140 Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
(ii) Photo-stability. 
Back in 2015, Chen et al.149 reported Li+, Mg2+ co-doped NiO HSM in p-i-n structured PSCs that retained 90% of their initial efficiency after constant illumination at AM1.5G one sun for 1000 h. The introduction of foreign atoms, usually in the atomic percentage range between 0.1–10%, does not only affect the optoelectronic properties of the inorganic semiconductor, but also influences its crystallinity, morphology (i.e. surface roughness), and surface energy. The influence of foreign atoms is more crucial in p-i-n device architectures as the bottom inorganic HSM affects the film formation and quality of the halide perovskite. Nie et al.140 deposited MAPbI3 on lithium doped NiO (Li:NiO), and observed a superior crystallinity and micro-strain reduction in perovskite film compared to that of PEDOT:PSS. The scheme of device architecture and energy alignment among components of the device are given in Fig. 8b and c. Their devices showed robust photostability for continuous illumination at high light intensities of up to 10 sun (Fig. 8d). Also, the Voc of their devices reaches a stabilised value extremely quickly in less than one second, while usually it is observed that the Voc of PSCs increases in the first few minutes and then becomes stabilised. The light-soaking induced increase in Voc recently has been correlated with a strain reduction in the perovskite crystal structure,150 and the chemical interaction between the surface halide in the perovskite film and the fullerene at the cathode.151,152
Another strategy is to reduce the UV-light soaking for perovskite. In p-i-n architecture, this can be realised by employing an HSM of relatively narrow bandgap. Hua et al.153 introduced delafossite-type CuCrO2 into MAPbI3 p-i-n structured devices that showed a high hole mobility of 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 that was two orders of magnitude higher than that of NiO (0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1), leading to improved hole extraction and transport, and an increase in FF and Voc. More importantly, the relatively low band gap (2.9 eV) of CuCrO2 shielded MAPbI3 from UV-light, leading to strongly improved long-term stability under UV exposure. After 300 h of UV-light exposure, they observed the feature peak of PbI2 in XRD measurement of NiO based devices, and a significant decrease in Jsc. In contrast, they found that CuCrO2 based devices maintained over 90% of the initial value after 1000 h of illumination under UV light.
(iii) Thermal stability. 
The accelerated ageing test has been a popular tool for evaluating the lifetime of silicon solar cells and polymer solar cells. It requires measuring the devices at an increased temperature, such as 85 °C. Islam et al.154 studied the acceleration factor, K, of 15% efficiency NiO/MAPbI3/PCBM/AZO/Ag devices, under the assumption of an Arrhenius model, defined by the equation: (2)where Ea is the activation energy for the degradation processes in electron volts (eV), and kB is the Boltzmann constant. By measuring the MPPT for 1000 h at two temperatures, 30 °C and 85 °C, they estimated the activation energy to be around 0.3 eV, which is similar to the value obtained for polymer solar cells.155 The value of activation energy adopted from the Arrhenius model is highly dependent on the materials. It relates to the morphology change or composition change at increased temperatures. Chiang et al.156 observed negligible loss after five days at 60 °C for LiCoO2 HSM, but their devices started to degrade at over 90 °C, which was largely due to the low thermal stability of the MAPbI3 perovskite. In both studies, the authors compared the device stability with PEDOT:PSS-based devices and found superior stability in inorganic HSM-based devices. Ouyang et al.157 employed low temperature processed NiCo2O4 of high hole mobility in p-i-n architecture. This material achieved an efficiency of over 18%, which is highly competitive for NiO. Remarkably, the devices without encapsulation retained over 90% in MPPT measurement for 500 h under AM 1.5 G 1 sun illumination under ambient conditions.
Limited studies have been reported employing inorganic HSCs in n-i-p structured devices. One pioneering work in this field was conducted by Arora et al.,158 who applied CuSCN in n-i-p devices. Surprisingly, CuSCN spin coated from diethyl sulphide did not bring noticeable damage to the beneath perovskite film. Rather, they found that an rGO interlayer was critical for the CuSCN/Au interface to avoid oxidisation of gold by thiocyanate anions under the influence of light. Amazingly, their devices maintained 95% of their initial efficiency after 1000 h MPPT measurement at 60 °C in N2 atmosphere. Besides, a few studies employed NiO nanoparticle ink as a route to deposit inorganic HSCs in n-i-p structured devices.159 Yet the efficiency lags far behind that of p-i-n structured devices.
(iv) Reverse bias stability. 
One recent work conducted by Bowring et al.160 discussed the reverse bias stability of devices ITO/NiO/CsFAMA perovskite/C60/SnO2/ITO. They found that shaded cells in the module were put into reverse bias by the illuminated cells, which was most likely due to tunnelling mediated by mobile ions. During this process, series resistance increased while Voc decreased. Infrequent random shading, such as from clouds could not be an issue. However, daily shading caused by a tree or other nearby stationary objects could create a serious pathway to device degradation for residential application. Rajagopal et al.161 reported that a similar phenomenon was specific to the NiO/MAPbI3 interface, yet not observed in the presence of a PEDOT:PSS interlayer between NiO and perovskite. The authors believed that the reverse bias behaviour was attributed to the formation of a transient tunnel junction at the NiO/MAPbI3 interface. More efforts in this regard are needed to examine the reverse bias stability of devices of different architectures and components.


3.3.2 Organic HSMs. 
(i) Instability in organic HSMs. 
Most of the state-of-the-art HSMs rely on organic small-molecules and polymers. Small molecules, having distinct structures and molecular weights, are the best option when high purity and yields are desired in industrial production.95 On the other hand, polymeric HSMs are preferred for their relatively good thermal and mechanical stability, higher hole mobility, and easy processing. Fig. 9 illustrates the molecular structure of the most commonly used organic HSMs in PSCs. Typically, organic HSMs are based on a triphenylamine (TPA) moiety, due to the presence of electron-rich nitrogen atoms, which minimises the intermolecular distance leading to non-planarity of the TPA system. This ultimately results in the formation of amorphous materials, a beneficial feature for HSMs to ensure a good electronic contact to the perovskite surface.162 Among the small molecules, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-bifluorene (Spiro-OMeTAD) is a TPA-based HSM adopted in the great majority of the studies first on solid-state DSSCs163 and later on PSCs as well because the PSC efficiencies achieved with it have been rarely attained or exceeded with other small molecules. As for the polymeric HSMs, poly-[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) was the first one tested in PSCs and still the material leading to the champion PSCs with world record efficiency.164 However, these two materials are far from being the optimal choice. Both are prohibitively expensive (∼300 $ per g for Spiro-OMeTAD and 1903.5 $ per g for PTAA)95,165 because of their onerous multistep synthetic schemes and the costly purification steps.166
 Fig. 9  Key examples of (a) small molecules and (b) polymeric HSMs for highly efficient and stable PSCs. The structures of the two most common reference materials, Spiro-OMeTAD (small molecule) and PTAA (polymer), are also included in (a and b). 
Moreover, pristine Spiro-OMeTAD, as most of the organic HSMs, shows modest hole mobility and conductivity (1.67 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 3.54 × 10−7 S cm−1, respectively),167 thus requiring chemical p-dopants to enhance the hole conductivity and thus the efficiency of PSCs. Commonly, lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide salt (LiTFSI) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP) are used as dopants with Spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA as well, to enhance the photovoltaic performance.168 When comparing the electrical JV and impedance spectroscopy responses of PSCs based on small molecule (Spiro-OMeTAD) or polymeric HSMs (poly(3-hexylthiophene 2,5-diyl), P3HT) with and without chemical doping, Ulfa et al.169 found out that the effect of doping on the performance has much higher weight in the case of small molecular HSMs. The PSC performance is limited by the HSM layer resistance and by the charge recombination at the HSM/perovskite interface. However, the presence of a hydrophilic dopant, namely LiTFSI, accelerates the degradation in the photovoltaic performance of the devices.170 Thus it is not a preferred choice when aiming for highly stable devices. Besides the negative influence caused by the dopant, a low glass transition point in HSMs will lead to poor thermal stability of PSCs in the accelerated ageing test.162 In the following, we will give a few examples of dopant-free HSMs and discuss the thermal stability of HSMs and their influence on device stability.
(ii) Dopant-free HSMs. 
A rich variety of organic materials have been proposed to replace Spiro-OMeTAD and other dopant-based HSMs, to improve the moisture resiliency and the overall PSC stability.171,179–182 Such dopant-free HSMs have a good charge transport characteristic in pristine form and appropriate energy levels to avoid the additional requirement for doping to achieve an efficient charge extraction.

Table 1 summarises the most representative recent examples of organic dopant-free HSMs, leading to the highest performance of the corresponding PSCs regarding efficiencies and stability. It is worth noting that a fair comparison between the HSMs is difficult, especially considering the lack of standard and widely adopted testing protocols for characterising PSCs and assessing their stability.33,183
Table 1 Summary of the most efficient dopant-free organic HSMs reported in the literature




Key moieties or composition
Advantages
Code
Efficiency
Stability
Ref.




D-π-A: triazatruxene donor-thiophene-based multiple conjugated arms and malonitrile acceptor
Face-on stacking organization on perovskite, which favors vertical charge carrier transport
KR321
19%
60% vs. 20% of initial PCE for KR312 and Spiro-OMeTAD after 650 h constant illumination in N2 atmosphere.

171



D-π-A: a rigid quinolizino acridine and a flexible triphenylamine donors with akyl-substituted terthiophene, and malononitrile as an electron acceptor
Suitable HOMO level and high intrinsic hole mobility
FA-CN and TPA-CN
18.9% (FA-CN)
65% vs. 15% of initial PCE for FA-CN and Spiro-OMeTAD after 1300 h constant illumination in a N2 atmosphere.

171



17.5% (TPA-CN)


2D discotic anthanthrone (ANT) core HSMs end capped with methoxy TPA at both ends (TPA–ANT–TPA and ACEANT-ACE)
Formation of a fully homogeneous protective coating HSM film on the surface of perovskite
TPA–ANT–TPA
17.5%
80% vs. 14% of initial PCE for TPA–ANT–TPA and Spiro-OMeTAD after 200 h of continuous 1 sun illumination in ambient air

172



3D HSMs based on spiro-fluorene derivative, in which pyridine group has been pendant to respective HSMs with different positions of nitrogen atoms (para, ortho and meta substitution)
The functionalization with a pyridine moiety is responsible for much better long-term stability than a traditional HSM with tBP dopant.
XDB, XOP, XMP, and XPP
17.2% (XPP without Tbp), 19.5% (XPP)
70% after 45 days vs. 30% after 15 days for XPP and Spiro-OMeTAD non-encapsulated devices stored under ambient air with RH of 40–50%.

173



Dopant-free 1D materials tetrathiafulvalene derivative
The intermolecular π–π stacking and chalcogen interactions between TTF derivatives remove the need for dopants
TTF-1
11%
A 20% decrease in PCE after 360 h (TTF-1) vs. 120 h (Spiro-OMeTAD)

174



1D linear molecular D′–A–D–A–D–A–D′-type HSM, based on monofluoro-substituted benzothiadiazole (FBT) and substituted silolodithiophene (DTS)
Good hydrophobicity, arising from the extended π-structure with small intermolecular spaces that impede moisture intrusion.
DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2
17.3%
80% was retained after over 500 h in high humidity (RH = 60%) with 1 sun light-soaking.

175



Polymeric dopant-free HSMs employ BDT and FBT groups
Hydrophobic material with high hole mobility and deep HOMO level
RCP
17.3%
17.3% for over 1400 h at RH of 75% for storage in darkness at room temperature.

176



Polymeric HSM is the D–A type also based on BDT and FBT groups, but with asymmetric alkyl substituents on FBT units instead of the conventional symmetric alkyl substitution
Soluble in green solvents, such as 2-methylanisole
Asy-PBTBDT
18.3%
91% was retained after storing the non-encapsulated devices for 30 days in RH of 50–75%.

177



D-π-A conducting homopolymer comprising the usual BDT and FBT moieties with addition of tetraethylene glycol (TEG)
Deep HOMO and good contact between perovskite and this HSM ensures effective hole transfer
PTEG
19.8%
98% for PTEG vs. 85% for Spiro-OMeTAD after 200 h, RH 25%, room temperature, in air.

178





Another strategy to enhance the HSM transport properties without resorting to dopants consists in the partial pre-oxidization of the HSM. Nguyen et al. demonstrated how to remarkably increase the overall conductivity of a HSM after pre-oxidation of a small fraction of Spiro-OMeTAD. The corresponding devices had comparable performances to devices with conventional Li-TFSI doping but had more stable performance under illumination.184 Leijtens et al. applied the same technique to a range of other molecular HSMs, demonstrating improved charge transport characteristics after partial pre-oxidation.185
(iii) Thermally stable HSMs. 
Organic HSMs intrinsically affect also the thermal stability of PSCs, even more than the actual hybrid perovskite layer. Small molecule HSMs tend to crystallise at relatively low temperature, thus weakening the contact with the perovskite and the metal electrode, which in turn worsens the PSC performance. Spiro-OMeTAD is not stable at temperatures higher than 100 °C since crystallisation onsets at this temperature.162 Larger crystals within the amorphous Spiro-OMeTAD cause morphological hole traps, thus affecting the charge transport. Moreover, dopants also reduce the glass transition temperature of Spiro-OMeTAD, thus accelerating its crystallisation.186 Hence, replacing Spiro-OMeTAD with thermally stable materials with high mobility to enhance the fill factor is paramount.187
Polymeric HSMs are thermally more stable than their molecular counterparts, because of the lower tendency of polymers to crystallise during the whole operating temperature range of solar cells.131 The metal electrode (typically gold) migration across the HSMs into the perovskite layer at moderate temperature (70 °C) is the dominant factor in severe performance losses and has to be blocked. Some approaches to hinder gold diffusion in PSCs include the deposition of buffer layers based on alumina nanoparticles or the introduction of chromium interlayers.170,188,189 The above mentioned inherent stability towards crystallisation of polymeric HSMs makes them a good barrier to gold migration,24,86,188,190 with excellent results regarding stability within the working temperature range of solar cells. PTAA was successfully adopted even at 85 °C in a stable device based on RbCsFAMA perovskite that retained 95% of its initial efficiency after 500 h under full illumination and MPPT.86

3.4 Electrode materials
In both regular structured PSCs and inverted structured PSCs, metals, such as gold, silver, copper or aluminium are deposited on top of the device for charge collection. These metal contacts, in general, have a deep work function that is beneficial for a high photovoltage in PSCs.191 Several studies suggested that an Ohmic contact was formed at the interface between gold and the HSM, like Spiro-OMeTAD,192 which benefits the efficient charge collection to the metal contact. Moreover, the metal contact reflects light and thus enhances the light capture of the system.193 However, silver, copper and aluminium can be easily oxidised in ambient air. The formed metal oxide layer is an insulating layer that contributes to the serial resistance of the device, and to an extent, it can bring significant drops in the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Compared to silver, copper and aluminium, gold is more chemically inert, and the bulk of gold will maintain its metallic property even though the very top thin surface (limit to few nanometres) may have some oxidation. As a result, gold, though it is expensive, seems to be an ideal contact for stable devices. However, several studies found that gold metal contact is not good for the long-term stability of PSCs. First, gold can diffuse through the HSC and reacts with halides in the perovskite film forming a metal halide barrier layer that significantly reduces the photovoltaic performance of the device.188 Similar or even worse conditions are observed for silver and copper.194 Secondly, halide migration in perovskite films can move through the HSC and reach the metal contact, which leads to degradation in efficiency as well.195 Direct observation of the two processes has been reported.196
An interlayer between the gold and HSCs can help to avoid the formation of metal halide. Domanski et al.188 deposited a thin layer of chromium between the gold contact and HSC because chromium is chemically inert to halides and has a high atomic density to prevent gold diffusion. In the ageing test, they conducted the MPPT under 1 sun illumination at 75 °C and N2 flow for 12 hours. At the first one or two hours, devices with and without Cr both showed an exponential decay. After that, the PSCs with a Cr interlayer stabilised at 83% of the initial PCE value. In contrast, PSCs without a Cr interlayer exhibited a linear decrease as time went, and lost over 50% of their initial efficiency after 12 hours illumination. Beside the Cr interlayer, Al2O3 was also examined as the interlayer between HSC and gold. It also helped to enhance the device stability.
Another method is to replace gold with some materials that are chemically inert to halides, such as carbon.198 Indeed, carbon is a popular yet cheap and stable electrode material with adjustable work junction.199,200 Several studies reported carbon black and carbon nanotubes as the electrode material.199 Aitola et al.197 reported a metal-free PSC with HSC based on a press-transferred single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) film infiltrated with Spiro-OMeTAD. The device architecture is displayed in Fig. 10a–d. Amazingly, a PCE of over 16% was achieved with SWCNT-based PSCs without the use of costly metal electrodes. They conducted the MPPT measurement of the devices with and without gold contact for 140 hours under white LED illumination with an intensity equivalent to 1 sun in an N2 atmosphere (Fig. 10e). The temperature was increased from 20 °C to 60 °C after the first 14 hours of light soaking. In this experiment, they observed a fast degradation in the gold-containing PSCs, with the efficiency dropped to less than 80% of its initial value in the first 20 hours, while PSCs using SWCNT/Carbon hold over 90% of their initial value for 140 hours. The authors calculated the value of T80 to be 580 h for this type of solar cell based on the assumption that the degradation trend would continue after 140 hours.
 Fig. 10  Schemes of device architectures (a) without and (c) with Au metal contact and the corresponding SEM images in (b) and (d).197 (e) Comparison of the MPPT results of PSCs using Au and SWCNT as contacts at elevated temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
4. Prospects and conclusions
Based on the above discussion, we believe that all inorganic PSCs will clear the hurdle of a short lifetime in PSCs on the path to commercialisation. However, the development of all inorganic PSCs lags behind the organic–inorganic hybrid PSCs. Part of the reason is that the all inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite needs high-temperature annealing and the deposition techniques developed for organic–inorganic perovskites cannot be directly adapted to all inorganic perovskites. Another important reason is that the cubic-phase CsPbI3 perovskite is thermodynamically non-stable at room temperature, but rather it transforms into a non-photovoltaic phase (δ-phase).114 The reason behind this is the small ionic radius of Cs+ that results in a high lattice strain in the APbI3 crystal to hold the cubic-phase at room temperature.201 Partially replacing iodide with the smaller sized bromide helps to stabilise its crystal structure. Indeed, it is reported that Br-mixed CsPbI3 shows a stable cubic phase yet leads to a higher optical band gap. The most commonly used CsPbI2Br perovskite has an optical band gap of around 1.92 eV that is not favourable for either single junction solar cells or tandem cells. The recent work by Sutton et al.114 showed that the fast quenching of CsPbI3 perovskite from 300 °C would result in a room-temperature stable orthorhombic phase or β-phase that is also a photovoltaic phase. Meanwhile, CsPbX3 (X = I/Br/Cl) quantum dots have been synthesised, and they showed excellent stability in photovoltaic applications.202
Despite the challenges in the field of inorganic PSCs, several recent studies have demonstrated efficiencies of over 10% for inorganic PSCs.116,203–205 More interestingly, if we take a closer look at these studies, we will notice that two trends are developed in this field. One trend is to develop versatile solution-processed methods to deposit a smooth and compact CsPbX3 (X = I/Br) perovskite film.116,205 The other trend is to dope CsPbI3 with foreign atoms, such as Eu2+.202,203 Yet, it is also noticed that the method developed for mixed halide inorganic perovskite may not give a good perovskite film for CsPbI3 perovskite. To better process the inorganic perovskite film, we need to have a better understanding of the crystallisation process of inorganic perovskites out of solution.
Furthermore, the knowledge on selective contacts developed for organic–inorganic perovskites should be used to instruct the device structure of all inorganic PSCs. Up to now, we have seen that inorganic PSCs exhibit robust stability in accelerated ageing tests.203 To further promote the development of the lifespan in PSCs, and to make the data reported by different research groups comparable with each other, it is highly important to establish a unified protocol for ageing tests of PSCs. As we discussed in Section 2, the testing protocol should consider several factors, including the hysteresis, the “burn-in” period, and the “reversible losses or gain” in PSCs. When the lifespans of PSCs are reported in one work, more than one sample should be tested, and detailed testing conditions should be provided at least in the supporting information. A unified protocol for an ageing test will help to set a standard evaluation process of PSCs, which will benefit the industrialisation of this young photovoltaic technology shortly.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation (ASPIRE project) and Business Finland/Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH (SolarWAVE project) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanemitsu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3427–3437 RSC .
J. Maes, L. Balcaen, E. Drijvers, Q. Zhao, J. De Roo, A. Vantomme, F. Vanhaecke, P. Geiregat and Z. Hens, J. Phys. Lett., 2018, 9, 3093–3097 CAS .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CAS .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lyu, M. Zhang, N. A. Cooling, Y. Jiao, Q. Wang, J.-H. Yun, B. Vaughan, G. Triani, P. Evans, X. Zhou, K. Feron, A. Du, P. Dastoor and L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2016, 61, 1558–1562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CAS .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CAS .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Lyu, M. Zhang, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 902–909 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Yang, Q. Jiang, P. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Tan, Y. Yang, M. Wei, B. R. Sutherland, E. H. Sargent and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, T. Masuda, L. Han and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12081–12088 RSC .
W. Qiong, C. Hongjun, M. Eric and W. Lianzhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501418 CrossRef .
J. Ávila, C. Momblona, P. P. Boix, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Joule, 2017, 1, 431–442 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-B. Song, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, C. Jiang, H.-H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. You and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9032–9050 RSC .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee and N.-G. Park, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 654–659 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, P. Kanjanaboos, C. T. O. Wong, J. J. McDowell, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, Z. Ning, A. J. Houtepen and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Ming, W. Ji, D. Li, A. Mei, Y. Hu and H. Han, J. Phys. Lett., 2018, 9, 2707–2713 CAS .
K. Cao, Z. Zuo, J. Cui, Y. Shen, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mathies, H. Eggers, B. S. Richards, G. Hernandez-Sosa, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2554–2569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Lin, W. Zheng, A. Liu, W. Cai, X. Yu, F. Zhang, Q. Liang, H. Wu, D. Qin and L. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22485–22494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
C. Huang, W. Fu, C.-Z. Li, Z. Zhang, W. Qiu, M. Shi, P. Heremans, A. K. Y. Jen and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2528–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and A. Abate, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800264 CrossRef .
L. K. Ono, Y. Qi and S. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1961–1990 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, D. Neher and A. Abate, Joule, 2018, 2, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz, D. S. Ginley, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, P. Morvillo, E. A. Katz, A. Elschner, O. Haillant, T. R. Currier, V. Shrotriya, M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. R. Kirov, G. Trimmel, T. Rath, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt, M. Lira-Cantu, D. Laird, C. McGuiness, S. Gowrisanker, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, J. Hauch, R. Steim, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, N. Espinosa, A. Urbina, G. Yaman-Uzunoglu, J.-B. Bonekamp, A. J. J. M. van Breemen, C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tiihonen, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, S. Lepikko, A. Poskela and P. D. Lund, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 730–738 RSC .
M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. M. Wolff, M. Stolterfoht, N. Phung, S. Albrecht, D. Neher and A. Abate, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4193–4201 CrossRef CAS .
N. Phung and A. Abate, Small, 2018, 14, 1802573 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, T. Buonassisi and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800408 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Wu and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 RSC .
D. Yang, R. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Liu and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3208–3214 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CAS .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Jung, D. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park, V. P. Dravid and B. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802769 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cao, X. Lv, P. Zhang, T. T. Chuong, B. Wu, X. Feng, C. Shan, J. Liu and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800568 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wali, A. Fakharuddin and R. Jose, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 1039–1052 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 RSC .
B. Roose, C. M. Johansen, K. Dupraz, T. Jaouen, P. Aebi, U. Steiner and A. Abate, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1850–1857 RSC .
W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Il, K. Myeong-Jong, C. Kyoungwon, L. Chaesung, K. Yun-Hi, K. Soon-Ki and P. Taiho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702872 CrossRef .
G.-H. Kim, H. Jang, Y. J. Yoon, J. Jeong, S. Y. Park, B. Walker, I.-Y. Jeon, Y. Jo, H. Yoon, M. Kim, J.-B. Baek, D. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6385–6390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, Y. Amir, A. Paulke, L. Perdigon-Toro, P. Caprioglio and D. Neher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1530–1539 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liang, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, L. Sun and D. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 58, 1801237 CrossRef .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi and D. Kim, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca and E. Mosconi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8326–8330 CrossRef .
M. Jung, T. J. Shin, J. Seo, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2188–2197 RSC .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J.-K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Svane, A. C. Forse, C. P. Grey, G. Kieslich, A. K. Cheetham, A. Walsh and K. T. Butler, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 6154–6159 CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Merdasa, M. Bag, Y. Tian, E. Källman, A. Dobrovolsky and I. G. Scheblykin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10711–10719 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jang, K. Park, D. H. Kim, J. Park, F. Shojaei, H. S. Kang, J.-P. Ahn, J. W. Lee and J. K. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5191–5199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702–713 RSC .
E. Mosconi, D. Meggiolaro, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3180–3187 RSC .
P. Delugas, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045301 CrossRef .
A. Sadhanala, S. Ahmad, B. Zhao, N. Giesbrecht, P. M. Pearce, F. Deschler, R. L. Hoye, K. C. Gödel, T. Bein and P. Docampo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6095–6101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Brivio, C. Caetano and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 1083–1087 CAS .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Bischak, A. B. Wong, E. Lin, D. T. Limmer, P. Yang and N. S. Ginsberg, J. Phys. Lett., 2018, 9, 3998–4005 CAS .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhu, L. Men, Y. Guo, Q. Zhu, U. Bhattacharjee, P. M. Goodwin, J. W. Petrich, E. A. Smith and J. Vela, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2948–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1507–1514 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
X. Tang, M. van den Berg, E. Gu, A. Horneber, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, A. J. Meixner, D. Zhang and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2172–2178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xing, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30484–30490 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Luo, W. Xia, S. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Cheng, C. Xu and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 3603–3608 CAS .
F. Haque, M. Wright, M. A. Mahmud, H. Yi, D. Wang, L. Duan, C. Xu, M. B. Upama and A. Uddin, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 11937–11944 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Heo, S. M. Han, N. S. Woo, Y. J. Kim, T.-Y. Kim, Z. Luo and S. Y. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15903–15910 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Syzgantseva, M. Saliba, M. Grätzel and U. Rothlisberger, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 1191–1196 CAS .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter and A. J. Pearson, Nature, 2018, 555, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong and M. Stocks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
K. Y. Chiu, S. H. Chang, W.-C. Huang, H.-M. Cheng, H. Shaw, S.-C. Yeh, C.-T. Chen, Y. O. Su, S.-H. Chen and C.-G. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 305701 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C. P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Philippe, M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, U. B. Cappel, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and H. k. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3589–3596 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, S. Svanström, V. Andrei, J. P. Rivett, N. Kornienko, B. Philippe, U. B. Cappel, H. k. Rensmo, F. Deschler and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13548–13557 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14173–14180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Albadri, P. Yadav, M. Alotaibi, N. Arora, A. Alyamani, H. Albrithen, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24903–24908 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, C. Zhang, N. D. Pham, Y. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, A. Du, Q. Shen, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, J. Phys. Lett., 2018, 9, 2113–2120 CAS .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kulbak, S. Gupta, N. Kedem, I. Levine, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Lett., 2015, 7, 167–172 Search PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad and D. T. Moore, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chen, H. Y. Lin, K. M. Chiang, W. L. Tsai, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605290 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, W. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Fan and Y. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3825–3828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nam, M. S. Jung, S. U. Chai, Y. J. Choi, D. Kim and J. H. Park, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 2936–2940 CAS .
S. Sanchez, N. Christoph, B. Grobety, N. Phung, U. Steiner, M. Saliba and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802060 CrossRef .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CAS .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
Y. Hu, F. Bai, X. Liu, Q. Ji, X. Miao, T. Qiu and S. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2219–2227 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies, R. Li, Z. Yang, T. Niu, X. Wang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
Z. Xinqian, W. Gang, F. Weifei, Q. Minchao, Y. Weitao, Y. Jielin, Z. Zhongqiang, L. Xinhui and C. Hongzheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702498 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, C. Jiang, P. Zhang and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14177–14185 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giorgi, K. Yamashita and M. Palummo, J. Phys. Lett., 2018, 9, 5891–5896 CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. Jesper Jacobsson, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710–727 RSC .
M. Deepa, M. Salado, L. Calio, S. Kazim, S. M. Shivaprasad and S. Ahmad, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4069–4077 RSC .
J. Endres, D. A. Egger, M. Kulbak, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, S. H. Silver, G. Hodes, B. P. Rand, D. Cahen, L. Kronik and A. Kahn, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 2722–2729 CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 RSC .
P. Schulz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1287–1293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Weibo, Y. Senyun, L. Yunlong, S. Weihai, R. Haixia, L. Zhiwei, B. Zuqiang and H. Chunhui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600474 CrossRef .
Z. H. Bakr, Q. Wali, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, T. M. Brown and R. Jose, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 271–305 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Tu, B. Yu, F. Liu, H.-W. Tam, G. Wang, A. B. Djurišić, L. Huang and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800515 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ziye, C. Jingjing, L. Zhenhua, Z. Long, Y. Zhou, C. Dazheng, Z. Chunfu, L. Shengzhong and H. Yue, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703432 CrossRef .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, J.-C. Blancon, F. Liu, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traore, M. Kepenekian, O. Durand, C. Katan, S. Tretiak, J. Crochet, P. M. Ajayan, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Even and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703879 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Greiner, L. Chai, M. G. Helander, W.-M. Tang and Z.-H. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4557–4568 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ming-Wei, W. Kuo-Chin, W. Jeng-Han, L. Ming-Hsien, L. Yu-Ling, O. Takuji, K. Nobuhiro, C. Peter, W. Der-Hsin, G. Tzung-Fang and H. Yao-Jane, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600135 CrossRef .
V. Roiati, E. Mosconi, A. Listorti, S. Colella, G. Gigli and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2168–2174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jordi, G. Antonio, R. Sara, A. Osbel, Z. Issac, M.-M. Elena, B. Juan and G.-B. Germà, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
R. A. Kerner and B. P. Rand, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 2298–2303 CAS .
S. A. L. Weber, I. M. Hermes, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, C. Gort, V. W. Bergmann, L. Gilson, A. Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, W. Tress and R. Berger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2404–2413 RSC .
P. Schulz, J. O. Tiepelt, J. A. Christians, I. Levine, E. Edri, E. M. Sanehira, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31491–31499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Acik, I. K. Park, R. E. Koritala, G. Lee and R. A. Rosenberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1423–1442 RSC .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shao, M. Abdu-Aguye, L. Qiu, L.-H. Lai, J. Liu, S. Adjokatse, F. Jahani, M. E. Kamminga, G. H. ten Brink, T. T. M. Palstra, B. J. Kooi, J. C. Hummelen and M. Antonietta Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2444–2452 RSC .
T. Zhang, S. H. Cheung, X. Meng, L. Zhu, Y. Bai, C. H. Y. Ho, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, S. K. So and S. Yang, J. Phys. Lett., 2017, 8, 5069–5076 CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, W. Chen, S. Yang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702762 CrossRef .
M. B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani and K. Miyano, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2291–2299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schuller, P. Schilinsky, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 37–40 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chiang, C.-C. Chen, M. K. Nazeeruddin and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13751–13760 RSC .
D. Ouyang, J. Xiao, F. Ye, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, L. Zhu, J. Cheng and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702722 CrossRef .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, A. Zhu, F. Cai, L. Tao, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6597–6605 RSC .
A. R. Bowring, L. Bertoluzzi, B. C. O'Regan and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702365 CrossRef .
A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 995–1003 CAS .
T. Malinauskas, D. Tomkute-Luksiene, R. Sens, M. Daskeviciene, R. Send, H. Wonneberger, V. Jankauskas, I. Bruder and V. Getautis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11107–11116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, E. M. Hutter, P. Rieder, I. Grill, J. Hanisch, M. F. Aygüler, A. G. Hufnagel, M. Handloser, T. Bein and A. Hartschuh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1703057 CrossRef .

          http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/aldrich/702471?lang=fi&region=FI, accessed on December 2018.
A. T. Murray, J. M. Frost, C. H. Hendon, C. D. Molloy, D. R. Carbery and A. Walsh, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8935–8938 RSC .
E. H. Anaraki, A. Kermanpur, L. Steier, K. Domanski, T. Matsui, W. Tress, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3128–3134 RSC .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, M. R. Leyden, S. Wang, L. K. Ono, Z. Hawash and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5702–5709 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ulfa, T. Zhu, F. Goubard and T. Pauporte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13350–13358 RSC .
S. Guarnera, A. Abate, W. Zhang, J. M. Foster, G. Richardson, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Lett., 2015, 6, 432–437 CAS .
S. Paek, P. Qin, Y. Lee, K. T. Cho, P. Gao, G. Grancini, E. Oveisi, P. Gratia, K. Rakstys, S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, C. Ludwig, J. Ko and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606555 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Pham, T. T. Do, J. Kim, C. Charbonneau, S. Manzhos, K. Feron, W. C. Tsoi, J. R. Durrant, S. M. Jain and P. Sonar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703007 CrossRef .
B. Xu, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Liu, C.-C. Chueh, X. Li and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700683 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Wu, C. Qin, X. Yang, T. Yasuda, A. Islam, K. Zhang, W. Peng, W. Chen and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2963–2967 RSC .
J. H. Heo, S. Park, S. H. Im and H. J. Son, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39511–39518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-W. Kim, G. Kang, J. Kim, G.-Y. Lee, H. I. Kim, L. Pyeon, J. Lee and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2326–2333 RSC .
J. Lee, M. Malekshahi Byranvand, G. Kang, S. Y. Son, S. Song, G.-W. Kim and T. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12175–12181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guan-Woo, L. Junwoo, K. Gyeongho, K. Taewan and P. Taiho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701935 CrossRef .
Z. Weiqi, W. Zhenhai and G. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702512 CrossRef .
P. Vivo, J. Salunke and A. Priimagi, Materials, 2017, 10, 1087 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Raza, F. Aziz and Z. Ahmad, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 20952–20967 RSC .
H. Zheng, G. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Ye, X. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41006–41013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Gratzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
W. H. Nguyen, C. D. Bailie, E. L. Unger and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10996–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, T. Giovenzana, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. S. Tinkham, N. K. Noel, B. A. Kamino, G. Sadoughi, A. Sellinger and H. J. Snaith, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5981–5989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Seo and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mesquita, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2471–2489 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, J. P. Correa-Baena, G. Lozano, M. Saliba, P. Anguita, B. Roose, A. Abate, U. Steiner, M. Grätzel, M. E. Calvo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11214–11221 RSC .
M. Taisuke, P. Ieva, M. Tadas, D. Konrad, D. Maryte, S. Matas, G. Paul, T. Wolfgang, C.-B. Juan-Pablo, A. Antonio, H. Anders, G. Michael, N. M. Khaja, G. Vytautas and S. Michael, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2567–2571 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Behrouznejad, S. Shahbazi, N. Taghavinia, H.-P. Wu and E. Wei-Guang Diau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13488–13498 RSC .
P. Gratia, A. Magomedov, T. Malinauskas, M. Daskeviciene, A. Abate, S. Ahmad, M. Grätzel, V. Getautis and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11409–11413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372–3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
N. Shlenskaya, N. A. Belich, M. Gratzel, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1780–1786 RSC .
S. Cacovich, L. Cina, F. Matteocci, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4700–4706 RSC .
K. Aitola, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, K. Sveinbjörnsson, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel, E. Kauppinen, E. M. J. Johansson, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606398 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Jeon, S. Seo, Y. Sato, C. Delacou, A. Anisimov, K. Suenaga, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsuo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25743–25749 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, Y. Xiong, M. Xu, A. Mei, Y. Sheng, L. Hong, T. W. Jones, G. J. Wilson, S. Xiong, D. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Rong and H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16481–16487 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tian, A. Mei, S. Zhang, H. Tian, S. Liu, F. Qin, Y. Xiong, Y. Rong, Y. Hu, Y. Zhou, S. Xie and H. Han, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Swarnkar, W. J. Mir and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Yang, P. Zhong, S. Mei, G. Zhang, G. Chen, G. He and R. Guo, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 3065–3076 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.10.008 .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Qiong Wang
	Qiong Wang is currently a postdoctoral researcher in the Young Investigator Group lead by Dr Antonio Abate at Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. Her research interests include developing stable perovskite solar cells, understanding the working mechanisms of perovskite solar cells and exploring new perovskite compounds. Before joining Dr Antonio Abate's group, she worked as a research fellow in the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State University in 2016–2017 after she obtained the PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Queensland.

Nga Phung
	Nga Phung is currently a PhD student in the Young Investigator Group Active Materials and Interfaces for stable perovskite solar cells at Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin focusing on the stability of halide perovskite solar cells. Her focus is on the intrinsic property of the perovskite absorber layer. Before joining Prof. Dr Antonio Abate's group, she obtained her MSc degree at Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands where she was a scholarship holder of the Global Sustainable Electricity Partnership.

Diego Di Girolamo
	Diego Di Girolamo is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry, University of Rome La Sapienza, under the supervision of Prof. Danilo Dini. He obtained a BSc in Chemistry and MSc in Physical and Inorganic Chemistry from the same university. His research focuses on the application of inorganic p-type semiconductors in perovskite solar cells. He is currently visiting the Young Investigator Group led by Dr Antonio Abate at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin.

Paola Vivo
	Paola Vivo is a Senior Research fellow at Tampere University of Technology (TUT), Finland. After pursuing her PhD in Chemistry, she received the Academy of Finland fellowship for postdoctoral research in 2013–2017. She currently leads the Hybrid Solar Cells research team at the Laboratory of Chemistry and Bioengineering (TUT). Her research interests include developing novel organic materials and hybrid organic–inorganic systems for third generation solar cells, with current emphasis on hybrid perovskite photovoltaics.

Antonio Abate
	Antonio Abate is a Team Leader at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin in Germany, Associate Professor at the University of Naples Federico II in Italy and Visiting Professor at Fuzhou University in China. His research aims at stable perovskite solar cells via interface engineering and novel materials. Before becoming part of the faculty, he led the solar cell research at Adolphe Merkle Institute within the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. He was a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Felow at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). He worked for four years as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) as a young photovoltaic technology have experienced fast development in the power conversion efficiency, with a world record efficiency of over 23%, highly competitive with that of silicon solar cells and thin-film photovoltaics (PVs). However, the operational lifetime of PSCs lags far behind compared to the well-established PVs. Therefore, enhancing the lifespan of PSCs has been one of the focuses of the perovskite PV community. To improve the lifetime of PSCs, an establishment of a standard protocol that can be used to evaluate the lifetime of PSCs and provides a figure of merit to allow comparison between different PVs is the first step. An accelerated ageing test has been suggested to be the widely adopted protocol that provides a T80 – the time that it takes for one device to degrade to 80% of its initial efficiency – to be used to quantify the lifespan of PSCs. The stability of a PSC is highly influenced by its working environment, such as moisture, temperature and ultra violet light irradiation via their interaction with electron/hole selective contacts, perovskite compounds, and metal contacts. All inorganic PSCs are believed to lead this PV technology towards long operational lifetime and future commercialization.


 	Fig. 1  Summary of literature data published from the year of 2013 to 2018 related to PCE80 (top panel), TS80 (middle panel), and generated energy of PSCs (bottom panel).32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics (top panel) and cross-sectional SEM images (bottom panel) of planar regular PSCs, regular mesoporous PSCs, and planar inverted PSCs with a scale bar of 200 nm.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the intrinsic stability and bandgap of ABX3 against moisture and heat influenced by cations and halides. The trends are extrapolated from the literature discussed in the main text. Selected references as the representative of each perovskite composition are labelled on the guidelines.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Digital photos; (b) absorption spectra; (c) absorption coefficients; (d) steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of perovskite films with mixed I/Br/Cl halides; (e) dependence of the bandgap extracted from (b–d) on the ratio of halides (I/Cl) of mixed halide perovskites.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015, American Society of Chemistry. (f) PL spectra of MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 perovskite films over 45 s in 5 s increments under 457 nm, 15 mW cm−2 light at 300 K; (g) normalised PL spectra of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 films with x ranging from 0 to 1 after illuminating for 5–10 minutes with 457 nm light at the intensity of 10–100 mW cm−2.68 Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scheme of the crystal structure of ABX3 perovskite, where the A site can be Cs+, MA+ or FA+.85 Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Tolerance factor plot for a range of monovalent cations at the A site in APbI3, with the digital photos of CsPbI3 and RbPbI3 films at temperatures of 28 °C, 380 °C and 460 °C.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Influence of Cs+ in (c) the crystal structure and (d) optical bandgap extracted from absorption spectra and steady-state PL spectra of FAMA-double perovskite, i.e. FA0.83MA0.17PbI0.83Br0.17.29 Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Science. (e) MPP tracking of quadruple cation perovskite, RbCsFAMA devices measured at 85 °C in an inert atmosphere.86 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermodynamic and kinetic properties of alkali cation incorporation (Cs+, Rb+, K+, Na+, and Li+) in FAPbI3. (a) Illustration of the possible locations of these cations in FAPbI3: (b) at the A site substitution and (d) at the interstitial site. (c) The formation energy of the alkali cation to be at the A site substitution and an interstitial site. (d) Illustration of iodide diffusion pathways, using K+ at an interstitial site of FAPbI3 perovskite as an example. (e) Diffusion barriers for iodide migration in FAPbI3 with (red line) and without (black line) interstitial K+.100 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Strategies to stabilise photoactive α-phase CsPbI3. (a) Surface passivation via PVP:106 (i) interaction of CsPbI3 with acylamino groups in PVP, (ii) PbI2 (blue shape) and Cs (purple ball) assembled around PVP to form a metastable state, (iii) after the assembly, the CsPbI3 nanocrystals attached around PVP, and (iv) PVP at the surface reduced the surface tension of the CsPbI3 crystal to stabilise the α-CsPbI3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. CC BY 4.0. (b) Reducing crystal sizes by sulfobetaine zwitterion:107 (i–iii) without zwitterion, the δ-phase formed rapidly after spin coating at room temperature, and (iv–vi): the zwitterion induced the amorphous phase before annealing, which induced the formation of small nanocrystals of 30 nm with the cubic phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) The CsPbI3 perovskite preserved its α-phase in a dry atmosphere for two months, prepared by using a solution-controlled growth method to reduce the evaporation rate of the solvent.108 Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. CC BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the crystal structure of the (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite family.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) GIWAXS maps for (i) polycrystalline room-temperature-cast and (ii) near-single-crystalline hot-cast (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films and (iii) schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (1) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal.123 Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure.124 Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Ni–I bonds at the interface region of NiO/MAPbI3 calculated from DFT (red sphere stands for O, grey for Ni, purple for I, light blue for N, brown for C, and pink for H). (b) Scheme for Li–NiO based p-i-n structured devices. (c) Energy diagram for each component in the device and (d) Jsc time evolution of the MAPbI3/LiNiO device measured at different light intensities.140 Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Key examples of (a) small molecules and (b) polymeric HSMs for highly efficient and stable PSCs. The structures of the two most common reference materials, Spiro-OMeTAD (small molecule) and PTAA (polymer), are also included in (a and b).	 

D-π-A: triazatruxene donor-thiophene-based multiple conjugated arms and malonitrile acceptor	Face-on stacking organization on perovskite, which favors vertical charge carrier transport	KR321	19%	60% vs. 20% of initial PCE for KR312 and Spiro-OMeTAD after 650 h constant illumination in N2 atmosphere.	
171

D-π-A: a rigid quinolizino acridine and a flexible triphenylamine donors with akyl-substituted terthiophene, and malononitrile as an electron acceptor	Suitable HOMO level and high intrinsic hole mobility	FA-CN and TPA-CN	18.9% (FA-CN)	65% vs. 15% of initial PCE for FA-CN and Spiro-OMeTAD after 1300 h constant illumination in a N2 atmosphere.	
171

17.5% (TPA-CN)
2D discotic anthanthrone (ANT) core HSMs end capped with methoxy TPA at both ends (TPA–ANT–TPA and ACEANT-ACE)	Formation of a fully homogeneous protective coating HSM film on the surface of perovskite	TPA–ANT–TPA	17.5%	80% vs. 14% of initial PCE for TPA–ANT–TPA and Spiro-OMeTAD after 200 h of continuous 1 sun illumination in ambient air	
172

3D HSMs based on spiro-fluorene derivative, in which pyridine group has been pendant to respective HSMs with different positions of nitrogen atoms (para, ortho and meta substitution)	The functionalization with a pyridine moiety is responsible for much better long-term stability than a traditional HSM with tBP dopant.	XDB, XOP, XMP, and XPP	17.2% (XPP without Tbp), 19.5% (XPP)	70% after 45 days vs. 30% after 15 days for XPP and Spiro-OMeTAD non-encapsulated devices stored under ambient air with RH of 40–50%.	
173

Dopant-free 1D materials tetrathiafulvalene derivative	The intermolecular π–π stacking and chalcogen interactions between TTF derivatives remove the need for dopants	TTF-1	11%	A 20% decrease in PCE after 360 h (TTF-1) vs. 120 h (Spiro-OMeTAD)	
174

1D linear molecular D′–A–D–A–D–A–D′-type HSM, based on monofluoro-substituted benzothiadiazole (FBT) and substituted silolodithiophene (DTS)	Good hydrophobicity, arising from the extended π-structure with small intermolecular spaces that impede moisture intrusion.	DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2	17.3%	80% was retained after over 500 h in high humidity (RH = 60%) with 1 sun light-soaking.	
175

Polymeric dopant-free HSMs employ BDT and FBT groups	Hydrophobic material with high hole mobility and deep HOMO level	RCP	17.3%	17.3% for over 1400 h at RH of 75% for storage in darkness at room temperature.	
176

Polymeric HSM is the D–A type also based on BDT and FBT groups, but with asymmetric alkyl substituents on FBT units instead of the conventional symmetric alkyl substitution	Soluble in green solvents, such as 2-methylanisole	Asy-PBTBDT	18.3%	91% was retained after storing the non-encapsulated devices for 30 days in RH of 50–75%.	
177

D-π-A conducting homopolymer comprising the usual BDT and FBT moieties with addition of tetraethylene glycol (TEG)	Deep HOMO and good contact between perovskite and this HSM ensures effective hole transfer	PTEG	19.8%	98% for PTEG vs. 85% for Spiro-OMeTAD after 200 h, RH 25%, room temperature, in air.	
178


 	Fig. 10  Schemes of device architectures (a) without and (c) with Au metal contact and the corresponding SEM images in (b) and (d).197 (e) Comparison of the MPPT results of PSCs using Au and SWCNT as contacts at elevated temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
