Covalent triazine frameworks for advanced energy storage: challenges and new opportunities  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE01360J View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE01360J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, Advance Article Covalent triazine frameworks for advanced energy storage: challenges and new opportunities
Peng Xiong

a, 
Shilin Zhang

*b, 
Rui Wanga, 
Longhai Zhanga, 
Quanwei Maa, 
Xiang Rena, 
Yuchen Gaoa, 
Ziyang Wanga, 
Zaiping Guob and 
Chaofeng Zhang

*a
aInstitutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Leibniz Joint Research Center for Materials Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Engineering Laboratory of High-Performance Waterborne Polymer Materials of Anhui Province, Key Laboratory of Structure and Functional Regulation of Hybrid Material (Ministry of Education), Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, P. R. China. E-mail: cfz@ahu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Sciences, Engineering and Technology, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia. E-mail: shilin.zhang01@adelaide.edu.au
Received 
1st May 2023
, Accepted 3rd July 2023First published on 4th July 2023AbstractIn comparison to inorganic electrode materials utilised in energy storage systems, organic electrode materials possess several advantages, including a lightweight nature, customisable structure, high specific capacity, wide availability of natural resources, and recyclability. However, the low ionic conductivity and susceptibility to degradation over time result in inferior performance and a shorter lifespan when compared to inorganic electrode materials. Recently, covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) have emerged as a promising strategy for the development of organic electrodes. CTFs are a type of covalent organic framework that exhibit customisable porosity, modifiable structures, and versatile functionality. They are characterised by a rigid triazine (C3N3) linking unit, which affords excellent thermal and chemical stability, enabling them to resist structural deformation upon cycling. CTFs have garnered considerable attention for their potential to store and transport charges in various electrochemical energy storage devices over the past few years. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the working principle and synthesis methods of CTFs, highlighting the significant advances in supercapacitors and various rechargeable battery systems. Additionally, this review introduces different design strategies and potential impacts on improving electrochemical performance. Finally, this review concludes by highlighting the opportunities for future research in this rapidly advancing field.Peng XiongPeng Xiong is currently a master's student at the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology of Anhui University. His research focuses on the organic cathode materials of batteries.Shilin ZhangDr Shilin Zhang is now a research fellow in the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Superconducting & Electronic Materials in the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2020, after he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with an MSc in 2016. His current research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterisation of materials in the field of electrochemical devices such as ion batteries and metal batteries.Chaofeng ZhangProf Chaofeng Zhang is currently a professor at the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. He received his BSc and MSc from Lanzhou University and Fudan University, respectively. Then, he obtained his PhD degree in 2013 from the University of Wollongong, Australia. He undertook a post-doc in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. His research focuses on electrochemistry for batteries, especially organic battery materials and electrolytes of aqueous zinc-ion batteries.

Broader context
Renewable energy sources such as solar, hydro, geothermal, and wind power, coupled with clean electrochemical energy storage technologies, offer a green and sustainable solution to address current energy and environmental challenges. However, the exploitation of these resources faces issues such as conversion efficiency, stability, and recombination. Additionally, electrochemical storage processes suffer from activity, capacity, cost, and stability problems, which limit the utilisation of these energy sources and technologies. To address these limitations, porous materials known as covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) have emerged as a potential solution. CTFs offer advantages such as abundant molecular design, diverse building blocks, large surface area, affordable synthetic strategies, high conjugation, and porosity. As a result, CTFs hold great promise in overcoming the challenges mentioned above. This review provides a comprehensive summary of the utilisation of CTFs for energy storage technologies, highlighting the current research status, existing challenges, and potential future research directions. The review aims to nourish the development of better CTFs for clean energy applications in this field.

1. Introduction
Ensuring a sustained energy supply is crucial for human survival and progress. However, due to the excessive consumption of non-renewable resources and environmental challenges, it is imperative to develop environmentally sustainable energy storage systems that can store clean and renewable energy sources such as solar and wind energy for extended periods. Achieving this goal requires the development of new materials with outstanding performance and durability.
Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) are the subject of extensive research and are currently considered the most intensively studied materials.6,7 Unlike metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which consist of metal ions or clusters connected by organic ligands, COFs are entirely composed of organic building blocks linked by strong covalent bonds, making COFs more stable than MOFs under some conditions. COFs are designed and produced using modular synthetic strategies, allowing for the incorporation of functional groups and creating a toolbox for exploring COFs as functional materials for various applications.6 Covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) are a type of COFs that have gained significant attention in the past decade due to atomically tailored structures, high intrinsic nitrogen content, tunable porosity, and modifiable skeletons. The first CTF material was synthesised in 2008 by Kuhn et al. through the trimerisation of 1,4-dicyanobenzene with the assistance of ZnCl2 as both solvent and catalyst at 400 °C.9 Since then, numerous CTFs with varying structures and functions have been synthesised. By incorporating diverse building blocks, CTFs provide vast opportunities in structural design and have increasingly shifted towards the functional design arena. Typically, CTFs consist of an extended porous framework formed by an aromatic CN linkage (triazine unit) between organic building blocks. The absence of weak bonds except for the aromatic group in CTFs renders them with long-term stability, and they are not prone to atmospheric deterioration, even in the presence of strong acid and base solutions.10–12 In contrast, COFs involving weak linkages such as imines, boronate esters, borazine, hydrazones, etc., are more susceptible to hydrolysis compared to CTFs, despite the application of various strategies to enhance the framework stability of COFs.13 The recyclability and reusability of CTFs make them potential candidates for industrial deployment, such as batteries,2,14,15 supercapacitors,16–18 catalysts,19–23 gas separation,24–26 dye adsorption,27,28 sensors,29–31 and many other applications.32–35
CTFs have emerged as promising materials for energy storage because of high intrinsic nitrogen content and tunable porosity, which can enhance the electrochemical performance by affecting the electron diffusion kinetics and distribution within the carbon network. The strong triazine units in CTFs make them more durable and less prone to degradation during electrochemical reactions. Generally, CTFs can be classified into two types: crystalline and amorphous (microcrystalline), depending on the strength of the π–π conjugated network that governs condensation reactions.11 The stronger the bonds in the highly dynamic condensation reactions (trimerisation), the more difficult it is to form ordered structures, which is why crystalline CTFs can only be obtained under certain conditions. Both crystalline and amorphous CTFs exhibit well-defined arrangements in stacking models, however, different functional devices require CTFs with different crystal structures. For instance, some electronic devices require highly ordered crystalline CTFs with well-defined periodic arrangements to achieve specific electronic properties, while others may require more disordered amorphous CTFs with a higher surface area to facilitate faster ion transport and higher energy storage capacity. Therefore, tailoring the crystal structure of CTFs to meet the specific requirements of different applications is essential. This can be achieved by adjusting the synthetic conditions, such as temperature, pressure, and catalyst type, or through post-treatment methods, such as thermal annealing or chemical modification, to modify the crystal structure and properties of the resulting CTFs.
In recent years, the emergence of a new low-temperature synthesis method for CTFs has paved the way for greater precision and control over the chemical composition and morphology. This has resulted in the creation of new CTF materials with tailored properties for energy storage systems, using a wider range of starting materials, including less reactive or thermally sensitive compounds. This development has opened up new avenues for research and innovation in the field of CTF-based energy storage. In this review, we explore recent advances in the use of CTFs as electrode materials in various battery systems, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium metal batteries (LMBs), sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), and zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs). We highlight the unique properties of CTFs that make them promising candidates for high-performance battery applications, such as high surface area and porous structures, high nitrogen content, and tunable electronic properties (Scheme 1). We also survey the advances in design principles and synthetic reactions, mainly focusing on the structure-performance correlations of CTFs. Furthermore, we examine the bottlenecks and challenges associated with CTFs, and suggest strategies from chemistry, energy storage, and material perspectives to make CTFs practical for energy storage systems in the near future (Fig. 1). Finally, this review aims to provide insights into the potential of CTFs as a new class of electrode materials for next-generation battery systems.
 Scheme 1  Three aspects of CTFs discussed in this review, including the synthesis methodologies, characterisations, and energy storage applications. 
 Fig. 1  A timeline of major breakthroughs and new discoveries in CTFs for advanced energy storage. 
2. Synthesis methodologies
This section aims to present the development of the preparation methods for creating CTFs starting from monomers that do not contain a triazine unit. Numerous strategies have been successfully developed to synthesise CTFs with various structures since the first CTFs were obtained in 2008 by Kuhn et al. These processing methods can be used to synthesise CTFs with two- or three-dimensional extended structures, which are highly conformal and can be precisely controlled during the synthesis process.9 Two main categories of methods exist depending on whether a high-temperature process is required. The ZnCl2-catalysed ionothermal method and the P2O5-involved method are considered to be high-temperature processes (>300 °C), while both the superacid-catalysed method and the amidine-involved polycondensation approaches are processed at low temperatures (<200 °C, Fig. 2). To further clarify, high- and low-temperature methods are further differentiated based on the precursor.
 Fig. 2  Advantages and disadvantages of different synthesis methodologies. 
2.1 High temperature synthesis
Ionothermal reaction strategy. According to Kuhn et al., the high-temperature ionothermal reaction involving molten ZnCl2 salts (with a melting point of 318 °C) has been observed to facilitate a dynamic trimerisation reaction under specific ionothermal conditions, resulting in the formation of crystalline CTFs. ZnCl2 was chosen as a suitable candidate due to its ready availability, cost-effectiveness, and high reactivity towards most aromatic nitrile monomers (Fig. 3). Due to strong Lewis acid–base interactions, nitrile precursors display excellent solubility in the ionic melt at 400 °C (molten ZnCl2) to form a clear solution. The temperature of 400 °C was selected, as most aromatic and heterocyclic nitriles remain stable at this temperature and only decompose well above 400 °C through C–H cleavage and subsequent hydrogen loss, although some amount of CTFs decomposition is inevitable.11 It is noteworthy that ZnCl2 plays a pivotal role in the synthesis of CTFs, acting as a functional catalyst and porogen that facilitates the trimerisation reaction. By employing 1,4-dicyanobenzene (DCB) as the monomer precursor, CTF-1 with high porosity (0.40 cm3 g−1), micropore size (1.2 nm), and specific surface area (791 m2 g−1) was successfully synthesised via the high-temperature ionothermal reaction. Notably, CTF-1 exhibited comparable performance to zeolites, MOFs, and covalent boron oxide-based frameworks.9 However, it has been observed that other nitriles such as 4,4′-dicyanobiphenyl (DCBP), 2,6-dicyanopyridine (DCP), 2,5-dicyanothiophene (DCT), and 1,3,5-tris(4-cyanophenyl)benzene (TCT), are unable to form crystalline CTFs due to structural features, such as a slightly contorted structure in DCBP and TCT and a lack of linear arrangement of the nitrile groups in DCT and DCP. Optimisation of the precursor/ZnCl2 ratio (greater than equimolar) was necessary to achieve high surface areas and porosities when using different nitrile precursors. Subsequently, the formation of crystalline CTF-0 through the trimerisation of 1,3,5-tricyanobenzene and crystalline CTF-2 through the trimerisation of planar monomer 2,6-dicyanonaphthalene were reported.36,37 In comparison to CTF-1, CTF-2 showed a smaller surface area of only 90 m2 g−1, with a pore size of 1.6 nm. On the other hand, CTF-0 had a smaller pore size than CTF-1, but its surface area was approximately 500 m2 g−1. This can be attributed to the presence of three functional groups in the 1,3,5-tricyanobenzene monomer and the longer length of the 2,6-dicyanonaphthalene monomer. The template-free synthesis used to prepare CTFs can also be extended to other nitriles such as tetrafluoroterephthalonitrile. In addition to controlling the precursor/ZnCl2 ratio and monomer type, the structural characteristics of CTFs can be further optimised by adjusting the reaction time and temperature. For example, when 1,4-dicyanobenzene is used as a monomer, the specific surface area of the resulting CTFs can be finely tuned by varying the reaction temperature from 400 to 600 °C. The surface area can range from 920 to 1930 m2 g−1, and further increasing the temperature to 600 °C for an extended period of time can result in an even higher surface area of 3270 m2 g−1.10 However, this increase in porosity and specific surface area is accompanied by an increase in the average pore diameter due to the irreversible carbonisation of a small amount of CTFs and the possible reconstruction of the triazine framework. In addition to temperature, the molar ratio between tetrafluoroterephthalonitrile and anhydrous ZnCl2 can also be optimised to control the porosity of a perfluorinated covalent triazine framework (FN-CTF) synthesised at different temperatures. Wang et al. found that the specific surface area of FN-CTF can be adjusted within the range of 817 to 2162 m2 g−1 by varying the reaction temperature from 400 to 900 °C.38 The pore size distribution analysis revealed that FN-CTF-400 (obtained at 400 °C) and FN-CTF-550 (obtained at 550 °C) had a pore size concentration of approximately 0.54 nm, while FN-CTF-900 (obtained at 900 °C) exhibited both micropores and mesopores, indicating possible cleavage of triazine at high temperatures during synthesis. It should be noted that while the reaction temperature can easily modulate the pore size and specific surface area, excessive temperatures may induce carbonisation side reactions. Thus, a careful balance must be struck between optimising porosity and preserving the structural integrity of the CTF during synthesis. To address the high temperature requirements associated with the ionothermal reaction using ZnCl2, researchers have explored the development of specific multicomponent metal halide molten salts with lower melting temperatures and impurities that are compatible with the desired nitrile component. For instance, the NaCl–KCl–ZnCl2 eutectic salt (ES) has been used to successfully synthesise CTF-1, resulting in a reduced reaction temperature of 200 °C for 24 hours. This method stabilises the conjugated triazine framework and preserves the nitrogen content, leading to improved conductivity characteristics of the resulting CTFs.39 Here, the ratio between ES and the DCB is optimised as 1. Researchers have also developed a new type of Zn-based molten salt, specifically zinc triflimide [Zn(NTf2)2] to address the issue of decreased catalyst activity and ion removal. This allows for the ionothermal reaction temperature to be reduced without introducing NaCl and KCl, which have different Lewis acidities that could potentially decrease the catalyst activity of ZnCl2. Notably, this new molten salt did not cause any side reactions during the synthesis of CTFs.40 Perfluorinated CTFs can be successfully obtained at 275 °C with a surface area of up to 367 m2 g−1, with micropores around 1.1 nm, using [Zn(NTf2)2]. The [Zn(NTf2)2] possesses weakly coordinated and highly delocalised counteranion (weak Lewis base), and can act as Lewis superacids, which exhibits higher catalytic activity compared with the classical Lewis acids including classical ZnCl2 and AlCl3, even with low loading. More importantly, the weakly coordinated and highly delocalised counteranion (NTf2)2− serves as a weak Lewis base, which helps to preserve functional groups and prevent cleavage of C–F bonds. This suggests that replacing classical ZnCl2 with Lewis superacid could further decrease the reaction temperature, and potential candidates could be elements from Group 14 or Group 15 in the periodic table (to be discussed further).41
 Fig. 3  Some representative molecules used as building units for CTFs. 
The physicochemical properties of CTFs, including surface area, porosity, pore size, crystallinity, and conductivity, can be influenced by various factors in the ZnCl2-assisted ionothermal reaction strategy, such as monomer structure, reaction temperature, reaction time, and ZnCl2 loading. Despite the advantages of the ZnCl2-assisted ionothermal reaction strategy, several issues need to be addressed, such as potential structural changes resulting from high reaction temperatures, the formation of gaseous products, and the presence of residual Zn species. Even trace amounts of metallic Zn residues can negatively impact the performance of resulting CTFs, making it essential to develop effective strategies for removing these residues. To address this issue, researchers have proposed some approaches, including the use of multicomponent metal halide molten salts that can be easily removed or are less likely to form residues to decrease the reaction temperature, and potentially mitigate the carbonisation side reaction. Another approach involves introducing inert gas or vacuum during the reaction process to remove gaseous products and minimise the impact of high reaction temperatures. Post-treatment methods such as high-temperature calcination, acid washing, and solvent extraction can also be used to remove residual Zn species and improve the performance of the obtained CTFs. While the ZnCl2-assisted ionothermal reaction strategy has shown promise for synthesising high-performance CTFs, further investigations are needed to fully address these challenges associated with this approach and optimise the synthesis reaction conditions. By developing effective strategies for addressing these challenges, it may be possible to use this approach to produce high-performance CTFs on a larger scale, opening up new possibilities for applications in energy storage fields.

P2O5-involved method. In 2018, Yu et al. were inspired by the effectiveness of P2O5 as a catalyst in the dehydration of amides into nitriles, and discovered that P2O5 can also catalyse the direct condensation of aromatic primary amide groups (C(O)–NH2) into s-triazine rings and the trimerisation of nitriles to s-triazine rings.42 The resulting CTF-1 obtained at 400 °C exhibited a high yield and was crystalline, with a specific surface area of 2034 m2 g−1, which was higher than that of CTF-1 obtained at 350 °C. However, the higher temperature led to partial carbonisation and amorphisation of the CTF. It should be noted that the P2O5-involved method is still in its early stages, and the polymerisation mechanism is not fully understood, which limits its application to other monomers and large-scale industrial production.In 2022, a ground-breaking discovery was made by Sun et al., who found that H6P4O13, a general polyphosphoric acid, can be used as a catalyst to synthesise a series of highly crystalline CTFs with a high specific surface area (up to 1335 m2 g−1) at 400 °C.43 The mechanism of the H6P4O13-catalysed reaction involves coupled protonation and nucleophilic addition in the first step, followed by the cycloaddition of the third nitrile and detachment of the acid in the following steps. The density functional theory calculations revealed that H6P4O13 has a much lower activation energy barrier for trimerisation of nitrile compared to its analogues such as P2O5 and H3PO4. This could be the reason why crystalline CTFs can be synthesised using H6P4O13, while only amorphous and semi-crystalline CTFs can be obtained using P2O5 and H3PO4, respectively, under the same reaction conditions. Moreover, this method can be extended to the production of CTFs at a kilogram level due to the use of environmentally friendly H6P4O13 and cost-effective monomers. These innovative procedures described here may revolutionise the synthesis of highly crystalline CTFs and open new avenues for the large-scale production.

2.2 Low temperature synthesis
Superacid catalysed method. In organic chemistry, superacids are a class of highly reactive mediums with a proton chemical potential greater than that of pure sulfuric acid. Superacids exhibit minimal basicity and are not readily protonated by other Brønsted acids.44 Commercially available trifluoromethanesulfonic acid (CF3SO3H, TfOH) and fluorosulfuric acid (HSO3F) are commonly used commercially as examples of superacids. In addition, strong superacids (such as fluoroantimonic acid) can be well created by combining a strong Lewis acid with a strong Brønsted acid. In addition, the carborane acid group represents another type of superacid, known for containing some of the strongest acids ever discovered.45The development of superacid catalysts has primarily been driven by the need for mild synthesis conditions in the preparation of CTFs. Serving as a kind of superacid catalyst, TfOH was used as a superacid catalyst to initiate the trimerisation of cyano groups for building up CTFs skeletons in 2012.46,47 The introduction of TfOH into the polymerisation has been shown to prevent undesired CTFs decomposition, condensation reactions (including weak C–H cleavage), and carbonisation side reactions at high temperatures. By adjusting the temperature during synthesis, it is possible to control the crystal structure of the resulting CTFs. For example, using chloroform as a solvent at 0–25 °C results in amorphous CTFs, whereas microwave-assisted methods at 110 °C produce CTFs with preferred orientations but limited crystallinity. Meanwhile, vapor-assisted TfOH and interfacial polymerisation have been shown to be effective in producing uncarbonised CTFs, which are free-flowing, fluorescent powders with adjustable bandgaps depending on the choice of monomers.11 Incorporating heteroatoms that are not resistant to high temperatures such as N, F, S, and O into the structure of CTFs would be more practical and enables different applications including catalysts, gas separation, and energy storage. In addition to CTFs in powder form, CTFs-based membranes can be produced using superacid-promoted sol–gel procedures, where strong Brønsted acids act as both catalysts and solvents.48,49 This approach can be further extended to the fabrication of CTFs-based membranes with ionic moieties from aromatic nitrile monomers with tertiary amino groups or the fabrication of CTF-based membranes with fluorine moieties.
The use of superacid catalysts in the synthesis of CTF has several advantages over traditional methods, as it reduces product decomposition and carbonisation, and the reaction time is much shorter, which is much faster than the classical ZnCl2-assisted high-temperature method, which usually takes from a few hours to several days. This method broadens the potential applications of CTFs. However, the surface area and porosity of the CTFs produced by the superacid strategy are lower, with less crystallinity compared to those obtained through traditional ionothermal reactions.47 Furthermore, the strong acidity and corrosiveness of superacids may necessitate specialised synthetic equipment and facilities. Another disadvantage of low-temperature synthesis of CTFs is that it may result in lower yield and slower reaction rates compared to high-temperature synthesis. Despite these disadvantages, low-temperature synthesis of CTFs remains a promising approach due to its ability to produce materials with unique structures and properties, and its potential to overcome the limitations of traditional high-temperature synthesis methods. Nevertheless, further research is needed to optimise the synthesis conditions and improve the scalability of the low-temperature synthesis method for CTFs.

Amidine-based condensation methods. In recent years, there has been significant interest in the development of low-temperature synthesis methods for CTFs, with a focus on improving the scalability and structural control of the process. In 2017, Wang et al. proposed a novel polycondensation reaction that offers several advantages over traditional high-temperature methods. The reaction can be carried out at mild temperatures (≤120 °C) without the need for strong acids or specialised equipment, making it potentially scalable. This method enables the synthesis of CTFs with characteristics such as bright colours, amorphous and layered structures, and high surface areas. The process involves a cascade condensation reaction between an aldehyde and an amidine dihydrochloride (Fig. 3), which includes reversible Schiff base formation, Michael addition reaction, and irreversible cyclisation and dehydrogenation.50 The reaction was carried out at 120 °C in the presence of Cs2CO3 using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the solvent, without the need for an inert atmosphere. DMSO was chosen due to its weak oxidising properties and high boiling point. By combining reversible and irreversible steps in the reaction, the ordered structure of the CTF can be modulated before it transforms into the stable triazine ring. This is essential for synthesising long-ordered CTFs with both 2D and 3D structures. Unfortunately, the resulting CTFs from the reaction between aromatic aldehydes and amidines are semi-crystalline.In order to improve the crystalline of CTFs, various methods have been developed to control the dynamic equilibrium reactions, including solvent selection,50–52 catalyst engineering,42 introducing nucleation inhibitors,53,54 in situ oxidation,55 and crystal species control.36 These approaches are designed to slow down the nucleation and crystal growth rates by modulating the reaction conditions. In order to obtain CTFs with highly crystalline, one crucial factor is controlling the feed rate of the monomer to ensure a self-correcting process. Additionally, finding the appropriate initial polymerisation temperature is essential to provide sufficient reaction energy for controlling the nucleation rate.
In summary, there are two main approaches to synthesising CTFs, with or without high-temperature methods. While high-temperature methods can produce CTFs with well-defined structures and high surface areas, they require specialised equipment and harsh reaction conditions. Low-temperature methods, on the other hand, can be more flexible and scalable but may require longer reaction times and use of specialised solvents, resulting in lower yields or semi-crystalline products. However, both high-temperature and low-temperature methods have advantages and disadvantages, and the selection of the appropriate method depends on factors such as the desired properties of the CTFs, the available resources, and the scalability of the process. It is essential to carefully consider these factors to choose the appropriate synthetic method based on specific applications, as the physicochemical properties such as specific area, crystallinity, porosity, pore size, conductivity, dimensions, and others can be modulated. Researchers should carefully consider these factors when choosing a method for synthesising CTFs. Other methodologies using triazine units-containing monomers can also afford CTFs with tunable structure, which can be modulated for specific applications. However, they are beyond the scope of this review, and detailed discussion of these methodologies can be found in other reviews.56,57

3. Application for energy storage
As an emerging class of organic materials, CTFs have garnered significant attention for potential applications in energy storage, due to high surface area, tunable pore size, high nitrogen content, conjugated networks, chemical tenability, adjustable composition, etc. In recent years, research on CTFs has focused on two main aspects. The first aspect involves material development with redox pairs suitable for LIBs. The second aspect involves extending the use of CTFs to emerging battery concepts beyond Li, including sodium-ion, potassium-ion, zinc-ion, and lithium-metal batteries, etc.58 The following part provides case studies to highlight the work that has advanced the field and illustrates key materials design concepts. The underlying mechanism of CTFs for energy storage in different battery chemistries is discussed, along with the current research status. This part also offers a perspective on how to make CTFs more practical for next-generation energy storage. It is important to note that the carbonisation of CTFs materials will not be discussed in detail.
3.1 CTFs as active materials for lithium storage
The vast array of available CTFs results in a diverse range of functionalities, spanning multiple fields of application, including Li-chemistry-based batteries. While prevalent LIBs have traditionally employed inorganic cathode (such as LiFePO4, LiCoO2, LiMn2O4, or LiNixMnyCozO2 (x + y + z = 1), etc. to dominate the market for portable electronics, electric vehicles, and large-scale energy systems for renewable energy storage including solar and wind.59–62 Despite advantages, LIBs using those cathodes face several issues. These include the scarcity of element resources such as cobalt and nickel, and the time-consuming and energy-intensive synthesis process required at high temperatures.63–65 Furthermore, cycling problems arising from the structural collapse of cathodes and challenges with recyclability also need to be addressed.66–68 In contrast, CTFs offer a promising alternative to traditional cathode materials with tunable structure, use of sustainable resources for synthesis, safety, and environmental friendliness, without recycling issues. CTFs also contain a high amount of nitrogen in the triazine structure, providing heteroatom effects that enable rich and functional centres and active sites for energy storage. In some cases, CTFs can even be used to engineer the anode, separator, and electrolytes. However, successful implementation of these functions depends on the structural engineering of the CTFs, including monomer design, application-driven functionalization, and suitable synthesis protocols, to tune properties such as porosity, crystallinity, morphology, thickness, and defect.
3.1.1 Storage mechanism as electrodes. The charge/discharge of a battery requires two active electrodes, with different redox potentials that undergo reversible redox reactions. In the context of cathode electrodes for LIBs, organic materials can be broadly classified as n-type, p-type, and bipolar organics, with the latter possessing properties of both p-type and n-type materials. During the reaction process, n-type organics are reduced to negatively charged anions during the reaction process, while p-type organics are oxidised to positively charged cations. Bipolar organics can be either reduced to a negatively charged state or oxidised to a positively charged state. CTFs are one of the widely studied porous organic materials and consist of 2D π-conjugated networks composed of aromatic rings connected by triazine units, which contain three carbon atoms and three nitrogen atoms. Heteroatoms such as O, F, and S can be introduced and bonded with carbon to form C–O bond, C–F bond, thiophene, and pyridine, allowing for the introduction of various functional groups, including carboxyl (CO), imine (CN), and azo (NN). Most CTFs electrode materials belong to the n-type organics class and undergo one or more electron reductions during the charge/discharge process, which have moderate voltage (<3.0 V vs. Li/Li+) and capacities due to multiple-electron transfer reactions. For instance, in CTFs with various functional groups, the energy storage mechanism is the reduction of the double bond to single bonds by Li+ ions and the initiation of electron transfer within the molecular structure.69,70 However, the cathode materials based on CTFs also suffer from issues such as insufficient utilisation of active sites, low energy density, and low rate capability, which impede practical applications. To address these issues, several strategies have been developed, including building up conductive networks with carbonaceous materials, improving the intrinsic conductivity of CTFs, and manipulating the microstructure of CTFs. For instance, Lei et al. developed a thin electrode material (E-CIN-1/CNT) consisting of exfoliated CTFs and carbon nanotubes, and monitored the underlying mechanism using ex situ FTIR measurement during charge/discharge, as shown in Fig. 4a.1 Specifically, the peaks located at 1350 and 1630 cm−1 were assigned to the C–N groups of piperazine rings and the CN groups, respectively, while the peaks at 1470 and 1550 cm−1 index to the triazine rings of the CTFs. During lithiation, the peak for CN disappeared and the peaks for triazine ring and piperazine rings became weakened, while all characteristic peaks recovered during delithiation, illustrating the good reversibility of the functional groups. In contrast, both triazine rings and C–N groups in bulk CTFs were inactive during charge/discharge, indicating the exfoliated CTFs kinetically favoured the charge transfer and exposed more active sites (Fig. 4b). In addition, E-CIN-1/CNT exhibited an ionic diffusion coefficient of 3.29 × 10−19–5.84 × 10−18 cm2 s−1 that was much higher than that of the bulk electrode (6.21 × 10−20–1.99 × 10−19 cm2 s−1), owing to its unique exfoliated structure. The lithium-storage mechanism of 11 electrons involved redox reactions associated with the functional groups in the E-CIN-1/CNT electrode, which achieved a high specific capacity of 1005 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles at the current density of 100 mA g−1. These findings highlight the potential of exfoliated CTFs as promising cathode materials for LIBs, and pave the way for the development of high-performance CTFs-based electrode materials for practical energy storage applications.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Ex situ FTIR characterisations of the E-CIN-1/CNT and E-SNW-1/CNT during the lithiation and delithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Charge storage mechanism of CTF-1 in LIBs. 
Furthermore, CTFs have the potential to function as bipolar materials for lithium storage. In a study by Sakaushi et al., an amorphous covalent triazine skeleton was prepared through the trimerisation of p-dicyanobenzene. This amorphous CTFs exhibited a unique energy storage mechanism using both p- and n-doped states for the cathode in a wide electrochemical window. The reduced (n-doped) state of the amorphous CTFs was observed below 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+, while the oxidised (p-doped) state was observed above 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ (Fig. 4c). Compared to crystalline CTFs, the amorphous CTFs also demonstrated significantly improved electrochemical reaction, as the triazine rings from the amorphous CTFs were involved in the electrochemical reaction and were responsible for stability in the potential range of 1.5–4.5 V vs. Li/Li+. Benefiting from the bipolar mechanism, the amorphous CTFs exhibited an extraordinary rate performance, and the full cell achieved a high specific energy density of 119 W h kg cell−1 assuming that the amorphous CTF constituted 35% of the total mass of active materials in a full cell.
In contrast, See et al. have demonstrated that well-defined structures containing triazine units in CTFs exhibited a low capacity (<10 mA h g−1) at relevant voltages (1.5–4.5 V) for cathode materials, while a relatively high, reversible capacity (about 150 mA h g−1) were observed for amorphous CTFs materials with little evidence of triazine functionality.71 They prepared the CTFs with 1,3,5-triazine at a variety of temperatures and found that the triazine unit is not responsible for charge storage. Instead, the CTFs should be prepared above the temperature at which triazine is stable in order to achieve N-doped amorphous carbons with relatively high gravimetric capacity (that means, the CTFs have been decomposed to carbon materials). These N-doped amorphous carbons lack triazine groups but have high concentrations of localized spins that may participate in the charge and discharge process, as confirmed by in situ EPR results. The N-doped amorphous carbon is similar to traditional N-containing porous carbon materials that have been studied as anode materials for LIBs. The cathode materials obtained in this case may not be classified as cathode materials for CTFs as they lack the triazine unit in the structure. The specific energy storage mechanism can be attributed to that of traditional N-doped carbon, however, further investigations are recommended to explore this mechanism further.
Although the aforementioned cases are mainly focused on CTFs with amorphous structures, it should be mentioned that crystalline CTFs are also explored as electrodes for Li-ion batteries.14,72,73 However, previous studies have indicated that amorphous CTFs exhibit advantageous over crystalline CTFs in terms of electrolyte wetting and energy storage. This is due to the fact that disordered structures provide a greater number of Li–C6 rings interactions.74 It is worth mentioning that many crystalline CTFs exhibit fluctuations in capacity, which can gradually increase over long-term cycling. The lithiation/delithiation process of crystalline CTFs-based electrodes can be explored by revealing the changes in morphology, bond information, and crystalline structure in electrodes through in situ or operando characterisations. In this case, the origin of extra capacity contribution will be revealed to help the researchers better understand the storage mechanism of crystalline CTFs-based electrodes in LIBs.

3.1.2 Performance enhancement strategies. The inherently 2D structure of CTFs and the dense packing of multiple layers in eclipsed mode with aligned channels presents a challenge for the insertion and reaction of Li+ ions with active sites located inside the long/deep channels. Several strategies have been developed to address the challenge, including exfoliation, composite materials, and molecular design (Fig. 5). These strategies aim to enhance the accessibility of the active sites to lithium ions and improve the electrochemical performance of CTFs as electrode materials for LIBs. Exfoliation involves the separation of individual layers of CTFs to increase the surface area and enhance the accessibility of active sites. Composite materials involve the combination of CTFs with other materials, such as carbonaceous materials, to improve the electrical conductivity and facilitate Li+ ion transport. Molecular design focuses on modifying the structure of CTFs to enhance the porosity and optimise the location and distribution of active sites for LIBs. These strategies offer promising approaches to addressing the challenge posed by the 2D structure and dense packing of CTFs and represent important avenues for further research in this field.
 Fig. 5  Possible strategies of performance enhancement for energy storage devices. 
Exfoliation. There are various methods developed to improve the electrochemical performance of CTFs due to the challenges posed by the intrinsically 2D structure and dense packing of multiple layers in eclipsed mode with aligned channels. One effective strategy is to exfoliate bulk materials into thin CTFs, which exposes active sites and increases ionic diffusion kinetics. It is worth noting that the layered-stacking structure required for exfoliation can only be constructed through specific synthetic methods, such as ionothermal synthesis, interfacial reaction using superacid catalysts, and polycondensation of amidine.75 Chemical exfoliation, interfacial condensation, and mechanical exfoliation are commonly classified as “top-down” strategies to convert bulk CTFs into CTFs nanosheets, while the monomer-dependent synthesis of CTFs nanosheets is a “bottom-up” approach. For instance, Zhu et al. utilised a chemical exfoliation method inspired by an acid–base driven mechanism, using oxidising H2SO4 or non-oxidising H3PO4 Brønsted acids at room temperature. The CTFs can be easily exfoliated into 1–2 layered functionalised nanosheets with a high yield of 42%.76 Exfoliated CTF electrode materials exhibit superior electrochemical performance, including rate performance, cycling performance, and charge transfer resistance, compared to bulk CTFs due to increased active site exposure and reduced ionic transport distance. In 2017, Zhang et al. introduced a novel approach to obtain few-layered fluorinated CTFs nanosheets (FCTFs) through a facile ball-milling exfoliation process. These exfoliated FCTFs (E-FCTFs) demonstrated remarkable improvements in rate performance and specific capacity when employed in alkaline-based batteries. Specifically, the E-FCTFs exhibited a specific capacity of 1035 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles for lithium-ion batteries, surpassing the performance of the bulk counterparts, which achieved 576 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after the same number of cycles. Moreover, at a current density of 2.0 A g−1, the E-FCTFs electrode displayed a significantly higher reversible capacity of 593 mA h g−1, while the bulk FCTFs electrode only exhibited a low capacity of approximately 170 mA h g−1. This superior rate capability of the E-FCTF can be attributed to the few-layered structure, which provides a greater number of exposed active sites, and the shorter diffusion path for Li+ ions. These factors contribute to enhanced electrochemical performance by facilitating efficient charge transfer and promoting rapid ion transport within the electrode material.73 Similar results can be also found in previous literature.71,73,77,78 However, only interfacial condensation and the monomer-dependent synthesis are mild and able to controllably produce large-sized nanosheets with excellent structural integrity. This is because the oxidant used in the chemical exfoliation method would dramatically destroy the in-pane bonds of the CTFs, resulting in oxidative debris of CTFs other than nanosheets, while the mechanical exfoliation method suffers from the low product yield or the amorphisation of CTFs due to the reduced long-range order structure.73 An alternative approach to synthesise crystalline triazine-based nanosheets is through monomer-dependent synthesis. Previous research has suggested that incorporating mechanically interlocked molecular architectures into 2D COFs could be a novel strategy for partitioning the interlayer space into pseudo-unit cells.79 Other bottom-up strategies, such as on-surface synthesis, interface synthesis (such as liquid–air interface and liquid–liquid interface), and solvothermal synthesis for building up COFs can also be extended to construct 2D thin CTFs nanosheets (Fig. 5). However, there are few reports on using these controllable designs in the development of thin CTFs nanosheets. In addition, new polymerisation methods such as Suzuki–Miyaura coupling and Ullman coupling, which are not limited to the monomer of cyano groups, may be worth exploring in the future. Exfoliated CTFs have demonstrated significant potential for improving the electrochemical performance of bulk CTFs for energy storage. In addition, studying other CTFs can provide valuable insights into the structure–property relationships and can potentially enhance the electrochemical performance of CTFs further, particularly in terms of specific capacity and rate performance. This can help determine if they can compete with conventional inorganic counterparts, such as carbons and Si/C composites for energy storage applications.
2D composites. In order to utilise CTFs for practical applications, the low electrical conductivity needs to be addressed. The conductivity of electrode materials is a crucial factor in achieving favorable electrochemical performance, particularly in terms of rate performance. The electrical conductivity of CTFs can be significantly influenced by various factors, such as the synthesis method, temperature, thickness, and monomers used.80 While thin CTFs are theoretically expected to exhibit higher electronic conductivity than bulk CTFs materials, the battery performance is still limited by electron and ion conductivity. This is because the defects and boundaries between thin nanosheets strongly impede electron transport, and the thin 2D CTFs nanosheets may aggregate due to strong π–π interactions, making it difficult for ions to diffuse, especially at high current densities. To enhance the conductivity of thin CTFs nanosheets, a feasible approach is to combine them with conductive carbon materials, such as graphene and carbon nanotubes, to form a composite.81,82 The introduction of conductive carbon materials can further alleviate the volume change of pristine CTFs nanosheets during lithiation/delithiation and prevent side reactions when exposed pristine CTFs nanosheets to organic electrolytes. For instance, Yuan et al. developed a CTF-rGO composite, which possessed a high specific surface area of 1357.2 m2 g−1 and exhibited a large capacity of 235 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 when used as cathode materials for LIBs.83 However, incorporating conductive carbon materials into the CTFs composite has been found to reduce the overall energy density of the pristine CTFs. This is due to the negligible capacity contribution of carbon materials within the given cathode voltage window of 1.5–4.5 V. Therefore, to address this issue, the ideal conductive carbons should possess merits of excellent transfer kinetics of charge carriers from the current collector and the electrolyte to the redox centres of CTFs. This can be achieved by carefully optimising the conductive materials to form a 2D composite with a compact and robust structure, featuring a large aspect ratio, ample transfer channels, and high specific surface area. To meet these requirements, the synthesis procedure of the 2D composite should also be carefully regulated. Su et al. innovatively fabricated a 2D composite consisting of graphene and porous CTFs by regulating various molecular building blocks under ionothermal conditions.77 Polyacrylonitrile-functionalised graphene nanosheets were employed as a template to deliberately design a series of graphene-based porous organic polymers (G-PPEs) with controllable porosities. The graphene-based 2D carbanions were created and used as initiators for the anionic polymerisation of acrylonitrile on the graphene surfaces and followed by the polymerisation of diverse molecular building blocks on graphene surfaces. The tailored pore structures of CTFs, ranging from 2.1 to 7.3 nm, were immobilised on a graphene substrate through covalent bonding to form an electroactive network across the entire aromatic structure. This approach effectively suppressed the side reactions between the electrolyte and pristine CTFs. Impressively, when serving as cathode for LIBs, the tightly coupled 2D graphene/CTFs exhibited remarkable cycle stability of 395 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 for thousands of cycles and excellent rate capability of 135 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 15000 mA g−1. This excellent performance was attributed to the unique 2D CTFs/graphene structure, which featured a strong π–π interaction and good structural compatibility between the two materials. In addition, different from the traditional physical adsorption method, the in situ polymerisation of monomers on the graphene surface reconstructed the porous structures of the pristine CTFs and introduced mesopores, resulting in an enlarged specific surface area. This approach can be further extended to the synthesis of 2D CTFs/graphene with high surface area (1822 m2 g−1), high nitrogen content (6.35 wt%), and high conductivity at a synthesis temperature of 800 °C by the polymerisation of p-benzenedinitrile monomer. Benefiting from these advantages, the assembled LIBs demonstrated a capacity of 235 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA g−1 for 3000 cycles in a working window range from 1.5 to 4.5 V.78In addition to graphene, there are other 2D nanomaterials with electrochemical activity in LIBs, such as transition metal-based materials, borane, phosphorus, MXene, etc., which can also serve as templates for the synthesis of 2D composites involving 2D CTFs nanosheets. These materials are particularly useful for synthesising layer-to-layer structures, which can significantly increase the number of conductive pathways and improve electronic transmission. For instance, 2D MoS2 can be functionalised by p-iodobenzene, which can be used as a 2D template for preparing sandwich-like CTFs superstructures.84 However, the synthesis of 2D CTFs composite with specific functionalities could be complicated and challenging, which may limit the commercial viability. In addition, the 2D CTFs composites may have limited mechanical properties, including low tensile strength, making it less attractive for certain energy storage devices that require high mechanical stability, such as wearable or flexible LIBs. The 2D CTFs composites have promising properties but also have limitations that must be considered for use in specific applications. Nonetheless, further research on the synthesis of 2D composites using various templates and optimisation of properties can lead to successful commercialisation in the future.
Molecular design. Apart from the strategies of exfoliation and forming 2D composites, incorporating redox-active species or functional groups into the CTFs skeleton has emerged as a promising approach to boost the electrochemical performance, particular for achieving high voltage battery configurations.85 It is generally accepted that the operating voltage of a battery largely depends on the cathode materials, and the redox potential of CTFs can be tailored by the introduction of election-donating (e.g., –NH2, –CH3, –OCH3) or electron-withdrawing (e.g., –CF3, –CN, –F, –S, –Cl, –Br) groups, leading to higher or lower redox potentials, respectively.86 The incorporation of active sites into the CTFs structure facilitates intermolecular charge transfer, enhances electron withdrawal, and increases electronic conductivity due to the extended π-conjugated network.87 Among the various functional groups, carbonyl compounds, particularly those with conjugated carbonyl groups, are highly attractive because of the high capacity derived from multiple electron reactions during charge/discharge. Recently, Buyukcakir et al. reported the synthesis of redox-active CTFs (rCTFs) by incorporating the anthraquinone unit through triazine linkages and evaluated the performance as anode materials for LIBs.15 The rCTFs exhibited excellent capacities at different densities of 0.5C (1200 mA h g−1), 10C (520 mA h g−1), and 20C (420 mA h g−1) after 1500 cycles, with a high areal capacity loading of up to 2.5 mA h cm−2. These results outperform most COF-based anodes reported to date. According to theoretical calculations and experimental results, the remarkable electrochemical performance can be attributed to the multiple electron redox processes (up to 23 electrons involved) caused by highly active quinone units, rapid charge transfer endorsed by the intimate binding between triazine and benzene rings, high surface area, and the possible disordered structure due to the introduction of lithiophilic redox active sites. The extended CTFs structure in rCTFs induced a continuous structural deformation of the CTFs structure and activation of the rCTFs, despite this activation only took several days. This design strategy can be extended by incorporating other organic materials with carbonyl compounds such as anhydrides, carboxylates, imides, and ketones. However, most carbonyl compounds have inferior electrochemical conductivity, which limits the rate performance. In addition, small carbonyl compounds suffer from severe dissolution in aprotic electrolytes, although it is uncertain if this issue applies to CTFs with carbonyl redox sites.It is also feasible to tune the electronic conductivity of CTFs by the introduction of electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups since these groups can modify the energy level of both the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). According to the energy band theory of molecules, the introduction of electron-withdrawing groups can narrow the bond gap of both the LUMO and the HUMO, which can lead to faster ion/electron transfer and improved electrical conductivity, and electrochemical performances in LIBs. For example, Zhang et al. synthesised fluorine-containing CTFs (F-CTFs) by incorporating F atoms into 1.4 dicarbonitrile-based benzene and in situ polymerisation by molten zinc chloride. The resulting F-functionalised CTFs possess more active sites (12 electrons) associated with the activated benzene and triazine rings, as well as increased conductivity due to a narrower band gap of 1.45 eV, which is smaller than that of the pristine CTFs (bandgap: 2.35 eV), according to the theoretical calculation results. When cycled at 100 mA g−1 after 200 cycles, the F-CTFs outperformed the non-fluorinated CTFs. The improved performance was attributed to the enhanced Li accessibility and reduced energy band gap for F-CTFs resulting from the introduction of fluorine atoms with negative charge. However, it is important to note that –F is an electron-withdrawing group, the resulting F-CTFs could only serve as an anode electrode material in this work due to the moderate redox window of the chosen CTFs.
In addition to the conventional carbonyl compounds as anode electrodes, some other CTF compounds based on CN (such as Schiff bases monomers),88 CN (such as 3,5-dicyano-2,4,6-trimethylpyridine monomer),89 NN (such as 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl) trianiline monomers),70 and conjugated CC that are usually n-type organics with high voltage,90 which are intriguing as cathode materials for LIBs. In a recent study, Zhao et al. demonstrated the use of a dual-active-center consisting of CO on polyimide and CN on triazine-modified atomic-layer CTFs as cathode materials in LIBs for the first time.91 Based on the FTIR and XPS results, the CO and CN groups can store one Li+ ion to form C–O–Li and C–N–Li species, respectively. The CO center has a stronger electronegativity than CN, resulting in Li+ ions first interacting with the CO group, allowing one unit of the modified CTFs to interact with 30 Li+ ions during charge/discharge processes. In addition, both redox functional groups reversibly weakened and rebounded during the charging and discharging process as demonstrated by in situ FTIR. The LIBs exhibited a high initial capacity of 110 mA h g−1 and a high capacity retention of 87.3% after 500 cycles. These results suggest that CTF compounds based on CN, CN, NN, and CC may be promising candidates for use as cathode materials in LIBs.
CTFs have recently emerged as a promising class of materials for use in LIBs, however, most CTFs incorporate abundant inactive linkers (e.g., benzene, triphenyl, and naphthaline) as robust cathode materials for LIBs, leading to a decreased theoretical specific capacity less than 300 mA h g−1. To address this limitation, two practical approaches are suggested. The first approach involves increasing the concentration of active parts in the modified CTFs while introducing suitable charge transfer channels for the diffusion of Li+ ions. Another approach is to change the inactive linkers to an electron-deficient system with multiple electroactive units. CTFs with abundant electroactive sites, such as CO and CC groups, can generate radical intermediates during the charging and discharging process. However, these highly reactive unpaired electrons can be unstable and may combine with other active parts or lead to the decomposition of electrolytes.92 Therefore, the concentration of radical intermediates should be monitored in CTFs with abundant reactive sites.
In short, CTFs can be tailored by introducing various functional groups to enhance electrochemical properties, including electron-donating or electron-withdrawing groups, and redox-active sites. Moreover, by modifying the inactive linkers with electron-deficient systems, the concentration of active parts in CTFs can be increased to improve the theoretical specific capacity. Despite significant progress in the development of COF-based cathode materials for LIBs, several challenges still need to be addressed. For instance, the low tap density and poor mechanical properties of CTFs limit the practical application as a bulk electrode material. Strategies such as compositing with conductive graphene or polymers can be used to overcome these limitations. Moreover, the scale-up production of CTFs and the optimisation of the corresponding synthesis methods remain a challenge for commercial applications. The underlying mechanism is also suggested to be explored by using in situ or operando facilities to provide guidelines for the design of CTFs in LIBs. Given the tunability, high surface area, and electrochemical properties, CTFs have great potential as electrode materials, while further research is required to optimise the design and synthesis of CTFs to address the challenges associated with practical application. By doing so, CTFs could play a vital role in the development of next-generation LIBs.

3.2 CTFs for next generation energy storage
The next generation of energy storage technologies is being developed to overcome the limitations of current energy storage systems, including metal batteries and capacitors, in terms of energy density, cost, safety, and environmental impact. These advancements are crucial for enabling the widespread adoption of renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar power, by offering reliable, cost-effective, and sustainable energy storage solutions. However, the deployment of next-generation energy devices in practical applications is contingent upon addressing several challenges, including performance, durability, reliability, and safety, etc. CTFs have been proposed as a potential solution to address the aforementioned challenges due to the high surface area, tailored pore size distribution, chemical stability, and low cost. In this section, we will focus on the application of CTFs in next-generation energy storage devices, highlighting potential for improving the performance, durability, and safety of energy storage systems (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  The application of CTFs on next generation energy storage devices. 
3.2.1 Lithium sulfur batteries. 
Cathode. Lithium–sulfur batteries have garnered scientific attention as a promising next-generation energy storage solution due to the theoretical energy density of 2567 W h kg−1, cost-effective sulfur cathodes, and a higher average working voltage of approximately 2.1 V. Despite potential, the state-of-the-art of Li–S batteries faces several challenges that impede commercial deployment, particularly those relating to sulfur cathodes. The low inherent conductivity of sulfur and the “shuttle effect” from the dissolved polysulfides, as documented, lead to poor cycling performance and rate capability.93,94 To address these issues, two prevalent strategies have been introduced: (1) using conductive materials to enhance the electron conductivity of the sulfur cathode; (2) physically encapsulating S elements into the host to absorb polysulfide.108 Due to high porosity, wide pore size distribution, tunable functional groups, and high surface area, CTFs are excellent host materials for sulfur cathodes. They can serve to absorb intermediate polysulfide species by forming chemical bonds to prevent the “shuttle effect”, or bond with sulfur through covalent bonding, where polysulfide dissolution does not occur during discharge. Additionally, the diverse building blocks used to create CTFs offer considerable flexibility in the design of adsorptive capabilities. Recently, Liao et al. demonstrated the successful immersion of sulfur into the CTF-1 host using a melt diffusion strategy for the first time, demonstrating the potential of CTFs as effective sulfur cathode hosts.95 CTF-1 material was synthesised by cyclotrimerisation of 1,4-dicyanobenzene in molten ZnCl2 at 400 °C, resulting in a specific surface area of 789 m2 g−1, a total pore volume of 0.37 cm3 g−1 and a pore size of 1.23 nm. The highly ordered 2D structure with nanoporous distribution in one direction provided ample space for sulfur impregnation, effectively inhibiting the dissolution of soluble intermediates. Although this work is interesting, the selected CTF-1 cannot load more sulfur due to the low pore volume, further modifications of the CTF-1 surface are required to restrict the diffusion of polysulfides. It is noteworthy that the electrochemical performance of CTFs in retaining polysulfides is mainly attributed to the small pore size, rather than any chemisorption effect.109 Furthermore, irregular sulfur domains physically linked by CTFs molecules left some sulfur unbound after long-term cycling, because lithiation cleaves S–S bonds in sulfur chains. These cleaved bonds may not be recovered to the original state and are easily dissolved in the electrolyte. To overcome this problem, Talapaneni et al. developed a novel strategy by forming CTFs with embedded polymeric sulfur (S-CTFs, Fig. 7), which exhibited a high sulfur content of 62%.96 Unlike physical bonding, in situ sulfuration allowed for covalent attachment of sulfur and homogeneous distribution within the pores, resulting in robust cycling performance for 300 cycles with 85.8% capacity retention and a high initial coulombic efficiency of 94.4% (ICE) at a current density of 0.05C (Table 1). The outstanding electrochemical performance was attributed to the formation of well-confined sulfur species within the CTF host, high sulfur loading, and strong sulfur bonding with the CTFs host, effectively suppressing the “shuttle effect” of the polysulfides. Additionally, Je et al. demonstrated the capacity for sulfur impregnation in perfluorinated CTFs through elemental sulfur-mediated synthesis, where the sulfur content in CTFs reached 86 wt%.97 The proposed reaction involves nucleophilic ionic intermediates from the ring-opening of circular S8 to facilitate in situ polymerisation toward a sulfur-embedded polymer network. The materials exhibited a high binding affinity toward lithium polysulfides, resulting in an ICE of 93.1% and capacity retention of 81.6% after 300 cycles. It is clear that the in situ sulfuration can endow CTFs with polysulfides chemisorption capabilities, which is a crucial and advantageous characteristic for those CTFs in Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 7  (a) Molecular structure of S-CTFs. (b) The synthesis process of S-CTFs. (c) First discharge and charge curves of S-CTF-1 measured at 0.05C (1C = 1600 mA h g−1). (d) Cycling performance and CEs of S-CTF-1 in comparison with a control sample, KB-S. The tests were performed at 0.2C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Table 1 Electrochemical performances of representative CTF-based Li–S batteries




Host material
Voltage range (V)
Rate (sulfur loading)
Cycle (n)
Initial capacity (mA h g−1)
Retained capacity (mA h g−1)
Sulfur content (wt%)
Ref.




CTF-1/S-155 °C
1.1–3.0
0.1C
50
1197
762
34
95


S-CTF-1
1.7–2.7
1C (0.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
482.2
413.7
62
96


S-CTF-1
1.7–2.7
2C (0.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
406.3
329.1
62
96


SF-CTF-1 (1:1)
1.8–2.7
1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
365.1
215.5
67
97


SF-CTF-1 (1:3)
1.8–2.7
1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
637.4
520.1
86
97


SF-CTF-1 (1:3)
1.8–2.7
2C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
528
435.1
86
97


SF-CTF-1 (1:3)
1.8–2.7
5C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
374.1
330.3
86
97


SF-CTF-1 (1:5)
1.8–2.7
1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
598.9
418.6
99.5
97


TB-COF/S-40 (CTF)
1.5–3.0
1C (0.9 mgsulfur cm−2)
800
808
663
40
98


TB-COF/S-40 (CTF)
1.5–3.0
2C (0.9 mgsulfur cm−2)
800
612
482
40
98


TB-COF/S-58 (CTF)
1.5–3.0
0.5C (2.2 mgsulfur cm−2)
150
1044
738
58
98


NO-CTF-1/S
1.5–3.0
0.5C (1.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
867.8
737.6
71
99


NO-CTF-2/S
1.5–3.0
0.5C (1.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
843
649.7
70
99


S@CTFO
1.7–2.8
1C (1.0–1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
796.3
512
67
100


S@CCTFO
1.7–2.8
1C (1.0–1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
665.3
318
72
100


COF-SQ-Ph-S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
150
1331
618
—
101


ART-COF/S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
1C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
1000
993
636
62
102


ART-COF/S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.5C (3.6 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
3.06 mA h cm−2
2.68 mA h cm−2
62
102


AFT-COF/S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.2C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
935
726
—
102


COF-Tr-BA@S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
200
1349
627
—
103


COF-Tr @S (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
200
1152
312
—
103


cPpy-S-CTF 0%
1.8–2.7
0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
582.2
501.3
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 0%
1.8–2.7
0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
—
227.6
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 1%
1.8–2.7
0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
647.2
508.1
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 1%
1.8–2.7
0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
—
290
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%
1.8–2.7
0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
702.9.
610.1
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%
1.8–2.7
1C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
699.4
682.6
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%
1.8–2.7
2C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
300
631.2
610.4
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%
1.8–2.7
0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
—
612.9
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 5%
1.8–2.7
0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
683.3
545.3
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 5%
1.8–2.7
0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
—
583.8
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 10%
1.8–2.7
0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
667.9
484.2
81–83
104


cPpy-S-CTF 10%
1.8–2.7
0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
—
348.6
81–83
104


S/P-CTFs@rGO (CTF)
1.7–2.8
0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
1130
920
70
105


S/P-CTFs@rGO (CTF)
1.7–2.8
2C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
200
—
650
70
105


S/P-CTFs
1.7–2.8
0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)
500
1022
779.8
75.30
105


CNT-CON/S (CTF)
1.0–3.0
0.1C (5 mgsulfur cm−2)
100
1353
1009
78
106


FMCTF-S
1.7–2.8
1C (1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)
400
681
426
77
107


FMCTF-S
1.7–2.8
0.2C (3 mgsulfur cm−2)
50
945
—
77
107




To mitigate the “shuttle effect” of polysulfides and improve the performance of Li–S batteries, incorporating lithophilicity and sulfophilicity functional groups into CTF matrices is a promising approach as strong chemical bonds can form between functional groups and polysulfides.110,111 Taking inspiration from this approach, Xiao et al. developed CTFs containing triazine and boroxine functional units, with the former capable of chemically absorbing Li+ ions through lithiphilic interaction between nitrogen atoms and Li+ ions and the latter is able to trap polysulfides through sulfiphilic interaction, respectively.98 UV-vis spectra studies and theoretical calculations further support the effectiveness of this approach in alleviating the “shuttle effect” of polysulfides during cycling. However, the identification of individual functional units and the specific role among the combinatorial effects of different functionalities in CTFs materials remains a significant challenge. To address this issue, Zhang et al. designed two N, O-containing CTFs with varying nitrogen and oxygen content (NO-CTF-1 and NO-CTF-2),99 with both exhibiting large surface area (1093.83 and 1144.03 m2 g−1 for NO-CTF-1 and NO-CTF-2, respectively) and pore size distribution (micropores and mesopores) to trap sulfur up to 70%. However, NO-CTF-1 demonstrated much better cycle stability and capacity retention (92% at 0.5C after 300 cycles) compared to NO-CTF-2, owing to the varied N and O content. The N and O with extra pair of electrons in NO-CTF-1 can interact with the strong Lewis acid of terminal Li atoms in lithium polysulfides. This work offers new insights into the cathode electrode materials in Li–S batteries to rationally design the building blocks of CTFs and similar results have been further reported by the introduction of B, N, O, and even other heteroatoms.100–103 Incorporating conductive materials such as carbon nanotubes, graphene, and conductive polymers into CTF-based electrodes can further enhance electronic conductivity and improve electrochemical performance. In addition, metal-modified CTFs and graphene composite have been proposed as effective solutions for suppressing the “shuttle effect” of polysulfides, due to the presence of unsaturated metal–N3 coordinated groups as active sites in the M-CTFs.112 The molecular diversity of CTFs makes them an ideal platform for cathode design in lithium–sulfur batteries, as unique structural properties enable high sulfur loading, uniform sulfur distribution, good sulfur-CTFs affinity, and the capacity to restrict polysulfide dissolution. However, one of the main drawbacks is that CTFs can undergo structural degradation over time, leading to polysulfides leaching out of the CTFs and re-entering the electrolyte, thereby reducing battery performance. Additionally, the adsorption capacity of several CTFs with limited surface area and pore size distribution is limited, which means that they can only trap a certain amount of polysulfides. This limits the overall capacity of the battery. Therefore, efforts should be focused on increasing surface area, creating suitable pores, inducing defects, and incorporating guest molecule functionality. Additionally, further efforts are necessary to improve the selectivity for polysulfide adsorption and developing CTFs with highly conductive skeletons to enhance the structural stability and cycling stability of CTFs. This can be achieved through the development of protective coatings to prevent degradation of the CTFs and the use of electrolytes with improved stability. These approaches will facilitate the development of advanced lithium–sulfur batteries with high energy density, long cycle life, and improved performance.
Separator. The microporous structures of CTFs offer an opportunity for use in modifying commercial separators to enhance polysulfide-trapping and anti-self-discharge capabilities.104,105 This is particularly relevant since the current separators used in Li+ based batteries are made of polyolefin materials with macropores (>100 nm), which have limited impact in curbing the “shuttle effect” of polysulfides. Previous modification techniques have centred on carbon-based coating layers, polar materials for trapping polysulfides, and transition metal materials for catalysing polysulfide conversion. Unfortunately, these functional materials need to be densely coated on the separator surface, resulting in increased interfacial impedance between the electrolyte and the modified separator.4 In view of advantages of high surface area, regular molecular arrangement, uniform pore distribution, light weight, and robust stability, CTFs have the potential to serve as a modified layer to prevent polysulfides from migrating through physical repulsion. Shi et al. firstly developed CTFs-coated separators for Li–S batteries by blade-coating CTFs onto Celgard separator. These 2D multi-layer lamellar CTFs with hierarchical microporous structure showed chemical compatibility with lithium polysulfide. The CTFs acted as ionic sieves, selectively allowing Li+ ions while inhibiting soluble polysulfides from reaching the Li anode. The CTFs demonstrated good anti-self-discharge behavior and enhanced protection for the Li anode. Consequently, Li–S batteries with CTFs-modified Celgard separator exhibited improved battery performance, including enhanced active material utilisation, high reversible specific capacity (1249 mA h g−1 at 0.5C), high rate performance (802 mA h g−1 at 2.0C), and excellent cycling stability with a low capacity fade-rate of 0.052% per cycle over 800 cycles at 1.0C.113 In addition, they introduced an ultralight functional separator (LBL-f separator) with an ordered structure using electrostatic layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly technique. The LBL-f separator consisted of positively charged poly(diallyl dimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) wrapped CTFs (CTF@PDDA) and negatively charged poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). The CTF@PDDA layers demonstrated strong polysulfide anchoring ability through physical/chemical interaction and exhibited high electrolyte uptake capacity due to the large specific surface area and porous structure. Additionally, the PEDOT:PSS layers acted as conductive layers with facilitated electron transfer and served as excellent interface stabiliser and adhesion binders. As a result, when assembled with a standard S-cathode and Li metal anode by using the proposed LBL-f separator, they exhibited remarkable cycling stability (0.052% capacity fade-rate per cycle over 1000 cycles at 1.0C), high sulfur utilisation (90.7% at 0.1C and 59.2% at 2.0C), and enhanced protection for the Li metal.114 In a recent study by Lee et al., a novel structural design involving the in situ growth of COF on CNT as an interlayer for Li–S batteries was proposed.115 This design allowed microporous COFs to effectively trap polysulfides without hindering ion/electron transfer within the CNT network. However, when COF is used as a dense layer with an oriented structure, it may impede the transfer of Li+ ions between two electrodes due to the large size of solvated Li+ ions and the high Li+ diffusion resistance in the channels of COF, resulting in poor lithium-ion conductivity and sluggish reactivation of sulfur species. To improve the Li+ ionic transfer kinetics, Cao et al. have developed lithiated CTFs that contain abundant phenolic and triazole units. These modified separator was then fabricated by dispersing lithiated CTFs onto Celgard separators using simple vacuum filtration with a loading amount of 0.3 mg cm−2 (Fig. 8a).4 The pyridine nitrogen in the CTFs traps the polysulfides, while the O–H and N–H bonds in adjacent phenolic and triazole units provide the activated sites for Li substitution. In addition, the ionic conductivity can be further improved by the introduction of sulfonate groups due to the large dissociation constant of Li+ ions,116 the introduction of polar groups (such as –OH, –B, –N groups) and anions/solvent molecules (Fig. 8b).8 In addition to these approaches, developing CTFs with short-ionic transfer channels and/or vertically aligned channels may achieve separators with capabilities of rapid ionic transportation, inhibiting the crossover of polysulfides or transition metal ions, and reducing side reactions on electrodes. In situ formation of CTFs on commercial separators could also lead to novel CTFs-based separators with multifunction for practical application.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the Li–S cell with the Li-CTFs@GN/Celgard separator, polysulfide adsorption site and lithiated-nanochannel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Schematic process of COF/PVDF separator in desolvating the diluted electrolyte and inducing lithium-ion deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
By taking advantage of microporous structures, CTFs can be used to modify commercial separators and enhance ability to trap polysulfides, which can significantly improve the cycling stability and energy density of Li–S batteries. However, one potential drawback is the possibility of decreased mechanical stability of the separator due to the intrinsic property of CTFs, which could lead to cracking or other forms of damage during battery operation and compromise the separator's integrity. Another potential drawback is the possibility of increased interfacial resistance between the electrolyte and the modified separator. While CTFs can trap polysulfides and stabilise the discharge products, introduction could increase the interfacial impedance between the electrolyte and the CTFs separator, resulting in decreased battery performance and reduced efficiency. Additionally, the scalability of the production process for CTF-modified separators could be a challenge, and alternative methods of dispersing CTFs onto the separator may be required to ensure a consistent and uniform coating on the separator surface. While previous results are exciting, the long-term stability and durability of CTF-modified separators should be further verified in a practical cell system. Therefore, further research and development is needed to optimise the performance and to fully understand the long-term stability and durability of CTFs. While CTFs show great promise as a means of modifying separators in Li–S batteries, it is important to carefully consider potential drawbacks and limitations.

3.2.2 Lithium metal batteries. Li metal has been recognised as a highly promising anode material for next-generation batteries, owing to its exceptional energy density (e.g., 350 W h kg−1 in Li-LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 batteries).117 However, the inherent issues of dendrite growth and volume expansion during Li plating/stripping often lead to capacity decay and safety hazards. Significant progress has been made in materials science and engineering to tackle dendrite growth, while novel electrolytes and additives are being developed to enhance battery stability and cycling performance. In this section, we focus on the potential of CTFs in mitigating the aforementioned challenges in LMBs.
Electrolyte. The critical role of electrolyte chemistry in the function of LMBs has been well-established in early studies, and this consensus continues to this day.118 Liquid electrolytes containing lithium-based salts and aprotic solvents are currently dominating the electrolytes used for LMBs.119 However, the dendritic growth and uncontrollable side reactions between Li metal and liquid electrolyte result in poor cyclability, and safety issues exist due to the low voltage windows and intrinsic flammability, particularly under high voltage operations or within large-size batteries.To address these issues, solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) have emerged as a promising solution. Polymers based SSEs containing light elements such as poly(ethylene oxide)120 and polyacrylonitrile,121 are particularly promising due to high chemical and thermal stability, high flexibility, good processability, and intimate interfacial contact with electrodes. However, the relatively low ionic conductivities at room temperature and low Young's modulus limit practical applications in high-voltage cathode and high-rate systems. CTFs offer promising solutions as SSE candidates due to the tunable microstructure, structural functionality, and acceptable Li+ ion transference number. CTFs-based SSEs can be divided into pristine CTFs conductors with/without additives involving solvents, salts, ionic liquid, etc. In terms of pristine CTFs, the ionic conductivity mechanism is primarily dependent on the concentration of active sites that enable Li+ ions hopping (Grotthuss mechanism), and the distance between these active sites. To enhance the ionic conductivity of CTFs-based electrolytes, solvents that facilitate ionic migration can be added. In particular, polar solvents with high dielectric constants can effectively enable weakly bound Li+ ions to escape from the insoluble CTFs skeletons.122 Comparatively, the pure CTFs SSEs exhibited high transference number (around 0.9),122 which indicates a single Li+ ion conduction behavior in the skeleton of CTFs due to the well-defined immovable lithium-conduction sites of CTFs. However, the introduction of salts or solvents in the nanochannels of CTFs reduces the transference number of Li+ ions to some extent, primarily due to anionic migration. However, the transference number of Li+ ions remains relatively high (around 0.6).123 Notably, the diffusion energy barrier of Li+ ions in CTFs is still lower than that of common ceramics, suggesting a high rate of Li+ ion conduction. This low diffusion barrier is attributed to consecutive ionic conducting sites in the CTFs, the directional ion channels, and structural flexibility to accommodate guest ions. For instance, Hou et al. designed vinyl-functionalised CTFs (V-CTFs) and grafted them with ether-based electrolytes via in situ polymerisation to produce poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate/V-CTFs (PDM/V-CTFs).124 The triazine rings structures in V-CTFs facilitates the uniform lithium deposition and establishes a stable interface between electrolyte and Li metal. The PDM/V-CTFs showed excellent ion conductivity of 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 40 °C, a wide electrochemical window up to 5.0 V, and a high Young's modulus of 92 MPa. As a result, the assembled Li‖PDM/V-CTFs‖LiFePO4 cell exhibited a capacity retention of 83.8% at a current density of 1C. However, safety risks such as flammability, leakage, and vaporisation of solvents during CTFs preparation should be considered due to the employment of ether-based solvents. Alternatively, solvents with high thermal stability can act as an ideal transport medium for fast Li+ ions conduction in a wide temperature range. The use of solvents with high thermal stability can act as an ideal transport medium for fast Li+ ions conduction in a wide temperature range. Notably, in contrast to inorganic SSEs (such as oxides and sulfides), the ion conductivity of PDM/V-CTFs is relatively low, despite the introduction of functional groups to enhance ionic migration.125 The overall ionic conductivity of CTFs-based SSEs is greatly restricted due to the random arrangement of CTFs and the isotropic arrangement of one-dimensional channels in most CTFs. To this end, Niu et al. developed a novel type of CTFs-based SSEs with oriented channels, which was achieved by subjecting the CTFs to a uniaxial hydraulic press at a high temperature of 150 °C.5 This technique exploited the weak π–π interaction between the interlayers of CTFs, which enables the slipping of a single layer under mechanical stress and temperature to achieve an anisotropic packing of the crystallites (Fig. 9a and b). The resulting SSE exhibited an impressive ionic conductivity of up to 1.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C, which is superior to that of isotropic CTFs (5.3 × 10−5 S cm−1). Moreover, the Young's module was as high as 10.5 GPa for the oriented CTFs, compared to that of isotropic CTFs (5.5 GPa) and traditional PVDF (2.45 GPa). The long-term cycling evaluations of the Q-CTF SSE showed that excellent cycling performance and average Coulombic efficiencies of 99.1% were realised even after 400 cycles with the capacity retention rate up to 82% (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of the electrochemically stable and holistically oriented COF SSE in two steps. The first step is stabilised modification, and the second step is crystallographic alignment experiment. (b) Synthesis of Q-CTF by the cyclisation reaction of I-CTF. (c) Long-term cycling of symmetrical lithium metal cells using (a) I-CTF SSE (green), Q-CTF SSE prepared at RT (blue), and Q-CTF SSE prepared at high temperature (red) at 0.1 mA cm−2; 0.1 mA h cm−2 lithium was plated/stripped per cycle, and (b) Q-CTF SSE at 0.2 mA cm−2; 0.2 mA h cm−2 lithium was plated/stripped per cycle. Inserts are the enlarged profiles at different measured times for Q-CTF SSE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the aforementioned strategies, the conductivity of CTFs can be further enhanced by modifying the CTFs skeleton. This can be accomplished through the introduction of functional groups with high ionic conductivity, pore size engineering, and formation of composites with conductive carbons or polymers to guide the CTFs formation with oriented channels (not randomly mixed each other). A systematic exploration of the effects of nanochannel pore structures on ionic conduction is crucial, as is increasing the contents of ion-conductive groups in CTFs. Additionally, feasible strategies to modify the synthesis procedure of CTFs with specific orientations, such as vertically aligned CTFs, must be explored. However, despite promising properties, most CTFs-based SSEs are currently prepared by a powder pressing method, leading to fragility and interfacial issues with electrodes, which limits practical applications in pouch-cell or wearable cells. Developing CTFs-based SSEs with high flexibility and mechanical strength is therefore necessary, yet challenging. In addition, charge transfer at interfaces and interface degradation leading to interphase formation must also be considered at both the anode and the cathode. The interface between CTFs-based SSEs and the lithium metal anode is particularly crucial for the stability and performance of the battery. Thus, the interfacial compatibility between electrode and CTFs-based SSEs must be optimised, including pore size, pore topology, and linkages. Considering the ionic conductive species in the skeleton of CTFs is still insufficient, which is unfavourable for rapid ionic transportation when compared with the liquid electrolyte, the exploration of building blocks with Li+ affinity is expected to be an interesting research direction, although it requires a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms of ionic transportation in CTFs materials. This includes the study of Li+ ion diffusion pathways, the interaction between Li+ ions and the framework, and the effect of pore size and structure. Furthermore, in order to facilitate the deployment of CTF-based SSEs in lithium metal batteries (LMBs), new exploration approaches and tools should be employed. For example, traditional trial and error methods are time-consuming and resource-intensive, which limits applicability to the vast design space of CTFs. Therefore, data-driven machine learning (ML) approaches could provide a solution for searching and predicting stable CTF structures, analysing experimental characterisation data, and assisting operando simulation under reaction conditions and micro-environments.126 Developing new manufacturing methods, optimising electrode design, and testing battery performance in real-world conditions are crucial steps towards scaling up the synthesis process and testing the performance of CTFs in large-scale battery prototypes. These efforts will enable the practical application of CTF-based SSEs in LMBs and accelerate the adoption of sustainable and high energy density energy storage solutions.
Protective layer. For Li metal anodes, the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) structure is another critical factor in determining the cyclability of Li metal anodes in LMBs.61 A well-designed SEI layer can effectively limit parasitic side reactions between the Li metal and the liquid electrolyte, promote uniform deposition of Li metal, and regulate the solid-state ion flux.127 The ideal SEI layer should have high ionic conductivity, electrical resistance within a wide range of temperatures, a stable structure, a uniformly distributed composition, and high mechanical toughness to withstand the volumetric changes that occur during Li plating/stripping.128 A stabilised SEI layer is a prerequisite for the safe operation of batteries at different temperatures and high voltage.129 However, unstable SEI layers are a common issue in LMBs and continue to grow during cycling, impeding development. The SEI layer is dominantly composed of inorganic salts (e.g., LiF, LiCl, Li2O, etc.), semi-carbonates ((ROCO2Li)2, R–O–Li, etc.), and polymers ((CH2–CH2–O)n), and those compositions are distributed as a mosaic-type microstructure within a multilayer. This uneven distribution leads to inhomogeneous deposition of Li+ and dendrite formation across boundaries. Therefore, designing an SEI layer with high phase uniformity and mechanical robustness is preferred to overcome this issue.CTFs-based layers represent a highly promising platform for the development of an artificial SEI layer in LMBs. This approach enables the stabilisation of the Li metal anodes, thereby extending cycle life and enhancing high-rate performance.130 A dense and robust network of CTFs can provide the necessary flexibility and toughness to the artificial SEI layer, while also effectively blocking electrolyte penetration to some extent and preventing parasitic side reactions between electrolytes and Li metal. Furthermore, the introduction of lithiophilic sites in CTFs can facilitate rapid Li+ ion diffusion with low energy barriers. For example, a flexible and conformal CTF-LiI coating has been rationally synthesised on the Li metal surface to stabilise metallic Li.131 The CTFs material was synthesised through one-step trimerisation of 1,4-dicy-anobenzene (DCB) catalysed by a TfOH catalyst at room temperature. Considering it is difficult to get a detailed polymerisation degree by using the pristine CTFs since the molecular weight is hard to determine, the LiI was added to enable the CTFs with high flexibility and mechanical strength. Symmetric cells coated with CTF-LiI showed stable cycling for over 2500 cycles at 10 mA cm−2, with much lower voltage hysteresis. In another study, Zhou et al. proposed a CTF-LiF layer by cyclotrimerisation of 1,4-dicyanobenzene using lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide as a Lewis acid catalyst,132 where LiF can be in situ formed and uniformly distributed within the framework. The CTF-LiF layer was further coated on air laid-paper to serve as Li host during plating/stripping. The lithiophilicity of CTFs and the interface stabilisation by LiF led to spatially uniform Li plating over the entire electrode, exhibiting stable Coulombic efficiency for 220 cycles at 10 mA cm−2 and small polarisation for 700 cycles at 5 mA cm−2, respectively. These findings highlight the potential of CTF-based layers in stabilising the Li metal anode, thereby improving the performance and safety of LMBs. The results pave the way for further optimisation and development of artificial SEI layers in LMBs through the use of CTFs.
As previously discussed, many reported works on constructing an artificial SEI layer using CTFs involve ex situ steps, where the CTFs layer is first synthesised and then coated onto the Li metal. However, a major drawback of this two-step coating procedure for an artificial SEI layer is that the adhesion between the CTFs layer and the Li metal may not be strong enough. The CTFs layer may swell or dissolve due to the volume change of Li metal during cycling, causing the functional CTFs to peel off from the Li metal and resulting in the failure of the battery. This limitation has a significant impact on the stability and durability of the artificial SEI layer and, therefore, affects the performance and cycle life of the LMBs. To address this issue, several potential solutions have been proposed. One approach is to introduce functional groups, such as –COOH, –OH, or –NH2, onto the CTFs that can react with the Li metal surface to form strong chemical bonds. This can significantly improve the interfacial adhesion and prevent detachment during cycling. Another approach is to increase the surface energy between the Li metal and CTF layers which can promote better adhesion of the CTFs layer.133 Researchers can also explore new coating techniques that can improve the adhesion strength of the CTFs layer on the Li metal surface. For example, in situ formation of the CTFs layer on Li metal is an interesting and promising approach, although it is challenging because of the chemically active nature of the metal and the special synthesis process of CTFs. One potential method for in situ formation of 2D CTFs as an artificial SEI layer on Li metal could be achieved using the superacid catalyst method, where high-temperatures are not required, such as electrochemical deposition. And some innovative ideas may come from the inspiration of in situ preparation of MOFs and COFs material on Li metal.134 To further advance the practical use of CTFs in LMBs, it is important to develop thin-film fabrication and surface techniques that enable good processability, excellent control, and large-scale preparation of various types of CTFs on the surface of Li metal. It is also important to ensure that the thickness of the CTFs layer is thin enough to avoid sacrificing energy density. In this case, methods such as the superacid-assisted pathway or involving polymerisation of CTFs at the solvent interface would be more preferred due to capabilities to produce CTFs with thin film morphologies. Mechanical exfoliation would be also promising as an alternative approach if ultrathin (several nanometers) layers are required.14 By addressing the adhesion issue and developing innovative coating techniques, the use of CTFs in LMBs can be further advanced, leading to significant improvements in performance, stability, and cycle life.
The use of CTFs in LMBs shows great potential for electrolyte and SEI layer design, owing to the high surface area, tunable pore size and distribution, and ability to form stable covalent bonds with Li+ ions. However, some challenges must be fully overcome before practical applications. For instance, producing CTFs on a large scale is difficult, and the cost of production may be higher compared to other materials. Developing efficient and cost-effective synthesis methods for CTFs will be crucial for the practical application in LMBs. In addition, more research is needed to gain a deeper understanding of the underlying electrochemical processes and how to control them. Enhancing the ionic conductivity of CTFs and developing reliable methods (such as operando characterisations) for evaluating the long-term stability and performance are also preferred. Despite these challenges, ongoing research efforts are expected to result in significant advancements in this emerging field. The future of CTFs in LMBs is promising, and potential as high-performance materials make them an exciting avenue for further exploration.

3.2.3 Sodium/potassium batteries. Sodium/potassium ion batteries (PIBs) show great potential as a viable energy storage solution for grid-scale applications and certain niche markets. These batteries utilise sodium and potassium, which are more naturally abundant and less expensive than lithium, and possess larger atomic and ionic radii, although they exhibit different redox potential.118,135–137 Compared to inorganic materials, CTFs with layered structures offer increased flexibility, resulting in relatively lower volume expansion during intercalation of larger Na or K ions.138 It is found that strong π–K+ interaction offers great opportunities for π-conjugated 2D CTFs in potassium storage.139,140 This section mainly discusses the application of CTFs as electrode materials in both SIBs and PIBs, although practical deployment of these batteries is still in the early stages. The development of advanced sodium and potassium batteries, as well as progress in understanding mechanisms and characterisations, are outside the scope of this discussion, but can be found in previous reviews.129,141–143
Electrode materials. The earliest record of CTFs applied in SIBs can be traced back to Sakaushi et al.'s report in 2013. They presented the use of thin 2D structure consisting of bipolar porous CTFs less than 10 stacking layers with a thickness of 4 nm, comprising benzene and triazine rings.144 Interestingly, upon use as an electrode in the electrolyte of 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate, the bipolar CTFs demonstrated the capability of coordinating with both Na+ cations and ClO4− anions in the polymeric network at different voltage regions (>2.8 V vs. Na/Na+ is the p-dopable region and <2.8 V vs. Na/Na+ is the n-dopable region), enabling a working window of 1.3–4.1 V (vs. Na/Na+) (Table 2). Additionally, they discovered that the storage mechanism for the p-doping/non-doping process (the storage reaction related to ClO4−) could occur at the surface of the bipolar CTFs, showing a pseudo-faradaic reaction with capacitive behavior. On the other hand, the n-doping/non-doping process (an insertion/de-insertion of Na+ mechanism) is suggested to be a faradaic reaction. The assembled SIBs exhibited a specific energy density of 500 W h kg−1 and 80% capacity retention after over 7000 cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1, based on the mass of bipolar CTFs. However, the redox reduction of the CTFs by the electrolyte salt could lead to decreased ionic conductivity of CTFs, thereby limiting the rate capability. Also, the amorphous nature of the bipolar CTFs could be unsuitable for high-rate SIBs. Liu et al. obtained crystalline CTFs with a unique staggered AB stacking and a dominant pore size of 0.6 nm, which differs from the common eclipsed AA stacking in various CTFs and COFs. When investigated as new anode materials in SIBs, both bulk CTFs and exfoliated CTFs exhibited high capacity but inferior rate performance,14 which could be attributed to the low conductivity, narrow pore size, and limited accessible active sites. Recently, our group has developed a type of hierarchical porous CTFs that contain poly(2,4,6-tri(thiophen-2-yl)-1,3,5-triazine) (CTFs-PTSA), featuring a range of pore sizes from micro to macro. The unique porous structure of CTFs-PTSA enables a 12-electron reaction between thiophene and triazine to occur during the Na storage process, as confirmed by both theoretical calculations and experimental results. Remarkably, the tube-bundles of CTFs-PTSA exhibited exceptional rate behavior, with discharge capacities of 587, 533, 519, 497, 484, 446, and 431 mA h g−1 at rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 7 A g−1, respectively. We attribute this excellent performance to the tube-bundle structures of CTFs-PTSA, which facilitate rapid electrolyte permeation, accommodate volume changes, and provide abundant active sites.145 In addition, Liu et al. exfoliated millimeter-size crystalline CTFs into micrometer-size few-layer sheets using micromechanical cleavage and liquid sonication. When explored as new polymeric anodes for SIBs, both crystalline bulk CTFs and exfoliated 2DP exhibit very high capacities (225 and 262 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, respectively), impressive rate capabilities (67 and 119 mA h g−1 at 5.0 A g−1, respectively), and excellent cycling stability (95% capacity retention after 1200 cycles).14 Furthermore, the CTFs have been extended to the application of PIBs due to the reduced transport distance,73 alleviated sluggish diffusion problems, and enhanced π–π stacking in few-layered CTFs resulting from exfoliation. It is assumed that a wide and large pore size in CTFs would be favourable for rapid ionic charge transfer and excellent rate performance in both Na+ and K+ ion batteries since these ions have a larger ionic radius than Li+ ions. However, Li et al. discovered that CTFs with a smaller pore size (CTFs-0) displayed higher K-ion storage capacity than those with large pore sizes (CTFs-1). This is because the depotassiation process in CTF-0 is exothermic, while that in CTF-1 is endothermic, allowing for the deintercalation of K+ ions from CTF-0 and contributing to its higher reversible capacity, as per molecular simulation results.146 These findings provide new insights into the design and development of advanced CTF materials for next-generation energy storage devices, with potential applications in both sodium and potassium ion batteries.
Table 2 Electrochemical performances of representative CTF-based Li/Na/K-ion electrodes




Active material
Composition (active/carbon/binder)
Voltage range (V)
Current density (A g−1)
Retained reversible capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycling number (current density)
Cycling retention (%)
Ref.




E-CIN-1/CNT (CTF)
8:1:1 (super P/PVDF)
0.001–3
0.1
1005
250 (0.1 A g−1)
—
1


E-SNW-1/CNT (CTF)
8:1:1 (super P/PVDF)
0.001–3
0.1
920
250 (0.1 A g−1)
86.9
1


rCTF
7:2:1 (super P/PVdF-HFP)
0.005–3.0
0.3
1190
1500 (12 A g−1)
—
15


Azo-CTF
6.5:2.5:1.5 (Super P/PVDF)
1.2–3
0.1
205.6
5000 (4 A g−1)
89.1
70


ACTF-1
7:2:1 (carbon black/PVDF)
1.5–4.5
0.05
160
1000 (5 A g−1)
84
72


E-F-CTF
7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.005–3.0
0.1
1035
1000 (2 A g−1)
—
73


G-PPFs-p-400–600 (CTF)
7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)
1.5–4.5
0.4
410
5100 (5 A g−1)
—
77


G-PPFs-p-400 (CTF)
7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)
1.5–4.5
0.4
155
1600 (5 A g−1)
—
77


E-TP-COF (CTF)
6:3:1 (ketjen black/PVDF)
1.5–3.5
0.2
96
500 (0.2 A g−1)
87.3
91


CTF-2
7:2:1 (carbon black/SBR + CMC)
0.01–3
0.1
1527
500 (1 A g−1)
—
147


aHATN-CTF
4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.01–3
0.05
1171
2000 (1 A g−1)
82.9
148


CTF-2DP
7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)
0.01–2.5 (vs. Na/Na+)
0.1
262
1500 (1 A g−1)
95
14


CTF-1
7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)
0.01–2.5 (vs. Na/Na+)
0.1
225
1500 (1 A g−1)
95
14


E-F-CTF
7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.005–2.7 (vs. Na/Na+)
0.1
220
200 (1 A g−1)
—
73


BPOE (CTF)
7:2:1 (carbon black/CMC)
1.3–4.1 (vs. Na/Na+)
0.01
∼200
7000 (5 A g−1)
80
144


aHATN-CTF
4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.01–3 (vs. Na/Na+)
0.05
611
180 (1 A g−1)
∼100
148


E-F-CTF
7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.005–3 (vs. K/K+)
0.1
228
200 (0.1 A g−1)
50.9
73


CTF-0
—
0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)
0.05
152
200 (0.1 A g−1)
73.4
146


CTF-1
—
0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)
0.05
73
200 (0.1 A g−1)
∼98
146


aHATN-CTF
4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)
0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)
0.05
677
130 (1 A g−1)
∼100
148




The application of CTFs in SIBs and PIBs is currently limited to a few structures. Therefore, there is a need for the rational design of CTFs structures to enhance both capacity (e.g., introducing active sites as discussed in Section 3.1.2) and rate performance (e.g., engineering pore size). While Li, Na, and K have similar physical properties, the energy storage mechanisms for a particular CTFs may differ between LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. Thus, the use of in situ spectroscopy and microscopy techniques is essential for a better understanding of CTFs in these battery systems. Furthermore, investigating the structural changes that occur during charge and discharge is crucial, particularly with respect to the potential exfoliation of 2D CTFs by large Na+ and K+ ions and electrolyte-derived ions. Therefore, further research is required to optimise the performance and ensure long-term stability of CTFs. A comprehensive understanding of the structure–property relationship is critical to inform the rational design of CTFs structures for use in SIBs and PIBs.
In addition to CTFs engineering, electrolyte engineering is crucial for achieving excellent electrochemical performance in battery systems, as the electrolyte plays a critical role in ion transport and electrochemical reactions during charge and discharge cycles. Therefore, studying the electrolyte is crucial to understanding the performance of the battery system, particularly when considering CTFs as electrode materials. CTFs in SIBs have been studied with different salts, including NaClO4,73 NaPF6,14 and NaCF3SO3,145 and solvents, such as ether and ester. These examples demonstrate that the diversity of electrolytes that have been investigated for use with CTFs in SIBs, however, a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between electrolyte engineering and the electrochemical performance of CTFs in SIBs is currently lacking, and more systematic studies are needed in this area. Noted, the choice of electrolyte for CTFs in SIBs and PIBs depends on several factors, including performance requirements for CTFs and Na/K metals, safety considerations, and cost-effectiveness. Continual development and evaluation of new electrolyte chemistries with various compositions will lead to improved performance of CTFs in SIBs and PIBs. Therefore, studying the electrolyte is essential for a better understanding of the performance of CTFs in battery systems, and more systematic studies in this area are needed.
Electrolyte and protective layer. Polymer CTFs have emerged as promising candidates for solid-state SIBs and PIBs due to promising properties. Despite the potential advantages of using CTFs in SIBs and PIBs, research on this topic is still in its early stage. Most of the reported studies have focused on using CTFs-based materials for LIBs, whereas the use of CTFs for SIBs and PIBs remains largely unexplored. One possible reason for this lack of research is that the chemical bonds in functional groups, such as CN or C–N bonds, may be unstable when in contact with highly reactive Na and K metals. Additionally, the large ionic radius of Na+ and K+ ions may hinder ionic charge transfer.149 Furthermore, several existing issues, including poor mechanical strength, high activation energy, and small ionic transference number, may also apply to CTFs-based SSEs for SIBs and PIBs. Similarly, the SEI formation is a common occurrence for Na and K metals due to the surface reaction with electrolytes, resulting in a combination of multilayer and mosaic-type microstructures. Despite the potential benefits of using CTFs materials to regulate SEI or build artificial layers to protect Na or K metals from corrosion by electrolytes, very few studies have explored this avenue. This could be due to the challenges in selecting proper 2D CTFs-based films that can facilitate the diffusion of Na+ or K+ ions. However, by engineering the chemical composition, structure, and thickness of the monomers, CTFs-based films can be optimised to provide sufficient ionic flux for artificial SEI layers in Na-/K-metal batteries. For example, previous reports have shown that the introduction of F-functional groups and inorganic species can efficiently regulate the plating/stripping behavior of both Na/K metals.129 Furthermore, the introduction of sodiophilic and potassiophilic sites could eliminate the formation of metallic dendrite. In situ formation is also a promising strategy for introducing CTFs as protective interlayer, but the growth of such CTFs film on the surface of Na or K metal needs to be controlled. Therefore, it is necessary to focus more attention on the interfacial change between the CTFs and Na/K metals, as well as between CTFs and electrolytes, to fully realise the potential of CTFs in improving the performance of Na/K metal batteries.

3.2.4 Aqueous zinc ion batteries. Featuring competitive performance (e.g., high theoretical capacity of 820 mA h g−1), abundant and cost-effective points, low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), and enhanced safety, aqueous zinc ion batteries (AZIBs) have garnered considerable attention as a promising alternative to current LIBs for large-scale application. Despite achievements made so far, significant challenges remain at both the material level and system levels, such as the lack of suitable cathode materials, unexpected parasitic side reactions, high activation barriers for diffusion due to larger Zn ionic radius, Zn dendrite formation, corrosion, and others.150–155 CTFs-based materials, with the large ionic space and soft skeleton, are capable of serving as elastic matrixes to accommodate Zn2+ ions with facile ionic diffusion, while the chemical inertness to water allows for the redox activity in aqueous solutions of various metal cationic bases.156 This part will discuss the current progress of CTFs-based materials in the development of cathode materials and artificial layers in Zn anode protection, followed by our understanding of how to further improve the performance and stability of AZIBs.
Electrode materials. In previous studies, it has been demonstrated that compounds containing carbonyl and imine groups, such as those found in pyrazines and quinones, can serve as active sites for reversible intercalation/de-intercalation of Zn2+ cations. Taking inspiration from this design strategy, Wang et al. recently reported a novel CTFs-based cathode material with a quinoxalinophenazinedione arm and triazine node (poly(triazine-5,7,12,14-tetraaza-6,13-pentacenequinone, TTPQ), which features a high density of carbonyl and imine functionalities as redox sites in aqueous electrolytes.156 The TTPQ cathode exhibited a specific capacity of 404 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.3 A g−1 in the voltage range of 0.1–1.4 V vs. Zn/Zn2+. Electrochemical behavior analysis indicated that TTPQ achieved a co-intercalation of H+ and Zn2+ ions, with reversible redox reactions coordinating Zn with both O and N atoms. However, severe voltage polarisation was observed at high rates, likely due to inferior electronic conductivity. In addition, a capacity decay of 6% was observed at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 after approximately 250 cycles. It is unknown if the capacity drop is caused by the dissolution of TTPO in aqueous electrolytes, so further in situ or operando characterisations are required to further understand the cause. Additionally, the co-intercalation mechanism of H+ and Zn2+ in the TTPO cathode material alters the pH value of the electrolyte, which is detrimental to the Zn anode. Achieving a stable Zn2+ ion storage performance through a single intercalation mechanism is challenging, yet crucial. A potential solution to this challenge is to increase molecular planarity to enhance π–π conjugation, as suggested in previous research.157 Another approach is to introduce hydrophobic functional groups, which can serve as an alternative strategy for improving Zn2+ intercalation.Very recently, Song et al. have demonstrated a novel approach to enhance the proton conduction kinetics in CTFs through the development of supramolecular H-bonded CTFs superstructures. This structure allows for deep access to protophilic oxygen motifs through a two-step nine-electron (de)coordination reaction (Fig. 10a–c).3 The designed supramolecular superstructures exhibited highly stable H-bonding networks with an ultralow activation energy for protonation, which was 0.09 eV compared to 0.25 eV for zincification. Proton coordination occurred with high kinetics, preceding the Zn2+ ions coordination into protophilic CO sites via a two-step nine-electron reaction. The resulting Zn-organic batteries demonstrated remarkable performance characteristics, including high-rate capability (135 mA h g−1 at 150 A g−1), high energy density (267 W h kg−1 cathode), and ultra-long life (50000 cycles at 10 A g−1, Fig. 10d). These findings suggest a promising design avenue for proton-conductive supramolecular superstructures to improve the efficiency of AZIBs with CTFs cathode. These results have been reported in a recent publication.
 Fig. 10  (a) 2D supramolecular planar structure stitched by lock-key H-bonds among 1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triamine and cyanuric acid. (b) Two-step proton coordination in the assembled cathode during discharging. (c) Optimised coordinate geometries after proton uptake and corresponding charge density difference isosurfaces of the assembled cathode s at state I and II. (d) Cycling stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2023, Wiley-VCH. 
In short, CTFs show promise as electrode materials in AZIBs due to the unique structure, which allows for efficient ion transport and storage. CTFs possess a high surface area and porous structure, providing ample space for Zn2+ ions to diffuse and interact with the electrode material. The nitrogen-containing groups in CTFs also facilitate the interaction between the Zn2+ ions and the electrode. Another advantage of CTFs is the high stability in aqueous environments. Unlike other electrode materials, such as graphite or lithium cobalt oxide, CTFs do not degrade in water-based electrolytes, making them a promising candidate for use in ZIBs. Despite the promising potential of CTFs as electrode materials in ZIBs, there are still some challenges that need to be addressed. One of the main challenges is the relatively low electrical conductivity of CTFs, which limits the rate capability and energy density. Another challenge is the optimisation of the overall AZIBs system, including the choice of electrolytes, anode modification, separators, and current collectors, to achieve high energy density, high power density, and long cycle life. With further research and development, CTFs could become a viable alternative to existing electrode materials in energy storage applications, contributing to a more sustainable and renewable energy future.
Protective layer. Previous reports have highlighted the high capacity of Zn metal but poor reversibility in aqueous electrolytes.158–161 However, the use of CTFs as an effective interlayer to modify the Zn plating/stripping behavior shows promise. Li et al. demonstrated that a Zn//Zn symmetric cell with a protected Zn anode achieved a long cycle lifespan of over 7000 h, approximately 40 times longer than that of bare Zn anodes.162 Meanwhile, the assembled Zn//calcium-doped V2O5 exhibited a capacity retention of 66.7% after 300 cycles at 1 A g−1. The CTFs layer, with its abundant tunnel structure, high chemical stability, and intrinsic zincophilic triazine rings, is capable of inducing even Zn deposition by decreasing the nucleation overpotential and regulating the Zn2+ diffusion pathways. Based on the analysis and discussion presented above, it can be concluded that CTFs-based materials offer improved performance for protecting Zn anodes in comparison to pristine Zn anodes. This is due to several factors, including improved interfacial compatibility that avoids direct contact with water molecules, increased Zn2+ affinity, homogeneous nucleation resulting from a slow nucleation process, and uniform ionic flux. However, to develop high-performance AZIBs, modifications to CTFs materials are required to satisfy certain conditions. These include being non-toxic and low-cost, having a large number of active sites (such as polar sites) for coordinating with Zn2+ ions to facilitate rapid ionic transfer, having a compact structure with high mechanical stability to buffer volume change during Zn plating/stripping, and being compatible with both the anode and cathode to stabilise interfaces between electrodes and artificial layers. To achieve these requirements, we suggest introducing functional groups such as –N, –F, and –S to enhance the interaction between CTFs and the Zn surface, guiding the deposition process of Zn metals. This approach is similar to the effective components found in the SEI layer on Li metal in LMBs, which facilitate ionic conductivity and prevent electrolyte penetration to improve corrosion resistance. Furthermore, in situ formation of CTFs on Zn metal could provide the Zn anode with better mechanical stability and contact adhesion,163,164 lowering the interfacial impedance for ionic and electronic diffusion, despite this is quite challenging. This could further enhance the performance of AZIBs (Fig. 11). For in situ formation of CTF-based layer on Zn anodes, one practical approach is pre-functionalisation, which involves introducing zinc-philic groups, such as carboxyl or N-containing groups, as “seeds” on the surface of the Zn anode. These functional groups can serve as templates for subsequent CTF growth. Another approach is electrochemical deposition, where careful control of the electrodeposition conditions, including the choice of solution and applied potential, enables the in situ formation of CTF layers on the Zn surface. It should be noted that the CTF precursor materials themselves need to be engineered and screened to enable the in situ formation of CTF layers on Zn metal. Overall, the in situ formation of CTF-based layers on Zn anodes and other metal anodes is an emerging research area, and further research activities should be dedicated to this field.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of in situ formation of CTFs with guest species during CTFs self-assembly. 
In summary, CTFs-based materials show promise for improving the performance of Zn anodes in AZIBs. To further develop these materials, modifications are necessary to meet certain conditions. The incorporation of functional groups and in situ formation of CTFs could offer a potential solution to these challenges. Ultimately, the continued exploration of CTFs-based materials and the modification will contribute to the development of high-performance AZIBs.

3.2.5. Supercapacitors. Supercapacitors (SCs) are a new type of energy storage system situated between conventional capacitors and rechargeable batteries. They possess fast charging and discharging capabilities, making them a promising energy storage system. SCs have higher energy and power densities than dielectric capacitors, allowing for the storage and delivery of substantial amounts of energy. In addition, the long cycling life and high safety make supercapacitors suitable for a wide range of energy storage based on these advantages.175,176 The use of CTFs-based materials in supercapacitors has gained popularity due to the high specific area, porosity, and the ability to undergo molecular modifications. CTFs-based supercapacitors employ two processes to store charge, namely physical storage of charge at the electrode/electrolyte interface (EDLC) and redox reactions on the surface of the electrode material, which is denoted as a pseudo capacitor.177,178CTFs-based materials have demonstrated promising supercapacitor performance because of the large specific area, porosity, and possibilities of molecular modifications. The specific surface area of electrode materials is widely recognised as a crucial factor influencing the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors. When unique electrode structures are engineered into nano-architectures with significant specific surface area and appropriate pore size distribution, advanced supercapacitors exhibit several beneficial features for efficient energy storage: (1) improved reactivity. These nano-architectures enable new reactions that are not possible in bulk materials, leading to enhanced electrochemical performance. (2) Increased electrode/electrolyte contact surface. The large surface area facilitates extensive electroactive sites, promoting efficient charge storage. (3) Shorter path length for electronic transport. The nano-architectures with high specific surface area may allow for operation at high power, as they offer shorter distances for electron movement. (4) Facilitated ionic transport. The desirable mesoporosity of these structures provides convenient diffusion paths for ions, boosting the charge transfer kinetics. It can be expected that the incorporation of intriguing nano-architectures with large specific surface area and suitable pore size distribution brings about advantageous characteristics, contributing to the development of advanced supercapacitors.17,179 Previous reports of CTFs on supercapacitors are summarised in Table 3. The first CTFs-based supercapacitor was designed by Hao et al. in 2015,16 where a conjugated microporous 2D CTFs (PTFs) was constructed by (1,3,5-tricyanobenzene) trimerisation reaction. Interestingly, the PTF-700 (synthesised at 700 °C) was able to be operated at a voltage over 3.5 V in an ionic liquid electrolyte, offering a high energy density and power density of 62.7 W h kg−1 and 8750 W kg−1, respectively, via a typical double-layer capacitor mechanism. The excellent supercapacitor performance is mainly caused by the abundant micropores in the PTF-700 (61.0% micropores and 97.3% pores smaller than 4 nm).
Table 3 Electrochemical performances of representative CTF-based supercapacitors




CTF
Electrolyte
Current density (A g−1)
Specific capacitance (F g−1)
Cycle number (current density)
Cycling retention (%)
High energy density (W h kg−1)
High power density (W kg−1)
Ref.




PTF-700
EMIMBF4
0.1
151.3
10000 (10 A g−1)
85
62.7
8750
16


TCNQ-CTF-800
EMIMBF4
0.1
100
5000 (7 A g−1)
92
42.8
8750
17


TCNQ-CTF-800
1 M KOH
0.2
383
—
—
—
—
17


g-C30N6-COF (CTF)
EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP
5.0 mV S−1
44.3 mF cm−2
5000 (1.2 mA cm−2)
95
38.5 mW h cm−3
14.4 W cm−3
18


g-C48N6-COF (CTF)
EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP
5.0 mV S−1
41.1 mF cm−2
5000 (1.2 mA cm−2)
95
35.7 mW h cm−3
16.9 W cm−3
18


g-C34N6-COF (CTF)
Gel LiCl/PVA
2.0 mV S−1
15.2 mF cm−2
5000 (2 mA cm−2)
93.1
7.3 mW h cm−3
10.4 W cm−3
89


TDFP-1 (CTF)
0.1 M H2SO4
2.0 mV S−1
354
1000 (10 A g−1)
95
58
4476
165


FCTF
1 M H2SO4
1.0
379
10000 (5 A g−1)
96.8
54
14060
166


PDC-MA-COF (CTF)
6 M KOH
1.0
335
20000 (5 A g−1)
88
29.2
7500
167


CTF-800
1 M H2SO4
0.5
448
10000 (10 A g−1)
84
15.5
5000
168


CTF-800
EMIMBF4
0.5
222
20000 (10 A g−1)
95
70
15000
168


CTF-800
1 M LiPF6
0.5
251
20000 (10 A g−1)
89
78
15000
168


CTFC-800
6 M KOH
1.0
273
—
—
—
—
169


CTFC-900
6 M KOH
1.0
287
—
—
9.8
153100
169


CTFC-900
1 M Li2SO4
1.0
231
20000 (10 A g−1)
98.7
32.2
187300
169


CTFC-1000
6 M KOH
1.0
254
—
—
—
—
169


P-CTF-800
1 M H2SO4
0.2
245.7
10000 (4 A g−1)
95.5
6.9
2700
170


BPY-CTF
1 M KOH
1.0
393.6
—
—
—
—
171


DCE-CTF
1 M KOH
1.0
280
—
—
—
—
171


DCP-CTF
1 M KOH
1.0
324.2
—
—
—
—
171


TPDA-1 (CTF)
1 M H2SO4
0.5
348
1000 (5 A g−1)
95
248.57
3365.38
172


DBT-MA-COF (CTF)
6 M KOH
1.0
90
30000 (5 A g−1)
83
32.1
8000
173


TPT-DAHQ COF (CTF)
1 M KOH
0.5
256
1850 (10 A g−1)
98.8
43
—
174




Except for the influence of porosity, CTFs with extended π–π conjugated networks have also contributed to capacity for supercapacitor. For instance, Bhunia et al. reported that the CTFs with plenty of CO groups showed a maximum specific capacitance of 354 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 and a cyclic stability of 95% retention after 1000 cycles.165 Besides, Li et al. discovered that a high specific capacitance of 380 F g−1 with considerable energy density of 42.8 W h kg−1 could be obtained by using a conductive microporous CTFs electrode, which is derived from tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ). The excellent performance can be attributed to the high nitrogen content (>8%) and large specific surface area (>3600 m2 g−1) of the TCNQ-derived CTFs. The electrochemical performance of CTFs-based supercapacitors can also be improved by introducing halogen heteroatoms or conductive carbons.18,166,180 Chemical stability is also important for achieving long-term cyclability. To address this issue, Li et al. introduced interlayer hydrogen bonding in the CTFs skeleton to prevent interlayer slip during cycling and ensure long-term stability.167
The application of CTFs-based materials in supercapacitors is limited by the low electron conductivity, which restricts the rate performance. In addition, the ionic diffusion in high loading CTFs electrodes could be further enhanced to improve the electrochemical performance. The poor electronic conductivity of CTFs is primarily due to weak interlayer interactions. To address this issue, a rational design of highly conjugated structures within the interlayer, such as the introduction of H-bonding, has been proposed. However, it remains unclear whether the H-bonds can be maintained during capacitor operation. Another approach is to introduce conductive linkers and linkages, such as tetrathiafulvalene and thiophene groups, which have shown promising results. However, it is important to consider flexibility in the development of intrinsically stretchable supercapacitors, as most conjugated polymers are brittle and can generate large cracks even under small strains. Previous research has demonstrated that mechanically interlocked structures, which introduce sliding cyclodextrin units, can produce a polymer with high conductivity and stretchability. These findings suggest that a rational design of interlayer structures, including the introduction of H-bonding and conductive linkers, as well as the development of stretchable materials, such as mechanically interlocked structures, could pave the way for the next generation of high-performance supercapacitors.181

3.2.6 Flow batteries. As a promising system for large-scale energy storage, flow batteries are recognised by ability to store renewable energy resources in a liquid electrolyte contained in external tanks. Typically, positive and negative redox species are dissolved in supporting electrolytes to form catholyte and anolyte, respectively, which are separated by a functional membrane. During electrochemical cycling, the ion-conducting anolyte and catholyte are pumped from the storage tanks to flow through the porous electrodes where the active species undergo respective redox reactions. Except for the anolyte and catholyte, the membrane in flow batteries serves as a critical component that enables the selective transport of ions, prevents mixing of electrolytes, maintains electrochemical efficiency, and ensures the stability and longevity of the battery system. Choosing an appropriate membrane material is essential for optimising the performance and overall functionality of flow batteries,182 and the following merits should be considered when selecting appropriate membranes including ionic selectivity, permeability, chemical stability, mechanical durability, and cost-effectiveness.Different membrane materials, such as ion-exchange membranes, polymer-based membranes, and composite membranes, have been explored to meet the aforementioned specific requirements of various flow battery chemistries. Among them, CTFs-based membranes would be interesting because of the interlayered channels and intrinsic in-plane pores.183 In a very recent work, Zuo et al. developed microporous CTF membranes-derived from aromatic nitrile monomers with different charge functionalities through a superacid-catalysed organic sol–gel process, which exhibit ultrahigh ion diffusivity but also extremely low permeability of active materials in flow batteries.153 For instance, a Na+ diffusion coefficient of 1.18 × 10−9 m2 s−1, close to the value in pure water at infinite dilution, and an area-specific membrane resistance as low as 0.17 Ω cm2. As a result, flow batteries based on the as-designed CTF membranes achieved long-term galvanostatic cell operation over 5000 cycles at 160 mA cm−2 using 0.1 M alkaline electrolyte concentration, and over 600 cycles at 400 mA cm−2 using 0.4 M electrolyte concentration. The excellent electrochemical performance can be further found in pH-neutral flow batteries using nitroxide radical/viologen-based redox chemistry. These data far exceed those for otherwise identical cells assembled with commercial membranes and state-of-the-art ion-sieving membranes. Obviously, the application of CTFs in flow battery technology represents a significant step forward in the pursuit of efficient and sustainable energy storage solutions, offering promising prospects for a cleaner and more reliable future. Exploration on CTF membranes with long-range ion diffusion behaviours will further facilitate the practical deployment in applications including water electrolysers, fuel cells, ion-capture electrodialysis, gas separation, but it would be hindered by pore tortuosity and available synthetic techniques.

4. Characterisation
Characterisation techniques play a critical role in elucidating the properties and qualities of electrode materials, particularly for addressing performance limitations such as rate capability, cycle lifespans, charge transfer kinetics, and round-trip efficiencies. By providing a means to gain insight into material behavior and underlying mechanisms, characterisation can reduce the time and cost associated with experimental approaches. In the context of CTFs electrodes, characterisation can be broadly categorised into two components: materials characterisation and in situ/operando characterisation during reaction. Materials characterisation typically involves the use of advanced analytical techniques such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, for identifying functional groups), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR, giving crucial molecular and ionic information), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, for measuring the elemental composition of the surface of CTFs materials), X-ray diffractometry (XRD, for identifying phases), electron microscopies (for identifying structures and morphologies), Raman spectroscopy (for identifying characteristic peaks of CTFs), atomic force microscopy (AFM, for identifying the thickness), etc.184 Each advanced technique has unique capabilities that allow for the study of specific CTFs properties. In contrast, in situ/operando characterisation provides a direct means of observing dynamic changes in CTFs-based electrodes during battery/capacitor operation. These techniques offer a window into material under operating conditions, which can inform the development of new materials and mechanisms. Here, “in situ” means “in the natural or original position or place”, while “operando” implies that the material is behaving as it would do in “real life”, in other words, the experiment is carried out under the operating conditions.185 These characterisation techniques include the aforementioned spectroscopy, scattering, scanning probe techniques, etc., the details of which will be discussed below as each technique is introduced. In this section, we focus specifically on the in situ/operando techniques used to study CTF-electrode materials during charge/discharge in batteries. While we will not provide a detailed overview of each characterisation technique, we will highlight the potential for elucidating the unique properties of CTFs.
4.1 FTIR spectroscopy
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is a powerful analytical tool that relies on the vibrational spectrum of absorption, transmission or reflection of infrared light to analyse chemical bonds or functional groups in CTFs such as C–O, NN, C–N bonds, providing insight into the charge density and local environment of organic materials. It is also capable of elucidating the composition of adsorbed species on CTF surfaces. The structural analysis of CTFs using FTIR is characterised by its fast determination, high sensitivity, and high resolution. During the synthesis of CTFs, the working principle of FTIR is based on the dipole moment of different functional groups, and the peak shifts between different functional groups can indicate changes in the chemical environment of the functional groups, providing information related to polymerisation of CTFs. For instance, the characteristic peaks of the triazine units are located at 1506 cm−1 (aromatic C–N stretching mode) and 1352 cm−1 (aromatic C–N breathing mode) in the infrared spectra.80 During the synthesis of CTFs, several featured peaks in the starting materials disappear, including the carbonitrile band (2228 cm−1),9 amide (3300 cm−1 and 1650 cm−1),42 and amidine groups (3016 cm−1).186
In situ FTIR technique studies the relationship between the electrochemical performance and structures of CTFs electrode materials, providing insights into the electrochemical mechanisms at the molecular level. For example, in order to distinguish specific active sites in CTFs that interact with Li+ ions during charge and discharge, Zhao et al. reported that the FTIR can be used to record spectra at each reaction stage in real-time during charging/discharging at different potentials.91 The reversible changes in the peak intensities of the CO and CN indicate both of them serve as active centres in CTFs, providing strong evidence to explain why good cycling stability was obtained in LIBs. However, FTIR technique is limited to identifying surface compositions of CTFs and does not provide information on the bond information between Li+ ions and CTFs. Therefore, other surface characterisation methods and techniques are required to obtain more detailed information on surface chemistries of CTFs. When testing CTFs materials in aqueous solutions (such as aqueous electrolytes for supercapacitors and AZIBs), special attention should be paid to exclude the interference of water signals (around 3300 cm−1 and 1600 cm−1)186 detected by the FTIR instrument. A potential alternative solvent is using deuteroxide, which exhibits low absorption behavior between 1300 and 1900 cm−1. In addition, various CTFs may have similar functional groups, such as carbonyl, C–H vibrations, etc., making data interpretation difficult to distinguish them from each other because of the overlapping vibrational signals. Thus, it is important to use the FTIR together with other techniques to monitor the change of specific functional groups over time in CTFs and identify all of the relevant species under reaction conditions and identify how the concentrations changed with time/reaction in experiments. Another possible direction of FTIR in identifying CTFs functional groups is to continue to improve the sensitivity and resolution, as well as to develop new techniques and methods for data analysis. One promising direction for FTIR in CTFs analysis is the use of synchrotron-based microspectroscopy. Our group has indicated that this technique can provide high-resolution spectra with spatial resolution on the micrometer scale, which is possibly suitable for the identification of specific functional groups in CTFs with high precision.161 In addition, building a comprehensive database of FTIR spectra for different CTFs with known functional groups may enable researchers to identify unknown CTFs based on FTIR spectra. This approach could provide valuable information for the characterisation of newly synthesised CTFs. One possible direction would be the development of ML algorithms to aid in the interpretation of FTIR spectra. These algorithms can help to identify subtle differences in spectra and assign functional groups to specific peaks, even in complex CTF structures. This can improve the accuracy and speed of CTFs functional group identification, which is essential for characterisation and application.
4.2 Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a highly valuable analytical technique for the qualitative and quantitative characterisation of organic materials. It is a non-destructive method that can provide detailed information on the chemical composition and molecular structure of materials. By examining Raman spectra,187 important information can be revealed about the interactions among functional groups and structural changes resulting from treatment or reaction, as well as interfacial properties of organic composites. In the case of CTFs with ordered lamellar structures, Raman shifts can reveal sharp G bonds (located at 1613 and 1519 cm−1, indicating a well-ordered sp2 planar structure) and D bonds (1416 cm−1, indicating distortion and carbon defects) with varying ratios depending on synthetic conditions.188 Raman spectroscopy can also be used to understand the strength of covalent bonding between CTFs and graphene materials.77
In recent years, in situ Raman surface analysis techniques have been used to analyse the intercalation and de-intercalation of Li+ ions in CTFs-based electrodes. Wu et al. used in situ Raman spectroscopy to verify the reversible insertion and extraction process of Li+ ions during charge and discharge,70 allowing for the characterisation of azo CTF cathodes at different stages of the process. Specifically, findings showed that the azo peak (a characteristic peak in azo CTF) at 1450 cm−1 decreased gradually and almost disappeared during the discharge from an open-circuit voltage ∼2.9 V to 1.2 V. Meanwhile, the peak indexed to Li–N–N–Li bonds at 1408 cm−1 increased gradually, indicating the formation of a strong ionic bond during Li+ ions insertion. During charging, the intensity of the Li–N–N–Li peak diminished, and the intensity of the corresponding NN peak increased, indicating reversible insertion and de-insertion of Li+ ions in LIBs. However, the use of in situ Raman spectroscopy in aqueous electrolytes may be subject to interference from parasitic electrochemical reactions or solvent volatilisation. These factors can change the focal plane of the laser beam and affect the stability of the signal. Therefore, using a cover glass and glass corrected lenses may be helpful to fix the change in refractive index.185 The suitability of Raman spectroscopy for in situ or operando characterisation of amorphous CTFs materials is still unknown, as the integration time and beam intensity could potentially damage the sample.
In addition, the future of CTF research can be advanced through improvements in instrumentation and analytic techniques. One promising approach involves the development of highly sensitive and high-resolution Raman spectroscopy methods that can detect even trace amounts of CTFs and functional groups. For example, the use of surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy or the development of new Raman-active probes that can selectively target specific functional groups could greatly enhance the capabilities of Raman spectroscopy in CTF analysis. Furthermore, the combination of Raman spectroscopy with other analytical techniques such as FTIR, X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry can provide a more comprehensive understanding of the structure and properties of CTFs. The development of new multi-modal imaging techniques that can simultaneously provide information on the chemical composition, crystal structure, and electronic properties of CTFs would be an exciting advancement in the field. Such techniques could greatly aid in the design and optimisation of CTF-based materials for a range of applications.
4.3 X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a widely used and valuable technique for investigating the surface composition, molecular environment, and valence states of the surface of CTFs materials. For example, the peaks with binding energies of 284.8 eV and 286.6 eV in the C 1s spectrum are attributed to carbon–carbon bonds in the benzene ring (CC), and carbon–nitrogen bonds in the triazine skeleton (CN), respectively. The high-resolution N 1s spectrum exhibits a dominant peak at 398.8 eV, which is attributed to nitrogen–nitrogen bonds within the triazine ring.15 These findings provide crucial information regarding the elemental composition and chemical bonding in CTFs. In addition, XPS can be used to correlate the relationship between the surface functional groups of CTFs and properties, such as pore size, surface area, and stability, especially the structural evaluation during battery operation. Future advances in XPS imaging and depth profiling capabilities could enable researchers to map the distribution of functional groups within CTF samples, providing deeper insights into the material structure and electronic properties.
However, XPS measurements have limitations for CTFs characterisations. One significant challenge is the risk of radiation damage due to the use of high-energy photons to excite the sample, which can alter the chemical structure of CTFs and affect the chemical signatures. Therefore, care should be taken when using XPS to accurately differentiate the content of different elements in CTFs. Another challenge to using XPS for in situ/operando experiments is the vacuum measurement condition typically used in lab XPS due to the small attenuation length of soft X-ray in air.185 Another challenge is the liquid electrolyte cannot be detected under vacuum condition and the lack of suitable in situ/operando cells also make the experiments difficult. However, near ambient pressure XPS (NAP-XPS) has been introduced recently to overcome these challenges, which can operate at pressures of a few tens of mbar and can probe chemical interactions at vapor/solid interfaces. For example, Paul et al. reported that XPS spectra of commercial electrolytes in LIBs can be obtained using an automated laboratory NAP-XPS system.189 Considering the lack of a detailed understanding of the interface reactions at the CTFs electrode–electrolyte interface, NAP-XPS may be a promising approach to conduct in situ/operando characterisation of CTFs materials. This could provide valuable insights to facilitate the development of CTFs-based materials for energy storage applications, such as electrodes or protective layers.
4.4 X-Ray diffraction
X-Ray diffraction (XRD) is a powerful technique that provides valuable information on the crystal structure of CTFs. By analysing the diffractogram, information about the type of crystal, crystal size and shape, and atomic positions can be easily obtained. For example, Yang et al. discovered that by engineering the synthetic approaches, CTF-1 with a staggered AB stacking order (orange powder) can be transformed to highly crystalline CTF-1 with an eclipsed AA stacking order (greenish powder).190 The different stacking modes can be distinguished by different XRD diffraction patterns. In AB stacking mode, CTF-1 exhibits a strong peak located at 26.46°, corresponding to (002) reflection, while only a broad peak is observed at 26.07° in AA stacking mode. XRD patterns can also be used to differentiate between amorphous and crystalline CTFs, with the former showing only diffuse scattering and the latter showing clear Bragg reflections. Pair distribution function (PDF) analysis is another useful tool for understanding the structure of CTFs, particularly for semi-crystalline or amorphous CTFs. PDF analysis helps to determine determination of different interatomic distances in CTF compounds but requires high signal-to-noise ratios and is only based on synchrotron X-ray or neutron sources to measure the scattering intensity of X-rays or neutrons as a function of the scattering angle. The PDF is then calculated from the scattering data using Fourier transformation. To distinguish CTFs using PDF analysis, one can compare the PDF of a given CTF with the PDF of a reference material, such as a crystalline compound with a similar structure. The comparison can be done by calculating the difference between the two PDFs, which can reveal the specific structural features that distinguish the CTF from the reference material.
In situ/operando XRD techniques provide a more comprehensive understanding of the structural evolution of crystal CTFs during cycling in dedicated in situ cells. These techniques can provide a more complete picture of the CTFs structure and properties, which is essential for understanding and optimising the performance in various applications. Rietveld refinement can be performed to obtain atomic positions and detailed structure information. However, CTFs may undergo structural evolution during battery cycling, transitioning from crystalline to amorphous status. In this case, PDF analysis that contains Bragg reflections and diffuse scattering can be used to interpret the amorphous electrode structure evolution after Fourier transformation.
4.5 X-Ray absorption spectroscopy
Another practical technique to characterise the elemental composition and environment is X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), which includes X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). XAS scans the energy near the X-ray absorption edge of a particular element, providing information on the valence state information, interatomic distances, and coordination numbers. XANES can be used to study the local electronic structure of the CTFs by measuring the absorption of X-rays at energies near the core electron excitation threshold. This technique can provide information on the valence electronic structure and oxidation state of the constituent atoms in the CTFs. EXAFS, on the other hand, can be used to study the local atomic structure of the CTFs by measuring the oscillations in the absorption spectra at energies beyond the XANES region. This technique can provide information on the coordination environment and bond lengths of the constituent atoms in the CTFs. According to the energy range of the X-ray source, XAS generally includes soft XAS (s-XAS), and hard XAS (h-XAS). XAS can be used to investigate the N K-edge of the CTFs, which corresponds to the excitation of an inner-shell electron in the N atoms of the triazine framework. The XAS spectra obtained from the N K-edge can provide information about the bonding in the CTF, such as the extent of delocalisation of the electrons in the material and the degree of conjugation between the N–N atoms. Additionally, XAS can also be used to investigate the C K-edge of the CTF, which provides information about the C–N bonding and the electronic structure of the carbon atoms in the material. For example, Kazuyuki et al. demonstrated that the coordination geometries of the synthesised Cu–S complexes in a Cu-modified sulfur-linked CTFs can be well evidenced by using h-XAS.191 Compared to h-XAS, s-XAS is more sensitive to the surface properties of CTFs and can probe the electronic configuration of elements in functional groups.192 The XAS measurements with high sensitivity to element and coordination structure are essentially necessary to identify the structures of CTFs.
In situ/operando XAS offer a promising avenue for investigating active sites and underlying reaction mechanisms under reaction conditions. However, in the context of batteries, the use of in situ/operando XAS presents a number of challenges. As a bulk technique, XAS may make it difficult to distinguish between different materials or phases within the battery. Moreover, the electrochemical environment can influence the data obtained, thereby complicating data interpretation. Temperature changes, current density, and electrode thickness are some of the factors that can impact XAS spectra. Furthermore, specialised in situ/operando cells are required to prevent electrolyte leakage or contamination, and the data collection process is often complex and time-consuming due to the expense and difficulty of accessing the XAS instrument.
To overcome these challenges, benchtop XAS instruments could be a viable alternative for studying the local atomic structure and electronic environment of materials. Although benchtop XAS produces lower energy X-rays compared to synchrotron radiation, it remains a cost-effective and accessible option for researchers who do not have access to synchrotron radiation or who require more frequent or rapid analyses. Furthermore, benchtop XAS may be suitable for studying CTFs containing light elements with low absorption energies (e.g., C, N, O, F, and S) where high-energy X-ray may not be required. However, benchtop XAS has limitations compared to synchrotron-based XAS, including lower energy resolution and limited sensitivity to low atomic number elements. It is unclear if benchtop XAS can reliably detect light elements in CTFs, and the sensitivity may depend on the specific instrument and the conditions of the analysis.
Overall, while benchtop XAS represents a promising approach for materials characterisation, researchers should carefully evaluate its suitability for the specific application and CTFs sample, especially for in situ/operando characterisations. Understanding the limitations and potential biases of different XAS techniques is crucial to ensuring accurate and informative data interpretation, and to advancing the understanding of the chemistry and physics of materials.
4.6 Microscopies
High-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are powerful tools for studying the structures and morphologies of CTFs at the nanoscale level. These techniques can provide valuable insights into the properties and behavior of CTFs. SEM images reflect the most realistic microscopic surface structure, size, and shape of CTFs, while HR-STEM images and corresponding selected area electron diffraction and electron energy loss spectroscopy can provide chemical, structural, and electronic information, such as crystallinity, crystalline surface spacing, and pore structure from areas as small as a few tens of nanometers.5 With HR-STEM, it is possible to image individual atoms, allowing for the determination of the lattice structure and the arrangement of the atoms in the CTFs. HR-STEM can also be used to identify defects or impurities within the CTFs, which can affect electrochemical properties.
Importantly, both SEM and HR-STEM can be used to perform in situ/operando experiments, allowing researchers to study the behavior of CTFs under specific conditions, such as exposure to various gases or liquids, and to monitor changes in the structure and properties over time. For example, our group examined the structural evolution and Na+ transfer for CTFs during the live sodiation/de-sodiation processed based on a nanoscale cell configuration by using the in situ TEM.145 During sodiation, the result demonstrates a low-volume expansion of our CTFs, which can be attributed to the hierarchical structure and the intercalation mechanism for Na+ storage. Upon subsequent de-sodiation process, the sodiated CTFs can rapidly de-sodiated and fully recover to the initial state without any structural degradation and significant volume change, indicating excellent structural reversibility and stability.
However, there are also some challenges associated with the application of HR-STEM and SEM. High-energy electron beams can damage sensitive CTF samples, particularly those that are semi-crystalline or amorphous. Additionally, preparing CTF samples for HR-STEM and SEM analysis can be challenging, as these techniques require limited samples to be loaded onto holders. Researchers must carefully consider these factors when using HR-STEM and SEM and develop strategies to mitigate any related influences on the data. Despite these challenges, HR-STEM and SEM represent powerful tools for investigating the structures and properties of CTFs at the nanoscale level.
4.7 Other techniques
Except for the aforementioned analysis techniques, there are still several general techniques that can be employed to characterise CTFs. For instance, thermogravimetric analysis can provide valuable information on the thermal stability, thermal decomposition pathways, and the thermal degradation products of the CTFs, thereby aiding in the determination of molecular formula.1,70 Atomic force microscopy can accurately measure the thickness of CTFs. Surface area and pore size distribution within CTFs can be determined by using the N2 adsorption/desorption technique.190 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), a magnetic resonance technique originating from the magnetic moments of unpaired electrons, can be used to qualitatively and quantitatively detect unpaired electrons in CTFs. EPR can also play an important role in studying reaction kinetics and elucidating reaction mechanisms. For example, See et al. found that CTFs electrodes with higher capacities exhibited stronger EPR signals, which could suggest that unpaired spins are involved in energy storage and charge transfer.71 In addition, optical microscopy is a useful technique for interface characterisation.193 For instance, Li et al. used in situ optical microscopy to study the structural evolution of CTF protective layer on the surface of Zn foils during plating/stripping,162 where the surface of bare Zn anodes became Zn dendrites and, in contrast, Zn@CTF electrodes exhibited a smooth surface morphology. While different analytical techniques provide different information on the morphology and chemical composition of CTFs, a combination of these techniques is needed to fully understand the complex reaction mechanisms and optimise the design of CTFs. Overall, utilising a variety of characterisation and analytical techniques will continue to be essential in advancing the understanding and development of CTFs.
In the pursuit of revealing the active centres of CTFs as electrode materials, comprehending the mechanism of electrochemical reactions, and optimising performance, it is crucial to use multiple in situ/operando characterisation techniques. The observation of new phenomena and reaction mechanisms through in situ/operando characterisation can facilitate the development of advanced energy storage devices. However, in situ/operando characterisation is currently not widespread compared to ex situ characterisation due to the challenges associated with mixed species, mass transport, and electrolyte molecules. Thus, it is essential to develop convenient and cost-effective techniques, specific setups, and testing cells to further understand the behavior and characteristics of CTF materials during battery operation. Importantly, calculations and models such as density functional theory or semiempirical single-point calculations, as well as molecular dynamics simulations, are critical for predicting the structure of CTFs materials and achieving rational design. By using computational tools, researchers can simulate the behavior of CTFs at the atomic level, predict the structure, stability, and properties, and characterise them, particularly when they are not detectable due to environmental issues or poor stability of intermediates. To gain mechanistic insight into the response and stability of CTFs at different voltages in battery devices, it is crucial to combine experimental and theoretical computational information. Meanwhile, ML tools have emerged as a promising technique for predicting the physical and chemical properties of CTFs materials. Using large datasets of experimentally measured properties and molecular descriptors as inputs, machine learning models can be trained to predict properties such as solubility, stability, and reactivity, thereby accelerating the discovery and optimisation of CTFs for battery applications. ML can also be employed to screen large databases of potential CTFs materials to identify those with desirable properties or structures, significantly accelerating the discovery of new CTFs materials and reducing the time and cost of experimental synthesis and battery performance testing. Furthermore, ML can be used to gain a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying the electrochemical behavior of CTFs in batteries, identifying the key factors influencing the performance of CTFs in batteries, thereby facilitating the development of improved battery systems. The future of ML for CTFs in energy storage appears promising and is expected to play a significant role in accelerating the discovery and development of new CTFs materials for high-performance batteries.
5. Conclusion
In recent years, CTFs have emerged as a promising class of materials owing to their unique physicochemical properties, including large surface areas, adjustable porous structures, and well-defined channels, making them attractive for diverse applications. The ordered structures of CTFs confer advantages over small-molecule systems for energy storage, particularly in batteries and supercapacitors. However, the underlying principles governing the energy storage performance remain poorly understood, necessitating an in-depth understanding of structural and chemical properties. In this study, we provide a comprehensive summary of CTFs, highlighting topological structures, synthesis methods, characterisation techniques, and effects on energy storage properties. While the abundance of building blocks with diverse structures and topologies offers immense potential for future exploration of CTFs, our focus is on the energy storage performance. Specifically, we demonstrate how the specific surface area, pore density and size, and molecular structures of CTFs can be fine-tuned for energy storage applications using presynthetic functionalisation strategies that select various building blocks with precise size, sharp, and functional groups. Moreover, we present postsynthetic functionalisation approaches that incorporate CTFs with other materials, such as conductive carbons, polymers, and metals, to create composite materials, leading to superior performance and durability in energy storage applications. Our findings underscore the significant impact of structural and chemical modifications on the energy storage performance of CTFs, offering insights into the design of advanced energy storage materials. Our study presents a novel perspective on CTFs as energy storage materials, complemented by a detailed and insightful discussion of structure–property relationships, providing a fresh starting point for future research on the design, synthesis, and optimisation of CTFs for advanced energy storage systems.
Obviously, rechargeable energy storage systems offer a promising solution to the increasing demand for efficient energy storage, while CTFs are a class of porous materials that have attracted attention as potential electrode and solid-state electrolyte materials in energy storage systems due to the high surface area, tunable pore size, and chemical stability. However, despite the potential, several critical challenges need to be addressed for practical deployment of CTFs in energy storage systems. One of the challenges in using CTFs as electrodes is achieving high-rate performance for energy storage. While validated data on CTFs as electrodes are based on coin cells, synthesising CTFs with high electron and ionic conductivity simultaneously, especially for pouch cell configurations with high electrode loading, is difficult. However, acceptable performance can be achieved by selecting appropriate electrode pairs, engineering electrolyte formulas, and forming stabilised interfaces between CTF electrodes and electrolytes, particularly at high working windows. Designing CTFs with high ionic conductivity and stability remains challenging for the application as solid-state electrolytes, mainly due to persistent synthesis drawbacks in building CTFs with oriented ionic channels. CTFs can also serve as protective layers in metal-based batteries, but the problematic issues of a two-step coating procedure, low ionic conductivity, and low mechanical stability must be addressed. In this case, in situ or operando characterisations should investigate the correlations between CTFs features, topological evolution, and CTFs performance. Additionally, the challenge of controllable synthesis of CTFs with customised functionalities by accommodating monomers with high accuracy, precision, and exactitude needs to be addressed. Most available procedures for making processable CTFs are prepared as powders or films with limited processability. Modulating synthetic conditions such as temperature, solvents, time, etc., especially the degree of crystallinity, is crucial for specific battery applications. The importance of crystalline order in CTFs for energy storage applications remains unclear, thus further understanding of the parameters influencing the structural organisation of CTFs with customised functionalities is necessary to enable the realisation of more sophisticated structures at a molecular scale. As a class of organic polymers with unique physicochemical properties, CTFs materials hold great potential for flexible energy storage devices. These materials possess stable and reversible redox centers, enabling efficient energy storage in flexible batteries, which are well-suited for wearable applications that require long-lasting and high-capacity energy storage. Furthermore, the structure and composition of CTFs can be tailored to meet specific requirements of flexible energy storage devices, including high power density, fast charge/discharge capabilities, and implantable capabilities. Another key advantage of organic CTFs electrodes is the inherent flexibility, which can withstand mechanical strain, bending, and deformation without significant degradation in performance. Finally, CTFs can be obtained and synthesised by cost-effective processes, making them potentially accessible for large-scale production and commercialisation. To achieve these goals, several strategies should be developed, (1) material design and synthesis. Continuous research efforts should focus on optimising the structure and composition of CTFs materials to further enhance the adaptability for specific flexible applications. This involves exploring various synthetic methods, functionalisation techniques, and structural modifications. (2) Electrode modifications. Elaborate engineering of the CTFs electrodes should be employed to maximise specific surface area, porosity, and accessibility of electroactive sites within the CTF-based electrode. Strategies such as hierarchical assembly, oriented growth, and surface modification are promising. (3) Electrolyte optimisation: selecting electrolytes that are compatible with flexible CTF-based electrodes, offer high ionic conductivity, and remain stable over multiple charge/discharge cycles is crucial. For example, gel electrolytes can enhance the mechanical stability and electrochemical performance of CTF-based flexible devices. By using these strategies and fostering a multidisciplinary approach, it will be possible to achieve high energy density, tailored functionality, mechanical flexibility, scalability, and cost-effectiveness in CTF-based flexible energy storage devices.
In conclusion, CTFs offer a promising avenue for practical deployment in rechargeable energy storage systems. Addressing the challenges of achieving high-rate performance for energy storage, designing CTFs with high ionic conductivity and stability, and improving the controllable synthesis of CTFs with customised functionalities are critical for the successful deployment in energy storage systems (Fig. 12). Continued efforts should be made to develop CTFs with novel topologies and to gain a deeper understanding of the parameters influencing the performance. Despite being in the early stages of development, continuous exploration of sciences and characterisation at the atomic level can significantly promote progress toward practical application. In addition to exceptional properties in battery and supercapacitor applications, there is growing interest in the potential for use in catalysts, drug delivery, energy conversion, and gas separation, among others. The interest is driven by the structural designability, processability, chemical and thermal stability, recyclability, and even biocompatibility. As such, it is expected that this review will generate widespread interest in synthesising functional CTFs and provide valuable design ideas with customised architectures for various applications in the next decade.
 Fig. 12  Challenges and opportunities of CTFs based materials for energy storage. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThis work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52172173 and 51872071), Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province for Distinguished Young Scholar (2108085J25), Excellent Research and Innovation Team Project of Anhui Province (2022AH010001), the Open Fund of Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Advance Energy Storage Materials (AESM202106), and Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province (2208085QE130).
Notes and referencesZ. Lei, X. Chen, W. Sun, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1801010 CrossRef .S. N. Talapaneni, T. H. Hwang, S. H. Je, O. Buyukcakir, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3106–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Song, L. Miao, L. Ruhlmann, Y. Lv, L. Li, L. Gan and M. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202219136 CAS .Y. Cao, C. Liu, M. Wang, H. Yang, S. Liu, H. Wang, Z. Yang, F. Pan, Z. Jiang and J. Sun, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 29, 207–215 Search PubMed .C. Niu, W. Luo, C. Dai, C. Yu and Y. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 24915–24923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Zheng, Y. Xu, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 1716–1745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yang, S. Yao, Z. Liang, Y. Wen, Z. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Liu and M. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 885–896 CrossRef CAS .P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Kuhn, A. Forget, D. Su, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13333–13337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Liu, L. Guo, S. Jin and B. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5153–5172 RSC .C. Krishnaraj, H. S. Jena, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 1038–1071 RSC .C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, eaal1585 CrossRef PubMed .J. Liu, P. Lyu, Y. Zhang, P. Nachtigall and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705401 CrossRef PubMed .O. Buyukcakir, J. Ryu, S. H. Joo, J. Kang, R. Yuksel, J. Lee, Y. Jiang, S. Choi, S. H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003761 CrossRef CAS .L. Hao, J. Ning, B. Luo, B. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Tang, J. Yang, A. Thomas and L. Zhi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Li, S. Zheng, X. Liu, P. Li, L. Sun, R. Yang, S. Wang, Z.-S. Wu, X. Bao and W.-Q. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7992–7996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Zhang, S. Wei, W. Wei, J. Zou, G. Gu, D. Wu, S. Bi and F. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1659–1666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Kamiya, R. Kamai, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Zhang, Z. Qi, X. Wu and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. López-Magano, N. Salaverri, L. Marzo, R. Mas-Ballesté and J. Alemán, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 317, 121791 CrossRef .C. Wu, Z. Teng, C. Yang, F. Chen, H. B. Yang, L. Wang, H. Xu, B. Liu, G. Zheng and Q. Han, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Iemhoff, M. Vennewald and R. Palkovits, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202212015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhao, K. X. Yao, B. Teng, T. Zhang and Y. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3684–3692 RSC .S. Dey, A. Bhunia, H. Breitzke, P. B. Groszewicz, G. Buntkowsky and C. Janiak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3609–3620 RSC .J. Du, Y. Liu, R. Krishna, Y. Yu, Y. Cui, S. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Song and Z. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26678–26686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-C. Xi, H.-N. Guo, C.-Y. Yang, R. Wang, D.-Y. Wang and B. Dong, Eur. Polym. J., 2021, 161, 110821 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tang, H. Huang, W. Xue, Y. Chang, Y. Li, X. Guo and C. Zhong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123382 CrossRef CAS .K. Yang, W. Yuan, Z. Hua, Y. Tang, F. Yin and D. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 3919–3927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Tang, H. Huang, B. Peng, Y. Chang, Y. Li and C. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16542–16550 RSC .S. Sarfaraz, M. Yar, M. Ans, M. A. Gilani, R. Ludwig, M. A. Hashmi, M. Hussain, S. Muhammad and K. Ayub, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 3909–3923 RSC .G. Tuci, M. Pilaski, H. Ba, A. Rossin, L. Luconi, S. Caporali, C. Pham-Huu, R. Palkovits and G. Giambastiani, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605672 CrossRef .L. Guo, J. Gong, C. Song, Y. Zhao, B. Tan, Q. Zhao and S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS .M. Mahato, R. Tabassian, V. H. Nguyen, S. Oh, S. Nam, W.-J. Hwang and I.-K. Oh, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Chen, G. Li, H. Lin and F. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132401 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Bojdys, J. Jeromenok, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2202–2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Katekomol, J. Roeser, M. Bojdys, J. Weber and A. Thomas, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1542–1548 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, J. Chen, G. Wang, Y. Li and Z. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13120–13124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z.-A. Lan, M. Wu, Z. Fang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Zhang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201482 CAS .X. Suo, F. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Kobayashi, C.-L. Do-Thanh, D. Maltsev, Z. Liu and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25688–25694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Greb, Chem. Eur. J., 2018, 24, 17881–17896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-Y. Yu, J. Mahmood, H.-J. Noh, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, S.-H. Shin, Y.-K. Im, I.-Y. Jeon and J.-B. Baek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8438–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Sun, Y. Liang, W. Luo, L. Zhang, X. Cao and Y. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202203327 CAS .E. Paenurk, K. Kaupmees, D. Himmel, A. Kütt, I. Kaljurand, I. A. Koppel, I. Krossing and I. Leito, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6964–6973 RSC .C. A. Reed, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1669–1677,  10.1039/B415425H .S. Ren, M. J. Bojdys, R. Dawson, A. Laybourn, Y. Z. Khimyak, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2357–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhu, C. Tian, S. M. Mahurin, S.-H. Chai, C. Wang, S. Brown, G. M. Veith, H. Luo, H. Liu and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10478–10484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Yang, W. Guo, S. M. Mahurin, S. Wang, H. Chen, L. Cheng, K. Jie, H. M. Meyer, D.-E. Jiang, G. Liu, W. Jin, I. Popovs and S. Dai, Chem, 2020, 6, 631–645 CAS .Z. Yang, T. Liu, S. Wang, H. Chen, X. Suo, T. Wang, B. P. Thapaliya, D.-E. Jiang, I. Popovs and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 3386–3393 CrossRef CAS .K. Wang, L.-M. Yang, X. Wang, L. Guo, G. Cheng, C. Zhang, S. Jin, B. Tan and A. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14149–14153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, W. Zan, K. Li, Y. Yang, F. Bu and Y. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11666–11669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Guo, Y. Niu, H. Xu, Q. Li, S. Razzaque, Q. Huang, S. Jin and B. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19775–19781 RSC .Q. You, F. Wang, C. Wu, T. Shi, D. Min, H. Chen and W. Zhang, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 6723–6727 RSC .A. R. Tiwari, T. Akash and B. M. Bhanage, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 10973–10976 RSC .M. Liu, Q. Huang, S. Wang, Z. Li, B. Li, S. Jin and B. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11968–11972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Puthiaraj, Y.-R. Lee, S. Zhang and W.-S. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16288–16311 RSC .H. Wang, D. Jiang, D. Huang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, C. Lai, M. Chen, M. Cheng, C. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22848–22870 RSC .S.-Y. Li, W.-H. Li, X.-L. Wu, Y. Tian, J. Yue and G. Zhu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7695–7701 RSC .S. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Fan, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4177–4202 RSC .S. Zhang, L. Sun, Q. Fan, F. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zou, S. Zhao, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Nano Research Energy, 2022, 1, 9120001 CrossRef .C. Zhang, H. Li, X. Zeng, S. Xi, R. Wang, L. Zhang, G. Liang, K. Davey, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Zhang and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2202577 CrossRef CAS .R. Xu, G. Wang, T. Zhou, Q. Zhang, H.-P. Cong, X. Sen, J. Rao, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Guo and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 253–261 CrossRef CAS .Q. Guo, C. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Xin, P. Zhang, Q. Shi, D. Zhang and Y. You, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 41, 185–193 CrossRef .Y. Fan, E. Olsson, G. Liang, Z. Wang, A. M. D'Angelo, B. Johannessen, L. Thomsen, B. Cowie, J. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Zhao, W. K. Pang, Q. Cai and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202213806 CAS .G. Liang, E. Olsson, J. Zou, Z. Wu, J. Li, C.-Z. Lu, A. M. D'Angelo, B. Johannessen, L. Thomsen, B. Cowie, V. K. Peterson, Q. Cai, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201969 CAS .J. Mao, C. Ye, S. Zhang, F. Xie, R. Zeng, K. Davey, Z. Guo and S. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2732–2752 RSC .Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, F. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202216047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, L. Qiu, Y. Zheng, Q. Shi, T. Zhou, V. Sencadas, Y. Xu, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, C.-L. Zhang, S.-H. Yu and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006425 CrossRef CAS .T. Ma, Q. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Pan and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6428–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wu, M. Hu, X. Yan, G. Shan, J. Liu and J. Yang, Energy Stor. Mater., 2021, 36, 347–354 Search PubMed .K. A. See, S. Hug, K. Schwinghammer, M. A. Lumley, Y. Zheng, J. M. Nolt, G. D. Stucky, F. Wudl, B. V. Lotsch and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3821–3829 CrossRef CAS .K. Sakaushi, G. Nickerl, F. M. Wisser, D. Nishio-Hamane, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7850–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhang, W. Sun, X. Chen and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14252–14261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Haldar, K. Roy, S. Nandi, D. Chakraborty, D. Puthusseri, Y. Gawli, S. Ogale and R. Vaidhyanathan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702170 CrossRef .T. Sun, C. Wang and Y. Xu, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 640–647 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, X. Chen, Y. Cao, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1434–1437 RSC .Y. Su, Y. Liu, P. Liu, D. Wu, X. Zhuang, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1812–1816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhu, X. Zhuang, J. Yang, X. Feng and S.-I. Hirano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16732–16739 RSC .X. Li, H.-S. Xu, K. Leng, S. W. Chee, X. Zhao, N. Jain, H. Xu, J. Qiao, Q. Gao, I.-H. Park, S. Y. Quek, U. Mirsaidov and K. P. Loh, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 1115–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Chen, X. Suo, Z. Yang and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Bi, W. Fang, L. Li, J. Wang, S. Liang, Y. He, M. Liu and L. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1799–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Laemont, S. Abednatanzi, P. G. Derakshandeh, F. Verbruggen, E. Fiset, Q. Qin, K. Van Daele, M. Meledina, J. Schmidt, M. Oschatz, P. Van Der Voort, K. Rabaey, M. Antonietti, T. Breugelmans and K. Leus, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3095–3103 RSC .R. Yuan, W. Kang and C. Zhang, Materials, 2018, 11, 937 CrossRef PubMed .J. Zhu, C. Yang, C. Lu, F. Zhang, Z. Yuan and X. Zhuang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 3191–3202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kandambeth, V. S. Kale, O. Shekhah, H. N. Alshareef and M. Eddaoudi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2100177 CrossRef CAS .B. Häupler, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402034 CrossRef .Q. Yu, Z. Xue, M. Li, P. Qiu, C. Li, S. Wang, J. Yu, H. Nara, J. Na and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002523 CrossRef CAS .R. Sun, X. Wang, X. Wang and B. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117668 CAS .J. Xu, Y. He, S. Bi, M. Wang, P. Yang, D. Wu, J. Wang and F. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12065–12069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xu, S. Zhang, K. Xu, H. Chen, X. Fan and N. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1022–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Zhao, H. Li, Z. Gao, L. Xu, Z. Mei, S. Cai, T. Liu, X. Yang, H. Guo and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101019 CrossRef CAS .X.-X. Luo, X.-T. Wang, E. H. Ang, K.-Y. Zhang, X.-X. Zhao, H.-Y. Lü and X.-L. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2023, 29, e202202723 CAS .Q. Fan, J. Jiang, S. Zhang, T. Zhou, W. K. Pang, Q. Gu, H. Liu, Z. Guo and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100957 CrossRef CAS .Q. Fan, S. Zhang, J. Jiang, W. Lie, W. K. Pang, Q. Gu, W. Yang, H. Liu, J. Wang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 2212796,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202212796 .H. Liao, H. Ding, B. Li, X. Ai and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8854–8858 RSC .S. N. Talapaneni, T. H. Hwang, S. H. Je, O. Buyukcakir, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3106–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Je, H. J. Kim, J. Kim, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703947 CrossRef .Z. Xiao, L. Li, Y. Tang, Z. Cheng, H. Pan, D. Tian and R. Wang, Energy Stor. Mater., 2018, 12, 252–259 Search PubMed .T. Zhang, F. Hu, C. Song, S. Li, W. Shao, S. Liu, H. Peng, S. Hu and X. Jian, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 127141 CrossRef CAS .G. Gao, Y. Jia, H. Gao, W. Shi, J. Yu, Z. Yang, Z. Dong and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 50258–50269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liang, M. Xia, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Sui, J. Xiao and Q. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 608, 652–661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Li, Y. Wang, S. Sun, Y. Yang, G. Gu and Z. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132254 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liang, T. Xia, Z. Chang, W. Xie, Y. Li, C. Li, R. Fan, W. Wang, Z. Sui and Q. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 437, 135314 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim, A. Elabd, S.-Y. Chung, A. Coskun and J. W. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4185–4193 CrossRef CAS .R. Guan, L. Zhong, S. Wang, D. Han, M. Xiao, L. Sun and Y. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8296–8305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Gomes and A. J. Bhattacharyya, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5946–5953 CrossRef CAS .D.-G. Wang, L. Tan, H. Wang, M. Song, J. Wang and G.-C. Kuang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .D. Luo, M. Li, Q. Ma, G. Wen, H. Dou, B. Ren, Y. Liu, X. Wang, L. Shui and Z. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 2917–2938 RSC .G. Li, F. Lu, X. Dou, X. Wang, D. Luo, H. Sun, A. Yu and Z. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3583–3592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X.-J. Hong, C.-L. Song, Z.-M. Wu, Z.-H. Li, Y.-P. Cai, C.-X. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126566 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhou, X. Song, C. Hao and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 825–831 CrossRef CAS .Q. X. Shi, H. J. Pei, N. You, J. Wu, X. Xiang, Q. Xia, X. L. Xie, S. B. Jin and Y. S. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121977 CrossRef CAS .Q. X. Shi, C. Y. Yang, H. J. Pei, C. Chang, X. Guan, F. Y. Chen, X. L. Xie and Y. S. Ye, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127044 CrossRef CAS .J. Yoo, S.-J. Cho, G. Y. Jung, S. H. Kim, K.-H. Choi, J.-H. Kim, C. K. Lee, S. K. Kwak and S.-Y. Lee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3292–3300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Cao, H. Wu, G. Li, C. Liu, L. Cao, Y. Zhang, W. Bao, H. Wang, Y. Yao, S. Liu, F. Pan, Z. Jiang and J. Sun, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 2997–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. Sun, Z. Du, X. Hu, J. Bi, C. Liu, W. Ai and Q. Yan, Nano Research Energy, 2023, 2, e9120048 CrossRef .D. Hubble, D. E. Brown, Y. Zhao, C. Fang, J. Lau, B. D. McCloskey and G. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 550–578 RSC .Z. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Li, J. C. Bouwer, K. Davey, J. Lu and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206682 CAS .S. Xia, B. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Yang, W. Liu and S. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101168 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. A. Rahman, A. Ahmad, L. H. C. Ismail and M. M. Salleh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 2144–2148 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cao, M. Wang, H. Wang, C. Han, F. Pan and J. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200057 CrossRef CAS .Q. X. Shi, X. Guan, H. J. Pei, C. Chang, H. Qu, X. L. Xie and Y. S. Ye, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 936–945 CrossRef CAS .Z. Hou, S. Xia, C. Niu, Y. Pang, H. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Xu and S. Zheng, Carbon Energy, 2022, 4, 506–516 CrossRef CAS .S. Ohno, A. Banik, G. F. Dewald, M. A. Kraft, T. Krauskopf, N. Minafra, P. Till, M. Weiss and W. G. Zeier, Prog. Energy, 2020, 2, 022001 CrossRef .H. Li, Y. Jiao, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202216383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Wu, W. K. Pang, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 8945–8966 RSC .R.-M. Gao, H. Yang, C.-Y. Wang, H. Ye, F.-F. Cao and Z.-P. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25508–25513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Liu, P. Liu and D. Mitlin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002297 CrossRef CAS .C. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Chen, Y. Jin, J. Liu, H. Xu, H. Wang, X. He and Q. Zhang, Energy Stor. Mater., 2023, 55, 498–516 Search PubMed .Y. Zheng, S. Xia, F. Dong, H. Sun, Y. Pang, J. Yang, Y. Huang and S. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006159 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16795–16799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Liu, X. Ji, J. Yue, S. Hou, P. Wang, C. Cui, J. Chen, B. Shao, J. Li, F. Han, J. Tu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2438–2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Chen, S. Huang, L. Zhong, S. Wang, M. Xiao, D. Han and Y. Meng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907717 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhang, J. Hong, X. Zeng, J. Hao, Y. Zheng, Q. Fan, W. K. Pang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101676 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Huang, J. Hong, B. Cao, J. Hao, Q. Fan, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900081 CrossRef .S. Zhang, Q. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Xi, X. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Hao, W. K. Pang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zhu, G. Xu, M. Barnes, Y. Li, C.-P. Tseng, Z. Zhang, J.-J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Khalil, M. M. Rahman, R. Verduzco and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100505 CrossRef CAS .T. Sun, Z.-J. Li, X. Yang, S. Wang, Y.-H. Zhu and X.-B. Zhang, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .X.-X. Luo, W.-H. Li, H.-J. Liang, H.-X. Zhang, K.-D. Du, X.-T. Wang, X.-F. Liu, J.-P. Zhang and X.-L. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117661 CAS .L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Zhang, J. Yang, Z. Shao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .B. Chen, D. Chao, E. Liu, M. Jaroniec, N. Zhao and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1096–1131 RSC .L. Sun, G. Li, S. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Yuwono, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Sci. China: Chem., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s11426-022-1442-4 .K. Sakaushi, E. Hosono, G. Nickerl, T. Gemming, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1485 CrossRef PubMed .L. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Wan, S. Zhang, S. Wang, K. Hua, X. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Luo, X. Zhang, M. Cao, H. Kang, C. Zhang and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2023, 35, 2210082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Y. Li, W. H. Li, X. L. Wu, Y. Y. Tian, J. Y. Yue and G. S. Zhu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7695–7701 RSC .F. Jiang, Y. Wang, T. Qiu, G. Yang, C. Yang, J. Huang, Z. Fang and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2022, 523, 231041 CrossRef CAS .J. Chu, L. Cheng, L. Chen, H.-G. Wang, F. Cui and G. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J, 2023, 451, 139016 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhao, L. Xu, J. Jiang, Z. Mei, Q. An, P. Lv, X. Yang, H. Guo and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2022, 92, 106756 CrossRef CAS .B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288–3304 RSC .T. Sun, J. Xie, W. Guo, D.-S. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904199 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, R. Wang, Q. Ma, H. Kang, L. Zhang, T. Zhou and C. Zhang, Carbon Neutralization, 2022, 1, 126–139 CrossRef .P. Zuo, C. Ye, Z. Jiao, J. Luo, J. Fang, U. S. Schubert, N. B. McKeown, T. L. Liu, Z. Yang and T. Xu, Nature, 2023, 617, 299–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Lyu, J. A. Yuwono, P. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Yang, S. Liu, S. Zhang, B. Wang, K. Davey, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202303011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Li, L. Sun, S. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Jin, K. Davey, G. Liang, S. Liu, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 2301291,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202301291 .Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Tang and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13868–13875 RSC .F. Ye, Q. Liu, H. Dong, K. Guan, Z. Chen, N. Ju and L. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202214244 CAS .X. Zeng, J. Mao, J. Hao, J. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Zheng, J. Liu, P. Rao and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zeng, K. Xie, S. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Hao, J. Liu, W. K. Pang, J. Liu, P. Rao, Q. Wang, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5947–5957 RSC .J. Wan, R. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, F. Liang, T. Zhou, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, Q. Lu, C. Zhang and Z. Guo, ACS Nano, 2023, 17, 1610–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Liu, J. Vongsvivut, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Zhang, K. Davey, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202215600 CAS .G. Li, X. Wang, S. Lv, J. Wang, X. Dong and D. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 450, 138116 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Peng, W. Chen, T. Wu, B. Hu, W. Weng, Y. Yao, J. Zeng, Z. Chen, P. Liu, Y. Liu, G. Li, J. Guo, H. Lu and Z. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Li, B. He, Y. Zhang, Z. Cheng, L. Yuan, Y. Huang and Z. Li, Small, 2022, 18, 2200567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Bhanja, K. Bhunia, S. K. Das, D. Pradhan, R. Kimura, Y. Hijikata, S. Irle and A. Bhaumik, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 921–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Gao, C. Zhi, P. Cui, K. A. I. Zhang, L.-P. Lv and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125967 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, F. Lu, R. Xue, B. Ma, Q. Li, N. Wu, H. Liu, W. Yao, H. Guo and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26355–26363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. M. Vadiyar, X. Liu and Z. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45805–45817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Liu, J. Wen, H. Chen, M. Yang, Y. Liu and H. Li, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 1091–1098 CrossRef CAS .C. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Hu, G. Shan, J. Gao, J. Liu, X. Zhou and J. Yang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000253 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, L. Chen, T. Wang, M. Di, F. Jiang, X. Xu and S. Qiao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 606, 1534–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Bhanja, S. K. Das, K. Bhunia, D. Pradhan, T. Hayashi, Y. Hijikata, S. Irle and A. Bhaumik, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, F. Lu, H. Guo and W. Yang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 312, 110766 CrossRef CAS .A. F. M. El-Mahdy, Y.-H. Hung, T. H. Mansoure, H.-H. Yu, T. Chen and S.-W. Kuo, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 1429–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. L. Van Aken, M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4806–4809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y.-N. Zhou, W. Tang, J. Yang, C. Peng and Z. Guo, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 219–248 CrossRef CAS .F. Luan, G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, H. Wang, Y. Tong, X.-X. Liu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7984–7990 RSC .Y. Liao, H. Wang, M. Zhu and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705710 CrossRef PubMed .C. Yuan, H. B. Wu, Y. Xie and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1488–1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Ishaq, M. Jabeen, W. Song, L. Xu, W. Li and Q. Deng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, Y.-X. Wang, D. Li, C.-T. Coen, E. Hwaun, G. Chen, H.-C. Wu, D. Zhong, S. Niu, W. Wang, A. Saberi, J.-C. Lai, Y. Wu, Y. Wang, A. A. Trotsyuk, K. Y. Loh, C.-C. Shih, W. Xu, K. Liang, K. Zhang, Y. Bai, G. Gurusankar, W. Hu, W. Jia, Z. Cheng, R. H. Dauskardt, G. C. Gurtner, J. B.-H. Tok, K. Deisseroth, I. Soltesz and Z. Bao, Science, 2022, 375, 1411–1417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhu, T. Jiang, M. Ali, Y. Meng, Y. Jin, Y. Cui and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 16610–16751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Yin, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18944–18951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Seo, S. Jeong, C. Bae, N.-G. Park and H. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801010 CrossRef PubMed .R. Wu, M. Matta, B. D. Paulsen and J. Rivnay, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4493–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, N. Wang, B. Tan and S. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6007–6014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. S. Goh, A. F. Ismail and B. C. Ng, in Membrane Characterization, ed. N. Hilal, A. F. Ismail, T. Matsuura and D. Oatley-Radcliffe, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 31–46 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-63776-5.00002-4 .J. Xie, S. A. Shevlin, Q. Ruan, S. J. A. Moniz, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Li, C. C. Lau, Z. X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1617–1624 RSC .P. M. Dietrich, L. Gehrlein, J. Maibach and A. Thissen, Crystals, 2020, 10, 1056 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yang, H. Chen, S. Wang, W. Guo, T. Wang, X. Suo, D.-E. Jiang, X. Zhu, I. Popovs and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6856–6860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Iwase, K. Kamiya, M. Miyayama, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 805–810 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Kong, J. Kim, S. Choi, F. Ciucci, Y. Hao, S. Yang, Z. Shao and J. Lim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154–9196 RSC .R. Wang, S. Xin, D. Chao, Z. Liu, J. Wan, P. Xiong, Q. Luo, K. Hua, J. Hao and C. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2207751 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Peng Xiong	Peng Xiong is currently a master's student at the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology of Anhui University. His research focuses on the organic cathode materials of batteries.
Shilin Zhang	Dr Shilin Zhang is now a research fellow in the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Superconducting & Electronic Materials in the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2020, after he graduated from Beijing University of Chemical Technology with an MSc in 2016. His current research interests focus on the design, synthesis and characterisation of materials in the field of electrochemical devices such as ion batteries and metal batteries.
Chaofeng Zhang	Prof Chaofeng Zhang is currently a professor at the Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. He received his BSc and MSc from Lanzhou University and Fudan University, respectively. Then, he obtained his PhD degree in 2013 from the University of Wollongong, Australia. He undertook a post-doc in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan. His research focuses on electrochemistry for batteries, especially organic battery materials and electrolytes of aqueous zinc-ion batteries.

Broader context
Renewable energy sources such as solar, hydro, geothermal, and wind power, coupled with clean electrochemical energy storage technologies, offer a green and sustainable solution to address current energy and environmental challenges. However, the exploitation of these resources faces issues such as conversion efficiency, stability, and recombination. Additionally, electrochemical storage processes suffer from activity, capacity, cost, and stability problems, which limit the utilisation of these energy sources and technologies. To address these limitations, porous materials known as covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) have emerged as a potential solution. CTFs offer advantages such as abundant molecular design, diverse building blocks, large surface area, affordable synthetic strategies, high conjugation, and porosity. As a result, CTFs hold great promise in overcoming the challenges mentioned above. This review provides a comprehensive summary of the utilisation of CTFs for energy storage technologies, highlighting the current research status, existing challenges, and potential future research directions. The review aims to nourish the development of better CTFs for clean energy applications in this field.


 	Scheme 1  Three aspects of CTFs discussed in this review, including the synthesis methodologies, characterisations, and energy storage applications.	 

 	Fig. 1  A timeline of major breakthroughs and new discoveries in CTFs for advanced energy storage.	 

 	Fig. 2  Advantages and disadvantages of different synthesis methodologies.	 

 	Fig. 3  Some representative molecules used as building units for CTFs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Ex situ FTIR characterisations of the E-CIN-1/CNT and E-SNW-1/CNT during the lithiation and delithiation process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Charge storage mechanism of CTF-1 in LIBs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Possible strategies of performance enhancement for energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 6  The application of CTFs on next generation energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Molecular structure of S-CTFs. (b) The synthesis process of S-CTFs. (c) First discharge and charge curves of S-CTF-1 measured at 0.05C (1C = 1600 mA h g−1). (d) Cycling performance and CEs of S-CTF-1 in comparison with a control sample, KB-S. The tests were performed at 0.2C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

CTF-1/S-155 °C	1.1–3.0	0.1C	50	1197	762	34	95
S-CTF-1	1.7–2.7	1C (0.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	482.2	413.7	62	96
S-CTF-1	1.7–2.7	2C (0.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	406.3	329.1	62	96
SF-CTF-1 (1:1)	1.8–2.7	1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	365.1	215.5	67	97
SF-CTF-1 (1:3)	1.8–2.7	1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	637.4	520.1	86	97
SF-CTF-1 (1:3)	1.8–2.7	2C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	528	435.1	86	97
SF-CTF-1 (1:3)	1.8–2.7	5C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	374.1	330.3	86	97
SF-CTF-1 (1:5)	1.8–2.7	1C (0.7 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	598.9	418.6	99.5	97
TB-COF/S-40 (CTF)	1.5–3.0	1C (0.9 mgsulfur cm−2)	800	808	663	40	98
TB-COF/S-40 (CTF)	1.5–3.0	2C (0.9 mgsulfur cm−2)	800	612	482	40	98
TB-COF/S-58 (CTF)	1.5–3.0	0.5C (2.2 mgsulfur cm−2)	150	1044	738	58	98
NO-CTF-1/S	1.5–3.0	0.5C (1.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	867.8	737.6	71	99
NO-CTF-2/S	1.5–3.0	0.5C (1.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	843	649.7	70	99
S@CTFO	1.7–2.8	1C (1.0–1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	796.3	512	67	100
S@CCTFO	1.7–2.8	1C (1.0–1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	665.3	318	72	100
COF-SQ-Ph-S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	150	1331	618	—	101
ART-COF/S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	1C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	1000	993	636	62	102
ART-COF/S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.5C (3.6 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	3.06 mA h cm−2	2.68 mA h cm−2	62	102
AFT-COF/S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.2C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	935	726	—	102
COF-Tr-BA@S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	200	1349	627	—	103
COF-Tr @S (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	200	1152	312	—	103
cPpy-S-CTF 0%	1.8–2.7	0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	582.2	501.3	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 0%	1.8–2.7	0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	—	227.6	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 1%	1.8–2.7	0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	647.2	508.1	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 1%	1.8–2.7	0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	—	290	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%	1.8–2.7	0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	702.9.	610.1	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%	1.8–2.7	1C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	699.4	682.6	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%	1.8–2.7	2C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	300	631.2	610.4	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 2.5%	1.8–2.7	0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	—	612.9	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 5%	1.8–2.7	0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	683.3	545.3	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 5%	1.8–2.7	0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	—	583.8	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 10%	1.8–2.7	0.5C (0.8 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	667.9	484.2	81–83	104
cPpy-S-CTF 10%	1.8–2.7	0.2C (4.0 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	—	348.6	81–83	104
S/P-CTFs@rGO (CTF)	1.7–2.8	0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	1130	920	70	105
S/P-CTFs@rGO (CTF)	1.7–2.8	2C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	200	—	650	70	105
S/P-CTFs	1.7–2.8	0.5C (1.5 mgsulfur cm−2)	500	1022	779.8	75.30	105
CNT-CON/S (CTF)	1.0–3.0	0.1C (5 mgsulfur cm−2)	100	1353	1009	78	106
FMCTF-S	1.7–2.8	1C (1.2 mgsulfur cm−2)	400	681	426	77	107
FMCTF-S	1.7–2.8	0.2C (3 mgsulfur cm−2)	50	945	—	77	107

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of the Li–S cell with the Li-CTFs@GN/Celgard separator, polysulfide adsorption site and lithiated-nanochannel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Schematic process of COF/PVDF separator in desolvating the diluted electrolyte and inducing lithium-ion deposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of the electrochemically stable and holistically oriented COF SSE in two steps. The first step is stabilised modification, and the second step is crystallographic alignment experiment. (b) Synthesis of Q-CTF by the cyclisation reaction of I-CTF. (c) Long-term cycling of symmetrical lithium metal cells using (a) I-CTF SSE (green), Q-CTF SSE prepared at RT (blue), and Q-CTF SSE prepared at high temperature (red) at 0.1 mA cm−2; 0.1 mA h cm−2 lithium was plated/stripped per cycle, and (b) Q-CTF SSE at 0.2 mA cm−2; 0.2 mA h cm−2 lithium was plated/stripped per cycle. Inserts are the enlarged profiles at different measured times for Q-CTF SSE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5, Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

E-CIN-1/CNT (CTF)	8:1:1 (super P/PVDF)	0.001–3	0.1	1005	250 (0.1 A g−1)	—	1
E-SNW-1/CNT (CTF)	8:1:1 (super P/PVDF)	0.001–3	0.1	920	250 (0.1 A g−1)	86.9	1
rCTF	7:2:1 (super P/PVdF-HFP)	0.005–3.0	0.3	1190	1500 (12 A g−1)	—	15
Azo-CTF	6.5:2.5:1.5 (Super P/PVDF)	1.2–3	0.1	205.6	5000 (4 A g−1)	89.1	70
ACTF-1	7:2:1 (carbon black/PVDF)	1.5–4.5	0.05	160	1000 (5 A g−1)	84	72
E-F-CTF	7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.005–3.0	0.1	1035	1000 (2 A g−1)	—	73
G-PPFs-p-400–600 (CTF)	7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)	1.5–4.5	0.4	410	5100 (5 A g−1)	—	77
G-PPFs-p-400 (CTF)	7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)	1.5–4.5	0.4	155	1600 (5 A g−1)	—	77
E-TP-COF (CTF)	6:3:1 (ketjen black/PVDF)	1.5–3.5	0.2	96	500 (0.2 A g−1)	87.3	91
CTF-2	7:2:1 (carbon black/SBR + CMC)	0.01–3	0.1	1527	500 (1 A g−1)	—	147
aHATN-CTF	4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.01–3	0.05	1171	2000 (1 A g−1)	82.9	148
CTF-2DP	7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)	0.01–2.5 (vs. Na/Na+)	0.1	262	1500 (1 A g−1)	95	14
CTF-1	7:2:1 (super P/PVDF)	0.01–2.5 (vs. Na/Na+)	0.1	225	1500 (1 A g−1)	95	14
E-F-CTF	7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.005–2.7 (vs. Na/Na+)	0.1	220	200 (1 A g−1)	—	73
BPOE (CTF)	7:2:1 (carbon black/CMC)	1.3–4.1 (vs. Na/Na+)	0.01	∼200	7000 (5 A g−1)	80	144
aHATN-CTF	4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.01–3 (vs. Na/Na+)	0.05	611	180 (1 A g−1)	∼100	148
E-F-CTF	7:2:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.005–3 (vs. K/K+)	0.1	228	200 (0.1 A g−1)	50.9	73
CTF-0	—	0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)	0.05	152	200 (0.1 A g−1)	73.4	146
CTF-1	—	0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)	0.05	73	200 (0.1 A g−1)	∼98	146
aHATN-CTF	4:5:1 (acetylene black/PVDF)	0.01–3 (vs. K/K+)	0.05	677	130 (1 A g−1)	∼100	148

 	Fig. 10  (a) 2D supramolecular planar structure stitched by lock-key H-bonds among 1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triamine and cyanuric acid. (b) Two-step proton coordination in the assembled cathode during discharging. (c) Optimised coordinate geometries after proton uptake and corresponding charge density difference isosurfaces of the assembled cathode s at state I and II. (d) Cycling stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2023, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of in situ formation of CTFs with guest species during CTFs self-assembly.	 

PTF-700	EMIMBF4	0.1	151.3	10000 (10 A g−1)	85	62.7	8750	16
TCNQ-CTF-800	EMIMBF4	0.1	100	5000 (7 A g−1)	92	42.8	8750	17
TCNQ-CTF-800	1 M KOH	0.2	383	—	—	—	—	17
g-C30N6-COF (CTF)	EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP	5.0 mV S−1	44.3 mF cm−2	5000 (1.2 mA cm−2)	95	38.5 mW h cm−3	14.4 W cm−3	18
g-C48N6-COF (CTF)	EMIMBF4/PVDF-HFP	5.0 mV S−1	41.1 mF cm−2	5000 (1.2 mA cm−2)	95	35.7 mW h cm−3	16.9 W cm−3	18
g-C34N6-COF (CTF)	Gel LiCl/PVA	2.0 mV S−1	15.2 mF cm−2	5000 (2 mA cm−2)	93.1	7.3 mW h cm−3	10.4 W cm−3	89
TDFP-1 (CTF)	0.1 M H2SO4	2.0 mV S−1	354	1000 (10 A g−1)	95	58	4476	165
FCTF	1 M H2SO4	1.0	379	10000 (5 A g−1)	96.8	54	14060	166
PDC-MA-COF (CTF)	6 M KOH	1.0	335	20000 (5 A g−1)	88	29.2	7500	167
CTF-800	1 M H2SO4	0.5	448	10000 (10 A g−1)	84	15.5	5000	168
CTF-800	EMIMBF4	0.5	222	20000 (10 A g−1)	95	70	15000	168
CTF-800	1 M LiPF6	0.5	251	20000 (10 A g−1)	89	78	15000	168
CTFC-800	6 M KOH	1.0	273	—	—	—	—	169
CTFC-900	6 M KOH	1.0	287	—	—	9.8	153100	169
CTFC-900	1 M Li2SO4	1.0	231	20000 (10 A g−1)	98.7	32.2	187300	169
CTFC-1000	6 M KOH	1.0	254	—	—	—	—	169
P-CTF-800	1 M H2SO4	0.2	245.7	10000 (4 A g−1)	95.5	6.9	2700	170
BPY-CTF	1 M KOH	1.0	393.6	—	—	—	—	171
DCE-CTF	1 M KOH	1.0	280	—	—	—	—	171
DCP-CTF	1 M KOH	1.0	324.2	—	—	—	—	171
TPDA-1 (CTF)	1 M H2SO4	0.5	348	1000 (5 A g−1)	95	248.57	3365.38	172
DBT-MA-COF (CTF)	6 M KOH	1.0	90	30000 (5 A g−1)	83	32.1	8000	173
TPT-DAHQ COF (CTF)	1 M KOH	0.5	256	1850 (10 A g−1)	98.8	43	—	174

 	Fig. 12  Challenges and opportunities of CTFs based materials for energy storage.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
