Effects of carbon nanodot fractionation on the performance of sensitized mesoporous titania based photovoltaic devices   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC00454B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00454B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 8824-8833Effects of carbon nanodot fractionation on the performance of sensitized mesoporous titania based photovoltaic devices†

        
          
            Jeremy B. 
            Essner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dustin J. 
            Boogaart
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sheila N. 
            Baker
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gary A. 
            Baker
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. E-mail: bakergar@missouri.edu
Received 
      1st February 2022
    , Accepted 4th May 2022First published on 6th May 2022AbstractFluorescent carbon dots hold particular appeal owing to their facile and sustainable preparation, biocompatibility, and outwardly superlative optical characteristics. However, growing evidence points to the fact that, in many cases, fluorescent features originate predominantly from molecular organic by-products rather than the presumed nanocarbons. To confront this exigent matter, in this work, carbon dots were prepared following four representative bottom-up syntheses: pyrolysis of citric acid in aqueous ammonia; solvothermal treatment of ethanolic L-arginine; microwave irradiation of aqueous citric acid-urea; and solvothermal decomposition of glutathione in formamide. The resulting crude “carbon dot” samples were fractionated using 50 kDa cutoff dialysis membranes and the resulting fractions (i.e., as-synthesized, retentate, dialysate) employed as photosensitizers within mesoporous titania-based photovoltaic devices to systematically explore their relative performance in light-harvesting applications. Our results unequivocally demonstrate that reaction by-products ubiquitously generate photocurrent, making principal contributions to the observed device performance. These results draw further attention to the need for (i) closer scrutiny of carbon nanodot claims; (ii) widespread implementation of rigorous and uniform purification and validation protocols; and, (iii) revisitation of prior work, particularly in cases where exceptional or extraordinary claims have been made.
Introduction
Fluorescent carbon dots (FCDs), which constitute the newest addition to the nanoscale carbon family, have been the focus of intense research in recent years due to their purportedly unique and useful optical features,1 as well as preferential properties over other quantum dot (QD) systems (e.g., CdS).2 This subclass of the nanoscale carbon family encompasses many classifications of fluorescent nanocarbons (e.g., carbon (nano)dots, carbon QDs (CQDs), graphene QDs (GQDs)), with the literature suggesting that these materials can be produced through myriad top-down and bottom-up approaches, where the appropriate thermal treatment of virtually any carbon-containing precursor professedly results in FCDs. For example, FCDs have been reported to originate from citrates,3–6 saccharides (e.g., glucose, chitosan),7–9 biomass,10–14 and even human urine.15 Due to their facile preparation and putatively promising characteristics, research on FCDs saw an exponential explosion in published works, however, the unbridled zeal and precipitous publication rate organically produced several uncritical, unsubstantiated, and detrimental claims and misconceptions entering the literature record. As has been previously pointed out, in many instances, revisiting prior work with more scientific rigor is warranted, in particular, employing proper characterization, consistent nomenclature, and, most of all, meticulous purification,16,17 however, such practices have yet to see widespread implementation.
While FCDs are reported to possess intriguing photophysical properties, the exact origin of these materials’ fluorescence remains elusive, which is, in large part, due to the lack of consistent and methodical purification, where ineffective and uncorroborated means are frequently employed, or worse, missing altogether. Historically, the luminescent features observed from these materials have been attributed to variations in physical and chemical properties,18 however, sample complexity first needs reduced through implementation of efficient and consistent separation procedures to illuminate the true origin of FCD fluorescence.19 Exacerbating these issues is the mounting evidence that the fluorescence associated with FCDs originates significantly from molecular/oligomeric by-products that are generated alongside the nanoscale carbons,4,16,20–26 where the properties of aggregates of these molecular by-products resemble the reported characteristics of FCDs,27 making a unified purification approach all the more pressing. Indeed, at least ten citric acid (CA) derived molecular fluorophores have been identified.27–35 Furthermore, works not attempting FCD formation synthesized these exact (or structurally related) species through similar synthetic protocols.36–40
Although FCDs are commonly employed in fluorescence-based applications, their other reported photophysical and electronic properties such as high molar absorptivity and tunable visible light absorption (typically, via heteroatom doping), as well as redox, donor/acceptor, and charge transfer capabilities, have resulted in significant interest in exploiting these properties in energy applications,41 in particular, in a wide range of photovoltaic (PV) architectures.42,43 Specifically, these materials are of keen interest as the sole or co-light harvester in sensitized (typically, metal-oxide-based) PV cells due to their intriguing optical properties, appropriate band alignments, and ability to inject charge carriers into semiconductor scaffolds such as titania (TiO2),44 with the highest reported power conversion efficiencies (η) employing FCDs as the sole sensitizer reaching 0.8 to 0.9%.45–47 Specifically, Wang et al. reported a η of 0.79% employing N-doped CDs (synthesized through the thermal decomposition of CA in ammonia) as the sensitizer, where the observed performance was dependent on the precursor mass ratio.45 Carolan and co-workers reported a comparable η of 0.80% employing N-doped CQDs generated via the application of a direct current, atmospheric-pressure microplasma to an aqueous solution of CA and ethylenediamine, where the CQDs were utilized as the photoactive layer in solid-state devices.46 Zhang et al. further pushed the η to 0.87% by hydrothermally treating CA and ethylenediamine in the presence of a TiO2 film affording in situ CQD sensitization.47 Given the previously reported ubiquity of reaction by-products in bottom-up FCD syntheses, as well as the naively perpetuated notion that filtration or centrifugation are sufficient, stand-alone modes of purification, the increasing exploitation of FCDs as photosensitizers begs the question: are the FCDs themselves or their reaction by-products responsible for the observed performance in photosensitizer-driven devices?
Herein, we present our findings on the effects that extensive dialysis purification of molecularly derived FCD samples has on their application as photosensitizers. Specifically, we show that the ubiquitous presence of reaction by-products consistently impacted the observed PV performance in devices based on “FCD”-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticle films, results that highlight the detrimental purification issues still plaguing the FCD field and draw further attention to the dire need for analytically rigorous product separations prior to characterization and application.
Experimental
Note, a fully detailed experimental is provided in the ESI.†
Fluorescent carbon dot syntheses
Four representative FCD synthetic protocols were explored in this work.8,45,48,49 Specifically, unfractionated samples (denoted as as-synth.) were generated through: (i) the thermal pyrolysis of CA (4 g) in aqueous ammonia (1 g in 10 mL water) at 200 °C for 3 h (product denoted as CA-NH4OH); (ii) the solvothermal treatment (200 °C for 3 h) of ethanolic L-arginine (0.35 g in 10 mL ethanol; product denoted as Arg); (iii) microwave-induced degradation (900 W domestic microwave; 5 min at 100% power) of 6 g CA and 6 g urea in 20 mL water (product denoted as CA-U); and (iv) solvothermal decomposition (180 °C for 4 h) of 100 mg glutathione in 10 mL of formamide (product denoted as GSH-F). The as-synth. fractions were then subjected to extensive purification via membrane dialysis (50 kDa molecular weight cutoff) to obtain a purified FCD-containing fraction (i.e., retentate or retent.) and a fraction consisting of reaction by-products (i.e., dialysate or dial.). The three fractions (i.e., as-synth., retent., dial.) were then employed as sensitizers in TiO2-based photoelectrochemical solar cells to assess the impact of reaction by-products on device performance.
Photovoltaic preparation, assembly, and characterization
TiO2 films, which were prepared in house, were sensitized in the CA-derived fractions (i.e., CA-NH4OH, CA-U) for 2 h, in the Arg fractions for 12 h, or in the GSH-F fractions for 24 h. Absorbance spectra of the TiO2 films were acquired before and after sensitization. Photographs of all sensitized films were also collected. Devices were then assembled by sandwiching a 60 μm plastic spacer between an FCD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode and a thin-film, Pt counter electrode, which were also prepared in house. Prior to clamping the device shut with 1′′ binder clips, commercial electrolyte containing the I−/I3− redox couple was injected in between the electrodes. Assembled devices were characterized with reverse-biased J–V sweeps under 1 sun illumination, as well as external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements. The relevant details and PV metrics (reported as average ± standard deviation) for all device sets explored in this work, including the total devices in each set and 99% confidence intervals, are provided in Table S1 (ESI†).
Results and discussion
Effects of fractionation of CA-NH4OH on PV performance
Since the CA-NH4OH system produced the highest photocurrent and efficiency among the four explored protocols, particular emphasis was placed on thoroughly exploring this system's dialysis fractions. Unfortunately, fractionation revealed that the by-product species permeating the membrane (i.e., dial. fraction) were the undeniable origin of the observed performance for the unfractionated, parent sample, while the FCD-containing fraction (i.e., retent.) produced substantially lower PV action, showing only a slight increase in performance above that of unsensitized, bare TiO2 (Fig. 1). Specifically, devices assembled with films that were sensitized in 5 mg mL−1 (i) as-synth., (ii) dial., and (iii) retent. fractions (in acetone) produced short-circuit current densities (JSC), open-circuit voltages (VOC), and fill factors (FF) of (i) 0.827 ± 0.044 mA cm−2, 0.512 ± 0.007 V, and 67.1 ± 3.5%, (ii) 0.822 ± 0.056 mA cm−2, 0.515 ± 0.007 V, and 67.1 ± 4.0%, and (iii) 0.317 ± 0.037 mA cm−2, 0.474 ± 0.011 V, and 66.4 ± 3.5%, respectively, which, in turn, yielded average η of (i) 0.284 ± 0.027%, (ii) 0.285 ± 0.035%, and (iii) 0.100 ± 0.015% (Fig. 1A and Table S1, ESI†). Note, bare TiO2 produced values of 0.184 ± 0.027 mA cm−2, 0.463 ± 0.042 V, and 54.8 ± 4.7%, leading to η of 0.048 ± 0.015%.
 Fig. 1  (A) Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for devices containing films sensitized in 5 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH-derived fractions dispersed in 100% acetone or 50:50 vol% acetone:ethanol (denoted by “EtOH”). (B) Average EQE and UV-vis absorbance (inset) spectra. (C) Images of representative films used in the devices. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison. 
While the as-synth. and dial. fractions produced comparable increases in photovoltage relative to bare TiO2, an improvement not observed for the retent. fraction, the main source of the prominent performance deviation between the dial. and retent. fractions was the stark difference in photocurrent, the origin of which was elucidated with EQE measurements (Fig. 1B). All three fractions displayed increased photon-to-current conversion (relative to bare TiO2) from 360–600 nm, however, the as-synth. and dial. fractions, showing comparable EQE to one another (as expected), presented with distinct EQE peaks of 9–12% at 430 nm, whereas the retent. fraction produced a less discernible peak, presenting as a pseudo-shoulder, with a statistically significant drop in EQE to 1–3.5% and a shift in the peak maximum to 410 nm. Additionally, all three fractions negatively impacted the photon-to-current conversion originating from TiO2 (λ = 300–375 nm) with the retent. fraction yielding the greatest EQE reduction. Interestingly, UV-vis spectra (Fig. 1B inset) and photos (Fig. 1C) of the sensitized films revealed that the as-synth. and dial. fractions possessed nearly identical optical absorption while the retent. fraction was markedly darker and had stronger absorbance, presumably, due to the presence of nanoscale carbons, which are reported to possess high absorption coefficients.50,51 The striking similarity between films sensitized with the as-synth. and dial. fractions and the pronounced difference between these fractions and films sensitized with the retent. fraction likely originates from the predominance of by-product production over nanoscale carbon generation within this reaction system. Indeed, crude calculations of retent. yield for this synthetic approach reveal that nanocarbon production is near or less than 1%, meaning that a 5 mg mL−1 solution of the as-synth. fraction roughly consists of 4.95 mg mL−1 dial. species and 0.05 mg mL−1 retent. species, hence, why the observed properties of as-synth.- and dial.-sensitized films and their corresponding device metrics are nearly identical. In fact, it was this poor yield that dictated the concentration employed for these studies as 5 mg mL−1 was the highest concentration of retent. that we could reasonably obtain while still retaining a utilizable solution volume for film sensitization.
Interestingly, we found that when the TiO2 films were sensitized in as-synth. and dial. solutions possessing a solvent composition of 50:50 vol% acetone:ethanol (denoted by “EtOH” in all relevant plots), the photoactive species appeared to “selectively” sensitize, evidenced by the comparable performance to films sensitized in 100% acetone despite having lower absorbance between 375–600 nm, which was visualized in the film color changing from orange/light brown to yellow/orange. However, since the exact chemical compositions of the by-product species comprising the as-synth. and dial. fractions are unknown, we cannot conclude that the sensitized species producing the yellow/orange film color are all photoactive and, thus, contribute to the generated photocurrent. That said, the prominent shoulder observed near 450 nm in the UV-vis spectra of films sensitized in the presence of EtOH correlates quite well with the EQE spectral profiles, implying that the species responsible for this absorption feature are likely the source of the photocurrent. This “selective” effect was more pronounced for films sensitized in 10 and 30 mg mL−1 solutions of the as-synth. and dial. fractions as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), which clearly demonstrate that the photocurrent originates from certain by-product species generated in route to the desired FCDs. Additionally, sensitization in the presence of EtOH resulted in more distinct EQE peaks due to lower photon-to-current conversion between 390–410 nm, an effect that was most prominent at higher concentrations, particularly, for the dial. fraction. Therefore, at lower concentrations, the observed photocurrent for acetone-dispersed fractions originates almost solely from by-product species due to the small nanocarbon content, whereas, at higher concentrations, specifically, 30 mg mL−1, the increase in EQE between 390–410 nm can be attributed, in part, to photocurrent contributions from the nanocarbons since this wavelength range coincides with the highest EQE values for the retent. fraction. Additionally, these results clearly indicate that the dial. fraction consists of multiple species that contribute to the photocurrent to varying degrees (or not at all), evidenced by the differing film optical properties for the two sensitizer–solvent systems and the slight increase in EQE between 390–410 nm, relative to the max, for films sensitized in 100% acetone. Note, although films sensitized in 100% acetone showed clear concentration-dependent sensitizer uptake, the resulting PV performance was essentially independent of concentration or employed solvent system, except for films sensitized with dial. in the presence of EtOH, which showed a uniform increase in average photocurrent as concentration increased.
PV performance of CA-NH4OH dial.-spiked retent. solutions
Furthermore, undisputable evidence that the observed PV performance for the as-synth. fraction, specifically, the photocurrent, predominately arises from reaction by-products, and not nanoscale carbons, is provided through the statistically significant performance changes observed for films sensitized in varying concentrations (0, 1, 2.5, 5, 10, or 30 mg mL−1) of dial.-spiked 5 or 1 mg mL−1 retent. solutions (Fig. 2). For both retent. concentrations explored, spiking in increasing quantities of dial. fraction to yield the listed concentrations led to continual increases in photocurrent and photovoltage, despite minimal changes to film optical properties for dial. concentrations lower than 30 mg mL−1. The one exception was films sensitized in a 5 mg mL−1 retent. solution spiked to 1 mg mL−1 dial., which oddly led to a slight decrease in performance relative to neat 5 mg mL−1 retent. Additionally, upon increasing the dial. concentration from 10 to 30 mg mL−1, the performance remained static for 5 mg mL−1 retent. while it decreased slightly for 1 mg mL−1 retent.; however, when the solvent system was swapped from 100% acetone to 50:50 vol% acetone:EtOH, the performance of films sensitized in the 5 or 1 mg mL−1 retent. solutions containing 30 mg mL−1 dial. increased markedly. In fact, the highest performances obtained were for films sensitized in the ethanolic 1 mg mL−1 retent. and 30 mg mL−1 dial. solutions. The exact origins of this noteworthy increase are unclear since films sensitized in the ethanolic solution of neat 30 mg mL−1 dial. yielded slightly lower photocurrent and performance. However, given that the concentrations of the dial. and retent. fractions were not optimized, as such studies were beyond the scope of this work, it is possible that at the optimum ratio of nanocarbons and photocurrent-producing by-products, synergistic effects arise and yield performances higher than those obtained for the individual constituents since FCDs are known to enhance the performance of sensitizer-based PVs when employed as photoanode dopants.42,43 Indeed, performance metric comparisons of the 10 mg mL−1 dial.-spiked retent. solutions to the 10 mg mL−1 as-synth. solution, which contains approximately 0.1 and nominally 10 mg mL−1 of the retent. and dial. species, respectively, reveal that this may be the case (Fig. S2A, ESI†). Although ratio-dependent synergistic effects between these species are evident, in general, higher concentrations of both the dial. and retent. fractions led to increased sensitizer uptake that negatively impacted performance, particularly for the latter fraction. This is clearly seen in head-to-head comparisons of the performances for the different dial. concentrations in the spiking studies as increasing the retent. concentration from 1 to 5 mg mL−1 led to markedly lower performances, even for the ethanolic sensitizer solutions. Therefore, at higher concentrations of retent. species, the apparent “selectivity” previously observed in the presence of EtOH may begin to fail and marginal nanocarbon uptake occurs, which could explain why films sensitized in an ethanolic solution of 1 mg mL−1 retent. and 30 mg mL−1 dial. yielded the highest performance (Fig. S2B and C, ESI†); possible synergistic effects arose due to optimal uptake of nanocarbons and photocurrent-producing species. The negative impact on performance imparted by increased uptake was further revealed in 24 h sensitization studies (not shown); in all conditions explored, the PV performance decreased regardless of concentration, solvent system, or fraction.52 Additionally, we observed water-induced irreversible aggregation in as-synth. fractions and aging effects in 30 mg mL−1 as-synth. fractions, both evidenced by reductions in PV performance.52
 Fig. 2  Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for devices containing films sensitized in dial.-spiked (A) 5 mg mL−1 or (B) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fractions dispersed in 100% acetone or 50:50 vol% acetone:ethanol (denoted by “EtOH”). Appropriate quantities of dial. fraction were spiked in the retent. solutions to yield concentrations of 1, 2.5, 5, 10, or 30 mg mL−1. Average EQE and absorbance spectra for the dial.-spiked (C and E) 5 mg mL−1 or (D and F) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fraction and UV-vis absorbance (inset) spectra. Representative images of films sensitized with dial.-spiked (G) 5 mg mL−1 or (H) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fractions. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison. 
Effects of fractionation of Arg on PV performance
Contrary to the trends observed for CA-NH4OH samples, upon fractionating away reaction by-products in the Arg system, device performance improved markedly (Fig. 3). In addition to the three conventional fractions, an aliquot of the as-synth. sample was also filtered through a syringe filter (0.20 μm pore size), retaining the filtrate and discarding the residue, to yield a fourth fraction denoted as “as-synth. filt.”. The performance of films sensitized with the as-synth. and as-synth. filt. fractions were almost identical (Fig. 3A and Table S1, ESI†), implying that syringe filtration provides minimal purification (despite material clearly being deposited in the filter), a conclusion consistent with our previous assessment that syringe filtration alone is not a sufficient mode for separating by-products from the target nanocarbons since the filter pores are substantially larger than the size of both species.16 Although, we note, the photocurrent for the filtered fraction was statistically lower so either removal of these larger species by the filter (i.e., the residue) directly impacted current production or small quantities of the photocurrent-producing nanocarbons became entrapped in the residue. Regardless, the photocurrent generated by both fractions was nearly identical to that produced by bare TiO2, implying that (certain) species constituting these fractions have poor photon-to-current conversion capabilities. Although, the sensitized films were extremely light in color either due to low sensitizer uptake or the sensitizing species being weak chromophores, which could also account for the minimal current generation. Interestingly, a statistically significant increase in photovoltage was observed for both as-synth. fractions though, an improvement not generated by the dial. fraction. Additionally, the dial. fraction yielded the lowest average photocurrent, lowest EQE (Fig. 3B), and lightest colored films (Fig. 3C). Conversely, the retent. fraction, showing the darkest films of all fractions and most intense absorbance, produced a massive increase in photocurrent and slight improvement to FF while retaining the higher photovoltage, all which led to almost a doubling in device efficiency (Table S1, ESI†). Additionally, all four Arg fractions negatively impacted the EQE of TiO2 (λ = 300–375 nm) but presented with increased EQE from 375–550 nm (Fig. 3B), which led to similar photocurrents for bare TiO2 and the first three fractions, while the retent. fraction generated markedly improved photon-to-current conversion in this range such that the JSC increased by approximately 0.1 mA cm−2. These results clearly show the photovoltage improvements stem from the putative nanocarbons in the retent. fractions and these species can generate appreciable photocurrent over bare TiO2, however, when the reaction by-products are not removed, these species negatively impact the performance, possibly through parasitic charge scavenging. Although, given the prevalence of the dial. species in the as-synth. fraction (approximately 70:30 dial.:retent. by mass) and the fact that the optical properties of the as-synth.-sensitized films are closer to those of the dial. over the retent., the poor performances observed for the as-synth. fractions likely arose from competitive adsorption between the dial. and retent. species, with the former dominating uptake and adsorption sites due to higher concentration and smaller hydrodynamic radii, factors that yield better film mesopore penetration and improved adsorption kinetics. Lastly, the Arg sample was also susceptible to water-induced aggregation, evidenced by markedly lower performances for dialysis fractions exchanged against 100% water (results not shown).
 Fig. 3  (A) Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for the 10 mg mL−1 Arg-derived fractions dispersed in ethanol. (B) Average EQE and UV-vis absorbance spectra with an expanded version of the EQE spectra provided as an inset. (C) Images of representative films used in the devices. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison. 
Effects of fractionation of CA-U and GSH-F on PV performance
Purification of the other two precursor systems explored in this work (i.e., CA-U, GSH-F) did not result in such dramatic performance differences between the fractions, with average device metrics marginally deviating either below (CA-U; Fig. S3, ESI†) or above (GSH-F; Fig. S4, ESI†) that of bare TiO2. Although, the results still clearly demonstrate the role purification plays on the proper reporting of PV action arising from nanoscale FCD sensitizers since by-product species in the dial. impacted the observed performance and generated photocurrent at incident wavelengths of 375 to 550 nm (Fig. S3B and S4B, ESI†). Additionally, aging effects were observed in every fraction for both precursor systems, presumably due to sample degradation.52 However, since both CA-NH4OH and Arg displayed solvent sensitivity, water-induced irreversible aggregation in these latter two systems cannot be ruled out as the possible origin of the lower performance and apparent sample degradation.
Interestingly, the GSH-F as-synth. and retent. fractions yielded stark differences in sensitized film color (brown vs. vibrant green) stemming, in part, from the two absorbance peaks at 645 and 690 nm (Fig. S4C and S5B, ESI†), features that fortuitously led to distinguishable photon-to-current conversion centered at 650 nm (Fig. S5A, ESI†). Although extremely low (<0.4%), this minor peak in the EQE spectrum is highly encouraging, as with a more fundamental understanding of the exact origin of these absorbance features (i.e., originating from FCDs or quasi-molecular species), the chemical composition and resulting photophysics of this FCD system could be better tailored to simultaneously increase the absorbance in the red end of the visible spectrum and improve the photon-to-current conversion to yield more efficient FCD sensitizers. As a step towards this, samples were generated at a higher carbonization temperature (200 vs. 180 °C) to assess the influence on overall PV performance and, in particular, any deviations in the photophysics of the species giving rise to the peaks between 600 and 800 nm (via UV-vis and EQE). A more detailed analysis is provided in the ESI† but, briefly, increasing the reaction temperature led to a decrease in all PV metrics for all three fractions, however, only a marginal drop in photocurrent occurred while the VOC and FF experienced marked reductions, resulting in negative deviations away from the performance of bare TiO2 (Fig. S4D, ESI†). Most notably, the distinct UV-vis and EQE features observed for the as-synth. and retent. fractions between 600 and 750 nm almost completely disappeared (Fig. S5C and D, ESI†) and a further reduction in the EQE attributed to TiO2 occurred, indicating that the higher carbonization temperature negatively affected the species responsible for the observed PV action, in particular, the photocurrent, and especially the photon-to-current conversion at redder wavelengths. We postulate that the higher reaction temperature led to a greater degree of carbonization (i.e., sp2 content), a well-known occurrence in FCD syntheses,4,24 that yields poorer PV performance for the device architecture employed herein. That is, the higher reaction temperature reduced the molecular and sp3 characteristics of the materials via the degradation of quasi-molecular moieties tethered to the nanocarbons, species that are responsible for the distinct green coloration and, in part, a fraction of the photocurrent, especially at redder wavelengths.
PV performance of coal-derived GQD sensitizers
In a similar vein, all FCD-containing retent. fractions performed poorly, producing power conversion efficiencies of approximately 0.1% or lower, loosely implying that thoroughly purified nanoscale carbons may not function as sufficient sensitizer replacements to the higher performing, albeit, more toxic semiconductor QDs. Further evidence of this notion is provided via characterizations of devices sensitized with extensively purified coal-derived GQDs,53 a subset of the FCD family with more well-defined, graphitic nanostructures (i.e., highly carbonized). Similar to the molecularly-derived, FCD-containing retent. fractions, these GQD sensitizers produced adverse effects on PV performance relative to bare TiO2, however, the deleterious consequences were even more drastic, plummeting device efficiency to essentially 0% (Fig. S6, ESI†). The origin of this negligible power conversion was from a reduction in all PV metrics, specifically, the VOC and FF decreased by over half and one third, respectively, while the JSC dropped nearly 10-fold. Despite the immense uptake of GQDs, evidenced by the deep brown color of the films and their corresponding UV-vis spectra, EQE measurements revealed that the source of the marked reduction in photocurrent was a lowering of photon-to-curren conversion to below 10% across all wavelengths such that the EQE was well below that observed for bare TiO2 even at wavelengths that the GQD sensitizers absorb strongly. Given these results, we speculate that the photocurrent observed in the molecularly-derived, FCD-containing retent. fractions arises, at least in part, from quasi-molecular moieties tethered to the FCD surface, while the nanocarbon core may function mostly as a conduit for delivering photogenerated charge carriers to the semiconductor but, in some instances, negatively impacts this charge transport or device energetic alignment to such an extent that photocurrent production is severely hindered.
Mass spectrometric analysis of CA-derived samples
Since bottom-up FCD syntheses are known to generate a variety of molecular by-products,4,16,20–25 especially those employing CA as the carbon source,25,27–35 ESI-TOF mass spectrometry (MS) was conducted (in positive ion mode) on select as-synth. fractions to potentially identify molecular species that could be responsible for the observed photocurrent. Specifically, the CA-derived as-synth. fractions, as well as solutions of neat CA and CA–U, were analyzed since the reactions, although differing in synthetic approach, share similar precursors (that is, CA and ammonia; in the CA–U system, the latter is generated in situ through decomposition of U) but yield products exhibiting drastically different PV performances. The spectra of the precursor solutions, shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), displayed numerous peaks attributable to various sodiated adducts of CA or U, including mono- or dibasic species of the former, labeled as NaCA or Na2CA, respectively. Specifically, the peaks at a m/z of 215, 237, 407, 429, and 643 were assigned to [CA + Na]+ (or [NaCA + H]+), [NaCA + Na]+ (or [Na2CA + H]+), [2CA + Na]+, [2Na2CA + H]+, and [3Na2CA + H]+, respectively, while the peak at a m/z of 143 was attributed to [2U + Na]+. Upon reaction, essentially all of the peaks ascribed to the employed precursors vanished (Fig. S8, ESI†) indicating complete degradation of the N-dopants and carbon source (CA), processes that are quite complex for the latter. Indeed, CA is known to go through multistep and multi-pathway dehydration and decarboxylation reactions that yield various carboxylic acids such as itaconic and citraconic acids (m/z = 132), as well as aconitic acid (m/z = 175),54,55 species that were observed in both systems. Although, since these acids are colorless solids in their virgin forms, they are likely not responsible for the observed photocurrent; however, since they all possess carboxyl groups, they could be impacting the photovoltaic performance through modification of TiO2 but whether they impart positive or negative effects is unclear.
Additionally, the reaction of CA with ammonia-generating compounds (e.g., NH4OH, urea) has been reported to generate various 2-pryidone derivatives such as citrazinic acid (CzA)29,56 and 4-hydroxy-1H-pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine-1,3,6(2H,5H)-trione (HPPT).29 However, the production of these species did not appear to occur, an observation that could be due to the employed reaction conditions since the reported generation of these by-products arose from lower reaction temperatures (<160 °C vs. 200 °C) and higher N-dopant:CA mole ratios (≥3:1 vs. ≤3:1). Furthermore, the reported peak absorbance of these by-products does not coincide with the observed absorbance for sensitized films; that is, the reported peak absorbance (350–400 nm) is blueshifted relative to the sensitized species (450 nm). Moreover, HPPT does not possess carboxyl moieties that would allow it to strongly chemisorb to the TiO2 film.
While the photocurrent does not appear to arise from CzA or HPPT, the reaction of CA with hexamethylenetetramine, which also yields ammonia upon decomposition, has been proposed to generate CzA derivatives functionalized in the three and five positions.31 Therefore, under the appropriate conditions, the generation of 3,5-derivatized CzA species in the reaction of CA with NH4OH or U cannot be discounted. Indeed, a peak was observed at m/z of 186 in both systems which could be attributed to an aminated derivative of CzA, such as 2,6-dihydroxy-3,5-diaminopyridine-4-carboxylic acid (HAPCA). Furthermore, a peak was observed at m/z of 142 in both precursor systems that could correspond to a decarboxylated version of the proposed CzA derivative, HAPCA. Since CzA absorbs UV to blue wavelengths, this feature may be retained upon derivatization, with a possible redshift in peak absorbance, as long as the aromaticity is not lost. However, since a peak at m/z of 186 is observed in both systems, as well as the precursor solutions, we suspect that this peak arises from tributylammonium (tba), a species originating from tetrabutylammonium (TBA), which is an ever-present contaminant in the ESI source used as an internal lock mass for yielding high mass accuracies.
Since further functionalization of CzA to HPPT produces redshifted absorbance peaks, namely a shift from 350 to 400 nm, it is plausible that a more extensively derivatized form of CzA (possibly in the 1, 3, or 5 positions) was produced, a species that absorbs around 450 nm, possesses aromaticity, and still contains a carboxyl headgroup, all of which would be minimum requirements to yield the observed sensitization and PV performance. Indeed, CzA derivatives functionalized with various uret species (e.g., urea, biuret) have been proposed,57 however, these postulated species were not observed either. Given the lack of evidence for the existence of a molecular by-product that could be responsible for the generated photocurrent, the sensitized species yielding the observed performance in the CA-NH4OH as-synth. and dial. fractions could be a large, poorly carbonized polymeric species possessing a molecular weight between 2 and 50 kDa such that its presence was not observed in the probed m/z range but its size (i.e., hydrodynamic radius) was small enough to still permeate the dialysis membrane. That said, the lack of current evidence for the formation of molecular by-products does not preclude their existence since the resultant positive ion mass spectra do not necessarily represent every species constituting the analyzed fractions. Therefore, in-depth positive and negative ion MS analyses beyond the scope of this study are warranted to elucidate the exact origin, whether molecular or polymeric, of the produced photocurrent. Regardless, the results clearly indicate that the species responsible for the majority of the observed performance in the CA-NH4OH system, specifically, the photocurrent, is not a nanocarbon.
Additional considerations
While the results presented herein imply that FCDs may not hold the perpetuated promise as greener, inexpensive sensitizer replacements, further (remedial) studies are necessary to better understand exactly how the (true) properties of these nanocarbons impact PV performance such as their electronic alignments, core/surface chemistries, and size, characteristics that are obfuscated by the overwhelming presence of by-products. For example, the reported sizes for the CA-NH4OH, Arg, CA-U, GSH-F, and coal-derived nanocarbons explored in this work were 6–16 nm,45 12–18 nm,8 1–7 nm,48,58 2–6 nm,49 and 15–50 nm,53 respectively. Given that the TiO2 paste employed contained 20 nm nanoparticles, which would yield pore sizes of comparable size (or smaller), the larger nanocarbons cannot adequately penetrate the film to yield a complete monolayer of surface coverage, leading to sensitization of only the upper portions of the film and, thus, producing lower performances. Contrary to this notion though, the larger nanocarbons (i.e., CA-NH4OH, Arg) generated higher performances than the smaller nanocarbons that could easily penetrate the entire film and the coal-derived nanocarbons, with the largest reported size, produced intensely sensitized films yet yielded the lowest performance. This discrepancy could be, in part, due to the fact that the three poorest performing systems were dispersed in and films sensitized in water, a solvent that can impart negative effects on device performance.59 Therefore, since possible size-dependent FCD uptake has only been suggested,8 systematic studies of the effects that differently sized, rigorously purified and characterized nanocarbons (ideally derived from the same precursor) and the sensitizing solvent(s) have on observed performance are necessary to arrive at a proper understanding of these nanocarbon photosensitizers. However, sizing information gleaned from TEM imaging is hardly trustworthy due to the reported assembly of by-products into observable nanoscale particles upon drying27 and, more importantly, the poor Z-contrast inherent to imaging a carbon nanoparticle resting atop a nanometer thick carbon-based support. Indeed, it has been reported that properly imaging silicon nanocrystals, which provide better Z-contrast than carbon-based nanoparticles, is extremely challenging due to this very reason.60 Thus, it is highly likely that many published TEM images of FCDs are, in fact, merely grid artifacts or nanoparticle contaminants from other materials explored in the same lab, a dire problem that has yet to be addressed; moving forward, it may be better to rely on AFM imaging alone for proper sizing.
Additionally, as FCDs are reported to possess both donor and acceptor properties, the poor performance observed for the investigated systems could arise not only from recombination centers at emission trap sites but also from the nanoscale carbons behaving as “electron sinks”, retaining more of the accepted electrons than they donate. Furthermore, the FCDs could be strong electron donors toward triiodide reduction, promoting parasitic back reactions that substantially reduce the photocurrent produced. Regardless, before such studies exploring the exact origins of the observed effects on PV devices, particularly sensitizer-driven architectures, are undertaken, analytically rigorous purification of the FCD parent samples and subsequent systematic characterization of the fundamental chemical, physical, and photophysical properties of the nanocarbon-containing fraction must be conducted to provide a better context of why these materials behave as they do when employed in PV devices, namely, as sensitizers. Only then can proper correlations be drawn to properties relevant to photosensitizer applications such as band gap/alignment and charge-carrier injection, lifetimes, and transport.
Moreover, every fraction in all four precursor systems displayed some form of instability such as water-induced irreversible aggregation or sample degradation and, in fact, every fraction displayed solution instabilities with sedimentation or electroless deposition occurring within days to weeks after synthesis, regardless of the storage container utilized (i.e., glass, plastic), thus, these sample instabilities also need addressed.
Conclusions
We have attempted to draw further attention to the improper and insufficient purification of FCDs, particularly those derived from molecular precursors, through the exploration of membrane-separated fractions to better understand how these nanocarbons, as photosensitizers, contribute to and affect PV performance in mesoporous TiO2-based solar cells, a common area of FCD application that has yet to implement analytically rigorous purification protocols. This detrimental issue, which is still unsettlingly common, has hindered the field in elucidating these nanocarbons’ true properties, for example, and in particular, the origin of their reported photoluminescence. The results disseminated here further illuminate how the lack of sufficient purification is impeding the field in arriving at a fundamental understanding of these nanocarbons’ inherent properties (e.g., size, composition, photophysical, photoelectric), revealing that scrupulous purification is necessary to properly report the source of the observed PV action and the devices’ corresponding performance metrics. Specifically, in some precursor systems, the observed PV action may not originate from the nanocarbons themselves but from molecular by-products generated alongside the nanocarbons, as was apparent for CA-NH4OH, or from quasi-molecular functional groups on the FCD core, as the results for GSH-F imply. Conversely, in other instances such as the Arg system, proper fractionation may lead to even higher PV performance than that observed for unpurified samples due to the presence of reaction by-products negatively impacting performance and masking the true potential of the nanocarbon sensitizers. Additionally, in all systems except Arg, substantial uptake of the various sensitizing species was observed resulting in dark, strongly absorbing films yet devices containing these films produced very little photocurrent implying that some of the chromophoric species, whether molecular or nanocarbon, do not meaningfully contribute to photocurrent. Furthermore, the exact effects that the size and core/surface chemistries of thoroughly purified FCDs have on applied technologies, especially related to light harvesting, remain unclear, mainly due to the widespread insufficient purification but also due to difficulties with properly identifying and sizing the nanocarbons, as well as the current inability to conclusively correlate size and chemistry to the observed luminescence. Therefore, studies should be devised to properly address these knowledge gaps. Since the resultant products are known to be precursor and approach dependent, moving forward, the field should cease the common practice of employing new carbon sources and studying the insufficiently purified product(s), especially those generated with low temperature syntheses (i.e., approximately 200 °C or lower), which are known to yield a large ratio of by-product to target nanocarbon.4,33 Instead, focus should be directed at better understanding the materials stemming from procedures that employ widely reported precursor systems, higher synthetic temperature (i.e., 200 °C or higher), and meticulous dialysis or chromatographic separations, where the conclusions drawn in the literature concerning proper purification protocols are strictly adhered to.16,17,19,25,27 Lastly, remedial studies employing analytically rigorous purification should be undertaken to reassess previously reported properties, particularly those that are highly relevant to light-harvesting applications such as band gap, band alignment, donor/acceptor capabilities, charge injection, and heteroatom doping.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the University of Missouri for supporting this work through the Mizzou Advantage funding program. The authors also thank Dr Mark Lee for his gracious assistance with mass spectrometric analysis.
References
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anwar, H. Ding, M. Xu, X. Hu, Z. Li, J. Wang, L. Liu, L. Jiang, D. Wang, C. Dong, M. Yan, Q. Wang and H. Bi, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 2317–2338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Essner, C. H. Laber and G. A. Baker, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16354–16360 RSC .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 747–750 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Laber, J. B. Essner, T. A. Scott, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2016, 6, 52–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Essner, R. N. McCay, C. J. Smith II, S. M. Cobb, C. H. Laber and G. A. Baker, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2163–2170 RSC .
J. Briscoe, A. Marinovic, M. Sevilla, S. Dunn and M. Titirici, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4463–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marinovic, L. S. Kiat, S. Dunn, M.-M. Titirici and J. Briscoe, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1004–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Sta. Ana and D. H. Camacho, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 228, 187–193 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dou, J. Duan, Y. Zhao, B. He and Q. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, X. Yu, Z. Yi, F. Chi, H. Wang, Y. Yuan, D. Li, K. Xu and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15083–15090 RSC .
Y. Meng, Y. Zhang, W. Sun, M. Wang, B. He, H. Chen and Q. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 257, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Q. Tang, Q. Meng, Z. Zhang, J. Li, B. He and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2143–2150 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Li, H. G. Yang, T. An, P.-K. Wong, D. Wang, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Essner, C. H. Laber, S. Ravula, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 243–250 RSC .
J. B. Essner, J. A. Kist, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1878–1887 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chen, Y.-H. Tsai and C.-W. Chang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 6153–6159 RSC .
K. J. Mintz, Y. Zhou and R. M. Leblanc, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4634–4652 RSC .
J. C. Vinci, I. M. Ferrer, S. J. Seedhouse, A. K. Bourdon, J. M. Reynard, B. A. Foster, F. V. Bright and L. A. Colón, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 239–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ehrat, S. Bhattacharyya, J. Schneider, A. Löf, R. Wyrwich, A. L. Rogach, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7710–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Hsu, Y.-H. Chen and C.-W. Chang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30086–30092 RSC .
T. Obadiya, H. Uppala and D. Sidebottom, MRS Adv., 2019, 4, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Righetto, A. Privitera, I. Fortunati, D. Mosconi, M. Zerbetto, M. L. Curri, M. Corricelli, A. Moretto, S. Agnoli, L. Franco, R. Bozio and C. Ferrante, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Lu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramírez-Barroso, A. Jacobo-Martín, I. Navarro-Baena, J. J. Hernández, C. Navio, I. Rodríguez and R. Wannemacher, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16935–16944 RSC .
C. J. Reckmeier, J. Schneider, Y. Xiong, J. Häusler, P. Kasák, W. Schnick and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10352–10361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khan, A. Sharma, S. Ghoshal, S. Jain, M. K. Hazra and C. K. Nandi, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 175–180 RSC .
A. Das, V. Gude, D. Roy, T. Chatterjee, C. K. De and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9634–9641 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kasprzyk, T. Świergosz, S. Bednarz, K. Walas, N. V. Bashmakova and D. Bogdał, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13889–13894 RSC .
X. Liu, H.-B. Li, L. Shi, X. Meng, Y. Wang, X. Chen, H. Xu, W. Zhang, X. Fang and T. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10302–10312 RSC .
J. Schneider, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Xiong, M. von Seckendorff, A. S. Susha, P. Kasák and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2014–2022 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, J. H. Yang, H. B. Zeng, Y. M. Chen, S. C. Yang, C. Wu, H. Zeng, O. Yoshihito and Q. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14374–14378 RSC .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5976–5984 RSC .
Y. Xiong, J. Schneider, E. V. Ushakova and A. L. Rogach, Nano Today, 2018, 23, 124–139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Yuan, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4367–4374 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kasprzyk, S. Bednarz and D. Bogdał, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6445–6447 RSC .
W. Kasprzyk, S. Bednarz, P. Zmudzki, M. Galica and D. Bogdal, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34795–34799 RSC .
J. P. Kim, Z. Xie, M. H. Creer, Z. Liu and J. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 550–558 RSC .

          A. A. Kokorina, A. A. Bakal, A. V. Sapelkin, G. B. Sukhorukov and I. Y. Goryacheva, High Luminescent Fluorophore Synthesized at Atmospheric Pressure from Citric Acid and Ethylenediamine, International Symposium on Optics and Biophotonics VI: Saratov Fall Meeting, 2018.
H.-X. Wang, Z. Yang, Z.-G. Liu, J.-Y. Wan, J. Xiao and H.-L. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8096–8104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, M. Li, J. Qiu and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315–2337 RSC .
J. B. Essner and G. A. Baker, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1216–1263 RSC .
S. Paulo, E. Palomares and E. Martinez-Ferrero, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 157 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Gao, L. Huang, T. Li, J. Song, H. Hu, Y. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. Sun, S. Cong, J. Wu, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Dai, Q. Yi and G. Zou, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Carolan, C. Rocks, D. B. Padmanaban, P. Maguire, V. Svrcek and D. Mariotti, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1611–1619 RSC .
Q. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, K. Yin and H. Li, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 130 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Qu, X. Wang, Q. Lu, X. Liu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12215–12218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Lao, W. Ding, Z. Zhang and S. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 284, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .
B. C.-M. Martindale, G. A.-M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo, S. Prantl, R. Godin, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6459–6463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L.-S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Essner, PhD dissertation, University of Missouri-Columbia,  2021 .
R. Ye, C. Xiang, J. Lin, Z. Peng, K. Huang, Z. Yan, N. P. Cook, E. L.-G. Samuel, C.-C. Hwang, G. Ruan, G. Ceriotti, A.-R. O. Raji, A. A. Martí and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2943 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Fischer, L. H. Merwin and R. A. Nissan, Appl. Spectrosc., 1995, 49, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wyrzykowski, E. Hebanowska, G. Nowak-Wiczk, M. Makowski and L. Chmurzyński, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2011, 104, 731–735 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Sell and T. H. Easterfield, J. Chem. Soc., Trans., 1893, 63, 1035–1051 RSC .
T. Wang, A. Wang, R. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Sun, G. Shan, Y. Chen and Y. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 10723 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Karthik, B. Saha, S. K. Ghosh and N. D. Pradeep Singh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10471–10473 RSC .
F. Bella, C. Gerbaldi, C. Barolo and M. Grätzel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3431–3473 RSC .
C. M. Hessel, D. Reid, M. G. Panthani, M. R. Rasch, B. W. Goodfellow, J. Wei, H. Fujii, V. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 393–401 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental and characterization details; additional plots for CA-NH4OH; CA-U and GSH-F characterizations; ESI-TOF spectra; PV metrics for all systems studied. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00454bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for devices containing films sensitized in 5 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH-derived fractions dispersed in 100% acetone or 50:50 vol% acetone:ethanol (denoted by “EtOH”). (B) Average EQE and UV-vis absorbance (inset) spectra. (C) Images of representative films used in the devices. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 2  Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for devices containing films sensitized in dial.-spiked (A) 5 mg mL−1 or (B) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fractions dispersed in 100% acetone or 50:50 vol% acetone:ethanol (denoted by “EtOH”). Appropriate quantities of dial. fraction were spiked in the retent. solutions to yield concentrations of 1, 2.5, 5, 10, or 30 mg mL−1. Average EQE and absorbance spectra for the dial.-spiked (C and E) 5 mg mL−1 or (D and F) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fraction and UV-vis absorbance (inset) spectra. Representative images of films sensitized with dial.-spiked (G) 5 mg mL−1 or (H) 1 mg mL−1 CA-NH4OH retent. fractions. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Average illuminated J–V curves with corresponding standard deviations for the 10 mg mL−1 Arg-derived fractions dispersed in ethanol. (B) Average EQE and UV-vis absorbance spectra with an expanded version of the EQE spectra provided as an inset. (C) Images of representative films used in the devices. The results for bare TiO2 (black curves) are provided in all relevant panels for comparison.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental and characterization details; additional plots for CA-NH4OH; CA-U and GSH-F characterizations; ESI-TOF spectra; PV metrics for all systems studied. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00454b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
