Fundamentals and perspectives in developing zinc-ion battery electrolytes: a comprehensive review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02620D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02620D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4625-4665Fundamentals and perspectives in developing zinc-ion battery electrolytes: a comprehensive review

        
          
            Tengsheng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Tang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinxin 
            Cao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Anqiang 
            Pan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guozhao 
            Fang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Shuquan 
            Liang
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha 410083, Hunan, P. R. China. E-mail: fg_zhao@csu.edu.cn; zhou_jiang@csu.edu.cn; lsq@csu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Electronic Packaging and Advanced Functional Materials of Hunan Province, Central South University, Changsha 410083, Hunan, P. R. China
Received 
      16th August 2020
    , Accepted 6th October 2020First published on 7th October 2020AbstractThe development of low-cost and high-safety zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) has been extensively discussed and reviewed in recent years, but the work on the comprehensive discussion and perspectives in developing zinc-ion electrolytes is still relatively lacking. Faced with critical challenges and bottlenecks practically, the viability of ZIBs critically depends on the development of suitable electrolytes and their practical considerations. In this review, a systematic summary with regard to the basic characteristics of zinc-ion electrolytes facing different issues from optimization strategies to the fundamental science of electrolyte/electrode interfaces (EEIs), particularly in the feasible modifications and advanced characterizations of EEIs, has been put forward. Due to the lack of consideration of the practical issues in major academic studies, we have particularly highlighted aspects that mainly focus on the choice of the electrolyte system, dosage of liquid and fluid electrolytes, status of gel and all-solid electrolytes, together with other concerns related to the electrolytes. The final section proposes significant perspectives to guide and promote the development of zinc-ion electrolytes.
Tengsheng Zhang
Tengsheng Zhang received his bachelor's degree (2018) in Materials Science and Engineering from CSU. He is now a master's student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, CSU, under the supervision of Prof. Yan Tang. His research focuses on zinc-ion electrolytes and electrolyte/electrode interface.
Guozhao Fang
Prof. Guozhao Fang received his PhD from CSU (P. R. China) in 2019. After graduation, he joined the CSU as a Professor in Prof. Shuquan Liang's group. His current interests include low-cost sodium-ion/zinc-ion electrolytes and electrolyte/electrode interface, structural regulation of electrode materials, etc.
Jiang Zhou
Prof. Jiang Zhou received his bachelor's degree (2011) and PhD (2015) from CSU. During 2014–2015, he studied in Prof. Hua Zhang's group at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) as an exchange PhD student. After graduation, he carried out his Postdoctoral Research in Prof. Ju Li's group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) since 2016. He joined CSU as a Professor at the end of 2017. His research interests include lithium (sodium)-ion batteries, aqueous zinc-ion batteries, etc.
Shuquan Liang
Prof. Shuquan Liang received his PhD from Central South University (CSU, P. R. China) in 2000. He has been the Dean of the School of Materials Science and Engineering in CSU from 2010 to 2018. He is the winner of the Monash University Engineering Sir John Medal. He has hosted 6 state research projects, including a national 973 subproject, a national 863 project, and a national natural science foundation of China project. Currently, his main research interests include micro-/nanostructured functional materials and nanocomposites and their applications in energy storage and conversion devices; high-performance, low-cost energy storage R&D of sodium-ion batteries, aqueous zinc-ion batteries; etc.

Broader context
Large-scale energy storage technologies have been deemed as reliable candidates to effectively store and transfer renewable energy. Due to low cost, high safety, and high volumetric energy density, zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) have attracted extensive attention in the field of electrochemical grid energy storage. Unfortunately, critical issues with regard to the electrolyte, anode, and cathode in ZIBs can greatly impede their large-scale deployment. In fact, the viability of practical ZIBs critically depends on the development of suitable electrolytes and their actual considerations, but work on comprehensive discussion and perspective in this aspect is still relatively lacking. This review provides a comprehensive and in-depth understanding and perspective on zinc-ion electrolytes, which is expected to guide the development of high-performance electrolytes and ZIBs in the future.

1. Introduction
With the increased depletion of traditional fossil energy and associated environmental issues, the demand for renewable energy resources has become increasingly urgent.1 However, most of them such as solar energy, tidal energy, and wind energy are limited by their inherent intermittency and instability.2 Therefore, large-scale electrochemical energy storage (EES) technologies have been deemed as reliable candidates to effectively store and transfer such energy.3 Among the various rechargeable batteries, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are considered to be a mature form of technology because of their popularity in portable electronic devices and electric vehicles. However, the excessive consumption of lithium resources, exorbitant cost, and safety issues limit their application in the field of energy storage, and therefore, alternatives to LIBs have been sought to meet the urgent demand of large-scale EES systems.4–8 Recently, rechargeable zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) have gained renewed and extensive attention because of their low cost, high safety, and environment-friendliness.4,5,9 Additional enthusiasm for ZIBs has been motivated by the unique advantages of metallic Zn,10 such as high theoretical capacity (820 mA h g−1 and 5855 mA h cm−3), low redox potential (−0.76 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), high abundance (about 300 times higher than lithium), and good insensitivity to oxygen and a humid atmosphere, which broaden the availability of electrolytes.11
As the main component of ZIBs, the electrolyte plays an important role in transporting Zn2+ between the anode and cathode, determining the electrochemically stable potential windows (ESPW) and affecting the Coulombic efficiencies (CEs) for Zn2+ storage and storage behaviors.12,13 Recently, numerous studies have focused on the exploitation of electrolytes for ZIBs; these mainly include aqueous electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, organic electrolytes, gel electrolytes, and quasi-solid/all-solid electrolytes (Fig. 1a).10,14–20 Attempts were made for using alkaline electrolytes, as early as in the 1960s.21 However, the low CE of the Zn anode, formation of zinc dendrites and ZnO byproducts, and fast capacity fading hindered the practical application of ZIBs based on alkaline electrolytes.11,22,23 Compared with alkaline electrolytes, a neutral or mild acidic aqueous electrolyte is preferable for ZIBs, but it also suffers from dissatisfactory CEs and narrow ESPW.5 To address these issues, various electrolytes such as organic electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes, gel electrolytes and quasi-solid/all-solid electrolytes have also been proposed.24–28
 Fig. 1  (a) Development of zinc-ion electrolytes. (b) Evolution of publications based on the keywords “zinc-ion battery” and “zinc-ion battery + electrolyte” and a brief statistic about the review articles on ZIBs until August 5, 2020. Search from the Web of Science. 
Although great progresses in designing electrolytes have been made to enhance the electrochemical performance of ZIBs, several critical issues still persist, which can be summarized as follows. (1) ZnSO4 and Zn(CF3SO3)2 solutions are common aqueous electrolytes for ZIBs, which are the most widely used due to their excellent compatibility with electrodes, but an aqueous electrolyte often suffers from poor CEs and rapid capacity fading due to the dissolution of the cathode materials in the electrolytes, and the irreversible side reactions on both cathodes and anodes.29–31 (2) Ionic liquid electrolytes often benefit from Zn2+/Zn plating/stripping and expanded ESPW, but low ionic conductivity, high viscosity, and lack of universality limit their applications.10 (3) Organic electrolytes possess wide ESPWs and good compatibility with Zn anodes. However, the original purpose of ZIBs may be defeated, which can adversely affect the safety and environment-friendliness.20,32 (4) A gel electrolyte principally focuses on flexible and stretchable electronic devices. There are many advantages of gel electrolytes. For instance, a gel electrolyte can prevent the possible leakage of the electrolyte and undesired dislocation caused by strain. The gel electrolyte also possesses high physical flexibility, desirable electrochemical properties, and excellent mechanical integrity, and it can simultaneously serve as both electrolyte and separator.33–35 However, low ionic conductivity, unsatisfactory mechanical strength, inferior thermal and chemical stability, and poor physical contact at the interface are still persistent problems for such types of electrolytes.17,36,37 (5) Quasi-solid and solid-state electrolytes are promising candidates to resolve the water-splitting reactions, water evaporation, and liquid leakage problems experienced by liquid electrolytes.18,19,38 However, the preparation of an all-solid zinc-ion electrolyte is a tough task because of the low diffusion rate of Zn2+ in the solid phase, and the high interfacial impedance due to the poor compatibility of solid-state electrolytes with the electrode can greatly hinder its application. Therefore, a true all-solid electrolyte has not been reported in ZIBs, but there are some quasi-solid electrolytes activated by a small amount of liquid electrolyte.38
In addition to the electrolytes themselves, many important scientific issues related to the electrolyte, such as a complex reaction occurring at the electrolyte–electrode interface (EEI), modification strategies and characterizations of the EEI, choice of electrolyte systems according to the electrode and the corresponding mechanism, dosage of liquid and fluid electrolytes, material processing for quasi-solid and all-solid electrolytes, etc. have a definite impact on the electrochemical performance of ZIBs. Therefore, a systematic and thorough understanding in this aspect is needed for research on zinc-ion electrolytes.
During the last several years, research activity on ZIBs has surged throughout the world, and there are many excellent reviews in the scope of ZIBs (Fig. 1b); they comprise comprehensive overviews of ZIBs,4,5,8,39,40 partial overviews of ZIBs (such as energy storage mechanism, cathodes, anodes, and electrolytes),11,41–48 and reviews that partially mention ZIBs.49–53 However, there are a few review articles that have specifically investigated zinc-ion electrolytes, and some of the articles have only mentioned their research progress and strategies.11,54 In particular, a timely and critical overview of the comprehensive discussions and perspectives in developing zinc-ion electrolytes is lacking. In this review, we particularly focus on the fundamental scientific understanding of the basic characteristics, challenges, and strategies of zinc-ion electrolytes and EEIs, practical considerations in developing zinc-ion electrolytes (Fig. 2), and future perspectives in this field.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the main components related to electrolytes. 
2. Electrolytes and their basic characteristics
The electrolyte is an important component in a battery, and its physical and chemical characteristics can conspicuously affect the electrochemical performance and energy storage mechanism of the battery. Therefore, the basic characteristics of zinc-ion electrolytes, namely, ionic conductivity, ion transference number, ESPW, etc., which are governed by the composition and structural factors of electrolytes, together with the analysis of issues faced by them and optimized strategies in the exploratory studies, are comprehensively covered and evaluated in this section (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Basic characteristic, composition, and structure of electrolytes. 
2.1 Ionic conductivity
Outstanding electrolytes always possess high ionic conductivity; because these characteristics can expedite Zn2+-ion transport, they can directly influence the rate performance of the battery.11 The methods required to ensure ionic conductivity mainly include Arrhenius theory and Vogel–Tammann–Fulcher (VTF) theory.55 The former can be expressed as follows: σ = (σ0)exp(−Ea/KT)(1)where σ denotes the ionic conductivity, σ0 denotes the ionic conductivity at an unlimited temperature, and T is the temperature in Kelvin; further, K and Ea represent the rate constant and activation energy of conductivity, respectively. The VTF theory can be used to deduce the ionic conductivity by using the following equation: σ = (σ0)exp[−B/(T − T0)](2)where B refers to the pseudo-activation energy and T0 is the reference temperature. The above two test methods are mostly used for solid-state electrolytes. Except for these methods, the ionic conductivity can also be modeled by using the below equation, which is the most widely used expression for aqueous ZIBs. σ = l/RA(3)where l represents the electrolyte thickness and A is the tested area of the electrolyte area along the direction of ion flow. Further, R is the bulk resistance and is expressed as the ohmic resistance, which can be tested by means of the AC impedance spectra.
Generally, the ionic conductivity of liquid and fluid electrolytes is higher than that of other electrolytes owing to their better fluidity, which is conducive for the fast migration of Zn2+ ions. In particular, aqueous electrolytes possess the highest ionic conductivity compared with organic and ionic liquid electrolytes due to their low viscosity and solvation energy. It has been reported that the former is generally a hundred times higher than the latter.56 For stronger electrolytes, such as ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte, the ionic conductivity, σ, can be further expressed as follows: σ = c(ν+λ0+ + ν−λ0−)(4)where c is the concentration of the electrolyte; ν+ and ν− are the number of moles of the cation and anion dissociated by dissolving 1 mole of the electrolyte, respectively; λ0+ and λ0− are the limiting molar conductivities of the cations and anions, respectively. Based on eqn (4), the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte can not only be related to the solubility, but also to the types of anions and cations. As a typical example, a KOH-based alkaline electrolyte has become the most extensively used electrolyte in Zn-based batteries at the earlier stages, which mainly included LiOH-, NaOH-, or KOH-based electrolytes.57 Since K+ possesses lower dissociation heat, a KOH solution with higher ionic conductivity (73.5 mS cm−1) can be obtained compared with Li+ (∼38 mS cm−1) or Na+ (∼50 mS cm−1), resulting in better transport kinetics.58 In addition to the selection of alkaline salts, the concentration of these salts is another key factor for alkaline ZIBs. In a diluted alkaline electrolyte, the continuous formation of ZnO, Zn(OH)2, and Mn(OH)2 byproducts leads to severe capacity degradation and poor CE during the electrochemical reaction. Therefore, a highly concentrated KOH electrolyte is required to improve the solubility of the byproducts, since ZnO can transform into Zn(OH)42− species in highly concentrated electrolytes because of the coordinated complexation reaction.11 Moreover, the electrochemical reaction kinetics improves with a reasonable increase in the solute concentration. Nevertheless, the concentration of the KOH electrolyte cannot exceed 6 M; otherwise, the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte can get worse.57
In comparison with alkaline electrolytes, aqueous, mildly acidic electrolytes can alleviate the formation of byproducts; because of this, aqueous electrolytes have recently achieved the leading position in ZIB research.15,59,60 Various zinc salts, such as Zn(NO3)2, Zn(ClO4)2, ZnCl2, ZnF2, ZnSO4, Zn(CF3SO3)2, Zn(CH3COO)2, Zn(BF4)2·xH2O, and Zn(N(CF3SO2)2)2 (denoted as Zn(TFSI)2), have been used to prepare zinc-ion electrolytes, which afford different electrochemical properties.40 Among these zinc salts, ZnSO4, Zn(CF3SO3)2, and Zn(TFSI)2 are the most widely used due to their ultrastable anions and good compatibility.11 Moreover, their ionic conductivities follow eqn (4). As shown in Fig. 4a, the calculated ionic conductivity of low-concentration ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte is 13.31 mS cm−1, while that for a high-concentration one is 25.74 mS cm−1.61 Therefore, higher electrolyte concentrations can afford higher ionic conductivities in ZnSO4 aqueous electrolytes. Ionic additives (such as Mn2+) to the electrolyte can improve the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte due to an increase in the number of conductive ions. As shown in Fig. 4c, the ionic conductivity increases from 4 to 6 S m−1 with an increase in the Mn2+ concentration, resulting in an improvement in CE.62 In addition, it is also demonstrated that the conductivity of CF3SO3-based aqueous electrolytes is higher than that of SO4-based aqueous electrolytes (Fig. 4d), which confirms that the type of zinc salts can also affect the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  Impedance spectra of (a) low-concentration and (b) high-concentration ZnSO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Ionic conductivities of 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolytes with different concentrations of the Mn(CF3SO3)2 additive and the corresponding initial CEs. (d) pH and ionic conductivity of 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 0.1 M Mn(CF3SO3)2, 3 M ZnSO4, and 3 M ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
For liquid electrolytes, some other factors such as solvation effect, solvent viscosity, and ion transference number, which are always affected by the concentration and solvent type of zinc salts, can also considerably influence the ionic conductivities. It has been reported that the viscosity increases with the aqueous Zn(CF3SO3)2 concentration, accompanied by a decrease in the ionic conductivity (Fig. 5a).59 In addition, ionic conductivity depends on both viscosity and ion transference number for a given electrolyte with a fixed salt and solvent. As shown in Fig. 5b, the ion transference number and viscosity increase while the ionic conductivity decreases.63 The viscosity of an electrolyte is approximately inversely proportional to the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte. For liquid electrolytes, the viscosity of an aqueous electrolyte is much lower than that of an organic electrolyte; hence, the ionic conductivity of the aqueous electrolyte is much higher. In the same solvent, the corresponding effect of the anion on the viscosity is negligible. However, it is worth mentioning that the influence of the salt concentration on the viscosity cannot be ignored.64
 Fig. 5  (a) Viscosity and ionic conductivity of different concentrated aqueous Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Viscosity, ionic conductivity, and ion transference number at room temperature for the different concentrated electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
Separating cations from anions can effectively enhance the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte, which is closely related to the solvation effect of the cations. A strong solvation effect can considerably increase the distance between the cations and anions; therefore, higher ionic conductivity can be obtained.65,66 However, the desolvation process is the rate-determining step for ion transport and EEI reaction; lower de-solvation energy suggests a faster rate of ion transport at the EEI and higher electrochemical reaction activity. For example, Zn2+ can coordinate with six H2O molecules to form Zn(H2O)62− in dilute aqueous Zn(TFSI)2 or LiTFSI mixture electrolyte, while it forms a Zn(TFSI)3 cluster in the most concentrated electrolyte (1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 M LiTFSI).10 A high-concentration zinc-ion electrolyte can be beneficial for zinc anodes, while the solvation structure of Zn2+ ions and desolvation energy might be adversely influenced. The solvent species also has a prominent effect on the desolvation energy. A typical example in this aspect is that a V3O7·H2O cathode shows significantly different electrochemical performance in aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes,67 which can be ascribed to the different sizes, structures, and electron configurations of the solvated molecules. Therefore, it is necessary to regulate the relationship between the ionic conductivity and solvation effect to achieve the best electrochemical properties.10,68
Gel electrolytes and quasi-solid electrolytes are mainly fabricated using polymer or inorganic compounds and liquids to form a crosslinked or mixture solution.69,70 The filler in the electrolyte mainly includes fumed silica, PEO, PVA, CMC, xanthan gum, gelatin, PAM, and so on.18,33,37,71–74 Gel electrolytes possess an ion transport mechanism similar to that of a liquid electrolyte; however, compared with liquid electrolytes, gel electrolytes exhibit relatively lower ionic conductivity because of their lower fluidity and the inevitable interaction between the electrolytic ions and functional groups. Therefore, electrolyte additives that have strong interactions with the functional groups of the polymer matrix, application of materials that have abundant micropores for the migration of Zn2+, and strong electrostatic interactions with water molecules are effective approaches to enhance the ionic conductivity of gel electrolytes.37,75 For example, a zwitterionic sulfobetaine/cellulose (ZSC) hydrogel electrolyte, which can provide separate ion migration channels for positive and negative ions and exhibit high water retention abilities and solubilities, can considerably facilitate electrolyte ion transport (Fig. 6a). As shown in Fig. 6b, the ZSC gel exhibits a high ionic conductivity of 24.6 × 10−2 S cm−1, which is comparable to that of the PAM gel (17.2 × 10−2 S cm−1). This ultrahigh ionic conductivity can be ascribed to the abundant micropores in the polymer matrix and the ion migration channels derived from the zwitterionic groups within the polymer network (Fig. 6c). Moreover, the equivalent faradaic charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the ZSC-gel electrolyte can be calculated as 124.8 Ω, which is considerably smaller than that of the PAM-gel electrolyte (255.5 Ω).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the ZSC-gel electrolyte in a ZIB under an external electric field. (b) AC impedance spectra of the ZSC-gel and PAM-gel electrolytes in the frequency range of 10 kHz to 0.01 Hz. The inset shows the calculated ionic conductivity. (c) SEM image of the freeze-dried ZSC gel. (d) EIS plots of the polyzwitterion batteries based on ZSC-gel and PAM-gel electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Although there are numerous studies on gel and quasi-solid ZIB electrolytes, the characteristics and analysis of the ionic conductivity of ZIBs are still insufficiently researched. To promote the development of ZIB electrolytes, more features and mechanisms need to be investigated in these fields and more approaches need to be formulated to enhance the electrochemical performance of ZIBs.
In the critical area of sustainable energy storage, solid-state batteries have attracted considerable attention due to their potential benefits with regard to safety, energy density, and lifecycle. For an all-solid electrolyte, which can serve as an electrolyte and separator, the ionic conductivity is a great barrier for practical applications. In spite of the small size of Zn2+, the determination of a suitable all-solid electrolyte has been challenging so far because of the strong electrostatic bonding of the divalent Zn2+ ions, which results in a high energy barrier and retards the solid-state diffusion process, subsequently causing slow diffusion kinetics and low ionic conductivity.76 A MOF-based single-ion Zn2+ solid electrolyte has been reported to have a high ionic conductivity of 2.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 30 °C, but the improvement in zinc-ion diffusion in the framework of this electrolyte is due to the addition of a small amount of water;38 therefore, it does not appear to be a real solid-state electrolyte. Until now, to the best of our knowledge, there is no convincing evidence stating that all-solid ZIB electrolytes have been discovered, because none of the ZIB electrolyte studies have given a convincing definition of all-solid electrolytes for use in ZIBs, similar to that with all-solid LIBs.19,25,36,38,73,77,78 Therefore, to develop solid-state ZIBs, it has become urgent to formulate a protocol for the development of all-solid electrolytes with fast Zn2+ diffusion, regardless of all-solid polymer electrolytes or inorganic all-solid electrolytes. For instance, due to the high ionic conductivity of superionic conductors in LIBs and sodium-ion batteries, the research and development of Zn-superionic conductors (ZNSICONs), which is still absent, may be the new choice for all-solid ZIB electrolytes.
2.2 Ion transference number
A good electrolyte should possess a high ion transference number, which effectively reduces the concentration polarization to suppress the formation of zinc dendrites and enhance the electrochemical performance of batteries.79 During the charge and discharge processes, the electric field between the cathode and anode promotes the transfer of anions and cations within the electrolyte. For example, Zn2+ has a positive charge and migrates to the anode under the action of the electric field pointing to the anode, while anions such as SO42− can migrate to the positive electrode. However, in fact, only the migration of working ions such as Zn2+ makes sense for ZIBs. The ratio of the number of Zn2+-ion migration to the total number of ion migration in the electrolyte is the number of Zn2+-ion migration tZn2+ (ion transference number), which can be expressed as follows:63 (5)where μ+ and μ− are the current carried by the cations (Zn2+ ions) and anions, respectively. This implies that the closer the migration number of Zn2+ is to 1, the higher is the proportion of Zn2+ migration in the electrolyte and higher is the efficiency of the charge transfer between the cathode and anode of the electrolyte. The ion transference number can be measured using the steady-state current approach in the Zn/electrolyte/Zn symmetric cell, which can be determined as follows:80 (6)where lss is the steady-state current; l0 is the initial current; R0 and Rss are the resistance at the initial and steady states, respectively; and ΔV is the applied constant potential.
In liquid electrolytes, Zn2+ can be solvated to form a shell on the surface because of the solvation effect, which limits the migration rate of Zn2+, while the anions are hardly solvated. Therefore, the ion transference number of a liquid electrolyte is usually lower than 0.5. That is, most of the ionic conductivity is provided by the anion; therefore, the efficient conductivity of the electrolyte is considerably reduced. This phenomenon can cause the anions to accumulate on the surface of the cathode electrode and create a concentration gradient between the two electrodes, which can induce concentration polarization and result in a large overpotential, limiting the energy density and power density of ZIBs.81
Increasing the ion transference number of liquid electrolytes is one of the most critical questions for ZIBs. Generally, conventional ZIB liquid electrolytes are dual ion conductors, where both anions and cations can migrate.45 According to eqn (5), it is easy to deduce that enhancing μ+ and reducing μ− can promote ion transference. By restricting the movement of anions and reducing the coordination number of Zn2+, this problem can be resolved to a certain extent.63,82,83 For instance, the Li+ transference number of the electrolyte with a high concentration of LiTFSI can reach 0.7. It is believed that this may be a unique solution structure that considerably reduces the ability of anions to move, while the cations are less affected.81 With regard to the Zn2+ coordination number, the change in the ion transference number has been appropriately illustrated by a ZnCl2-based electrolyte.83 As shown in the femtosecond-stimulated Raman spectroscopy results, the coordination structure converts from octahedral [Zn(OH2)2Cl4]2 (peak: 287 cm−1) to tetrahedral [ZnCl4]2− (peak: 245 cm−1) with an increase in the ZnCl2 concentration (Fig. 7a), which implies that the solvation effect of Zn2+ is decreased. As a result, the ion transference number of Zn2+ in the 30 M ZnCl2 electrolyte is higher than that in the 5 M ZnCl2 electrolyte (Fig. 7b). Until now, relatively few studies have been conducted to improve the ion transference number of liquid electrolytes in ZIBs; therefore, there are still a lot of prospects in this area. It is believed that a soluble, polymer, anionic zinc salt is an effective way to achieve a liquid electrolyte with a high Zn2+-ion transference number, which deserves an in-depth study in this regard.
 Fig. 7  (a) Raman spectra of ZnCl2 solutions of different concentrations. (b) Zn2+-ion transference number for dilute (5 M) and concentrated (30 M) ZnCl2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the morphologies of Zn–metal anode with LE/PZHE during Zn plating and the corresponding ion transference numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
For other kinds of electrolytes, such as polymer-gel and solid-state electrolytes, it has been found that a zinc ion can interact with Lewis base sites in the polar groups of polymers. Accordingly, the zinc-ion transference number can get lowered and usually becomes lower than the anion transference number.45 To resolve this problem, using a single-ion conducting polymer is an alternative to increase the zinc-ion transference number. In this kind of electrolyte, the anions are fixed on a polymer long chain, and they do not move under the action of an electric field. For example, based on the idea of fixing anions on zwitterionic polymer networks proposed by Lou et al., the strong interaction between the anions in the electrolyte and charged groups on the branch immobilizes the anions and increases the Zn2+-ion transference number, which can inhibit side reactions and dendrites (Fig. 7c).82 The enhancement in the ion transference number can be ascribed to the steric hindrance effect of the polymer network and electrostatic effect of the charged groups.
In addition, several additives, functioning as Lewis acids, can compete with zinc ions to interact with the coordination sites, which can facilitate the release of more free zinc ions, thereby increasing the ion transference number in the electrolyte. Nevertheless, to further increase the ion transference number in the gel or quasi-solid-state electrolytes, research on polymer electrolytes should focus on obtaining a deeper understanding of the “additive-salt–polymer” reaction mechanism.
Undoubtedly, an all-solid electrolyte has the highest ion migration number (close to 1) due to the absence of anion movement, which has been a very hot research topic in LIBs.84,85 However, as mentioned earlier, there are difficulties in developing such all-solid electrolytes.
2.3 ESPW
The ESPW of an electrolyte limits the voltage range of the cathode and anode materials. According to front-line orbital theory, when the electrochemical potential of the cathode material is lower than the electrolyte's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level, the electrons in the electrolyte can be captured by the cathode material, which are oxidized by the electrolyte, thereby causing the positive electrode material to become polarized. When the electrochemical potential of the anode material is higher than the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level of the electrolyte, the electrons of the anode material are captured by the electrolyte; therefore, the electrolyte is oxidized and the reaction product forms a solid–liquid interface layer (solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) film) in the organic electrolyte (Fig. 8a). In an aqueous electrolyte, problems of hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are caused, which can cause the battery to fail (Fig. 8b). These unfavorable reactions induce water exhaustion and low battery efficiency.20,32
 Fig. 8  Schematic open-circuit energy diagram of (a) organic electrolyte and (b) aqueous electrolyte. 
The ESPW is mainly related to the solvent and zinc salts. With regard to the solvent, the ESPW of a nonaqueous electrolyte is much wider than that of an aqueous electrolyte; however, an aqueous electrolyte affords the best overall performance and some unique advantages. Therefore, many measures need to be undertaken to enlarge the ESPW of aqueous electrolytes, and the following discussions are focused on aqueous electrolytes. It is well known that the theoretical ESPW of water is 1.23 V.45 Further, the stability of zinc salt can affect the ESPW of the electrolyte. It is well known that ZnCl2 is one of the most water-soluble, inorganic zinc salts. However, the drawbacks of a narrow, anodic ESPW (∼0.75 V for 1 M ZnCl2 solution) and continuous side reactions limit its feasibility in high-performance aqueous ZIBs (Fig. 9a). The NO3− anions of Zn(NO3)2 are strong oxidants, which lead to serious corrosion of the Zn foil and cathode material (Fig. 9b). The Cl atom of ClO4− has a valence of +7 and can be easily reduced to a low valence, but ClO4− affords low activity because of its stable structure. However, owing to the high overpotential caused by the formation of byproducts (e.g., a ZnO thin layer on Zn foil), such a Zn(ClO4)2 solution is not suitable as an ideal electrolyte of ZIBs.86,87 Different from the zinc salt electrolytes mentioned above, ZnSO4, Zn(CF3SO3)2, and Zn(TFSI)2 aqueous electrolytes are much more stable and widely used in ZIBs. As shown in Fig. 9c–f, although the ESPW of these aqueous zinc-ion electrolytes can reach ∼2.3 V due to the existence of overpotential and regulation of salt concentration, the ESPW of an aqueous electrolyte is still unsatisfactory, which greatly hinders improvements in energy density and stability.45,59
 Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of a Zn electrode in aqueous electrolytes containing (a) 1 M ZnCl2, (b) 1 M Zn(NO3)2, (c) 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, and (d) 1 M ZnSO4. Electrochemical stability for (e) 1 M ZnSO4 and 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and (f) 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
To resolve these issues, recently, a considerable amount of research effort has been focused on enlarging the ESPW of aqueous electrolytes.53 The first effective way is to construct a stable EEI. It has been reported that the deposition of oxide films on current collectors made from Al cathodes and Ti anodes exhibits a strong passivation effect, which can considerably enlarge the ESPW of an aqueous electrolyte up to 3.5 V.88 The theoretical computation and analysis (shown in Fig. 10a) indicated that the energy barrier of HER and energy barrier (DGO*–DGHO*) of OER increase after the surface of the Al current collector is covered with an Al2O3 film and the surface of Ti is coated with the TiO2 film. The calculation results suggest that the ESPW of an aqueous electrolyte can be widened with the help of the passivation of an oxide film, which was also confirmed by the LSV curves shown in Fig. 10b. However, the conductivity of the current collector decreases with an increase in the thickness of the oxide film. Therefore, it is important to determine a balance between the passivation effect and conductivity maintenance of the current collector covered with the oxide film. Except for a physical or chemical coating, functional additives89–92 or certain high-concentration electrolytes,10,68,93 which could generate SEI films or stable cathode–electrolyte interfaces (CEIs) to widen the ESPW, are some effective ways to fabricate a stable EEI.
 Fig. 10  (a) Adsorption energy of O* and HO* on Ti or TiO2 and adsorption energy of H2O* and H* on Al or Al2O3 surfaces. (b) The potential of hydrogen evolution on Al, Pt, and fresh Ti and the thickness of Al2O3 coated on Al is 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, and 5 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. 
Another choice is trying to reduce the amount of active water in the electrolyte or prepare gel and quasi-solid electrolytes. Preparing “water-in-salt” electrolytes and quasi-solid electrolytes are the main methods. The water-in-salt electrolyte mostly comprises LiTFSI, Zn(TFSI)2, or Zn(CF3SO3)2. It has been demonstrated that a water-in-salt electrolyte can retard the HER and OER in a wide electrochemical window in an aqueous electrolyte (∼3.0 V).94,95 Reasonable explanations for the stability of these kinds of electrolytes lie in mainly two characteristics.96 One is that anions accumulate at the cathode interface, forming a dense hydrophobic layer that prevents water from coming into contact with the electrode. The other can be attributed to the increased stability of the cathode to the SEI formed by TFSI− reduction, which prevents water molecules from contacting the cathode surface. Both these characteristics consider the fact that reducing the active water molecules from the electrode surface is an effective way to widen the ESPW. As shown in Fig. 11a, the OER of water usually occurs at ∼1.98 V in 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, while OER is significantly suppressed up to ∼2.60 V in 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, which is much higher than the theoretical voltage of oxygen oxidation. As a result, no obvious OER occurs in Zn/VOPO4 batteries based on 21 M LiTFSI/1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte even when they are charged to 2.10 V (Fig. 11b). In addition, there are other water-in-salt electrolytes, such as those employing high-concentration ZnCl2 (Fig. 11c)83,93 and high-concentration acetate (Fig. 11d),97 which can also be used to widen the ESPW.
 Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of Zn electrodes in different electrolytes. (b) First charge/discharge curves of Zn/VOPO4 batteries based on different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) ESPW of ZnCl2 electrolytes for different concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Stability window test for acetate-based salt-concentrated electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. 
In addition to the strategies mentioned above, regulating the pH of the electrolyte can also be used. As the potentials of OER and HER vary with the pH values, theoretically, the ESPWs of aqueous electrolytes can be deliberately adjusted by regulating the electrolyte pH. There are two different kinds of approaches to manipulate the electrolyte pH, namely, regulating the general pH and designing multiple electrolytes with varied pH values.99–102 As shown in Fig. 12a, a new electrolytic Zn–MnO2 system has been designed via pH adjustment, which maximizes the electrolysis process.101 This new design provides a record-high output voltage of 1.95 V and impressive capacity of ∼570 mA h g−1. Notably, the electrolyte with 0.10 M H2SO4 exhibits a wide ESPW (∼2.41 V) (Fig. 12b) and flat voltage platform (Fig. 12c). In addition, an electrolyte-decoupling strategy has been proposed to maximize the full potential of Zn–MnO2 batteries by simultaneously enabling the optimal redox chemistry of both Zn and MnO2 electrodes.102 As shown in Fig. 12e, the battery consists of alkaline and acidic chambers for Zn anode and MnO2 cathode, respectively, separated by a neutral chamber. These three chambers are separated by a cation- and anion-exchange membrane. Moreover, the ESPW of the cells is up to 3.2 V (Fig. 12d). In fact, the novel design of these kinds of batteries originates from the pH adjustment of the electrolyte, which is the second pH regulation strategy, thereby affording multiple electrolytes with varied pH values. This is because an alkaline electrolyte can reduce the HER potential and acid electrolyte can promote the OER potential. As a smart design approach, the zinc anode can be operated in an alkaline environment and the cathode in an acidic environment to enlarge the ESPW of the aqueous electrolyte and fabricate high-energy rechargeable aqueous Zn–MnO2 batteries.99,100
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the galvanostatic discharge process in 1 M ZnSO4 and 1 M MnSO4 electrolytes. (b) Working potential window of a novel electrolytic Zn–MnO2 battery. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curves in electrolytes with x M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Charge voltage determination of the DZMB. (e) Schematic of the DZMB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
2.4 Temperature adaptability
For the utilization of ZIBs under extreme conditions (such as high- or low-temperature environments), the temperature adaptability of the electrolyte can become a big issue. Moreover, a certain amount of heat is released during ZIB operation, because of which the liquid in the battery slowly evaporates. Once the liquid is evaporated, zinc salts are precipitated; subsequently, the corresponding electrochemical performance can dramatically decline. However, in a low-temperature environment, the electrolyte freezes and causes a dramatic reduction in the electrochemical performance of the battery or even lose efficacy. Therefore, it is imperative to develop a wide-working-temperature electrolyte to maintain the normal operation of ZIBs.
In general, a liquid electrolyte possesses the worst temperature adaptability due to low boiling point, high freezing point, and easy evaporation. There are mainly three types of existing strategies for fabricating wide-working-temperature ZIB electrolytes. One method involves increasing the solute concentration of aqueous electrolytes to enlarge the temperature window.10,103–105 Another approach is employing gel, quasi-solid, and all-solid electrolytes to reduce the activity of the solvent molecules (H2O) and enlarge the temperature window.87,106–109 However, the evaporation and freezing problems of water molecules in the hydrogel electrolytes are still intractable, despite the fact that water can be effectively constrained under milder conditions. An anti-freezing hydrogel electrolyte has been reported, which can work at −20 °C (Fig. 13a).17 Because of the addition of both EG–waPUA and PAM, there are three types of interactions among EG–waPUA, PAM, and water existing in the polymer matrix with binding energies ranging from −16.53 to −17.49 kcal mol−1, which is thrice that of EG and water (Fig. 13b). The enhanced molecular interaction can be ascribed to the synergistic effects. The water molecules, which connect the hydroxyl groups of EG–waPUA and carbonyl groups of the PAM chains like a bridge, can enhance the interaction between the EG–waPUA and PAM polymer chains. Moreover, the tight interactions can firmly lock the water molecules in the polymer networks and destroy the formation of crystal lattices, which make the electrolyte harder to freeze.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the strong hydrogen bonds among EG–waPUA, water, and PAM in the AF gel. (b) Density functional theory (DFT) analysis of water molecules, PAM, and EG–waPUA interacting with polymer chains via multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions in the AF gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the approaches mentioned above, an electrolyte additive and the utilization of an organic solvent can also widen the temperature window of the electrolyte.107–110 Low-molecular vicinal alcohols, such as glycerol and ethylene glycol (EG), are well-known nontoxic inhibitors for water freezing and have been widely used as an engine coolant in the industry. These molecules can interact with the water molecules to form hydrogen bonds that can prevent the formation of tetrahedral structures of ices. As shown in Fig. 14a, the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in water can form 1DMSO–2water bond and 2DMSO–1water bond, which occupy 46% and 12%, respectively. Besides the two identified modes for the formation of hydrogen bonds between DMSO and water molecules, a network-like pattern exists, interconnecting the two formed hydrogen bonds. This is because the formation of 1DMSO–2water hydrogen bonds involved in the network/cluster do not have the minimum energy configurations. Moreover, many configurations lie in the same interaction energy range. In this way, a mixture would not generate a crystal-like ordered structure at low temperatures and therefore contribute toward a decrease in the freezing point. As a result, the NTP‖2M-0.3‖AC battery exhibits excellent rate performance at −50 °C (Fig. 14b).109 In general, organic molecules possess a wider temperature window than water; therefore, employing an organic solvent can also be a promising solution. The nonaqueous electrolyte of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution containing Zn2+ can even be operated in a wide temperature range from −70 to 150 °C (Fig. 14c and d). In addition to these, using an ionic-liquid-based Zn salt electrolyte to prepare gel and quasi-solid electrolytes can also be a good choice.19
 Fig. 14  (a) Conformational analysis of a system with a molar fraction of 0.3 DMSO from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. (b) Rate performance at an ultralow temperature of −50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Temperature-dependent investigation of a Zn//PQ-MCT rechargeable battery. (c) Low-temperature performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. (d) High-temperature performance at a current density of 2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
3. EEI
In a working battery, energy storage and release are always accompanied by the transfer of electrons and transport of ions at the EEI.111–113 The EEI mainly includes the anode–electrolyte interface (AEI) and CEI. The characteristics of the EEI, which are greatly affected by the electrolyte, play a critical role in stabilizing the cycling performance and prolonging the service life of rechargeable batteries. Therefore, deeply understanding the electrolyte and the corresponding EEI is of great significance. Some important interfacial characteristics (such as physical contact, interfacial compatibility, and electrochemical stability) and the existing issues, corresponding strategies, and the characterization and analysis of EEI are discussed and evaluated in this section (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Schematic of the important elements of the EEI. 
3.1 Interfacial characteristics and issues

3.1.1 Physical contact. 
A good physical contact between the electrolyte and electrodes facilitates electrical and ionic transfer in the EEI. Theoretically, liquid electrolytes possess superiority in terms of physical contact with electrodes and it can be effectively maintained during the cycling process due to the excellent fluidity and interfacial compatibility (Fig. 16a).11,45 However, in fact, this situation is affected by interfacial side-effects; for example, the surface passivation of the Zn anode can hinder the migration of Zn2+ ions. This property in gel electrolytes may not be as good as that in liquid electrolytes, but gel electrolytes usually exhibit good flexibility, which can also ensure effective physical contact in the EEI (Fig. 16b).45 However, it is a big issue for the development of all-solid-state electrolytes, because the physical contact of the solid electrolyte and electrode is a point-to-point contact and there are numerous microgaps between the different point contacts (Fig. 16c). Moreover, these point contacts are particularly sensitive to stress variations during the cycling process, which can lead to the formation and propagation of cracks, as well as the delamination of interfaces.84 Therefore, it is imperative to develop effective strategies to alleviate the issue of physical contact for solid-state electrolytes.
 Fig. 16  Physical contact of (a) liquid electrolyte, (b) gel electrolyte, and (c) solid electrolyte with the electrode. 


3.1.2 Interfacial compatibility. 
Interfacial compatibility is the key factor for the long-term cycling stability of ZIBs. It has been reported that choosing and regulating the electrolyte can afford good interfacial compatibility with the electrodes.10,114 In conventional alkaline electrolytes, the OH− in the electrolyte can seriously attack the Zn anode to form byproducts (Zn(OH)42− or ZnO), and it displays an unsatisfactory compatibility with Zn anodes.115 In comparison with alkaline electrolytes, the common aqueous electrolytes of ZIBs (ZnSO4 and Zn(CF3SO3)2 solutions) can alleviate the formation of byproducts, thereby showing better compatibility with Zn anodes. In general, a traditional organic electrolyte can exhibit high compatibility with Zn anodes, but the ionic conductivity and toxicity always hinder its application potential. Compared with liquid electrolytes, gel and quasi-solid electrolytes can be promising strategies to improve the electrolyte compatibility with Zn anodes, because the free H2O molecules in these electrolytes can be trapped in the framework of the polymer chains, leading to limited side reactions.75 Moreover, the corrosion problem and dissolution of cathode materials can also result in bad interfacial compatibility (Fig. 17). To resolve these issues, proper interfacial modification becomes an easy and convenient solution. Current efforts in alleviating interfacial compatibility mainly include modifying the electrode and optimizing electrolytes, which can lead to longer battery lifetimes and enhanced safety.
 Fig. 17  Schematic of some main issues that cause bad interfacial compatibility. 


3.1.3 Electrochemical stability. 
The electrochemical stability between electrolytes and active electrodes is another important factor for lifetime and safety considerations of the battery. During the cycling process, an unstable EEI can trigger some severe issues, such as the formation of byproducts and zinc dendrites, corrosion, passivation, element dissolution, etc., which can deteriorate the electrochemical performance, particularly in aqueous media.11 Therefore, guaranteeing the electrochemical stability of the EEI is consequential for improving the electrochemical performance of ZIBs.116 The electrochemical reaction on the EEI can be strongly affected by the desolvation process, diffusion dynamics, and transport pathway of Zn2+ on the EEI, which rely on the structures and compositions of the interface and electrolyte.117
In aqueous electrolytes, a Zn metal anode always suffers from dendrite formation, corrosion, byproduct formation, and hydrogen evolution problems because of the poor electrochemical stability of the AEI (Fig. 18a).118–121 For example, due to the high electrochemical activity of zinc metal, zinc dendrite formation is a common problem in alkaline zinc-based batteries.48,121 A better understanding of the electrochemical behavior and formation mechanism of these adverse reactions can facilitate the formulation of more targeted strategies to modify the AEI. Zn–metal deposition is mainly driven by the electric field between the electrode, which includes the nucleation and migration of zinc to the interfacial nucleation sites. The free-energy schematic of the zinc reduction reaction is shown in Fig. 18b; there is an energy barrier between Zn2+ in the electrolyte and zinc metal, which corresponds to the nucleation of zinc to form a new solid phase. After nucleation, zinc continues to be deposited on the initial layer. A typical voltage profile of zinc deposition is shown in Fig. 18c. Nucleation overpotential and plateau overpotential are the two main factors that affect the quality of zinc plating, which can be considerably influenced by the electrolyte. Nucleation overpotential is defined as the difference between the tip potential and subsequent stable potential, which refers to the thermodynamic cost of forming a critical atom cluster. Plateau overpotential is related to zinc growth after initial nucleation.122 In conventional aqueous electrolytes, the nucleation overpotential and plateau overpotential usually decrease in the beginning, which might be caused by an increase in the specific surface area and soon followed by disorder.123 These phenomena can be ascribed to dendrite formation. Soon after, the electrochemical performance deteriorated with an uncontrollable side reaction and the gradual growth of zinc dendrites that damaged the separator. Therefore, to prepare an outstanding electrolyte, a feasible zinc nucleation and growth process must be achieved, namely, the two overpotentials should be small, because it can maintain the zinc-plating quality and reduce the energy consumption during the deposition process. With regard to the formation mechanism of zinc dendrites, since the priority of zinc growth depends on the intensity of the electric field and ionic concentration, the zinc ions absorbed on the surface of the anode undergo two-dimensional (2D) diffusion along the surface to aggregate at priority nucleation sites and form an initial tip. Then, the subsequent deposition tends to accumulate at these tips to minimize the surface energy, resulting in the growth of small tips and finally forming zinc dendrites (Fig. 18d).124 Zn dendrites are hard to suppress because the initial nucleation is normally localized and the newly plated ions prefer the existing crystals to minimize the surface energy. In general, nonuniform electric field distribution and unrestricted 2D diffusion are responsible for the formation of zinc dendrites.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic for the problems encountered in the Zn deposition process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The energy barrier in the zinc nucleation process. (c) Typical voltage profile during zinc deposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic showing dendrite growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of unmodified and modified Zn anodes before and after 80 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society. 
The corrosion of the Zn anode is mainly caused by an electrochemical reaction. During the discharge process, the Zn anode dissolves into the electrolyte to generate soluble Zn2+, which leads to Zn exfoliation.126 The passivation of the Zn anode is mainly caused by Zn dendrite and HER; the Zn dendrite usually exhibits a needle shape. Once the brittle dendrite fractures the Zn surface, it leads to dead Zn because of which a passivation layer is generated.121 The HER proceeding in the local high-energy area induces an increase in OH− concentration; then, the OH−, Zn2+, and SO42− accumulate together to form the byproduct of zinc hydroxy sulfate (ZHS) on the surface of the Zn anode (Fig. 18e).125 Moreover, the solubility of ZHS is limited: the accumulation of ZHS on the surface of the anode gradually consumes the electrolyte and active zinc ions, which leads to the low CE of the zinc anode.
In fact, the problems discussed above can affect each other. Dendrite formation can lead to an increase in the surface area of the anode, which can accelerate hydrogen evolution.127 This hydrogen evolution induces a change in the pH value; subsequently, ZHS—an electrochemically inert corrosion byproduct—is formed and deposited on the surface of the anode.128 The ZHS on the anode surface can result in a nonuniform surface and increased electrode polarization, which, in turn, induces dendrite formation.121 Therefore, when we try to resolve one of the issues mentioned above, other issues get alleviated at the same time.
At the cathode side, more complicated chemical reactions can occur. Problems associated with the CEI mainly include cathode dissolution and the generation of byproducts. The dissolution of the cathode materials in an aqueous electrolyte can cause faster capacity fading and shorter cycling life of the ZIBs. This problem mainly occurs in manganese-based materials because of the Jahn–Taylor effect or in vanadium-based materials and organic materials in weakly acidic aqueous electrolytes.5,129 Moreover, due to the relatively high activity of the water solvent, the dissolution problem can worsen and result in serious capacity degradation.130,131 The ZHS byproduct generated on the CEI, which appears during the discharge process and disappears during the charge process, is universally observed in both vanadium-based and manganese-based materials during cycling.56,132,133 It remains controversial how the ZHS byproduct is generated and its functionality during the electrochemical reaction process has also been debated. Some researchers hold an opinion that the formation of ZHS owing to the change of the electrolyte pH.134 Further, some researchers have opined that the generation of ZHS adds to the battery capacity. For this issue, Nazar et al. considered that the side reactions between the dissolved O2 and existing Zn2+, SO42−, and OH− species in the electrode caused the generation of ZHS species and that the capacity contribution from reversible ZHS formation/disappearance plays an insignificant role in the electrochemical performance.67 However, Pang et al. confirmed that the formation of ZHS could be attributed to [Zn(H2O)6]2+ dehydration, where ZHS can also protect the electrode material from the corrosion of H3O+ and facilitate the dehydration process of Zn2+ on the CEI. Moreover, ZHS can facilitate the migration of Zn2+ on the electrode surface due to their three-dimensional pathways (Fig. 19).135 In general, more efforts are needed to be applied to the exploration of the formation mechanism of ZHS and its analogs at the CEI; for example, the dissolved oxygen, variation in the pH, and energy storage mechanism need to be taken into consideration. However, the gradual and continuous accumulation of ZHS on the CEI can inevitably induce the perpetual consumption of the aqueous electrolyte, blocking the path for ion transportation and resulting in an increment in electrochemical impedance. To resolve the issues persisting with the CEI, electrolyte optimization and using a surface coating are some effective ways.
 Fig. 19  Schematic of the key processes involved in VO2(B)/Zn cell with the ZnSO4 electrolyte during the discharge and charge processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2 Strategies to ameliorate EEI
To resolve the problems associated with the EEI, great efforts have been devoted and some effective strategies have been proposed to ameliorate problems such as bad physical contact, unsatisfactory interfacial compatibility, and unstable electrochemical reactions at the EEI. These effective strategies are mainly divided into two parts according to the different interfaces.

3.2.1 Modification of the AEI. 
Strategies such as surface modification (artificial SEI, physical coating, and chemical decoration),136–141 electrolyte optimization (additives, gel, organic, and solid electrolytes),10,19,20,32,142–144 and structural design (alloying and 3D current collector)31,145 have been widely applied in the AEI. The mechanisms and effects of these strategies are mainly discussed in this part.
Surface modification is the simplest and most straightforward way to improve the AEI. The effects of surface modification are mainly divided into two types. One is to avoid direct contact between the Zn anode and the electrolyte, and the other is to guide the uniform deposition of Zn. In general, there are two main types of surface modification: artificial surface modification and in situ surface modification.136,137,140 For example, a simple ‘‘brightener-inspired’’ physical coating layer can affect the deposition process of the Zn anode.119 As shown in Fig. 20a, an artificial polyamide layer can function as a separator to prevent the effect of Zn metal on water in the electrolyte and dissolved O2. Moreover, the water molecules, which contain intrinsic hydride ions and can harm the AEI, are fixed by the abundant hydrogen-bonding network existing in the polyamide on the inner microlevel. That is, the solvation sheath of Zn2+ in the aqueous solution is destroyed when passing through the polyamide layer; hence, the number of components that participate in the side reactions decreases. Not surprisingly, the deposition on bare Zn is heterogeneous and then continuously grows into dendritic Zn (Fig. 20b, left), while coated Zn exhibits smooth surface morphology in the entire plating process and there are no visible dendrites (Fig. 20b, right). Impressively, a 60-fold enhancement in the running lifetime (over 8000 h) compared with bare Zn is obtained by using the polyamide coating layer (Fig. 20c). In addition to a physical coating, a chemical coating that forms a 3D nanoporous ZnO architecture on the Zn plate can also resolve the problems associated with the AEI.137 The 3D ZnO layers that form on the Zn plate via Zn(OH)42− deposition can accelerate the kinetics of Zn2+-ion transference and deposition as well as suppress hydrogen generation. As shown in Fig. 20d, geometrically optimized O element can induce additional charge concentration at the surface, resulting in the easier desolvation of Zn2+ from the electrolyte to the interface. Namely, an electrostatic attraction is induced and Zn2+ desolvation is simplified, and therefore, H2 evolution is also effectively prevented (Fig. 20e).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic for Zn deposition on bare Zn and coated Zn. (b) Cross-sectional Zn deposition morphology on bare Zn plate and coated Zn plate using an in situ optical microscope. (c) Long-term cycling of symmetrical Zn cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Differential charge density distribution of Zn@ZnO-3D. (e) Electric double-layer structure in the vicinity of the anode and the corresponding energy barriers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The in situ surface modification can also be realized by the regulation of the electrolyte.142 It has been reported that a zinc-anode-compatible in situ SEI layer was formed by cation solvation modulation (Fig. 21a). In this case, a change in the TFSI− coordination environment enables the anion-derived SEI formation for metallic Zn. DFT calculations demonstrate that Zn2+–TFSI− complexes become reductively unstable below 0.37 V (vs. Zn/Zn2+) by the intimate interaction between TFSI− and Zn2+, which is higher than the reduction potential for isolated TFSI−, corroborating the preferential decomposition of TFSI− over Zn2+ reduction (Fig. 21b). In addition, the XPS spectral results revealed that ZnF2 mainly exists in the inner SEI region and S-/N-rich organic compounds are mainly distributed in the outer SEI layer (Fig. 21c). Because the novel SEI layer can ensure faster ion migration and higher mechanical strength, the Zn metal anode can show good reversibility in the as-prepared electrolyte. To form a SEI film in the zinc-ion electrolyte, it is important to alter the decomposition object from the water molecules to other substances, which can be realized by manipulating the solvation sheath of Zn2+. There are mainly three kinds of strategies to regulate the solvation structure of cations. The first is to prepare ultrahigh-concentration electrolytes, namely, water-in-salt electrolyte, which was first explored by Suo et al. in an aqueous LIB, who successfully managed to form the very first aqueous SEI by altering the Li+-solvation sheath structure at a superhigh concentration.63 The second is to replace the solvent by an organic liquid or to add a moderate organic liquid to the aqueous electrolyte, which has been illustrated above. The last one is to prepare some novel gel electrolytes possessing massive functional groups, which can exhibit strong electrostatic interactions with positively charged Zn2+, leading to the formation of an SEI layer.37 In general, the generation of SEI films through electrolyte regulation is an effective way to improve the electrochemical performance of ZIBs.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of Zn metal plating/stripping in 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and in ZES. (b) Predicted reduction potentials. (c) XPS spectra at various argon-sputtering depths on the SEI accumulated on the Zn substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
In short, surface modification always focuses on reducing the energy barrier of the deposition process, regulating the nucleation sites, and preventing Zn metal from directly contacting the aqueous solution. These strategies, which can promote interfacial compatibility and electrochemical stability of the AEI, are easy and have strong practicability.
The direct cause of AEI problems is the electrolyte that usually makes intimate contact with the AEI; therefore, electrolyte optimization is a promising way to improve the AEI. There are three main directions to optimize the electrolyte. The first is to guide uniform zinc deposition by adjusting Zn2+ adsorption on the anode surface. For instance, some water-soluble organic additives in the electrolyte, which can be regarded as surfactants, can be used to resolve these intractable problems to a certain extent. During the plating process, these additives can absorb on the surface of the zinc anode and change the surface states, which may provide a guiding role in zinc deposition and restrict 2D zinc-ion diffusion; therefore, zinc-ion aggregation and dendrite growth can be restricted.146 From Fig. 22a and b, it is evident that additives can optimize the surface morphology of the zinc anode during electroplating by suppressing zinc growth along the (100) and (110) directions, which are likely to produce zinc dendrites. In addition to organic additives, some charged ions can also be a promising additive to resolve the above issues.147 It has been indicated that the addition of Na2SO4 can significantly ameliorate the deposition on zinc anodes (Fig. 22c). This phenomenon can be ascribed to the electrostatic shell effect caused by the lower reduction potential of Na+ than Zn2+. Therefore, the surface of the protruding zinc dendrite can be covered by sodium ions to form a thin layer of sodium-ion protection shell, which can repel zinc ions to hinder the further growth of zinc dendrites (Fig. 22d). All the examples mentioned above can be regarded as surfactants; moreover, some metals,143,148 ionic liquids,149 small organic molecules,90 and high-molecular polymers30 can also alleviate the dendrite problem.
 Fig. 22  (a) SEM images and (b) XRD patterns of zinc anodes cycled in ZnSO4 electrolyte with and without additives. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of zinc anodes cycled in ZnSO4 and ZnSO4/Na2SO4 electrolytes. (d) Schematic of the Na2SO4 additive suppressing the formation of Zn dendrites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
The second is to change the solvation sheath of Zn2+via electrolyte regulation. It has been reported that Zn(CF3SO3)2 can decrease the solvation effect of Zn2+ and facilitate its transport.59,150 However, it was also reported that the OER of 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte usually takes place at ∼1.98 V in aqueous Zn//VOPO4 cells; besides, the CE is unsatisfactory.98 To settle these problems, preparing a water-in-salt electrolyte to change the solvation sheath of Zn2+ is a reasonable choice. Due to the merits of the water-in-salt electrolyte, an ultrahigh efficiency of approximately 100% for Zn plating/stripping can be achieved in 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 M LiTFSI electrolyte (Fig. 23a). As per the ex situ SEM images of the substrates, the Zn plates still exhibit dense and dendrite-free morphology after long cycling (Fig. 23b), which contains no ZnO according to the XRD pattern. The MD results reveal that Zn2+ is expected to coordinate with six water molecules without much contribution from TFSI− in 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 5 M LiTFSI, while the TFSI− anions start to occupy the Zn2+ solvation sheath in 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 10 M LiTFSI. More importantly, the Zn2+ solvation sheath is primarily occupied by TFSI−, with all the six coordinating oxygens coming from TFSI− (Fig. 23c). This implies that HER can be restrained with an increase in the LiTFSI concentration, and the electrochemical stability of AEI can be enhanced. Besides the preparation of high-concentration electrolytes, the replacement of the solvent is also a feasible way. For example, a novel ionic liquid zinc electrolyte was prepared based on a zinc salt (Zn(BF4)2) and an ionic liquid ([EMIM]BF4).19 DFT calculations were used to study the Zn2+ state in EMIMBF4 solution. The obtained results demonstrated that the Zn2+ solvation sheath is occupied by three BF4−, with a complex structure of Zn(BF4)3− (Fig. 23d), which differs from conventional aqueous Zn2+ electrolytes. Because of the special Zn2+ solvation sheath, the Zn/Zn symmetric cell provides excellent reversibility (Fig. 23e). In addition to the above two methods, other methods such as using additives and preparation of composite electrolytes can also change the solvation structure of cations.151–153 High-concentration electrolytes exhibit good performance, but such a high concentration can increase the cost and impede practical applications, particularly for salts with intrinsically expensive costs such as Zn(CF3SO3)2, LiTFSI, Zn(TFSI)2, etc. Therefore, some cheaper and more convenient measures (such as additives and preparation of composite electrolytes) should be developed and considered.
 Fig. 23  (a) Zn plating/stripping time and CE. (b) SEM image and XRD pattern of a Zn anode after 500 cycles in 1m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20m LiTFSI electrolyte. (c) Snapshot of the MD simulation and representative Zn2+ solvation structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Representative Zn2+ solvation structures in ILZE. (e) Representative cycling stability in ILZE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
The third is to reduce the active water molecules and simultaneously constrain Zn2+ diffusion. Preparing gel, quasi-solid, or all-solid electrolytes appropriately can achieve these goals.36,38,154 In some cases, the above electrolytes have been reported to alleviate the problems with zinc anodes. The possible reason is that their existence can improve the distribution of zinc ions, which lies in the interaction between zinc ions and negatively charged groups in these electrolyte.118 These kinds of electrolytes are typically used in a flexible device; therefore, the mechanical strength, flexibility, and physical and chemical stability need to be taken into consideration.70
In addition to surface modification, the structural design of the anode can also alleviate the problems faced by the AEI. At present, structural design mainly includes designing of the 3D current collector and alloying the zinc anode. The 3D current collector can increase the surface area in contact with the electrolyte and promote the uniform deposition of metal ions.155 Such an area increment allows lower nucleation overpotential and favors electron transport and electrolyte contact, consequently mitigating dendrite formation. In particular, a shorter ion diffusion length and more electroactive sites permit faster Zn2+/Zn redox kinetics and higher rate capability can be obtained by using a nanostructured Zn electrode. For example, 3D conductive substrates such as N-doped porous carbon cloth (CC), carbon fiber–graphite felt, carbon nanotube (CNT) paper/yarns, graphene foam, stainless steel mesh, and porous copper foam have been employed as collectors for the in situ electroplating of 3D structured Zn anodes.31,156–159 Interestingly, the reversible epitaxial electrodeposition of Zn can be achieved by selecting a graphene-based substrate (Fig. 24a). A low lattice mismatch between graphene and Zn can effectively drive the Zn deposition with a locked crystallographic orientation relation, resulting in longer cyclability (over 10000 cycles). The substrate effect offers plenty of room to guide the nucleation and deposition of Zn for a stable electrode structure.156 A flexible 3D CNT framework with a high specific surface area and good electrical conductivity can also be introduced for Zn plating to diminish dendrite formation (Fig. 24b). Besides the utilization of 3D collectors, the alloying of the zinc anode with another appropriate metal is also a promising approach, which has been a convincing method in other metal batteries.160 A novel strategy is based on the eutectic structure of the Zn/Al alloy.145 The formation of an Al2O3 shell on Al lamellas protects against the dissolution of Al and allows the selective electrochemical stripping/plating of Zn in an aqueous electrolyte (Al3+/Al (−1.66 V vs. SHE) < Zn2+/Zn (−0.76 V vs. SHE)). The apparent electrochemical behaviors of Zn and Al enable the different roles of each lamellas in the charge/discharge processes: Zn lamellas supplying Zn2+ charge carriers and Al lamellas serving as the 2D skeleton host to accommodate Zn plating (Fig. 24c). In particular, the insulation property of the Al2O3 shell can block the electron transfer from Al to Zn2+ cations. Therefore, a positive electrostatic shield around the Al/Al2O3 lamellas was formed, which can guide uniform Zn deposition between their interlayer spacing along the Zn precursor sites.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic showing the design principle of epitaxial metal electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Schematic showing Zn deposition on CC and CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Zn stripping process in eutectic Zn/Al alloys with a lamellar structure composed of alternative Zn and Al nano-lamellas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Zn-Free materials are another potential way to resolve the problems encountered when using zinc metal; however, the structural instability and dissolution of materials, lower energy density of full cells, and narrow available voltage range hinders their development.161,162 Moreover, a variety of methods to improve the physical contact and electrochemical stability of AEI have been developed according to the fundamental principle. However, the further exploration of dynamic changes and the transport of electrons and ions at the AEI are still a challenge. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze these aspects more fundamentally so as to explore more novel and effective methods.


3.2.2 Modification of the CEI. 
The main problems existing in the CEI of ZIBs are unsatisfactory interfacial compatibility, dissolution of cathode materials, and generation of byproducts. Until now, some solutions already exist, which mainly include electrolyte optimization and coating of the cathode materials, and they have been proposed to resolve the problems mentioned above.
As an important factor causing interface problems, the electrolyte can be optimized to ameliorate the above issues. For instance, the addition of Mn2+ in the electrolyte can alleviate the dissolution problem in Mn-based cathode materials and stabilize the cycling performance without changing the redox reaction of the MnO2 electrode, because the addition of Mn2+ can suppress the Jahn–Teller effect that occurs on the surface of the cathode.15 The principle of solution equilibrium has also been applied in V-based cathode materials by adding cationic additive such as Na+.147
Besides the inhibition of cathode dissolution, interfacial compatibility can also be improved via electrolyte optimization. In the Zn/LiFePO4 battery with 1 M Zn(SO3CF3)2 and 1 M Li(SO3CF3) hybrid electrolyte, the addition of SDBS additives can reduce the contact angle between the electrolyte and cathode (Fig. 25a and b), which means that the SDBS additive can enhance the hydrophilicity of LiFePO4 toward water. Moreover, MD simulations indicated that the tail of the SDBS surfactant can be adsorbed on the LiFePO4 surface, which can promote the adhesion of water molecules; subsequently, the diffusion of Li+ was accelerated at the interface (Fig. 25c). Besides, the overpotential of LiFePO4 with the SDBS additive is significantly lower than that of LiFePO4 without additives, indicating that SDBS additives can reduce the electrochemical reaction resistance (Fig. 25d).
 Fig. 25  Contact angle measurements at the LFP EEI (a) with additive and (b) without additive. MD calculations conducted at the LFP (010)/electrolyte interface (c) with additive and (d) without additive to study Li-ion migration. (e) GITT measurements of Zn/LFP batteries with/without an additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
To resolve the problems associated with the CEI, another effective way is coating the cathode materials.164–170 For instance, a proper coating on the cathode materials can increase cathode hydrophobicity and further forces the desolvation of hydrated Zn2+ at the CEI, thereby facilitating zinc-ion insertion into the host materials.171 As shown in Fig. 26a, the hydrophobicity of the cathode material can be realized via a facile two-step process and four kinds of cathode with different water contact angles (WCA) can be fabricated (Fig. 26b). Due to the difference in the WCAs, these four cathodes exhibit different cycling performances (Fig. 26c). Further, the third one affords the best electrochemical performance; therefore, it can be deduced that an appropriate WCA should be achieved if the electrochemical performance of the cathode needs to be enhanced via CEI modification. Besides an artificial coating, some novel in situ coatings can also resolve the problems of the CEI. For example, a single-component cathode-based SEI layer (CaSO4·2H2O) via an in situ electrochemical charging process in a Ca2MnO4 cathode for an aqueous ZIB has been proposed.168 The in situ formed CaSO4·2H2O possesses electronic insulation and ionic conduction properties, indicating that it is an appropriate SEI film. Accordingly, material dissolution can be effectively suppressed in the presence of the SEI layer on the cathode side (Fig. 26d).
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of MNGs composite. (b) WCAs of MnO2 and MNGs cathodes before cycling. (c) WCAs of MnO2 and MNGs cathodes before cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic of the battery reaction mechanism of α-MnO2 and CMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Although many promising ways such as electrolyte optimization and surface coating have been applied to modify the CEI, the understanding of the CEI is not sufficiently comprehensive, and its formation mechanism and existence form are still unclear. To further optimize the electrochemical performance of ZIBs, it is necessary to focus on the transport of ions and electrons at the CEI.

3.3 Characterization and analysis of EEI
An in-depth understanding of the interfacial reactions and interfacial kinetics is of significance for guiding the rational design of EEI in ZIBs. Although many traditional physicochemical and electrochemical methods, such as EIS, LSV, CV, GITT, PITT, and some ex situ methods, have been developed to investigate the basic characteristics of the EEI, the present understanding of the interfacial behavior is still limited. Due to their complicated components, more intuitive characterization methods and theoretical analysis strategies need to be applied and developed, particularly under realistic operation conditions and dynamic process simulations. As shown in Fig. 27, some advanced characterizations and analysis methods of EEI will be briefly introduced in this section.
 Fig. 27  Some important interface characterization techniques and analysis methods. 

3.3.1 Advanced characterization techniques. 
On some occasions, due to the sensitivity of the working electrodes to air and moisture, the results from ex situ measurements regarding electrochemical processes, such as valence changes on the surface, and interfacial reactions may not fully reflect the actual situation. Therefore, obtaining correct information under realistic battery operating conditions is critical for the development of ZIBs. In situ/operando measurements can reveal more valuable information about the interface without disassembling the testing cells. These methods can help us in better understanding the diffusion of Zn2+ and other ions, electrochemical reaction, morphology, and phase transformation on the EEI.
Optical techniques are known as nondestructive, noncontact analysis tools, which show less restriction on the in situ cell design. Optical sources for use in optical techniques mainly involve the utilization of visible and invisible light, which can provide a lot of valuable information about the EEI, including the formation and growth of Zn dendrite, morphological evolution, and variations in the molecular structure. Among all the in situ optical techniques, in situ optical microscopy is the most widely used. In particular, it can be used to directly observe the morphology of Zn metal at the micrometer scale. As shown in Fig. 28a, optical microscopy has been employed to observe the EEI evolution during the operation of Zn/Zn cells, where nucleus formation as well as Zn dendrite growth at different plating/stripping cycles can be observed in real time.172 Visible light can be used to investigate the electrochemically induced macroscopic structural changes in the electrodes and dendritic formation; however, the structure and composition of the EEI cannot be observed. Fortunately, the employment of invisible light, such as in situ UV-vis spectra, FTIR, and Raman, can determine variations in the compositions and chemical bonds of the EEI. For example, the in situ UV-vis spectra can be used to investigate the dissolution of redox species in aqueous electrolytes, which can further detect the dissolution behavior of cathode materials. As shown in Fig. 28b, the nearly unchanged UV-vis spectra prove that the concentration and composition of the electrolyte are stable during the cycling process for batteries that use a Nafion membrane. This further revealed the inhibition of cathode dissolution as well as the outstanding EEI stability. Moreover, the electrolyte in batteries without a Nafion coating turns light yellow after cycling with gradually enhanced UV-vis adsorption peaks, which can be ascribed to the unstable EEI and the subsequent cathode dissolution. Besides, in situ FTIR can identify the presence of characteristic functional groups and chemical bonds for EEI, which can facilitate the real-time monitoring of the chemical reaction on the surface of the ZIBs during the charge/discharge process (Fig. 28c).129 In addition to the above spectral techniques, in situ Raman spectroscopy is very useful to investigate the nature of EEI during cycling, which can be used to obtain the variations in lattice symmetry and bonding information through the vibration and rotation modes of the molecules. As shown in Fig. 28d, the in situ Raman spectra can be used to investigate the reversible dissolution/deposition mechanism of the MnO2 electrode.102
 Fig. 28  (a) Zn electrodes and PVB@Zn electrodes in symmetric transparent cells along with the specified numbers of plating/stripping cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) In situ UV-vis spectra of Zn–C4Q batteries with and without a Nafion separator. (c) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of the C4Q cathode in one discharge/charge cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) In situ Raman spectra of the MnO2 electrode under DZMB working. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
As discussed above, in situ optical technology has become relatively mature in ZIBs. Some other advanced characterization methods, such as in situ synchrotron X-radiation (SXR), have related applications. Yufit et al. employed the synchrotron X-ray computed tomography (SXR-CT) to investigate the growth, dissolution, and regrowth of zinc dendrites (Fig. 29a).173 This technology offers the opportunity for obtaining nondestructive analytical insights with high spatial and temporal resolutions of the 2D and 3D data of the electrode surface with a relatively large field of view.
 Fig. 29  (a) Operando study of growth, dissolution, and regrowth of zinc dendrites in a cell without a separator at a current density of 30 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (b) In situ SEM images at intervals of 5 min from 1 to 6 during Li electrodeposition with a Cu CC film (thickness: 30 nm). The current density is 100 μA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society. 
Because of the limited resolution of optical microscopy, other in situ techniques that involve the electron, namely, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), have become reliable options.174,175 These techniques can provide microlevel information about the EEI. Compared with the mostly popularly applied ex situ investigation (SEM), in situ observations are more challenging. Fig. 29b shows some in situ SEM images of the AEI; here, the electrodeposition and dissolution of Li were performed and observed in situ through the viewport.176In situ SEM can commendably reflect the surface morphology, which is essential for understanding the formation and transformation of the regular pattern of the EEI. However, variations in the lattice fringe and elemental distribution at the EEI need higher resolution, and in situ SEM cannot meet these requirements. The TEM technique provides much higher resolution than the SEM. Besides, an enormous number of operating modes are possible under the TEM, such as conventional images, scanning TEM images (STEM), high-resolution TEM images (HRTEM), diffraction, and spectroscopy, along with their combinations. Overall, TEM reveals not only morphological features but also accurate information such as structure, chemical composition, and uniformity.177
These SEM and TEM techniques are relatively mature in LIBs. However, they are rare for ZIBs. In particular, it is difficult to employ electron microscopy in the presence of an electrolyte. Therefore, it is imperative to develop some novel methods to accelerate the application of in situ SEM and TEM in ZIBs.178,179
The neutron scattering technique can be used to detect the structure and dynamics of materials over a wide range of time and length. In comparison with other characterization techniques, neutron scattering has its unique advantages. First, neutrons can penetrate very deeply into the material; therefore, neutron scattering is generally considered to be a large and nondestructive detector. This feature can considerably facilitate in situ research. Second, neutron scattering is more sensitive to lighter elements, which facilitates the direct determination of the position of these light elements in the crystal structure and can be used to obtain images of lighter elements from the background of heavier elements. Finally, neutrons not only have a wavelength equivalent to the distance between the atoms, but also their energy and momentum can be comparable to the basic excitation of vibration and diffusion. Therefore, neutrons are ideal particles for studying the ion transmission properties of the EEI.174 In general, the characterization methods of EEI in ZIBs are still not mature. To accelerate the application of an advanced characterization technique, it is important to take examples from LIBs.


3.3.2 Theoretical and simulation analyses. 
Although there are a sufficient number of techniques to characterize the EEI, a reasonable analysis of the obtained characterization results is needed. That is, the EEI needs to be understood more theoretically. Theoretical and simulation analyses can provide some theoretical guidance and prediction as well as facilitate the systematic analysis of the EEI after combining with the experimental data.
DFT calculations, MD simulations, COMSOL Multiphysics modeling software, etc. are some common theoretical and simulation analysis methods for EEI evaluation, among which DFT calculations are the most popular theoretical analysis method. For example, on the basic assumption that the dissolution of MnO2 can proceed through the protonation of a surface O atom to form an OH* intermediate and then the reaction of OH* with a second H+ ion leads to the formation and desorption of H2O (Fig. 30a), DFT calculations can be employed to explore the role of acetates in the discharge process of MnO2. Obviously, the produced H2O binds strongly to the bare MnO2 surface, while the acetate ion can significantly weaken the binding of H2O on MnO2, which means that the application of acetate can reduce the barrier for MnO2 dissolution (Fig. 30b). The differential charge density distributions can also be obtained by means of DFT calculations (Fig. 30c), using which prominent electron transfer occurs from MnO2 to the acetate ions. Namely, the surface Mn atoms carry fewer electrons and provide weaker binding with the OH* and H2O species, facilitating the dissolution process of MnO2 in the acetate system.180 In the abovementioned case, the DFT calculations were employed to analyze the absorption energy of the MnO2 surface and the related charge density distributions, which can help to more comprehensively analyze the electrochemical reaction on the EEI.
 Fig. 30  (a) Atomic structures for the dissolution reaction on MnO2 with a bare surface and an acetate-rich surface. (b) Energy diagram of the dissolution reaction on MnO2 with a bare surface and an acetate-rich surface. (c) Differential charge density of an acetate ion adsorbed on MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) 3D snapshot obtained by MD simulations and representative Zn2+ solvation structure in the ZS electrolyte. (e) RDFs for Zn2+–N (SN) and Zn2+–O (water) from MD simulations of ZS. Schematic of Zn2+ solvation structure and corresponding interfacial reactions in (f) ZW and (g) ZS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc. 
MD simulations can be used to analyze the solvation structure of the cations in the electrolyte, which can further help to deduce the interactions between the electrolyte and electrode, as well as the interfacial reactions occurring on the EEI. Fig. 30d shows a typical solvation structure of Zn2+ in the ZS electrolyte (Zn(ClO4)2·6H2O/SN ratio of 1:8) via MD simulations, where Zn2+ coordinates with two water molecules and two SN molecules to form four-coordinate Zn2+ complexes. Moreover, the resulting radial distribution functions (RDFs) provide additional evidence of Zn2+ coordination to both SN and H2O (Fig. 30e). Combining the MD simulation results, the interfacial reaction can be illustrated. As shown in Fig. 30f, parasitic reactions such as passivation, corrosion, and hydrogen evolution compete with the Zn/Zn2+ redox processes as well as among each other because of the presence of fragile Zn[OH2]62+ in conventional aqueous electrolytes. In comparison to regular aqueous electrolytes, the parasitic reactions that occur at the ZS electrolyte interface can be obviously relieved, because the primary solvation shell of Zn2+ is mostly occupied by the SN molecules (Fig. 30g).181 With the help of MD simulations, the solvation structure of Zn2+ can be simulated and then the interfacial reactions can be explained more reasonably.
Dendrite growth during charging results in the degradation of battery performance. Until now, various experimental and theoretical studies have been reported on the in situ observations, dynamics, and underlying mechanisms of Zn dendrite growth. Besides, a novel simulation method called phase-field simulations has also been proposed to simulate the dendrite growth and corresponding Zn-ion concentration evolution (Fig. 31a), which can greatly facilitate EEI investigations.182
 Fig. 31  (a) Evolution of electrode morphology after Zn electrodeposition for 80, 130, 150, and 180 s and the corresponding Zn-ion concentration evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Current distribution and electric field distribution of the 3D scaffold structure and 2D planar structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
COMSOL Multiphysics software has been widely employed to simulate the local current density and electric field in the EEI (Fig. 31b). Accordingly, the introduction of 3D conductive directly grown vertical graphene (VG) scaffold with obviously increased surface area enables the effective lowering of the current density, which results in the delay of the initial formation point of the dendrite; this is superior to the scenario in 2D planar graphene. Moreover, a uniformly distributed electric field could be provided and maintained by such a 3D VG scaffold, onto which Zn can be evenly deposited. In contrast, a planar configuration without a 3D scaffold tends to form individual nucleation points and further evolves into an uneven electric field. In this respect, Zn dendrites can emerge in sequence.183 In general, theoretical calculations and simulations can be used as an auxiliary means of experiment to ensure the results obtained from the experiments are more reliable.

4. Practical considerations for electrolytes
Although zinc-ion electrolytes have grown in leaps and bounds, most of them are based on academic research in the laboratory, which is far from their practical applications. In our opinion, some key issues that may be encountered in practical applications need to be considered during specific investigations. These should include the choice of electrolyte system, dosage of liquid and fluid electrolytes, materials processing of gel and all-solid electrolytes, and other concerns related to electrolytes (such as water content in the electrolyte, effect of dissolved oxygen in electrolyte, and assistance from membrane) (Fig. 32). This section will provide a targeted overview of these aspects for the first time.
 Fig. 32  Practical issues and considerations of zinc-ion electrolytes. 
4.1 Choice of electrolyte system
Admittedly, some studies have provided novel designing strategies of electrolytes, but many of them have only focused on improving the stability of the zinc anode and have ignored the overall performance of batteries. In fact, electrolyte composition also has a great impact on the electrochemical performance of cathode materials. Obviously, most manganese-based cathodes such as δ-MnO2 exhibit two obvious discharge platforms (namely, 1.1–1.3 V and 1.35–1.4 V vs. Zn2+/Zn) in ZnSO4-based or Zn(CF3SO3)2-based aqueous electrolytes.29,59,60,184 However, in an acetonitrile-based organic electrolyte, the δ-MnO2 cathode only showed a smooth galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) curve (Fig. 33a).10,185 This phenomenon was also observed in vanadium-based cathodes, since many of them can deliver obvious working platforms in aqueous media, while exhibiting low electrochemical activity in organic electrolytes (Fig. 33b), which may be ascribed to sluggish interfacial charge transfer of the vanadium-based cathode in nonaqueous electrolytes.67 In an ionic liquid electrolyte, manganese-based cathodes such as spinel LiMn2O4 show lower capacity, which is far less than that of an aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 33c).10,59 However, it should be noted that an opposite behavior was observed in vanadium-based cathodes in ZnCl2-based water-in-salt electrolyte and dilute aqueous electrolyte.93 These phenomena are fairly confusing, but have received little attention.
 Fig. 33  (a) GCD curves of δ-MnO2 in an aqueous electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V., and in an organic electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) GCD curves of V3O7·H2O in aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) GCD curves of ZnMn2O4 in an aqueous electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society, and in an ionic liquid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Zn–O Mayer bond order and binding energy in different Zn2+ cluster models and (e) the working mechanism of the interfacial reaction of the LiMn2O4 cathode in ZnSO4-based aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
To reveal the corresponding mechanism, a typical work was conducted by Zhang et al. to exhibit the totally different electrochemical behaviors of spinel LiMn2O4 in three different electrolyte systems, namely, aqueous, water-in-salt, and organic electrolytes.133 The obtained results indicated that aqueous electrolytes offer lower desolvation energy and smaller Mayer bond order for Zn2+ as compared to those observed in the other systems (Fig. 33d), which is responsible for the different electrochemical behaviors in different electrolytes. Moreover, the interfacial reaction was found to be responsible for the additional redox peaks and higher capacity of spinel LiMn2O4 in aqueous electrolytes, during which Zn2+ desolvated and combined with the OH− and SO42− in the electrolyte, thereby forming ZHS (Fig. 33e).
From the discussion above, it should be noted that the composition of the electrolyte can greatly influence the electrochemical behavior and specific capacity of ZIBs. For these reasons, the choice of the electrolyte system has become a hot topic. There is an urgent need to establish a relationship between the electrolyte system and electrochemical performance of the battery based on the types and energy storage mechanisms of the cathode materials. Because of the different physicochemical characteristics and crystal structures, these cathode materials always exhibit different energy storage behaviors, and their electrochemical activity requires the assistance of the electrolyte. For example, in a Zn–Mn battery, some important reactions, such as the formation of ZHS, dissolution–deposition of Mn2+/MnO2, etc., require water;186 therefore, the electrolyte used in this system should contain a sufficient amount of water. Besides, it is obvious that a significant amount of Zn2+/proton (H+) co-insertion often takes place when oxides and phosphates are cycled in an aqueous electrolyte.39,60 This distinction is probably because of the interfacial nature of the cathode material, because most oxides and phosphates are typically hydroxyl-terminated and hydrated in aqueous media.187 Therefore, the choice of the electrolyte should also account for the interface of the cathode in different electrolytes. The corresponding electrolyte system should be used to provide a complete opportunity to achieve the maximum activity for the cathode material. However, there is relatively little research in this area, and it is hoped that this topic will receive more attention in future works.
In addition, the cost of the electrolyte system is a nonnegligible issue for practical applications. For example, although a water-in-salt electrolyte possesses good electrochemical stability and wide electrochemical stability window (which is worthwhile for Zn anodes,10 vanadium-based cathodes,98,188,189etc.), the water-in-salt electrolyte that mainly comprises Zn(CF3SO3)2 and Zn(TFSI)2 is too expensive to hinder practical applications. Hence, some alternative candidates such as ZnCl2 and Zn(ClO4)2 that possess higher solubility can prove to be a good choice if they can play the same role.93
4.2 Dosage of liquid and fluid electrolytes
Theoretically, the electrolyte—which should be a non-consumable product—functions as a transporter between the anode and cathode for ion transfer. Excess electrolyte can reduce the energy density of the whole battery; therefore, just a small amount of electrolyte is needed to ensure a working battery. In fact, the electrolyte is consumed due to decomposition and side reactions during the electrochemical reaction in ZIBs; hence, the electrolyte should be appropriately excessive for these additional consumptions. To benefit and facilitate the practical application of ZIBs, the dosage of liquid and fluid electrolytes is an important and meaningful issue and must be taken into consideration. However, the recognition between the dosage of electrolyte and electrochemical performance in ZIBs is still in its infancy.
In fact, this issue has been systematically discussed in other systems. For LIBs, lab coin cells often use unlimited amounts of Li and electrolytes and cannot reflect the conditions in operating practical Li–metal cells (Fig. 34a). The lifespan of a battery can sharply decrease when the amount of electrolyte is insufficient (Fig. 34b).190,191 This is because the electrolyte in these batteries can be consumed to form the SEI during the cycling process, resulting in an electrolyte-depleted state in the battery. Subsequently, there is insufficient Li+ to ensure the normal operation of the battery. Fig. 34c further confirms that the capacity can return to normal after refilling the electrolyte. Similarly, in lithium–sulfur batteries, excessive electrolyte is often required due to the dissolution of polysulfides in the liquid electrolyte, which considerably reduces their energy density.191–194 Evidently, the dosage of electrolyte is very important for batteries.
 Fig. 34  (a) Comparison between lab coin cells and high-energy pouch cells. Cycling performance of Li‖NMC cells (b) with different electrolyte amounts and (c) with electrolyte replenished after the original lean electrolyte is consumed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
In ZIBs, the breakthroughs in high performance such as high rate performance (over 30 A g−1)195 and excellent cycling life (over 10000 cycles)196 have been achieved. However, it should be noted that these results are usually evaluated under conditions of ultra-excessive electrolyte. Most published works that yielded results of good electrochemical performance did not consider the dosage of the electrolyte. However, excessive electrolyte inevitably results in a low actual energy density. Therefore, a relevant optimization process urgently needs improvement. Different from LIBs, many side reactions in ZIBs are associated with the electrolyte. On one hand, byproducts such as ZHS formed on the CEI can reversibly undergo deposition/dissolution during the charge/discharge process. On the other hand, the side reactions and HER/OER that occur at the electrode interface are usually irreversible, which consume the electrolyte. Additionally, the intercalation of H2O into the cathode material and the generation of a new phase containing structural water can expend the electrolyte. Moreover, taking the vibration of pH during the operation process into consideration, it is easy to deduce that the dosage of the electrolyte can greatly influence pH variations in the battery system. These complex behaviors make it more difficult to control the dosage of the zinc-ion electrolyte. Therefore, to understand the complex zinc-ion loss and replenishment process under electrochemical conditions still requires in-depth research.
Furthermore, cathode loading, electrolyte amount, and Zn–metal amount (thickness), in addition to other inactive materials, such as separators, current collectors, and packaging materials, have serious effects on the electrochemical performance of the whole cell. To maximize the energy density and accelerate commercialization, these details should follow a quantitative standard, particularly the electrolyte dosage.
4.3 Materials processing of gel and all-solid electrolytes
Gel electrolyte, quasi-solid electrolyte, and all-solid electrolyte are research hotspots in the field of ZIBs in recent years. On one hand, researchers believe that these types of electrolytes can reduce the presence of active water, inhibit side reactions at the interface, and help the battery achieve excellent performance. On the other hand, these electrolytes can be used in multifunctional scenarios, particularly involving flexible devices, and some progress has been made in this area; however, there are still many problems that need to be urgently addressed.
For gel and quasi-solid electrolytes, to enable their practical use in flexible devices, some of the features required in actual scenarios, such as mechanical property, flexibility, thermal stability, chemical stability, and electrochemical performance, need to be considered. Typical gel/quasi-solid electrolytes include networks without crosslinking, with physical crosslinking, and/or chemical crosslinking.18,19,77,154,167,197 Among them, the electrolyte without crosslinking often exhibits unsatisfactory mechanical properties (Fig. 35a). These electrolytes can get damaged and deformed under stress and need additional separators in most cases. On the contrary, electrolytes with a crosslink are more stable and flexible. For instance, PVA/Zn(CF3SO3)2 hydrogel electrolyte with a physical crosslink can autonomously self-heal via hydrogen bonding without any external stimulus (Fig. 35b). The PAM electrolyte with a chemical crosslink showed good tensile strength (273 kPa) and high stretchability up to 3000% strain (Fig. 35c). Therefore, electrolytes with chemical crosslinking possess a more stable network structure, which guarantees good mechanical strength and flexibility; therefore, they are more suitable for practical applications. However, due to the existence of water molecules in polymer networks, conventional hydrogel electrolytes inevitably freeze and lose elasticity at subzero temperatures, which severely affects their electrochemical performance and practical applications in extremely cold environments. Therefore, proper modification is also necessary to be performed on these electrolytes to meet some specific conditions. As shown in Fig. 35d, the PAM electrolyte exhibits excellent mechanical property after the modification of EG–waPUA, especially at low temperatures. Even when an anti-freezing battery is bent at different angles and experiences various heavy loads, it still shows great electrochemical performance, which indicates the ultra-excellent stability of the electrolyte (Fig. 35e and f). In addition to the better mechanical properties and electrochemical stability, large scale and cost control are still critical issues that are well worth considering for this type of electrolyte. To realize scale preparation, the methods to prepare this type of electrolyte should be as simple as possible; in addition, raw materials should be abundant and at a low price in order to achieve better cost control.
 Fig. 35  Schematic of gel/quasi-solid electrolytes (a) without crosslink,11 (b) with physical crosslink, Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH, and (c) with chemical crosslink, Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Elastic stability of the AF gel at −20 °C. (e) Illustration of bending the AF battery at different angles and the corresponding GCD curves. (f) GCD cycling curves of the AF battery undergoing various heavy loads at −20 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For an all-solid electrolyte, a generally perceived obstacle is the low mobility of Zn2+ in solid materials, which prevent the development of all-solid electrolytes of ZIBs.198 To the best of our knowledge, there is no definite evidence to show the existence of an all-solid Zn2+ electrolyte, because most of it still contains small amounts of water molecules in the framework.38 In general, Zn2+ has a similar ionic radius to Li+, and therefore, it should be easy to transport like Li+. In an actual situation, however, it is not the case due to the complexities of diffusion kinetics caused by multivalence instead of simple geometry; further, there is a strong interaction between Zn2+ and the solid structural lattice that results in a higher diffusion energy barrier. Therefore, overcoming the inherent shortcomings of Zn2+ to develop an all-solid electrolyte remains a significant and fundamental scientific challenge. In other all-solid battery systems, a variety of structural and electronic design principles for fast cation mobility have been proposed, which could be used for reference. It has been proposed that Zn2+ prefers tetrahedral coordination and that the faster motion of an ion can be achieved when the stable site for the ion has an unfavorable coordination and the activated state has more favorable coordination.199,200 In addition, minimizing changes in the coordination environment along the migration path and the introduction of abundant defects further contribute toward a lower ion diffusion barrier.201 Therefore, the design of a novel all-solid Zn2+ electrolyte should be based on the above principles.
Moreover, controllable preparation is very important. For example, a thick all-solid electrolyte might influence the power density (sluggish ion diffusion) and energy density of a full battery, while a thin all-solid electrolyte is hard to prepare and possesses bad mechanical properties. Therefore, it is imperative to control the thickness of the solid electrolyte. In general, there are many scientific issues worth exploring, which mainly include controllable and large-scale preparation methods, simplified processing technology, selection of raw materials, etc.
4.4 Other concerns related to electrolytes
Other concerns related to electrolytes, such as water content in the electrolyte, effect of dissolved oxygen, assistance from the membrane, etc., are also critical with regard to practical applications. In view of the above factors, this section will give a brief analysis and discussion.
The water content in an electrolyte has been discussed earlier. Abundant active water in aqueous electrolytes can result in the maximum activation of electrode materials, but it can also damage the electrode, including the formation of dendrites, corrosion of the Zn anode, unwanted side reactions, and dissolution of active materials. Therefore, it is worthwhile to reduce the free water in the electrolyte as far as possible for practical applications according to the type of cathodes and their corresponding energy storage behaviors.
Generally, ZIBs are assembled in air, which is also one of their advantages; however, the oxygen content in the electrolyte might affect the reversibility of the Zn anode. Subsequently, the performance of ZIBs can be influenced. In fact, the impact of oxygen dissolved in the electrolytes on ZIBs has been discussed in some reports. The Zn/Zn battery cycled much longer in an O2-absent electrolyte, and it underwent a sudden and irreversible rise in the polarization voltage in the presence of O2 (Fig. 36a). Moreover, the energy efficiency of an O2-absent electrolyte (Fig. 36b) is much better than that of an O2-containing electrolyte (Fig. 36c). Therefore, it is easy to deduce that the presence of O2 in the electrolyte is harmful to the Zn anode. Not surprisingly, in the presence of O2, there are more byproducts appearing during the charge/discharge process (Fig. 36d).134 However, on the contrary, Niu et al. designed a novel self-charging aqueous ZIB by the spontaneous redox reaction between the discharged cathode and oxygen from the ambient environment. As shown in Fig. 36e, owing to the difference in the redox potential between O2 and CaZn3.6VO, CaZn3.6VO tends to release electrons to get oxidized and O2 can accept these electrons to be simultaneously reduced. Therefore, the oxidation of vanadium in CaZn3.6VO would be realized, and Zn2+ ions would be extracted from the layered structure to balance the charge at the same time. As shown in Fig. 36f, the open-circuit voltage of Zn/CaZn3.6−xVO batteries continually rises along with extending the oxidation time of CaZn3.6VO. Therefore, although the presence of oxygen may have a certain impact on the cycling performance of ZIBs, the presence of oxygen in the electrolyte can sometimes also be used to design a novel system.
 Fig. 36  (a) Electrochemical stability and reversibility of a symmetrical Zn/Zn cell using 2 M ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte in the presence of O2 and in the absence of O2. The specific energy and energy efficiency of the symmetrical Zn/Zn cells (b) in the absence of O2 and (c) in the presence of O2. (d) XRD patterns of Zn after 120 h long-term galvanostatic cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Energy-level transition diagram of CaZn3.6VO and O2. (f) Galvanostatic discharging process of chemically self-charging ZIBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Normally, the liquid electrolyte can be absorbed into the separator to maintain the uniformity of current density and electric field distribution between the electrodes. Therefore, the functions of the electrolyte can be affected by a proper modification of the separator, thereby affecting the electrochemical performance of ZIBs. For example, Yang et al. designed directly grown VG carpets as Janus separators with better wetting behavior with an aqueous ZnSO4 electrolyte (Fig. 37a). Moreover, the separator can also inhibit side reactions of the electrolyte by adjusting the uniformity of the electric field distribution (Fig. 37b).183 In addition, it has been reported that a functional separator, such as an ion-selective membrane, can be applied to realize the application of multiple electrolytes in a single battery to promote the capacity and operational voltage (Fig. 37c),99,100,102 which represents a worthwhile strategy toward the design of novel electrolyte systems. However, the cost of these separators is higher than that of the electrolyte, particularly selective separators, the price of which is 5–10 times that of conventional separators. Therefore, some cheap alternative candidates should be developed.
 Fig. 37  (a) Contact angle measurements of pristine separator and Janus separator. (b) Ex situ XRD patterns of the Zn anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of Zn–MnO2 cells employing select separators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
ZIBs possess many distinctive merits such as low cost, intrinsic safety, environmental friendliness, etc., which have shown great potential in large-scale energy storage systems. However, some perplexing issues persist with regard to the development of zinc-ion electrolytes. According to prior achievements of this thriving field, in this review, we have presented the most elaborate discussions and perspectives on zinc-ion electrolytes. We initiated by covering the basic characteristics, challenges, and optimized strategies of zinc-ion electrolytes. Then, the fundamental understanding of EEIs and their modification, together with advanced characterization and analysis methods, were discussed. Due to the lack of attention to practical issues in most studies, we finally proposed and commented on the aspects that need to be considered in actual processes. Considering the predicament and further development of electrolytes, future prospects and potential directions are likely to be proposed according to the following aspects.
5.1 In-depth understanding of electrolytes
Although an electrolyte has a great impact on ZIBs, investigations on the structure of the electrolyte, in situ state of the electrolyte, interaction between the electrolyte and electrochemical performance, and practical considerations of electrolytes are still in their infancy. Therefore, it is very important to have an in-depth understanding and exploration of these aspects. Here, some perspectives based on our understanding are provided.

Exploration of electrolyte structures. 
The basic structure of the electrolyte is a key factor that affects the basic characteristics of the electrolyte as well as the electrochemical performance of ZIBs. In particular, the structural properties of the solvation sheath and its interfacial compatibility with the electrode material play a very important role, for instance, the desolvation energy, bond length, Mayer bond level, etc. However, due to the complexity of the electrolyte system and the limitations of the characterization methods, the current understanding of these properties is still insufficient. To figure out these issues, a combination of certain characterizations and analysis methods, such as FTIR, Raman, NMR, DFT, MD simulation, etc., can be of assistance. It is meaningful and worthwhile to investigate the essential structures of electrolyte and how these parameters affect the electrochemical performance.


Investigations of electrochemical in situ state of electrolytes. 
Normally, the state of the electrolyte can change under different charging and discharging states. For ZIBs, it is an important and complicated issue; however, this aspect has received little attention. Revealing the electrochemical in situ state of an electrolyte can facilitate the better design of the electrolyte and regulate its dosage. On one hand, the liquid electrolyte may turn into the solid state, such as ZHS, during electrochemical operation; it is important to investigate this in situ state by using in situ XRD and in situ optical microscopy technology to detect the changes in the phase and morphology. On the other hand, the pH value—an important parameter for aqueous electrolytes—can change due to the complex electrochemical reaction of ZIBs; subsequently, the electrochemical performance of ZIBs can be influenced. Therefore, it is important to monitor the vibration of the pH value of the electrolyte by using an in situ pH meter. Moreover, variations in the functional groups and molecular structures are also important for the investigation of the electrochemical in situ state of the electrolyte, particularly for gel polymer electrolytes, which contain abundant functional groups in the polymer matrix. To investigate the variations in the functional groups and molecular structures, a combination of some advanced experimental characterization methods and theoretical simulation methods can be an effective solution. For example, the in situ FTIR, Raman, and NMR techniques can provide the timely monitoring of variations in the functional groups and molecular structures, which can facilitate the understanding of the ion transport mechanism in the electrolyte. MD simulations can help us obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the experimental phenomenon and more reasonably analyze the corresponding mechanism.


Exploration of relationship between electrolyte and electrochemical performance. 
Although recent works have improved the cycling performance by electrolyte regulation, there is still a lack of a reasonable relationship between the electrolyte and electrochemical performance. In this aspect, not only the critical factors in the electrolyte that ensure a longer cycling life of the Zn anode and cathode need to be determined, but also investigate how the novel electrolyte component can boost the energy density of the full cell. In short, this requires more systematic and detailed works to summarize and analyze whether the strategy is “treating the symptoms but not the root cause” or “treating both the symptoms and the root cause.”

5.2 Toward cost-effective and innovative electrolytes
Currently, the low ion transference number, low electrochemical stability, narrow ESPW, and narrow temperature window have largely hindered the development of aqueous electrolytes. Although some novel electrolytes such as ionic liquid electrolyte and organic electrolyte have been explored, their practical applications are still impeded by some critical issues such as either high cost or low ionic conductivity and low electrochemical activity. In addition, owing to the low ionic conductivity and interface impedance, the development of solid ZIB electrolyte also faces a big obstacle. To design practical ZIBs with high specific energy and long-life stability to meet the actual needs of large-scale energy storage, it is urgent to develop cost-effective and innovative electrolytes. Considering the merits of different electrolyte systems, developing mixed electrolytes as an important strategy should be seriously considered. For a liquid electrolyte, it is important to reduce the amount of active water. For solid electrolytes, adding some aqueous electrolytes can increase the ionic conductivity and improve the interfacial compatibility. As a bottleneck issue for ZIBs, further breakthroughs in energy density should not only pursue complicated innovations in cathode materials, but also pay more attention to electrolyte strategy. Last but not least, to meet the environmental adaptability of large-scale energy storage, functional electrolytes need to be developed. Here, some novel proposals are discussed as follows.

Mixed electrolytes with high electrochemical activity and long-life stability. 
Aqueous electrolytes possess high ionic conductivity; however, the electrochemical instability of water, as characterized by its narrow ESPW of 1.23 V, places an upper limit on its energy density. This upper limit was recently breached by a new class of water-in-salt electrolytes, which consist of super-concentrated lithium salts (LiTFSI) and zinc salts (Zn(TFSI)2 or Zn(CF3SO3)2) and they expand the ESPW to ∼3 V. Such approaches still face questions of practicality in production, with either aggravated cost issues or limited cycling stability. Although organic electrolytes, such as acetonitrile, trimethyl phosphate, and DMF, have significantly expanded the ESPW and have good interfacial compatibility with the Zn anode, their low ionic conductivity caused by high viscosity can further influence the rate performance of ZIBs. Therefore, considering the exploitation of the synergistic effects between aqueous and organic electrolytes, a mixture of aqueous and organic electrolytes can afford a wider ESPW and higher ionic conductivity. Considering the difference in compatibility between different organic molecules and aqueous electrolytes, there are two different targeted strategies. For hydrophilic organic liquids, we should focus on adjusting the ratio between the organic liquid and water content due to good compatibility. Meanwhile, the concentration of zinc salt in the prepared mixed electrolyte should also be taken into consideration. In the end, a mixed electrolyte with the best ionic conductivity, CE, and high- and low-temperature performance should be obtained; for hydrophobic organic liquids, we need to confine the organic liquid at the surface of the zinc anode, which can be realized by coating the Zn anode with MOF or other modification strategies. There will be delamination between the water-based electrolyte and these kinds of organic liquids, and the solvated H2O around Zn2+ will be replaced by organic molecules during Zn2+ transport from the aqueous electrolyte to the organic electrolyte. In general, the addition of an organic composition can change the solvation structure of Zn2+, which can benefit the Zn plating process and interfacial compatibility. In addition, a mixture of an inert inorganic compound, such as phyllosilicate, and an inorganic substance capable of strong ion exchange in an aqueous electrolyte may be a potential strategy. On one hand, the high stability and abundant functional groups of inorganic compounds can help to provide faster ion diffusion channels for mixed electrolytes. On the other hand, reducing the content of aqueous electrolyte to prepare quasi-solid electrolytes can alleviate many of the problems caused by the instability of the aqueous electrolyte.


Electrolyte adjustment toward high energy density of ZIBs. 
Basically, we can improve the energy density using two aspects: total capacity and operation voltage. Until now, many efforts have been devoted to improving the energy density of ZIBs via the advanced design of electrode material. However, the capacity of the electrode is harder to be enhanced due to the limitation posed by its theoretical capacity. Other than the preparation of high-capacity electrode materials, a new interesting approach to increase the energy density is to introduce soluble redox mediators, such as hydroquinone/quinone, Fe3+/Fe2+, I−/I2, Br−/Br2, etc., into traditional inert electrolytes to prepare a redox-active electrolyte, which can contribute to the additional capacity to ZIBs via the redox reaction of the active electrolyte. Because a conventional electrolyte in ZIBs can act as the mediator for transporting Zn2+, they are usually electrochemically inactive. Nevertheless, a redox-active electrolyte can not only transport Zn2+ ions, but also provide electrochemically active species for an additional charge transfer reaction. Another approach to improve the energy density is to prepare cost-effective water-in-salt electrolytes (such as high-concentration ZnCl2, Zn(ClO4)2), adjust the pH value of the electrolyte, and introduce effective electrolyte additives (such as Fe3+, Al3+, Ti4+) to improve the operational voltage.


Functional electrolytes with good environmental adaptability. 
In actual situations, large-scale energy storage equipment often have to experience high and low temperatures. Therefore, a common challenge for aqueous electrolytes of ZIBs comes from notable changes in their properties at lower temperatures, such as phase transition, solvation state of ions, and viscosity, which can significantly decrease their electrochemical performance. To address these issues, functional electrolytes with good environmental adaptability should be developed, which can be realized by the addition of certain additives. Low-molecular vicinal alcohols, such as glycerol and EG, are well-known nontoxic inhibitors for water freezing and have been widely used as engine coolants in the industry. In these binary solutions, alcohols form stable molecular clusters with H2O molecules, which compete with hydrogen bonds in water, leading to a decrease in the saturated vapor pressure of water. Besides, the addition of DMSO, DMF, and isophorone diisocyanate is also a feasible choice to prepare a functional electrolyte.

5.3 Systematic and thorough study of the EEI
Actually, EEIs are critical in determining the overall performance of ZIBs, which are considerably influenced by the electrolytes. However, due to the multiphase, multistep reduction of the intricate interface formation and mysterious ion transfer behavior within the interfaces, it is still insufficient to comprehensively describe the relationship between the electrolytes and EEIs, thereby affecting the battery performance. The interfacial properties are closely related to the formation of compounds on the surface of the electrode, which can considerably influence the ionic conductivity and mechanical strength. In addition, the physical contact, interfacial compatibility, and electrochemical stability are some important parameters of the interfaces. Therefore, understanding the structure and composition of the EEIs and their evolution, as well as the ion transport mechanism, should be further investigated. To further understand the EEIs, the below discussion should be noted.

Establishment of relationship between electrolyte and EEIs. 
Normally, the electrolyte should be in intimate contact with the EEI; whether there is a variation in the composition, structure, or state, there will be a significant impact on the EEI. For example, the solvation structure of Zn2+ can be changed by adjusting the composition of the electrolyte, which can affect the basic characteristics of the electrolyte and EEI, such as ionic conductivity, ion transference number, interfacial compatibility, etc. Meanwhile, the interfacial reactions between the electrolyte and different electrode materials are different, and the acceleration of the desolvation dynamics and transportation of Zn2+ in the EEI are closely related to the rate performance and electrochemical stability. Therefore, the development and regulation of ZIB electrolytes need to consider the structural properties of the Zn2+ solvation sheath in the electrolyte and its electrochemical behavior at the interface of specific electrode materials. To establish the relationship between the electrolyte and EEI, some important elements such as solid–liquid interface impedance compatibility, interface contact potential, evolution of the interface structure, ion diffusion, electron transfer behavior of the EEI, solvation of Zn2+, ionic conductivity, ion transference number, ESPW of the electrolytes, and interaction between the solvated ions and the interface should be taken into consideration.


In-depth understanding of interfacial effect via advanced characterization methods. 
It is imperative to study the interfacial effect due to its “bridge” function between the electrolyte and the cathode/anode. However, the study of EEIs is very complicated. On one hand, the characterization of the electrolyte is difficult. For example, it is difficult to determine the solvated structure of the electrolyte and the electric double-layer structure of the interface. On the other hand, the interface reaction is generally more complicated. Different types of electrolytes, cathodes, and different discharge/charge states can result in a totally different interfacial reaction. In addition, various side reactions also exacerbate the complexity of the interfacial reaction. These factors can complicate the characterization of the interface. Current analysis techniques cannot provide in-depth insights into the interfacial effect, which is more likely related to the electrolyte properties. Therefore, it should be captured in real time at the real location via a combination of advanced “in situ” techniques. These in situ techniques mainly include in situ optical microscopy, FTIR, Raman, UV-vis, SXR, SEM, TEM, and so on, which can precisely track the formation, evolution, and ion transport pathway of the interface. Moreover, the in-depth understanding can also be helpful in designing some novel electrolytes to ameliorate the EEI.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52072411 and 51932011) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of Central South University (Grant No. 2020zzts443).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Fang, J. Zhou, A. Q. Pan and S. Q. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2480–2501 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Tang, L. T. Shan, S. Q. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288–3304 RSC .
P. F. Wang, Y. Xiao, N. Piao, Q. C. Wang, X. Ji, T. Jin, Y. J. Guo, S. F. Liu, T. Deng, C. Y. Cui, L. Chen, Y. G. Guo, X. Q. Yang and C. S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104474 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, H. Tan, D. L. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802564 CrossRef .
J. Yi, P. Liang, X. Liu, K. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3075–3095 RSC .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, J. Zhu, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14480–14494 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Wang, H. F. Li, Z. J. Tang, Z. X. Liu, Z. H. Ruan, L. T. Ma, Q. Yang, D. H. Wang and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804560 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, J. Xu, D. Yin and Y. Du, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 18220–18234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Hou, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2906 CrossRef .
H. L. Pan, Y. Y. Shao, P. F. Yan, Y. W. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. M. Nie, C. M. Wang, J. H. Yang, X. L. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. M. Melief, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 482–483 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Q. Meng, Z. Liu, H. Li, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 706–715 RSC .
D. Chao, C. R. Zhu, M. Song, P. Liang, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, H. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Wang, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803181 CrossRef .
L. Ma, S. Chen, N. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien, S. Chen, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908121 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naveed, H. Yang, Y. Shao, J. Yang, N. Yanna, J. Liu, S. Shi, L. Zhang, A. Ye, B. He and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900668 CrossRef .

          P. Butler, P. Eidler, P. Grimes, S. Klassen, R. D. Miles, Linden and T. Reddy, Handbook of batteries, ed. D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, McGraw-Hill, 3rd edn,  2002, vol. 39, 2001 Search PubMed .
E. J. C. F. R. McLarnon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 645 CrossRef .
M. W. K. Kordesh, J. Power Sources, 1994, 51, 61 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Li, S. Jin, Z. Li, S. Zhang and H. Zhou, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 14, 100349 CrossRef .
B. He, Q. C. Zhang, L. H. Li, J. Sun, P. Man, Z. Y. Zhou, Q. L. Li, J. B. Guo, L. Y. Xie, C. W. Li, X. N. Wang, J. X. Zhao, T. Zhang and Y. G. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14594–14601 RSC .
M. S. Chae, J. W. Heo, H. H. Kwak, H. Lee and S.-T. Hong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q. Zhao, X. Wu, Z. Wang, R. Qin, Y. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Song, G. Qian, Z. Song, L. Yang and F. Pan, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 1–8 CrossRef .
M. Chen, J. Chen, W. Zhou, J. Xu and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26524–26532 RSC .
G. Z. Fang, C. Y. Zhu, M. H. Chen, J. Zhou, B. Y. Tang, X. X. Cao, X. S. Zheng, A. Q. Pan and S. Q. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808375 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13180–13191 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, L. Fu, S. Wu, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15841–15847 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naveed, H. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2760–2764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, H. Dong, B. Zhu, J. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, R. Bai, B. Chen and Z. Suo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1901693 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Pharr and G. A. Salvatore, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9614–9635 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. X. Liu, H. R. Zhu, X. S. Xie, J. W. Gao, C. B. Deng, M. M. Han, S. Q. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 109–116 CrossRef .
F. Mo, Z. Chen, G. Liang, D. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000035 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Wang, J. T. Hu, L. Han, Z. J. Wang, H. B. Wang, Q. H. Zhao, J. J. Liu and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Blanc, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Joule, 2020, 4, 771–799 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, J. Guo, C. Xia, W. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 135, 58–84 CrossRef .
V. Mathew, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, S. Kim, S. Park, S. Lee, M. H. Alfaruqi, V. Soundharrajan, S. Islam, D. Y. Putro, J.-Y. Hwang, Y. Sun and J. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 2376–2400 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, M. Lu, D. Cai, H. Yang and W. Han, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 712–726 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Yu, Z. Niu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4203–4219 RSC .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, B. Tawiah, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, J. H. Huang, J. Yi, X. Y. Liu, Y. Y. Liu, Y. G. Wang, J. J. Zhang and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903977 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550–587 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, Z. Guo, J. Yi, X. Liu, K. Wu, P. Liang, Q. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2160–2185 CrossRef CAS .
A. Konarov, N. Voronina, J. H. Jo, Z. Bakenov, Y.-K. Sun and S.-T. Myung, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2620–2640 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba4098 CrossRef CAS .
P. Canepa, G. Sai Gautam, D. C. Hannah, R. Malik, M. Liu, K. G. Gallagher, K. A. Persson and G. Ceder, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4287–4341 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Sun, L. Qin, X. Cao, J. Zhou, A. Pan, G. Fang and S. Liang, ChemNanoMat, 2020 DOI:10.1002/cnma.202000384 .
X. Xu, F. Xiong, J. Meng, X. Wang, C. Niu, Q. An and L. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904398 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Yang, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 180–232 RSC .
Z. Ye, Z. Cao, M. O. Lam Chee, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, J. Shen and M. Ye, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 290–305 CrossRef .
S. Xia, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Cui and W. Liu, Chem, 2019, 5, 753–785 CAS .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .

          C. K. Dyer, P. T. Moseley, Z. Ogumi, D. A. Rand and B. Scrosati, Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources, Elsevier Science & Technology,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. R. Mainar, O. Leonet, M. Bengoechea, I. Boyano, I. de Meatza, A. Kvasha, A. Guerfi and J. Alberto Blázquez, Int. J. Energy Res., 2016, 40, 1032–1049 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, K. Lei, C. Chen, X. Liu and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12894–12901 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Han, R. Hu, M. Zhu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9775–9778 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Olbasa, F. W. Fenta, S. F. Chiu, M. C. Tsai, C. J. Huang, B. A. Jote, T. T. Beyene, Y. F. Liao, C. H. Wang, W. N. Su, H. Dai and B. J. Hwang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4499–4508 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Long, X. Liu, F. Li and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 405 CrossRef .
L. Suo, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef .
C. Geng, D. Buchholz, G. T. Kim, D. V. Carvalho, H. Zhang, L. G. Chagas and S. Passerini, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800208 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, P. Shi, J. Chen, Q. Wu, X. Liang, X. Rui, H. Xiang and Y. Yu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100031 CrossRef .
N. Wu, P. H. Chien, Y. Qian, Y. Li, H. Xu, N. S. Grundish, B. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Y. Hu, G. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4131–4137 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, S. Hosseini Vajargah, L. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 881–892 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Peng, S. Dong, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and Y. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 90 CrossRef .
P. Yu, Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804760 CrossRef .
A. Mitha, H. Y. Mi, W. H. Dong, I. S. Cho, J. Ly, S. Yoo, S. Bang, T. K. A. Hoang and P. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 836, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Qiu, Y. Li, A. You, Z. M. Zhang, G. F. Li, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14838–14846 RSC .
J. Q. Wang, J. Liu, M. M. Hu, J. Zeng, Y. B. Mu, Y. Guo, J. Yu, X. Ma, Y. J. Qiu and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11113–11118 RSC .
S. Zhang, N. Yu, S. Zeng, S. Zhou, M. Chen, J. Di and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12237–12243 RSC .
K. T. Leng, G. J. Li, J. J. Guo, X. Y. Zhang, A. X. Wang, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001317 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Guduru and J. C. Icaza, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 41 CrossRef .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941–951 RSC .
Q. Han, X. W. Chi, S. M. Zhang, Y. Z. Liu, B. A. Zhou, J. H. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23046–23054 RSC .
Q. Zhou, J. Ma, S. Dong, X. Li and G. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902029 CrossRef CAS .
J. Evans, C. A. Vincent and P. G. Bruce, Polymer, 1987, 28, 2324–2328 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Diederichsen, E. J. McShane and B. D. McCloskey, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2563–2575 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Schaefer, D. A. Yanga and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 834–839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Z. Lai, Y. Han, H. Zhang, S. Xie and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802396 CrossRef .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, Y. H. Lee, Y. B. Song, H. Kwak, S. Y. Lee and Y. S. Jung, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 718–727 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kasiri, R. Trócoli, A. Bani Hashemi and F. La Mantia, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Venkata Narayanan, B. V. Ashokraj and S. Sampath, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 505–512 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Hou, X. Q. Zhang, H. S. Ao, M. K. Liu, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 14, 100337 CrossRef .
Z. G. Hou, X. Q. Zhang, X. N. Li, Y. C. Zhu, J. W. Liang and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 730–738 RSC .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, W. Huo, Y. Wang, G. Yao, X. Gu, H. Cheng, L. Mai, C. Hu and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, G. Li, C. Li, H. Yang, G. Qin, X. Sun, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13790–13796 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, B. Kohn, U. Scheler, F. Wang, S. Oswald, M. Loffler, D. Tan, P. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905681 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, I. A. Rodriguez-Perez, H. Jiang, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, Q. B. Guo, W. F. Wang, S. M. Han, L. M. Wang and X. L. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902653 CrossRef .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136–7141 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. X. Lin, L. M. Suo, X. L. Fan, T. Gao, C. Y. Yang, F. D. Han, Y. Qi, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3666–3673 RSC .
R. Bouchal, Z. Li, C. Bongu, S. Le Vot, R. Berthelot, B. Rotenberg, F. Favier, S. A. Freunberger, M. Salanne and O. Fontaine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15913–15917 CAS .
S. G. Chen, R. Lan, J. Humphreys and S. W. Tao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 205–215 CrossRef .
F. Wan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Liu, C. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7062–7067 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, C. Ye, F. Xie, W. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Q. Gu, K. Davey, L. Gu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001894 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Yadav, D. Turney, J. C. Huang, X. Wei and S. Banerjee, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2144–2146 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Gu, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7823–7828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, B. Liu, J. Ding, X. R. Liu, Y. W. Zhong, Y. Li, C. B. Sun, X. P. Han, Y. D. Deng, N. Q. Zhao and W. B. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 440–449 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. McOwen, D. M. Seo, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, P. D. Boyle and W. A. Henderson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 416–426 RSC .
T. Deng, W. Zhang, H. B. Zhang and W. T. Zheng, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 605–612 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Xu, T. W. Bai, H. Chen, F. Guo, J. B. Xi, T. Q. Huang, S. Y. Cai, X. Y. Chu, J. Ling, W. W. Gao, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 38–45 CrossRef .
M. Chen, W. Zhou, A. Wang, A. Huang, J. Chen, J. Xu and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6828–6841 RSC .
C. Lu and X. Chen, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1907–1914 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, W. Shin, L. Ma, J. J. Hong, Z. X. Wei, Y. S. Liu, S. Y. Zhang, X. Y. Wu, Y. K. Xu, Q. B. Guo, M. A. Subramanian, W. F. Stickle, T. P. Wu, J. Lu and X. L. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2020, 2000968 CrossRef .
Q. Nian, J. Wang, S. Liu, T. Sun, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16994–16999 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, X. Dong, B. Wang, Z. Guo, Z. Wang, R. Wang, X. Qiu and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 14685–14691 CrossRef .
J. Nanda, G. Yang, T. Z. Hou, D. N. Voylov, X. Li, R. E. Ruther, M. Naguib, K. Persson, G. M. Veith and A. P. Sokolov, Joule, 2019, 3, 2001–2019 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, H. R. Li and Q. Zhang, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 128–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Peng, Z. W. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, G. Zhang, J. Xie, W. T. Xu, J. L. Shi, X. Chen, X. B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9551–9558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, J. Long, B. Li, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903605 CrossRef .
W. Shang, W. Yu, Y. Liu, R. Li, Y. Dai, C. Cheng, P. Tan and M. Ni, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 44–57 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Energies, 2010, 3, 135–154 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, H. R. Li, X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, R. Xu, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9422–9429 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Xie, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 146–159 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Zhao, J. W. Zhao, Z. L. Hu, J. D. Li, J. J. Li, Y. J. Zhang, C. Wang and G. L. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
B. Lee, H. R. Seo, H. R. Lee, C. S. Yoon, J. H. Kim, K. Y. Chung, B. W. Cho and S. H. Oh, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2948–2956 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, C. Xie, H. Zhang and X. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3996–4006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sagane, K. I. Ikeda, K. Okita, H. Sano, H. Sakaebe and Y. Iriyama, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Y. Luan, Y. G. Tang, X. B. Ji, S. Y. Wang and H. Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18444–18448 RSC .
Y. Yin, S. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Song, N. Chang, Y. Pan, H. Zhang and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906803 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Li, C. J. Xu, C. P. Han, Y. Y. Chen, C. G. Wei, B. H. Li and F. Y. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1439–A1444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 933–935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604685 CrossRef .
W. B. Liu, L. B. Dong, B. Z. Jiang, Y. F. Huang, X. L. Wang, C. J. Xu, Z. Kang, J. Mou and F. Y. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134565 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, W. Huang, Z. Luo, L. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Ma and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao1761 CrossRef .
V. Soundharrajan, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, S. Islam, J. Jo, S. Kim, V. Mathew, Y.-k. Sun and J. Kim, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 407–417 CrossRef .
Y. M. Zhang, H. N. Li, S. Z. Huang, S. Fan, L. N. Sun, B. B. Tian, F. M. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. M. Shi and H. Y. Yang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–16 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. C. Xue, L. Yang, J. Wang, F. Meng, Q. Li, H. Pan, J. N. Zhang, Z. Jiang, W. Yang, X. Yu, L. Gu and H. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001413 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Zhang, Y. Tang, G. Z. Fang, C. Y. Zhang, H. L. Zhang, X. Guo, X. X. Cao, J. Zhou, A. Q. Pan and S. Q. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002711 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, L. Liu, B. Liu, J. Meng and X. Yan, iScience, 2020, 23, 100995 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, H. N. Zhao, R. Q. Lian, Q. Fu, Y. J. Wei, A. Sarapulova, J. Q. Sun, C. Z. Wang, G. Chen and H. Ehrenberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9567–9578 RSC .
C. B. Deng, X. S. Xie, J. W. Han, Y. Tang, J. W. Gao, C. X. Liu, X. D. Shi, J. Zhou and S. Q. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000599 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Xie, S. Q. Liang, J. W. Gao, S. Guo, J. B. Guo, C. Wang, G. Y. Xu, X. W. Wu, G. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 503–510 RSC .
K. Liu, A. Pei, H. R. Lee, B. Kong, N. Liu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, P. C. Hsu, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4815–4820 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. He, H. Tong, X. Y. Song, X. P. Song and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7836–7846 RSC .
P. C. Liang, J. Yi, X. Y. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Cui, Y. Y. Liu, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia and J. J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908528 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, S. Guo, G. Fang, H. Sun, X. Cao, J. Zhou, A. Pan and S. Liang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 55, 549–556 CrossRef .
H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef .
G. Chang, S. J. Liu, Y. N. Fu, X. Hao, W. Jin, X. B. Ji and J. G. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Deng, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9377–9381 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Wang, Q. Ran, R. Q. Yao, H. Shi, Z. Wen, M. Zhao, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1634 CrossRef .
K. E. Sun, T. K. Hoang, T. N. Doan, Y. Yu, X. Zhu, Y. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9681–9687 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1656 CrossRef .
T. Otani, Y. Fukunaka and T. Homma, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 364–372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, J. Hu, J. Tang, W. Gu, L. He and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32031–32040 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 14–21 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, S. L. Di, F. B. Zhang, X. Bian, Y. Y. Wang, J. Z. Xu, L. B. Wang, F. Y. Cheng and N. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3252–3261 RSC .
Y. Jie, Y. Tan, L. Li, Y. Han, S. Xu, Z. Zhao, R. Cao, X. Ren, F. Huang, Z. Lei, G. Tao, G. Zhang and S. Jiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12689–12693 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Fan, X. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Shen, Y. He and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14935–14941 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, F. Wan, S. Bi, J. Zhu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4313–4317 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and L. A. Archer, Science, 2019, 366, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, R. Qin, X. Liu, P. Fang, D. Zheng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903675 CrossRef .
C. P. Li, X. D. Shi, S. Q. Liang, X. M. Ma, M. M. Han, X. W. Wu and J. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122248 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. H. Huang, Z. W. Guo, X. L. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289–1300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Niu, Z. H. Zhang and D. Aurbach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000697 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chae, J. W. Heo, S. C. Lim and S. T. Hong, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 3294–3301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, L. Luo, L. Zhong, J. Chen, B. Li, W. Wang, S. X. Mao, C. Wang, V. L. Sprenkle, G. Li and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13673–13677 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Hao, J. Long, B. Li, X. L. Li, S. L. Zhang, F. H. Yang, X. H. Zeng, Z. H. Yang, W. K. Pang and Z. P. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903605 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Liu, W. He, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 154–161 CrossRef .
S. Islam, M. H. Alfaruqi, J. Song, S. Kim, D. T. Pham, J. Jo, S. Kim, V. Mathew, J. P. Baboo, Z. Xiu and J. Kim, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 815–819 CrossRef .
B. Wu, G. Zhang, M. Yan, T. Xiong, P. He, L. He, X. Xu and L. Mai, Small, 2018, 14, 1703850 CrossRef .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, M. Yu, J. Yi, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700274 CrossRef .
S. Guo, S. Liang, B. Zhang, G. Fang, D. Ma and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13456–13464 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, J. Ming, Y. Lei, W. Zhang, C. Xia, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2776–2781 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, X. Tang, K. Liu, G. Fang, Z. He and Z. Li, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 100475 CrossRef .
X. T. Zhang, J. X. Li, H. S. Ao, D. Y. Liu, L. Shi, C. M. Wang, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 337–345 CrossRef .
J. N. Hao, X. L. Li, S. L. Zhang, F. H. Yang, X. H. Zeng, S. Zhang, G. Y. Bo, C. S. Wang and Z. P. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001263 CrossRef CAS .
V. Yufit, F. Tariq, D. S. Eastwood, M. Biton, B. Wu, P. D. Lee and N. P. Brandon, Joule, 2019, 3, 485–502 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, X. Lin, Z. Y. Huang, J. T. Meng, Y. Zhong, G. T. Ma, Y. Zhou, Y. Shen, H. Ding and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2000806 CrossRef .
Y. L. Jie, X. D. Ren, R. G. Cao, W. B. Cai and S. H. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910777 CrossRef CAS .
M. Motoyama, M. Ejiri and Y. Iriyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A7067–A7071 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Yu, Q. Meng, Y. Zhu, E. Hu, K. Sun, H. Yun, X. Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, H. Gan, Y. Mo, E. A. Stach, C. B. Murray and D. Su, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11441 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Boebinger, O. Yarema, M. Yarema, K. A. Unocic, R. R. Unocic, V. Wood and M. T. McDowell, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. Q. Liu, S. W. Wang, X. K. Cai, K. Qian, F. Y. Kang and B. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12993–12996 RSC .
X. Zeng, J. Liu, J. Mao, J. Hao, Z. Wang, S. Zhou, C. D. Ling and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904163 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Yang, X. F. Du, J. W. Zhao, Z. Chen, J. J. Li, J. Xie, Y. J. Zhang, Z. L. Cui, Q. Y. Kong, Z. M. Zhao, C. G. Wang, Q. C. Zhang and G. L. Cui, Joule, 2020, 4, 1557–1574 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hong, Z. Ahmad and V. Viswanathan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2466–2474 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Sun, T. Yang, L. Yu, N. Wei, Z. Tian, J. Cai, J. Lv, Y. Shao, M. H. Rummeli, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, L. Zou, L. Liu, M. H. Engelhard, R. L. Patel, Z. Nie, K. S. Han, Y. Shao, C. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Pan and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900567 CrossRef .
S.-D. Han, S. Kim, D. Li, V. Petkov, H. D. Yoo, P. J. Phillips, H. Wang, J. J. Kim, K. L. More, B. Key, R. F. Klie, J. Cabana, V. R. Stamenkovic, T. T. Fister, N. M. Markovic, A. K. Burrell, S. Tepavcevic and J. T. Vaughey, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4874–4884 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Zhou, C. Bai, X. Li, G. Fang and S. Liang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16, 100396 CrossRef .
P. Oberholzer, E. Tervoort, A. Bouzid, A. Pasquarello and D. Kundu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 674–682 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, N. Li, C. Long, B. Dong, D. Fang, Z. Liu, Y. Zhao, X. Li, J. Fan, S. Chen, S. Zhang and C. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, X. Shi, Z. Wu, S. Guo, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 294–301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. N. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Y. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu, A. Manthiram, Y. S. Meng, V. R. Subramanian, M. F. Toney, V. V. Viswanathan, M. S. Whittingham, J. Xiao, W. Xu, J. H. Yang, X. Q. Yang and J. G. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, B. Q. Li, H. J. Peng, H. Yuan, J. Y. Wei and J. Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12636–12652 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, E. Hu, K. J. Gaskell, X. Fan, T. Gao, C. Cui, S. Ghose, X. Q. Yang and C. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 14712–14720 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Chen, H. M. Zhang, H. J. Yang, J. Y. Lei, A. Naveed, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. L. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 307–315 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Luo and X. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2140–2195 RSC .
G. Z. Fang, S. Q. Hang, Z. X. Chen, P. X. Cui, X. S. Zheng, A. Q. Pan, B. G. Lu, X. H. Lu and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, F. Wan, S. Huang, S. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, B. Li and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Dong, D. Aurbach and Y. Yao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Rong, R. Malik, P. Canepa, G. S. Gautam, M. Liu, A. Jain, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6016–6021 CrossRef CAS .
P. Canepa, S. H. Bo, G. Sai Gautam, B. Key, W. D. Richards, T. Shi, Y. Tian, Y. Wang, J. Li and G. Ceder, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1759 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Tengsheng Zhang
	Tengsheng Zhang received his bachelor's degree (2018) in Materials Science and Engineering from CSU. He is now a master's student in the School of Materials Science and Engineering, CSU, under the supervision of Prof. Yan Tang. His research focuses on zinc-ion electrolytes and electrolyte/electrode interface.

Guozhao Fang
	Prof. Guozhao Fang received his PhD from CSU (P. R. China) in 2019. After graduation, he joined the CSU as a Professor in Prof. Shuquan Liang's group. His current interests include low-cost sodium-ion/zinc-ion electrolytes and electrolyte/electrode interface, structural regulation of electrode materials, etc.

Jiang Zhou
	Prof. Jiang Zhou received his bachelor's degree (2011) and PhD (2015) from CSU. During 2014–2015, he studied in Prof. Hua Zhang's group at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) as an exchange PhD student. After graduation, he carried out his Postdoctoral Research in Prof. Ju Li's group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) since 2016. He joined CSU as a Professor at the end of 2017. His research interests include lithium (sodium)-ion batteries, aqueous zinc-ion batteries, etc.

Shuquan Liang
	Prof. Shuquan Liang received his PhD from Central South University (CSU, P. R. China) in 2000. He has been the Dean of the School of Materials Science and Engineering in CSU from 2010 to 2018. He is the winner of the Monash University Engineering Sir John Medal. He has hosted 6 state research projects, including a national 973 subproject, a national 863 project, and a national natural science foundation of China project. Currently, his main research interests include micro-/nanostructured functional materials and nanocomposites and their applications in energy storage and conversion devices; high-performance, low-cost energy storage R&D of sodium-ion batteries, aqueous zinc-ion batteries; etc.

Broader context
Large-scale energy storage technologies have been deemed as reliable candidates to effectively store and transfer renewable energy. Due to low cost, high safety, and high volumetric energy density, zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) have attracted extensive attention in the field of electrochemical grid energy storage. Unfortunately, critical issues with regard to the electrolyte, anode, and cathode in ZIBs can greatly impede their large-scale deployment. In fact, the viability of practical ZIBs critically depends on the development of suitable electrolytes and their actual considerations, but work on comprehensive discussion and perspective in this aspect is still relatively lacking. This review provides a comprehensive and in-depth understanding and perspective on zinc-ion electrolytes, which is expected to guide the development of high-performance electrolytes and ZIBs in the future.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Development of zinc-ion electrolytes. (b) Evolution of publications based on the keywords “zinc-ion battery” and “zinc-ion battery + electrolyte” and a brief statistic about the review articles on ZIBs until August 5, 2020. Search from the Web of Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the main components related to electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Basic characteristic, composition, and structure of electrolytes.	 
σ = (σ0)exp(−Ea/KT)	(1)
σ = (σ0)exp[−B/(T − T0)]	(2)
σ = l/RA	(3)
σ = c(ν+λ0+ + ν−λ0−)	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Impedance spectra of (a) low-concentration and (b) high-concentration ZnSO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Ionic conductivities of 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolytes with different concentrations of the Mn(CF3SO3)2 additive and the corresponding initial CEs. (d) pH and ionic conductivity of 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 0.1 M Mn(CF3SO3)2, 3 M ZnSO4, and 3 M ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Viscosity and ionic conductivity of different concentrated aqueous Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Viscosity, ionic conductivity, and ion transference number at room temperature for the different concentrated electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the ZSC-gel electrolyte in a ZIB under an external electric field. (b) AC impedance spectra of the ZSC-gel and PAM-gel electrolytes in the frequency range of 10 kHz to 0.01 Hz. The inset shows the calculated ionic conductivity. (c) SEM image of the freeze-dried ZSC gel. (d) EIS plots of the polyzwitterion batteries based on ZSC-gel and PAM-gel electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Raman spectra of ZnCl2 solutions of different concentrations. (b) Zn2+-ion transference number for dilute (5 M) and concentrated (30 M) ZnCl2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic of the morphologies of Zn–metal anode with LE/PZHE during Zn plating and the corresponding ion transference numbers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic open-circuit energy diagram of (a) organic electrolyte and (b) aqueous electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of a Zn electrode in aqueous electrolytes containing (a) 1 M ZnCl2, (b) 1 M Zn(NO3)2, (c) 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, and (d) 1 M ZnSO4. Electrochemical stability for (e) 1 M ZnSO4 and 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and (f) 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Adsorption energy of O* and HO* on Ti or TiO2 and adsorption energy of H2O* and H* on Al or Al2O3 surfaces. (b) The potential of hydrogen evolution on Al, Pt, and fresh Ti and the thickness of Al2O3 coated on Al is 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, and 5 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CV curves of Zn electrodes in different electrolytes. (b) First charge/discharge curves of Zn/VOPO4 batteries based on different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) ESPW of ZnCl2 electrolytes for different concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Stability window test for acetate-based salt-concentrated electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the galvanostatic discharge process in 1 M ZnSO4 and 1 M MnSO4 electrolytes. (b) Working potential window of a novel electrolytic Zn–MnO2 battery. (c) Galvanostatic discharge curves in electrolytes with x M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Charge voltage determination of the DZMB. (e) Schematic of the DZMB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the strong hydrogen bonds among EG–waPUA, water, and PAM in the AF gel. (b) Density functional theory (DFT) analysis of water molecules, PAM, and EG–waPUA interacting with polymer chains via multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions in the AF gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Conformational analysis of a system with a molar fraction of 0.3 DMSO from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. (b) Rate performance at an ultralow temperature of −50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Temperature-dependent investigation of a Zn//PQ-MCT rechargeable battery. (c) Low-temperature performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. (d) High-temperature performance at a current density of 2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of the important elements of the EEI.	 

 	Fig. 16  Physical contact of (a) liquid electrolyte, (b) gel electrolyte, and (c) solid electrolyte with the electrode.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of some main issues that cause bad interfacial compatibility.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic for the problems encountered in the Zn deposition process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The energy barrier in the zinc nucleation process. (c) Typical voltage profile during zinc deposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic showing dendrite growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of unmodified and modified Zn anodes before and after 80 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic of the key processes involved in VO2(B)/Zn cell with the ZnSO4 electrolyte during the discharge and charge processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic for Zn deposition on bare Zn and coated Zn. (b) Cross-sectional Zn deposition morphology on bare Zn plate and coated Zn plate using an in situ optical microscope. (c) Long-term cycling of symmetrical Zn cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Differential charge density distribution of Zn@ZnO-3D. (e) Electric double-layer structure in the vicinity of the anode and the corresponding energy barriers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of Zn metal plating/stripping in 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and in ZES. (b) Predicted reduction potentials. (c) XPS spectra at various argon-sputtering depths on the SEI accumulated on the Zn substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) SEM images and (b) XRD patterns of zinc anodes cycled in ZnSO4 electrolyte with and without additives. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of zinc anodes cycled in ZnSO4 and ZnSO4/Na2SO4 electrolytes. (d) Schematic of the Na2SO4 additive suppressing the formation of Zn dendrites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Zn plating/stripping time and CE. (b) SEM image and XRD pattern of a Zn anode after 500 cycles in 1m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20m LiTFSI electrolyte. (c) Snapshot of the MD simulation and representative Zn2+ solvation structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Representative Zn2+ solvation structures in ILZE. (e) Representative cycling stability in ILZE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic showing the design principle of epitaxial metal electrodeposition. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Schematic showing Zn deposition on CC and CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Zn stripping process in eutectic Zn/Al alloys with a lamellar structure composed of alternative Zn and Al nano-lamellas. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 25  Contact angle measurements at the LFP EEI (a) with additive and (b) without additive. MD calculations conducted at the LFP (010)/electrolyte interface (c) with additive and (d) without additive to study Li-ion migration. (e) GITT measurements of Zn/LFP batteries with/without an additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of MNGs composite. (b) WCAs of MnO2 and MNGs cathodes before cycling. (c) WCAs of MnO2 and MNGs cathodes before cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) Schematic of the battery reaction mechanism of α-MnO2 and CMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Some important interface characterization techniques and analysis methods.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Zn electrodes and PVB@Zn electrodes in symmetric transparent cells along with the specified numbers of plating/stripping cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) In situ UV-vis spectra of Zn–C4Q batteries with and without a Nafion separator. (c) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of the C4Q cathode in one discharge/charge cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) In situ Raman spectra of the MnO2 electrode under DZMB working. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Operando study of growth, dissolution, and regrowth of zinc dendrites in a cell without a separator at a current density of 30 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2018, Elsevier Inc. (b) In situ SEM images at intervals of 5 min from 1 to 6 during Li electrodeposition with a Cu CC film (thickness: 30 nm). The current density is 100 μA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Atomic structures for the dissolution reaction on MnO2 with a bare surface and an acetate-rich surface. (b) Energy diagram of the dissolution reaction on MnO2 with a bare surface and an acetate-rich surface. (c) Differential charge density of an acetate ion adsorbed on MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) 3D snapshot obtained by MD simulations and representative Zn2+ solvation structure in the ZS electrolyte. (e) RDFs for Zn2+–N (SN) and Zn2+–O (water) from MD simulations of ZS. Schematic of Zn2+ solvation structure and corresponding interfacial reactions in (f) ZW and (g) ZS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Evolution of electrode morphology after Zn electrodeposition for 80, 130, 150, and 180 s and the corresponding Zn-ion concentration evolution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Current distribution and electric field distribution of the 3D scaffold structure and 2D planar structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  Practical issues and considerations of zinc-ion electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) GCD curves of δ-MnO2 in an aqueous electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V., and in an organic electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) GCD curves of V3O7·H2O in aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) GCD curves of ZnMn2O4 in an aqueous electrolyte, Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society, and in an ionic liquid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Zn–O Mayer bond order and binding energy in different Zn2+ cluster models and (e) the working mechanism of the interfacial reaction of the LiMn2O4 cathode in ZnSO4-based aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Comparison between lab coin cells and high-energy pouch cells. Cycling performance of Li‖NMC cells (b) with different electrolyte amounts and (c) with electrolyte replenished after the original lean electrolyte is consumed. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic of gel/quasi-solid electrolytes (a) without crosslink,11 (b) with physical crosslink, Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH, and (c) with chemical crosslink, Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Elastic stability of the AF gel at −20 °C. (e) Illustration of bending the AF battery at different angles and the corresponding GCD curves. (f) GCD cycling curves of the AF battery undergoing various heavy loads at −20 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Electrochemical stability and reversibility of a symmetrical Zn/Zn cell using 2 M ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte in the presence of O2 and in the absence of O2. The specific energy and energy efficiency of the symmetrical Zn/Zn cells (b) in the absence of O2 and (c) in the presence of O2. (d) XRD patterns of Zn after 120 h long-term galvanostatic cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Energy-level transition diagram of CaZn3.6VO and O2. (f) Galvanostatic discharging process of chemically self-charging ZIBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Contact angle measurements of pristine separator and Janus separator. (b) Ex situ XRD patterns of the Zn anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of Zn–MnO2 cells employing select separators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
