A perovskite based plug and play AC photovoltaic device with ionic liquid induced transient opto-electronic conversion   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01427E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01427E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9019-9028A perovskite based plug and play AC photovoltaic device with ionic liquid induced transient opto-electronic conversion†

        
          
            S. 
            Karak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Nanjo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Odaka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Yuyama
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Masuda
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            M. M. 
            Matsushita
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            K. 
            Awaga
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemistry and Research Centre for Material Sciences, Nagoya Univeristy, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602 Nagoya, Japan. E-mail: awaga@mbox.chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp
bNisshinbo Holdings Inc, 2-31-11, Ningyo-cho, Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8650, Japan
cCREST JST, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan
Received 
      17th February 2016
    , Accepted 12th April 2016First published on 13th April 2016AbstractThis study reports on the implementation of transient opto-electronic conversion for energy harvesting associated with induced electric double layers (EDLs) at perovskite/ionic liquid interfaces. High speed alternating current (AC) producing photovoltaic devices are successfully fabricated and demonstrated with a device architecture as indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/ionic liquid/aluminum (Al). 52% peak external quantum efficiency with a maximum responsivity of 228 mA W−1 has been observed with a relatively uniform response over the whole visible solar spectrum. Such a new class of devices can produce photocurrent under both light “ON” and “OFF” cycles in response to a pulsed signal. This unique feature makes them inherently capable of producing AC power when illuminated under modulated solar radiation. The large (∼90 dB) linear dynamic range (LDR) of the devices confirms their efficient power conversion capabilities even from very low intensity light sources. At 50 Hz modulation frequency, a photovoltaic device with ∼2% overall effective AC power conversion efficiency, which further increases and gets saturated around ∼3% beyond 160 Hz modulation frequency, is also successfully realized. The mechanism of the AC effect formation is explained based on the energy band diagram and an equivalent resistance (R)–capacitance (C) circuit of the devices.
1. Introduction
Various scientific research studies for low-cost photovoltaic and other low-power electronic devices have been fuelled by the desire for environmentally friendly and cost effective alternative energy sources to meet the ever-increasing energy demands of human civilization with continuous growth in population and industrialization. Over the past few decades, solution-processable organic and hybrid semiconductors have emerged as two very promising candidates for new generation photovoltaic technologies. Steady performance improvement of organic photovoltaic devices has already been achieved with the highest reported power conversion efficiency (PCE) exceeding 10%.1–3 Very recently, organometal trihalide perovskites (CH3NH3PbX3) have been emerging as a new class of hybrid optoelectronic materials showing rapid progress in the photovoltaic field with the highest certified efficiency reaching 20.1% in 2014.4–8 Excellent intrinsic optoelectronic properties such as high and balanced electron and hole mobilities, long carrier diffusion length (over 1 μm), non-excitonic nature, and large absorption coefficient make them ideal candidates for photodetectors and solar cell applications.9–19 Although the chemical flexibility and solution processability of these organic photovoltaic cells keep them at the centre of attraction, poor charge carrier mobility, strong exciton binding energy, device unstability, and poor performance reproducibility pose significant design restrictions on such devices, limiting their steady-state photoconduction performance.20–27 In spite of several breakthroughs, to follow the footsteps of silicon (Si) solar cells en route to commercialization, new generation photovoltaic devices require further optimization to ensure that the energy production cost ($ W−1) remains considerably low. In general, one of the reasons for such a gap between the promise and the actual performance is their installation complexity. Current generation solar cells used in photovoltaic (PV) panels inherently produce a direct current (DC) output which then needs to be further processed and inverted for most of the AC applications. Although mass production of PV panels using modern manufacturing facilities is feasible without any apparent issues, the power converters used in PV systems are still assembled with discrete electronic components associated with additional power losses and are hardly compatible with mass production. Therefore novel integration of solar cells that can feed the AC signal directly to the panel is likely to reduce the installation complexity leading to a major cost saving. Here we propose an AC photovoltaic device which could be used as a “plug and play” one unit system suitable for direct interconnection to the grid, based on the idea of ionic liquid induced transient optoelectronic conversion in a perovskite/ionic liquid heterojunction.
According to the Helmholtz model when inserted between a metal electrode and a semiconductor, unlike solid-state dielectrics in which thickness dependent linear potential drop occurs, an ionic liquid forms electric double layers (EDLs) at the solid/ionic liquid interfaces and the potential drop gets restricted within the outer Helmholtz plane (OHP) only, irrespective of the thickness of the electrolyte.28–30 Such ionic liquid induced EDLs at solid interfaces have been used in many applications in the fields of photochemistry, electrochemistry, energy storage, and electronics.31–37 Recently we proposed a new type of organic photocell, which produces a strong transient photocurrent response generated at organic semiconductor/ionic liquid interfaces, significantly overcoming the limitations of large exciton binding energy and poor charge carrier mobility.38–44Scheme 1 shows the structure and fundamental mechanism of the EDL photocells, which consist of a semiconductive charge separation layer (CSL) and an electrolyte polarization layer (PL). The CSL corresponds to a photodiode and the PL corresponds to a capacitor as shown in Scheme 1(a). These two layers face each other and are sandwiched by ITO and a metal electrode. An illumination induces charge separation in the CSL and then the generated carriers are accumulated in the PL. Namely, this cell is based on the idea of combining a displacement current, i.e. a time-varying change in the polarized electric field, and an ionic liquid as a large capacitor associated with EDLs and a synergetic effect that the polarization in the PL enhances the charge separation in the CSL. During the light-on period, the PL is charged up with increasing field intensity generating a positive transient photocurrent while in the light-off period, a negative transient photocurrent appears due to the discharging in it. Therefore, a modulated light signal produces an AC current as shown in Scheme 1(b). The entire flow chart of the anomalous transient photocurrent generation is summarized in Scheme 1(c).
 Scheme 1  Origin of the anomalous transient photocurrent generation: (a) device configuration with an equivalent circuit, (b) transient photo-current and photo-voltage, and (c) flowchart of the overall mechanism. 
Here we propose a photocell based on an ionic liquid gel and perovskite with a sandwiched device structure as indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(n-propyl)ammonium trifluoromethyltrifluoroborate (Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3)/aluminum (Al) as a high speed ‘plug and play’ AC photovoltaic device. Photovoltaic devices with a large linear dynamic range (LDR ∼ 90 dB), high responsivity (228 mA W−1), fast response time (67 μs), 52% peak external quantum efficiency and ∼2–3% overall AC power conversion efficiency were successfully realized. Devices fabricated with the ionic liquid gel (Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3) showed better stability than other devices containing pure ionic liquids as the gel becomes a solid once cooled down below 100 °C and showed less migration into the perovskite layer. Although the performance parameters of our photovoltaic devices are not comparable with those of the state of the art steady state perovskite solar cells yet, the results are still very promising as they can produce AC power directly and can be operated at higher frequencies as well. Ideally due to several inbuilt advantages like high power, easy and low cost installation, light-weight panels and improved stability, AC solar cells should be an attractive choice for next generation photovoltaic technology. Therefore the tunable polarity of the signal provides new opportunities for rational device optimization as a novel energy harvesting platform and needs to be studied in more detail.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 98.0%) and methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I, MAI, 98.0%) were purchased from TCI Co. Ltd while [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was obtained from American Dye Source and used as received. 2-Propanol (99.5%), 1,2-dichlorobenzene (DCB, 99.0%), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Different ionic liquids like BMIM–OTF (IL1) (BMIM: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium and OTF: trifluoromethanesulfonate), DEME–TFSI (IL2) (DEME: N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium and TFSI: bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide), and DEME–BF4 (IL3) (BF4: tetrafluoroborate) were purchased from Kanto Chemical Co while N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(n-propyl)ammonium trifluoromethyltrifluoroborate (Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3) ionic liquid gel was obtained from Nisshinbo chemical inc.
2.2 Device fabrication
Devices were fabricated in a sandwich-type geometry on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates (10 Ω □−1, Photo Precision Co. Ltd.). First, ITO substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with detergent, deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol in sequence with 10 minute steps and then exposed to UV/ozone treatment for 20 min to reform their surface energy. On top of them, a PEDOT:PSS layer was spin-coated at 3000 rpm for 120 s and dried at 150 °C for 30 min on a hot plate. The solution processed perovskite/PCBM active layer was fabricated by following the same procedure as discussed in our previous publication.19 The PbI2 and MAI solutions were prepared in DMF and 2-propanol with a concentration of 400 mg ml−1 and 40 mg ml−1, respectively. The PbI2 solution was heated at 100 °C for 10 min to make it completely dissolved before spin coating on PEDOT:PSS coated substrates around 70 °C at 6000 rpm for 35 s. Subsequently the films were dried at 70 °C on a hot plate for 30 min. Next, the MAI solution was spun on top of it at 6000 rpm for 35 s at room temperature. The composite films were again dried at 100 °C for 1 hour when a complete transformation of a dark brown ∼300 nm thick perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) layer was observed. The PCBM solution in DCB (20 mg ml−1) was spin-coated over the perovskite layer at 1000 rpm for 60 s. Empty cells were then prepared by depositing an Al electrode (width ∼2 mm, thickness ∼100 nm) on clean glass substrates by thermal evaporation under 1 × 10−4 Pa vacuum pressure and adjusting it inversely (Al facing inwards) on top of the active layer using a spacer in between. Next, the cells were filled with ionic liquids using the capillary forces by putting a droplet around the open edges. For Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3 ionic liquid crystals, they were heated to 105 °C to melt first and then cooled down to room temperature.
2.3 Device characterization
The time- and frequency-dependent transient photocurrent measurements were carried out using a 532 nm LED as the light source modulated by a Texio-FG-274 function generator. The devices were connected to a DLPCA-200 current amplifier to amplify and convert the signal into a voltage signal, which was then recorded by a Tektronix TBS 1052B digital oscilloscope. For the AC photovoltaic devices, the transient photocurrent and photovoltage were measured across a variable external load resistance (Fig. S2†) under AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 simulated solar radiation using an Asahi spectra-Hal-320 solar simulator modulated by a mechanical light chopper (5584A Light chopper, NF Electronic Instrument) at various frequencies ranging from 10 Hz to 400 Hz. Signals were recorded using the same Tektronix TBS 1052B digital oscilloscope. The light power density was calibrated using an Asahi spectra CS-20 power meter. The wavelength-dependent transient photocurrent measurements (EQE and responsivity) for the devices were performed using an AT-100 HG, Shimadzu halogen lamp as the light source attached with a Shimadzu SPG 120 IR-VIS-NIR monochromator and a light chopper (5584A Light chopper, NF Electronic Instrument). The light power density was calibrated using an optical power meter (Adcmt 8230E) over the visible range (400–800 nm) and the responsivity was calculated from the peak values of the photocurrent response. The absorption spectrum of the perovskite/PCBM heterojunction was measured with a Shimadzu UV-3100PC spectrophotometer. The rest potentials of the ionic liquids were measured using a Hokuto Denko HZ-5000 electrochemical analyzer with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and untreated ITO as the working electrode.
3. Results
3.1 Transient photoresponse and device speed under modulated light
The schematics of the device architecture, band energy diagram and the chemical structures of the used molecules (PCBM, perovskite, and Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3) are shown in Fig. 1. The constructed photocell has a sandwiched type device structure like ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3(IL)/Al with perovskite/PCBM as the active CSL. To investigate their transient properties, the devices were illuminated through the bottom ITO electrode using a 532 nm LED modulated at different frequencies. The light spot was carefully focused on the active layer within the superimposed area between the counter cross electrodes (ITO and Al) only.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the device configuration. (b) Schematic illustration of the energy level diagram and charge transport of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/PCBM/IL/Al photo-cell. The chemical structure of (c) PCBM, (d) N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(n-propyl)ammonium trifluoromethyltrifluoroborate (Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3) and (e) perovskite. 
Corresponding photoresponses were measured with a current amplifier and an oscilloscope under zero bias conditions as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2(a) shows the photoresponse of the devices to the modulated square-wave light pulses (λ = 530 nm and f = 10 Hz) with light ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ photocycles while the red curve (Fig. 2(a)) shows the time trajectory of the input reference signal (10 Hz). Clearly distinguishable transient photocurrent peaks with opposite polarities were observed. When the light is turned ‘ON’, the photocurrent increases quickly and after reaching a maximum it starts to decrease exponentially. Subsequently when the light is turned ‘OFF’, the photocurrent changes its polarity keeping the basic features the same. Therefore the devices can successfully generate photocurrent under both light ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ cycles indicating effective production of displacement current too.38–44 Frequency dependencies of the device photoresponse, tested between 10 Hz and 100 kHz, are shown in Fig. 2(b). At low frequency (∼10 Hz), the photocurrent signal shows well-balanced consecutive positive and negative transient peaks upon light on and off, respectively. Importantly in every photocycle, the peaks decayed to complete zero, suggesting that all the accumulated charge recombines and a steady state has been reached. With increasing frequency (∼100 Hz) the waveform shape changed as the transient peak did not get enough time to decay completely. Therefore with further increase in frequency (∼1 kHz), a pseudo square-wave type photoresponse was observed. However, a maximum responsive frequency of about ∼100 kHz was achieved.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photoresponse of the devices to the square-wave light pulses (λ = 530 nm and f = 10 Hz) with light “ON” and “OFF” photocycles. (b) Qualitative frequency dependence of the photoresponse of the devices tested between 10 Hz and 100 kHz. (c) Transient photoresponse of the perovskite photocells (λ = 530 nm and f = 1 kHz) under zero bias voltage with a rise time (τr) of ∼67 μs and a decay time (τd1) of ∼50 μs and a (τd2) of ∼109 μs. 
The mechanism behind such transient photocurrent can be explained using an equivalent resistance (R)–capacitance (C) circuit under an AC electric field as explained in Fig. S1.† For the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3(IL)/Al photocell, the polarized ionic liquid layer can be considered as the series combination of two capacitors (CEDL1, CEDL2) and one resistor (RBULK) since EDL forms at both the PCBM/ionic liquid and Al/ionic liquid interfaces. During the light ‘ON’ period, the active layer produces photogenerated charge carriers. After separation at the perovskite/PCBM heterojunction, holes travel through the perovskite layer and eventually get collected at the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode, while electrons move through PCBM and accumulate at the PCBM/ionic liquid interface. This would induce an EDL (CEDL1) at this interface and due to the high ionic conductivity, a second EDL (CEDL2) will also be formed at the ionic liquid/Al interface. However, two capacitors and a resistor in series (CEDL1–RBULK–CEDL2) can be considered as a single equivalent capacitor. Now with a modulated periodical light signal an alternating electric field will be created in the polarized ionic liquid layer. The field intensity increases during the light-on period, charging the equivalent capacitor and resulting in a positive photocurrent while in the following light-off period, a negative transient photocurrent appears due to the discharging of the capacitor, decreasing the electric field intensity. Such transient optoelectronic conversion is therefore quite different from steady state current where actual charge carriers move under an electric field; rather it is more like displacement current originating from the time-varying electric field induced by the polarization of the ionic liquid under pulsed light. As the capacitive reactance, which is inversely proportional to the capacitance of the corresponding layer, should play a great role in such unconventional photocurrent generation, ionic liquids are ideal candidates. Because of their high capacitance associated with electric double layer (EDL) formation and large ionic conductivities, increased alternating photocurrent and faster device operational speed can be achieved.45–48 To better understand the operation speed of our devices, the temporal response of their photocurrent was further analyzed at 1 kHz modulation frequency as shown in Fig. 2(c). It should be noted that the signal shown in Fig. 2(c) is normalized between 0 and 1 while the responses shown in Fig. 2(b) were normalized between −0.5 and +0.5 and as a consequence although the device generates positive and negative photocurrents at all the frequencies (as evident in Fig. 2(b)), in Fig. 2(c) the negative photocurrent peak seems to disappear. However, it has been done intentionally as the purpose of Fig. 2(b) is to show the waveform shape changes with operational frequency, while Fig. 2(c) estimates the device speed. A short rise time (from 10% to 90% of its peak value) of about 67 μs was estimated and biexponential photocurrent decay with time constants of 50 μs and 109 μs was observed as well. Both the rise and decay time should be limited by the charging–discharging process of the ionic liquid layer. The photocurrent multi-exponential decay indicates the coexistence of two different discharge paths, probably related to the charge trapping at the solid/ionic liquid interfaces.
3.2 AC photovoltaic properties and spectral response
It is evident from the above results that the devices are capable of producing an alternating photocurrent under pulsed light which opens up new opportunities to utilize them for energy harvesting technologies such as solar cells. The AC photovoltaic properties of the devices were measured across an external load resistance under simulated solar radiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) modulated at 50 Hz frequency using a mechanical light chopper. The corresponding circuit is shown in Fig. S2.† The photocurrent was measured through the load resistance while the photovoltage was measured across it using an oscilloscope without applying any bias voltage. The transient photoresponse, consistent with previous signal features but with a higher amplitude, was observed as shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). Both charging and discharging peaks are clearly observable although their transient shape is slightly asymmetric. The devices showed a higher photocurrent under the light ‘ON’ cycle compared to that of the light ‘OFF’ period. This is mainly because of the change in the bulk resistance of the active layer (perovskite/PCBM) under light and dark conditions. During the light ‘OFF’ period, the bulk resistance of the active layer should be a few orders of magnitude higher than the resistance they have under light. This would affect the overall RC impedance of the circuit and consequently alters the photocurrent amplitude. Interestingly, with increasing external load resistance the photocurrent was found to decrease, while the photovoltage shows a reverse trend. This is a common phenomenon for any solar device under illumination as the separation of photo-generated charges (electrons and holes) in space results in the flattening of the internal energy band structure with the formation of a photovoltage. To quantify the performance parameters of solar cells, the current vs. voltage plot was extrapolated from their temporal photoresponses as shown in Fig. 3(c). By the definition of the AC signal, the total current is considered as the peak to peak values while the voltage as the half of it. The devices showed an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.53 V, a short circuit current (JSC) of 4.44 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 41.64%: and an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) (η) of 0.98% at 50 Hz (domestic use) frequency. Considering the fact that only half of the total photons are consumed during a complete light ‘ON–OFF’ cycle, as there are no photons available during the light ‘OFF’ period, the light intensity becomes half i.e. ∼50 mW cm−2 as verified by the Asahi spectra CS-20 power meter and the effective efficiency of the devices can be estimated as the double of the measured value, i.e. nearly ∼2%. Despite the fact that our results are not comparable with those of the state of the art perovskite solar cells yet (η ∼ 15–20%), they are still of great significance as they can produce AC power directly. Novel integration of such ‘plug and play’ type AC solar cells to the panel is likely to cause a major cost saving due to their installation simplicity.
 Fig. 3  (a) and (b) Transient photo-current and photo-voltage responses of the AC solar cell under AM 1.5 simulated (100 mW cm−2) solar radiation at a chopping frequency of 50 Hz. (c) Current vs. voltage characteristics of the corresponding devices. (d) EQE and responsivity spectra of the corresponding devices. 
To understand the spectral response of the devices, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and wavelength dependence of responsivity were also investigated. Fig. 3(d) (black sphere) shows the corresponding photocurrent action spectrum. It closely follows the absorption profile of the perovskite/PCBM heterojunction as shown in Fig. S3† with a maximum external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼52% at 490 nm. The EQE was measured using the relationship: (1)where P0 is the incident light intensity of the source (mW cm−2), JSC is the short-circuit current density (mA cm−2) calculated from the peak values of the transient photocurrent during the light-on period, and λ is the wavelength (nm) of incident radiation. High EQE values were observed almost uniformly between 400 and 800 nm, suggesting efficient photon to free charge conversion throughout the visible region of the solar spectrum. Fig. 3(d) (gray sphere) shows their corresponding responsivity (Ri) curve, calculated using the following formula: (2)where Iph is the photocurrent, Popt is the incident light power, h is the Planck constant, c is the velocity of light, λ is the incident light wavelength, and q represents the elementary charge. Again a nearly uniform response was observed over the broad wavelength region (400–800 nm) with responsivity reaching the maximum (228 mA W−1) at 640 nm without any applied bias. Such a high responsivity at zero bias is even comparable with that of commercially available Si photo-diodes.
3.3 Light intensity and frequency dependence of device performances
Another important figure of merit for such transient type photovoltaic devices should be their linear dynamic range (LDR), i.e. the range of photon intensities when the photocurrent response remains linear. In practical application, a constant response from strong light to very weak light is desired as the device can then be applied for power generation from a weak signal too. However, every photocell has a finite LDR limited by the optical properties of their active material. Fig. 4(a) shows the photocurrent vs. light intensity or photon flux density for our devices. Under modulated pulsed light, the devices showed a linear photocurrent response between an incident photon flux density range from ∼1016 to ∼107 numbers per s per cm2 or power density range from ∼10−13 to 10−4 W cm−2 with a large LDR nearly 90 dB. The total photocurrent is considered as the peak to peak values of one cycle. These results are very promising as they are comparable with those of commercial silicon (Si) photodetectors (120 dB) and even higher than those of indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) photodetectors (66 dB). Fig. 4(b) shows that the normalized photoresponse vs. pulse frequency varied between 10 Hz and 300 kHz for the devices. Under zero bias conditions, the experimentally determined −3 dB cutoff frequency was found to be around 65 kHz for the present photocell. The device speed is mostly limited by the charging and discharging period of the EDLs, i.e. the RC time constant of the devices and lower charge carrier mobility (∼10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) of the PCBM layer. However, it is still much faster than the desired real time daily life usage. To further verify the limit of the devices, they were tested under simulated solar radiation with varying chopping frequencies from 10 Hz to 400 Hz as shown in Fig. 4(c). Interestingly, the devices showed a constant increase in the AC power conversion efficiency with increasing modulation frequency and reaches ∼2% at 50 Hz, while it became saturated around ∼3% beyond 160 Hz. This confirms the practical feasibility of our devices both for domestic (50–60 Hz) and military (400 Hz) purposes. It is interesting to note that similar frequency dependence studies have been carried out by Yang and Co. for regular perovskite/PCBM photodiodes and a comparable LDR over 100 dB and a fast photoresponse (600 ns) with a −3 dB bandwidth up to 3 MHz was found too.15 Therefore, although a direct comparison of efficiency between this new class of AC devices with the state-of-the-art DC perovskite solar cell should not be fair, still it is very promising that parameters related to the frequency dependency of the devices like LDR, device speed and −3 dB cutoff range which are mostly controlled by the intrinsic properties of the perovskite layer itself are fairly comparable.
 Fig. 4  (a) Linear dynamic range of the photocells: the devices showed a large LDR of ∼90 dB. (b) Frequency response of the devices. (c) Device efficiency (AC) with chopping frequency. 
3.4 Mechanism of the effect formation and different controlling factors
To understand the mechanism and different controlling factors of the AC photovoltaic effect in more detail, we systematically investigated single layer (excluding PCBM) device performances with different electrode materials having different work functions such as gold (Au), copper (Cu) and aluminum (Al) keeping the ionic liquid common and also with different ionic liquids with different electrochemical potentials keeping the electrode material fixed. The representative current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of such devices are shown in Fig. 5. Schematic illustrations of the device configuration and the energy level diagram of ITO (UV-ozone treated)/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/IL (BMIM–OTF)/Al, Cu, and Au photo-cells are shown in Fig. S4.† The corresponding transient photo-current and photo-voltage responses are shown in Fig. S5.† Clearly the largest photocurrent and photovoltage were observed with Al as the top electrode, while a gradual decrease in the signal was observed with Cu and Au electrodes, respectively. However, the transient feature of the devices remains consistent with previous results showing clear charging and discharging peaks. Device performances with different electrode materials and different ionic liquids are summarized in Table S1.† Photovoltaic devices with Al as the cathode gave an open-circuit voltage VOC = 0.42 V, with a short-circuit current density JSC = 3.58 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 39.23%; the overall PCE was η = 0.59%. Device performances slightly degraded with VOC = 0.31 V, JSC = 2.45 mA cm−2, FF = 32.91% and an overall PCE of η = 0.25% and VOC = 0.11 V, JSC = 0.97 mA cm−2, FF = 20.61% and an overall PCE of η = 0.02% with Cu and Au as the cathode, respectively. Such performance variation can be correlated with the internal built-in potential of the devices caused by the work function difference of the electrodes and internal band structure.11,49 Since the anode (ITO) is common for all the devices, a higher built-in potential is expected for the Al cathode as it has a lower work function (4.3 eV) than that of Cu (4.6 eV) or Au (5.1 eV), which results in efficient charge extraction and a higher photovoltage. On the other hand, VOC and JSC were found to be strongly dependent on the choice of the ionic liquid as well. Schematic illustrations of the energy level diagram of the ITO (UV-ozone treated)/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/IL (1,2,3)/ITO (untreated) photo-cell, changes in effective electrode potential of ITO with different ionic liquids and their molecular structures are shown in Fig. S6.†
 Fig. 5  Current vs. voltage characteristics of the AC solar cell (a) with different electrodes and (b) with different ionic liquids, where IL1 is BMIM–OTF (BMIM: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium and OTF: trifluoromethanesulfonate), IL2 is DEME–TFSI (DEME: N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium and TFSI: bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide), and IL3 is DEME–BF4 (BF4: tetrafluoroborate). 
To understand the various effects of ionic liquids on device performances we determined their rest potentials (EWR) (Fig. S6(b)†) by measuring the relative potential difference between a working and a reference electrode immersed in different ionic liquids,50–52 expressed as EWR = EW − ER(3)where EW and ER are the potentials of the working and reference electrodes, respectively. Now EW can be expressed aseEW = ΦW + δIL–W δIL–W = e(ΨW + ΨIL)(4)where ΦW corresponds to the work function of the working electrode and δIL–W is the potential difference between the working electrode (ΨW) and ionic liquid (ΨIL) at their interface which reflects the electrochemical potentials of the solution. In our case, Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode while untreated ITO glass was used as the working electrode as ITO showed good stability in ionic liquids. Since ER and ΦW are constant, EWR can be considered as directly proportional to δIL–W. Therefore it indicates the overall electrochemical potential of the ionic liquid, considering the combined effect of the difference in the contact potential between the working electrode and ionic liquid and the polarization effect. For ITO/BMIM–OTF (IL1) (BMIM: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium and OTF: trifluoromethanesulfonate), ITO/DEME–TFSI (IL2) (DEME: N,N-diethyl-N-methyl(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium, TFSI: bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide), and ITO/DEME-BF4 (IL3) (BF4: tetrafluoroborate) interfaces these values were found to be 0.11 V, 0.29 V and 0.42 V, respectively. The corresponding device photoresponses are shown in Fig. S7.† The devices with IL1 (BMIM–OTF) gave an open-circuit voltage VOC = 0.34 V, with a short-circuit current density JSC = 2.49 mA cm−2 and a fill factor (FF) of 41.34%; the overall PCE was η = 0.35%. Device performances degraded for the devices with IL2 (DEME–TFSI) and IL3 (DEME–BF4) with VOC = 0.27 V, JSC = 2.18 mA cm−2, FF = 33.97% and an overall PCE of η = 0.20% and VOC = 0.17 V, JSC = 1.86 mA cm−2, FF = 22.13% and an overall PCE of η = 0.07%, respectively. These results indicate that the electronic structure of the interface between the ionic liquid and electrode contact, i.e. the EDL significantly controls the overall photovoltaic effect of the devices too. The mechanism of the effect formation can be explained based on the band energy diagram of the ITO (UV-ozone treated)/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/ionic liquid/ITO (untreated) heterostructure as shown in Scheme 2. When a metal makes contact with a semiconductor, due to the thermodynamic equilibrium they share a common Fermi level which leads to charge redistribution between the semiconductor, surface/interface states and the metal and consequently band bending occurs in the semiconductor. It is well known that the work function of the ITO(UV-ozone treated)/PEDOT:PSS electrode is about 5.2 eV while the work function of the untreated ITO is about 4.5 eV as shown in Scheme 2(a). Thus when the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/ITO heterojunction is formed, the thermodynamic equilibrium requires that the Fermi levels of all the materials align. A potential drop (δAC ∼ 0.7 eV) equal to the difference in the Fermi levels of the two electrodes should be redistributed over the bulk of the perovskite layers. Assuming that there are no other losses, this should be nearly equal to the built-in potential of the devices as shown in Scheme 2(b). However, when the ionic liquid is inserted between the perovskite (semiconductor) and ITO (metal) electrode there should be an additional drop across the EDLs. Thus the effective electrode work function will become higher by the amount of electrochemical potentials (δIL–C) which corresponds to the rest potential (EWR) of the ionic liquids (Scheme 2(c)). Again this will also decrease the total built-in potential (δAC − δIL–C) of the devices by the same amount (Scheme 2(d)). So it is confirmed that BMIM–OTF (IL1) performed better than DEME–TFSI (IL2) or DEME–BF4 (IL3) as it has lower EWR compared to the others, and thus has a minimum effect on the built-in potential. Approximately the AC open circuit voltage of our devices was found to be quantitatively proportional to the difference between the work function of the cathode and anode (ΦC and ΦA) and the electrochemical potentials (δIL–C) of the ionic liquid used. Thus it is clearly evident that the device performance strongly depends on the internal built-in potential which can be tuned by the appropriate choice of the electrode and ionic liquids.
 Scheme 2  Schematic band diagram of the devices showing the effect of the ionic liquid on the built-in potential. VOC was found to be strongly dependent on the internal built-in potential. 
3.5 Power generation from room light
Such plug and play type AC solar devices can be particularly very useful for indoor applications as most of the modern day indoor lighting like fluorescent lamps (FL) or energy saver compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) are self-modulated. It is well-known that a fluorescent lamp shows luminous modulation due to the fact that inbuilt conventional core–coil magnetic ballasts result in flicker at twice the frequency of the electrical supply (50/60 Hz, resulting in flicker at 100/120 Hz) while the energy-efficient electronic ballasts used in CFL operate at substantially higher frequencies (20–60 kHz). Hence our devices should produce AC power under such self-modulated light sources without any external stimuli. Devices tested under a single CFL source (energy efficient) without any external modulation showed promising results as shown in Fig. 6. In spite of the low intensity and spectral mismatch with solar spectra, successful production of an AC photo-current of the order of ∼50 μA cm−2 and an AC photo-voltage of the order of ∼0.2 V was observed. Such unorthodox generation of AC power from common indoor light sources might open up a new horizon for energy harvesting.
 Fig. 6  AC photo-current and photo-voltage generation under energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) for indoor applications. 
4. Conclusions
To summarise, in this study we demonstrated an ‘AC’ photovoltaic effect in ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/ionic liquid/Al devices based on the transient optoelectronic conversion caused by the ionic liquid induced electric double layers. The origin of the effect formation was explained using an equivalent R–C circuit and energy band diagrams. The tunable polarity of the signal had provided a unique energy harvesting platform. A strong displacement current associated with high density charge accumulation at the ionic liquid/solid interfaces under pulsed light enabled us to introduce the one unit ‘plug and play’ type AC photovoltaic devices. A large LDR of 90 dB, a fast response time of 67 μs and a very high responsivity of 228 mA W−1 were observed at zero bias, making them ideal candidates for battery-less or very low power applications. A peak external quantum efficiency of about 52% and ∼2–3% overall effective AC power conversion efficiency in between 10 and 400 Hz modulation frequency were also successfully realized.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT). Funds were also provided by the JSPS Core-to-Core Program, A. Advanced Research Networks.
Notes and references
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. C. Chen, Z. Hong, J. Gao, Y. Yang, H. Zhou, L. Dou, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3356,  DOI:10.1038/srep03356 .
Y. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Li, C. Mu, W. Ma, H. Hu, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade and H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5293,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms6293 .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg, accessed:  November 2015.
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kwon, E. Hwang, C. H. Ra, W. J. Yoo, J. H. Ahn, J. H. Park and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms6404 .
M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. V. Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kirchartz, K. Taretto and U. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17958 CAS .
B. Yang, J. Cox, Y. Yuan, F. Guo and J. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 133302 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, J. Kirkpatrick, U. Rau and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115209 CrossRef .
H. Aarnio, P. Sehati, S. Braun, M. Nyman, M. P. de Jong, M. Fahlman and R. Osterbacka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 792 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganas and J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gelinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karak, F. Liu, T. P. Russell and V. V. Duzhko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20904 CAS .
S. Karak, Z. A. Page, J. S. Tinkham, P. M. Lahti, T. Emrick and V. V. Duzhko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 103303 CrossRef .
H. von Helmholtz, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1879, 7, 337 CrossRef .
H. Wang and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16711 CAS .
H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, M. Kawasaki and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1046 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cho, J. Lee, Y. Xia, B. Kim, Y. He, M. J. Renn, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Dhoot, C. Israel, X. Moya, N. D. Mathur and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 136402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Ye, S. Inoue, K. Kobayashi, Y. Kasahara, H. T. Yuan, H. Shimotani and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Kim, K. Hong, W. Xie, K. H. Lee, S. Zhang, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fujimotoa and K. Awaga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8983 RSC .
G. A. Elia, J. Hassoun, W. J. Kwak, Y. K. Sun, B. Scrosati, F. Mueller, D. Bresser, S. Passerini, P. Oberhumer, N. Tsiouvaras and J. Reiter, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thiemann, S. Sachnov, S. Porscha, P. Wasserscheid and J. Zaumseil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13536 CAS .
L. Hu, Y. Noda, H. Ito, H. Kishida, A. Nakamura and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243303 CrossRef .
L. Hua, A. Iwasakia, R. Suizua, H. Yoshikawaa, K. Awagaa and H. Ito, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 484, 177 CrossRef .
B. Li, Y. Noda, L. Hu, H. Yoshikawa, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 163304 CrossRef .
B. Li, S. Dalgleish, Y. Miyoshi, H. Yoshikawa, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 173302 CrossRef .
S. Dalgleish, M. M. Matsushita, L. Hu, B. Li, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dalgleish, L. Reissig, L. Hu, M. M. Matsushita, Y. Sudo and K. Awaga, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Reissig, S. Dalgleish and K. Awaga, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 015306 CrossRef .
B. Skinner, T. Chen, M. S. Loth and B. I. Shklovskii, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2011, 83, 056102 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Fedorov and A. A. Kornyshev, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 11868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Misra, M. McCarthy and A. F. Hebard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 052905 CrossRef .
S. Karak, J. A. Lim, S. Ferdous, V. V. Duzhko and A. L. Briseno, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1039 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 1659 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujimoto, M. M. Matsushita and K. Awaga, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5552 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The device structure, measurement circuit, absorption properties of materials, and device performance with different ionic liquids and electrode materials. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta01427eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Origin of the anomalous transient photocurrent generation: (a) device configuration with an equivalent circuit, (b) transient photo-current and photo-voltage, and (c) flowchart of the overall mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the device configuration. (b) Schematic illustration of the energy level diagram and charge transport of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3)/PCBM/IL/Al photo-cell. The chemical structure of (c) PCBM, (d) N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(n-propyl)ammonium trifluoromethyltrifluoroborate (Et2PrNMe–CF3BF3) and (e) perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photoresponse of the devices to the square-wave light pulses (λ = 530 nm and f = 10 Hz) with light “ON” and “OFF” photocycles. (b) Qualitative frequency dependence of the photoresponse of the devices tested between 10 Hz and 100 kHz. (c) Transient photoresponse of the perovskite photocells (λ = 530 nm and f = 1 kHz) under zero bias voltage with a rise time (τr) of ∼67 μs and a decay time (τd1) of ∼50 μs and a (τd2) of ∼109 μs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) and (b) Transient photo-current and photo-voltage responses of the AC solar cell under AM 1.5 simulated (100 mW cm−2) solar radiation at a chopping frequency of 50 Hz. (c) Current vs. voltage characteristics of the corresponding devices. (d) EQE and responsivity spectra of the corresponding devices.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Linear dynamic range of the photocells: the devices showed a large LDR of ∼90 dB. (b) Frequency response of the devices. (c) Device efficiency (AC) with chopping frequency.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current vs. voltage characteristics of the AC solar cell (a) with different electrodes and (b) with different ionic liquids, where IL1 is BMIM–OTF (BMIM: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium and OTF: trifluoromethanesulfonate), IL2 is DEME–TFSI (DEME: N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium and TFSI: bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide), and IL3 is DEME–BF4 (BF4: tetrafluoroborate).	 
EWR = EW − ER	(3)
eEW = ΦW + δIL–W
δIL–W = e(ΨW + ΨIL)	(4)

 	Scheme 2  Schematic band diagram of the devices showing the effect of the ionic liquid on the built-in potential. VOC was found to be strongly dependent on the internal built-in potential.	 

 	Fig. 6  AC photo-current and photo-voltage generation under energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) for indoor applications.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The device structure, measurement circuit, absorption properties of materials, and device performance with different ionic liquids and electrode materials. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta01427e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
