Structure modulation of two-dimensional transition metal chalcogenides: recent advances in methodology, mechanism and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS01016F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS01016F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 1215-1272Structure modulation of two-dimensional transition metal chalcogenides: recent advances in methodology, mechanism and applications

        
          
            Yao 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chengyi 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Miao-Miao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shengfu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Fu
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Xiuhua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aCollaborative Innovation Centre for Advanced Organic Chemical Materials Co-Constructed by the Province and Ministry, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Synthesis and Application of Organic Functional Molecules, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, P. R. China. E-mail: zhangxh@hubu.edu.cn; chen_mm@hubu.edu.cn
bThe Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS), Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: leifu@whu.edu.cn
cCollege of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, P. R. China. E-mail: leifu@whu.edu.cn
Received 
      30th September 2022
    First published on 5th January 2023AbstractTogether with the development of two-dimensional (2D) materials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have become one of the most popular series of model materials for fundamental sciences and practical applications. Due to the ever-growing requirements of customization and multi-function, dozens of modulated structures have been introduced in TMDs. In this review, we present a systematic and comprehensive overview of the structure modulation of TMDs, including point, linear and out-of-plane structures, following and updating the conventional classification for silicon and related bulk semiconductors. In particular, we focus on the structural characteristics of modulated TMD structures and analyse the corresponding root causes. We also summarize the recent progress in modulating methods, mechanisms, properties and applications based on modulated TMD structures. Finally, we demonstrate challenges and prospects in the structure modulation of TMDs and forecast potential directions about what and how breakthroughs can be achieved.
Yao Xiao
Yao Xiao is a Postdoctoral Researcher in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Hubei University. He received his PhD from the Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS) of Wuhan University in 2021. During that period, he devoted himself to the structural modulation and theoretical mechanism of 2D TMDs and vertical heterostructures. His current research interests include the synthesis, structure modulation and applications of 2D materials.
Chengyi Xiong
Chengyi Xiong received his BS Degree from Hubei University in 2013. Subsequently, he obtained his PhD from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Southwest University in 2018. Currently, he works as an Assistant Professor at Hubei University. His current research is focused on the synthesis and functionalization of novel luminescent materials, and electrochemiluminescence biosensing and bioimaging.
Miao-Miao Chen
Miao-Miao Chen is an Associate Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. She received her PhD from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences of Wuhan University in 2019. Her current research program aims to design, synthesize, and obtain materials with multifunctional properties for potential applicability as portable electrochemiluminescence sensors.
Shengfu Wang
Shengfu Wang is a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. He obtained his MS Degree and PhD from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences of Wuhan University. His recent research interest mainly focuses on the application of functional nanomaterials in electrochemistry and analytical chemistry.
Lei Fu
Lei Fu received his BS Degree in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2001. He obtained his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. After obtaining his PhD, he worked as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM (2006–2007). Thereafter, he became an Associate Professor at Peking University. In 2012, he joined Wuhan University as a Full Professor. His current research interests are related to the controlled growth and novel property exploration of 2D atomic layer thin crystals.
Xiuhua Zhang
Xiuhua Zhang is a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. He received his PhD in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hubei University in 2008. Currently, his main interest is developing photoelectric functional materials and their application in electrochemical biosensors.
1 Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials, which are defined as layered materials with strong intralayer bonding and relatively weak interlayer interactions, have become a series of popular materials in recent years. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are regarded as comparable candidates with graphene for a diversity of applications by virtue of their various and programmable structures. TMDs vary in the composed chalcogen and transition metal atoms, where over 50 types of TMDs exist, covering semiconductors, semimetals and metallic materials.1–3 Therefore, TMDs possess diverse atomic arrangements and thereby exhibit various band structures and properties. Researchers have spent several years improving the quality and size of TMD single crystals and films with excellent thickness controllability.4 Consequently, they have successfully achieved the wafer-scale synthesis of monolayer and bilayer TMDs,5–9 which indeed promoted the development of large-scale integrated circuits and further devices. However, the improvement in their quality is not sufficient to enhance their structure diversity and further property modulation. Compared to their building blocks, intrinsic TMDs present excellent crystallinity and controllable thickness, but this only indicates high-performance units rather than an entire architecture. Analogous to integrated chips based on silicon or carbon nanotubes,10,11 functional variety and integration effectively enhance the controllability and work efficiency of modulated structures compared with intrinsic ones.
In pace with further research on modulated TMDs, diverse novel behaviours and innovative phenomena have been discovered in recent years, which favour great research interest in this field. Exhilarating effects have helped with the understanding of the topological transition, condensed matter physics and quantum physics in 2D systems, promoting the development of fundamental physical models. To date, there are reviews on the synthesis, phase transition, properties and applications of TMDs and investigations on some of their defects.12–18 Nevertheless, as a series of important model materials, defects and derivatives of TMDs, denoted as modulated structures herein, should be classified into several types based on their atomic arrangements, and thus studies and conclusions can be sorted and drawn systematically to report their inherent structure-activity relationships. Together with the expansion of TMDs and corresponding modulated structures, the relation among their atomic arrangements, electron structures and properties is gradually becoming necessary to establish to determine the root cause of these structures and corresponding regulated properties. To meet the requirements of emergent 2D-material-based artificial intelligence applications, systematic interpretation of TMDs and their modulated structures will promote the development of programmable TMD structures and fundamental sciences.
Herein, we introduce the recent advances in the structure modulation of 2D TMDs regarding their methodology, mechanism and applications (Scheme 1). Initially, we classify the modulated structures of 2D TMDs into different types according to the modulated regions, such as target atoms, atom chains and surfaces. We analyse the characteristics and origin of the modulated structures to clarify the relationship between the TMD phases and tendentiously modulated structures. In particular, we connect the modulated structures of novel TMDs with defects of traditional semiconductors to ensure the analogous structures and unique ones beyond the conventional concepts. Next, we summarize the various methods toward structure modulation to uncover how they are introduced to the intrinsic grains. We emphasize the modulating mechanisms rather than the strategy details to boost the development of methodology for structure modulation. According to their advantages and disadvantages, researchers can choose or utilize appropriate methods for the preparation of specific modulated structures. Then, we focus on the altered band structures of modulated TMD structures, and thereby properties. Depending on the electron structures, most of the properties of TMDs can be modulated in accordance with the alteration in their atomic arrangement and lattice symmetry. We also introduce some examples of their application in electronics, optoelectronics, sensors and catalysts to highlight how modulated structures work in these applications. Finally, we conclude the recent advances in TMD structure modulation and preview the further focal points of development toward TMDs and the whole 2D family.
 Scheme 1  Modulated TMD structures together with the related methods, properties and applications. 
2 Modulated structure types of 2D TMDs
On account of the flexibility of 2D TMDs, various structures have been designed specifically to tune the properties of 2D TMDs. Due to the fact that the different d electrons of various transition metals have specific extranuclear electron configurations, monolayer TMD polymorphs possess diverse d orbital splitting conditions for different transition metal centres (M4+) with pertinent coordination types, including trigonal prismatic phase (1H), octahedral phase (1T), and distorted phases (1T′ and 1T′′).3,19 In addition to the typical phases, some particular cases have also been obtained or predicted to enrich the TMD family, such as 1T′′′-MoS2, 2M-WS2, Pd-based TMDs, and 1S phase group V B TMDs.20–24Scheme 2 presents the reported phases of the 39 TMDs with different transition metal centres, together with the illustration of their structures and unit cells. Specifically, the 39 TMDs can be divided into 55 polymorphs according to their unit cells and symmetries. Instead of filling in the blanks of TMDs, it is much more efficient to gain access to diverse modulated TMD structures based on existing polymorphic monomers.
 Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of the intrinsic phases of monolayer TMDs classified by components and structures. 
Inspired by the types of defects in traditional semiconductors,25–27 we classify the modulated structures of 2D TMDs into point structures, linear structures and out-of-plane structures according to their modulated positions and types. Considering the differences between layered 2D TMDs and traditional bulk semiconductors, some specific types will be emphasized to be more appropriate for 2D TMDs.
2.1 Point structures
Point structures of 2D TMDs consist of modulated regions with a single atom or a few atoms, which are removed from, modified and attached to the TMD structures. Point structures can be classified into atomic vacancies, anti-site points, doped atoms and attached species.28,29Fig. 1 illustrates the modulated point structures in 1H-TMDs as examples. It is possible for different types of point structures to appear in pairs,30 which can make the situation much more complicated. Thus, we will ignore the paired point structures and introduce the features of each type in this section.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of modulated point structures of TMDs. 

2.1.1 Atomic vacancies. 
Atomic vacancies are generated from the missing atoms in the lattice, which can be hardly avoided in bulk semiconductor crystals. Atomic vacancies can result in charge trapping and local strain because the stability should be guaranteed by the slight displacement of adjacent atoms and the transformation of the bonding strength. The atomic vacancies in 2D TMDs include metal vacancies (VM in Fig. 1(a)), monochalcogen vacancies (VX in Fig. 1(a)) and dichalcogen vacancies (V2X in Fig. 1(a)).31,32 In the case of 1H- and 1T-TMDs, a VX in the upper chalcogen layer (Fig. 2(a)) seems to be equivalent to that in the lower layer due to the mirror plane and the centre of symmetry in the D3h and D3d symmetry structures,33 respectively, while the interaction of different surfaces and the substrates can make it different, in addition to the broken symmetry for the adjacent structural transformation to maintain the stability. Actually, a VX in the chalcogen layer away from the substrate exhibits excellent chemical activity because the chalcogen atoms can drift from their original positions and induce the drift of VX without strong interactions between the substrate surface atoms and TMD atoms. Specifically, it is possible for VX structures to form linear structures with numerous atomic vacancies or even drive the phase transition from 1H to 1T.34 This reconstruction process will be introduced in Section 3. The VX structures cause the neighbouring M atoms possess unpaired d electrons,35 which further endow localized charge distribution. VM and V2X (only in 1H-TMDs, Fig. 2(b))33 act as nanopores in the TMD layers, and can also lead to unpaired electrons and charge accumulation in the neighbouring atoms, which may finally construct 5|7 structures. It should be noted that the number of V2X is relatively less than that of VM and VX for most 1H-TMDs (e.g., MoS2 and NbSe2),36,37 where the formation energy is vital to the vacancy type and number. The formation energy (Eform) of atomic vacancies can be calculated as follows (eqn (1)): (1)where Evac and Epristine represent TMDs with and without atomic vacancies, and nM, nX, μM and μX represent the number and chemical potential of missing M/X atoms, respectively.38 When the MXn units are removed, nanopores can be formed in the TMD layers with inner edges, which tend to dominate the properties of nanopores due to their dilatation. Atomic vacancies can be fulfilled by other atoms or molecules, which may achieve the recovery of properties.39,40 In this case, the formation and modulation of atomic vacancies of TMDs have been the focus to deal with their property-tuning requirements.
 Fig. 2  Modulated point structures in H-phase TMDs. (a) Chalcogen monoatomic, (b) diatomic vacancies and (c)–(f) metal substitutions for original chalcogen sites in 1H-TMDs, for example, MoS2. (g) Schematic illustration of Cr-, Mo- and O-doped WS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 33, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (g) from ref. 41, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 


2.1.2 Anti-site points. 
Anti-site points are formed by substituting X (or M) atoms in the original M (or X) positions. During the formation of TMD crystals, the anti-site atoms act as wrong blocks in these “buildings”. Fig. 1(b) shows the two anti-site types, XM and MX, where XM indicates the X atom located at the original M atom position, while MX is the opposite. Fig. 2(c) demonstrates that MX causes the distortion of the neighbouring region and X atoms will be connected with the anti-site atom.33 Anti-site points can appear with atomic vacancies incidentally, as shown in Fig. 2(d).33 Besides single anti-site points, anti-site M atoms can be located at two X sites in both two chalcogen layers or at two adjacent X sites in the same layer (Fig. 2(e) and (f)),33 both of which lead to the distortion of the structures. XM points appear quite complicated,31 which can be attributed to the higher electronegativity of chalcogen atoms than transition metals. To sum up, anti-site points provide internal strain for further property tuning, but they are still restricted by the relatively high reactivity and possible reconstruction.


2.1.3 Doped atoms. 
Doped atoms, also known as dopants, play a significant role in traditional semiconductors including Si and GaAs. Doped atoms involve midgap bands in the band structures of semiconductors, which help to change the carrier density of semiconductors. In the case of TMD crystals, their X and M sites can be replaced by different chalcogen (or halogen) atoms and metal atoms, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1(c). The doped atoms can directly accommodate the charge distribution and lead to localized midgap bands. Considering the atom radius of the doped atoms, the internal strain of TMD crystals with doped atoms drives the local structural distortion. For instance, Fig. 2(g) shows WS2 doped with O, Cr and Mo.41 Compared with the chalcogen and metal atoms constructing TMDs, it is difficult for atoms with a large radius or charge differences to be embedded in the lattices such as rare earth metal and alkali metal atoms. Recently, enriched doped atoms have covered some rare earth metals (e.g., Eu),42 which may promote the development of the synthesis methodology and basic physics of TMDs. Moreover, the doping amount can affect the TMD structure.43,44 For example, WTe2xS2(1−x) exhibits a 1H structure when x is equal to 0.08 but shows a 1T′ structure when x is determined to 0.85.43 A relatively high doping amount can enable the formation of TMD alloys, which manifest structures between two different TMDs.45 Besides chalcogen dopants with discrepancy in their atom radius and charge density, doped transition metal atoms are likely to induce the phase transition in the original TMDs, which is derived from the distinguished coordination of transition metals with extra valence electrons. For example, MoS2 flakes with doped Re or Fe atoms are transformed from the original 1H phase to the 1T phase46,47 because the extra valence electrons of Re and Fe dopants induce altered orbital splitting on account of the crystal field theory. Doped atoms have become excellent research platforms for the structure and property modulation of TMDs, which provide opportunities for customizable applications.


2.1.4 Attached species. 
Attached species here refer to the atoms, ions or molecules that are intercalated in the TMD layers or anchored to the TMD surface, as shown in Fig. 1(d). Intercalated species, such as alkali metal atoms (or ions), ammonium ions or molecules, can be driven to intercalate into adjacent TMD layers and weaken the interlayer interactions, which are widely studied in the fields of liquid exfoliating synthesis and energy storage applications.48–52 Intercalated species are beneficial to construct a series of superlattices or induce the phase transition.3,17,49–51,53 For instance, Li-intercalated 2H-MX2 will be transformed into LixMX2, which endows the possibility of phase transition to 1T-MX2.3,49,51 Apparently, the partial intercalation of few-layer H-phase TMDs can be further transformed into lateral heterostructures based on different polymorphs.17,54 In contrast to the commonly used intercalants, transition metal ions exhibit special behaviours, i.e., the transformation from layered TMDs to bulk materials, which further affect their electrical properties. For example, the interlayer octahedral interstitial sites of 2H-NbS2 and TaS2 are often occupied by Fe2+ and Cr3+ intercalants, while their tetrahedral sites are preferred by Cu+.55 Intercalants in the distorted pseudo-octahedral coordination environments enhance the correlation of adjacent layers, which may induce the construction of intercalant-dominated superlattices or “bulk” materials. Notwithstanding, 2D TMDs with ordered intercalants can act as hybrid cases between layered and bulk materials, promoting studies on the relationship of different material systems.
The adatoms on the surface of TMDs exhibit extraordinary behaviour including special density of states and high chemical activities. Adatoms can originate from external adsorption56,57 or surface atom migration.35 The former is relevant to the energy barrier of the adatom adsorbed on the specific position, while the latter is related to both the decomposition energy of the atom in TMD crystals (forming an atomic vacancy at the original position) and the adsorption energy of the decomposed atom on the adsorbed position. Specifically, adatoms suggest the approximate condition of TMDs with deposited thin metal films or decorated particles, which is helpful to uncover the details upon thermal evaporation and post treatment.

2.2 Linear structures
Linear structures of 2D TMDs can serve as “surfaces” or “interfaces” of bulk materials. Taking Bi2Se3 as an example, this topological insulator exhibits surface conductivity, but its internal bulk structure is insulating. Similarly, linear structures exhibit special edge states, which are different from the electron structures of the internal grains. Here, we introduce several typical linear structures in 2D TMDs together with their structural characteristics (Fig. 3), including grain boundaries, twinned boundaries, edge structures, screw dislocations and lateral heterostructure interfaces.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of modulated linear structures of TMDs. 

2.2.1 Grain boundaries. 
Grain boundaries can be easily formed when the adjacent grains exhibit different orientations. Grain boundaries are 2D defects in bulk materials, while they act as linear structures in 2D materials because two adjacent 2D crystals are stitched, consequently forming one-dimensional boundaries. Fig. 3(a) shows the 1H-TMD grains with a typical 7|5 grain boundary as an example. The grain boundaries are classified as periodic and aperiodic grain boundaries according to their atom arrangements, which are actually related to coherent and incoherent grain boundaries based on whether the grain boundaries share the atoms in adjacent lattices.40 Generally, periodic grain boundaries obey the coincident-site-lattice (CSL) theory, which can be described by Burgers vectors, as follows (eqn (2)): b = ma1 + na2(2)where b is the Burgers vector. a1 and a2 are the basis vectors of the lattice, and m and n represent integers, respectively. The direction of the Burgers vector indicates the dislocation direction, which is calculated by comparing the grain boundary structure with a perfect lattice. Due to the mature growth strategies and relatively certain structures, the grain boundaries of 1H-TMDs have been investigated detail. Fig. 4(a)–(c) present the zigzag-tilt and armchair-tilt grain boundaries of monolayer MoS2 with different tilt angles.58 In the case of the zigzag-tilt grain boundaries in Fig. 4(a), the tilt angle, θ, shows the relationship with the corresponding Burgers vector and dislocation density, which can be calculated according as follows (eqn (3)): (3)where |b(1,0)+(0,1)| and d(1,0)+(0,1) represent the width and density of dislocation, respectively. The zigzag-tilt grain boundaries contain both Mo 5|7 (sharing Mo–Mo bonds, blue regions) and S 5|7 (sharing S–S bonds, yellow regions) structures, and the dislocation density increases with an increase in the tilt angle θ. In the case of the armchair-tilt grain boundaries in Fig. 4(b) and (c), tilt angle, θ, is expressed as follows (eqn (4)): (4)where |b(1,0)| and d(1,0) represent the width and density of dislocation, respectively. The relationship between the tilt angle and dislocation density for armchair-tilt grain boundaries is opposite to that for zigzag-tilt grain boundaries. It can be concluded that the edge structures (zigzag or armchair) of adjacent grains affect the stitching behaviour, and finally contribute to different grain boundary types. Aperiodic grain boundaries of 1H-TMDs with 5|7, 4|8, 4|6 or 6|8 rings can be constituted by stitching the zigzag and armchair edges of adjacent grains with large misorientation angles;59–62 however there is a lack of systematic theoretical studies. In the case of 1T-TMDs, their upper and lower chalcogen layers are not equivalent, and thus complicated 1T-TMD edge structures can lead to various grain boundaries. For instance, the symmetric grain boundary of 1T-PtSe2 consists of linear 5|7 dislocation cores, which make the grains on both sides of the grain boundary have an identical β angle, as shown in Fig. 4(d).63 The rotation angle, α, between two grains is expressed as α = 180° − 2β. However, the asymmetric grain boundary in Fig. 4(e) shows different angles (β1 and β2) between the grain orientation and grain boundary. Fig. 4(f)–(h) show the different dislocations formed by removing atoms along the lattice vectors of b(1,0) and b(0,1), which also act as Burgers vectors of two types of dislocations in Fig. 4(g) and (h), respectively. Therefore, for 1T or even 1T′ phases, edge variety and structural reconstruction lead to the uncertainty regarding the grain boundaries, which consequently increases the computational complexity of theoretical simulation.
 Fig. 4  Grain boundaries of (a)–(c) MoS2 with different tilt angles and (d)–(h) 1T-PtSe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 58, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (d)–(h) from ref. 63, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
Besides the grain boundaries obtained by in-plane stitching, special dislocations also lead to abnormal grain boundaries. When the grains match the M–X bonds, these two grains will locate at different planes, and consequently wrinkles or buckles will appear along the grain boundaries.64 The layer number also affects the grain boundary structures because relatively weak interlayer interactions can induce different stacking arrangements, and then support the formation of grain boundaries of a second layer even though the first layer can be smoothly stitched.65,66 It should be emphasized that the chalcogen atoms at the grain boundaries (e.g., 4|4|8 or 4|8 structures) exhibit high activity, which can drive the structural evolution between periodic and aperiodic structures.67 Grain boundaries ameliorate the diversity of TMD structures and provide various research platform for further exploration.


2.2.2 Twinned boundaries. 
Twinned boundaries, as special types of grain boundaries, have an enormous impact on innovative physical behaviour. The grains on either side of twinned boundaries are mirror images, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The twinned boundaries of 1H-TMDs possess different structures with different Burgers vectors. As shown in Fig. 5(a)–(c), 4|4P shows shared double chalcogen atoms along the boundary, while 4|4E demonstrates an edge-sharing structure compared with the pristine TMD structure.59,68Fig. 5(d) shows a 55|8 twinned boundary with shared metal atoms and slight structural distortion. The 4|4P twinned boundary is the most commonly observed one, exhibiting localized metallic behaviour in intrinsic semiconducting TMDs.69 Recently, exciting results of twinned boundary in 1T′′-ReS2 have been reported, where the upward and downward Re chains are distributed in distinct grains separated by a twinned boundary.70–72 The Re chains formed by the Re–Re metal bonds lying in different 1T′′-ReS2 domains can further result in three types of twinned boundaries, including (0°, 0°)σ, (60°, 120°)σ and (120°, 240°)σ, as shown in Fig. 5(e)–(g), respectively.71 Compared with the grain boundaries, the adjacent domains along the twinned boundaries generally share atoms rather than forming distorted rings, except that antenna atoms appear on the domain edges. Twinned boundaries, as periodic linear structures, are closely relevant to novel symmetric structures and topological phase transition behaviour, which are quite attractive for basic physics and innovative phenomena.
 Fig. 5  Twinned boundaries of (a)–(d) 1H-TMDs and (e)–(g) 1T′′-ReS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 68, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (e)–(g) from ref. 71, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. 


2.2.3 Edges and fractals. 
Compared to the surface of bulk materials, edges are the borders of 2D TMDs with unsaturated chemical bonds. Fig. 3(c) presents a schematic illustration of the edges of 2D TMD, including zigzag, armchair and mixed structures. As a demonstration, three basic types of MoS2 edges are highlighted in Fig. 6(a).73 It should be noted that metal and chalcogen terminals can lead to different zigzag edges, and thus the TMD morphology finally depends on the edge structures. With the growth of 2D TMD crystals, the active edges tend to disappear and stable ones can be retained. Compared with the edges of 1H-TMDs, that of other TMDs (1T, 1T′ and 1T′′ phases) are much more complicated, and thus it is difficult to reveal the relationship between their edges and shapes. Fortunately, 1T′-MoTe2 and 1T′-WTe2 have been studied based on the simulation of the corresponding edge evolution and experimental results,74–76 which revealed the origin of their rectangular or ribbon shapes. Specifically, edge evolution can help to understand the underneath growth mechanism of TMD crystals. Complex or irregularly distributed edges can construct TMD fractals (Fig. 3(d)) (or so-called dendrites),77–79 where abundant reactive edges can act as catalytically active sites. Besides potential catalysts, fractals, which are defined as shapes with self-similarity, have non-integer dimensions (D). Specifically, an original geometric shape is divided equally into several parts (m), and the fractal is formed by using some of them (n). The dimension (D) of the fractal is defined as follows (eqn (5)): (5)where D is generally a fraction. TMD fractals are essential to the mechanism of crystal growth and evolution, which can promote the crystal growth kinetics. Fig. 6(b) shows the MoS2 fractal as an example, which can facilitate the synthesis of non-integer dimensional TMD crystals.79 However, fractals of that beyond H-phase TMDs are difficult to achieve due to their complicated edge structures and crystal growth kinetics, which still need further explorations.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of (a) MoS2 edges, (b) MoS2 fractals and (c) screw dislocations in WS2 crystals. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (b) from ref. 79, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; and (c) from ref. 82, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 


2.2.4 Screw dislocations. 
Screw dislocations are prone to appear in 2D materials, but the dislocation lines may be difficult to confirm, which is ascribed to the strong intralayer covalent bonds and relatively weak interlayer van der Waals forces. It is worth noting that the dislocation lines of the screw dislocations in bulk materials can be easily determined according to the Burgers vectors due to the three-dimensional isotropy of their structures. However, in the case of 2D TMDs, screw dislocations appearing in the bottom layer lead to small-angle rotation and form spiral steps (Fig. 3(e)). Specifically, the dislocation lines will be difficult to be separated from the grain boundaries once the second stages are not already constructed. Screw dislocations have been reported in spiral 1H-TMDs, including MoS2,80,81 WS2,82,83 and WSe2,84 but they still remain to discovery in other TMDs. Fig. 6(c) shows the screw-dislocation-driven process of a spiral structure, but the dislocation lines will not be fixed in the same location due to the mild motion of the atoms.82 This can be attributed to the distortion adaptability because 1T-TMDs and low-symmetry ones can resist the distortion and the symmetry breaking in contrast to high-symmetry 1H-TMDs. Nonetheless, screw dislocations promote the construction of TMD structures with broken symmetry, which provides opportunities for innovative physical effects.


2.2.5 Lateral heterostructure interfaces. 
When different TMDs are stitched with each other laterally, lateral heterostructures can be constructed with linear interfaces, as shown in Fig. 3(f). Lateral heterostructure interfaces are closely associated with the lattice mismatch and symmetry differences between TMD grains. Fig. 7(a)–(f) demonstrate the annular dark-field (ADF) scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) images and schematic illustration of interfaces of 1H–1T-WS2 lateral heterostructures,85 which are also called homojunctions in some reports. The so-called β boundaries (Fig. 7(a)–(d)) and β-W boundaries (Fig. 7(e) and (f)) are similar to TMD grain boundaries, which can be attributed to the symmetry difference rather than lattice parameters between the 1T- and 1H-WS2 regions. Besides polymorph lateral heterostructures, that constructed using different TMDs with the same phase are commonly the focus, including the typical 1H-phase heterostructures (Fig. 7(g)) and newly reported 1T′′-ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructure (Fig. 7(h)).86 When lateral heterostructures consist of different TMDs with certain lattice mismatch, atomic distortions occur along the lateral heterointerfaces and lead to internal strains, and thus the structural evolution and physical properties in the region of the lateral heterostructure interfaces have attracted wide attention.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of different lateral heterostructure interfaces. (a)–(f) STEM images and schematic illustration of different 1H–1T-WS2 lateral heterostructure interfaces. Schematic illustration of (g) H-phase lateral heterostructure interface and (h) 1T′′-ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructure interface. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 85, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society and (g)–(h) from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 

2.3 Out-of-plane structures
Distinguished from point and linear structures in the planes or on the surface of TMDs, out-of-plane structures focus on stacking symmetry and interlayer interfaces of few-layer TMDs or vertical TMD heterostructures (Fig. 8). In the case of few-layer TMD or TMD heterostructures, stacking arrangements are essential to the symmetry and interlayer interactions. In the case of few-layer TMDs, we emphasize the relationship among the stacking arrangement, twist angles and symmetry, and we introduce how the interlayer twist angles affect the interfaces in vertical TMD heterostructures (constructed only by different TMDs or their alloys).
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of modulated out-of-plane structures of TMDs. 

2.3.1 Stacking arrangements. 
Stacking arrangements directly determine the lattice symmetry, and thus extended polymorphs are formed without the transformation of their intralayer structures (Fig. 8(a)). As mentioned above, monolayer polymorphs of TMDs generally include 1H, 1T, 1T′ and 1T′′ phases.3 For instance, few-layer TMDs formed by stacking 1H-TMDs layers can exhibit an R or 2H phase, corresponding to AB and AA′ stackings (Fig. 9(a) and (b)), respectively.65 With an increase in the number of TMD layers, the stacking variety is generally enriched due to the diverse atomic alignment for different layers (e.g., AB and AA′ stacking for bilayer TMDs and ABA and ABC stacking for trilayer TMDs). For example, 1T-TaS2 with D3d symmetry can be stacked layer-by-layer with the alignment of the metal and chalcogen atoms in two adjacent layers. However, the stacking arrangements of H-phase TaS2 layers are much more complicated than that of 1T-TaS2 layers. As shown in Fig. 9(c), few-layer H-phase TaS2 polymorphs include 2Ha, 2Hb and 3R phases, which are different in the layer-by-layer alignment conditions.87 In particular, alternating H and T phases consist of 4Hb and 6R polymorphs for four- and six-layer TaS2, respectively. These polymorphs differ from each other in lattice parameter c, especially for high-index facets. Nevertheless, low-symmetric TMDs, such as 1T′-TMDs, generally demonstrate complex stacking arrangements. Taking 1T′-MoTe2 as an example, its cross-section view shows two possible types of Te octahedral deformations, the so-called P- and M-types, respectively.88 Considering the alignment of the Mo and Te atoms in the P- and M-type layers, different planar displacements between these two layers compared with the orthorhombic centrosymmetric structure are defined as minus (−) and plus (+), respectively. In this case, trilayer MoTe2 crystals with M–P–M-type structures contain at least four possible stacking arrangements, i.e., M–P–M, M+P+M, M+P–M, and M–P+M types, where the former two are 1T′ phases and others are Td phases, respectively. As a matter of fact, few-layer TMDs consisting of 1T′- or 1T′′-TMD monolayer units present quite intricate and flexible stacking arrangements, which indeed hinder the discovery of their certain stacking structures and even the promising moiré patterns.89 Besides the symmetric studies related to the stacking arrangements of few-layer TMDs, moiré patterns of twisted few-layer TMDs have also obtained attention due to the rapid development of twisted bilayer graphene.90 Unlike the superlattices of twisted bilayer graphene, TMD superlattices have complicated interlayer conditions with different twist angles. It is simple to experimentally confirm the relationship between the twist angles and properties, but it is difficult to explain the detailed structures of few-layer TMDs with specific twist angles due to the irregularly distributed chalcogen atoms in the interlayer space.91 However, experimental evidence is still necessary to confirm the theoretical simulation.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustrations of different stacking arrangements of few-layer TMDs and vertical heterostructures. (a) and (b) AB and AA′ stacking of bilayer MoS2. (c) Different phases and stacking arrangements of few-layer TaS2. (d) Vertical MoX2/WX2 heterostructures with long-period moiré patterns and three typical stackings. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) and (b) from ref. 65, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; (c) from ref. 87, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; and (d) from ref. 92, Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


2.3.2 Vertical heterostructure interfaces. 
Vertical TMD heterostructures have been studied regarding their controllable synthesis, properties and applications. H-phase TMD heterostructures are the most popular due to their relatively mature synthetic methods and high-symmetric structures. Fig. 9(d) shows an illustration of the typical MoX2/WX2 heterobilayers.92 Due to the lattice mismatch and small twist angle, periodic moiré patterns can be observed in the superlattices with approximately three regions, including Rhh, RXh, and RMh. These regions refer to the sites that the hexagon unit, chalcogen atom and metal atom in the upper TMD layer are aligned to the hexagon units in the lower TMD layer, respectively. Vertical H-phase TMD heterostructures with specific twist angles exhibit a periodic interlayer distance distribution,93,94 and the mini-Brillouin zones in reciprocal space correspond to superlattices. These properties will be summarised in Section 4 in detail. Recently, some TMD derivatives without mirror symmetry include vertical TMD heterostructures. Janus H-phase TMDs, as special TMD alloys, have been reported for the construction of vertical heterostructures with another 1H-TMD, such as MoSSe/MoS2 vertical heterostructures.95,96 Without mirror symmetry, MoSSe/MoS2 vertical heterostructures have two possible interfaces-S/Se and S/S interfaces, which enable different interlayer interactions to tune their properties. In the case of other vertical TMD heterostructures containing 1T-, 1T′- and 1T′′-TMDs, the atomic structures of the interfaces still need further exploration, which can be attributed to their uncertain chalcogen atomic arrangement in the interfaces.

3 Structure modulating methods for 2D TMDs and related mechanism
Based on the features of different modulated structures, efficient modulation methods have been proposed and developed for specific structures. Structure modulation can occur during or after the synthesis of as-obtained TMDs; thus, generally, the modulation methods can be classified as direct modulation methods and post treatment strategies. Nevertheless, it is difficult to remove intrinsic defects during the fabrication of TMD crystals or films accompanied with spontaneous thermal motions of atoms and improper atomic arrangements.97,98 Isolated point structures, such as atomic vacancies,31,99–101 anti-site points,31,33 attached atoms and paired point structures,35 can be usually observed in as-grown TMDs due to their low formation energy.102–105 On account of their individual appearance, artificially modulated structures can be distinguished from intrinsic structures, reflecting the high relevance of the characteristics of modulation strategies. Briefly, we only discuss the methods and corresponding mechanisms of structure modulation in this section, ignoring the interference of intrinsic defects.
3.1 Direct modulation during synthesis processes
Direct structure modulation combined with the synthesis process contributes to excellent controllability for modulated TMD structures. Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is generally adopted for the controllable synthesis of TMDs.1 Based on the elementary steps during the CVD process, TMD structures can be modulated depending on the precursor supply, substrate induction, reactant transport and reaction conditions.

3.1.1 Precursor supply. 
In the CVD route, the precursor supply includes precursor decomposition and mass transfer, which are both vital to the growth of TMDs and their derivatives. Actually, altering the precursor supply is efficient for the introduction of doped atoms in pristine TMDs. It is a commonly used strategy to mix solid dopants in the metal or chalcogen precursors,106 but this may be inappropriate for dopants with a high vapour pressure or large atomic radius. Liquid mixtures of dopants and metal precursors enable relatively uniform doped TMDs to be obtained. Fig. 10(a) shows the preparation of Nb-doped WS2 using a mixed solution of Na2WO4 and Nb(HC2O4)5.107 Without gas transfer processes, in situ decomposition and sulphuration of the mixed precursors result in the formation of monolayer Nb-doped WS2 by ignoring the vapour pressure of the Nb precursors. Similarly, ammonium niobate oxalate and ammonium metatungstate hydrate can be employed as substitutes for the aforementioned Nb dopant and W precursor, respectively, where NaOH needs to be added to stabilize the mixed solution.108 These mixtures can be directly used for CVD growth because 1H-NbS2 with superb stability exhibits low lattice mismatch with 1H-WS2 (less than 10%).109,110 When the chalcogenides corresponding to the doped metal atoms distinguish dramatically from the host TMDs, the doped TMDs may be finally broken down after direct chalcogenization of the mixed precursors due to the enormous internal strain. Metal chalcogenides can be good choices because they share similar species with TMDs. For example, ZnS was mixed with MoO3 for the synthesis of Zn-doped MoS2,111 which benefitted from the superior volatility of ZnS. For most dopants with poor volatility, it is preferable to use some additives. As shown in Fig. 10(b), Mn-doped MoS2 can only be obtained by using MnO2 and NaCl as the dopant and additive, respectively.112 The growth kinetics of MoS2 can be highly determined by MnO2, and the Mo sites can only be replaced by applying a large amount of MnO2. With the involvement of melted NaCl, the atomization of MnO2 becomes easier due to the obvious decrease of vapour pressure, and thus Mn doping can be achieved under a low flux of MnO2. In the extreme case, it is difficult for rare-earth elements to be included in the TMD lattices despite their addition in a large quantity. Inspired by the use of melted salt for the synthesis of TMD crystals, rare-earth atoms can also be carried in the TMD lattices. Fig. 10(c) shows an example that Eu-doped MoS2 is achieved via the CVD process with the addition of NaCl.42 It is a concern that heavy Eu doping may lead to the breakdown of MoS2 crystals because the atom radius of Eu is much larger than that of Mo. Hence, Xu et al. used SiO2 powder as a melting-assisted medium to form the sustained-release matrix Na2SixO2x+1 with melted NaCl, which then achieved the sustained release of the Eu source. This strategy provides an effective way to achieve the atomic doping of TMDs for atoms that are quite difficult to evaporate, and also considers the structural protection of TMDs after atomic doping. In short, appropriate dopants, evaporate-assisting additives and sustained-release matrixes can be included in the precursor supply to achieve atomic doping, where the latter two parts depend on the volatility of the dopants and the structural stability of the doped TMDs.
 Fig. 10  Direct modulation for atomic doping by changing the precursor supply. (a) Nb(HC2O4)5 mixed in W source for the growth of Nb-doped WS2. (b) MnO2 assisted by NaCl for the fabrication of Mn-doped MoS2. (c) Eu-doped MoS2 achieved by sustained-release Eu source in CVD process. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 107, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society; (b) from ref. 112, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; and (c) from ref. 42, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 
The precursor supply determines the concentration gradient of precursors around the crystal domain, which leads to the attachment-limited or diffusion-limited growth of TMDs.113 Edge evolution reflects the influence of the precursor supply on the growth kinetics of TMDs, which results in morphology tuning or fractal construction. Morphology tuning by changing the precursor supply has been studied in detail, which can be explained as the colligative edge reactivity toward the chemical potential of precursors.114–116 Herein, we emphasize the recent understanding of complex TMD fractals to explain how the precursor supply affects the TMD edge structures. Chen et al. reported the preparation of highly organized MoS2 patterns via homoepitaxial CVD growth (Fig. 6(b)).79 These patterned structures are relevant to the growth rates of S- and Mo-terminal edges. Fig. 11(a) shows the formation energy toward the chemical potential of S (μS) for different edges including zigzag-S edge, zigzag-Mo edge, antenna-S edge and antenna-Mo edge.79 Specifically, the extension of the crystal domain follows two possible routes. One is that the initial zigzag-S edge is extended to antenna-Mo edge, and then to a new zigzag-S edge, while the other refers to the process forming the initial zigzag-Mo edge to antenna-S edge, and then to a new zigzag-Mo edge (Fig. 11(b) and (c)).79 Thus, the growth energy barriers can be described as the formation energy differences between the antenna-Mo and zigzag-S edges (or antenna-S and zigzag-Mo edges), labelled as ΔE1 and ΔE2, respectively. The ratio of growth rates between the S and Mo edges at the same μS can be expressed as follows (eqn (6)): (6)where vS and vMo, kB and T represent the growth rates of the S and Mo edges, Boltzmann constant and reaction temperature, respectively. Because the energy barrier is a function of μS (Fig. 11(d)), the adjustment of the S and Mo precursor supply can finally determine the regularly patterned growth of MoS2 when the ratio () is much larger than 2.79 This result can be employed as a guide for the preparation of different regular fractals by using certain composition ratios of precursor supply. However, the edge evolution is very complicated, resulting in the formation of irregular fractals or as-called dendrites. Fig. 11(e) shows the relationship between fractal dimension and S/Mo ratio.78 It can be concluded that high-dimension fractals tend to appear by applying a precursor supply with extremely low/high S/Mo ratios. Giant dosage differences of S and Mo sources lead to a relatively saturated S or Mo atmosphere, facilitating the thermodynamic process for MoS2 growth. Under a moderate S/Mo ratio, the crystal growth is kinetically controlled. Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to confirm the quantitative relationship of fractal morphology (or aforementioned fractal dimension, D) and the composition of precursor supply because of the uncertain locations and structures of branching cores for TMD fractals. Inspired by theoretical simulations of graphene fractals,117 2D diffusion-limited aggregation analysis together with thermodynamics and statistical physics have potential for the further construction of TMD fractals via the regulation of the precursor supply.
 Fig. 11  Direct modulation for TMD edges, fractals and stacking arrangements through precursor control. (a)–(d) Formation energies and energy barriers of different MoS2 edges under the different chemical potentials of sulphur. (e) Fractal dimensions of different MoS2 fractals toward a change in the Mo and S precursor ratios. (f) and (g) Schematic illustration and formation energies of twisted bilayer WS2 with/without Sn induction. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 79, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (e) from ref. 78, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (f) and (g) from ref. 119, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
As mentioned above, the precursor supply determines the growth kinetics of TMDs, which also affects the stacking arrangement of few-layer TMD crystals. It has been widely reported that stable stacking arrangements were obtained arbitrarily under the same reaction conditions.118 Recently, it was verified that the stacking arrangements can be modulated randomly by adjusting the precursor supply. Shao et al. achieved bilayer WS2 with different twist angles by including Sn in the precursors.119 Besides, a few-layer WS2 crystal with a rotation angle of 60° was also fabricated (Fig. 11(f)). This is ascribed to the SnO2 spot included in the bilayer WS2 structure, resulting in a relatively lower formation energy of different stacking arrangements in comparison to that without Sn, as shown in Fig. 11(g). However, there is a doubt that the introduction of Sn in the WS2 structure may be defined as Sn-doped WS2 rather than pristine WS2 bilayer, and then the properties should be tuned partially by Sn doping. Thus, further exploration is still required to develop effective methods for the preparation of arbitrarily twisted few-layer TMDs without the introduction of any other species. Furthermore, the principal problem that remains to be resolved is the controllable nucleation of the TMD upper layers with a specific rotation angle.
TMD heterostructures can also be constructed through the transformation of the precursor supply. Different precursors for each composition of TMD heterostructures are separated from each other to prevent the formation of TMD alloys. For example, WS2/MoS2 heterostructures were constructed by using MoO3 and mixed W/Te as precursors for the growth of MoS2 and WS2 regions, respectively.120 However, temperature seems to be the most important factor to achieve lateral or vertical heterostructures rather than the precursor supply, which will be discussed in Section 3.1.4. Different types of TMD heterostructures have been achieved by changing the precursor supply in recent years. Li et al. reported a universal growth strategy for TMD heterostructures via rational kinetic control based on the modulation of the precursor composition ratio.121Fig. 12(a) shows the different growth results of MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures based on as-grown MoS2 domains using diverse W/Se precursor ratios. With an increase in the W/Se ratio, the MoS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure obtained at low W/Se ratio turned into a hybrid structure, which was then transformed to a MoS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructure. Fig. 12(b) shows the different formation energies of the possible species as a function of the chemical potential of Se (μSe) during the growth of WSe2 on the as-obtained MoS2 layers. Apparently, the W1Se3 cluster possesses the lowest formation energy at a low W/Se ratio, and all types of W1Sex (x = 1, 2, and 3) active clusters can coexist at a high W/Se ratio. With a lower diffusion barrier on the MoS2 surface, dominant W1Se3 clusters at low W/Se ratio diffuse on the MoS2 surface easily, and they are then attached to the lateral MoS2 edges (Fig. 12(c)). On account of the high stability of vertical heterostructures compared with lateral ones, as shown in Fig. 12(d), the stacked WSe2 layer tends to be formed by the accumulation of W1Se1 clusters with a high diffusion barrier at a high W/Se ratio. Therefore, an altered precursor supply results in different active intermediates on different nucleation positions, and then achieves distinct heterostructures (Fig. 12(d)). A similar mechanism was also utilized to explain the construction of few-layer WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures, where the upper WSe2 can be formed only at a relatively high W/Se ratio.122 In short, it has been reported that active intermediate species with different formation energies and diffusion barriers are directly attributed to the modulation of the precursor supply, which can provide a universal strategy for the construction of TMD heterostructures.
 Fig. 12  Direct modulation mechanism for TMD lateral and vertical heterostructure interfaces by controlling the precursor supply. (a) Schematic illustration and optical images of heterostructures composed of MoS2 and WSe2 with a chance in the W/Se ratio. (b) Formation energies and (c) adsorption energies of possible precursor species of WSe2. (d) Binding energies of lengths of WSe2 crystals of lateral and vertical heterostructures. (e) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of lateral WSe2–MoS2 and vertical WSe2/MoS2 heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(e) from ref. 121, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. 
In summary, the precursor supply drives most of modulation processes due to the customized chemical potential of each precursor, which can generally adapt to the introduction of doped atoms, edge structures, stacking arrangement and heterostructures. The adjustment of the precursor supply is suitable and convenient for large-scale structure modulation, especially for that obeying the thermodynamic or kinetic growth mechanism, but it may not work for atomically precise modulation or metastable structures. Modulation occurring by adjusting precursor supply can be approximately predicted to ascertain the probable supply range, while the real precursor supply needs further exploration given that theoretical simulation is generally different from the actual synthesis conditions. Nonetheless, the precursor supply should be primarily considered to achieve universality and simpler operation.


3.1.2 Substrate induction. 
Substrate induction is not commonly used for the structure modulation of TMDs because catalytic substrates are not required for the growth of TMDs and the interactions between the substrate surface and TMDs are usually weak. Thus, substrate induction is generally aimed at tuning the diffusion barriers of the intermediate clusters rather than affecting the nucleation barriers of TMDs. Initially, the precursor intermediate species can be trapped on a rough substrate surface (e.g., SiO2/Si), which leads to the island-like growth of TMDs. Fig. 13(a) shows the growth behaviour of lateral TMD heterostructures on different substrates.123 On a flat sapphire surface, the crystalline substrate structure results in the ideal lateral epitaxial growth of a lateral WS2–MoS2 heterostructure, but a rough SiO2 surface leads to island-like heterointerfaces due to the possible trapping points on the substrate distributed over as-grown TMD edges. Precursor trapping results in the high diffusion barrier of the intermediate clusters, which brings about locally oversaturated precursor concentration, and then induces the rapid growth of thick TMD islands along the initial TMD edges (Zone 1).124 In addition to microscale roughness, discrete sites of crystalline substrates exhibit different diffusion barriers for precursor intermediates. For example, the MoS3 monomer, the unit for MoS2 growth, has two possible diffusing pathways on SrTiO3(001) (Fig. 13(b)) with different energy barriers.77 Obviously, pathway 1 with a low energy barrier is the dominant route, where the monomer diffuses from the Sr to O sites, whereas in pathway 2, it occurs from the Sr to Ti sites. Due to the different symmetries of MoS2 and SrTiO3, the hopping rate (hs) of the MoS3 monomer along pathway 1 on the surface is different from that it along the MoS2 edges (he), which can expressed as follows (eqn (7) and (8)): (7) (8)where ν, ED and ΔE represent the applied frequency, diffusing energy barrier and edge stabilization energy, respectively. For the CVD growth of MoS2, the hopping rate of the MoS3 monomer is determined by the ED value, and thus the monomers are inclined to hop on the SrTiO3 surface to form MoS2 fractals with a lower ED rather than the edges of MoS2 nuclei to form regular triangular crystals (Fig. 13(c)).
 Fig. 13  Mechanism of substrate induction toward TMD-modulated structures. (a) Schematic illustration of fabricated WS2–MoS2 lateral heterostructures on SiO2 and sapphire. (b) Diffusion pathways of precursor molecules and (c) morphological evolution process for MoS2 fractals on SrTiO3(001). Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 123, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons and (b and c) from ref. 77, Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons. 
Highly crystalline substrates can also result in the formation of out-of-plane TMD structures by means of periodic lattice mismatch. Early in 2016, MoS2 moiré superlattices shaped in nanoscale ripples were formed by combining an MoS2 monolayer with a 4-fold symmetric Au(100) surface.125 Generally, TMD superlattices can be obtained via the growth of TMDs on different facets of chalcogenide-resistant metal substrates after annealing under the appropriate conditions in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) furnace. These out-of-plane structures originating from superlattices are quite common in TMD vertical heterostructures when the bottom layer is recognized as a substrate. However, this method is restricted by the instrument, and it cannot be achieved chemically for the diverse conditions of TMD synthesis and substrate annealing. In addition, soft materials that are sensitive to temperature alteration have appealed to researchers due to their unique thermomechanical deformation.126 The inconsistent flexibility of soft substrates enables the modulation of TMD structures by means of the deformed crystal field and slightly delocalized electron distribution.
Briefly, substrate induction mainly focuses on the precursor diffusion pathway and nucleation barrier, demonstrating controllable modulation for crystal thickness and edge structures. Obviously, substrate induction can be easily carried out and is suitable in the case of fractals and vertical heterostructures, but the lack of universality restricts its utilization for most modulated TMD structures. Serving as templates or affecting the diffusion dynamics of precursor intermediates, substrate induction employed to assist other structure modulation methods.


3.1.3 Reactant transport. 
Reactants are defined here as the precursor and intermediate species in accordance with the states involved in the synthesis of TMDs. In this section, we will only discuss the movement of reactants on the target substrates for the formation of modulated TMD structures. The local supersaturation of the reactants determines whether the layer-by-layer or island-like growth of TMDs occurs.124 For instance, selective precursor accumulation induces the formation of a TMD crystal with different types of vacancies in different regions, creating a patterned crystal. Hexagonal WS2 crystals with two alternating triangular domains were obtained via the inhomogeneous accumulation of the W precursor (Fig. 14(a)).127,128 As a typical method, WS2 was synthesized via the spin-casting of ammonium metatungstate hydrate solution and post-sulphuration in a CVD furnace. The chalcogen supply seems to be in excess compared to the metal precursors, but metal accumulation is commonly attributed to the overflowing of the metal sources and high volatilization of chalcogen sources during CVD processes of TMDs growth.129 Hexagonal WS2 crystals have alternating W- and S-terminated edges with rich and poor W accumulation, inducing S and W vacancy regions, respectively. Specifically, some atomic vacancies can be modulated by the precursor supply, and it is possible to hinder their formation by transforming the metal supply routes and increasing the amount of chalcogen precursors.130 Employing Au as a barrier layer, SW and S2W anti-site points (S or S2 sites as the substitution for original W sites) can be introduced in WS2via the nonequilibrium CVD process.131 Most W atoms are locked in an Au layer, and the impeded W transport leads to a W-poor environment and lowers the formation energy of the SW and S2W anti-site points. In conclusion, modulation of the reactant transport can be employed to control the chemical potential of the reactants, consequently affecting the formation energy of the modulated point structures that are preferentially formed during the synthesis of TMDs.
 Fig. 14  Mechanism of reactant transport control toward TMD modulated structures. (a) W-vacancy-rich and S-vacancy-rich regions in WS2 achieved by selective W precursor accumulation. (b) Vicinal edges of typical Mo or S terminal edges in MoS2 induced by 2D VLAS growth. (c) Typical kink edges of (010) and (110) surfaces with corresponding edge energies of each kink edge and (d) kink edge structures of 1T′-WTe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 128, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; (b) from ref. 132, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society; and (c) and (d) from ref. 75, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 
As the reactants migrate to the TMD domain edges, the edge evolution highly depends on the reactant transport, which then determines the modulated edges or fractals. Inspired by the vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth of one-dimensional materials, Huang et al. reported the 2D vapour–liquid–adatom–solid (VLAS) growth of MoS2 induced by a KCl catalyst (Fig. 14(b)).132 Owing to the strong ionic nature of KCl, the enhanced anchoring and deposition of reactants (MoOx and S species) on the substrate surface and flake edges can overcome the threshold for kinetic growth. This can be attributed to the surface instability on the low-index edges (vicinal edges of Mo/S zigzag edges) caused by the inhomogeneity of reactant transport. Thereafter, MoS2 branches based on low index edges were formed by 2D VLAS growth at the adjacent edges. When the actual precursor supply exceeds the required amount for TMD growth, the mass transfer along active edges can determine the kinetic growth of TMDs, and then induce the formation of a specific crystal morphology. A similar mechanism is also applicable to special shapes of low-symmetric TMDs. Xiao et al. studied the origin of branching 1T′-WTe2 crystals.75 As a low-symmetric lattice with the C2v group, the growth of 1T′-WTe2 still obeys the kinetic Wulff construction (KWC) theory under a supersaturated reactant supply on mica substrate, which has few trapping sites and provides fast mass transfer of W/Te species. As shown in Fig. 14(c), the typical edges with diverse kink angles have different formation energies (γ), which can be calculated as follows (eqn (9)): (9)where L, E, Nedge and μWTe2 represent the edge length, total energy, molecular number and the chemical potential of WTe2 for the WTe2 ribbons with different edges, respectively. The active (110) kink edge can induce the growth of WTe2 domains, and then produce branches along certain directions related to the stable (100) and (010) edges (Fig. 14(d)). The angles between the [110] and [100] directions are 61° or 119°, respectively, as a result of the WTe2 branches occupying some of the six-fold axes. In addition, the formation of rhomboid ReSe2 crystals and the corresponding stitched branched domains is also ascribed to the rhombohedral Re chains of the ReSe2 lattices and the as-formed special Se terminal edges.133 The reactant transport promotes the creation of controllable and predictable pathways of edge evolution, consequently uncovering the underlying growth mechanisms of modulated TMD edges and fractals.
In summary, control of the reactant transport provides an effective route for the structure modulation of TMDs regarding their atomic vacancies, anti-site points, edges and fractals, which is ascribed to the controllable thermodynamic or kinetic processes. However, despite the excellent match between experimental observation and theoretical explanation, endowing this method with good reliability, theoretical mechanisms are still urgently need for further insight. It should be noted that the reported mechanisms ignore the diffusion barriers actually existing during the mass transfer on the substrates with a sufficient or even excessive precursor supply. Thus, it is more appropriate to consider the possible precursor accumulation and attachment barriers to study the thermodynamic growth of TMDs.


3.1.4 Reaction conditions. 
The reaction conditions are important factors controlling direct synthesis processes, including the temperature, carrier gas, pressure and reaction time, among which, temperature is the most essential to control the precursor species and TMD structures. To achieve the atomic doping of TMDs, regulating the reaction temperature can be easily performed according to the thermodynamic stability of TMDs with different doping levels. Tang et al. reported that O-doped MoS2 was successfully obtained by controlling the temperature of the deposition zone (Fig. 15(a), left).134 Based on the ternary phase diagram of Mo, S and O2 (Fig. 15(a), right), O-doped MoS2 can be fabricated during the transformation from MoO3 to MoS2 when the temperature is controlled below 850 °C. A low growth temperature promotes oxygen doping with a high O2 supply. Besides, pristine MoS2 can be synthesized without the substitution of oxygen with sulphur atoms. Theoretically, the formation energy of modulated point structures varies with temperature because the involved chemical potential of transition metal and chalcogen atoms is related to the free energy at a specific pressure and temperature.135 Similarly, the formation energies of the grain boundaries, edges and fractals can also be calculated based on the chemical potential of the composed atoms, with an inevitable correlation with the temperature. However, the mechanism of screw dislocation cannot be simply attributed to the formation energy differences at distinct growth temperatures. Fan et al. presented an appropriate explanation for the screw dislocation happening in spiral WS2.83 As shown in Fig. 15(b), screw dislocation-driven growth happens at relatively low temperature (600–800 °C) with a low precursor supersaturation, while layer-by-layer growth occurs at high temperature (∼950 °C). As confirmed by the experimental results, at a lower deposition temperature, more screw dislocations appear. However, the uncertain structures of the screw dislocation centres need further evidence to explain how screw dislocation is induced under low precursor supersaturation. Moreover, temperature control has been generally utilized to construct lateral and vertical TMD heterostructures since 2014.120 In the case of lateral TMD heterostructures, precursor supersaturation is governed by deposition temperature, and thus two steps with contrasting growth temperatures during the sequential growth of binary TMD lateral heterostructure can finally lead to the formation of four types of as-grown materials. For instance, lateral MoS2–WS2 heterostructures can only be fabricated when relatively low temperature is employed for the growth of each TMD domain (680 °C and 800 °C for MoS2 and WS2, respectively).136 Otherwise, unexpected MoxW1−xS2 alloys appear instead of one of them or even both regions. Hence, lateral heterostructures are also related to the precursor supersaturation corresponding to each domain. The low supersaturations of both Mo and W precursors can lead to the thermodynamic growth of these two domains, while relatively high supersaturation results in the kinetic growth of TMDs with unavoidable alloying. It is possible to reveal the mechanism by theoretical computation of the temperature-dependent chemical potential of each metal chalcogenide species and formation energies of different lateral heterointerfaces. Besides, the stacking arrangements of vertical TMD heterostructures can be directly modulated by temperature during CVD growth. For example, distinct orders of vertical MoS2/WS2 heterostructures can be achieved by exchanging the temperatures of two sequential processes on the Au substrate during the typical CVD process.137 The mechanism can be described as different adsorption energies of Mo and W atoms on the Au surface and as-grown TMD layer. On account of this mechanism, similar behaviour was also reported in the twinned growth of vertical ReS2/WS2 heterostructures by Zhang et al.138 Besides temperature control, the transformation of reaction pressure is effective for structure modulation by regulating the balance of the partial pressure of the precursor species and vapour pressure of as-grown TMDs.139,140 In conclusion, temperature and pressure affect the precursor supersaturation and nucleation energy barrier, which are typical thermodynamic factors in structure modulation strategies.
 Fig. 15  Reactant condition control toward the formation of modulated TMD structures. (a) MoS2 doped with oxygen atoms at specific doping concentrations achieved by controlling growth temperature according to the phase diagram. (b) Spiral WS2 with screw dislocations and stacked layers obtained at different deposition temperatures and precursor concentrations. (c) 1T′-WTe2 nanoribbons with specific edges obtained by H2 etching. (d) and (f) Schematic illustration and reaction free energies of the different etching directions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 134, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; (b) from ref. 83, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (c)–(f) from ref. 76, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
Distinguished from thermodynamic control, the carrier gas can be associated with side reactions, such as etching, to alter the growth of TMDs. Xu et al. reported the growth of 1T′-WTe2 nanoribbons with specific edges by H2 etching and further ripening (Fig. 15(c)).76 H2 was adopted to etch the as-grown 1T′-WTe2 flakes and form gaseous H2Te species. Etching happens along the [100] direction due to different W–Te bond lengths (Fig. 15(d)). The following ripening process is ascribed to the lower reaction free energy of W and H2Te than that of W and Te (Fig. 15(e)), and the lower surface energy of the (100) facet than that of the (010) facet (Fig. 15(f)). In this case, the reactive components from the carrier gas or atmosphere tend to induce the modulation of TMD structures toward a stable route with kinetic control. The kinetic pathways can be utilized for the modulation of the grain boundaries and lateral heterointerfaces of TMDs, including seamless grain boundaries of TMDs62 and sequential edge-epitaxial growth of TMD lateral heterostructures.141 The former applies H2 to modulate the orientation of the adjacent domains to form small-angle grain boundaries, which apparently act as seamless stitching. The latter involves H2O in the reaction to form atomically sharp interfaces. Complicated reactions occur cyclically between H2O, H2 and TMD species by means of gaseous metal oxides. The introduction of H2 and H2O may be essential to the structure modulation, but it is still difficult to simulate the oriented transformation of crystals and complicated chemical reactions at the atomic scale for the complex intermediates. The carrier gas direction can also be advantageous to achieve multi-level lateral TMD heterostructures.142 Nevertheless, further understanding is required once the detailed reaction routes and involved transient states are definitely proven.
In addition, controlling the reaction time can help to achieve relatively complete structural evolution for either thermodynamic or kinetic modulation.143 The improvement in mechanism for structure modulation through reaction condition transformations will benefit from entire evolutionary pathways instead of several steps.
In summary, the reaction conditions determine the thermodynamic or kinetic growth routes of TMDs. They are helpful for certain precursors and substrates to control the reaction pathways and gaseous mass transfer. Considering that the environmental atmosphere and humidity affect the synthesis of TMDs, it is difficult to describe the universal regularity or mechanism for the control of the reaction conditions. We hope that theoretical simulation, including density functional theory (DFT), molecular dynamics (MD) computations and finite-element analysis, can solve this dilemma and reveal the mechanisms for controlling the reaction conditions.

3.2 Post-treatment strategies
Although structure modulation in combination with TMD fabrication can promote the discovery of the modulating mechanism based on the growth mechanism, the modulating precision still needs to be tailored. Accordingly, post-treatment strategies have been developed for targeted structure modulation of as-obtained TMDs, such as external energetic routes, atomic substitution, etching and mechanical operations.

3.2.1 External energetic routes. 
External energetic routes aim to overcome the formation energy barriers of modulated structures by means of irradiation, plasma and thermal treatment. Energetic species have been introduced to force the transformation from intrinsic TMDs to modulated TMDs with advantages of high efficiency and excellent directionality.
External energetic routes can be classified into electron beam irradiation, ion beam irradiation and laser irradiation according to the types of involved high-energy particle streams. Electron beam irradiation is easy to achieve via electron microscopy, especially transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and STEM, and thus in situ structure modulation and investigation can be simultaneously conducted. Initially, electron beam irradiation drives the in situ formation of modulated linear structures in an MoS2 monolayer induced by vacancy migration.144 An S vacancy (marked by a white box in Fig. 16(a)) started to migrate and the generated embryonic linear structure was observed after irradiation for 125 s, as shown in Fig. 16(b). The length of this linear structure expanded to about 61 nm after an 846 s irradiation process (Fig. 16(a)–(g)). The shear strain around the vacancy can be directly modulated through the irradiation of the focused electron-beam in STEM, which then induces the migration of the atomic vacancies. With the assistance of Monte Carlo simulation, vacancy annihilation behaviour is a general stabilization process via electron-beam-induced and edge-mediated vacancy migration.145 Due to the flexibility of M–X bonds, their short-range movement or atomic slippage can be induced by the incident electron beam, which then changes the stacking arrangement of few-layer TMDs.91 For example, moiré patterns in the original five-layer MoSe2 with twisted angles of 8° and 22° (Fig. 16(h)–(i)) were changed into different ones after 10 min irradiation (Fig. 16(j)–(k)), and the magnified regions in Fig. 16(h) and (j) exhibit the transformation from AA′ stacking to non-AA′ stacking. Although electron beam irradiation effectively induces the modulation of linear structures and stacking arrangements, knock-on damage and phase transitions tend to make the resulting structures deviate from the original structures.91,146 Thus, we anticipate that mild ways to achieve electron injection for TMDs may address this problem by avoiding unexpected damage and phase transition processes, and thus the mechanism of structure modulation can be clearly revealed.
 Fig. 16  External energetic routes for the structure modulation of TMDs. (a)–(g) Vacancy migration process from points to lines observed by in situ STEM with electron beam irradiation. (h)–(k) Stacking arrangement alteration achieved by in situ STEM with electron beam irradiation. (l) Schematic illustration of laser-induced O doping of MoS2. (m) Raman spectra and (n) optical images of pristine and O-doped MoS2 regions, where the insets show the elementary distributions. (o) Illustration of thermal induction for the transformation from quaternary MoxW1−xS2ySe2(1−y) alloys to lateral heterostructures. (p) and (q) Factors that affect the formation of lateral heterostructures, including composition of the quaternary alloys and miscibility gaps in MoxW1−xS2ySe2(1−y) at different temperatures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(g) from ref. 144, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; (h)–(k) from ref. 91, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (l)–(n) from ref. 155, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons; and (o)–(q) from ref. 168, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 
Given that electron emitters are necessary for electron beam irradiation, ion beam irradiation is a low-cost way to obtain modulated point structures. Different from the atomization and the followed knocking out process during electron beam irradiation, specific atoms in the target region are removed by means of collisions with the incident ions. For instance, chalcogen vacancies are efficiently generated upon irradiation with a helium ion beam.147,148 Under the irradiation of a high-energy ion beam, a large amount of chalcogen vacancies can emerge when the transformation of the stacking arrangement occurs.149 However, heavy ion beams, including gallium, iron, silver and gold ions, can result in the ejection of both the chalcogen and transition metal atoms due to the giant momentum of the incident ions.150–152 In particular, aimed at the transformation of chemical components, ion beam irradiation can effectively introduce atomic dopants in the host TMDs, especially for those that are difficult to achieve by general synthesis strategies, such as chlorine doping.153 Compared with the excellent focusing capability of the electron beam at the atomic scale, low doses of ion beams are utilized for sub-microscale or microscale regions with relatively random vacancy positions. In the case of single-atom vacancies, the focused ion beam (FIB) strategy has been developed to reform the spatial accuracy and further reduce the ion beam dosage to eliminate unexpected damage.150 Actually, the masses and charges of the incident ions are influential factors, causing the results to vary from substitution to atomic vacancy, and then to large pores,154 as well further impacting the lattice strain. To turn ion beam irradiation into a highly customized and non-destructive method, the existing difficulties need to be solved, including unexpected thermal effects and strain-induced damages, to avoid the unforeseen decomposition of the materials.
Laser irradiation has also been generally employed to modulate TMD structures given that the energetic photon beam can help overcome the energy barriers of structural transformation. It is a concern that laser irradiation may induce the formation of atomic vacancies due the energetic incident photons, but the surrounding atmosphere of target TMDs has an enormous impact on this process. It is possible for gases to be deformed and atomized by energetic laser irradiation, and then be anchored on the vacancy sites of TMDs. Specifically, oxygen doping generally occurs under ambient conditions because the deformation of oxygen and water vapour can be induced by the incident laser. Fig. 16(l) shows an example of a laser-induced patterned MoS2−xOδ structure.155 Compared with pristine MoS2, the blue shift in the A1g peak of ∼1.5 cm−1 indicates the O-doped feature (Fig. 16(m)). Fig. 16(n) and the inset exhibit the clear interface of two regions (MoS2−xOδ and MoS2) with and without oxygen doping by optical microscopy (OM) and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES). O-doped MoTe2 can be constructed via a similar operation.156 By means of a direct laser writing system, it is easy to produce patterned O-doped TMD regions by confocal laser writing, where the only requirement is that the instantaneous energy of the laser spot on TMDs should be equal to or larger than the deformation energy of oxygen. For the introduction of other doped atoms, TMDs are placed in the environment of the corresponding gases with the protection of inert gas, and then exposed to laser irradiation. For instance, P-doped MoS2 could be achieved in a mixed atmosphere of PH3 and Ar in a dedicated sealed apparatus.157 In this case, the energy of the incident laser should be large enough to overcome the deformation energy barriers of gaseous dopants, but it cannot destroy the as-obtained doped TMDs. There is no doubt that laser irradiation promotes the development of patterned doping for TMDs, while the dopant choice is still limited and the mechanism of in situ atomic doping under an optical field needs further exploration.
Plasma treatment is another effective method to introduce atomic vacancies and atomic doping to TMDs. Mild plasma with a low radio-frequency (RF) power tends to the formation of chalcogen vacancies in TMDs,158,159 while strong plasma with a high RF power and long treatment time can lead to atomic doping.160,161 In addition, the reactivity of the gas source determines the requirement of RF power and exposure time to create atomic vacancies or atomic doping. Plasma based on inert gases (He or Ar) can only introduce atomic vacancies in as-obtained TMDs,158,159 while the slightly active ones (e.g., N2) can induce doped TMDs by applying extremely high RF power (e.g., hundreds of watts).160 For reactive gas sources, such as NH3 and O2, atomic doping with various concentrations can be achieved by controlling the RF power (in the range of tens of watts) and treatment time.161–163 Regardless of the reactive gas source, the plasma species generated by an extremely low RF power only act as charged particles, colliding with the TMD lattice rather than energetic dopants with high chemical activity.164 Moreover, H2 plasma may be unique because it can just induce the formation of atomic vacancies without hydrogen doping despite its excellent reducibility.158,165 This is attributed to the high activity and possible oxidation of H-doped TMDs under ambient conditions. In summary, plasma treatment depends on the gas supply and plasma strength to a great extent. Considering further development, it is better to reveal the formation mechanism of plasma based on plasma chemistry and physics when different gas sources are utilized, which will be beneficial for appropriate theoretical simulation for modulated point structures.
In addition to the irradiation and collision of energetic particle beams and plasma, thermal treatment can also lead to the structure modulation of TMDs. The thermodynamic process can be commonly described as the transformation from thermally induced active states to modulated structures. As the vacuum level decreases, Te vacancies, oxygen doping, oxygen adatoms and O2 adsorption can be introduced in MoTe2 through rapid thermal annealing (RTA).166 Actually, Te atoms are easily deformed via thermal treatment and reactive Te vacancies can be occupied by O atoms to form stable O-doped MoTe2 at a relatively low vacuum level. Rapid annealing will protect the whole TMD structure, otherwise quenching or long-term annealing can provoke its deformation or complete oxidation. Due to the phase separation of metal alloys upon annealing,167 the rearrangement of the metal components of TMD alloys can be induced by thermal treatment.168Fig. 16(o) demonstrates the transformation from the quaternary MoxW1−xS2ySe2(1−y) alloy to the lateral MoS2xSe2(1−x)–WS2ySe2(1−y) heterostructure after annealing from 5 h at 250 °C under ultrahigh vacuum (pressure of ∼20 mTorr). This phenomenon, which is known as segregation, happens only in alloys with specific compositions (points marked green in Fig. 16(p)). This means that segregation requires high miscibility and excellent stability of pure TMD references. The mixing energies and corresponding configurational entropy are dependent on the miscibility gaps at different temperatures. The miscibility gap at 523 K (experimental temperature) indicates that phase segregation occurs along the MoSe2–WS2 diagonal (Fig. 16(q)). Besides phase segregation, thermal annealing offers opportunities to transform small domains of randomly stacked bilayers into large regions via the thermal grain transition process.169 The thermodynamic parameters can be calculated by simulating the modulated structures through thermal treatment, which can promote the comprehension of the underlying mechanisms.
External energetic routes indeed provide convenience and excellent precision for in situ structure modulation, enabling real-time observation to present the structure evolution process directly. Nevertheless, the inevitable damage induces unexpected missing atoms and structure reconstruction, which are far from expectation. Thus, it is interesting how to apply energetic strategies to only small regions or even single atoms, which can avoid the above-mentioned damage and maintain the intrinsic properties of the areas beyond modulated sites.


3.2.2 Atomic substitution. 
Different from the precursor supply for the direct synthesis of TMDs, atomic substitution is intended for the post-treatment of the as-obtained materials. Atomic substitution is commonly employed for atomic doping and heterointerface modulation with thermodynamically or kinetically controlled processes. Typically, MoS2xSe2(1−x) alloys can be obtained at the selenization temperature of 600–800 °C based on the as-fabricated MoS2.170,171 Theoretically, Se substitution proceeds through attachment to an S site and the rotation of the S–Se bond rather than the direct deformation of an S atom. This method was reported to adapt to the alloying of wafer-scale MoS2 films.171 In the case of metastable TMDs, stable phases will be initially obtained, and then transformed to alloys or heterostructures.172 For selective atomic substitution, Yun et al. reported the preparation of MoTe2xS2(1−x) alloy and lateral 2H-MoTe2–MoS2 heterostructure via telluridation at different temperatures.173 As shown in Fig. 17(a) and (b), alloying starts with the active surfaces and edges of as-grown MoS2 at high temperature simultaneously, while lateral heterostructures can be formed by telluriding specifically along the crystal edges at low temperature. Moreover, Na2Te acts as a driving agent to accelerate the telluridation of MoS2 and the dissipation of gaseous S2. It is interesting that specific lateral heterointerfaces can be obtained due to their higher edge activity for the attachment of alkali metal chalcogenides. The chemical balance of the involved reactions can be thermodynamically controlled to customize the pathway to either TMD alloys or lateral heterostructures. Based on modulated structures besides edges, atomic substitution tends to be triggered on the active sites. Zhu et al. reported the formation of lateral MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructures starting with the grain boundaries of MoSe2 crystals.174 As shown in Fig. 17(c), the buried 8|4|4|8 grain boundary is rich in active sites, which can promote S substitution in original Se sites, resulting in increased stability. A non-uniform strain distribution can drive further substitution, and finally cause a transformation from alloyed interfaces to sharp ones. Therefore, to achieve specific lateral heterostructure interfaces, preliminary structure modulation is advantageous to construct active sites, serving as sequential modulating centres.
 Fig. 17  Atomic substitution for structure modulation of TMDs. (a) and (b) Lateral 2H-MoTe2–MoS2 heterostructure and MoTe2xS2(1−x) alloy obtained by Te substitution with and without NaCl assistance at different temperatures. (c) Lateral MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure formed by S substitution from the reactive grain boundaries of MoSe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 173, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature and (c) from ref. 174, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
With the assistance of energetic routes, precursor deformation and TMD pre-treatment are conducted to achieve atomic substitution. Accelerating the deformation of the precursor assists the atomization process, especially for that with high atomization temperatures. Murai et al. reported that atomic beams drove Nb doping and repaired the unexpected Se vacancies in Nb-doped WSe2 in a UHV chamber.175 The resulting excellent crystallinity and few unexpected impurities make this method versatile for the construction of doped TMDs. In the case of Janus TMDs, H2 plasma is generally used to remove the chalcogen atomic layer exposed to the atmosphere and form reactive surfaces for the sequential binding of another type of chalcogen atom,176,177 which can be recognized as plasma-assisted atomic substitution.
In summary, atomic substitution supports atomic doping and heterointerface modulation, maintaining the atomic structures. The direct substitution with few secondary introduced defects gradually makes it popular for structure modulation. Nonetheless, it should be noted that this strategy is still restricted in the atomically precise substitution and expansion of target TMDs, and its theoretical mechanism is still unknown.


3.2.3 Etching. 
Etching is aimed at structure modulation by removing atoms from the as-obtained TMDs toward the construction of atomic vacancies and special edge structures. Etching starting with several sites of TMD grains drives the appearance of atomic vacancies, and then induces the formation of pores of TMD grains. Han et al. reported the utilization of Lewis acids for NbS2 etching, which began with S sites, and then resulted in porous NbS2.178Fig. 18(a) shows the reaction of AlCl3, a Lewis acid, and the S site of NbS2. A coordinate bond is formed based on the lone-pair electrons of the S atom and unoccupied orbital of Al atom, and then Cl tends to bind with the neighbouring Nb, with the breaking of the related Nb–S bond. These two steps involve spontaneous electrophilic addition and rate-determining transmetalation with a giant fluctuation in total energy (Fig. 18(b)). Given that more AlCl3 molecules are involved in the reaction, the following Al2SCl5− dimerization and multiple reaction cycles lead to the formation of porous NbS2. AlCl3 treatment is also proven to be suitable for the formation of nanopores of MoS2 and TiS2.178 However, this universal strategy has some shortcomings such as the introduction of organic solvents and complicated washing processes. Gao et al. reported mild H2O2 treatment for inducing sulphur monovacancies in MoS2.179 The HO2− ions coming from the hydrolysis of H2O2 solution cause the rearrangement of S electron clouds because of their large electronegativity, which consequently accelerate the breaking of the Mo–S bonds. Compared with Lewis acid treatment, H2O2 treatment only involves fast solution treatment, followed by washing and drying steps, which is compatible with patterning strategies and devices. Nevertheless, H2O2 treatment can trigger the deformation of metal atoms slowly, and thus it requires much more time to attain nano-porous TMDs instead of inducing chalcogen monovacancies.179,180 The controllable modulation of the atomic vacancies evidently benefits from the appropriate choice of etchants.
 Fig. 18  Etching for structure modulation of TMDs. (a) and (b) Reaction routes and mechanisms of AlCl3 etching for vacancies in NbS2. (c)–(e) KWC and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations for etching mechanisms of WSe2 crystals with different edges. (f) Temperature-induced etching for different WSe2 kirigami shapes. (g) Schematic illustration and (h)–(j) mechanism of Te-promoted disassembly of ReS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 178, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(e) from ref. 180, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (f) from ref. 181, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (g)–(j) from ref. 182, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons. 
Owing to their high reactivity, etching often activates the edge sites to initiate complex edge evolution. As mentioned above, long-time H2O2 treatment can lead to the formation of nanopores in TMDs, and thus both the edges of the TMD grains and inner edges around the pores will be exposed to the H2O2 etchant.180 Zhao et al. demonstrated the etching mechanism based on KWC and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. Fig. 18(c) shows that an Se-rich environment induces as-grown triangular WSe2 crystals with Se-zigzag edges. However, in a W- or Se-rich environment, the W and Se edges exhibit disparate etching pathways, resulting in two different types of shape evolution. Fig. 18(d) demonstrates that rounded corners and smooth zigzag edges appeared after etching in an Se-rich condition, while Fig. 18(e) indicates that jagged edges in the W-rich environment are attributed to the enormous etching rate difference of the W and X edges. Besides solution-based chemical etching, sequential etching after the CVD synthesis of TMDs takes advantage of the reducing atmosphere and controlled temperature in the furnace. Cai et al. reported the kirigami of WSe2 through chemical etching.181 As shown in Fig. 18(f), a relatively high temperature can lead to various etching situations for multilayer WSe2. The etching along the inward directions of the corners in the upper layers can be attributed to H2 etching and reverse balance of WSe2 formation. Combining experimental observation and phase-field simulation, etching starts with the three vertexes, and then forms kirigami structures. The edge evolution during the etching process is vital to reversely unravel the growth mechanism of TMDs. With the combination of different theoretical strategies, it is hopeful to clarify the etching mechanism for the guidance of further edge modulation.
In addition, etching heterostructures can directly modulate the heterointerfaces. Xiao et al. reported the disassembly of vertical ReS2/WS2 heterostructures by weakening the interlayer interactions with the assistance of Te disassembly promoters (DPs) (Fig. 18(g)).182 At a temperature below that of heterostructure formation, there are two possible routes for Te atoms to combine with the heterostructure S sites in ReS2 or WS2 layers. Due to their lower formation energy, Te DPs tend to enter the ReS2 layer and activate the heterostructure, which weakens the interlayer interaction according to the increasing interlayer distance (Fig. 18(h) and (i)). The detailed steps in Fig. 18(j) indicate the activated structures with good stability and weakened interlayer interaction. The disassembly of vertical TMD heterostructures inspires the modulation of vertical heterointerfaces through chemical etching or disassembly processes by choosing appropriate promoters, which takes the compatibility of patterned design into consideration and fills the blanks of the structure modulation beyond lateral heterostructures.
Briefly, etching to achieve relatively controllable deformation can conveniently deal with large-scale structure modulation via thermodynamic or kinetic routes compared with the aforementioned energetic irradiation. However, this strategy can also compromise the entire deformation and transformation if unsuitable conditions are adopted. Specifically, precise modulation for etching procedures is still necessary, which should be further developed.


3.2.4 External forces. 
Here, external forces include mechanical forces, electric field and magnetic field excluding heat and light. The mechanical stretching force exerted on TMDs on flexible substrates causes their destruction with the appearance of fresh edges,183 which is similar to the destruction of graphene.184,185 Uniaxial strain along various directions has different effects on diverse TMDs with D3d, D3h, C2v and Ci symmetry. The possible edge structures can be predicted according to theoretical simulation, but it is difficult for the real structures to be known in actual situations. Mechanical strategies have also employed to disassemble as-formed vertical TMD heterostructures. Liu et al. reported the mechanical exfoliation of vertical TMD heterostructures and their rearrangement with new interfaces via layer-by-layer transfer.186 The commonly used Au-assisted exfoliation187 provides opportunities for the preparation of vertical TMD heterostructures, but it still needs further exploration for the preparation of patterned structures. Unlike graphene and its heterostructures, we attribute the distinct mechanical modulation behaviour to the larger friction forces of the interfaces of TMDs and their heterostructures than that of few-layer graphene and graphene-based heterostructures.90 In addition to mechanical forces, electric or magnetic fields also exhibit potential to achieve structure modulation, especially for ferroelectric or ferromagnetic materials. Therefore, we expect that continuous twist-angle modulation of few-layer TMDs and related TMD vertical heterostructures can be achieved through external forces beyond mechanical ways, promoting the excellent prospect for structure modulation of the stacking arrangements and vertical heterostructure interfaces.
In summary, external forces play an important role in non-destructive methods for structure modulation because these forces do not affect the chemical bonds of TMDs. However, their inefficient and inconvenient modulation is restrictive and prohibitive, in particular due to the requirement of complicated instruments and various treatments, which still limit the structure modulation of TMDs.

4 Properties and applications of 2D TMDs with modulated structures
4.1 Property transformations
Modulated TMD structures, according to their transformation in the aspects of charge density distribution and symmetry, exhibit distinguished properties compared to their intrinsic structures. Actually, the band structures, which are generally called electron structures, are the most influential properties for modulated TMDs. Then, the transformed band structures determine the alteration in electrical, optical, magnetic and other properties, which will be introduced according to the different classifications of modulated structures.

4.1.1 Band structures. 
Band structures are very relevant to the symmetry and charge density distribution of materials, which determine the electron energy dispersion along the Brillouin zone paths. Here, we demonstrate the characteristics of band structures together with the variation in the electron density of states (DOS) in modulated structures.
In the case of modulated point structures, localized differences in charge distribution result in localized bands of band structures compared with that of intrinsic TMDs. Once the charges are bound to the modulated points, they can be reflected on the flat bands, which also lead to the Fermi level shifts.
Atomic vacancies directly lead to midgap bands due to the destruction of the original bonds and electrons occupying the non-bonding orbitals. For example, a single W vacancy in WSe2 results in 5 midgap states, which involve the breakdown of six 4/3 electron-filled W–Se bonds and the removal of two unpaired d electrons of the W atom.188 In contrast, single W and S vacancies in WS2 result in the formation of 5 and 2 midgap states, respectively.189 In the case of semiconducting 1H-TMDs, the monoatomic vacancies VM and VX lead to midgap states near the valence and conduction band edges,190 respectively. They both result in p-type doping and the Fermi level shift near the valence band maximum (VBM) for the removal of electrons. Atomic vacancies often induce the reconstruction of the surrounding atoms, which then make the band structures much more complicated such as augmented midgap states.191 The removal of the MXn units can give rise to enormous transformations of M–X bonds around the atomic vacancies, contributing to the migration of various Fermi levels.189 In the case of metallic TMDs, atomic vacancies have little impact on their physical behaviour though they induce localized states. For instance, several localized states induced by Se vacancies are located at levels far away from the Fermi level and have little impact on the positions of half-filled Nb-d bands.37 Recently, systematic studies on group VB TMDs revealed the detailed changes in band structures with the introduction of monoatomic vacancies (VM and VX) and diatomic vacancies (VX–X and V2X).192 According to differences in previous reports regarding the stable phases and predicted band structures and the experimental results,193–196 we think that precise and detailed discussions are still necessary for the vacancy-induced band structures of group V B TMDs. As a special TMD, PdSe2 with monoselenium vacancy (VSe) also exhibits two midgap bands near the original CBM, similar to most VX-induced ones.197 In conclusion, chalcogen vacancies may ordinarily lead to midgap states, but metal vacancies can result in quite complex situations. Thus, it is reasonable to consider spin–orbit coupling effects for the unpaired electrons and fractal filling bonds, which may improve the precision of theoretical computations and make the band structures much more coherent.
Anti-site points also involve midgap states in the original band structures. For example, S2W in WS2 results in 4 midgap states, and three of them are located near the VBM189 with an increased Fermi level due to the increasing electron affinity, which was further confirmed experimentally via scanning tunnelling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS). This phenomenon is attributed to the remaining semi-occupied states of the two substitutional S atoms.131 Additionally, the observed SW point induces strong unoccupied states in the conduction band minimum (CBM) due to the rearrangement of the atoms around the substitutional S atom, especially for the two closed S atoms.131 The midgap states introduced by anti-site points are modulated by the reconstructed or relaxed structures (e.g., SW or S2W, respectively) to a great extent. Therefore, band structure modulation is necessary to tune the stability and consider the involved rearrangements of anti-site points to avoid the failure of additional bands after structure modulation.
Besides autologous structures, doped atoms, as heterogenous point structures, improve the diversity of band structures of modulated TMDs. In general, isoelectronic atomic doping may not generate observed differences in band structures from the original TMDs when the structural distortions are mild enough to be neglected. For example, Cr-doping in MoS2 only induced low-energy states near the intrinsic CBM due the more unoccupied orbits of Cr than that in the original Mo, while V-doped MoS2 exhibited a spin-resolved DOS near the original VBM and CBM.198 The unpaired valence electrons of Cr (3d2) are similar to that of Mo (4d2), but that of V (3d1) are very different. Under neutral atomic doping conditions, the lack of electrons in the V dopant results in unpaired electrons in the whole material due to the different spin-up and spin-down DOS. Once negatively charged V doping occurs, this spin-resolved phenomenon will be absent. Similar conclusions were drawn on account of the DOS of Cr-, Fe-, Nb- and Mo-doped WS2.199Fig. 19(a) shows that the DOS of Cr-doped WS2 is similar to that of the pristine WS2, with unoccupied states near the CBM, which is ascribed to the short-range interaction of the Cr d3z2−r2 orbital and the combination of d orbitals from 6 neighbouring W atoms (Fig. 19(b)). Due to the two more valence d electrons in Fe and the broken threefold rotational symmetry, the first midgap state split by Jahn–Teller distortion is doubly occupied with both spins (Fig. 19(c)). The corresponding charge density indicates the short-range interaction between the d3z2−r2, dx2−y2, and dxy orbitals of the Fe atom and anti-bonding d orbitals of two neighbouring W atoms (Fig. 19(d)). For Nb with one less d electron than W, a spin-polarized hole exists in the near-VBM of Nb-doped WS2 (Fig. 19(e)), while Mo doping causes almost no extraordinary states in the original WS2 DOS (Fig. 19(f)). Specifically, d electron differences help to explain the appearance of the midgap states, and the transformation of the WS2 symmetry can affect the charge density of the doping centres. In the case of multilayer semiconducting 1H-TMDs, it is possible for the doping-induced localized midgap bands to cross over the original band edges of valence bands (e.g., VBM located at the Γ point of multilayer MoS2 rather than K point of monolayer MoS2) and lead to band restructuring.200 Moreover, transition metal doping of 1T-TMDs also obeys the above-mentioned regularity. For example, Ti doping of 1T-TaS2 results in an impurity state near the band edge of the pseudogap of the original 1T-TaS2 due to the one less d electron of Ti than the Ta atom.201 Due to the charge density wave (CDW) transition of 1T-TaS2, Ti doping induces localized disordering, and then hinders the transition from nearly commensurate CDW (NCCDW) to commensurate CDW (CCDW), reflecting the disappearance of the original pseudogap. For atomic doping of main group metals, similar phenomena exist in the midgap states. Sb doping of MoS2 contributes to near VBM bands of hybrid Mo 4d (main), Sb 5s and 4d orbitals and two unoccupied bands below the CBM from the Sb 5s orbital.202 Atomic doping in the chalcogen sites also follows an analogous relationship to the valence electrons of the dopants and original chalcogen atoms. For instance, the band structures of O-doped TMDs are similar to that of the original TMDs due to the same valence electrons of O and chalcogen atoms, but some degenerated bands are attributed to the symmetric breaking by O doping.197,203 Amazingly, Cochrane et al. reported the degeneration of the CBM and half-filling of the valence bands of CH−-doped WS2 (left panel of Fig. 19(g)).204 Due to hydrogen desorption, C˙− causes spin polarization and exchange-induced splitting of the in-gap state, which indicates the single spin-polarized unoccupied state with an energy difference (Δ) of 593 meV of two opposite spins (right panel of Fig. 19(g)). In addition, the spin-polarized valence electrons in the bands marked grey in the right panel Fig. 19(g) exhibit the energy degeneracy of the K and K′ valleys with a certain shift (λ) depending on the doping concentration (Fig. 19(h)). Similar localized midgap states also appear in the band structures of semiconducting TMDs decorated with organic molecules, such as heterocyclic carbenes.205 However, the localized midgap states at low doping concentrations will be transformed into midgap bands and induce band shifts when high doping concentrations or TMD alloys are reached. Meanwhile, energy degeneracy is also induced by alloying. Semiconducting TMD alloys show bandgaps in the range of that of one of their pristine components to the other. For example, the bandgap of W0.68Mo0.32S2 was calculated to be 1.86 eV, which is between the bandgaps of the pristine MoS2 and WS2 (1.83 and 1.94 eV, respectively).206 Quaternary WxMo1−xS2ySe2(1−y) alloys exhibit bandgaps between that of binary WxMo1−xS2 and MoS2ySe2(1−y) alloys, where the bandgaps of these two alloys can also be altered by the transformation of their components.207 Actually, the broken symmetry resulting from non-uniform strain of atomic doping is ignored, otherwise the band structures of TMD alloys can be extremely complicated. When the atomic occupancy ratios are considered, the improvement in the precision is too small to deserve the cost of theoretical computation. Specifically, the band structures of Janus TMDs can be analysed considering the high-symmetry pathways related to the z axis in the reciprocal space due to the broken symmetry, depending on different chalcogens.208,209
 Fig. 19  Electron structures of modulated point structures of TMDs. (a)–(f) DOS and charge density of doping centres of Cr-, Fe-, Nb- and Mo-doped WS2. (g) Band structures of CH− and C˙− doping of WS2. (h) Energy degeneracy induced by unpaired spins of K and K′ valleys. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 199, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons and (g)–(h) from ref. 204, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
According to the characteristics of the atomic vacancies, anti-site points and doped atoms, they can be recognized as different types of doping. In the case of the attached species, they do not involve the substitution in structure modulation. Adatoms affect the TMD band structures through the redistribution of surficial charges. K adatoms lift the spin degeneracy of the midgap states of WS2 with W vacancies due to the unpaired electron derived from the extra electron from the K adatom.188 Regarding the adatoms on pristine TMDs, additional electrons increase the electron–phonon coupling and lead to special physical behaviours, such as high-temperature superconductivity in semiconducting MoS2, which is attributed to the Holstein polarons induced by Rb adatoms.210 Intercalated atoms also induce midgap states similar to other modulated point structures.211 Briefly, valley degeneracy together with electron–phonon coupling is derived from the localized symmetry breaking and charge distribution, respectively, promoting excellent prospects in innovative physical properties. Due to the complicated behaviours, the relationships between modulated point structures and corresponding band structures are still being discovered. Actually, holistic band structure modulation is difficult to achieve by isolated point structures due to the localized charge distribution and strain to a limited extent.
In the case of linear structures consisting of point structures, whether if they are regular or not, localized states of the modulated sites are regarded as edge states, where linear structures can be recognized as boundaries of TMD grains. Thus, symmetry breaking results in distinct band structures and electron DOS along the boundaries and edges from that of ordered grains. Grain boundaries generally introduce midgap states in semiconducting TMDs due to the atomic missing of the distortion cores. For instance, the small-angle grain boundaries of WSe2 with 4|6 distortion cores induce the formation of unoccupied states near the CBM.212 In this case, the midgap states of grain boundaries can be treated as a collection of those induced by point structures, but adjacent cores can lead to interlinked structural transformations and strains, which differ from the conditions of isolated point structures. Once grain boundaries implicate atomic vacancies and reconstruction, the complexity of 1T- and 1T′′-TMDs will increase in the aspects of both band structures and DOS. Compared with the band structures and DOS of pristine PtSe2 with a bandgap of 1.38 eV (Fig. 20(a) and (b)), the Pt-rich grain boundary induces metallic behaviour, while the Se-rich one keeps semiconducting behaviour with midgap states (Fig. 20(c) and (d)).63 In the case of grain boundaries with 5|7 and 4|4|8 cores shown in Fig. 4(g) and (h), midgap states can be introduced in intrinsic semiconductors due to the unpaired electrons and unoccupied orbitals of deficient Pt and Se atoms (Fig. 20(e) and (f)), respectively. Although grain boundaries with unavoidable missing atoms can induce complicated localized states, it is reasonable to predict the possible band structures on account of the analysis of the electrons and orbitals of a single distortion core and extrapolation to the whole grain boundary.
 Fig. 20  Electron structures of modulated linear structures of TMDs. (a)–(f) Band structures and DOS of PtSe2 with different grain boundaries compared with the pristine one. (g) Band structures and DOS of 4|4P MTBs of MoSe2. (h) Band structures of MTBs of MoS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 63, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (g) from ref. 214, Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society; and (h) from ref. 215, Copyright 2019, the American Physical Society. 
In contrast, twin boundaries or as-called mirror twin boundaries (MTBs) exhibit unique band structures due to their one-dimensional periodic structures. Since 2016, metallic behaviours and interesting phenomena have been discovered in twin boundaries of semiconducting H-phase TMDs, including pseudogaps of metallic band structures and 1D CDW transition.69,213 For the pseudogap observed in typical 4|4P MTBs of MoSe2, its origin was explained based on theoretical simulation.214 In a tripled MoSe2 cell, as shown in the left panel of Fig. 20(g), one of the folded Mo dxz band branches(red) is filled and the other two are empty. Meanwhile, the three branches of the twice-folded Mo dxy/dz2 bands (green) all lie above the Fermi level. With the introduction of Hubbard potential correction (right two panels of Fig. 20(g)), a gap of ∼0.47 eV is opened between the filled and empty states of Mo dxz band without any observed changes for Mo dxy/dz2 bands. The as-formed indirect bandgap of 0.26 eV between the occupied Mo dxz band at X and unoccupied Mo dxy/dz2 bands at Γ indicates the as-reported pseudogap in metallic MoSe2 MTBs. Similarly, the spin-degenerate MTB bands of MoS2, serving as edge states located in the bandgaps of bulk materials, highly depend on the Mo atomic orbitals (Fig. 20(h)).215 Spin–orbit coupling induces two anti-crossing MTB bands with small bandgaps of ∼80 meV near the K or K′ valleys. Despite the metallic behaviours of twin boundaries, the 4|4P and 4|4E twin boundaries of semiconducting 1H-TMDs both induce MTB bands, covering almost the entire bandgap energy range,68 while the 55|8 twin boundary with the breaking of rotational symmetry induces spin-polarized midgap states with small energy dispersion.216 Amazingly, the mirror boundaries of special semiconducting TMDs, for example ReSe2, exhibit invariable band structures in comparison with the pristine TMDs.217 It is not possible for additional localized states to appear along the boundaries without any missing atoms and unpaired electrons due to the flexibility of the atomic arrangement. In the case of edges, reconstruction and symmetry breaking result in spin-polarized edge states and separated spatial charge distribution,218–220 which will be analysed in electrical and magnetic properties in detail. However, it is difficult for the band structures of fractals to exhibit common characteristics due to their complicated edge structures. The relationship between mixed edge types may be helpful to uncover the possible band structures of TMD fractals. Another theory is based on the band structures of the screw dislocation in spiral TMDs because of the diverse Brillouin zone paths in these symmetrically broken structures. However, the band structures of these two modulated linear structures are still confusing due to their structural variety and the restriction of their characterization.
Additionally, lateral heterointerfaces, to a great extent, improve the diversity of the band structures of modulated linear structures for individual TMDs. The typical lateral TMD heterostructures exhibit programmable well-aligned bands of semiconducting TMDs and Fermi level pinning of metallic TMDs near heterointerfaces, which is ascribed to the mismatch-induced structural distortion and charge redistribution of lateral heterointerfaces.221–223 Compared with the well-summarized lateral heterostructures with different TMD components, polytypic lateral heterointerfaces with identical atomic components in adjacent grains exhibit combined electron DOS, for example, intrinsic and induced metallic behaviours in 1T′–1H MoSe2 and WSe2 heterointerface.224,225 Recently, lateral heterostructures consisting of metallic and semiconducting TMDs tend to be excellent candidates for electronics due to the elimination of the energy barriers caused by van der Waals gaps and Fermi level pinning. Whether the lateral heterostructures are polytypic or not, it is significant to learn from the band structures of heterointerfaces with external field induction under practical conditions.
Similar to the increasing attention in magic-angle twisted few-layer graphene, the band structures of modulated out-of-plane TMD structures have also aroused wide interest.90 In the case of few-layer TMDs, stacking arrangements will induce the symmetric transformation of their superlattices with different interlayer coupling. The bandgaps of few-layer semiconducting twisted H-phase TMDs vary due to the band valleys located in different symmetric sites of their Brillouin zones.226–228Fig. 21(a) shows the band structures of monolayer and bilayer MoS2 with different twist angles as an example.227 Compared with the direct bandgap at the K point of monolayer MoS2, bilayer MoS2 crystals exhibit indirect bandgaps between the Γ and K points, with the twist angles varying from 0° to 60°. This can be attributed to the higher energy of the upper branch, one of the two splitting branches of doubly degenerated valence band near the Γ point, than that of valence band at K due to the different interlayer electronic coupling, which was reported early in 2014.229 Notably, besides the selection of similar high-symmetry pathways for few-layer TMDs with specific twist angles, the symmetric transformation of few-layer superlattices with arbitrary twist angles should be considered to explore the general dependence of band structures on the random stacking arrangement.
 Fig. 21  Band structures of modulated out-of-plane structures of TMDs. (a) Band structures of monolayer and bilayer MoS2 with different stacking arrangements. (b) Band structures of C7 and T stackings of MoS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures. (c)–(f) Band structures of monolayer WS2, WSe2 and their vertical heterobilayers obtained by ARPES and theoretical calculations. (g)–(k) Schematic illustration, band structures and ARPES results of 1T/1H-TaS2 vertical heterostructures, indicating the behaviours of artificial heavy fermions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 227, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society; (b) from ref. 233, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(f) from ref. 237, Copyright 2021, the American Association for the Advancement of Science; and (g)–(k) from ref. 238, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
In contrast, theoretical studies on the band structures of vertical TMD heterostructures can be regarded as superb standards and references. Traditionally, the band alignment and surficial band bending of vertical TMD heterostructures were merely the focus in the past due to their well-acknowledged connections with electrical and optical properties.209,230,231 Then, components of the band structures attracted some attention, which was beneficial to explain how and why the TMD energy bands align in specific ways. For instance, the AB-stacked MoS2/WS2 heterostructure exhibited an indirect bandgap of 1.16 eV between the Γ and K points, in which MoS2 mainly contributed to the CBM at the K point.232 In recent years, symmetry breaking can be considered to study the band structures of vertical TMD heterostructures, together with the discovery of moiré superlattices and the development of characterization (e.g., STS/STM, angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES)). Fig. 21(b) shows the band structures of MoS2/WS2 heterobilayers with C7 and T stackings.233 Although they exhibit valence and conduction band edges with similar conditions, including stronger interlayer hybridization at the Γ point than that at K point, the deep levels of the valence and conduction bands are slightly different. In previous reports, possible difficulties existed in defining the unit cells of vertical heterostructures. The computational complexity increases as the modelled supercells approach to real structures considering both the lattice mismatch and twist angle. With a negligible mismatch (0.06%) and specific twist angle (16.1°), both the hexagonal unit cell and orthogonal supercell can be used for MoSe2/WS2 heterostructures, which leads to exact folding for four special points of the hexagonal unit cell into Γ points of the orthogonal supercell.234 On account of the correspondence between the Brillouin zones of unit cells and supercells, the electronic states at special points beyond the high-symmetry sites improve the accuracy of the band structures.233,234 Due to the different periodicity of the superlattices and inevitable lattice mismatch, the stacking arrangements of TMD heterobilayers with specific twist angles differ from each other in different moiré-patterned regions. This means that the topological band inversion regions or band edge shifting regions are periodically distributed and well aligned.90,235,236 Specifically, to determine the exact band structures of vertical heterostructures, it should be effective to combine the Brillouin zones of each layer with the mini-Brillouin zone of the superlattice. The situation can be simplified by regarding one TMD layer as a reference when the twist angle is extremely small. In twisted WS2/WSe2 or WSe2/WS2 heterostructures, different weight functions indicate band structure differences along the same ΓK high-symmetry direction of WS2 as the reference (Fig. 21(f)).237 In the case of monolayer WS2 and WSe2, the degenerate valence bands at Γ are experimentally observed to split into two branches at the K points along the ΓK direction, in accordance with the tight-binding computations with spin–orbit coupling (Fig. 21(c) and (e)), respectively. As shown in Fig. 21(d), compared with the well-superposed ARPES of WSe2/WS2 with the twist angle of 6° and the superlattice vector of 2.8 nm, the flattened valence bands and enlarged binding energy offset at Γ point together with broadened band linewidths demonstrate the renormalized effective masses and mini bands resulting from the zone folding of the mini-Brillouin zone. Semiconducting TMD heterostructures with moiré patterns exhibit potential for patterned devices due to their periodically distributed band structures. By contrast, vertical metallic heterostructures also serve as platforms for innovative physical phenomena and behaviours. For example, 1T/1H-TaS2 exhibits artificial heavy-fermion behaviour.238Fig. 21(g) demonstrates the combination of localized moments of 1T-TaS2 and itinerant electrons of 1H-TaS2 with the exchange coupling JK. As shown in Fig. 21(h)–(j), pseudo fermion and electrons in 1T- and 1H-TaS2 can induce flat and metallic bands in the Fermi level regions, respectively, which promotes the band crossing and the emergence of small bandgaps. This heavy fermion-hybridized bandgap near the Fermi level and the local DOS (LDOS) puts forward the observation of Kondo resonance toward a 2D Kondo lattice on metal surfaces. The strongly localized states in 1T-TaS2 help with the emergence of a bandgap in 1H-TaS2, as shown by the interlayer coupling and band hybridization in Fig. 21(k). Metallic vertical heterostructures often present innovative behaviours due to the special electron–electron and electron–phonon interactions in correlated systems. Briefly, the band structures of vertical TMD heterostructures will gradually become clearer with the development of ARPES and theoretical simulation. Studies on the band structures of superlattices will improve the comprehension of the interlayer coupling in interesting phenomena.
In summary, the band structures of modulated TMDs highly depend on their electrons, orbitals and lattice symmetries. The general relationships between the electronic occupation of modulated TMDs and their band structures are beneficial to design modulated structures for specific targets. Further breakthroughs in band structures are vital to electrical, optical, magnetic, catalytic and other properties.


4.1.2 Electrical properties. 
Based on the band structures of modulated TMDs, the electrical properties of semiconducting, semimetallic and metallic TMDs can be effectively tuned by the transformation of their charge distribution and orbital occupation. In this section, we introduce the electrical behaviours according to the types of modulated TMD structures.
Among the modulated point structures, atomic vacancies and doped atoms have a similar impact on the majority carrier type, carrier density and charge trapping, which then highly affect the electrical properties such as transport characteristics and electrical conductivity. The charge trapping will be enhanced by introducing atomic vacancies in semiconducting TMDs due to the general localized trap states,239 usually referring to the midgap states in Section 4.1.1. Unexpected charge trapping can be well relieved by eliminating these midgap states through isoelectric vacancy repair.239,240 The presence of traps at both the TMD/air and TMD/dielectric interfaces can lead to anomalous random telegraph noise (RTN) signals and observed threshold voltage shifts, according to the explanation by nonradiative multiphonon (NMP) models.241 In the case of atomic vacancies of metallic TMDs (e.g., TaS2), the appropriate introduction of vacancies enhances the electron–phonon interaction, and then enlarges the DOS at Fermi level, which causes an increase in the critical temperature (Tc) of superconductivity in the strongly correlated metallic TMDs.242 Similar behaviour in atomically doped TMDs is induced by electron donors or acceptors. For example, field-effect transistors (FETs) based on conventional semiconducting TMDs, including n-type MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and ambipolar WSe2, show more negative threshold voltages with Re doping,243,244 whereas more positive threshold voltages with Nb and V doping.243,245–247 In the case of V-doped bilayer MoS2, the midgap states near the valence band edges enhance the activity of the S 3pz orbitals and move more S 3pz states to the band edges, which are transformed from fully occupied to partially occupied and dispersive states.248 Extended orbitals improve the interlayer electron mobility, demonstrating the metallic conducting behaviour. Under heavy atomic doping conditions, strongly dispersive states may affect the contribution to the band edges for different orbitals, and the altered charge distribution will lead to distinct electrical properties. Isoelectronic doping in MoSe2 results in a transformation from n-type to p-type semiconductor with an increase in W substitution due to the upshift in the VBM.249 Chalcogen vacancies and oxygen doping cause p-type doping due to the reduction in electrons in comparison with the original TMDs after the treatment of strong oxidizers such as XeF2.250 The impact of atomic doping on the electrical properties of semiconducting TMDs can be directly concluded based on the band structure analysis including midgap states and orbital occupation. However, the electrical properties of atomically doped metallic TMDs differ even with isoelectronic dopants. Ta-doped 1T-TiSe2 exhibits superconductivity with a maximum Tc of 2.2 K with 20% Ta substitution, while Nb doping cannot induce the superconductivity, which is ascribed to the weaker electron–phonon coupling and less effective electron donation of Nb dopants than that of Ta.251 When the isoelectronic doping levels of chalcogen atoms drive the conversion between the metallic and semiconducting phases, the Debye temperatures and electron–phonon coupling strength of the different components reflect the interactions between the atoms and correlations between electrons and phonons, respectively. With an increase in the Se ratio of MoSexTe2−x, the insensitive electron–phonon coupling strength and the heightened Debye temperature indicate weak-coupling BCS superconductivity and the strengthening atomic interactions.252 electron–phonon coupling is essential to prepare atomically doped metallic TMDs, which maintain their superconductivity. Atomic doping offers a relatively controllable method to modulate the superconductivity of TMDs on account of the tunable electron–phonon coupling strength.
Compared with atomic vacancies and doping, it is still necessary to explore how anti-site points impact the electrical properties of TMDs. The charge numbers of different anti-site points (isolated MX, XM and neighbouring MX–XM sites) can be determined to understand the cause of the altered carrier concentration in semiconducting TMDs according to the following expressions: (10) (11)where ˙ and ′ denote a positive and negative charge, respectively.253 The neighbouring MX–XM site can be recognized by the combination of eqn (10) and (11), and thereby shows no additional charges. Specifically, the isolated MX and XM sites result in p-type and n-type behaviour for semiconducting TMDs, respectively, while the neighbouring MX–XM site does not seem to change the carrier concentrations unless obvious structural distortion induces possible out-of-plane delocalization. Anti-site points can possibly affect the intralayer and interlayer electron–phonon coupling strength, and then change the metallic or superconducting behaviour, which still needs further exploration.
Additionally, intercalation has potential for altering the electron–phonon coupling. For example, intercalated K and Cu highly improve the interlayer electron–phonon coupling of MoS2 and IrTe2 (expanded to Ir1−xZrxTe2 alloys), and then induce superconducting transition by forming stoichiometric compounds.254,255 Intercalation-induced superconductivity disappears once the intercalated species are removed, which is probably applicable to reversible superconductors. In addition, large-molecule intercalants can introduce weak interlayer coupling in TMDs, which is not strong enough to trigger a superconducting phase transition. Recently, it has been proven that adatoms influence the electrical properties of TMDs. Chen et al. demonstrated the anisotropic carrier mobility of 2H-WSe2 because of the nonuniform adsorption of Se or W atoms.256 The anisotropic carrier transfer is attributed to the intrinsic screening layers consisting of W and Se adatoms rather than impurity scattering. Adatoms help to regulate the electrical properties and can explain some previously reported mysteries, but they may hinder the electrical applications due to Fermi level pinning and other unexpected effects.257 Modulated point structures offer a definite relation with the electron occupation conditions and electron–phonon coupling strength, which affect the carrier density, carrier transportation and conductivity directly. Once the controllability of modulated point structures improves, their drawbacks such as fixed Schottky barrier heights and strong Fermi level pinning will be relieved, which is beneficial to enhance the electrical applications of TMDs.257
Modulated linear structures mainly affect the electrical properties of TMDs in the aspects of carrier transfer and conductivity. Generally, it is considered that grain boundaries result in carrier scattering, which is harmful to TMD-based electronics. Exactly, the grain boundaries located in semiconducting TMDs, for example, MoS2, exhibit misorientation-angle-dependent inter-domain energy barriers, which hinder the carrier transfer along the channel and lead to relatively low carrier mobility.61 Alternatively, the narrow bandgaps or metallic band structures formed by localized midgap states provide excellent conductivity for the grain boundaries, preventing charge accumulation and breakdown in the materials.61,258 The twin boundaries of TMDs also exhibit second-order phase transition according to the increase in temperature-dependent resistance.213
Another case is the electrical properties of the TMD edges, which are restricted in the metallic or semiconducting edge states of intrinsic semiconducting or metallic TMDs, respectively.218,259,260 Recently, topologically protected edge states of monolayer WTe2 induced edge conducting behaviour, manifesting excellent inspiration in the fields of innovative physics, such as quantum spin Hall (QSH) effect.261–263 Unfortunately, the electrical properties of mixed edges or fractals with regular or irregular atomic arrangement are still difficult to investigate because of the dilemma of both synthesis and characterization. We expect that secure predictions will be reported to uncover the transformations of electrical properties with a change in edge structures.
The screw dislocations in TMDs do not tend to affect their conductivity because missing atoms are rarely involved,81 but the carrier transfer can still change due to the enhanced channel length. Spiral TMD crystals induced by screw dislocations have excellent prospects in highly integrated devices with excellent gate moderation and channel conductance.
Appropriate heterointerfaces also improve the device performances and solve the Fermi level pinning via suitable band alignments, where lateral metallic–semiconducting TMD heterostructures are good examples. For instance, lateral MoS2–NbS2 heterostructures with intermediate boundaries exhibit smooth band alignments without the Schottky barriers that generally exist in TMD electronics with metal contacts.264 Lateral heterostructures of metallic and semiconducting TMDs offer ohmic contacts with relatively low contact resistances, which are gradually adapted to high-performance TMD electronics.265 Semiconducting lateral heterostructures have been conventionally studied for band rearrangement and junction formation, which are still employed in electronics.1,231,266,267 However, metallic lateral heterostructures seem to attract little attention due to their plain conductivity transformations. With the further understanding of metallic and semimetallic TMDs, innovative electrical properties and behaviours will promote the development of lateral heterostructure physics. In the case of complicated lateral heterostructures, such as multilevel heterostructures, most of the electrical properties are highly related to device construction, which will be introduced in the Electronics and Applications in Section 4.2.1.
Due to the dependence of electrical properties on band structures, they can be tuned through out-of-plane structure modulation. Compared with monolayer semiconducting TMDs, few-layer TMDs exhibit relatively low critical electric field strength and breakdown current density.268 Recently, Liu et al. reported that bilayer MoS2 showed a relatively high carrier mobility with a high on-state current, but they demonstrated that the 2H and 3R stacking arrangements show negligible differences in carrier mobilities.9 This is reasonable because the channel length covers a number of moiré pattern periods, enabling the carriers to move along both the intralayer and interlayer directions. Besides the dependence on the twist-angle, it will be interesting if the channel length becomes equal to the moiré pattern periodicity of specifically stacked TMDs. Due to the in-plane anisotropy and specific stacking arrangements of few-layer metallic 1T′-TMDs, such as 1T′-MoTe2 and 1T′-WTe2, they have been proven to be ferroelectric materials upon the application of a vertical electric field and the as-induced inverse symmetric breaking.88,269 Staking-dependent ferroelectric materials are suitable for ferroelectric FETs to reach the limits of subthreshold swing and saturated current. Nevertheless, the stacking arrangement of few-layer metallic 1T-TMDs (e.g., TiSe2), which possibly possess thickness-dependent CDW transition temperatures,270 is rarely reported regarding its influence on CDW transition or superconductivity. However, we believe that these innovative metallic behaviours will benefit from periodic moiré patterns.
Unlike pure TMDs, vertical TMD heterostructures have gained popularity in recent years due to the great interest in magic-angle twisted few-layer graphene.90 Specifically, either vertical heterointerfaces or stacking arrangements are vital to the electrical properties of vertical TMD heterostructures. Both interlayer coupling and band alignment are typical factors for estimating the electrical properties of vertical heterostructures. As conventional examples, vertical MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, which are type-II heterostructures, exhibit lower thermal activation energy than as-grown MoS2 crystals on SiO2/Si due to the strong interlayer coupling and charge transfer between MoS2 and WS2.271 Actually, the carrier mobility values and on/off current ratios are highly determined by the constructed vertical or lateral FET channels based on the same heterostructures. Devices with different channels improve the diversity of vertical-heterostructure-based electronics, which will be also introduced in detail in Section 4.2.1. Recently, researchers have gradually focused on metallic heterostructures. Vertical metallic heterostructures provide excellent platforms for proximity-induced superconductivity in materials that do not have intrinsic superconductivity (e.g., type-II Weyl semimetal WTe2 in vertical NbSe2/WTe2 heterostructures).272 The unconventional behaviours emerging in newly fabricated vertical heterostructures enrich the basic physics of 2D TMDs. Additionally, moiré pattern periodicity provides an exquisite opportunity for some unique electrical properties, although it is quite difficult and rarely studied compared with the optical properties controlled directly by band structures. As mentioned above, moiré-pattern-dependent band structures can be achieved by applying uniform perpendicular electrical fields to vertical TMD moiré superlattices.235 Thus, FETs based on vertical TMD moiré superlattices may exhibit interesting phenomena upon the application of diverse gate voltages. Li et al. observed charge-order-enhanced capacitance in MoSe2/WS2 moiré superlattices, where the gate capacitance of devices based on TMD moiré superlattices with low carrier density highly depends on the filling factors spanning up to four electron moiré minibands.273 Periodic in-plane moiré potential may also induce specific in-plane conducting channels.274 Considering the moiré-periodicity-dependent effective carrier mass and band alignment, it is still challenging for researchers to investigate the electrical properties of TMD moiré heterostructures. The development of in situ modulation of the twist angles and the optimization of device construction will stimulate studies on tuning electrical properties of vertical TMD heterostructures.
In summary, the electrical properties based on modulated TMDs are generally attributed to energy bands near the Fermi levels located in individual Brillouin zones together with considerable electron–phonon coupling. In addition to the transformation of the band structures of modulated TMDs, the device geometry differences and investigation methods also determine the apparent electrical properties.


4.1.3 Optical properties. 
Optical properties are conventionally confined to semiconductors or materials including semiconducting regions due to the necessary excitation and emission processes, which are only suitable for photoluminescence (PL) properties. Besides pure optical processes of PL, photogenerated carriers and nonlinear optical properties, belonging to the expansion of optical properties, indicate photon–electron or photon–electron–phonon processes, which are desirable to obtain unique structures. According to the type of structure modulation, we will analyse the connection between specific optical properties and modulated band structures.
Similar to electrical properties, diverse modulated point structures, especially atomic vacancies and doped atoms, show similarities in optical properties due to their analogous band modulation effects, i.e., the introduction of midgap states, which are often known as the donor and acceptor levels. Chalcogen vacancies generally induce acceptor levels near the conduction band edges with an upshift in the valence band edges, inducing the typical bound excitons. Low-energy peaks corresponding to defect-bound excitons decrease the possibility of forming intrinsic excitons, and thus the neutral exciton peaks decline dramatically.275 For example, the typical normalized PL results of WS2 with and without S vacancies at 77 K in Fig. 22(a) indicate apparent defect-bound excitons (XD) at around 1.75 eV without any energy shift in the neutral excitons (XA) at around 2.05 eV.276 Interestingly, Liu et al. demonstrated the use of 2D transient absorption microscopy (TAM) for the visible observation of exciton lifetimes for TMDs with atomic vacancies based on their different exciton lifetime weights. Due to the two distinct formation and recombination pathways of intrinsic and defect-bound excitons, as shown in Fig. 22(b), time-resolved pump-induced change of probe transmission (ΔT) can reflect the different lifetime weights of types kinds of excitons (Fig. 22(c)).276 Thus, the vacancy density in response to lifetime weight can be directly presented in the 2D TAM images, which promotes the development of direct observation methods for modulated point structures based on tuned optical properties. Conventionally, a decrease in PL intensity and quantum yield means the poor optical performance, but some special behaviours based on atomic vacancies have emerged in recent years. The photoexcited electrons in conduction bands can either further excite the other electrons to the deep conduction bands or be trapped at the midgap levels, which is regarded as Auger-type carrier trapping in high-carrier-density TMDs.277 This phenomenon reveals that the phonon-suppressed Auger scattering process is related to the normal vacancy-bound-exciton emitting process, indicating complex electron–electron scattering and electron–phonon relaxation processes. Based on the midgap states, TMDs with atomic vacancies can also serve as photon emitters when the electrons trapped in midgap states are recombined with holes to form excitons.147 Meanwhile, the neutral and charged vacancies differ in the midgap state conditions, which cause photon emission with diverse photon energies.147 Actually, it is extremely difficult to control the charges of atomic vacancies for achieving extrinsic single-energy photon emitters. Additionally, high circular polarization is possibly reached via different radiative and nonradiative lifetimes because different defect densities are induced by regions rich in metal and chalcogen vacancies, respectively.278 The determination of circularly polarized incident light has potential to facilitate the exploration of controllable opto-valleytronics. Considering unexpected vacancy-bound excitons, repairing chalcogen vacancies can help resume the intrinsic PL without vacancy-bound exciton peaks.239,279
 Fig. 22  Optical properties of modulated point structures of TMDs. (a) PL spectra and (b) illumination mechanism of WS2 with S vacancies. (c) Exciton spatial population of pristine and vacancy-involved WS2 at different delay times in 2D TAM images. (d) PL spectra of pristine, Co-doped and Co, Cr-co-doped MoS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 276, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons and (d) from ref. 281, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Atomic doping incudes similar optical properties in comparison with atomic vacancies. With midgap states involved, the PL spectra of atomically doped TMDs generally present several peaks, corresponding to neutral intrinsic and defect-bound excitons together with charged excitons.244,280 On the one hand, doping-induced shifts in the band edges result in the energy transformation of neutral intrinsic excitons and charged excitons. On the other hand, localized midgap states improve the possibility of nonradiative recombination. Actually, despite the fact that pristine TMDs serve as references, inevitable atomic vacancies cause charged excitons to dominate the PL emission. For example, pristine MoS2 with S vacancies presents the transformation of neutral excitons (X) into negative trions (X−) with the assistance of vacancy-induced electrons, while Co doping and Co, Cr co-doping can both act as p-type dopants to turn negative trions into neutral excitons as a result of the reduced electron density (Fig. 22(d)).281 Although increasing the exciton density is beneficial to recover the PL intensity of TMDs with chalcogen vacancies, it should be more efficient to utilize isoelectric oxygen doping. O doping directly eliminates the localized states induced by S vacancies of WS2, and thereby suppresses either trion emission or nonradiative recombination.282 Isoelectric doping can become one of the most effective ways to deal with the recovery of ideal intrinsic PL. Accidentally, isoelectric doping leads to optical bandgaps measured by PL characteristic peak positions according to eqn (12), as follows: (12)where , EPL, MX2 and EPL, NX2 are the optical bandgaps of isoelectric-doped M1−xNxX2, intrinsic MX2 and NX2, respectively, and b represents the calculated bowing parameter.283 However, it still needs to be confirmed whether the optical bandgaps upon isoelectric chalcogen doping and complicated situations (quaternary alloys or TMDs beyond Mo- or W-based TMDs) obey eqn (12). Atomic doping may also have an impact on the valley splitting behaviour. In general, the valley splitting of the valence bands at the K and K′ valleys of semiconducting TMDs (H-phase MoS2, WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2) is ascribed to the in-plane symmetry breaking and strong spin–orbit coupling effect.284,285 Atomic doping does not only contribute to midgap states for excitons of lower energies, but also changes the splitting of K and K′ valleys.202,286 The effect of valley splitting at a low doping concentration is still limited, except when the doping concentration reaches as high as that of TMD alloys. In addition to the changes in valley splitting, Zeeman splitting and relative magneto-optical effects indicate that the capability of time-reversal symmetry breaking (e.g., applied out-of-plane magnetic field) can lift the locking of spin and valley pseudospin degree of freedom at the K and K′ valleys,285 which requires the further exploration of doped TMDs.
In some cases, the combination of atomic vacancies and atomic doping, regarded as modulated structure complexes, brings both donor and acceptor midgap levels, thus resulting in single photon emission (SPE) or defect-dominant optical emission in these two-level quantum systems.287,288 Despite their unique emitting behaviours, it is a challenging issue to achieve the controllable formation of complexes of neighbouring atomic vacancies and doped atoms, requiring appropriate modulated levels, and thereby highly-localized midgap states.
With the further investigation of environmental stability for PL emission, attached species have recently become the focus due to the natural adsorption of gaseous molecules, among which the adsorption of O2 can affect the PL emission immediately.289 As-grown MoS2 with S vacancies exhibits low PL intensity in its inner regions, which can be enhanced by the propagation of dissociated vacancies from the edge to interior with the induction of chemisorbed O2. This method offers not only the transformation of optical properties under ambient conditions but also the innovative pathway for vacancy recovery.
Besides modulated point structures, modulated linear structures endow TMDs with unique optical properties due to the aforementioned band structure tuning. The charge transfer around the modulated linear structures, accompanied with the relative local states, can induce differences in optical properties. In general, the TMD grain boundaries hinder the carrier transport across the boundaries, induce charge accumulation near the linear regions, and then facilitate the formation of biexcitons and enhance the PL intensity.290 The charge distribution has an impact on the exciton type with spatial differences, and consequently reflected in the PL intensity distribution. Carrier transport across the grain boundaries can be induced by a high voltage, and consequently electroluminescence (EL) is observed at the boundary with the forced electron–hole recombination under a high electrical field.291 The charge distribution effectively dictates the optical emission routes at the TMD grain boundaries under an external electrical or optical field. Moreover, odd-layer H-phase TMDs generally exhibit second-harmonic generation (SHG) effects for the nonzero second-order tensors of electric susceptibility determined by the broken inversion symmetry. Thus, SHG investigation provides a convenient strategy for the configuration of grain boundaries in monolayer H-phase TMDs because the SHG intensity is apparently lowered by the destructive interference of the neighbouring SHG fields.292,293 Nevertheless, it is not potent enough for grain boundaries between two adjacent grains with small rotating angles due to the inapparent destructive interference of the neighbouring SHG fields. Dark-field SHG should be one of the improved approaches by enlarging the second-harmonic contrasts of grain boundaries with large rotating angles of neighbouring grains.294 As the energy of the incident laser increases, the dark-field SHG at the grain boundaries can be tuned by the possible plasmonic resonance. Aimed at small-angle grain boundaries, third-harmonic generation (THG) with generally existing third-order tensors of electric susceptibility is sensitive to structural differences in various regions of TMDs with grain boundaries.295 Higher-order harmonic effects provide opportunities for rapid characterization and novel optical behaviours, which not only can uncover the symmetry differences at the grain boundaries but also employed to develop nonlinear optical applications.
Dominant biexcitons also contribute to the enhanced PL along the TMD edges.290 With the presence of chemisorbed oxygen atoms and electron accumulation on the TMD edges, the PL intensity will be enhanced by the dominant trions because high localized states appear near conduction bands with oxygen passivation rather than metallic edge states without oxygen chemisorption.296 Due to the possible reconstruction of the TMD edges, chemisorbed oxygen atoms can induce further PL recovery from the edge to interior.289 As mentioned above, the carrier transport along the grain boundaries occurs at high velocity due to the lower scattering of internal modulated linear structures, which also provides preconditions for the directional motion of photogenerated carriers to produce photocurrents. Traditionally, positive or negative photocurrents are observed near the electrodes of optoelectronics based on H-phase semiconducting TMDs because of the accumulation of photogenerated carriers.297 Metallic edge states tend to accelerate the carrier transport rather than accumulate the carriers. However, it is distinctly different for semimetallic or metallic TMDs. Weyl-semimetallic Td-WTe2 exhibits edge-resolved photocurrents due to its low-symmetry lattice.298 By means of electrical anisotropy, photocurrent generation is described as a function of the optical electric field (E(ω)) according to eqn (13), as follows: jα = σαβγEβ(ω) Eγ(−ω)(13)where jα, Eβ(ω) and Eγ(−ω) are the spatial components of the current density (j) and E(ω), respectively. It has been observed that the coefficient σαβγ is related to the lattice symmetry, given that the photocurrent along the WTe2 edges highly depends on the edge structures. Survival Fermi arcs, starting from one chiral projection of a Weyl node on the surface and terminating on the opposite one, display finite edge photocurrents along high-index surfaces without measured signals along the (100) or (010) surfaces. The edge states are often determined by the edge structures and lattice symmetry, and thus the interaction of TMDs and optical fields can be tuned by different symmetry-breaking conditions. These phenomena also reflect the SHG signals of diverse TMD edges. Taking 1H-MoS2 as an example, the S zigzag edges and S–Mo Klein edges, presenting additional edge-state levels that are coincident with virtual transition levels, exhibit enhanced SHG at the resonance points, while the Mo zigzag edges do not match the additional edge states, and therefore maintain the same SHG signals.299 The relationship among the edge structures, lattice symmetry and electronic DOS determines the diverse optical properties with complicated interactions of photons, electrons and phonons.
Screw-dislocation-induced spiral TMDs show similar PL results to multilayer TMDs due to the indirect bandgaps of near-stacking crystals.80 Conversely, screw dislocation results in the individual symmetry varying in each step of spiral TMD crystals, which reflects the shift in the polarization direction of polarized SHG outputs.82 The accumulation of the nonlinear tensor of electric susceptibility finally enhances the nonlinear optical properties as the spiral TMD thickness increases.
Lateral heterostructure interfaces tend to demonstrate laterally modulated optical properties due to their programmable band alignment. Lateral heterostructures, which consist of the same semiconducting TMD with different layers, show band alignments with separated bandgaps, and thereby distinct PL results. For example, monolayer–multilayer WSe2 shows spatially distributed exciton types ranging from excitons of monolayer WSe2 regions to charged ones of multilayer regions.300 The built-in electric field across the interface separates the photocarriers and maintains the energy barrier at the forward electric field (from monolayer to multilayer regions), which can be utilized for optical diodes with excellent rectification effects. The modulated properties are also attributed to the edge states of the upper layers in these heterostructures. The interface of monolayer–bilayer WSe2 shows much smaller bandgaps compared with its internal monolayer or bilayer regions due to the edge states of the second layer edges.301 The comparable photoconductivity of the heterointerface with that of bilayer WSe2 is attributed to the increasing carrier density and mobility. Consequently, the built-in electric field and high photoconductivity of the interfaces can promote an improvement in the performances of photodiodes. In addition to thickness-dependent heterostructure interfaces, lateral polymorphic heterostructures also exhibit altered optical properties via a variation in charge transport. Trions tend to be formed in semiconducting 1H-TMD regions due to the injected charges from metallic 1T-TMD regions.302 Slight lattice mismatching in lateral layer-differed or polymorphic TMD heterostructures accelerates the carrier transport, with reduced possibility of carrier scattering. In the case of typical lateral TMD heterostructures, the strain resulting from the lattice mismatch induces a shift in the energy of the band edges, thus demonstrating inhomogeneous PL distributions.303,304 The photo-induced transformation of the carrier type and density appears in lateral heterostructures and affects the charge accumulation along the heterointerfaces, despite the disassociation of tightly bound excitons to free carriers.305 The spatially distributed photoconductivity in modulated lateral heterointerfaces promotes the further understanding of the intralayer photogenerated carrier transport and exciton dynamics.
Apparently, the optical properties of modulated linear structures are relevant to not only the band alignment but also the complicated light–matter interactions, photogenerated carriers and other photon–electron–phonon processes, as well as the influence of carrier scattering and strain. In the case of modulated out-of-plane structures, interlayer coupling determines the optical properties of the entire superlattice, while the intralayer optical properties maintain the inherent properties to a great extent. As mentioned above, the stacking arrangement determines the band structure of TMD by regulating the Brillouin zone of the superlattice. For twisted bilayer MoS2, the band structures and energy differences between the lowest conduction and highest valence bands vary from the CSL (the smallest commensurate unit cell volume Σ) corresponding to different rotation angles.306 In addition to the general direct K-valley exciton energy of ∼1.9 eV, the PL peaks of 1.6 eV corresponding to the moiré excitons of 21.8°- and 27.8°-twisted bilayer MoS2 (Σ = 7 and 13) are attributed to the bandgaps between the Γ and A valleys, respectively. The PL intensity of the moiré exciton is related to the exciton recombination speed, as well as the shifts in the band edges at Γ, K and A (close to Γ′, the centre of the reciprocal lattice for another layer) points. The appropriate stacking provides general regularity for moiré excitons, where dark excitons are generated due to the larger moiré periodicity of deviated stacking. Moreover, equivalent interlayer excitons will become inequivalent because of the transformation from the original symmetric band alignment to type-II band structure if a vertical electric field is applied to the bilayer TMDs.307 Following spin-allowed recombination, energy shifts in the K valleys in both layers lead to two groups of split peaks for four mixed interlayer excitons, which are generated from two intralayer B excitons and two charge transfer excitons (recombined by fully-separated electrons and holes in two layers). Electrically tunable interlayer excitons offer another way to further access quantum information in comparison with magneto-optical effects based on the broken inversion symmetry of semiconducting 1H-TMDs. Besides excitons, the broken symmetries of different stacking arrangements also result in polarization-resolved SHG outputs, where 3R stacking rather than 2H stacking MoS2 shows excellent SHG conversion efficiency.308 Nevertheless, the broken inversion symmetry varies from periodic regions of moiré-patterned TMD bilayers, and thus the nonlinear optical properties should exhibit definite periodicity. In this case, the relationships between the nonlinear optical properties and twist angles of twisted bilayer TMDs are necessary to achieve interesting phenomena such as stacking-resolved nonlinear optical patterns.
Vertical heterostructures are the most interesting among the modulated out-of-plane structures due to their tunable heterointerfaces and stacking arrangements. Initially, researchers focused on the band alignment of binary vertical TMD heterobilayers, especially traditional ones consisting of two types among MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2. The intralayer and interlayer neutral and charged excitons of the vertical heterostructures have attracted significant attention. The six heterostructures, i.e., MoS2/MoSe2, MoS2/WS2, MoS2/WSe2, MoSe2/WS2, MoSe2/WSe2 and WS2/WSe2, all possess type-II band alignments.271,309–313 In general, intralayer excitons and trions are generated from the intralayer electrons and holes at the K valleys for each layer, and interlayer excitons often come from electrons at K valley of one layer and holes at Γ/K valley of the other (an example of MoS2/MoSe2 shown in Fig. 23(a)).312,314–316 Energy shifts in the band edges occur due to the interlayer coupling and specific stacking arrangements as a result of the direct or indirect interlayer excitons formed by the CBM or VBM located at Γ or Q (between Γ and K) besides the original K point.315,316Fig. 23(a) shows the dependence of the intralayer and interlayer excitons on the excitation power. Owing to the boosted exciton density and interlayer charge transfer, intralayer trions tend to be formed, and interlayer exciton X1 is blue-shifted because the screening of the Coulomb interaction increases the Bohr radius, and thereby the exciton binding energy.314 The relation among the bandgap, exciton binding energy and exciton emission energy can be described as expression (14), as follows: Eb = Eex,binding + Eemission(14)where Eb, Eex,binding and Eemission represent the electronic bandgap, exciton binding energy and emission energy, respectively. The exciton emission intensity is related to the electron–hole recombination rate as a function of exciton lifetime, which can be modulated by the charge transfer and separation.317,318 The interlayer excitons with long lifetimes are not only observed in the six conventional heterostructures but also reported in the new type-II ones, such as MoS2/ReSe2 heterostructures.319 Besides, incoherent interlayer excitons are generated from electrons in one layer and holes tunnelled from the same layer to the other, with the assistance of the emission and adsorption of phonons.320 Interlayer excitons with reduced binding energies benefit from the enhanced heterointerface screening with longer formation times compared with intralayer ones. As an essential factor to realize interlayer coupling and exciton formation, the interlayer tunnelling of electrons and holes can be quantitatively evaluated by the charge transfer ratio.313 This offers a quantitate method for evaluating the interlayer coupling strength, which can provide secure evidence for optoelectronic performances. For example, the MoS2/MoSe2 interface with weak interlayer coupling tends to induce the formation of intralayer trions through charge transfer. Meanwhile, a negative short circuit current (ISC) is generated by the built-in electric field (Fig. 23(b)).314 On the contrary, with the strong interlayer coupling (achieved by heterostructure annealing), a photocurrent with a positive ISC is generated by band-to-band tunnelling (BTBT) and the subsequent current along the external circuit after partial interlayer recombination, and thereby X1 emission (Fig. 23(c)). As bound electron–hole pairs, the transition of interlayer excitons can be controlled by a perpendicular electric field because the Coulomb interaction balance of these quasi-particles is easily broken. Unuchek et al. demonstrated a gate-controlled device for switchable photoemission by modulating the interlayer exciton diffusion (Fig. 23(d)).321 When the gate voltage is set to zero, the interlayer excitons can diffuse along the heterointerface and emit at the optical output electrode, which is micrometres away from the optical input electrode, after the exciton recombination process (left panels of Fig. 23(e) and (f)). This emission can be suppressed by applying a sufficient positive gate voltage (over kBT) to the output gate (right panels of Fig. 23(e) and (f)). Appropriate gate voltages maintain the exciton drift and recombination but trap-like gate voltages prevent the exciton diffusion. Therefore, this has potential for electrically switchable optoelectronics. In addition, vertical electric fields also have an impact on the band alignment, and thus affect the charge transfer process.322 The prohibited charge transfer processes prevent the formation of interlayer excitons, and thus only photoemission related to recombined intralayer excitons can be achieved. Briefly, electrical control is efficient to modulate exciton formation and transition processes for switchable optoelectronics.
 Fig. 23  Optical properties of vertical TMD heterostructures. (a) Intralayer and interlayer excitons in MoS2/MoSe2 vertical heterostructures under different excitation powers. (b) and (c) Photocurrent generation mechanisms of MoS2/MoSe2 vertical heterostructures with weak or strong interfaces under illumination. (d) Schematic illustration, (e) theoretical energy variations and (f) exciton emission images for the exciton transport in WSe2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 314, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (d)–(f) from ref. 321, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
As mentioned above, the valley splitting of four traditional semiconducting TMDs (referring to MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2) always affect the interlayer exciton formation, resulting in interlayer valley polarization and Zeeman splitting.316,323,324 Wherever valley splitting appears in reciprocal space, interlayer excitons can be divided into singlet bright excitons and triplet dark excitons, which are formed by electrons and holes from individual layers with the same or different spins, respectively. On the one hand, valley splitting at the same point leads to pairwise bright and dark excitons, representing two peaks in PL spectra with an energy difference in accordance with the valley splitting energy.316,323,324 On the other hand, the valley difference originating from the broken inversion symmetry (e.g., K and K′ valleys) and spin-allowed exciton recombination results in a circular-polarization-resolved emission under a magnetic field.316,323–325 Moreover, the valley splitting can be modulated not only by a magnetic field but also a vertical electric field, and thus this interlayer circular-polarization-resolved emission is also electrically controlled.326 These behaviours will be much more complicated when the heterointerface number increases in multiple vertical heterostructures because of the multiplied recombination pathways and possible charge-transfer-induced valley polarization behaviours.327–329 Magneto-optical applications and valleytronics may benefit from studies on controllable interlayer polarization-resolved emission processes.
Semiconducting vertical heterostructures with type-I band alignment exhibit distinct optical properties. Taking WSe2/MoTe2 as an example, the band edges of MoTe2 are located in the bandgap of WSe2. Specifically, the PL emission is only determined by exciton recombination in the MoTe2 layer, but obvious PL enhancement can be observed in this type of heterostructure compared with the intrinsic monolayer MoTe2.330 High-energy excitation makes it possible to generate bright and dark excitons of K valley of WSe2 or K–Σ interlayer route (Σ, a point in reciprocal space, related to the superlattice), and then induce emission in the K valley of MoTe2 experiencing a unique Dexter-type energy transfer process.331 Special charge transfer or energy transfer processes in semiconducting vertical heterostructures with different band alignments contribute to innovative optical properties and behaviours. Vertical TMD heterostructures consisting of metallic and semiconducting TMDs also demonstrate special emission behaviours, corresponding to interlayer excitons.332 Metallic TMDs initially induce Fermi level shifts, and then result in subsequent energy shifts in the band edges of semiconducting TMDs. Although the charge transfer can be accelerated with the assistance of metallic TMDs, exciton recombination tends to occur between the regions with/without metallic TMDs on account of the charge trapping. Vertical heterostructures with varying band alignments have potential for the further exploration of novel optical behaviours by revealing the specific charge transfer and exciton recombination processes.
In addition to band alignment, it was mentioned that the twist angles of vertical heterobilayers to affect the lattice-symmetry-resolved band structures in Section 4.1.1. Considering the mismatch between two layers, the choice of the unit cell corresponding to heterostructures and the high-symmetry pathways varies depending on the twist angles. Therefore, the electron structures, or specifically, the VBM and CBM, can differ from heterostructures with different stacking arrangements. According to the high correlation between the band structures and twist angles, direct interlayer excitons are transformed into indirect ones by changing the stacking arrangement.333,334 Actually, twist-angle-resolved interlayer excitons are not entirely equivalent to moiré excitons, because the latter emerges in the strong coupling regime with the premise of the periodic moiré potential.335,336 Moiré superlattices can split the original exciton resonances of monolayer semiconducting TMDs into multiple moiré exciton peaks, which is attributed to the multiple moiré exciton states at the centre of the mini-Brillouin zones. These states have been confirmed by the PL results of MoSe2/WSe2 and WSe2/WS2 heterostructures with near-zero twist angles.335,336 However, moiré exciton states still differ in various heterostructures. For example, the MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure shows multiple interlayer exciton peaks,336 while WSe2/WS2 shows substitutional multiple peaks due to the original WSe2 exciton and efficient interlayer coupling.335 In the case of the inevitable lattice mismatch between two layers, the formation of moiré superlattices is restricted in small-twist-angle structures. In addition, the valley splitting of molybdenum and tungsten dichalcogenides provides periodic circular-polarization-resolved moiré excitons in vertical heterostructures.92,336,337 Moiré-patterned stacking arrangements result in different symmetric breaking conditions, and thereby lead to intensity-distinguished moiré excitons with two opposite chirality, manifesting the spin, valley and moiré quasi-angular momentum. Therefore, the electrons and holes located at different valleys with contrasting spin combinations determine the distinct circular polarization ratios of moiré excitons. Meanwhile, the hybrid resonant excitons can also be confirmed by virtue of the exciton band hybridization in the mini-Brillouin zone with the involvement of intra- and interlayer excitons.338 The exciton bands and electron structures in the mini-Brillouin zones provide reasonable evidence for the innovative behaviours of moiré excitons. Perpendicular external fields make it possible to modulate the interlayer coupling, including electric fields and strains. Electrically controlled interlayer coupling reflects the shifted exciton DOS, which then affects the emission process, and even leads to the reversal circular-polarized emission compared with original one without an applied electric field.92 Besides neutral excitons, a vertical electric field can cause moiré trions to create extremely complicated situations. The left and middle panels of Fig. 24(a) indicate that both neutral moiré excitons and charged moiré trions are located in the moiré trapping sites, but electrons partially or fully fill the six nearest neighbouring moiré trapping sites surrounding the moiré trions due to the Coulomb interactions between the electrons and trions (right panel of Fig. 24(a)).339 The binding energies of on-site trions vary from the electron density of the nearest neighbouring trapping sites, showing stair-like energy differences, as shown in Fig. 24(b). Under specific perpendicular electric fields across the heterostructure, trions with different nearest neighbouring electrons can be formed, and then they recombine to emit photons with different energies (Fig. 24(c)–(f)). Electrical control toward moiré trions suggests a quantum-like modulation based on the occupation of nearest neighbouring electrons. An electric field can govern the carrier density, making it is easy to obtain positive or negative moiré trions.340 Actually, perpendicular uniaxial strains also result in energy shifts in the exciton bands in mini-Brillouin zones, but unfortunately, they are not as efficient as electric field induction.341 Interlayer quantum photoconductivity or quantum emitters may emerge with the further explorations of moiré excitons or trions, which will facilitate the development of the field of quantum information. Under a suitable magnetic field, valley-polarization-induced Zeeman splitting occurs in both neutral moiré excitons and charged moiré trions, differing in helicity-resolved PL emission.339,340,342 Magneto-optical behaviours are also modulated by electron- or hole-doping through specific electric fields because of the complex motion of charged particles under electric and magnetic fields.340 Undoubtedly, magneto-optical properties provide opportunities for valleytronics and valley encoding for vertical TMD heterostructures. Quantum/valley communication is innovative and attractive, benefitting fast information transmission and efficient information encryption.
 Fig. 24  Charged excitons in moiré-patterned TMD vertical heterostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of interlayer excitons and charge trions located at different moiré trapping sites of MoSe2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (b) Energies of interlayer excitons and trions toward electron density of neighbouring trapping sites. (c) and (d) PL peak shifts and (e) and (f) theoretical energy shifts of two different vertical heterostructures under controllable electron doping. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 339, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 


4.1.4 Magnetic properties. 
In the case of modulated TMDs, magnetic properties are often determined by spin-resolved electron DOS. Modulated point structures are likely to result in differences in the spin-up and spin-down DOS, which are mostly relevant to the localized states. Atomic vacancies generally induce spin-resolved DOS in atoms near vacancy points with distinct charges.35,343,344 In addition, magnetoresistance hysteresis happens under illumination as the applied voltage matches the midgap states, which indicates specific spin density accumulation around vacancies.343 In the case of doped TMDs, magnetic properties can be determined by the equivalent or inequivalent spin-resolved DOS. Fig. 25(a) and (b) exhibit slightly asymmetric spin-resolved DOS for Re-doped MoSe2 with different doping concentrations, in accordance with small magnetization.345 The positive spin densities of Re atoms indicate ferromagnetic features (Fig. 25(c) and (d)). In the case of the conventional group VIB TMDs, doped atoms that possess extra or absent electrons compared with Mo/W atoms can induce asymmetric up and down spin DOS.281,346,347 Isoelectric Mn doping of 1T′′-ReS2, an anisotropic semiconductor, also induces changes in magnetic properties.348 Owing to the considerable reduction in the exchange gap between the occupied and empty spin-polarized orbitals, the Mn2ReS6 alloy with an extremely low-symmetry structure exhibits ferromagnetic behaviour with a high Curie temperature of ∼360 K. Room-temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors are quite attractive, and thus enormous efforts have been devoted to introducing asymmetric spin-resolved DOS in semiconducting TMDs through modulated point structures to maintain their intrinsic properties. Karthikeyan et al. demonstrated a systematic study on the magnetic properties of molybdenum dichalcogenides with transition metal dopants or adatoms embedded in lattices.349Fig. 25(e) demonstrates that dopants with completely filled bonding and nonbonding states (Ti, Zr, Hf, Ni, Pd, and Pt) cannot induce magnetic moments unless unpaired electrons fill the bonding, nonbonding or antibonding states. The highest magnetic moments in a series of MoSe2 and MoTe2, with Os occupying the original Se site (X-Sub) and Mn substituting for Mo site (Int), respectively, are ascribed to the strong d-orbital splitting and spin-polarization around the Fermi level (middle panels of Fig. 25(e)). According to the prediction, the anti-site points and attached species are reasonable to involve unpaired electrons in the lattices, which then affect the magnetic behaviour. Adsorbed molecules and intercalants can introduce spin polarization in TMDs through strain-engineering-induced distortion, which is attributed to the d-orbital transformations caused by elongated M–X bonds or distorted interstitial pseudo-tetrahedral (or pseudo-octahedral) coordination environments.350–354 However, most of the modulated point structures with low-density distributions are difficult to force the transformation of the whole magnetic orders of TMDs to the ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism, diamagnetism or paramagnetism of the materials.
 Fig. 25  Magnetic properties of modulated structures of TMDs. (a) and (b) Spin-polarized DOS and (c) and (d) up (blue) and down (red) spin densities of Re-doped MoSe2 with different doping concentrations. (e) Magnetic moments and DOS of MoSe2 and MoTe2 with transition metals. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 345, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (e) from ref. 349, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Modulated linear structures provide more opportunities due to the “edge” magnetic properties of individual grain edges or grain boundaries. Gao et al. studied the magnetic properties of 18 types of grain boundaries of MoS2.355 It can be concluded that grain boundaries with Mo 5|7 and S 5|7 periodic structures have ferromagnetic properties with considerable magnetic moments of 0.32–1.10 μB nm−1 due to the unpaired electrons in the localized bonding or antibonding orbitals by the hybridization of 4dx2−y2, 4dxy and 4dz2 of Mo and 3px of S around the Mo–Mo or S–S bonds.355,356 Grain boundaries composed of continuous 5|7 rings or 4|8 rings favour antiferromagnetic orders because the adjacent distortion cores possess opposite spins with almost the same spin density distributions.355 In-plane grain boundaries with certain ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic orders can promote the development of magnetic property modulation, but their practical application is still restricted in devices. The magnetic properties of the TMD edges also rely on their spin density distributions. 1T′-TMDs show potential to achieve tunable magnetic properties by means of edge reconstruction with different periodicities. 1T′-TMDs generally have two different types of chalcogen-terminated edges, which show specific reconstruction widths possessing ferromagnetic orders.357 These special structures in 1T′-MoS2 nanoribbons are desirable for information storage (e.g., magnetic encoding) and spintronic applications. For these 1T-TMDs, such as PtSe2, their edges directly introduce central symmetry breaking and dangling bonds of edge atoms in materials, which then induce magnetism due to the asymmetric spin-up and spin-down band structures and DOS.358
Magnetism generally depends on unpaired electrons, which exists in TMDs with modulated point and linear structures. Specifically, the anti-site points and lateral heterointerfaces show potential as magnetic candidates, while screw dislocations without missing atoms may not exhibit magnetism. In the case of out-of-plane structures, magnetic fields tend to induce valley splitting, which is relevant to the magneto-optical properties in Section 4.1.3. However, spin-related magnetic properties still require further exploration together with the controllable modulation of TMD structures.


4.1.5 Other properties. 
Besides the electrical, optical and magnetic properties of modulated TMDs, other properties, implicating topological transitions, extraordinary phases, phonons and thermal properties, have been discovered in recent years. These unique phenomena expand the fundamental physics and further applications of modulated TMDs.
Charge distribution is essential to both electrical properties and topological phase transitions. Actually, STM has already become the universal characterization tool to investigate the charge distribution through tunnelling current detection in constant-height operation. In the case of MTBs in 1H-MoSe2 or MoTe2, the Peierls transition can be observed in STM images because unstable 1D metallic bands with clear atomic corrugations turn into three-time-periodic parallel lines as the temperature decreases from room temperature, accompanied with a transition from uniform electron density to a Peierls-type CDW.359,360 Distinct from 2D CDW, 1D CDW in semiconducting TMDs can shut down the high-speed metallic channels for charge transport, which is potential for switchable devices. In addition, the localized charge density oscillation along MTBs on graphene has a slower delay rate than that on the Au(110) surface, which indicates a Tomonaga–Luttinger liquid and Fermi liquid, respectively.361,362 The contraction of the surrounding metal atoms toward the central metal atom in Star-of-David clusters in 2D CDW phases can also lead to the periodic reconstruction of the TMD edges, for example, 1T-NbSe2.363 Briefly, the correlation between modulated structures and charge distribution causes further charge density modulation and structural reconstruction, inducing innovative physical behaviours. Recently, Li et al. observed tip-induced discharging of moiré electrons in vertical WSe2/WS2 heterostructures (Fig. 26(a)).364 With a near-zero twist angle and a moiré period of 8.1 nm, the STM image in constant-current operation shows different heights, varying in different stacking arrangements (Fig. 26(b) and (c)). The differential conductivity (dI/dV) mappings in Fig. 26(d) and (e) indicate that an increase in the positive tip voltage (Vb) drives the electron discharge at the nearby BSe/W sites (regions that Se atoms in upper layer are aligned to W atoms in bottom layer) due to the repulsion between localized electrons in the BSe/W sites and the negative-charge-accumulated tip. Localized moiré charge states with periodic energy fluctuations enable Wigner crystals to be observed,365 a crystalline phase of electrons first predicted by Eugene Wigner in 1934.366Fig. 26(f) shows a schematic illustration of the setup, in which graphene and top hexagonal boron nitride act as the sensing layer and dielectric medium, respectively. The STM topography image (Fig. 26(g)) demonstrates the perfect moiré superlattice without any distortion. Specifically, omitting defects, Wigner crystals with different electron filling conditions can be observed by dI/dV mappings and fast-Fourier transform (FFT) patterns (Fig. 26(h) and (i)), which offer real and reciprocal space information, respectively. Thus, TMD moiré heterostructures have gradually become popular platforms for the investigation of fundamental physics and novel phases. Considering the limitations of STM investigation, electron holography based on traditional TEM and STEM helped to develop an easier method that is sensitive to both structure modulation and charge density, which is suitable even for single atomic vacancies.367 Nevertheless, the exploration of characterization instruments and techniques can promote the further comprehension of the correlation among modulated structures, charge distributions and novel topological states.
 Fig. 26  Moiré electrons in vertical TMD heterostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of tip-induced moiré electron discharging. (b) STM images and (c) atomic schemes of WSe2/WS2, showing different stacking arrangements of the moiré patterned sites. (d) and (e) STS images of the region in (b) at different tip voltages, indicating the discharging behaviour. (f) Schematic illustration of the device to observe Wigner crystals in WS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (g) Topography of STM images of WS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (h) STS images and (i) FFT patterns of Wigner crystals at different applied voltage bias, indicating different electron filling conditions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(e) from ref. 364, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature and (f)–(i) from ref. 365, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. 
Phonon structures are effectively transformed by structure modulation. Modulated point structures, for example, single atomic vacancies, often induce folded Brillouin zones in prime structures, and then result in attached phonon states.368 With the comprehension of the centroid transformation of modulated structures, phonons present changes in frequencies, serving as quasi-particles describing the lattice vibration. Thus, the isotopic doping condition indicates a shift in the Raman characteristic peaks, which has been utilized to reveal the growth mechanism of graphene.369 In detail, isotopic Mo doping of MoS2 induces small shift in the A1g peak to a high wavenumber and large shift in the E2g peak to low wavenumber with an increase in the Mo isotope mass.370 A1g represents the out-of-plane S–Mo–S vibration without Mo motion, whereas E2g is the in-plane vibration when the Mo atom moves to one direction and the S atoms to the opposite with a certain centroid movement. Different from phonon–phonon scattering in isotopically pure MoS2, natural MoS2 (with different Mo isotopes) exhibits lower thermal conductivity due to its shortened phonon lifetime. The substitution of 180W and 80Se for the naturally abundant WSe2 also leads to similar results.371 Actually, the phonon structure can determine the lattice vibration, which finally results in thermal conductivity. Besides the intralayer vibration, attached species generally eliminate most of the vibration corresponding to out-of-plane phonons because of the weakened interlayer interactions.372 It is inferred that thermal transport may be hindered along the out-of-plane direction. Linear structures, such as grain boundaries and lateral heterointerfaces, enable the effective modulation of thermal properties due to the altered phonon scattering and lowered thermal conductance. Thus, hot spots will appear along these modulated structures, inducing thermal accumulation.373 Furthermore, heat flux transport relies on lattice vibration, causing thermal-induced mechanical behaviours (e.g., thermal-induced bending) to emerge, especially in structures possessing asymmetric vibration (e.g., lateral MoSSe–WSSe heterostructure).374 These behaviours enable researchers to develop thermomechanical devices to achieve energy conversion from heat to mechanical energy or electricity. Considering the stacking arrangements, in-plane thermal conductivity is higher than the through-plane conductivity due to the broken through-plane translation symmetry of the randomly-stacked TMD layers, whereas they are similar in well-stacked TMDs.375 The overdamping of strongly scattered through-plane longitudinal acoustic (LA) modes, together with suppressed transverse acoustic (TA) modes, induce the extremely difficult through-plane thermal transport. This provides promising candidates with excellent anisotropic thermal conductivities (the anisotropic ratio of ∼900 for MoS2) for innovative heat insulation strategies and efficient thermoelectric applications.376 In addition to interlayer phonon-determined thermal properties, moiré phonons exhibit many interesting behaviours in twisted few-layer TMDs. Both shear and layer-breathing (LB) modes distinguish 0°/60° stacking from other random twist angles, but they are insensitive to arbitrarily twisted bilayer TMDs, especially for those with large twist angles.377–379 Lin et al. demonstrated that folded LA, TA and out-of-plane acoustic (ZA) (FLA, FTA and FZA) phonons are sensitive to the twist angles, which are governed by the basic vectors of moiré reciprocal lattices rather than that in the reciprocal space of crystallographic superlattices.377 Nevertheless, FLA, FTA and FZA phonons are generally located in the low-frequency regions with extremely low intensity in comparison with characteristic modes (e.g., E2g and A1g modes corresponding to optical phonons). In the case of twisted bilayers, the LB modes show extremely small sensitive regions toward the twist angles, covering the range of only ∼2° to ∼6°.380 Flat trends of two different LB modes together with the shear mode demonstrate that these modes are insensitive to most twist angles, while acoustic phonons show excellent sensitivities. Furthermore, divergent strains are distributed in different regions in twisted bilayer TMDs, where compressive, tensile and uniaxial strains are distributed in the AA-stacking, AB/BA-stacking regions and AA–AB(BA) boundaries, respectively.380 On account of the stacking-distinguished strain, phonons also show different rotation varying in different regions, resulting in chiral moiré phonons with excellent tunability.381 Unique phonon structures offer attractive potential including magneto-mechanical devices and magneto-thermal applications.
The mechanical properties of modulated TMDs are often confirmed by strain analysis of the modulated structures and neighbouring regions, in which the interlayer shear forces of few-layer TMDs can be investigated by shear modes in Raman spectroscopy.382 Mechanical properties are meaningful for flexible electronics and piezoelectronics. Accordingly, uniaxial strain can be applied to modulated linear structures, including grain boundaries and lateral heterointerfaces, to determine their force tolerance and piezoelectric efficiency. Grain boundaries with different tilt angles exhibit various tensile stress–strain curves, indicating different mechanical strengths.58 Because of the different prestress distributions, diverse dislocation-dominant grain boundaries show distinct fracture behaviours, which are associated with atomic reconstruction. This strain is quite localized in both grain boundaries and MTBs due to the local strain distribution around the dislocation cores.383 The strain directions can vary in various grain boundaries. Biaxial or shear strain appears along the grain boundaries, while uniaxial strain is homogenously distributed along the MTBs. The existence of grain boundaries also makes it more effective to attain charge separation to enable piezoelectricity compared to in the pristine crystals,384 but the unidirectional distribution with suitable density is vital to piezoelectronics otherwise currents cannot be formed without any electrical field formed by polarization charges. Compared with grain boundaries and MTBs, lateral heterointerfaces can induce interfacial strains due to the mismatch in composed TMD lattices. The proven dislocations and out-of-plane ripples located at the heterointerfaces may have an impact on PL modulation or non-linear optical applications due to the strain-induced band structures and symmetric modulations.385,386
In conclusion, modulated TMD structures have inspired researchers to discover significant properties for further development in fundamental sciences and practical applications. The relationship between structures and properties gives access to modulate the electron and phonon structures, thereby tuning the electrical, optical, magnetic, thermal and mechanical properties. It is necessary to determine the structure-activity relationships to achieve the structure modulation of T-phase TMDs, where low-symmetry TMDs are required to reveal the connection between the electronic configuration of transition metals and properties of modulated TMDs.

4.2 Applications
As mentioned, the structure modulation of TMDs induces a number of properties in their intrinsic crystals. However, although the tuned properties are quite interesting and promising, they need to be exhibited in devices or other applications. In this section, we introduce some typical examples and their intrinsic mechanisms for modulated TMDs in electronics, optoelectronics, sensors, catalysts and other applications.

4.2.1 Electronics. 
Electronics, ranging from single circuit elements to integrated circuits, are formed by considering and weighing the electrical properties of modulated TMDs, including carrier types, charge transfer and conducting mechanisms. Diodes can be constructed based on p–n junctions, which are effectively obtained by atomic doping and formation of heterostructures. Typically, p–n junctions composed of W-doped MoS2 (or MoSe2) and intrinsic MoS2 (or MoSe2) can be utilized in diodes with excellent rectification factors.56,249 The post-transfer process is aimed at the formation of junctions with an appropriate energy barrier because atomic doping cannot offer a clear and sharp interface between doped and intrinsic regions, which inevitably increases the construction difficulty. With the development of lateral TMD heterostructures, p–n junctions can be efficiently fabricated, and thus lateral-heterostructure-based diodes have attracted much attention.141,387 As shown in Fig. 27(a)–(c), p–n junctions consist of lateral WSe2–MoSe2 and WS2–MoS2 heterostructures with atomically sharp interfaces, and the device transport curve (drain–source current–drain–source voltage, Ids–Vds) based on the WS2–MoS2 p–n junction (Fig. 27(d)) shows typical diode-like behaviour with an appreciable rectification ratio.141 It should be noted that the Ids–Vds curve shows a large threshold voltage of ∼2 V, which is attributed to the large built-in potential required to overcome. In the case of lateral heterostructures, the built-in potentials are determined by the relative positions of the band edges of the composed TMDs, which are hardly affected by the work function of the electrodes and applied electric fields. Vertical heterostructures offer controllable platforms because carrier transfer can be tuned by a perpendicular electric field.388,389 In the case of vertical MoS2/MoTe2 heterostructures, negative differential transconductance (NDT) with a high peak-to-valley current ratio (PVCR) of ∼103 under a gate voltage (Vgs) ranging from −40 to −10 V indicates special gate operation behaviour (Fig. 27(e)).389 Under different Vgs of −40 and 50 V, the Ids–Vds curves represent diodes, i.e., forward diode and Zener diode behaviours with near-zero threshold voltages, respectively (Fig. 27(f)–(i)). The gate operation with different Schottky barrier heights (SBHs) between metal electrodes and TMDs determines the band alignment of vertical heterostructures, and consequently the minority carriers can be resisted or tunnelled from MoTe2 to MoS2 in forward and Zener diodes, respectively. Primarily, gate-dominated carrier transfer results in BTBT and thermal emission behaviours with distinct SBHs and band bending conditions at different gate voltage regions,390,391 where low-power devices benefit from the involved BTBT process. On account of p–n junctions,392 bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) and junction FETs (JFETs) can also be fabricated based on lateral or vertical TMD heterostructures, for example, lateral MoS2–WSe2 and vertical MoTe2/MoS2.393,394 The observed negative differential resistance (NDR) makes lateral MoS2–WSe2 BJTs possible for multi-value logic, but the small current gains are still far from the requirements of high-performance logical circuits. In addition to MoTe2/MoS2 JFETs, they offer advantages in small operation voltages (Vgs as low as ∼1 V) and large subthreshold swing (SS) values (∼100 and ∼204 mV dec−1 for n- and p-channel JFET, respectively),394 but high gate leakage currents (Ig) are possible to raise the power consumption, and then break down the whole circuits.
 Fig. 27  Electrical diodes based on modulated TMD structures. (a)–(d) Optical images and corresponding output curves of diodes based on MoSe2–WSe2 and MoS2–WS2 lateral heterostructures. (e) NDT behaviour of devices based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures. (f)–(h) Gate-dominated forward-diode-type and Zener-diode-type Ids–Vds behaviours of devices based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures. (i) Band structures of the forward diode and Zener diode based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures at different gate voltages. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 141, copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (e)–(i) from ref. 389, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
By means of modulated TMDs, logic circuits based on metal-oxide-semiconductor FETs (MOS FETs) are easily constructed to exhibit excellent performances. The simplest logic gate is the NOT gate, which is also called an inverter.1 An n-channel MOS FET (NMOS FET) can directly act as an inverter, which is occasionally connected with a resistance (partially doping to form semiconducting–metal heterostructures) to improve the performance.165 Due to the restriction of a single semiconducting channel especially for low inverting speeds, complementary MOS FETs (CMOS FETs) composed of in-series p-channel MOS FETs (PMOS FETs) and NMOS FETs show excellent inverting performances via partial p-doping for n-type TMDs, including atomic doping,156 metal deposition395 and molecular adsorption.396 Neutral voltages are also vital in inverters, which helps avoid the definition of ON and OFF operations according to the concrete input voltage values. Tang et al. developed an inverter with a voltage gain of 90 composed of two in-series NMOS FETs (a different connection from CMOS inverters) based on O-doped MoS2, and then this material can be utilized for high-performance NAND, NOR and AND logic gates.133 The construction of logic gates based on modulated TMDs promotes the development of integrated circuits. In recent years, multi-value logical devices have received great interest for the simplification of integrated circuits and the improvement of multi-function. Thermal emission and tunnelling processes are operated by different Vgs regions, taking advantage of different SBHs of heterointerfaces.397–399 Gate-operated band alignments of p–n or n++–n junctions (n++, heavy n-type doping) exhibit distinct carrier injecting behaviours, i.e., tunnelling and thermionic carriers, from one region to the other, consequently generating different carrier transfer characteristics. Multi-value logic gates enormously improve the computational complexity in a single device, deservedly lifting the functional integration of electronics. Together with the discovery and fabrication of modulated TMDs beyond Mo- and W-based TMDs, it is worth constructing novel FETs and diodes to enrich the material choices for electronics.400 Channel design with programmable band alignments can attach multiple functions to devices, while research on the electrode contacts can decrease the power consumption and lower the breakdown possibility. Emerging metallic or semimetallic TMDs, such as VS2, NbTe2 and 1T′-MoTe2, are involved in lateral or vertical heterostructures with conventional semiconducting Mo- and W-based TMDs to improve electronic properties.265,401–403 Owing to the lower SBHs and depletion widths of TMD electrode contacts in comparison with metal ones, carrier injection from the electrodes to channels will happen, and thus higher output currents can be achieved. Modulated TMDs have gradually become important components in FETs and related circuits, which have potential for enhancing the performances of traditional silicon chips.
Besides, memory devices play an important role in electronic information technology. Initial memory devices, for instance, memristors and memtransistors, depend on voltage-operated charge storage, referring to switchable low/high resistance states (LRS/HRS) and voltage hysteresis windows.258,404,405 Charge trapping and storage processes in memristors and memtransistors are similar to neurotransmitter transportation during the signal transmission between neurons. Therefore, memristors and memtransistors are also called synaptic devices with excellent programming and erasing performances.155,406,407 In the case of memtransistor-type synaptic devices, charges are often trapped in the localized midgap states of modulated semiconducting TMDs during the forward scan, and they are released during the backward process. Therefore, semiconducting TMDs with atomic vacancies, doping atoms and heterointerfaces have become excellent candidates for memtransistor-type synaptic devices due to the localized states distributed in modulated point structures or interfaces.405,406 As a demonstration, V-doped MoS2 demonstrated considerable voltage hysteresis during a voltage sweep from −100 V to 100 V, and then back to −100 V.406 Under a Vgs of 80 V, the electrons in the conduction bands of MoS2 are injected into the trapping level corresponding to the V atoms to form programming states. Subsequently, they are detrapped and return to the conduction bands of MoS2 to form erasing states under the Vgs of −80 V, as shown in Fig. 28(a). On account of this mechanism, V-doped MoS2 memtransistors exhibit good repeatability with a programming/erasing current ratio of 104, as shown in Fig. 28(b). WSe2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures can also be utilized in memtransistors because Vgs-controlled charge trapping occurs in the vertical interfaces.405 However, charge trapping and detrapping need to be maintained beyond the operating voltage regions due to the gate-operated band alignments, and thus heterostructures are constructed as MoTe2 fully covered by WSe2 with the drain and source electrodes on it rather than traditional FETs based on layer-by-layer stacked TMDs. From another point of view, memtransistors also involve the transition between HRS and LRS in the mechanism that charge trapping and detrapping processes, leading to a decrease and increase in conductance, respectively, which may be the reason why memtransistors, memristors and similar devices are all called synaptic devices. Initial TMD-based memristors take advantage of the migration of chalcogen atoms in TMDs with chalcogen vacancies or grain boundaries to achieve the formation and deformation of conducting channels.258,404 This process often affects the lattice structures, which are pertinent to long-term stability and breakdown frequency. Chalcogen vacancy migration is quite different in modulated TMDs with diverse grain boundaries or lateral heterointerfaces. A two-terminal MoS2–MoS2−xOδ-based memristor, as shown in Fig. 28(c), was prepared via a laser-assisted patterning strategy, showing a lateral heterointerface parallel to both electrodes.155Fig. 28(d) and (e) present the partial Ids–Vds curve of one sweeping cycle and consecutive sweeping cycles in the range of 0–20 V and −20 to 20 V, respectively. Evidently, with the formation of stable conductive channels, the currents at LRS gradually increased and reached a stable LRS current. Different conductive channels near the heterointerfaces lead to distinct transition behaviours between the LRS and HRS (Fig. 28(f) and (g)), which reflect the transition voltages from the HRS to LRS and currents of the LRS. Compared with the typical memristor behaviour, the trapping mechanism shows better performances and controllability in two-terminal synaptic devices.407 In addition, light illumination or gate control can both act as external factors toward two-terminal devices, such as stimulation-induced production and inhibition of neurotransmitters.155 Synaptic devices and synaptic network calculations are attractive due to the potential breakthrough for the limitation of Moore's law.
 Fig. 28  Electrical memory devices based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Memory processes and (b) performances of V-doped MoS2 memtransistors. (c) Construction of patterned MoS2–MoS2−xOδ-based memristors. (d)–(g) Performances of patterned MoS2–MoS2−xOδ-based memristors with different sweeping conditions and patterns. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 406, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(g) from ref. 155, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 
In conclusion, modulated TMDs have been applied in logic circuits and memory devices in recent years, but their performances still need further improvement. Besides conventional electronics, modulated TMDs are rarely utilized for wireless communication compared to graphene.408,409 Specifically, it is necessary to explore multifunctional and innovative electronics based on modulated TMDs with the development of electronic construction and micro-nano fabrication technology.


4.2.2 Optoelectronics. 
As is known, optoelectronics generally refer to illumination-operated electronics, such as photodiodes, phototransistors and photovoltaic (PV) devices (e.g., solar cells). Modulated TMDs, especially for semiconducting TMDs, provide highly controllable band alignments for optoelectronics with excellent photo responsibility or PV effects. Actually, photodiodes and phototransistors are common devices for photo detection. It should be noted that the localized states change with atomic migration, and thus it is difficult to employ TMDs with atomic vacancies, doped atoms or grain boundaries in photodetectors due to the electric-field-driven inevitable atomic migration, and thereby localized state transition. Photodiode-type detection often employs photoconductive (PC) or PV effects to achieve photocurrents, where the former is derived from the directional motion of photo-excited carriers and the latter to carrier transport driven by the effective formation of internal potential difference, respectively. Specifically, the PC effect generally exists in TMD-based photodetectors, while the PV effect is just involved in photodetectors, which are regarded as modulated TMDs and channels with photo-induced potential differences. For example, PV-effect-dominated photodetection occurs in photodetectors based on Mo-intercalated MoS2 or MoSe2, which is attributed to the distinct motion of excess electrons and holes from the channel to the drain or source side, respectively.410 In comparison with the favourable motion of excess electrons, the transport of excess holes can be hindered by the energy barrier between the Fermi level of the source electrode and valence bands of the channel, together with the trapping levels near the intercalated atoms. Despite the stable PV effect caused by the slightly shifted states of Mo intercalation, the hole accumulation depends on the energy barrier of the source–channel junction with device construction uncertainty, which is inferior to customized energy barriers of TMD heterointerfaces.
Lateral or vertical TMD heterostructures with clear interfaces play an important role in photodetectors due their certain but customized band structures. Built-in electric fields in lateral p–n junctions, such as MoS2–WS2 and MoSe2–WSe2, are tuned by photo illumination, and then result in the generation of photocurrents together with external circuits with excellent photo responsibility.411–413 When lateral anisotropic heterostructures are involved in photodetectors, they exhibit observed polarization resolution. Fig. 29(a) and (b) demonstrate excellent polarization-resolved Ids–Vds curves in anisotropic ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructures.86 In addition to type-II p–n junctions, built-in-potential-driven photocarrier transport also happens in lateral type-I heterostructures, which may be attributed to efficient photocarrier transport across lateral covalent heterointerfaces.414,415 Multi-level type-I lateral heterostructures act as quantum-well-like structures, possibly improving the capability of capturing incident photons, and thereby resulting in high photo responsibility with low responding times.415 Vertical heterostructures in photo detectors often serve as photo-sensing regions because the lateral channels generally consist of individual TMDs and heterostructure regions rather than vertical ones. Specifically, the as-fabricated photodetectors are sensitive to incident photons with specific energies that can excite electrons from valence bands to conduction bands over intralayer or interlayer bandgaps. Due to the generation efficiency of different photocarriers, the detected photocurrents vary from wavelengths of incident lights with the same power.416,417 Moreover, incident illuminations with fixed photon energies and various powers induce different output photocurrents by virtue of the altered photocarrier amounts.418,419 In the case of diode-like Ids–Vds curves of photo detectors, reverse and forward photocurrents are ascribed to the efficient generation of photo-excited electron–hole pairs and effective separation of excessive electron–hole pairs, respectively.419,420 As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, the band alignments of vertical TMD heterostructures are effectively modulated by perpendicular electric fields, and thus phototransistors can be operated by gate voltages, which are called writing voltages here. At different applied gate voltages, BTBT currents are transformed due to the band inclination to different degrees,421,422 while the major carrier types in dipolar semiconducting TMDs (e.g., H phase MoTe2 and WSe2) also change.423,424 Besides an electric field, strains that are perpendicular to vertical heterointerfaces can also enable a piezo-photo response due to the strain-induced incline band structures of TMDs.311 By virtue of high-density integrated configurations, vertical-heterostructure-based photodetectors can be designed as detecting arrays, for example, WSe2/MoSe2 node-like photodetector array (Fig. 29(c)).425 This array is composed of crossed network nodes of WSe2 and MoS2 nanoribbons with nanoscale depletion regions (Wd), showing typical diode-like wavelength-dependent I–V curves and considerable photo responsibility (Fig. 29(d) and (e)). Based on vertical heterostructures, a 10 × 10 matrix made up by photo detector pixels exhibits excellent response for photocurrent mapping with the illumination of focused and defocused lights (Fig. 29(f)–(h)). Highly integrated photodetector units have potential for high-throughput photo-responsible instruments, which also conforms to the development of feasible optoelectronic circuits. Actually, the trapping states, interfacial potential barriers or both can affect photoelectric performances in modulated-TMD-based optoelectronics, which raises the difficulty in understanding the working mechanisms of the transformation from optical to electrical signals.
 Fig. 29  Optoelectronics based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Schematic illustration and (b) Ids–Vds curves of the optical diode based on ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructures under incident lights with different polarizations. (c) Schematic illustration and optical image of WSe2/MoSe2 node-like photodetector array. (d) and (e) Optical responsibility of different incident lights of the device. (f)–(h) Optical images and light responsibility of the photodetector array toward focused and defocused lights. (i) and (j) Bioinspired optoelectronic synapse devices based on ReS2 with atomic vacancies. (k) Work function and conductivity alteration of the optoelectronic synapse under and after optical spike. (l) Memory mechanisms of ReS2 optoelectronic synapse. (m) Signal keeping time after optical spike of ReS2 optoelectronic synapse. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (c)–(h) from ref. 425, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons and (i)–(m) from ref. 429, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 
PV devices still employ p–n junctions to achieve the motion of electrons from p-type to n-type regions and the opposite motion of holes, driven by built-in electric fields in both lateral and vertical TMD heterostructures.392,426,427 However, low power conversion efficiency (PCE) values indicate that TMD-heterostructure-based PV devices are far from the practical applications, for example, 2.56% and 0.7% for lateral WSe2–MoS2 and vertical WSe2/MoS2 heterostructures, respectively.426,427 Enhanced light absorption and hole extraction are beneficial to improve the PCE,427,428 implying that extra materials or device structures should be attached to modulated TMDs of great necessity. Actually, modulated TMDs cannot match the practical requirements of PV applications independently for the essential light absorption and carrier extraction parts, which still remain to be explored.
With the development of synaptic electronics, optoelectronic synapses also emerge, suggesting the promising prospect for multifunctional memory applications. Seo et al. reported optoelectronic synapses based on ReS2 with atomic vacancies.429Fig. 29(i) and (j) demonstrate the bioinspired optoelectronic intelligence model and the detailed optoelectronic synapse under optical stimulation, indicating the good simulation of presynaptic and postsynaptic signals. Two-terminal ReS2 optoelectronic synapse devices exhibit high channel work functions, which turn into lower work functions under optical spikes, and then the low channel work functions are maintained after optical spikes, indicating optoelectrical memory behaviour (Fig. 29(k)). This is mainly attributed to the thermal capture of electrons after photoexcitation and energy relaxation processes and strong electron–phonon coupling induced suppression of radiative recombination due to the photo sensitive vacancies in the ReS2 channels (Fig. 29(l)). The optical spike signal can be kept in the optoelectronic synapse for about 300 s according to the work function investigation in Fig. 29(m). Long-term memory simulation provides valuable insight for the development of biomimetic devices, which may assist with the breakthrough of Moore's law for low-cost, low-consumption, high-computation-power and multi-functional chips.


4.2.3 Sensors. 
Modulated TMDs can also be employed as sensing channels for the transformation of electrical and optical properties given that the interactions between targets and modulated TMDs. Relying on giant specific surface area and sensitive characteristic changes, sensors based on modulated TMD structures allow target molecules to be adsorbed on or pass through the sensing regions effectively with transparent property alteration. In this section, we will take modulated-TMD-based gas sensors and biosensors as examples and present the in-depth mechanisms of the corresponding devices.
By virtue of the high-performance and environmentally sensitive electronics and optoelectronics based on modulated TMD structures, gas sensors can generally employ these devices to achieve high sensitivity and low limit of detection due to the accessible permeance and adsorption of gaseous molecules.
Gaseous molecules can permeate through TMDs with atomic vacancies, varying in different pore sizes. Fig. 30(a)–(d) demonstrate the interaction energies of diverse gaseous molecules when they go through the atomic pores of WS2.430 Intended pore sizes only permit the appropriate molecules to permeate through WS2 layers along the optimal directions, and the prohibited species show extremely positive energies when they are placed near or in the pores. The phenomena indicate obvious permeance transformations, which may be potential for gas selection and sensing.
 Fig. 30  Gas sensors based on modulated TMD structures. (a)–(d) Total energies when different gas molecules go through WS2 layers with different atomic vacancies. (e) Schematic illustration of gas sensing process based on WSe2/WS2 optical diodes. (f) and (g) Responses to NO2 and NH3 gases with different concentrations. (h)–(j) Sensing mechanism of WSe2/WS2 heterostructure in N2, NO2 and NH3 conditions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 430, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (e)–(j) from ref. 435, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons. 
Furthermore, molecule permeance also results in an alteration in the charge distribution of TMDs, which possibly affects the electrical or optical properties. This provides opportunities to carry out gas sensing by constructing FET- or diode-based devices and investigating their characteristic signals. Gas sensors based on adsorption-determined properties are much more general devices for gas sensing due to the distinct charge transfer between adsorbates and TMDs.431 The doping atoms and anti-site points embedded in TMDs provide advantageous adsorption sites for gas sensing due to the enhanced interaction and charge transfer between adsorbates and modulated centres of TMDs.432–434 In addition, band engineering and localized states dominated by doping concentration and adsorbed species result in adsorption-induced current changes, which endows gas sensors sensitivity to gas concentrations as low as, for example, 10 ppm for NO2.432 Diode-type gas sensors employ not only electrically but also optically driven carrier transport to achieve the output currents, which are relevant to the gas concentration, and therefore, TMD heterostructures can also be utilized for gas sensors. Fig. 30(e) shows a schematic illustration of NO2/NH3 sensors based on WSe2/WS2 optical diodes, possessing excellent responses to NO2 and NH3 (Fig. 30(f) and (g)).435 The sensing mechanism lies in the different charge transfer processes that NO2 adsorption results in the transfer of more holes from WS2 to WSe2 but the NH3 adsorption decreases transferred holes in comparison with that occurring in N2 conditions (Fig. 30(h)–(j)). The gas adsorption directly tunes the band structures of modulated TMDs, and thereby affects the charge transfer processes, which then lead to different output signals.
Biosensors are another main series of sensing applications. Electrical and optical signals can be employed to evaluate biosensing performances. In the case of TMD-based electrical sensors, their output currents are related to biomolecular permeance of the TMD nanopore sensing and biomolecular connection with channels of modulated-TMD-based electronics.436–438 The former is one of the commonly used methods for biomolecular identification because the biomolecular concentration difference of two sides of TMD layers can be easily formed in the electrolytic solutions. Early in 2015, the designed nanopores of MoS2 were utilized to identify single nucleotides by different direct current drops when four types of nucleotides went through porous MoS2.436 Moreover, the nanopores in the TMD intralayer and nanochannels for TMD interlayers can affect the molecule transport behaviours, which may also promote the development of water desalination and nanopower generators.439–441 When biomolecules are connected with channels of TMD-based sensors, the devices are similar to gas sensors based on FETs, which depend on the alteration of transfer curves with the combination of target molecules and FET channels.442,443 Distinct from FET/diode-based gas sensors, necessary identification parts, such as aptamers and receptors, should be primarily anchored to modulated sites of TMD channels.437,438 In this case, a few steps of channel modulation can be tolerated otherwise electrical properties of FETs will be altered enormously with unexpected signal hysteresis, which may be regarded as a limitation. The substitution of metallic TMDs for semiconducting ones can solve this problem,444 but their high resistance may reduce the time resolution of currents.
In addition to biosensors based on electronics, optic-related biosensors are suitable in most cases, which exhibit excellent spectroscopic sensing or imaging performances. For example, a high-sensitivity versatile plasmonic biosensor based on monolayer WS2 with grain boundaries was utilized for the detection of novel coronavirus through surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy, where the construction procedure is presented in Fig. 31(a).445 With the combination of different amounts of target ribonucleic acid (RNA) strands, the resonance angles shift due to the altered refractive indexes of the monolayer WS2 decorated with Au nanoparticles (AuNPs) and complementary DNA (cDNA) probes. Fig. 31(b) indicates that relatively numerous and large AuNPs (growth times of 90, 120 and 150 s) can help biosensors exhibit wide dynamic responses in the range of 10−16 to 10−8 M for the detection of a representative oligonucleotide sequence, denoted as RdRp, in the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). The excellent controllability of grain boundaries and neglectable refractive index of monolayer WS2 makes the decoration species act as the only independent variable that is relevant to RdRp concentration.
 Fig. 31  Biosensors based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Construction process and (b) sensing properties of RdRp sensors based on cDNA and AuNP-decorated monolayer grain-boundary-rich WS2 films. (c) and (d) Sensing mechanism of S vacancy identification. (e) MoS2 PL imaging and fluorescently labelled S vacancies. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 445, Copyright 2021, Elsevier and (c)–(e) from ref. 446, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
In pace with the increasing demand of practical applications, non-destructive and universal investigation strategies, such as spectroscopy, have been considered in the field of biosensing. Modulated TMD structures present differences in PL images before and after capturing biomolecules decorated with some fluorophores, which also show potential for locating the defects in TMDs. Fig. 31(c) shows that double-stranded DNA decorated with fluorophores and thiols, which are employed for imaging and identifying S vacancies of monolayer MoS2 single crystals.446 Dynamic adsorption and desorption of these markers presents intermittent fluorescence results, which can be distinguished from PL results of MoS2 according to their different emitting wavelengths by means of the insertion of filters in the light pathways (Fig. 31(d) and (e)). Conversely, biomolecules, serving as markers for modulated structures, can also capture targets in solution for biosensing. Biomolecular imaging based on modulated TMDs can take advantage of the optical properties of TMDs and the reversible combination between target molecules and modulated centres, which promotes the development of secure biosensors.


4.2.4 Catalysts. 
Consistent with the dominant application of semiconducting TMDs in most electronics and optoelectronics, all TMDs can possibly employed for electrochemical catalysis, such as the typical water-splitting reactions, industrially important carbon dioxide reduction reaction and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). In this section, we demonstrate the diverse catalytic mechanisms of the reactions occurring on the different active sites located in modulated point or linear TMD structures to reveal their common underlying structure-activity relationship.
Atomic vacancies and doped atoms may improve catalytic activity synergistically. For instance, neither pristine TMDs (MoS2 or VS2) nor pure Mo1−xVxS2 alloy show excellent activity, but Mo0.7V0.3S2 with favourable V and S vacancies exhibits excellent hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) performances.447 This conclusion is possibly attributed to the different configuration of the d electrons and the adsorption energy of species during the HER process. The atomic vacancies and doping in metallic TMDs (e.g., PtTe2) are also beneficial for the stable adsorption of hydroxyl groups toward water-splitting or water-gas shift reaction.448 The activities of TMD-based catalysts for four basic electrochemical catalytic reactions, that is, the HER, oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), are generally evaluated based on their d-band centres because transition metals are conventionally regarded as catalytic centres. However, the p electrons of chalcogens and even the unoccupied/fully-occupied orbitals of the whole surfaces are possibly devoted to the catalytic activities. Therefore, the Fermi softness, and then Fermi abundance are defined to describe the catalytic activities of complicated solid surfaces considering the DOS weighted by derivative Fermi-Dirac distribution function.449,450 These theoretical models enormously promote the development of the electrochemical catalytic mechanism, especially for the initial adsorption steps, but the limitation in the chemical reaction mechanism makes them difficult to popularize. Actually, for the adsorption of reactants or the formation of intermediates, the solid surfaces are very different from the original ones, and thus the new Fermi softness distributions should be calculated several times for the extra adsorption steps or the desorption of produced species. Moreover, solvation and ambient conditions also have an impact on electrochemical reactions, which indicate that free energy criterion is still effective and convenient for complex reaction mechanisms.
Atomic vacancies and doped atoms may also work synergistically in novel TMD-based catalysts. A specific structure (3N3Sv-ReS2) of N-doped ReS2 species with S vacancies exhibited excellent performances for CO2 evolution and reduction reactions, which are vital to charging and discharging processes of Li–CO2 batteries.451 N doping sites and S vacancies serve as electrophilic and nucleophilic centres, respectively, which are beneficial for the adsorption of intermediates during the processes.
In addition to atomic vacancies and doped atoms, adatoms or attached species can also facilitate electrochemical reactions by acting as active sites. For example, Sun et al. reported NRR catalysis based on Fe-adsorbed MoSe2 or MoTe2.452 The Fe adatoms promote an increase in metal–nitrogen bonds and weaken the nitrogen–nitrogen triple bonds, indicating the enhanced N2 adsorption and decomposition. Compared with the only contribute of d orbitals of Mo or Fe in MoS2 or Fe-adsorbed MoS2, Fe-adsorbed MoSe2 and MoTe2 exhibit different projected DOS (PDOS), demonstrating that the valence band edges near the Fermi level are mainly composed of d orbitals of Fe, Mo and p orbitals of Se or Te. These higher electron densities result in efficient electron transfer from the Fe-adsorbed MoSe2 and MoTe2 to N2, consequently offering excellent NRR performances. Modulated point structures are expected to improve catalytic activities by reducing the energy barriers of some adsorbed intermediates. Nevertheless, the catalytic mechanisms for different reactions based on modulated TMD point structures cannot be concluded using general rules, owing to the diverse reaction pathways.
Besides modulated point structures, linear structures, especially for grain boundaries and edges, are usually regarded as active sites for TMDs. Fig. 32(a) and (b) demonstrate the HER performances of grain boundaries and edges of MoS2 with different structures by evaluating the hydrogen adsorption free energies (ΔGH), suggesting that grain boundaries (e.g., 8|4|4 defects, 6|8 and 5|7) are better active sites for the HER than edges.453 Owing to the HER-inert basal planes and HER-active edges of MoS2, enriched edge structures of MoS2 nanoribbons result in excellent HER performances compared to bare Au electrodes and intrinsic MoS2 crystals on Au (Fig. 32(c) and (d)).183 Instead of semiconducting TMDs, metallic TMDs with excellent conductivities may emerge as candidates to enhance the catalytic performances. For instance, 2H-TaS2 exhibits near-zero Gibbs free energies (ΔGH*) for S- or Ta-edges but a relatively higher ΔGH* for basal planes (Fig. 32(e) and (f)).454 Compared with the highly catalytic Mo-edges of MoS2, the S- and Ta-edges, together the basal planes have better HER performances, which are even comparable with that of Pt (Fig. 32(g) and (h)). Metallic or semimetallic TMDs can take advantage of their excellent conductivities and catalytic modulated structures, emerging as better candidates for electrochemical catalysts than semiconducting ones.
 Fig. 32  Catalysts based on TMD modulated structures. (a) and (b) Catalytic performances of MoS2 grain boundaries and edges. (c) and (d) Enhanced HER performances of MoS2 nanoribbons with enriched compared with MoS2 single crystals. (e)–(h) Enhanced HER performances of TaS2 in comparison with MoS2 owing to near-zero Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption on Ta and S edges. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 453, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (c), (d) from ref. 183, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; and (e)–(h) from ref. 454, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
On account of their customized structures, modulated TMDs can act as catalysts, and thus show potential for industrial reactions or energy storage applications. Presently, reaction mechanisms are studied by analysing the localized electron structures and calculating the energy transformation of elementary steps, but the general structure-activity relationships still need further exploration. We expect that a universal mode for the design of specific catalysts for various reactions can be announced to inspire researchers to simplify the structural design process.
In conclusion, applications based on TMDs with modulated structures have become ideal candidates with broad prospects in diverse fields including electronics, optoelectronics, sensors and catalysts. The mechanisms of these applications are still related to the electron structures of modulated TMDs. However, the choice of structure is still restricted in a few types including atomic vacancies, atomic doping, grain boundaries, edges and heterointerfaces (both lateral and vertical ones). The expansion of selected modulated structures, together with the underlying structure-activity relationships or mechanisms of the applications need to be further explored to extend the variety of material choices, structure design and device construction rather than entirely substituting the maturing instruments.

5 Summary and outlook
In the last few years, explosive progress has been made in the structure modulation of TMDs, tremendously promoting the development of both the fundamental sciences and practical applications. Regarding the intralayer covalent bonds and interlayer van der Waals forces of TMDs, their structure modulation types can be enriched, which can efficiently change these interactions.
In this review, we initially classified the various modulated structures of TMDs into several series according to the modulated regions. In comparison with traditional semiconductors and defects, we highlighted the opinion that the defects in the conventional sense should be recognized as modulated structures in TMDs because these structures offer not only detrimental affections but also interesting behaviours and enhancement of properties. We introduced the characteristics and origin of modulated point, linear and out-of-plane structures, respectively, which revealed the detailed evolution processes of each type of modulated TMD structure. Then, we presented the structure-modulating methods and related mechanisms. We focused on direct modulation methods during the synthesis process and post-treatment strategies. We analysed the mechanism of each method for the introduction of modulated structures in TMDs, which also helped us to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages. Finally, we summarized the properties and applications of modulated TMD structures. We emphasized the altered electron structures of modulated structures, which were regarded as the basis of most of electrical, optical and magnetic properties and applications. We presented the recent progress in electronics, optoelectronics, sensors and catalysts based on modulated TMDs. The typical examples also provided potential evolution routes for the future, which also gave us inspiration for attractive applications.
With the extensive attention, structure modulation has a prominent impact on the structure design, crystal growth mechanism, innovative properties and applications. Despite the rapid development, challenges and difficulties still remain to be overcome in the structure modulation of TMDs and the expansion to other 2D materials.
Initially, modulated structures were aimed at H-phase TMDs, which may be derived from high-symmetry structures, easy-access synthesis and excellent stability. Alternatively, the structure modulation of 1T, 1T′, 1T′′ and other phases will be expected to fill in the blanks beyond H-phase TMDs, where high-quality manufacture should be initially achieved.
Secondly, systematic and appropriate classification is urgent to. To date, little is known by researchers about the details, characteristics and origin of some modulated TMD structures, such as screw dislocations. Unlike the certain distortion cores existing in traditional three-dimensional semiconductors, the screw dislocations in TMDs are difficult to locate because of the flexibility of their atom arrangement. Briefly, the commonly-acknowledged rules for the classification and description of modulated TMD structures should be developed by means of theoretical computation and in situ microscopy.
Moreover, controllable modulation methods are still restricted in modulated structures with relatively large-scale certainty in spatial component distribution, layer numbers and stacking arrangements. It should be acknowledged that most of modulated structures, especially atomic vacancies, atomic doping and grain boundaries, are difficult to locate at predetermined sites with specific structures. Specifically, we cannot make the as-obtained ordered structures get rid of disordering due to the increase in spontaneous entropy. Despite the fact that in situ irradiation can help with the customized introduction of modulated structures, subsequent atom-scale reconstruction can eliminate the original design. Thus, efforts should be devoted to authentically predicting the stable structures to reveal the metastable ones and avoid targeting them. Kinetically dominated synthesis methods may also have potential for the patterned or periodic distributions of modulated structures, and thus we expect that innovative methods combining structure modulation with synthesis processes can succeed in the efficient manufacture of modulated arrays or meta-structures.
Besides, the inevitable introduction of intrinsic defects can be hardly distinguished from expected structure modulation, which impedes the studies of modulated structures. These intrinsic structures are attributed to their low formation energy in TMDs according to theoretical simulations, but the processes are still uncertain. When energetic processes are involved in the synthesis of TMDs, intrinsic modulated structures with a high density can be neglected. In situ characterization methods, especially in situ TEM, Raman spectroscopy and nonlinear optical spectroscopy, are in great demand to uncover the interior routes in the “black boxes”, but the latent possibility of secondary damage induced by external energetic radiation (e.g., electron beams or lasers) can obscure the original intrinsic defects. Nonetheless, it is worth exploring the formation processes of intrinsic defects, which may be advantageous to further understand the structure modulation mechanisms.
Regarding properties and applications, we also think about the potential directions. One is the improvement of computing power to achieve precise theoretical simulation. In fact, most modulated structures exhibit a change in crystal symmetry, which are less focused and presented in their band structures. The precision of theoretical simulations can help us comprehensively and accurately understand the property tuning of modulated structures. Another aspect is the exploration of mechanisms of related applications through in situ characterization. In situ spectroscopic and microscopic investigations are beneficial to clarify the inner device workings with real-time structure changes.
With the development of 2D TMDs, bottlenecks are encounters in different aspects, where the expansion of the 2D family can solve this dilemma. Specifically, further explorations in various fields, including theoretical mechanism, methodology, properties and applications, are necessary to meet the requirements of controllable and customized structure modulation for TMDs. We also hope that novel discoveries can be expanded to other 2D materials beyond TMDs to enrich the material choices and structure designs of 2D systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 42275152, 32072305 and 22076042), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2022M721073), Special Project for the Government to Guide the Development of Local Science and Technology of Hubei Province (No. 2019ZYYD004), Applied Basic Research Programs of Wuhan Science and Technology Bureau of Hubei Province (No. 2020020601012269), and the Foundation for Creative Research Groups of Hubei Province of China (No. 2011CDA111).
References
M. Zeng, Y. Xiao, J. Liu, K. Yang and L. Fu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6236–6296 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Han, D. L. Duong, D. H. Keum, S. J. Yun and Y. H. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6297–6336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, M. Zhou, J. Liu, J. Xu and L. Fu, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 759–775 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhai, Z. Li, L. Zhai, Y. Yao, S. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Ren, B. Chi, Y. Ge and H. Zhang, Matter, 2022, 5, 2405–2408 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, G. Das, X. He, M. N. Hedhili, E. D. Fabrizio, X. Zhang and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901070 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, H. Xu, G. Zou, W. Zhang, R. Chai, J. Choi, J. Wu, H. Liu, G. Shen and H. Fan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5392–5401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. Wang, Q. Jiang, H. Qian, S. Hu, H. Kang, C. Chen, X. Zhan, A. Yu, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Sui, S. Qiao, G. Yu, S. Peng, Z. Jin and X. Liu, Small, 2021, 17, 2100743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Liu, D.-M. Sun, L. Huang, L.-P. Ma, L.-C. Yin, T. Ma, Z. Zhang, X.-L. Ma, L.-M. Peng, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, T. Li, L. Ma, W. Li, S. Gao, W. Sun, R. Dong, X. Zou, D. Fan, L. Shao, C. Gu, N. Dai, Z. Yu, X. Chen, X. Tu, Y. Nie, P. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Nature, 2022, 605, 69–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Holler, M. Guizar-Sicairos, E. H. R. Tsai, R. Dinapoli, E. Müller, O. Bunk, J. Raabe and G. Aeppli, Nature, 2017, 543, 402–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shulaker, G. Hills, R. S. Park, R. T. Howe, K. Saraswat, H. S. P. Wong and S. Mitra, Nature, 2017, 547, 74–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Y. Huan, P. Yang, M. Cheng, J. Shi and Y. Zhang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 751–763 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sokolikova and C. Mattevi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3952–3980 RSC .
N. P. Wilson, W. Yao, J. Shan and X. Xu, Nature, 2021, 599, 383–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
Y. Liu, A. Elbanna, W. Gao, J. Pan, Z. Shen and J. Teng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, K. Pei, Y. Li, H. Li and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tebyetekerwa, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, T. N. Truong, Z. Yin, Y. Lu, S. Ramakrishna, D. Macdonald and H. T. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14579–14604 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, X. Hu, W. Zhao, J. Pan, D. Wang, K. Bu, Y. Mao, S. Chu, P. Liu, T. Zhai and F. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 790–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, J. Pan, D. Zhang, D. Wang, H. T. Hirose, T. Terashima, S. Uji, Y. Yuan, W. Li, Z. Tian, J. Xue, Y. Ma, W. Zhao, Q. Xue, G. Mu, H. Zhang and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901942 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Pan, X. Wang, Y. Fang, C. Song, L. Wang, K. He, X. Ma, H. Zhang, F. Huang, W. Li and Q.-K. Xue, Nat. Phys., 2019, 15, 1046–1051 Search PubMed .
W. L. Chow, P. Yu, F. Liu, J. Hong, X. Wang, Q. Zeng, C.-H. Hsu, C. Zhu, J. Zhou, X. Wang, J. Xia, J. Yan, Y. Chen, D. Wu, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, C. Jin, B. K. Tay and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602969 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, A. Kuc, Y. Jing, P. Philipsen and T. Heine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10214–10218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Kelly and K. M. Knowles, Crystallography and Crystal Defects, John Wiley & Sons, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, 2nd edn,  2012 Search PubMed .

          A. K. Macpherson, in Mechanics and Physics of Discrete Systems, ed. A. K. Macpherson, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1990, vol. 2, pp. 91–116 Search PubMed .

          F. Shimura, in Semiconductor Silicon Crystal Technology, ed. F. Shimura, Academic Press, San Diego, California,  1989, pp. 22–81 Search PubMed .

          I. Sunagawa, Crystal-Growth, Morphology, and Perfection, Cambridge University Press, The United States of America, New York,  2005 Search PubMed .

          G. Dhanaraj, X. R. Huang, M. Dudley, V. Prasad and R. H. Ma, in Crystal Growth Technology, ed. K. Byrappa, T. Ohachi, W. Michaeli, H. Warlimont and E. Weber, William Andrew Publishing, Norwich, NY,  2003, pp. 181–232 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Ho, W.-H. Chen, K. K. Tiong, K.-Y. Lee, A. Gloter, A. Zobelli, O. Stephan and L. H. G. Tizei, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11162–11168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Huang, J. Lin, J. Cui, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, F. Liu, Q. Zeng, J. Zhou, P. Yu, X. Wang, H. He, S. H. Tsang, W. Gao, K. Suenaga, F. Ma, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, E. H. T. Teo, G. Liu and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 394 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Poh, X. Zhao, S. J. R. Tan, D. Fu, W. Fei, L. Chu, D. Jiadong, W. Zhou, S. J. Pennycook, A. H. Castro Neto and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7562–7570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bertoldo, R. R. Unocic, Y.-C. Lin, X. Sang, A. A. Puretzky, Y. Yu, D. Miakota, C. M. Rouleau, J. Schou, K. S. Thygesen, D. B. Geohegan and S. Canulescu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 2858–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Si, D. Choe, W. Xie, H. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Bang and S. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3612–3617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, Y. Guo, K. Mu, H. Shan, J. Dai, Y. Liu, Z. Sun, A. Zhao, X. C. Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703123 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hong, Z. Hu, M. Probert, K. Li, D. Lv, X. Yang, L. Gu, N. Mao, Q. Feng, L. Xie, J. Zhang, D. Wu, Z. Zhang, C. Jin, W. Ji, X. Zhang, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6293 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Nguyen, H.-P. Komsa, E. Khestanova, R. J. Kashtiban, J. J. P. Peters, S. Lawlor, A. M. Sanchez, J. Sloan, R. V. Gorbachev, I. V. Grigorieva, A. V. Krasheninnikov and S. J. Haigh, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2894–2904 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang and A. M. Dongare, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 9064–9075 CrossRef .
W. Yu, J. Li, T. S. Herng, Z. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Chi, W. Fu, I. Abdelwahab, J. Zhou, J. Dan, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Li, J. Lu, S. J. Pennycook, Y. P. Feng, J. Ding and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903779 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Man, D. Srolovitz, J. Zhao and T. H. Ly, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 4191–4202 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Schuler, J.-H. Lee, C. Kastl, K. A. Cochrane, C. T. Chen, S. Refaely-Abramson, S. Yuan, E. van Veen, R. Roldán, N. J. Borys, R. J. Koch, S. Aloni, A. M. Schwartzberg, D. F. Ogletree, J. B. Neaton and A. Weber-Bargioni, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10520–10534 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xu, W. Chen, M. Zeng, H. Xue, Y. Chen, X. Sang, Y. Xiao, T. Zhang, R. R. Unocic, K. Xiao and L. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 755–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang, J. Zhou, P. Sun, X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Dan, J. Yang, K. Zhou, X. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900862 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Azizi, M. Dogan, J. D. Cain, K. Lee, X. Yu, W. Shi, E. C. Glazer, M. L. Cohen and A. Zettl, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18297–18304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Singh, P. Kumbhakar, A. Krishnamoorthy, A. Nakano, K. K. Sadasivuni, P. Vashishta, A. K. Roy, V. Kochat and C. S. Tiwary, iScience, 2021, 24, 103532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. Cheng, P. Wang, R. Du, L. Song, J. He and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Deng, X. Li, H. Si, J. Hong, S. Wang, Q. Feng, C.-X. Hu, S. Wang, H.-L. Zhang, K. Suenaga and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003264 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Stark, K. L. Kuntz, S. J. Martens and S. C. Warren, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808213 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Peng, H. Sun, Y. Guo, H. Liu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Z. Lin, H. Ren, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Yuan, S. Sae Hong, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664–2680 RSC .
Y. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Li and T. Zhai, Small, 2017, 13, 1701649 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Song, G. Noh, T. S. Kim, M. Kang, H. Song, A. Ham, M.-K. Jo, S. Cho, H.-J. Chai, S. R. Cho, K. Cho, J. Park, S. Song, I. Song, S. Bang, J. Y. Kwak and K. Kang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16266–16300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, D. Li, X. Liang and W. D. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 141–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Xie, S. Husremović, O. Gonzalez, I. M. Craig and D. K. Bediako, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 9525–9542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, J. Lin, W. Feng, K. Xiao, Y. Qiu, X. Chen, G. Liu, W. Cao, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou and P. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6371–6379 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, H. Lin, X. Xiao, W. Huang, W. Yao, M. Yan, Y. Xing, Q. Zhang, Z.-X. Li, S. Hoshino, J. Wang, S. Zhou, L. Gu, M. S. Bahramy, H. Yao, N. Nagaosa, Q.-K. Xue, K. T. Law, X. Chen and S.-H. Ji, Nat. Phys., 2019, 15, 904–910 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Lin, K. Xu, X. Cao, Z. Zhang and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 8758–8767 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J.-C. Idrobo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2615–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Azizi, X. Zou, P. Ercius, Z. Zhang, A. L. Elías, N. Perea-López, G. Stone, M. Terrones, B. I. Yakobson and N. Alem, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Ly, D. J. Perello, J. Zhao, Q. Deng, H. Kim, G. H. Han, S. H. Chae, H. Y. Jeong and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10426 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Ji, Y.-C. Lin, K. Nagashio, M. Maruyama, P. Solís-Fernández, A. Sukma Aji, V. Panchal, S. Okada, K. Suenaga and H. Ago, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 403–411 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Wen, G. H. Ryu, J. C. Grossman and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16748–16759 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Reifsnyder Hickey, N. Nayir, M. Chubarov, T. H. Choudhury, S. Bachu, L. Miao, Y. Wang, C. Qian, V. H. Crespi, J. M. Redwing, A. C. T. van Duin and N. Alem, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6487–6495 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yan, C. S. Ong, D. Y. Qiu, C. Ophus, J. Ciston, C. Merino, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 22559–22566 CrossRef .
J. Chen, G. S. Jung, G. H. Ryu, R.-J. Chang, S. Zhou, Y. Wen, M. J. Buehler and J. H. Warner, Small, 2019, 15, 1902590 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yu, C. Zhu, Y. He, J. Zhou, Y. Xu, Z. Liu, W. Guo and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6014–6021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600468 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, S. Kolekar, H. Coy Diaz, J. Aprojanz, I. Miccoli, C. Tegenkamp and M. Batzill, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5130–5139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, H.-S. Kim, G. Kwon, K. Jeong, H. Lee, J. H. Lee, M. Park, C. Lee, S. Yu, H. Kim, S. Im, K. Yoo, E. Lee and M.-H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108777 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Wang, J. Hong, D. Liu, Q. Feng, Z. Lei, K. Liu, F. Ding and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906385 CrossRef .
W. Yu, Z. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Wang, T. S. Herng, T. Ma, Z. Zhu, J. Ding, G. Eda, S. J. Pennycook, Y. P. Feng and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003057 CrossRef .
T.-X. Huang, X. Cong, S.-S. Wu, K.-Q. Lin, X. Yao, Y.-H. He, J.-B. Wu, Y.-F. Bao, S.-C. Huang, X. Wang, P.-H. Tan and B. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5544 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Berry, S. Zhou, J. Han, D. J. Srolovitz and M. P. Haataja, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 114002 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, M. Zhou, J. Liu, B. Wei, S. Yue, Y. Zhou, K. Yang, T. Zhang, M. Zeng, Z. Wang and L. Fu, Chin. J. Chem., 2020, 38, 709–713 CrossRef .
M. Xu, B. Tang, Y. Lu, C. Zhu, Q. Lu, C. Zhu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, N. Han, W. Fang, Y. Guo, J. Di, P. Song, Y. He, L. Kang, Z. Zhang, W. Zhao, C. Guan, X. Wang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 18103–18113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, J. Wen, J. Li, C. Li, J. Shi, X. Zhou, K. Shi, H. Chen, Y. Li, S. Deng, N. Xu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3299–3305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Cai, R. Shi, Z. Wu, W. Wang, G. Long, Y. Tang, N. Cai, W. Ouyang, P. Geng, B. N. Chandrashekar, A. Amini, N. Wang and C. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 635–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Zhao, G. Grinblat, Z. Chen, S. J. R. Tan, W. Fu, Z. Ding, I. Abdelwahab, Y. Li, D. Geng, Y. Liu, K. Leng, B. Liu, W. Liu, W. Tang, S. A. Maier, S. J. Pennycook and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704674 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Liu, A. B. Wong, J. Kim, X. Hong, C. Liu, T. Cao, S. G. Louie, F. Wang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6418–6423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Ly, J. Zhao, H. Kim, G. H. Han, H. Nam and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7723–7728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Jiang, X. Zhuang, H. Liu, T. Xu, W. Zheng, P. Fan, H. Li, X. Wu, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhou, W. Hu, X. Wang, L. Sun, X. Duan and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4892–4898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Zhao, W. Zheng, H. Li, X. Wu, X. Hu, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Jin and A. Pan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3885–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Shearer, L. Samad, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. Puretzky, K. W. Eliceiri, J. C. Wright, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3496–3504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, C.-H. Yeh, H.-C. Lin, M.-D. Siao, Z. Liu, H. Nakajima, T. Okazaki, M.-Y. Chou, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12080–12088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Hong, X. Wang, X. Li, Q. Feng, C. Tan, T. Zhai, F. Ding, H. Peng and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804696 CrossRef .
M. Yoshida, J. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. Imai, S. Kimura, A. Fujiwara, T. Nishizaki, N. Kobayashi, M. Nakano and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5567–5571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-T. Huang, S. Joon Lim, S. Singh, J. Kim, L. Zhang, J.-W. Kim, M.-W. Chu, K. M. Rabe, D. Vanderbilt and S.-W. Cheong, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4211 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, G. Yu, Y. H. Kwan, Y. Jia, S. Lei, S. Klemenz, F. A. Cevallos, R. Singha, T. Devakul, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. L. Sondhi, R. J. Cava, L. M. Schoop, S. A. Parameswaran and S. Wu, Nature, 2022, 605, 57–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, J. Liu and L. Fu, Matter, 2020, 3, 1142–1161 CrossRef .
U. J. Kim, H. Lee, W. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, H. Kim, G. H. Han, H. S. Lee, Y. Park, Y.-G. Roh, Y. H. Lee, E. Lee and S. W. Hwang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706864 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, G.-B. Liu, J. Tang, X. Xu and W. Yao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701696 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, C.-P. Chuu, X. Ren, M.-Y. Li, L.-J. Li, C. Jin, M.-Y. Chou and C.-K. Shih, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601459 CrossRef PubMed .
W. T. Geng, V. Wang, J. B. Lin, T. Ohno and J. Nara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 1048–1053 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Y. Guo, Q. Ji, A.-Y. Lu, C. Su, H. Wang, A. A. Puretzky, D. B. Geohegan, X. Qian, S. Fang, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong and S. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17499–17507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Guo, D. T. Larson, Z. Zhu, S. Fang, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 14394–14403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Edelberg, D. Rhodes, A. Kerelsky, B. Kim, J. Wang, A. Zangiabadi, C. Kim, A. Abhinandan, J. Ardelean, M. Scully, D. Scullion, L. Embon, R. Zu, E. J. G. Santos, L. Balicas, C. Marianetti, K. Barmak, X. Zhu, J. Hone and A. N. Pasupathy, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4371–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding, F. Lin and C. Jin, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32, 255701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Addou, L. Colombo and R. M. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11921–11929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y.-C. Lin, J. Hong, B. Gao, H. E. Lim, X. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Tateyama, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Sakuma, K. Suenaga and T. Taniguchi, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 7301–7308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bahmani, M. Lorke, M. Faghihnasiri and T. Frauenheim, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2021, 258, 2000524 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Shein, V. V. Bannikov and A. N. Enyashin, J. Struct. Chem., 2016, 57, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rhodes, S. H. Chae, R. Ribeiro-Palau and J. Hone, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 541–549 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Singh and A. K. Singh, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2021, 5, 084001 CrossRef .
M. Pizzochero and O. V. Yazyev, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 245402 CrossRef .
Y. Gong, Z. Liu, A. R. Lupini, G. Shi, J. Lin, S. Najmaei, Z. Lin, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, G. You, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, R. Vajtai, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, J. Lou, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 442–449 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qin, L. Loh, J. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Zhang, B. Haas, C. Alvarez, H. Okuno, J. Z. Yong, T. Schultz, N. Koch, J. Dan, S. J. Pennycook, D. Zeng, M. Bosman and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10768–10775 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, S. J. Yun, Y. I. Kim, J. H. Kim, Y.-M. Kim, K. K. Kim and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8784–8792 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Schutte, J. L. De Boer and F. Jellinek, J. Solid State Chem., 1987, 70, 207–209 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Carmalt, T. D. Manning, I. P. Parkin, E. S. Peters and A. L. Hector, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 290–291 RSC .
E. Z. Xu, H. M. Liu, K. Park, Z. Li, Y. Losovyj, M. Starr, M. Werbianskyj, H. A. Fertig and S. X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3576–3584 RSC .
Z. Cai, T. Shen, Q. Zhu, S. Feng, Q. Yu, J. Liu, L. Tang, Y. Zhao, J. Wang, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Small, 2020, 16, 1903181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dong, L. Zhang and F. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801583 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Rong, Y. Fan, M. Pacios, H. Bhaskaran, K. He and J. H. Warner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6371–6379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Govind Rajan, J. H. Warner, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4330–4344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu and Q. Wang, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 107105 CrossRef .
J. Li, M. Chen, C. Zhang, H. Dong, W. Lin, P. Zhuang, Y. Wen, B. Tian, W. Cai and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902431 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, M. Zhou, M. Zeng and L. Fu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801501 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Shao, X.-X. Xue, X. Liu, D. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Wu, B. You, Y.-C. Lin, S. Li, K. Suenaga, X. Wang, A. Pan, H. Li, J. Hong, Y. Feng and S. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 9721–9729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Feng, Z. Li, C. Ma, J. Qu, X. Wu, D. Li, X. Zhang, T. Yang, Y. He, H. Li, X. Hu, P. Fan, Y. Chen, B. Zheng, X. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Duan and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901351 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, Z. Zhang, B. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, M. Liu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1198–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-C. Chiu, K.-H. Huang, C.-A. Chen, Y.-Y. Lai, X.-Q. Zhang, E.-C. Lin, M.-H. Chuang, J.-M. Wu and Y.-H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704796 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Irisawa, in Crystal Growth Technology, ed. K. Byrappa, T. Ohachi, W. Michaeli, H. Warlimont and E. Weber, William Andrew Publishing, Norwich, NY,  2003, pp. 25–54 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, J. Shi, Y. Qi, M. Liu, D. Ma, Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, Z. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3461–3468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, A. K. Sachan, S. T. Howell, A. Conde-Rubio, A. W. Knoll, G. Boero, R. Zenobi and J. Brugger, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8250–8257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jeong, Y. Jin, S. J. Yun, J. Zhao, J. Baik, D. H. Keum, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605043 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. An, S. J. Yun, Y. H. Lee and H. S. Lee, Small, 2020, 16, 2003326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I. Yakobson, J.-C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 754–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ju, X. Liang, J. Liu, L. Zhou, Z. Liu, R. G. Mendes, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6095–6103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, L. Zhang, G. D. Nguyen, X. Sang, C. Liu, Y. Yu, W. Ko, R. R. Unocic, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan, L. Fu, G. Duscher, A.-P. Li, M. Yoon and K. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Q. H. Thi, F. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. W. Chu, C.-S. Lee, J. Zhao and T. H. Ly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13130–13135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, M. Hong, W. Wei, L. Zhao, N. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. Yang, N. Gao, X. Zhou, C. Xie, J. Shi, Y. Huan, L. Tong, J. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Q. Fu and Y. Zhang, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1, 17 CrossRef .
J. Tang, Z. Wei, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Han, X. Li, B. Huang, M. Liao, J. Liu, N. Li, Y. Zhao, C. Shen, Y. Guo, X. Bai, P. Gao, W. Yang, L. Chen, K. Wu, R. Yang, D. Shi and G. Zhang, Small, 2020, 16, 2004276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Sin and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4828–4835 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Pak, Y.-W. Lee, Y. Park, A. R. Jang, J. Hong, Y. Cho, B. Hou, S. Lee, H. Y. Jeong, H. S. Shin, S. M. Morris, S. Cha, J. I. Sohn and J. M. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13047–13055 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, R. Tong, X. Zhou, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, Q. Fang, L. Gu, X. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10664–10672 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, B. Jiang, Z. Xu, R. G. Mendes, Y. Xiao, L. Chen, L. Fang, T. Gemming, S. Chen, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13911 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Su, Y. Zhang and L. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1866 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Nan, Z. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Liang, Y. Lu, Q. Chen, D. He, P. Tan, F. Miao, X. Wang, J. Wang and Z. Ni, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5738–5745 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Sahoo, S. Memaran, Y. Xin, L. Balicas and H. R. Gutiérrez, Nature, 2018, 553, 63–67 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Zhang, C. Li, J. He, Y. Wei, J. Zhao, R. Zhang, P. Wang, S. Fu, F. Chen, R. Peng and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 3549–3559 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Li, S. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Chen, H. Sawada, C. S. Allen, A. I. Kirkland, J. C. Grossman and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7721–7730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. M. Ajayan, J. Wen and H. D. Espinosa, Small, 2022, 18, 2105194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Klein, M. Lorke, M. Florian, F. Sigger, L. Sigl, S. Rey, J. Wierzbowski, J. Cerne, K. Müller, E. Mitterreiter, P. Zimmermann, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, U. Wurstbauer, M. Kaniber, M. Knap, R. Schmidt, J. J. Finley and A. W. Holleitner, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Seol, S. Kim, W.-S. Jang, Y. Jin, S. Kang, S. Kim, D. Won, C. Lee, Y.-M. Kim, J. Lee, H. Yang, M. S. Jeong, A. Belianinov, A. Tselev, S. Somnath, C. R. Smith, O. S. Ovchinnikova, N. Balke and Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105451 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gupta, V. Chauhan, S. Upadhyay, N. Koratkar, F. Singh, S. Kumar, A. Mahajan, R. Chandra and R. Kumar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2022, 276, 125422 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Thiruraman, P. Masih Das and M. Drndić, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904668 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shi, R. C. Walker, I. Jovanovic and J. A. Robinson, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4151 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. He, R. Zhao, X. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Su, S. Huang, J. Xue, J. Dai, S. Cheng, M. Liu, X. Wang and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42524–42533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Prucnal, A. Hashemi, M. Ghorbani-Asl, R. Hübner, J. Duan, Y. Wei, D. Sharma, D. R. T. Zahn, R. Ziegenrücker, U. Kentsch, A. V. Krasheninnikov, M. Helm and S. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5834–5846 RSC .
Z. Li and F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 011103 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Sun, E. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Wu, L. Gu, H. Li and K. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Zhu, Q. Wang, J. Wan and R. Liu, Small, 2020, 16, 2001428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, C. Ko, K. Kim, Y. Chen, J. Suh, S.-G. Ryu, K. Wu, X. Meng, A. Suslu, S. Tongay, J. Wu and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 341–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tosun, L. Chan, M. Amani, T. Roy, G. H. Ahn, P. Taheri, C. Carraro, J. W. Ager, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6853–6860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yim, D. M. Sim, W. I. Park, M.-J. Choi, J. Choi, J. Jeon, K. H. Kim and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5631–5640 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, Z. G. Yu, L. Huang, J. Chai, S. L. Wong, J. Deng, W. Yang, H. Gong, S. Wang, K.-W. Ang, Y.-W. Zhang and D. Chi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2506–2513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tan, K. Ding, X. Zhang, Z. Ni, K. Ostrikov, X. Gu, H. Nan and S. Xiao, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 15278–15284 RSC .
Z. Jin, Z. Cai, X. Chen and D. Wei, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4923–4930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Ma, C. Zhao, W. Hong, C. Nie, Z.-J. Qiu and S. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4405–4415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Jung and W. Choi, Mater. Lett., 2021, 295, 129865 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Stanford, Y.-C. Lin, M. G. Sales, A. N. Hoffman, C. T. Nelson, K. Xiao, S. McDonnell and P. D. Rack, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 13 CrossRef .
D. Qu, X. Liu, M. Huang, C. Lee, F. Ahmed, H. Kim, R. S. Ruoff, J. Hone and W. J. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606433 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Papaefthimiou, F. Tournus, A. Hillion, G. Khadra, D. Teschner, A. Knop-Gericke, V. Dupuis and S. Zafeiratos, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1553–1560 CrossRef .
S. Susarla, J. A. Hachtel, X. Yang, A. Kutana, A. Apte, Z. Jin, R. Vajtai, J. C. Idrobo, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804218 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, Y. Ji, J. Chen, W. Fu, J. Dan, Y. Liu, S. J. Pennycook, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900237 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, X. Wu, H. Liu, B. Zheng, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Wei, X. Zhuang, H. Zhou, W. Tang, X. Duan and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 961–967 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Lim, J. K. Han, Y. Yoon, J.-B. Lee, C. Jeon, M. Choi, H. Chang, N. Park, J. H. Kim, Z. Lee, W. Song, S. Myung, S. S. Lee, K.-S. An, J.-H. Ahn and J. Lim, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901405 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, S. Feng, X. Cai, H. Liu, J. Li, M. Amjadian, Y. Cai, H. Wong, M. Tamtaji, L. An, K. Zhang, G. Chen, N. Wang, Z. Xu and Z. Luo, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 9760–9768 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yun, G. H. Han, H. Kim, D. L. Duong, B. G. Shin, J. Zhao, Q. A. Vu, J. Lee, S. M. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2163 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, M. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. He, Q. Zeng, Y. Deng, S. Guo, M. Xu, J. Shi, W. Zhou, L. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Hu, Z. Zhang, W. Guo and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Murai, S. Zhang, T. Hotta, Z. Liu, T. Endo, H. Shimizu, Y. Miyata, T. Irisawa, Y. Gao, M. Maruyama, S. Okada, H. Mogi, T. Sato, S. Yoshida, H. Shigekawa, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, R. Canton-Vitoria and R. Kitaura, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19225–19232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, M. Sayyad, A. R.-P. Montblanch, M. S. G. Feuer, D. Dey, M. Blei, R. Sailus, D. M. Kara, Y. Shen, S. Yang, A. S. Botana, M. Atature and S. Tongay, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106222 CrossRef PubMed .
A.-Y. Lu, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, C.-P. Chuu, Y. Han, M.-H. Chiu, C.-C. Cheng, C.-W. Yang, K.-H. Wei, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, P. Yang, D. A. Muller, M.-Y. Chou, X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 744–749 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Han, H. K. Kim, B. Baek, J. Han, H. S. Ahn, M.-H. Baik and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13663–13671 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gao, Q. Liao, X. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Gu, B. Liu, J. Du, Y. Ou, J. Xiao, Z. Kang, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906646 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Kong, M. J. Shearer, F. Ding and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 7815–7822 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cai, M. J. Shearer, Y. Zhao, Z. Hu, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. W. Eliceiri, R. J. Hamers, W. Yan, S. Wei, M. Tang and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10980–10987 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, T. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Weng, X. Chang, K. Yang, J. Liu, J. Li, B. Wei, Z. Wang and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805976 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, J. Xia, J. Zhou, Q. Zeng, K. Li, K. Fujisawa, W. Fu, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Jia, M. Terrones, Z. X. Shen, Z. Liu and L. Wei, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9191–9199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fujihara, R. Inoue, R. Kurita, T. Taniuchi, Y. Motoyui, S. Shin, F. Komori, Y. Maniwa, H. Shinohara and Y. Miyata, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9027–9033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Na, X. Wang, R. D. Piner, R. Huang, C. G. Willson and K. M. Liechti, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9616–9625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Bai, S. H. Chae, Q. Li, J. Wang, J. Hone and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2020, 367, 903–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, E. Sutter, N. N. Shi, J. Zheng, T. Yang, D. Englund, H.-J. Gao and P. Sutter, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Wang, F. Yang, J.-K. Huang, L.-J. Li, W. Yao, W. Ji and C.-K. Shih, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1595–1602 CAS .
X. Wang, J. Dan, Z. Hu, J. F. Leong, Q. Zhang, Z. Qin, S. Li, J. Lu, S. J. Pennycook, W. Sun and C. H. Sow, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7970–7978 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Koós, P. Vancsó, M. Szendrő, G. Dobrik, D. Antognini Silva, Z. I. Popov, P. B. Sorokin, L. Henrard, C. Hwang, L. P. Biró and L. Tapasztó, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24855–24864 CrossRef .
X. Zou, M. Liu and B. I. Yakobson, Small, 2019, 15, 1805145 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Guo, X. Fan, Z. Chen, Z. Luo, Y. Hu, Y. An, D. Yang and S. Ma, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 176, 109540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonilla, S. Kolekar, Y. Ma, H. C. Diaz, V. Kalappattil, R. Das, T. Eggers, H. R. Gutierrez, M.-H. Phan and M. Batzill, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 289–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, H. Deng, X. Sun, X. Li, J. Zhao, J. Wu, W. Chu, S. Zhang, H. Pan, X. Zheng, X. Wu, C. Jin, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700715 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Ji, C. Li, J. Wang, J. Niu, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Q. Fang, Y. Zhang, J. Shi, L. Liao, X. Wu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, B. Zhao, P. Chen, R. Wu, B. Li, Q. Xia, G. Guo, J. Luo, K. Zang, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, G. Sun, X. Duan and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801043 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Hoffman, Y. Gu, L. Liang, J. D. Fowlkes, K. Xiao and P. D. Rack, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 50 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Robertson, Y.-C. Lin, S. Wang, H. Sawada, C. S. Allen, Q. Chen, S. Lee, G.-D. Lee, J. Lee, S. Han, E. Yoon, A. I. Kirkland, H. Kim, K. Suenaga and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10227–10236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-D. Siao, Y.-C. Lin, T. He, M.-Y. Tsai, K.-Y. Lee, S.-Y. Chang, K.-I. Lin, Y.-F. Lin, M.-Y. Chou, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, Small, 2021, 17, 2007171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suh, T. L. Tan, W. Zhao, J. Park, D.-Y. Lin, T.-E. Park, J. Kim, C. Jin, N. Saigal, S. Ghosh, Z. M. Wong, Y. Chen, F. Wang, W. Walukiewicz, G. Eda and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 199 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Gao, L. Cheng, K. Bu, Z. Wu, Y. Fei, Y. Zheng, L. Wang, F. Li, X. Luo, Z. Liu, Y. Sun and Y. Yin, npj Quantum Mater., 2022, 7, 8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, C. Shen, L. Huang, H.-X. Deng, G. Shen, H. Zheng, Z. Wei and J. Li, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, J. Tang, X. Li, Z. Chi, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, B. Han, N. Li, B. Huang, J. Li, H. Yu, J. Yuan, H. Chen, J. Sun, L. Chen, K. Wu, P. Gao, C. He, W. Yang, D. Shi, R. Yang and G. Zhang, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Cochrane, J.-H. Lee, C. Kastl, J. B. Haber, T. Zhang, A. Kozhakhmetov, J. A. Robinson, M. Terrones, J. Repp, J. B. Neaton, A. Weber-Bargioni and B. Schuler, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 7287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sadhukhan and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 5598–5606 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Wu, W. Yu, L. Chen, Z. Huang, H. Jiang, J. He, Q. Liu, Y. Lu, D. Zhu, W. Liu, P. Cao, S. Han, X. Xiong, W. Xu, J.-P. Ao, K.-W. Ang and Z. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606469 CrossRef .
S. Susarla, A. Kutana, J. A. Hachtel, V. Kochat, A. Apte, R. Vajtai, J. C. Idrobo, B. I. Yakobson, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702457 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Muhammad, B. Zhang, H. Lv, H. Shan, Z. U. Rehman, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. Wu, A. Zhao and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 835–841 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Kahraman, A. Kandemir, M. Yagmurcukardes and H. Sahin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4549–4557 CrossRef .
M. Kang, S. W. Jung, W. J. Shin, Y. Sohn, S. H. Ryu, T. K. Kim, M. Hoesch and K. S. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 676–680 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, M. Zeng, Q. Zheng, J. Zhang, D. Xu, W. Chen, C. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Xie, Y. Ding, S. Zheng, J. Zhao, P. Gao and L. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5886 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. L. Huang, Z. Ding, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Chang, Y. Shi, L.-J. Li, Z. Song, Y. J. Zheng, D. Chi, S. Y. Quek and A. T. S. Wee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3682–3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barja, S. Wickenburg, Z.-F. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Ryu, M. M. Ugeda, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, S.-K. Mo, E. Wong, M. B. Salmeron, F. Wang, M. F. Crommie, D. F. Ogletree, J. B. Neaton and A. Weber-Bargioni, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 751–756 Search PubMed .
S. Krishnamurthi and G. Brocks, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 102, 161106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, K.-H. Xue, M. Mouis, F. Triozon and A. Cresti, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 235403 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lin, T. Björkman, H.-P. Komsa, P.-Y. Teng, C.-H. Yeh, F.-S. Huang, K.-H. Lin, J. Jadczak, Y.-S. Huang, P.-W. Chiu, A. V. Krasheninnikov and K. Suenaga, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6736 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hong, X. Zhou, N. Gao, S. Jiang, C. Xie, L. Zhao, Y. Gao, Z. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Shi, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zhao and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10095–10103 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cui, J.-H. Choi, W. Chen, J. Zeng, C.-K. Shih, Z. Li and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1097–1101 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fei, T. Palomaki, S. Wu, W. Zhao, X. Cai, B. Sun, P. Nguyen, J. Finney, X. Xu and D. H. Cobden, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 677–682 Search PubMed .
X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu and J. Li, Science, 2014, 346, 1344–1347 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Nugera, P. K. Sahoo, Y. Xin, S. Ambardar, D. V. Voronine, U. J. Kim, Y. Han, H. Son and H. R. Gutiérrez, Small, 2022, 18, 2106600 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zheng, C. Ma, D. Li, J. Lan, Z. Zhang, X. Sun, W. Zheng, T. Yang, C. Zhu, G. Ouyang, G. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Wang and A. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11193–11197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Gong, X. Zou, P. Liu, P. Yang, J. Shi, L. Zhao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 885–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, Z. Hu, H. Xu, Y. Shao, J. Su, Z. Chen, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2316–2323 CAS .
M. M. Ugeda, A. Pulkin, S. Tang, H. Ryu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, D. Wong, Z. Pedramrazi, A. Martín-Recio, Y. Chen, F. Wang, Z.-X. Shen, S.-K. Mo, O. V. Yazyev and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Li, G. Yang and G. Ouyang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 19812–19819 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, Y. Liu, H. Liu, C. Qiu, S. Zheng and D. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 21123–21128 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Thomas, J. J. Fonseca, C. D. Spataru, J. T. Robinson and T. Ohta, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18060–18070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, L. Zhang, T. Cao, C. Jin, D. Qiu, Q. Zhou, A. Zettl, P. Yang, S. G. Louie and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Chiu, W.-H. Tseng, H.-L. Tang, Y.-H. Chang, C.-H. Chen, W.-T. Hsu, W.-H. Chang, C.-I. Wu and L.-J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603756 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Y. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Han, Q. Zhou, B. Wang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Xue, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16314–16321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, A. Manjanath and A. K. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 24475–24480 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, W. A. Saidi, Y. Xie, Z. Lan, O. V. Prezhdo, H. Petek and J. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6435–6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhang and G. Lu, npj Comput. Mater., 2021, 7, 191 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tong, H. Yu, Q. Zhu, Y. Wang, X. Xu and W. Yao, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 356–362 Search PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Fölsch, Y. Nie, D. Waters, Y.-C. Lin, B. Jariwala, K. Zhang, K. Cho, J. A. Robinson and R. M. Feenstra, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1849–1855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Stansbury, M. I. B. Utama, C. G. Fatuzzo, E. C. Regan, D. Wang, Z. Xiang, M. Ding, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Blei, Y. Shen, S. Lorcy, A. Bostwick, C. Jozwiak, R. Koch, S. Tongay, J. Avila, E. Rotenberg, F. Wang and A. Lanzara, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf4387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vaňo, M. Amini, S. C. Ganguli, G. Chen, J. L. Lado, S. Kezilebieke and P. Liljeroth, Nature, 2021, 599, 582–586 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. A. Tanoh, J. Alexander-Webber, J. Xiao, G. Delport, C. A. Williams, H. Bretscher, N. Gauriot, J. Allardice, R. Pandya, Y. Fan, Z. Li, S. Vignolini, S. D. Stranks, S. Hofmann and A. Rao, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6299–6307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Wang and D. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 4929–4938 CrossRef CAS .
B. Stampfer, F. Zhang, Y. Y. Illarionov, T. Knobloch, P. Wu, M. Waltl, A. Grill, J. Appenzeller and T. Grasser, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5368–5375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Z. Yu, J. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Guo, Z. Li, J. Zhao, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9461–9466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. D. Kim, L. Liang, J. C. Idrobo, P. Chow, J. Tan, B. Li, L. Li, B. G. Sumpter, T.-M. Lu, V. Meunier, J. Hone and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9735–9743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, B. M. Bersch, J. Joshi, R. Addou, C. R. Cormier, C. Zhang, K. Xu, N. C. Briggs, K. Wang, S. Subramanian, K. Cho, S. Fullerton-Shirey, R. M. Wallace, P. M. Vora and J. A. Robinson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706950 CrossRef .
Y. Jin, Z. Zeng, Z. Xu, Y.-C. Lin, K. Bi, G. Shao, T. S. Hu, S. Wang, S. Li, K. Suenaga, H. Duan, Y. Feng and S. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3534–3541 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, R. Xu, J. Tan, Y. Luo, J. Zou, Z. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Lin, X. Zou, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006941 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kozhakhmetov, S. Stolz, A. M. Z. Tan, R. Pendurthi, S. Bachu, F. Turker, N. Alem, J. Kachian, S. Das, R. G. Hennig, O. Gröning, B. Schuler and J. A. Robinson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105252 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Cao, Y. Wang, T. Cao, C. Wang, B. Cheng, W. Zhang, X. Wan, J. Lin, S.-J. Liang and F. Miao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10265–10275 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, M.-W. Lin, L. Basile, S. M. Hus, A. A. Puretzky, J. Lee, Y.-C. Kuo, L.-Y. Chang, K. Wang, J. C. Idrobo, A.-P. Li, C.-H. Chen, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8240–8247 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, D. Drysdale, V. Koutsos and R. Cheung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702455 CrossRef .
H. Luo, W. Xie, J. Tao, I. Pletikosic, T. Valla, G. S. Sahasrabudhe, G. Osterhoudt, E. Sutton, K. S. Burch, E. M. Seibel, J. W. Krizan, Y. Zhu and R. J. Cava, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1927–1935 CrossRef .
P. Li, J. Cui, J. Zhou, D. Guo, Z. Zhao, J. Yi, J. Fan, Z. Ji, X. Jing, F. Qu, C. Yang, L. Lu, J. Lin, Z. Liu and G. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904641 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Feng, S. Fan, S. Shi, Y. Yue, W. Shen, Y. Xie, E. Wu, C. Sun, J. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Pang, D. Sun, W. Feng, Y. Feng, S. Wu and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30107–30114 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, I. L. Tsai, J. Chapman, E. Khestanova, J. Waters and I. V. Grigorieva, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 629–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, Y. Ji, D. Yu, S. Guo, Y. He, K. Li, Y. Huang, C. Zhang, P. Yu, S. Luo, H. Wang and H. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 3705–3712 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J. Pan, W. Gao, B. Wan, X. Kong, Y. Cheng, K. Liu, S. Du, W. Ji, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M. S. Choi, E. Hwang, W. J. Yoo and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Sangwan, H.-S. Lee, H. Bergeron, I. Balla, M. E. Beck, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, Nature, 2018, 554, 500–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cortés, O. Ávalos-Ovando, L. Rosales, P. A. Orellana and S. E. Ulloa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 122, 086401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Tongay, Q. Yue, J. Kang, J. Wu and J. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 174307 CrossRef .
S. Tang, C. Zhang, D. Wong, Z. Pedramrazi, H.-Z. Tsai, C. Jia, B. Moritz, M. Claassen, H. Ryu, S. Kahn, J. Jiang, H. Yan, M. Hashimoto, D. Lu, R. G. Moore, C.-C. Hwang, C. Hwang, Z. Hussain, Y. Chen, M. M. Ugeda, Z. Liu, X. Xie, T. P. Devereaux, M. F. Crommie, S.-K. Mo and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 683–687 Search PubMed .
L. Peng, Y. Yuan, G. Li, X. Yang, J.-J. Xian, C.-J. Yi, Y.-G. Shi and Y.-S. Fu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 659 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, V. Fatemi, Q. D. Gibson, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. J. Cava and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2018, 359, 76–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kwon, K. Lee, J. Heo, Y. Oh, H. Lee, S. Appalakondaiah, W. Ko, H. W. Kim, J.-W. Jung, H. Suh, H. Min, I. Jeon, E. Hwang and S. Hwang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702931 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Naylor, W. M. Parkin, Z. Gao, J. Berry, S. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. B. McClimon, L. Z. Tan, C. E. Kehayias, M.-Q. Zhao, R. S. Gona, R. W. Carpick, A. M. Rappe, D. J. Srolovitz, M. Drndic and A. T. C. Johnson, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8619–8627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, X. Wan, W. Xie, J. Wen, Z. Kang, X. Zeng, H. Chen and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6431–6437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. Zhou, W. Tang, B. Tian, X. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. Liu, D. Geng, S. J. R. Tan, W. Fu and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7194–7197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pak, Y. Jang, J. Byun, K. Cho, T.-Y. Kim, J.-K. Kim, B. Y. Choi, J. Shin, Y. Hong, S. Chung and T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fei, W. Zhao, T. A. Palomaki, B. Sun, M. K. Miller, Z. Zhao, J. Yan, X. Xu and D. H. Cobden, Nature, 2018, 560, 336–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Duchamp, Q. Zeng, X. Wang, S. H. Tsang, H. Li, L. Jing, T. Yu, E. H. T. Teo and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704382 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Sun, S. Wu, Z. Jia, X. Lu, H. Yu, W. Chen, J. Zhu, G. Xie, R. Yang, D. Shi, X. Xu, J. Xiang, K. Liu and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1950–1956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, C. He, Y. Wang, E. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zeng, Z. Ma, T. Cao, C. Yi, N. Wang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Shao, Y. Shi, X. Chen, S.-J. Liang, Q.-H. Wang and F. Miao, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7962–7968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. Zhu, Y. Tang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, V. Elser, J. Shan and K. F. Mak, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, A. Surrente, M. Baranowski, D. K. Maude, P. Gant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and P. Plochocka, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7651–7657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Lu, K. Ho, Z. Hu, Z. Dang, A. Carvalho, H. R. Tan, E. S. Tok and C. H. Sow, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5559–5567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Zuo, D. Liu and J. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, M.-F. Lin, X. Zhang, A. Britz, A. Krishnamoorthy, R. Ma, R. K. Kalia, A. Nakano, P. Vashishta, P. Ajayan, M. C. Hoffmann, D. M. Fritz, U. Bergmann and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6078–6086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Lin, W.-S. Tseng, C. M. Went, M. L. Teague, G. R. Rossman, H. A. Atwater and N.-C. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1350–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, W. Choi, S. Jeon, D.-H. Kim, H. Kim, S. J. Yun, Y. Lee, J. Lee, Y.-M. Kim and J. Kim, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, W. Su, F. Chen, L. Fu, S. Ding, K. Song, X. Huang and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3900–3907 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, P. Guo, C. Wang, H. Tan, W. Hu, W. Yan, C. Ma, L. Cai, L. Song, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, L. Wang, W. Zhao, Y. Yin, X. Li and S. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1584 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Cui, Z. Luo, Q. Cui, W. Zhu, H. Shou, C. Wu, Z. Liu, Y. Lin, P. Zhang, S. Wei, H. Yang, S. Chen, A. Pan and L. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105339 CrossRef .
J. Kim, H. Seung, D. Kang, J. Kim, H. Bae, H. Park, S. Kang, C. Choi, B. K. Choi, J. S. Kim, T. Hyeon, H. Lee, D.-H. Kim, S. Shim and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 9153–9163 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhu, H. Zeng, J. Dai, Z. Gong and X. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 11606–11611 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, J. Lin, H. Sims, C. Jiang, C. Cong, J. A. Brehm, Z. Zhang, L. Niu, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, T. Yu, K. Suenaga, R. Mishra, S. T. Pantelides, Z.-G. Zhu, W. Gao, Z. Liu and W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906536 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gupta, J.-H. Yang and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 408–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, S. Li, H.-P. Komsa, L.-J. Chang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, G. Eda and K. Suenaga, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704210 CrossRef .
T. W. Lo, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C. W. Leung, A. V. Zayats and D. Lei, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 1915–1921 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Kim, S. J. Yun, Y. Lee, C. Seo, G. H. Han, K. K. Kim, Y. H. Lee and J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2399–2405 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Rong, Y. Sheng, M. Pacios, X. Wang, Z. He, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1093–1100 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Rao, K. F. Mak, Y. You, S. Wang, C. R. Dean and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3329–3333 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yin, Z. Ye, D. A. Chenet, Y. Ye, K. O’Brien, J. C. Hone and X. Zhang, Science, 2014, 344, 488–490 CrossRef PubMed .
B. R. Carvalho, Y. Wang, K. Fujisawa, T. Zhang, E. Kahn, I. Bilgin, P. M. Ajayan, A. M. de Paula, M. A. Pimenta, S. Kar, V. H. Crespi, M. Terrones and L. M. Malard, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 284–291 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Karvonen, A. Säynätjoki, M. J. Huttunen, A. Autere, B. Amirsolaimani, S. Li, R. A. Norwood, N. Peyghambarian, H. Lipsanen, G. Eda, K. Kieu and Z. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15714 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, J. Avila, X. Wang, J. F. Leong, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. C. Asensio, J. Lu, A. Carvalho, C. H. Sow and A. H. Castro Neto, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4641–4650 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, A. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. He, J. Cao, X. Liu, M. Wang, J. Ma, J. Lai, H. Lu, S. Jia, D. Yan, Y. Shi, J. Duan, J. Han, W. Xiao, J.-H. Chen, K. Sun, Y. Yao and D. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5736 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-I. Lin, Y.-H. Ho, S.-B. Liu, J.-J. Ciou, B.-T. Huang, C. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-L. Tu and C.-H. Chen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 793–797 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, M. Li, Y. Lin, H. Cai, Y. Wu, H. Ding, S. Zhao, N. Pan and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4959–4967 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chu, A. Han, C. Lei, S. Lopatin, P. Li, D. Wannlund, D. Wu, K. Herrera, X. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald, X. Li, L.-J. Li and K. Lai, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7200–7206 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, T. Huang, J. He, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Liu, X. Ge, R. Zhang, M. Qiu, Y. Sang, X. Wang, X. Zhou, T. Li, C. Liu, N. Dai, X. Chen, Z. Fan and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 597–603 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Yu, A. Manjavacas and F. J. García de Abajo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Berweger, H. Zhang, P. K. Sahoo, B. M. Kupp, J. L. Blackburn, E. M. Miller, T. M. Wallis, D. V. Voronine, P. Kabos and S. U. Nanayakkara, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14080–14090 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. Qiao, X. Zhou, H. Chen, J. Y. Tan, H. Yu, S. M. Chan, J. Li, H. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Dan, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, Z. Liu, B. Peng, L. Deng, S. J. Pennycook, S. Y. Quek and K. P. Loh, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 203–210 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Peimyoo, T. Deilmann, F. Withers, J. Escolar, D. Nutting, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Taghizadeh, M. F. Craciun, K. S. Thygesen and S. Russo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 888–893 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, P. Yu, F. Liu, P. He, R. Wang, L. Qin, J. Zhou, X. Li, J. Zhou, X. Sui, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, T. C. Sum, X. Qiu, Z. Liu and X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701486 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Kim, C. Seo, H. Kim, J. Lee, D. H. Luong, J.-H. Park, G. H. Han and J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6211–6219 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. May, T. Jiang, C. Du, K.-D. Park, X. Xu, A. Belyanin and M. B. Raschke, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 522–528 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lin, L. Zhu, D. Li, L. Xu, C. Pan and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802849 CrossRef .
D. Kozawa, A. Carvalho, I. Verzhbitskiy, F. Giustiniano, Y. Miyauchi, S. Mouri, A. H. Castro Neto, K. Matsuda and G. Eda, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4087–4093 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, X. Liang, C. Qin, Y. Gao, Y. Song, S. Wang, X. Su, G. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Hu, M. Jing, L. Xiao and S. Jia, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12966–12974 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Luong, H. S. Lee, G. P. Neupane, S. Roy, G. Ghimire, J. H. Lee, Q. A. Vu and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701512 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Okada, A. Kutana, Y. Kureishi, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Saito, T. Saito, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Gupta, Y. Miyata, B. I. Yakobson, H. Shinohara and R. Kitaura, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2498–2505 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Hanbicki, H.-J. Chuang, M. R. Rosenberger, C. S. Hellberg, S. V. Sivaram, K. M. McCreary, I. I. Mazin and B. T. Jonker, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4719–4726 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1996–2003 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, M. Zhu, T. Ren, J. He, K. P. Loh and Q.-H. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 26575–26582 CrossRef .
J. Yang, S. Jiang, J. Xie, H. Jiang, S. Xu, K. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Zhang, Z. Zeng, G. Fang, T. Wang and F. Su, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 16760–16768 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ovesen, S. Brem, C. Linderälv, M. Kuisma, T. Korn, P. Erhart, M. Selig and E. Malic, Commun. Phys., 2019, 2, 23 CrossRef .
D. Unuchek, A. Ciarrocchi, A. Avsar, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. Kis, Nature, 2018, 560, 340–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sahoo, M. C. Sahu, S. K. Mallik, N. K. Sharma, A. K. Jena, S. K. Gupta, R. Ahuja and S. Sahoo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 22360–22369 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, W. Xu, A. Rasmita, Z. Huang, K. Li, Q. Xiong and W.-B. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 753 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, S. Miao, Z. Li, Y. Meng, Z. Lu, Z. Lian, M. Blei, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. Tongay, D. Smirnov and S.-F. Shi, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 694–700 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Du, S. Feng, R.-W. Zhang, B. Cao, C. Zou, Y. Chen, M. Liao, B. Zhang, S. A. Yang, G. Zhang and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4226 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ciarrocchi, D. Unuchek, A. Avsar, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. Kis, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 131–136 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Baranowski, A. Surrente, L. Klopotowski, J. M. Urban, N. Zhang, D. K. Maude, K. Wiwatowski, S. Mackowski, Y. C. Kung, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and P. Plochocka, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6360–6365 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Surrente, Ł. Kłopotowski, N. Zhang, M. Baranowski, A. A. Mitioglu, M. V. Ballottin, P. C. M. Christianen, D. Dumcenco, Y.-C. Kung, D. K. Maude, A. Kis and P. Plochocka, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3994–4000 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Surrente, D. Dumcenco, Z. Yang, A. Kuc, Y. Jing, T. Heine, Y.-C. Kung, D. K. Maude, A. Kis and P. Plochocka, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4130–4136 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamaoka, H. E. Lim, S. Koirala, X. Wang, K. Shinokita, M. Maruyama, S. Okada, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801021 CrossRef .
L. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Zhou and H. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2341–2348 Search PubMed .
J. Joshi, T. Zhou, S. Krylyuk, A. V. Davydov, I. Žutić and P. M. Vora, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8528–8538 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, B. Huang, M. Tian, F. Ceballos, M.-W. Lin, M. Mahjouri-Samani, A. Boulesbaa, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, M. Yoon, H. Zhao, K. Xiao, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6612–6622 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Nayak, Y. Horbatenko, S. Ahn, G. Kim, J.-U. Lee, K. Y. Ma, A. R. Jang, H. Lim, D. Kim, S. Ryu, H. Cheong, N. Park and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4041–4050 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jin, E. C. Regan, A. Yan, M. Iqbal Bakti Utama, D. Wang, S. Zhao, Y. Qin, S. Yang, Z. Zheng, S. Shi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nature, 2019, 567, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tran, G. Moody, F. Wu, X. Lu, J. Choi, K. Kim, A. Rai, D. A. Sanchez, J. Quan, A. Singh, J. Embley, A. Zepeda, M. Campbell, T. Autry, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, N. Lu, S. K. Banerjee, K. L. Silverman, S. Kim, E. Tutuc, L. Yang, A. H. MacDonald and X. Li, Nature, 2019, 567, 71–75 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jin, E. C. Regan, D. Wang, M. Iqbal Bakti Utama, C.-S. Yang, J. Cain, Y. Qin, Y. Shen, Z. Zheng, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Phys., 2019, 15, 1140–1144 Search PubMed .
E. M. Alexeev, D. A. Ruiz-Tijerina, M. Danovich, M. J. Hamer, D. J. Terry, P. K. Nayak, S. Ahn, S. Pak, J. Lee, J. I. Sohn, M. R. Molas, M. Koperski, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. S. Novoselov, R. V. Gorbachev, H. S. Shin, V. I. Fal’ko and A. I. Tartakovskii, Nature, 2019, 567, 81–86 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Baek, M. Brotons-Gisbert, A. Campbell, V. Vitale, J. Lischner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and B. D. Gerardot, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1237–1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zhu, K. L. Seyler, P. Rivera, H. Zheng, Y. Wang, M. He, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. R. Gamelin, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, E. C. Regan, D. Wang, C. Jin, S. Hsieh, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Yumigeta, M. Blei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, N. Y. Yao and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 8910–8916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Seyler, P. Rivera, H. Yu, N. P. Wilson, E. L. Ray, D. G. Mandrus, J. Yan, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nature, 2019, 567, 66–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Nguyen, J. Jiang, B. Song, M. D. Tran, W. Choi, J. H. Kim, Y.-M. Kim, D. L. Duong and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2102911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yun, B. W. Cho, T. Dinesh, D. H. Yang, Y. I. Kim, J. W. Jin, S.-H. Yang, T. D. Nguyen, Y.-M. Kim, K. K. Kim, D. L. Duong, S.-G. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta, R. Kalia, A. Nakano, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, B. Zheng, A. Sebastian, D. H. Olson, M. Liu, K. Fujisawa, Y. T. H. Pham, V. O. Jimenez, V. Kalappattil, L. Miao, T. Zhang, R. Pendurthi, Y. Lei, A. L. Elías, Y. Wang, N. Alem, P. E. Hopkins, S. Das, V. H. Crespi, M.-H. Phan and M. Terrones, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. H. Pham, M. Liu, V. O. Jimenez, Z. Yu, V. Kalappattil, F. Zhang, K. Wang, T. Williams, M. Terrones and M.-H. Phan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guan, C. Huang, K. Deng and E. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 10114–10119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Karthikeyan, H.-P. Komsa, M. Batzill and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4581–4587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, W. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Fan, L. Pi, L. Zhang and Y. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 195803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Guo, H. Cheng, J. Dai, X. An, J. Zhao, K. Tian, S. Wei, X. Cheng Zeng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rajapakse, B. Karki, U. O. Abu, S. Pishgar, M. R. K. Musa, S. M. S. Riyadh, M. Yu, G. Sumanasekera and J. B. Jasinski, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2021, 5, 30 CrossRef CAS .
H. Han, L. Zhang, D. Sapkota, N. Hao, L. Ling, H. Du, L. Pi, C. Zhang, D. G. Mandrus and Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 094439 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Y. Yuan, M. Wang, P. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Wen, S. Zhou and X.-X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 114403 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gao, Y. Guo, S. Zhou, Y. Bai and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12261–12269 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Zou, V. H. Crespi and B. I. Yakobson, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10475–10481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, J. Deng, X. Ding, J. Sun, S. Yang and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16206–16212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, T. Joseph, M. Ghorbani-Asl, S. Kolekar, A. V. Krasheninnikov and M. Batzill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110428 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, H. C. Diaz, J. Avila, C. Chen, V. Kalappattil, R. Das, M.-H. Phan, T. Čadež, J. M. P. Carmelo, M. C. Asensio and M. Batzill, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Yu, A. Chen, H. Li, W. Ren, S. Lu, S. Ding, H. Yang, Q.-K. Xue, F.-S. Li and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8299–8306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, W. Ho, H. Xu and M. Xie, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10716–10722 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhu, W. Ruan, Y.-Q. Wang, H.-Z. Tsai, S. Wang, C. Zhang, T. Wang, F. Liou, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. B. Neaton, A. Weber-Bargioni, A. Zettl, Z. Q. Qiu, G. Zhang, F. Wang, J. E. Moore and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Mater., 2022, 21, 748–753 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, T. Zhang, Z. Huang, Y. Chen, X. Song, X. Hao, H. Yang, X. Wu, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, H.-J. Gao and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1332–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, S. Li, M. H. Naik, J. Xie, X. Li, E. Regan, D. Wang, W. Zhao, K. Yumigeta, M. Blei, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. Tongay, A. Zettl, S. G. Louie, M. F. Crommie and F. Wang, Nat. Phys., 2021, 17, 1114–1119 Search PubMed .
H. Li, S. Li, E. C. Regan, D. Wang, W. Zhao, S. Kahn, K. Yumigeta, M. Blei, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. Tongay, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie and F. Wang, Nature, 2021, 597, 650–654 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Wigner, Phys. Rev., 1934, 46, 1002–1011 CrossRef .
V. Boureau, B. Sklenard, R. McLeod, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and D. Cooper, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 524–530 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yoo, K. Yang, B. W. Cho, K. K. Kim, S. C. Lim, S. M. Lee and M. S. Jeong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 4182–4187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, M. S. Bharathi, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, S. Nie, X. Wang, H. Chou, C. Tan, B. Fallahazad, H. Ramanarayan, C. W. Magnuson, E. Tutuc, B. I. Yakobson, K. F. McCarty, Y.-W. Zhang, P. Kim, J. Hone, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2013, 342, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Zhang, A. A. Puretzky, A. Yoshimura, X. Sang, Q. Cui, Y. Li, L. Liang, A. W. Ghosh, H. Zhao, R. R. Unocic, V. Meunier, C. M. Rouleau, B. G. Sumpter, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2481–2489 CAS .
W. Wu, M. D. Morales-Acosta, Y. Wang and M. T. Pettes, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1527–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, A. Kumar, H. Dong, J. M. Woods, J. V. Pondick, S. Xu, D. J. Hynek, P. Guo, D. Y. Qiu and J. J. Cha, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, A. A. Murthy, Y. Xu, R. dos Reis, G. S. Shekhawat and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808244 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ren, H. Qin, H. Liu, Y. Chen, X. Liu and G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110846 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Kim, F. Mujid, A. Rai, F. Eriksson, J. Suh, P. Poddar, A. Ray, C. Park, E. Fransson, Y. Zhong, D. A. Muller, P. Erhart, D. G. Cahill and J. Park, Nature, 2021, 597, 660–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Lee, M.-S. Kang, G.-S. Kim, J. W. Choi, N.-W. Park, Y. Sim, Y.-H. Kim, M.-J. Seong, Y.-G. Yoon, E. Saitoh and S.-K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3404–3416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Lin, Q.-H. Tan, J.-B. Wu, X.-S. Chen, J.-H. Wang, Y.-H. Pan, X. Zhang, X. Cong, J. Zhang, W. Ji, P.-A. Hu, K.-H. Liu and P.-H. Tan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8770–8780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, L. Meng, Z. Meng, Y. Weng, L. Kang and X.-A. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 30684–30688 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Q. Lin, J. Holler, J. M. Bauer, P. Parzefall, M. Scheuck, B. Peng, T. Korn, S. Bange, J. M. Lupton and C. Schüller, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Quan, L. Linhart, M.-L. Lin, D. Lee, J. Zhu, C.-Y. Wang, W.-T. Hsu, J. Choi, J. Embley, C. Young, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, C.-K. Shih, K. Lai, A. H. MacDonald, P.-H. Tan, F. Libisch and X. Li, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1100–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Suri, C. Wang, Y. Zhang and D. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 10026–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-U. Lee, S. Woo, J. Park, H. C. Park, Y.-W. Son and H. Cheong, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1370 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, Z. Ding, J. Chen, J. Dan, S. M. Poh, W. Fu, S. J. Pennycook, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1940–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, W. Zheng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Lin, K. Li, Y. Hu, E. Sun, J. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Y. Fu, W. Cao and P. Hu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 201–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, K. Nguyen, M. Cao, P. Cueva, S. Xie, M. W. Tate, P. Purohit, S. M. Gruner, J. Park and D. A. Muller, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3746–3751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, L. Tu, Y. Han, L. Huang, K. Kang, K. U. Lao, P. Poddar, C. Park, D. A. Muller, R. A. DiStasio and J. Park, Science, 2018, 359, 1131–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, P. Li, J.-K. Huang, M.-Y. Li, C.-W. Yang, Y. Shi, X.-X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10516–10523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Doan, Y. Jin, S. Adhikari, S. Lee, J. Zhao, S. C. Lim and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3832–3840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Duong, J. Lee, S. Bang, C. Park, S. C. Lim and M. S. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4478–4485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, N. Fang, K. Nakamura, K. Ueno, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and K. Nagashio, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800207 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Hu, S. Ding, D. W. Zhang, P. Zhou and W. Bao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800237 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Ma, N. A. N. Ouedraogo, F. Liu, C. You, W. Deng and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 123–144 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, X. Zhu, S.-H. Tsai, S.-P. Tsai, S. Lei, Y. Shi, L.-J. Li, S.-J. Huang, W.-F. Wu, W.-K. Yeh, Y.-K. Su, K. L. Wang and Y.-W. Lan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11015–11023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lim, M. Kim, Y. Jeong, K. R. Ko, S. Yu, H. G. Shin, J. Y. Moon, Y. J. Choi, Y. Yi, T. Kim and S. Im, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 37 CrossRef .
D. Qi, C. Han, X. Rong, X.-W. Zhang, M. Chhowalla, A. T. S. Wee and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9464–9472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Ji, P. Solís-Fernández, D. Yoshimura, M. Maruyama, T. Endo, Y. Miyata, S. Okada and H. Ago, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903613 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nourbakhsh, A. Zubair, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1359–1366 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, H. J. Lee, W. Choi, H.-J. Jin, H. Cho, Y. Jeong, S. Lee, K. Kim and S. Im, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2108737 CrossRef .
J. Kim, M. Jung, D. U. Lim, D. Rhee, S. H. Jung, H. K. Cho, H.-K. Kim, J. H. Cho and J. Kang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 570–577 CrossRef PubMed .
E. G. Marin, D. Marian, M. Perucchini, G. Fiori and G. Iannaccone, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1982–1989 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Sung, H. Heo, S. Si, Y. H. Kim, H. R. Noh, K. Song, J. Kim, C.-S. Lee, S.-Y. Seo, D.-H. Kim, H. K. Kim, H. W. Yeom, T.-H. Kim, S.-Y. Choi, J. S. Kim and M.-H. Jo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1064–1070 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Leong, Q. Ji, N. Mao, Y. Han, H. Wang, A. J. Goodman, A. Vignon, C. Su, Y. Guo, P.-C. Shen, Z. Gao, D. A. Muller, W. A. Tisdale and J. Kong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12354–12358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, Q. Tao, W. Dang, Y. Liu, B. Li, J. Li, B. Zhao, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, G. Sun, X. Duan and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806611 CrossRef .
J. Jadwiszczak, D. Keane, P. Maguire, C. P. Cullen, Y. Zhou, H. Song, C. Downing, D. Fox, N. McEvoy, R. Zhu, J. Xu, G. S. Duesberg, Z.-M. Liao, J. J. Boland and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14262–14273 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, Y. Jeong, H.-J. Jin, J. Park, H. Jang, S. Lee, W. Huh, H. Cho, H. G. Shin, K. Kim, C.-H. Lee, S. Choi and S. Im, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12064–12071 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zou, Z. Cai, Y. Lai, J. Tan, R. Zhang, S. Feng, G. Wang, J. Lin, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7340–7347 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhai, P. Xie, Z. Feng, C. Du, S.-T. Han and Y. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2108440 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Grajal, J. L. Vazquez-Roy, U. Radhakrishna, X. Wang, W. Chern, L. Zhou, Y. Lin, P.-C. Shen, X. Ji, X. Ling, A. Zubair, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, M. Dubey, J. Kong, M. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nature, 2019, 566, 368–372 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Romagnoli, V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, F. H. L. Koppens, C. Huyghebaert, D. Neumaier, P. Galli, W. Templ, A. D’Errico and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 392–414 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. Maassen, J. Lee, S. M. Kim, G. Han, J. Kwon, S. Hong, J. Park, N. Liu, Y. C. Park, I. Omkaram, J.-S. Rhyee, Y. K. Hong and Y. Yoon, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705542 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Sahoo, S. Memaran, F. A. Nugera, Y. Xin, T. Díaz Márquez, Z. Lu, W. Zheng, N. D. Zhigadlo, D. Smirnov, L. Balicas and H. R. Gutiérrez, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12372–12384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Najafidehaghani, Z. Gan, A. George, T. Lehnert, G. Q. Ngo, C. Neumann, T. Bucher, I. Staude, D. Kaiser, T. Vogl, U. Hübner, U. Kaiser, F. Eilenberger and A. Turchanin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101086 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jia, Z. Jin, J. Zhang, J. Yuan, W. Chen, W. Feng, P. Hu, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2020, 16, 2002263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Bellus, M. Mahjouri-Samani, S. D. Lane, A. D. Oyedele, X. Li, A. A. Puretzky, D. Geohegan, K. Xiao and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7086–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. J. Ji, K. H. Kim, S. Choi, D.-H. Kang, K. Heo, S. Cho, S. Yim, S. Lee, J.-H. Park, Y. S. Jung and G. Y. Yeom, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4701 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, W. Xu, Y. Sheng, C. S. Lau, Y. Fan, Q. Chen, M. Tweedie, X. Wang, Y. Zhou and J. H. Warner, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702917 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Li, W. Fan, R. Wang, S. Zhou, J.-T. Lü, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800339 CrossRef .
H. Xue, Y. Wang, Y. Dai, W. Kim, H. Jussila, M. Qi, J. Susoma, Z. Ren, Q. Dai, J. Zhao, K. Halonen, H. Lipsanen, X. Wang, X. Gan and Z. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804388 CrossRef .
A. M. Afzal, M. Z. Iqbal, G. Dastgeer, A. U. Ahmad and B. Park, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Wang, G. Wu, Z. Wang, H. Fang, T. Lin, S. Sun, H. Shen, W. Hu, J. Wang, J. Sun, X. Meng and J. Chu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703293 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Shin, C. Park, K. J. Lee, H. J. Jin and S.-Y. Choi, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5741–5748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhong, J. Ye, T. He, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, Q. Li, B. Han, P. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Yu, J. Guo, Z. Zhang, M. Peng, T. Xu, X. Ge, Y. Wang, H. Wang, M. Zubair, X. Zhou, P. Gao, Z. Fan and W. Hu, Small, 2021, 17, 2102855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, L. Yin, Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, F. M. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Y. Huang, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5499–5506 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wu, Y. Xie, Q. Liu, X. Hu, J. Liu, D. Zhang and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5430–5438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-B. Lee, Y. R. Lim, A. K. Katiyar, W. Song, J. Lim, S. Bae, T.-W. Kim, S.-K. Lee and J.-H. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, M.-Y. Li, J. R. D. Retamal, K.-T. Lam, Y.-C. Lin, K. Suenaga, L.-J. Chen, G. Liang, L.-J. Li and J.-H. He, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701168 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Cha, J. C. Kim, D. Lee, W. Huh, Y. Kim, S. W. Lee, H.-G. Park, H. Y. Jeong, S. Hong, G.-H. Lee and C.-H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2443–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Feng, L. Chen, L. Wang, W. C. Tan, L. Huang and K.-W. Ang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 667–673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seo, J.-J. Lee, R.-G. Lee, T. H. Kim, S. Park, S. Jung, H.-K. Lee, M. Andreev, K.-B. Lee, K.-S. Jung, S. Oh, H.-J. Lee, K. S. Kim, G. Y. Yeom, Y.-H. Kim and J.-H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hassani, M. Ghorbani-Asl, B. Radha, M. Drndić, A. V. Krasheninnikov and M. Neek-Amal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 25055–25066 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, A. Du and L. Kou, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 8, e1361 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Ko, S. Lee, K. Park, Y. Kim, W. J. Woo, D. Kim, J.-G. Song, J. Park, J. H. Kim, Z. Lee and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34163–34171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Panigrahi, T. Hussain, A. Karton and R. Ahuja, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2646–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. K. Sahoo, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, T. Shimada and T. Kitamura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14113–14121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Lee, J.-G. Song, K. Y. Ko, W. J. Woo, S. W. Lee, M. Park, H. Lee, Z. Lee, H. Choi, W.-H. Kim, J. Park and H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003360 CrossRef .
J. Feng, K. Liu, R. D. Bulushev, S. Khlybov, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1070–1076 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, S. Baek, A. Sen, B. Jung, J. Shim, Y. C. Park, L. P. Lee, Y. J. Kim and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1826–1835 CrossRef PubMed .
C. De-Eknamkul, X. Zhang, M.-Q. Zhao, W. Huang, R. Liu, A. T. C. Johnson and E. Cubukcu, 2D Mater., 2020, 7, 014004 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Heiranian, A. B. Farimani and N. R. Aluru, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8616 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 536, 197–200 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Keerthi, A. K. Geim, A. Janardanan, A. P. Rooney, A. Esfandiar, S. Hu, S. A. Dar, I. V. Grigorieva, S. J. Haigh, F. C. Wang and B. Radha, Nature, 2018, 558, 420–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, A. Zavabeti, H. Quan, W. Zhu, H. Wei, D. Chen and J. Z. Ou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 142, 111573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Kajale, S. Yadav, Y. Cai, B. Joy and D. Sarkar, iScience, 2021, 24, 103513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Yang, J. H. Shim, H.-U. Cho, T.-M. Jang, G.-J. Ko, J. Shim, T. H. Kim, J. Zhu, S. Park, Y. S. Kim, S.-Y. Joung, J. C. Choe, J.-W. Shin, J. H. Lee, Y. M. Kang, H. Cheng, Y. Jung, C.-H. Lee, D. P. Jang and S.-W. Hwang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2108203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, K. Ye, Z. Jia, T. Xue, A. Nie, J. Xiang, C. Mu, B. Wang, F. Wen, K. Zhai, Z. Zhao, Y. Gong, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 194, 113596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Lihter, T.-H. Chen, M. Macha, A. Rayabharam, K. Banjac, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Comtet, N. R. Aluru, M. Lingenfelder, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7168–7178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, T. T. Debela, J. Y. Kim, S. J. Yoo, J.-G. Kim, J. Park and H. S. Kang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 14672–14682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Politano, G. Chiarello, C.-N. Kuo, C. S. Lue, R. Edla, P. Torelli, V. Pellegrini and D. W. Boukhvalov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706504 CrossRef .
B. Huang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6239–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Huang, C. Zhang, F. Li and H. Shu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1530–1536 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, D. Wang, J. Tan, Y. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Liu, N. Zhao, X. Zou, G. Zhou and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 3106–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Ding, B. Xia, J. Duan, M. Antonietti and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202115198 CAS .
Y. He, P. Tang, Z. Hu, Q. He, C. Zhu, L. Wang, Q. Zeng, P. Golani, G. Gao, W. Fu, Z. Huang, C. Gao, J. Xia, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhu, Q. M. Ramasse, A. Zhang, B. An, Y. Zhang, S. Martí-Sánchez, J. R. Morante, L. Wang, B. K. Tay, B. I. Yakobson, A. Trampert, H. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. J. Wang, J. Arbiol and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Huan, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, M. Hong, Q. Fang, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 958 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Yao Xiao
	Yao Xiao is a Postdoctoral Researcher in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of Hubei University. He received his PhD from the Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS) of Wuhan University in 2021. During that period, he devoted himself to the structural modulation and theoretical mechanism of 2D TMDs and vertical heterostructures. His current research interests include the synthesis, structure modulation and applications of 2D materials.

Chengyi Xiong
	Chengyi Xiong received his BS Degree from Hubei University in 2013. Subsequently, he obtained his PhD from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Southwest University in 2018. Currently, he works as an Assistant Professor at Hubei University. His current research is focused on the synthesis and functionalization of novel luminescent materials, and electrochemiluminescence biosensing and bioimaging.

Miao-Miao Chen
	Miao-Miao Chen is an Associate Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. She received her PhD from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences of Wuhan University in 2019. Her current research program aims to design, synthesize, and obtain materials with multifunctional properties for potential applicability as portable electrochemiluminescence sensors.

Shengfu Wang
	Shengfu Wang is a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. He obtained his MS Degree and PhD from the College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences of Wuhan University. His recent research interest mainly focuses on the application of functional nanomaterials in electrochemistry and analytical chemistry.

Lei Fu
	Lei Fu received his BS Degree in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2001. He obtained his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. After obtaining his PhD, he worked as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM (2006–2007). Thereafter, he became an Associate Professor at Peking University. In 2012, he joined Wuhan University as a Full Professor. His current research interests are related to the controlled growth and novel property exploration of 2D atomic layer thin crystals.

Xiuhua Zhang
	Xiuhua Zhang is a Professor in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hubei University. He received his PhD in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Hubei University in 2008. Currently, his main interest is developing photoelectric functional materials and their application in electrochemical biosensors.

 	Scheme 1  Modulated TMD structures together with the related methods, properties and applications.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic illustration of the intrinsic phases of monolayer TMDs classified by components and structures.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations of modulated point structures of TMDs.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Modulated point structures in H-phase TMDs. (a) Chalcogen monoatomic, (b) diatomic vacancies and (c)–(f) metal substitutions for original chalcogen sites in 1H-TMDs, for example, MoS2. (g) Schematic illustration of Cr-, Mo- and O-doped WS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 33, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (g) from ref. 41, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of modulated linear structures of TMDs.	 
b = ma1 + na2	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Grain boundaries of (a)–(c) MoS2 with different tilt angles and (d)–(h) 1T-PtSe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 58, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (d)–(h) from ref. 63, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Twinned boundaries of (a)–(d) 1H-TMDs and (e)–(g) 1T′′-ReS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 68, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (e)–(g) from ref. 71, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of (a) MoS2 edges, (b) MoS2 fractals and (c) screw dislocations in WS2 crystals. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 73, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (b) from ref. 79, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; and (c) from ref. 82, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of different lateral heterostructure interfaces. (a)–(f) STEM images and schematic illustration of different 1H–1T-WS2 lateral heterostructure interfaces. Schematic illustration of (g) H-phase lateral heterostructure interface and (h) 1T′′-ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructure interface. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 85, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society and (g)–(h) from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of modulated out-of-plane structures of TMDs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustrations of different stacking arrangements of few-layer TMDs and vertical heterostructures. (a) and (b) AB and AA′ stacking of bilayer MoS2. (c) Different phases and stacking arrangements of few-layer TaS2. (d) Vertical MoX2/WX2 heterostructures with long-period moiré patterns and three typical stackings. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) and (b) from ref. 65, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; (c) from ref. 87, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; and (d) from ref. 92, Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  Direct modulation for atomic doping by changing the precursor supply. (a) Nb(HC2O4)5 mixed in W source for the growth of Nb-doped WS2. (b) MnO2 assisted by NaCl for the fabrication of Mn-doped MoS2. (c) Eu-doped MoS2 achieved by sustained-release Eu source in CVD process. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 107, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society; (b) from ref. 112, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; and (c) from ref. 42, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 11  Direct modulation for TMD edges, fractals and stacking arrangements through precursor control. (a)–(d) Formation energies and energy barriers of different MoS2 edges under the different chemical potentials of sulphur. (e) Fractal dimensions of different MoS2 fractals toward a change in the Mo and S precursor ratios. (f) and (g) Schematic illustration and formation energies of twisted bilayer WS2 with/without Sn induction. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 79, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (e) from ref. 78, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (f) and (g) from ref. 119, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Direct modulation mechanism for TMD lateral and vertical heterostructure interfaces by controlling the precursor supply. (a) Schematic illustration and optical images of heterostructures composed of MoS2 and WSe2 with a chance in the W/Se ratio. (b) Formation energies and (c) adsorption energies of possible precursor species of WSe2. (d) Binding energies of lengths of WSe2 crystals of lateral and vertical heterostructures. (e) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of lateral WSe2–MoS2 and vertical WSe2/MoS2 heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(e) from ref. 121, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.	 
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 13  Mechanism of substrate induction toward TMD-modulated structures. (a) Schematic illustration of fabricated WS2–MoS2 lateral heterostructures on SiO2 and sapphire. (b) Diffusion pathways of precursor molecules and (c) morphological evolution process for MoS2 fractals on SrTiO3(001). Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 123, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons and (b and c) from ref. 77, Copyright 2016, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Mechanism of reactant transport control toward TMD modulated structures. (a) W-vacancy-rich and S-vacancy-rich regions in WS2 achieved by selective W precursor accumulation. (b) Vicinal edges of typical Mo or S terminal edges in MoS2 induced by 2D VLAS growth. (c) Typical kink edges of (010) and (110) surfaces with corresponding edge energies of each kink edge and (d) kink edge structures of 1T′-WTe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 128, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; (b) from ref. 132, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society; and (c) and (d) from ref. 75, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 15  Reactant condition control toward the formation of modulated TMD structures. (a) MoS2 doped with oxygen atoms at specific doping concentrations achieved by controlling growth temperature according to the phase diagram. (b) Spiral WS2 with screw dislocations and stacked layers obtained at different deposition temperatures and precursor concentrations. (c) 1T′-WTe2 nanoribbons with specific edges obtained by H2 etching. (d) and (f) Schematic illustration and reaction free energies of the different etching directions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 134, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons; (b) from ref. 83, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (c)–(f) from ref. 76, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  External energetic routes for the structure modulation of TMDs. (a)–(g) Vacancy migration process from points to lines observed by in situ STEM with electron beam irradiation. (h)–(k) Stacking arrangement alteration achieved by in situ STEM with electron beam irradiation. (l) Schematic illustration of laser-induced O doping of MoS2. (m) Raman spectra and (n) optical images of pristine and O-doped MoS2 regions, where the insets show the elementary distributions. (o) Illustration of thermal induction for the transformation from quaternary MoxW1−xS2ySe2(1−y) alloys to lateral heterostructures. (p) and (q) Factors that affect the formation of lateral heterostructures, including composition of the quaternary alloys and miscibility gaps in MoxW1−xS2ySe2(1−y) at different temperatures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(g) from ref. 144, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; (h)–(k) from ref. 91, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (l)–(n) from ref. 155, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons; and (o)–(q) from ref. 168, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  Atomic substitution for structure modulation of TMDs. (a) and (b) Lateral 2H-MoTe2–MoS2 heterostructure and MoTe2xS2(1−x) alloy obtained by Te substitution with and without NaCl assistance at different temperatures. (c) Lateral MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure formed by S substitution from the reactive grain boundaries of MoSe2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 173, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature and (c) from ref. 174, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  Etching for structure modulation of TMDs. (a) and (b) Reaction routes and mechanisms of AlCl3 etching for vacancies in NbS2. (c)–(e) KWC and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations for etching mechanisms of WSe2 crystals with different edges. (f) Temperature-induced etching for different WSe2 kirigami shapes. (g) Schematic illustration and (h)–(j) mechanism of Te-promoted disassembly of ReS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 178, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(e) from ref. 180, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (f) from ref. 181, Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society; and (g)–(j) from ref. 182, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  Electron structures of modulated point structures of TMDs. (a)–(f) DOS and charge density of doping centres of Cr-, Fe-, Nb- and Mo-doped WS2. (g) Band structures of CH− and C˙− doping of WS2. (h) Energy degeneracy induced by unpaired spins of K and K′ valleys. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 199, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons and (g)–(h) from ref. 204, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  Electron structures of modulated linear structures of TMDs. (a)–(f) Band structures and DOS of PtSe2 with different grain boundaries compared with the pristine one. (g) Band structures and DOS of 4|4P MTBs of MoSe2. (h) Band structures of MTBs of MoS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 63, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (g) from ref. 214, Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society; and (h) from ref. 215, Copyright 2019, the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Band structures of modulated out-of-plane structures of TMDs. (a) Band structures of monolayer and bilayer MoS2 with different stacking arrangements. (b) Band structures of C7 and T stackings of MoS2/WS2 vertical heterostructures. (c)–(f) Band structures of monolayer WS2, WSe2 and their vertical heterobilayers obtained by ARPES and theoretical calculations. (g)–(k) Schematic illustration, band structures and ARPES results of 1T/1H-TaS2 vertical heterostructures, indicating the behaviours of artificial heavy fermions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a) from ref. 227, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society; (b) from ref. 233, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(f) from ref. 237, Copyright 2021, the American Association for the Advancement of Science; and (g)–(k) from ref. 238, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 22  Optical properties of modulated point structures of TMDs. (a) PL spectra and (b) illumination mechanism of WS2 with S vacancies. (c) Exciton spatial population of pristine and vacancy-involved WS2 at different delay times in 2D TAM images. (d) PL spectra of pristine, Co-doped and Co, Cr-co-doped MoS2. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 276, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons and (d) from ref. 281, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 
	(12)
jα = σαβγEβ(ω) Eγ(−ω)	(13)
Eb = Eex,binding + Eemission	(14)

 	Fig. 23  Optical properties of vertical TMD heterostructures. (a) Intralayer and interlayer excitons in MoS2/MoSe2 vertical heterostructures under different excitation powers. (b) and (c) Photocurrent generation mechanisms of MoS2/MoSe2 vertical heterostructures with weak or strong interfaces under illumination. (d) Schematic illustration, (e) theoretical energy variations and (f) exciton emission images for the exciton transport in WSe2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(c) from ref. 314, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (d)–(f) from ref. 321, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  Charged excitons in moiré-patterned TMD vertical heterostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of interlayer excitons and charge trions located at different moiré trapping sites of MoSe2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (b) Energies of interlayer excitons and trions toward electron density of neighbouring trapping sites. (c) and (d) PL peak shifts and (e) and (f) theoretical energy shifts of two different vertical heterostructures under controllable electron doping. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(f) from ref. 339, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 25  Magnetic properties of modulated structures of TMDs. (a) and (b) Spin-polarized DOS and (c) and (d) up (blue) and down (red) spin densities of Re-doped MoSe2 with different doping concentrations. (e) Magnetic moments and DOS of MoSe2 and MoTe2 with transition metals. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 345, Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons and (e) from ref. 349, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Moiré electrons in vertical TMD heterostructures. (a) Schematic illustration of tip-induced moiré electron discharging. (b) STM images and (c) atomic schemes of WSe2/WS2, showing different stacking arrangements of the moiré patterned sites. (d) and (e) STS images of the region in (b) at different tip voltages, indicating the discharging behaviour. (f) Schematic illustration of the device to observe Wigner crystals in WS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (g) Topography of STM images of WS2/WSe2 vertical heterostructures. (h) STS images and (i) FFT patterns of Wigner crystals at different applied voltage bias, indicating different electron filling conditions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(e) from ref. 364, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature and (f)–(i) from ref. 365, Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 27  Electrical diodes based on modulated TMD structures. (a)–(d) Optical images and corresponding output curves of diodes based on MoSe2–WSe2 and MoS2–WS2 lateral heterostructures. (e) NDT behaviour of devices based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures. (f)–(h) Gate-dominated forward-diode-type and Zener-diode-type Ids–Vds behaviours of devices based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures. (i) Band structures of the forward diode and Zener diode based on MoS2/MoTe2 vertical heterostructures at different gate voltages. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 141, copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (e)–(i) from ref. 389, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Electrical memory devices based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Memory processes and (b) performances of V-doped MoS2 memtransistors. (c) Construction of patterned MoS2–MoS2−xOδ-based memristors. (d)–(g) Performances of patterned MoS2–MoS2−xOδ-based memristors with different sweeping conditions and patterns. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(b) from ref. 406, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (c)–(g) from ref. 155, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 29  Optoelectronics based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Schematic illustration and (b) Ids–Vds curves of the optical diode based on ReS2–ReSe2 lateral heterostructures under incident lights with different polarizations. (c) Schematic illustration and optical image of WSe2/MoSe2 node-like photodetector array. (d) and (e) Optical responsibility of different incident lights of the device. (f)–(h) Optical images and light responsibility of the photodetector array toward focused and defocused lights. (i) and (j) Bioinspired optoelectronic synapse devices based on ReS2 with atomic vacancies. (k) Work function and conductivity alteration of the optoelectronic synapse under and after optical spike. (l) Memory mechanisms of ReS2 optoelectronic synapse. (m) Signal keeping time after optical spike of ReS2 optoelectronic synapse. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 86, Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons; (c)–(h) from ref. 425, Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons and (i)–(m) from ref. 429, Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  Gas sensors based on modulated TMD structures. (a)–(d) Total energies when different gas molecules go through WS2 layers with different atomic vacancies. (e) Schematic illustration of gas sensing process based on WSe2/WS2 optical diodes. (f) and (g) Responses to NO2 and NH3 gases with different concentrations. (h)–(j) Sensing mechanism of WSe2/WS2 heterostructure in N2, NO2 and NH3 conditions. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a)–(d) from ref. 430, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society and (e)–(j) from ref. 435, Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 31  Biosensors based on modulated TMD structures. (a) Construction process and (b) sensing properties of RdRp sensors based on cDNA and AuNP-decorated monolayer grain-boundary-rich WS2 films. (c) and (d) Sensing mechanism of S vacancy identification. (e) MoS2 PL imaging and fluorescently labelled S vacancies. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 445, Copyright 2021, Elsevier and (c)–(e) from ref. 446, Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  Catalysts based on TMD modulated structures. (a) and (b) Catalytic performances of MoS2 grain boundaries and edges. (c) and (d) Enhanced HER performances of MoS2 nanoribbons with enriched compared with MoS2 single crystals. (e)–(h) Enhanced HER performances of TaS2 in comparison with MoS2 owing to near-zero Gibbs free energy of hydrogen adsorption on Ta and S edges. Separate panels are reproduced with permission: (a), (b) from ref. 453, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (c), (d) from ref. 183, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society; and (e)–(h) from ref. 454, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
