Interaction engineering in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0MH00745E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0MH00745E
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2208-2236Interaction engineering in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Mingzhe 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chongwen 
            Li
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Bingyu 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiakang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuqian 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weisi 
            Guo
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongmin 
            Zhou
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shuping 
            Pang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yanfa 
            Yan
          
        
      b
aState Key Laboratory Base of Eco-chemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, People's Republic of China. E-mail: nick8110@163.com; zhouzm@qust.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, and Wright Center for Photovoltaic Innovation and Commercialization, The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43607, USA. E-mail: chongwen.li@rockets.utoledo.edu
cQingdao Key Lab of Solar Energy Utilization and Energy Storage Technology, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, People's Republic of China
Received 
      5th May 2020
    , Accepted 5th June 2020First published on 5th June 2020AbstractLow production cost and ever-increasing efficiencies make perovskite solar cells a flourishing area of research. The high efficiency originates from not only the unique optoelectronic properties of perovskites, but also various device optimization strategies, such as interfacial engineering, defect engineering, and componential engineering. Behind these strategies stand the fundamental intermolecular interactions and bondings, such as hydrogen bonding, halide bonding, ionic bonding, Lewis acid–base interactions, and van der Waals interactions. In this review, we focus on different types of interactions and summarize the progresses made in perovskite solar cells. Additionally, perspectives on further efforts in improving device performance and stability are presented.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) have received tremendous attention owing to their multitudinous applications, including those in field-effect transistors,1 light-emitting diodes,2 solar cells,3 photodetectors,4 and lasers.5 In particular, OIHP-based solar cells, which convert light energy into electrical energy, can achieve power conversion efficiency (PCE) from the initially reported 3.8% to the latest certified 25.2% in their expansive development over the past decade,6,7 which makes them comparable to conventional silicon solar cells.8 This formidable accomplishment largely depends on the excellent intrinsic properties of OIHPs, including large absorption coefficient,9 high carrier mobility,10 long carrier diffusion length,11 and direct bandgap.12
Perovskite materials generally assume the chemical formula ABX3, where the monovalent A cation coordinates with the nearest 12 X− anions and the divalent B cation coordinates with the nearest 6 X− anions, taking shapes of corner-connected BX6 octahedra with interstitial A cations (Fig. 1a and b).13 The formability and stability of perovskite structures are usually estimated by the Goldschmidt's tolerance factor t, where RA, RB, and RX denote the corresponding ionic radii of the A, B, and X sites.14 The ideal perovskite cubic structure requires t to be in the range from 0.813 to 1.107 and ideally close to 1.19 Therefore, predicting the radii of multiple ions is critical to determine the proper tolerance factor. Note that t is not the only prediction criteria. Octahedral factor μ (μ = RB/RX) is another parameter for predicting perovskite formability,15 which should be between 0.442 and 0.895.14 Until now, in widely studied perovskites, the A site is often occupied by CH3NH3+ (MA+)/HC(NH2)2+ (FA+)/Cs+, the B site is usually occupied by Pb2+/Sn2+, and the X site is commonly occupied by I−/Br−/Cl−.
 Fig. 1  ABX3 perovskite structure exhibiting (a) BX6 octahedral and (b) AX12 cuboctahedral geometries. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Graphical summary of pairwise vdW energies, EABvdW, between the atom sites A and B in the unit cell of MAPbI3. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Calculated absorption spectra plotted for different orientations of MA+, clearly showing the impact of organic cation rotation. Blue refers to MA+ aligned along the (111) direction, while yellow refers to the (011) direction. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The property of a perovskite depends not only on its constituent atoms, but also on how these atoms are bound to each other. Taking a typical perovskite MAPbI3 as the example, outstanding photovoltaic properties result from the portfolio of direct bandgap p–p transitions afforded by the s orbitals of Pb lone-pair electrons and perovskite symmetry, powerful antibonding coupling between Pb lone-pair s and I p orbitals, high ionicity, and so on.16 It is well known that MAPbI3 is essentially an ionic material.17 Wang et al. employed the optB86b + vdWDF XC functional calculation, which revealed that the main interactions between organic groups and inorganic framework are the ionic bonds (IBs) between the MA+ cations and I− anions for orthorhombic perovskite MAPbI3.18 Besides, there is a combined covalent bond (CB) and IB characteristic between Pb and I atoms. Agiorgousis et al. reported that Pb2+ cations and I− anions in MAPbI3 exhibit strong covalency due to the formation of Pb dimers and I trimers through CB in intrinsic defects, including I vacancy and Pb-on-MA antisite, Pb interstitial, and I-on-MA antisite.19 Owing to the existence of dipole moments for both PbI3− (2.89 Debye (D)) and MA+ (2.29 D), dipole–dipole electrostatic interactions have also been demonstrated to remarkably contribute toward the binding energy.20 Dispersion forces are widely accepted to be the universal glue among organic matters. Egger et al. took advantage of calculation to indicate that dispersive interactions strongly affect the structure of MAPbI3 (pseudo-cubic phase), exhibiting significant volume contraction (∼18 Å3).21 In addition, the pertinent dispersive interaction contribution originates from the direct van der Waals (vdW) interactions between the halides, as shown in Fig. 1c.21 The energy of each atomic pair is around 0.1 eV, which is within the limits of typical vdW energies. Fig. 1c also shows that the hydrogen bond (HB) between H and I, which is ∼0.25 eV (dispersive energy) per unit cell, plays an important role in the stability of the MAPbI3 structure.21 Motta and co-workers exploited the vdW-corrected density functional theory (DFT) calculations to find that the HB interactions between N in MA+ and I− in inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedra can contribute toward their MAPbI3 (pseudo-cubic phase) structural cohesion.22 The orientation of MA+ in MAPbI3, driven by the dispersive forces between MA+ and inorganic [PbI6]4− octahedra, has a robust impact on the bandgap, as shown in Fig. 1d. MAPbI3 films with different orientations of MA+ exhibit different absorption spectra. Additionally, Varadwaj et al. indicated the existence of N–H⋯I and C–H⋯I HB interactions in MAPbI3.20 Based on the abovementioned data, although views may vary, the overall property of MAPbI3 structure should be attributed to the synergistic effect among various interactions.
In order to achieve high light utilization and effective carrier transport, high-quality perovskite films are required. However, the unavoidable defects generated in the bulk, at the surface, and at the grain boundaries (GBs) due to the polycrystalline nature and solution processability can induce nonradiative electron–hole recombinations, leading to energy loss as phonons instead of photons and reduced photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY).23 Besides, the interfacial contact between the adjacent layers has a direct influence on carrier extraction and recombination, and therefore, it affects the device performance.24 It is worthwhile that huge progress has been made to ameliorate the device performance by different engineering strategies, such as componential,25 interfacial,26 and passivation engineering.27 Nevertheless, the implementation of these engineering was achieved mainly through interactions between the perovskites/charge transport layers and different molecules/ions, which primarily include (but not limited to) HB, CB, coordination bonding, halogen bonding (XB), π effects, IB, and vdW forces.
Intermolecular interactions have been extensively employed to ameliorate device performances. Varieties of interplays can facilitate the study of the fundamental physics of perovskites and provide powerful tools to examine the structure–property relationship in the device. Additionally, in turn, it can further guide the design and synthesis of target-directed molecules to participate in improving device performances. Therefore, in terms of scientific significance as well as technical importance, a review of this field has become imperative at this stage. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reviews that have discussed the promising achievements made through the viewpoint of chemical interactions. In this review, we will cover the introduction, including crystal structures and intrinsic interactions of perovskites, as well as focus on the various types of interactions in perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Finally, perspectives on further efforts in improving the device performance and stability will be presented. It is expected that based on this comprehensive summary and analysis, explicit information about numerous engineering interactions can guide increased focus toward the understanding of the fundamental chemistry and physics of perovskites and devices.
2. Various intermolecular interactions in PSCs
2.1 HB
A HB is an important intermolecular interaction, which involves a polar donor group Dδ−–Hδ+ and an electronegative atom Aδ− as the acceptor (Scheme 1),28 denoted as “D–H⋯A”. D or A refer to N, O, F, S, or even C. Although the modality is fairly simple, a HB is well known to play a critical role in structural stabilization.29 It is critical in determining the molecular conformation, aggregation, and function of numerous chemical systems such as inorganic, organic, and biological ones. HBs in perovskite crystals have been characterized by using infrared (IR) spectra,30 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra,31 raman spectra,32,33 neutron diffractions,34 and load–displacement curves.35 Extensive and in-depth theoretical explorations are considered to both promote the fundamental understanding of the underlying physical chemistry and the chemical physics involved, and they can expedite the formulation of novel functional nanomaterials that can become prerequisites for the design of optoelectronic devices having applications in photovoltaic technologies.36
 Scheme 1  HB is an attractive interaction between a hydrogen atom from a molecule or a molecular fragment D–H, where D is more electronegative than H, and an atom or a group of atoms, A, is the same or a different molecule. Copyright 2018, Molecular Diversity Preservation International. 
In this section, we begin with HB interactions in perovskites, including a discussion on the phase transition and ion migration involving HB interactions and summarizing the influence of water molecules on perovskites via HB interactions, which should be avoided during the fabrication of PSCs. Furthermore, we briefly present HB interactions in two-dimensional (2D) and other categories of perovskites. Finally, various applications of HB interactions in devices are detailed.

2.1.1 HB interactions in perovskites. 
2.1.1.1 Phase transition/ion migration in MAPbI3. 
It is well known that MAPbI3 undergoes consecutive phase transitions, from cubic to tetragonal and then to the orthorhombic phase, with a decrease in temperature.37 The cubic Pmm phase of MAPbI3 appears above 327 K, below which it turns into tetragonal I4/mcm and then into orthorhombic Pnma at 165 K.38 HB interactions participate in phase transitions by changing the lengths and bond angles. For instance, the phase transition of MAPbI3 from Pnma to I4/mcm strongly involves HB between the MA+ cation and the surrounding [PbI6]4− octahedral cages. Along with increases in temperature and unit cell volume (Fig. 2a), a HB with the shortest bond length of 2.57 Å (H3⋯I12 and H2⋯I4) moves to 2.67 Å (H1⋯I6) and the bond length of H3⋯I12 becomes 3.12 Å (Fig. 2b).39 By means of calculations, Ong et al. pointed out that the structural transition from tetragonal I4/mcm to cubic Pmm is not direct, as originally believed.39 Rather, a quasi-cubic tetragonal P4mm phase appeared between I4/mcm and Pmm, which can be considered as an “intermediate”. The transition from I4/mcm to P4mm arises from the rotation of MA+ cation, increase in the Pb–I–Pb angles, and unit cell volume expansion, rather than the obvious change in the HB length; however, the HB length increases and MA+ cation reorientation occurs when the phase transforms to Pmm.
 Fig. 2  (a) Influence of cubic cell volume change on the phase transitions of MAPbI3. (b) Analysis of HBs between I atoms and H atoms within different structures: P4mm with a = b = 6.375 Å and c = 6.253 Å; Pmm with a = b = c = 6.455 Å; and Pnma and I4/mcm with a = 8.98 and c = 12.57 Å (I4/mcm) and 12.30 Å (Pnma). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) An isosurface of MLWF, where yellow and turquoise represent positive and negative values, respectively. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Ion migration in perovskites mainly includes the migrations of hydrogens, halides, and organic cations. Organic cation and halide migrations in perovskites have low activation energies (0.2–0.8 eV; 4.6–18.4 kcal mol−1), which allow the ions to easily move through the defects and GBs.40,41 Organic cation migration, which is related to the dipole interactions and π interactions have not been discussed here. Hydrogen migration can be attributed to the verisimilar motor defects of H+, H0, and H−.42 Therein, H+ has been deemed to migrate by tracing a transient HB concatenating two equatorial iodides. This process affords a low barrier, but it accompanies an evident rearrangement of the iodide, Pb, and MA+ ions close to H+. A proton enables the iodides to move closer to each other, leading to the bridging of the two iodide sites in MAPbI3. H0 and H− have little association with HBs. The neutral H0 category is in an interstitial site of PbI2, while the negatively charged H− ion is closer to the Pb2+ cation. When the MA+ cation rotates through certain angles, the H atom of the NH3+ group can be at a distance of less than 3 Å from the iodide in the cubic Pmm structure of MAPbI3.41 The maximally localized Wannier function analysis shows the covalent characteristic of H⋯I1 (Fig. 2c).43 As shown in Fig. 2c, the electron density on I1 is already low. Therefore, the partial polarity reversal of negatively charged I1 abstracts the lone-pair p electrons of the adjacent I3, thereby supporting the Iδ+⋯Iδ− interaction, and induces halide migrations or diffusions and subsequent formation of I2. As the formation of I2 results in the decomposition of the perovskite materials, incorporating organic cations with strong HB capabilities is very beneficial for suppressing ion migration and therefore further improving the stability of perovskite materials.
2.1.1.2 Influences of water molecules. 
A plausible water-induced acid–base degradation cycle of MAPbI3 is shown in Fig. 3a.44 Partial pristine perovskites are hydrated by water molecules (a) to form pale yellow MAPbI3·H2O hydrates.45,46 Then, the adduct degrades into hydrogen iodide (HI, b) and methyl ammonium (c) under visible light.47 HI is then further oxidized into I2 in ambient air or under UV light from sunlight.48 Finally, yellow PbI2 solid is formed (d). Confirmed by IR spectra,49 water molecules can interfere with the HB between the MA+ cation and [PbI6]4− inorganic cage.50 When H2O replaces a MA+ cation, the perovskite structure collapses due to charge imbalance, further resulting in the detachment of I− anions.51 The HBs of N–H⋯I between the [PbI6]4− octahedral cages and MA+ cations are known to stabilize the MAPbI3 structure. Stronger HB of N–H⋯O from H2O results in the spontaneous hydration–decomposition process in perovskites,52 where the distance of H⋯O is very small (1.16 or 1.64 Å) for 4MAPbI3·H2O (Fig. 3b and c).53,54 The plausible route of H2O infiltration in MAPbI3 is shown in Fig. 3d.55 The maximized energy barrier for water penetration in the [PbI6]4− cage surface of MAPbI3 is 9.0 kcal mol−1,53,56 which is much lower than the energy needed to be overcome even at room temperature (18 kcal mol−1). This water penetration can be confirmed by IR spectroscopy. Müller et al. pointed out that within 1 min of exposing MAPbI3 to ambient conditions (relative humidity (RH) under 45%; 22 °C), O–H broad band (3500 cm−1) appeared in the IR spectrum (Fig. 3e),45 which was also found under 13% RH. The HB occurring between the NH group and the oxygen of water along with the OH group of water interacting with the iodide ion was confirmed by the evident blue-shift in the N–H stretching vibrations and receding strength of the symmetric N–H vibration. (Fig. 3f) However, Zhu et al. proposed negligible water penetration under ambient air (at 25 °C and 40–45% RH), and evident water absorption could be detected only for RH of ∼85%49 with maximum 1:1 MAPbI3/H2O molar ratio at ∼100% RH (Fig. 3g). The water molecules may partially immobilize MA+ cations in perovskites and therefore possibly slow down their movements.57 Note that the strong HB between the MA+ group and H2O molecule can lead to distortion in the crystal structure.53 Besides, the bandgap of the corresponding perovskite can get enlarged,58,59 which can be attributed to the larger electronegativity difference between oxygen (N–H⋯O) and iodine (N–H⋯I). In particular, it is worth noting that the hydration process is reversible.46 After absorbing water, the perovskite film can be dehydrated at 60 °C under a vacuum and inversely hydrated again when the temperature is reduced to room temperature under ambient conditions (Fig. 3h).60 It has been reported that Br− can suppress the transformation of the perovskite into the monohydrate (MAPbI3·H2O), probably due to the stronger HB interactions of the bromine anion than the oxygen anion with an organic cation in water.61 However, it has been suggested that a certain amount of water is beneficial toward the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films. Adhikari et al. introduced 5 vol% H2O of iPrOH into MAI solution to afford better device performances (from 9.04% to 12.42%).62 Under ambient air (30–40% RH), You et al. and Tavakoli et al. achieved better device performance as compared to that when annealing was performed in N2 and O2 atmospheres (17.1% and 20.2% versus 12.3% and 18.8%, respectively).63,64 In both these works, the enlargement of grain size of the perovskite films improved the PL intensity and lifetime, as well as the device performance. Note that the adsorbed water molecules can go through autoionization at the surface and the as-obtained hydroxyl and proton ions may act as charge carriers. However, the exact mechanism of water-enhanced improvement on the device performance is still vague and needs further investigation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Possible decomposition pathway of hybrid halide perovskites in the presence of water. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) HBs in a hydrated MAPbI3 crystal. The system of N–H⋯I HBs connecting the MA+ cation with the [PbI6]4− framework is shown. The four N atoms correspond to the four orientations of the cation. Three corresponding H atoms are shown for each N position. Six bonds (brown lines) corresponding to cation 2 (N2) are presented with 29.5% probability and six bonds (yellow lines) corresponding to cation 1 (N1) are presented with 16.5% probability for each instance. The O–H interactions (black dotted lines) are presented with a probability of 8.8%. The probabilities of the bonds are defined by the probability of the cation orientations and O occupancy. The dashed black contour indicates the most probable part of the structure, which leads to its decomposition. The dashed black arrow between N1 and N2 indicates the compensation of the leaving part. Copyright 2016, International Union of Crystallography. (c) Optimized geometrical structures of 4MAPbI3·H2O. HBs are noted as red and blue dotted lines. The red lines denote the HBs between the H of H2O and I− (O–H⋯I), while the blue lines refer to HBs between the O of H2O and H of N (N–H⋯O). Light blue, violet, green, blue, red, and white represent Pb, I, C, N, O, and H, respectively. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Illustration of the penetration trace of H2O near the surface of MAPbI3. The red dashed curve and red arrow denote the guidelines for the penetration path and initial orientation of the MA+ cation without the penetrated H2O molecule, respectively. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) IR spectra of 300 nm-thick MAPbI3 on a Si substrate measured in a vacuum (3 mbar) and under ambient conditions (45% RH; 22 °C) (f) IR spectra of 200 nm MAPbI3 on Si in different gas environments. (g) Up: Integrated area of the O–H stretching vibration mode in the range of ∼3360–3600 cm−1 for the same film as a function of RH. For calculating the area, the spectra are corrected with the help of a linear baseline, and the spectrum in a pure nitrogen atmosphere was subtracted from each spectrum. The uncertainty in RH is 5%. Symbol size corresponds to the error bar along the y-axis. Bottom: Peak positions of the N–H stretching vibrations as a function of RH. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h) IR spectrum shows the appearance and disappearance of O–H stretching upon heating and cooling the material, thereby revealing the role of moisture in the fabrication of the thermochromic perovskite MA4PbI6·2H2O. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
2.1.1.3 2D or other categories of perovskites. 
Then, we investigate lower-dimensional perovskites comprising HB interactions. Lower-dimensional perovskite structures are difficult to form due to the large radius of the A+ cation, which collapses [PbI6]4− networks and increases t above 1.11.65,66 One of the lower dimensions is the Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase assuming the formula of An+1BnX3n+1, where n (n ≥ 2) is the number of layers of the octahedra in perovskite-like stack. A typical ABX3 perovskite is formed when n tends to infinity, while when n is not too large, a quasi-2D perovskite is formed (Fig. 4a).67
 Fig. 4  (a) Changing process of the perovskite structure from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞), where the RP phase (An+1BnX3n+1, n ≥ 2) exists between them. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. Schematic view of 2D perovskites containing (b) RNH3+ and (c) carboxy groups. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) DFT (PBEsol)-optimized structures for a combination of AVA+via HBs. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of transporting holes and electrons in (pyrene-O-propyl)2PbI4. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) View normal to the ab plane of the unit cell structure of α-(N2H5)PbI3 (50% electron density), revealing a Pb2I4 ribbon and the locations of the hydrazinium cations. (g) Pb2I4 ribbon along c. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
Further, [HOOC(CH2)n−1NH3]2PbI4 and [CH3(CH2)n−1NH3]2PbI4 adopt the simplest RP phase of A2BX4, where n = 1. It is a sandwich structure integrated by [PbI6]4− networks with RNH3+ cations via HB interactions. As shown in Fig. 4b, the carbon chains of n-heptyl ammoniums were perpendicularly self-assembled, while the carboxy groups of piperidic acid generated new HBs mutually assuming the zigzag shape in the central section of the organic layer (Fig. 4c). In comparison with 3D species, RNH3PbI4 was stable toward moisture because of the presence of bulky and hydrophobic organic layers.68
5-Ammonium valeric acid (AVA+) is commonly utilized as an additive in the preparation of perovskites. It could also form stable HB networks in RP perovskites (Fig. 4d).69 Calculations based on DFT and molecular dynamics (MD) revealed the length of N–H⋯I, which ranged from 3.63 Å (n = 3) to 3.90 Å (n = 1), while the H⋯O bond length between the carboxy groups ranged from 1.5 Å (n = 1) to 1.6 Å (n = 3), revealing the presence of a strong acidic HB. MD simulations at room temperature also revealed that HB networks were well preserved. Such strong HB networks clearly strengthened the cohesion between the two organic layers, reinforcing the thermal stability of AVA-based RP phases at elevated temperatures. Passarelli et al. fabricated fused-aromatic-based (pyrene-O-propyl)2PbI4.70 The intramolecular HBs occurring between the organic cations and the supramolecular π-stacking interactions afford a narrow bandgap and fantastic out-of-plane conductivity (Fig. 4e). The active layer can be chemically stable for several minutes without any decomposition into PbI2 in water. The device based on such chemically stable 2D perovskites afforded modest PCE of 1.38%.
Hydrazinium (N2H5+) with the same effective radius as that of MA+ (i.e., 217 pm) is assumed to occupy the same cation site as that of MA+ in perovskites. Moreover, the prediction of “modified” and “revised” tolerance factors indicated that (N2H5)PbI3 might form the desired cubic perovskite structure.65,71 Although N2H5+ itself can act as both HB donor and acceptor, its strong tendency toward forming HB is likely to induce a structural anomaly, which can substantially contribute toward additional lattice energy.72 In fact, parallel ribbons of Pb2I4 and chains of PbI2 were observed instead of cubic perovskite structures, even though the perovskite ABX3 comprised α- and β-(N2H5)PbI3 phases (Fig. 4f and g).73 The bandgap for both α- and β-(N2H5)PbI3 was 2.70 eV. Based on the Shockley–Queisser limit, the theoretical maximum of PCE based on these two phases was only 9%. NH3OH+ (effective radius: 216 pm) could reciprocally form a HB similar to its isoelectronic species N2H5+. Even though the acidity of NH3OH+ ion (pKa = 5.97) is higher than that of N2H5+ (pKa ≈ 8.0),74 NH3OHPbI3 is fairly easily oxidized in air, affording elemental iodine. For the first time, it was reported that perovskite melts (m.p. ≈ 80 °C) before exothermally decomposing at 103 °C. Such chemical behavior, together with the yellowish appearance, renders it totally unsuitable for photovoltaic applications.73


2.1.2 Various applications of HB in devices. 
Long-term stability of PSCs is one of the decisive factors for their commercialization and therefore needs to be comprehensively addressed. Polyethylene glycol (H–(O–CH2–CH2)n–OH, PEG)—an ideal acceptor of HB—can strongly connect with the MAPbI3 film and ZnO layer via HBs, as shown in Fig. 5a.75 Therefore, PEG can successfully passivate the oxygen defects on the ZnO surface; consequently, the thermal stability of the device improved remarkably, maintaining 80% of its original PCE (15.5%) for more than 1 year under ambient conditions. Additionally, α,ω-diamino poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-NH2), a derivative of PEG, can form a HB with the halogen atom in the perovskite, which enhances the electronegativity of the halogen and the strength of Pb–halogen bonds, thereby ameliorating the stability of PSCs under ambient conditions.76 Very recently, Wei et al. introduced β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) to fabricate a water-resistant perovskite absorption layer.77 Due to the stronger HB in MA+⋯β-CD than that in MA+⋯H2O, which was verified by their lower interaction energies (−46.75 kcal mol−1 and −14.61 kcal mol−1, respectively), superficial MA+ cations were immobilized by β-CD and resistance against water molecules going into the inner frames of the perovskite was improved (Fig. 5b). This further deferred perovskite film decomposition by moisture. As a result, the corresponding device could maintain 90% of its original PCE after continuous AM1.5 illumination in ambient air with 80% RH for 300 h. 18-Crown-6 (18C6) has also been reported to form multiple HBs (N–H⋯O), which connected the adjacent N atoms of MA+ in Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskites. The binding energy was calculated by DFT to be −0.74 eV (−71.3 kJ mol−1) for N–H⋯O in MA+, while they were −0.70 and −0.42 eV for Cs+ and FA+, respectively. The introduction of 18C6 improved the device performance from 18.12% to 20.71%.78 Polyethylene alcohol (PVA) was introduced into a FASnI3 system to form the orientated HB of O–H⋯I, which could be verified by the broadened peaks of H(a) on PVA in the 1H NMR spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 5c. The adsorption energy of PVA toward the FASnI3 surface was calculated to be −36.4 kJ mol−1 by DFT.79 The strong HB interactions largely suppressed the volatilization of FA+ and I− before integrating into the interstitial sites of the perovskite frameworks during thermal annealing, resulting in the higher efficiency and better stability of FASnI3-based PSCs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic mechanism of MAPbI3 conversion on the ZnO and ZnO:PEG layers. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Water-resistant property of the perovskite with β-CD. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 1H NMR spectra of PVA, PVA + SnI2, and PVA + FAI in DMSO-d6 solution. Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
Crosslinking reagents have been extensively utilized in perovskite systems. Butylphosphonic acid 4-ammonium chloride (4-ABPACl) was introduced into the perovskite precursor solution to fabricate high-quality perovskite films.80 With the addition of a crosslinking reagent, the HB between –PO(OH)2 and MA+ increased the cohesion among perovskite grains (Fig. 6a), facilitating the perovskite to permeate into the mesoporous TiO2 scaffold. The use of 4-ABPACl facilitated the formation of uniform perovskite films, leading to improved device performance. Nimens et al. introduced benzene-1,4-diboronic acid (BDBA)—a crosslinking reagent—with a π-conjugated organic system to improve the charge transfer.81 The –B(OH)2 terminal groups of BDBA could act as the HB donor to connect the iodine of the [PbI6]4− octahedral cage (Fig. 6b). In pristine BDBA, the symmetric out-of-plane bending vibrational mode of B–O–H was observed at 513 cm−1, as shown in Fig. 6c. BDBA was introduced into a MAPbI3−xClx system (showing a blue-shift to 710 cm−1), suggesting strong HB interactions between BDBA and MAPbI3−xClx. Lim et al. introduced 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)-bis(ethylammonium iodide) (GA) to serve as a crosslinker in the perovskite structure.82 The HB between the GA and perovskite could be observed in 1H NMR spectra. The proton peak of the NH3+ group of GA was broadened and slightly shifted to a lower field in a DMF-d7 solution upon mixing with MAPbI3, indicating the presence of HB interactions (Fig. 6d). The introduction of GA can bridge the two unit cells within a crystal and/or across a GB. As a result, the device stability toward moisture and light was considerably improved, as revealed by the PbI2 peaks in the XRD data, as well as the device performance. The best PCE of a c-TiO2/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM)/MAPbI3-based device was 13.53% with a hysteresis factor of 0.2%, while the best PCE of a c-TiO2/PC61BM/MAPbI3/GA-based device was increased to 13.96% without hysteresis.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of two neighboring grain structures crosslinked by 4-ABPACl HB interactions (O–H⋯I and N–H⋯I) of the iodide from the iodoplumbate complex with phosphonic acid (–PO(OH)2) and ammonium (–NH3+) end groups of the 4-ABPACl species. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic representation of BDBA crosslinking two perovskite crystals via HBs. (c) IR spectra of pristine and BDBA-crosslinked MAPbI3−xClx crystals. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (d) Enlarged (at 8 ppm) 1H NMR spectra of MAI (9.5 mM), MAPbI3 (9.5 mM MAI + 10 mM PbI2) with or without GA (1 mM), as well as GA (1 mM), in DMF-d7 are shown. Asterisks (*) represent the residual solvent peaks of DMF-d7. The ammonium proton peaks were assigned to –NH3+. Copyright 2018, Science-Direct. (e) Device structure of perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells and a schematic illustration for the crosslinking of C60-SAM with a silane coupling agent. ET: electron transfer. (f) Images of the devices based on conventional PC61BM and (g) 10D-CLCS ETLs after exposure to water droplets for 4 min. The scale bars in both the images are 0.5 cm. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
MoO3 as the hole transport material (HTM) atop the perovskite was reported to possess strong doping effects with MAPbI3.83 The HBs between the superficial MA+ cations and oxygen atoms in MoO3, along with the Mo–I CBs, enabled the fabricated devices to exhibit higher durability and better performances. Although PC61BM has been extensively utilized as the electron transport materials (ETMs) in PSCs, there are some intrinsic shortcomings that limit their further applications,84–86 such as their vulnerability to water that leads to decomposition, aggregation, and so on. Inspired by the hydrophobic characteristic of the fluoroalkyl group, Bai et al. developed an easily obtainable 4-(1′,5′-dihydro-1′-methyl-2′H-[5,6]fullereno-C60-Ih-[1,9-c]pyrrol-2′-yl) benzoic acid (C60-SAM) with (3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)-silanetriol as the crosslinking reagent.87 As shown in Fig. 6e, the strong intermolecular HB between O–H and CO resulted in the self-assembled compact C60-SAM layer. Along with the hydrophobic CF3 group, the C60-SAM film significantly improved the device stability as the non-sealed cell maintained 90% of its initial efficiency (19.5%) after exposure to the ambient environment for 30 days. The authors also compared the stability of the devices utilizing conventional PC61BM and C60-SAM as the ETMs. As shown in Fig. 6f and g, the device with C60-SAM as the ETM exposed to the water droplet showed no obvious changes, while the reference cell exhibited severe degradation.
Chlorobenzene, toluene, and ethyl ether are common antisolvents used during the spin-coating process, which are usually sensitive to dripping parameters. A novel antisolvent anisole showed the stronger energy of HB (C–H⋯O) with the bulk solvent (dimethyl formamide (DMF)/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)).88 Therefore, wider time and volume windows could be obtained, which increased the repeatability for the fabrication of high-quality perovskite films.

2.2 CB
A CB, involving the sharing of electron pairs between the atoms, is always affected by the electronegativity of the corresponding atoms, and it refers to the polarity of the bond. A bond formed by mutual attractions holds the resultant atoms together. The stronger the mutual attraction, the larger is the bond energy. In general, the bond energy of a CB is larger than that of a HB. Therefore, the CB may play a more significant role in PSCs.
Proppe et al. introduced 4-vinylbenzylammonium bromide (VBABr) to construct 2D/3D heterojunction with (MAPbBr3)0.15(FAPbI3)0.85.89 VBA, on top of the perovskite layer, can get photoexcited by UV light to crosslink via the vinyl groups, resulting in a new CB comprising the C–C and/or C–N bonds. A schematic of this formation process is shown in Fig. 7a. Various characterization techniques (UV-vis, XRD, ATR-FTIR, and 1H NMR) have been exploited to reveal the existence of photochemical crosslinking among the VBA molecules. Together with the additional 2D layer, these new CBs can further stabilize the perovskite system, affording better stability while retaining 90% of their initial efficiency after 2300 h of dark aging as compared to the retention of 20% performance in the case of 3D reference films. In addition, the introduction of VBABr passivated the trap states of the upper surface of the perovskite layer, which facilitated the improvement in device performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustrating the process of 2D/3D heterostructures using the VBABr ligand. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Three proposed PVP passivation configurations of (b) excess Cs ions and (c) undercoordinated Pb ions. (d and e) Charge difference density images of PVP–Cs halide and PVP–Pb halide interfaces, respectively, with an isosurface of 0.00635 e Å−3. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Chemical interactions between the PET substrate and graphene sheet by the APTES interlayer. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhang et al. reported that polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) could reduce the trap states on the surfaces of perovskite grains and improve the crystallinity of CsPbI2Br.90 First-principles calculations were used to examine the chemical interactions between PVP and CsPbI2Br. Two sets of the most possible combinations were designed: PVP–Cs and PVP–Pb, as shown in Fig. 7b and c. The adsorption energies for O to Cs and Pb surfaces were predicted to be 14.64 and 45.28 kJ mol−1, respectively. This indicated that the O group of PVP could effectively modify the undercoordinated Pb2+ ions as compared to the excess Cs+ in CsPbI2Br. Additionally, covalent-like bonds were revealed via additional electron accumulation around the O–Pb bond rather than that for the O–Cs bond (Fig. 7d and e, respectively). The ultralong photoluminescence lifetime of more than 2500 ns was consequently obtained after the introduction of PVP in the CsPbI2Br system.
Heo et al. introduced 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) as an adhesion promoter between an AuCl3-doped single-layer graphene transparent electrode and a PET flexible substrate to improve the mechanical bending stability.91 After the plasma treatment, the condensation reaction promoted the formation of CBs between the silanol group in APTES and hydroxyl groups on the PET surface (Fig. 7f). Then, single-layer graphene grown on the Cu foil was transferred onto the APTES-treated PET substrate. The epoxy rings on graphene were expected to form CBs with the amine groups in APTES via an epoxy–amine addition reaction (Fig. 7f). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to confirm the formation of CBs between the APTES and single-layer graphene sheet. Consequently, owing to the formation of CBs by the introduction of the APTES interlayer, the mechanical stability of the flexible device was considerably improved.
2.3 Lewis acid–base reactions
A Lewis acid is a substance containing an unoccupied orbital that has the capacity of accepting a lone pair of electrons from another substance, forming a stable Lewis acid–base adduct. The substance that donates the lone pair of electrons to the Lewis acid to form a dative bond is called a Lewis base.92 With regard to OIHPs, taking MAPbI3 as an example, Pb2+ has been considered to be a Lewis acid as it contains 6 electrons in the outermost valence shell (4 from Pb2+ itself and 2 from the surrounding I− anions). To satisfy the octet rule, an incomplete octet tends to acquire a lone pair of electrons from a Lewis base to fill the empty orbital. Typical Lewis bases that contain functional groups bearing lone pairs of electrons, e.g., nitrogen (N) donor, oxygen (O) donor, and sulfur (S) donor, are capable of forming intermediate Lewis acid–base adducts with Pb2+. DMF, a widely used solvent in dissolving perovskite precursors, contains an O-donor functional group, where the lone pair of electrons fills the empty orbital of Pb2+ and forms a coordinate bond. Solvent–solute interactions driven by the Lewis acid–base reaction facilitate the dissolution of perovskite reactants. More importantly, the perovskite crystallization process can be further controlled by carefully coupling Pb2+ with Lewis bases that have different degrees of basicity.
Except for solvent–solute interactions, the Lewis acid–base reaction has also been applied in defect passivation. Perovskites are defective due to their “soft” and ionic characteristics.93 The defects are typically located at the surfaces and GBs due to the disorganized orientations of the neighboring crystals at the surface/GBs, including intrinsic defects such as vacancies (VMA, VPb, and VI), interstitial (MAi, Pbi, and Ii), cation substitutions (MAPb and PbMA), antisite substitutions (MAI, PbI, IMA, and IPb), and extrinsic defects (such as Pb and I impurities) (Fig. 8a and b).94,95 Although the dominant defects (i.e., vacancies) in OIHPs are usually shallow-level defects and perovskites are tolerant to defect-induced losses, the existence of defects can still induce ion migration, which accelerates the degradation of PSCs.96–104 On the other hand, deep-level traps, such as antisite defects PbI and IPb and interstitial Pbi, play an important role in limiting the PCE of PSCs reaching the Shockley–Queisser limit. These deep trap states can create undesirable energy states that are deeply localized in the bandgap101 and capture photon-excited electrons and holes in transition as they pass through the bands. The energy required for the electrons and holes to escape from these trap states is larger than the thermal energy kBT (where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature), which converts the electron excitation energy into vibrational energy (heat) comprising nonradiative recombinations, surface recombinations, and Auger recombinations. This further reduces the efficiency of photon-to-electron conversion. Due to the Lewis acid–base characterization of these defects, the corresponding Lewis acid–base passivation agents can be adopted to react and reduce the defect density, improving the performance of PSCs. In this section, we discuss the implementation of the Lewis acid–base concept in both modulating the perovskite crystallization process and passivating the intrinsic defects in perovskite thin films.
 Fig. 8  Transition energy levels of (a) intrinsic acceptors and (b) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c) DN values of the solvents. Higher DN increases the coordination with Pb2+. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite layers deposited from (d) pure GBL and (e) mixed solvent comprising GBL/DMSO with dripping toluene. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. SEM images of perovskite films from (f) PbI2·DMSO and (g) PbI2·NMP precursors via intramolecular exchange. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 

2.3.1 Lewis acid–base adducts for fabricating high-quality PSC films. 
The performance of a PSC highly depends on the quality of the perovskite's light-absorbing layer. Except for the successes of vacuum deposition and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods,105–111 a solution process remains a more widely used and viable strategy for fabricating high-efficiency PSCs. Organic solvents used in the solution process, such as DMF, DMSO, and γ-butyrolactone (GBL), are Lewis bases as they contain donor groups, while metal cations (e.g., Pb2+ and Sn2+) in the perovskite precursors are Lewis acids accepting lone pairs of electrons. The selection of solvents largely affects the properties of the fabricated perovskite thin film, such as the grain size, grain orientation, film morphology, and defect density.112 In the early stages, GBL and DMF were used as solvents for the fabrication of perovskite films. However, both of them are relatively weak Lewis bases with low Gutmann's donor numbers (DN), which allow only weak coordination with metal cations in the precursor. Therefore, complexation is favored between the metal cations and halide ions.102 The rapid perovskite crystallization results in a reduced grain size and excess GBs. Defects and impurities that cause nonradiative recombinations can more readily appear at the GBs.113,114 Therefore, prolonging the crystallization process and enlarging the perovskite grains can effectively reduce such nonradiative recombinations and consequently improve the quality of perovskite films.
DMSO has stronger basicity than DMF and GBL due to its larger DN, and therefore, it can effectively coordinate with metal cations.92,115 The stronger coordination between DMSO and metal cations can stall the halides in the precursor and retard the overall crystallization rate (Fig. 8c).112 Moreover, the crystal growth via stronger Lewis adducts is expected to be more homogeneously and precisely controlled, as the crystallization rate can be constantly retarded by the removal of Lewis bases during the annealing process in film formation. Jeon et al. introduced a solvent engineering method using GBL and DMSO mixed solvent to prepare a MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (x = 0.1–0.15) film.116 The use of DMSO enabled the formation of a MAI(Br)·PbI2·DMSO intermediate phase, which was confirmed by the stretching vibrations observed in IR spectra. The intermediate phase retarded the fast reaction between MAI and PbI2 and therefore helped the formation of an extremely uniform and dense perovskite film, as shown in Fig. 8d and e. Later, Yang et al. prepared PbI2·DMSO by extracting one DMSO molecule from the PbI2·DMSO2 complex heating in a vacuum oven overnight.117 Then, each DMSO molecule was replaced by one FAI molecule during the spin-coating process, because FAI has stronger affinity to PbI2 as compared to that of DMSO. The conversion from uniform and dense PbI2·DMSO intermediates to perovskites by intramolecular exchange with FAI avoided uncontrollable lattice expansion due to the similarities in sizes of FAI and DMSO molecules. Therefore, FAPbI3-based perovskite films with dense and large grains and preferred orientation with the high (111) plane were prepared, which enabled the PSC to exhibit certified PCE exceeding 20%. Concurrently, Ahn et al. directly synthesized PbI2·DMSO (1:1 mol%) intermediate phase when dissolving equal molar ratios of DMSO, PbI2, and MAI in a DMF solvent.118 The formation of PbI2·DMSO intermediates because of the strong coordination between the Pb2+ cations and DMSO molecules regulated the perovskite crystal growth. The fabricated PSCs showed the best PCE of 19.7% with negligible hysteresis and high reproducibility.119 Recently, utilizing PbI2·DMSO Lewis adducts to regulate perovskite crystallization processes and improve the quality of perovskite films has become a widely used technique in the fabrication of perovskite films by different methods120–122 and their use has shown extensive applicability for various perovskite categories, such as organic or mixed organic–inorganic,117,121–123 all inorganic,124–127 and Sn-based (or Sn–Pb mixed) perovskites.128–132 Ma et al. explored the working mechanism of solvents on MAPbI3 by considering the molecular electron distribution.133 Evidently, the electron distributions around the CO groups in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and GBL were located between the C and O atoms, whereas the distribution mainly concentrated around the S atom of the SO group in DMSO. The higher concentration of electron density around the S atom induced locally distributed stronger polarity, which gave the DMSO a stronger driving force to react with Pb2+. As a result, DMSO better suppressed the MAPbI3 nucleation process, which enabled the formation of a film with high crystallinity and larger grain size.
Except for DMSO, NMP is a stronger Lewis base that forms more stable Lewis adducts with FAPbI3 due to its larger DN.115,119 Jo et al. prepared and compared perovskite films made by PbI2·DMSO and PbI2·NMP intermediate complexes.134 Dense and full-coverage films could be obtained from both these precursors, whereas the film made by PbI2·NMP showed higher quality with larger average grain size and longer carrier lifetime (Fig. 8f and g). Lee et al. quantized the more stable intermediate adduct of PbI2·NMP by comparing the larger interaction energy of FAI·PbI2·NMP (−2.413 eV) to that of FAI·PbI2·DMSO (−2.138 eV).135 The better suitability of NMP as compared to DMSO toward FAPbI3 was concluded based on the following three aspects: higher HB-accepting ability, more steric accessibility of the Lewis base functional group, and the matching of hard–soft acid–base (HSAB) concept (also known as the Pearson acid–base concept). NMP has higher polarizability (10.66 Å3) than DMSO (8.03 Å3) and therefore is a softer base as compared to DMSO. Since FA+ has lower dipole moment (0.21 D) than MA+ (2.29 D), FA+ is a softer Lewis acid.135 By matching the HSAB concept, DMSO as a hard base is expected to form more stable compounds with MA+ (hard acid), while NMP as a soft base works better with FA+ (soft acid).136,137 The use of NMP also helped in modulating the microstructure of the PbI2 layer in the two-step spin-coating method.138,139 When adding a small amount of NMP in the PbI2/DMF precursor solution, the lattice of the fabricated PbI2 layer expanded due to the stronger interactions between PbI2 and NMP, which resulted in the formation of densely packed PbI2 films with high crystallinity. The expanded and densely packed PbI2 film further helped perovskite phase transformation upon the spin-coating of FAI, which led to the formation of high-quality perovskite layers with low recombinations. Other O-donor Lewis bases forming Pb–O dative bonds with PbI2 were also used to retard the molecular exchange between FAI/MAI and PbI2 due to the strong coordination and high boiling point, which improved the film quality, device performance, and stability of the fabricated PSCs.140
S-Donor Lewis bases have also been used to form strong intermediate phases with perovskites. Thiadiazole derivatives such as 1,3,4-thiadiazoleidine-2-thione (TDZT) and 1,3,4-thiadiazolidine-2,5-dithione (TDZDT) were used to form adducts with MAPbI3 to modulate the crystal growth.141 Perovskite grains were increased to 800 nm with reduced GBs, which further lowered the defect density by 7 times when compared with the control sample measured by the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) method. Lee et al. applied thiourea (Tu) to form a PbI2·(DMSO1−xTux) complex with FAPbI3.119 The incorporation of Tu slowed down the crystallization process and enlarged the grain size due to its higher sublimation temperature as well as the stronger coordination of the SC group with PbI2. By implementing an optimized amount of Tu (x = 0.2), the grain size could be increased to a couple of micrometers with enhanced absorptions over the entire wavelength range. Further, Fei et al. used Tu in MAPbI3 to form a MAI·PbI2·Tu intermediate,142 which effectively controlled the crystallization process and afforded a compact and smooth film with an enlarged grain size (ranging from 500 nm to 2 μm). Zhu et al. compared the role of S-donor Tu with O-donors DMSO and urea during the formation of the perovskite film.143 They found that PbI2·DMSO and PbI2·urea intermediate complexes remained in the film for shorter than 10 min upon annealing at 100 °C, while PbI2·Tu remained for longer than 40 min, which is in good agreement with its higher sublimation temperature.119 It was also observed that grains growth occurred before the complete removal of Lewis bases, which revealed the influence of the residual Lewis base on the ripening of perovskite films. The PbI2·Tu film with pronounced ripening showed the largest grain size of more than 2 μm, but with distinct cracks and gaps. However, the PbI2·DMSO film with a shorter ripening time exhibited compact and full-covered morphology, but with a smaller grain size of less than 500 nm. To balance the grain size and film coverage, the mild Lewis base of urea was used and mixed with DMSO to optimize the film crystallization process. It was also suggested that DMSO played a role mainly in the crystallite process, while urea and other strong Lewis bases had a larger role in the ripening process.


2.3.2 Passivation. 
Due to the ionic nature and solution processability, perovskite thin films unavoidably possess noteworthy levels of impurities and imperfections.93 When compared with the bulk, the GBs and surfaces are more defective and have severer recombinations.144 Although perovskites have superior defect tolerance benefiting from their inherently defect-tolerant electronic structure,145 nonradiative recombinations induced by the inevitably deep traps still limit the carrier lifetime and cause large open-circuit voltage (VOC) deficits, which act as barriers for PSCs to reach the Shockley–Queisser limit. Moreover, the more pronounced ion migration at the GBs accelerated by defects speeds up the degradation process and reduces the stability of PSCs.146,147 Undercoordinated Pb2+/1+/0 and I1−/0 are two typical types of defects in perovskites, including mobile I− anions, I2 interstitials, undercoordinated MA+/FA+ and Pb2+/1+ cations, and Pb0 clusters. The undercoordinated ions induce a local excess of positive or negative charges, i.e., the loss of I− induces a positive charge on the Pb atom, while uncoordinated I− anions cause excess negative charges. These charged sites are the locations in which photoexcited electrons and holes are trapped, which lower the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency. The number of electroneutrally removed electrons/holes from these sites to the conduction band/valence band (VB) is usually high.95 Yang et al. reported an iodide management strategy by adding a small amount of I2 to avoid deficient I− defects.148 However, it is known that excess I2 molecules can cause irreversible degradation as I2 triggers the decomposition of the chemical chain by reacting with I− anions and MA+/FA+ organic cations, which regenerate more I2 under illumination.149,150 Passivation of defects by forming excess PbI2 on GBs has also been reported as a useful strategy.151 However, recent studies have shown that the unreacted PbI2 on perovskite surfaces/GBs can undergo photodecomposition under continuous light illumination, generating metallic Pb and I2 that are deleterious to device stability.152,153 As the undercoordinated Pb2+/1+/0 and I1−/0 defects are Lewis acids and bases, respectively, passivation by corresponding adverse Lewis bases and acids becomes an effective pathway to reduce defects and improve the performance of PSCs.
2.3.2.1 Lewis base passivation. 
Undercoordinated Pb2+ having incomplete octets in the outer orbitals are Lewis acids as they tend to accept electrons to satisfy the octet rule. These undercoordinated Pb2+ defects, therefore, can be passivated by Lewis bases that donate lone pairs of electrons. Noel et al. proposed a strategy of using the Lewis bases of thiophene (S donor) and pyridine (N donor) to neutralize the net positive charges residing on Pb atoms caused by the loss of I− (Fig. 9a).154 The passivation of these Coulombic trap states significantly reduced the nonradiative electron–hole recombinations, resulting in an impressively long carrier lifetime of 2016.5 ± 5.3 ns. Later, Liu et al. investigated the passivation mechanism of thiophene and pyridine by using nonadiabatic molecular dynamics combined with time-domain DFT.155 They found that pristine perovskites without any passivation afforded high electron densities at the surface, which could serve as charge recombination sites. Thiophene passivated these defect sites by delocalizing the charges away from the surface. On the other hand, pyridine localized the electrons on itself and the Pb atom by the stronger N–Pb bonding and the more electronegative nature of the nitrogen atom, leaving the passivated site more energetically near the conduction band edge (Fig. 9b). The passivated site was found more like a shallow state located closely to conduction band maximum, which allowed the passage of electrons. Poly(4-vinylpyridine) containing a pyridine side chain was reported by Chaudhary et al. to coordinate with the undercoordinated Pb2+ in perovskites, which reduced the trap states and nonradiative recombinations and significantly increased the steady-state PL intensity.156 Other amino-group-containing Lewis bases have also been used to passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ defects. Urea-modified nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide could passivate the surface defects and reduce nonradiative recombinations by coordination between the Lewis-base nitrogen groups of urea and FA+ cations in the perovskite precursor, which consequently enlarged the film grain size and contributed to improved VOC.157 Melaminium iodide has also been used by Kim et al. to passivate Pb2+ defects via its three primary amines.158 Such passivation reduced the Urbach tail energy and lowered the trap density from 1.02 × 1016 to 0.645 × 1016 cm−3, which indicated reduced nonradiative recombinations. The average VOC and fill factor (FF) improved from 1.054 to 1.095 V and from 0.693 to 0.725 for the passivated PSCs. Wang et al. used benzylamine to effectively passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ ions, reduce recombination centers, and improve charge extraction.159,160 FAPbI3-based PSCs with benzylamine passivation could yield a PCE value of 19.2% with VOC of 1.12 V.156 In addition, the hydrophobic benzene ring in benzylamine further improved perovskite stability against moisture, which enabled the air-stable PSC retain its PCE for more than 2900 h in a 50 ± 5% moisture environment. Sn2+-containing perovskites have been developed to reduce toxicity and could be used to fabricate low bandgap and all-perovskite tandem PSCs.129,161,162 Except for Pb2+, undercoordinated Sn2+ ions also caused nonradiative recombinations. More importantly, undercoordinated Sn2+ sites were more readily oxidized.130,162,163 Ethane-1,2-diamine (edamine) has been used to passivate undercoordinated Sn2+ ions by its amino groups when fabricating Sn-based perovskites.164 PSCs after passivation showed increased VOC values by up to 0.1 V, which was in agreement with the reduced defect density. Furthermore, the edamine molecules stabilized undercoordinated Sn2+ ions and unreacted SnI2 residuals, further preventing the oxidation of Sn-based perovskites.
 Fig. 9  (a) Thiophene or pyridine passivation of undercoordinated Pb2+ and (b) simulation cells showing optimized geometries of (left) the Cl-doped MAPbI3(001) surface and the same surface with adsorbed (middle) pyridine and (right) thiophene molecules. Both molecules connected to the undercoordinated Pb atom; however, this coordinate bonding is stronger through the nitrogen atom of pyridine than that through the sulfur atom of thiophene. This difference has a notable influence on the localization of the electron wave function. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Passivation of PC61BM on PbI3− antisites. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of QAHs assembled on perovskite defect sites. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Coordination of the BCF and PTAA HTLs. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Other Lewis bases such as O donors and S donors were also adopted to passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ defects.165–168 O-containing polymers such as PEG, polyethylenimine (PEI), and PVP could strongly coordinate with Pb2+ ions and thereby increase the perovskite grain size during the perovskite crystallization process.169 Further, these polymers passivated the undercoordinated Pb2+ defects and, more importantly, form perovskite–polymer structures that improved the device stability against moisture.169–171N-(3-Aminopropyl)-2-pyrrolidinone (NAP) synthesized from PVP was used to passivate undercoordinated Sn2+/Pb2+ of mixed Sn–Pb perovskites and form vertically oriented 2D layers.172 The 2D/3D hybrid low-bandgap mixed Sn–Pb PSC retained 70% of its original performance under continuous illumination in a N2 atmosphere for over 1 month. Molecular semiconductors, such as 4,4′,4′-(5,5,10,10,15,15-hexahexyl-10,15-dihydro-5H-diindeno[1,2-a:1′,2′2-c]fluorine-2,7,12-triyl)tris(3-fluoripyridine) (Trux-FPy), 6,6,12,12-tetrakis-(4-hexylphenyl)-indacenobis(dithieno[3,2-b;2,3-d]thiophene) end-capped with 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone substituted by different numbers of fluorine atoms (INIC series), 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (ITIC), 7,7′-[4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene2,6-diyl]bis[6-fluoro-4-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole] (p-DTS(FBTTh2)2(DTS)), benzodithiophene (BDT)-unit-based DR3TBDTT, and benzodithiophene and diketopyrrolopyrrole with linear alkylthio substituents (BDTS-2DPP) have also been utilized as Lewis bases to passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ ions by their functional carbonyl (CO) or cyan (CN) groups.173–178 Pb0 interstitial defects (Pb clusters) are not only detrimental to the perovskite crystal integrity, but also deep trap states causing severe nonradiative recombinations.179 Recently, Wu et al. employed the Lewis base of pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate) (ML) to suppress Pb clusters by back-oxidizing metallic Pb0 into Pb2+ species,180 since the thiol groups in interconnected ML connected formed a disulfide compound that exhibited the oxidation property. Then, the Pb2+ species were further passivated by ML molecules, which promoted the PCE from 19.0% to 21.4%.
2.3.2.2 Lewis acid passivation. 
Undercoordinated I− defects, e.g., I− interstitials and Pb vacancies, are negative trap states that trap photoexcited holes and may cause nonradiative recombinations.95 Further, PbI3− antisites are deleterious defects that induce the formation of deep traps and higher density of recombination centers.181 These defects are Lewis bases that tend to donate lone pairs of electrons and therefore can be passivated by Lewis acids. 2,3,5,6-Tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) possessing strong electron-accepting ability has been used as a Lewis acid to passivate undercoordinated I−via coordination.182 The passivation at the interface between the HTL and perovskite can lead to reduced trap density and consequently improve the VOC value and reduce J–V hysteresis. PC61BM is a fullerene derivative of the C60 buckyball.183 It exhibits strong electron-accepting ability due to its topological characteristics and electron rehybridization.184 Therefore, it could be used as a Lewis acid to form Lewis adducts that passivated the Lewis base defects.185 PC61BM has also been used to passivate PbI3− antisites and unincorporated I− defects on GBs by forming thermodynamically favored halide–fullerene bonds, as shown in Fig. 9c.186 The reduced I− anions suppressed ion migration through the GBs under the effect of an electric field, which eliminated J–V hysteresis.187
2.3.2.3 Bifunctional passivation. 
Choline chloride, a quaternary ammonium halide (QAH), has been used to bifunctionally passivate charge defects in perovskites.188 Quaternary ammonium ions can passivate negatively charged defects, while chloride ions passivate positively charged ones. Therefore, it can work as both Lewis base and Lewis acid (Fig. 9d). After simultaneous passivation, these devices afforded reduced charge trap density and enhanced carrier recombination lifetime, which afforded a certified PCE value of 20.59 ± 0.45% for a passivated device with superior stability against moisture. Zheng et al. employed bis-PC61BM mixed isomers in chlorobenzene as the antisolvent, which passivated negatively charged PbI3− antisites and undercoordinated I− anions during the film formation process.188 Meanwhile, N-(4-bromophenyl)-thiourea (BrPh-ThR) was added as a Lewis base in the perovskite precursor. It not only coordinated with PbI2 and retarded film crystallization, but also passivated the undercoordinated Pb2+. Passivation by both Lewis acid and base can be used to fabricate a device with PCE of 21.7% with significantly reduced trap-state density.189 Cu(Tu)I, an effective bifunctional passivation agent, has been incorporated to passivate both undercoordinated Pb2+ by I− anions and undercoordinated I− by its electropositive copper.190 The trap-state energy level after passivation was shallowed from 0.35–0.45 eV to 0.25–0.35 eV. Cu(Tu)I—a p-type conductor—also increased the width of the depletion region from 126 to 265 nm, which accelerated carrier transport and reduced carrier recombinations.


2.3.3 Lewis base and acid on transport layers. 
Except for passivation in perovskite layers, Lewis base and acid have also been used to passivate the defects in carrier transport layers.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a promising ETM due to its superior optical properties.191,192 However, the existence of hydroxide groups (OH−) on the surface at low reaction temperatures and their deprotonation property that reacts with the Lewis acid of MA+ can cause inevitable perovskite decomposition at the perovskite/ZnO interface.193–195 Chen et al. passivated the ZnO layer by converting its surface into ZnS at the ZnO/perovskite interface.196 The S atoms on the interface reacted strongly with Pb2+ cations by forming Pb–S coordination bonds, which reduced the perovskite decomposition and interfacial charge recombinations. The strong binding of ZnO–ZnS–Pb also created a novel pathway for electron transport and yielded a champion PCE value of 20.7% for PSCs. Notably, the passivated interface increased the long-term stability, which enabled devices to maintain 88% and 87% of their initial PCE values after 1000 h under storage and 500 h under UV radiation. Zhao et al. prepared magnetically sputtered Al-doped AZO to reduce the amount of surface OH− groups and residual organic ligands.197 The use of AZO improved the thermal stability of perovskites as it diminished the Lewis acid–base reactions of the MA+ and OH− groups. The use of PC61BM between the perovskite and ZnO layer could also help prevent the decomposition of the perovskite layer from being etched. Yu et al. enabled the atomic layer deposition (ALD) of ZnO on top of PC61BM by predepositing a layer of trimethyl aluminum (TMA).198 The Lewis base of TMA reacted with the CO group in PC61BM, which generated nucleation sites for the growth of ALD ZnO. The successful growth of a compact ZnO layer on the PC61BM/perovskite improved device stability against moisture, and the PC61BM layer acted as a blocking layer for gas diffusion, which further improved the long-time stability of the perovskite film.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is also a widely used ETM in the fabrication of high-performance PSCs. However, the photocatalysis of TiO2 can attract electrons from the I− anions and cause perovskite decomposition, which can reduce the stability of PSCs under illumination.199 The surface of TiO2 was also expected to have defects such as undercoordinated and reactive Ti and O atoms.200 Shallcross et al. used APTES as the Lewis base to passivate the defects on TiO2 layers by the reaction of terminal amines and Lewis acid defects.200 Zhang et al. used hexamethyl phosphoramide (HMPA) as the Lewis base to form the PbI2-HMPA compound at the interface of perovskite and TiO2 layer, which passivated the TiO2 surface and prevented the migration of I− ions into the TiO2 layer.168 The HTMs for PSCs, such as (N,N-p-dimethoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,5,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA), usually possess low charge carrier mobility and conductivity. Therefore, dopants are needed to improve the electrical properties.201 Lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI) is widely used to improve the hole mobility (μh) and conductivity. However, Li-TFSI can cause the undesirable oxidation of HTMs under working conditions (i.e., light and heat). Besides, Li-TFSI is hygroscopic and it absorbs moisture and damages the perovskite stability. Tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane (BCF) is a hydrophobic p-type dopant. It is also a Lewis acid as it contains strong π-electron acceptors and can react with Lewis-base HTMs that contain electron donor groups. Ye et al. applied BCF as the p-type dopant in both spiro-OMeTAD and PTAA to increase the hole transport ability and conductivity, as shown in Fig. 9e.202,203

2.4 XB
XB is a common intermolecular interaction and has been exactly defined by IUPAC in 2013 with the schematic structure of R–X⋯Y, as shown in Scheme 2,28,204 comprising XB donor R–X and XB acceptor Y. R and X can covalently interplay with each other, where X represent any halogen atom that can produce an electrophilic region and can be bound to more than one group. Y, as a molecular entity, generally possesses more than one nucleophilic region. XB occurs between R–X and Y through inter-attractions. There are potential undercoordinated halogen ions during perovskite preparation, which provides the possibility for the formation of XB.
 Scheme 2  XB is an attractive interaction between an electrophilic region R–X associated with a halogen atom Y in a molecular entity and a nucleophilic region in another, or the same, molecular entity. Copyright 2018, Molecular Diversity Preservation International. 
Due to the nonstoichiometric precursors in MAPbI3 perovskite solutions, undercoordinated I− on the surface of perovskite grains may exist and trap positive charges and/or holes, leading to reduced carrier extraction and severe charge recombinations. Iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB, Fig. 10a), as a strong XB donor, was introduced by Abate et al. to effectively passivate undercoordinated I−.205 The XB of C–I⋯I− occurs as the C–I region in IPFB exhibits weak electron density due to the strong electronegative fluorine atoms in the benzene ring. A schematic view of the XB interaction between IPFB and I− is shown in Fig. 10b. IPFB treatment can be used to effectively bond iodine ions exposed at the grain surface and prevent the formation of dipoles, which may lead to energetic barriers for charge extraction. In addition, they claimed that the introduction of IPFB can result in efficient hole transfer and significantly suppress hole recombinations. As a result, the PCE of PSCs with IPFB treatment increased to 15.7% as compared to that of the device not treated with IPFB (13.0%). XB passivation by the introduction of IPFB was subsequently studied by Zhang et al. via first-principles calculations.206 They claimed that after IPFB treatment, the Mulliken charge distribution on the grain surface was modified. The iodine atom participating in the XB of perovskite grains becomes less negatively charged (by 0.12 |e|). Therefore, XB could mitigate the negative charge accumulation on the grains surface and facilitate interfacial charge transfer.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the XB interactions between the IPFB (XB donor) and a generic halogen anion (X− = I−, Br−, Cl−, and XB acceptor) with sp3-hybridized valence electrons. (b) Schematic of the IPFB assembly on the crystal surface. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the XB interactions between C4F8I2/C4H8I2 (XB donor) and iodine anions (XB acceptor) in the MAPbI3 precursor solution. (d) Top-view SEM images of neat TiO2 and various MAPbI3 films after thermal annealing. All the images have the same scale bar (200 nm). (e) Comparison of the J–V characteristics of various MAPbI3 solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 illumination attained in the forward (F) and reverse (R) scan directions. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Upper left: Schematic representation of XB between an XB acceptor (A) and donor (X). Lower left: Structure and optimized geometry (DFT calculations at the B3LYP/def2tzvp level of theory) of TFDIB, with the corresponding top and side views of the electrostatic potential surface, highlighting the σ-hole. Right: Envisaged modes of interactions of TFDIB with a hybrid perovskite; asymmetric surface passivation (top) and symmetric crosslinking (bottom) of the perovskite grains. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
XB plays an important role in the crystallization process of perovskite films. Bi et al. were the first to report the effects of XB on the crystallographic kinetics of perovskite grains.207 They introduced 1,4-diiodooctafluorobutane (C4F8I2) and nonfluorinated 1,4-diodobutane (C4H8I2) into the perovskite precursor solution to modulate perovskite crystallization (Fig. 10c). Both C4F8I2 and C4H8I2 were utilized as donors to bond I− to form XB within the perovskite system. Mulliken charge calculations and 19F NMR spectroscopy were used to affirm the existence of XB after the introduction of C4F8I2 and C4H8I2. Due to the stronger electronegativity of the F atom, the XB strength between C4F8I2 and I− is higher than that between C4H8I2 and I−. After the introduction of C4F8I2 and C4H8I2, the morphology of the perovskite films was dramatically improved, as shown in Fig. 10d. It should be noted that the C4F8I2-treated film showed more significant improvement, which resulted from the stronger XB strength. In addition, the trap density and carrier mobility were improved after the introduction of XB donors, which increased the charge transport property. Due to the stronger XB bond strength, the C4F8I2-treated perovskite film showed better performance and stability, which possibly originated from the compact and pinhole-free morphology (Fig. 10e).
Ruiz-Preciado et al. introduced the bifunctional modulator, 1,2,4,5-tetrafluoro-3,6-diiodobenzene (TFDIB), to induce (FA0.9MA0.1)0.95Cs0.05Pb1.03(I0.93Br0.1)3 perovskite film crystallization.208 TFDIB was expected to interact with hybrid perovskites via XB, passivating the perovskite film surface and crosslinking the adjacent grains. 2D solid-state 19F NMR spectroscopy together with DFT calculations showed atomic-level bifunctional molecular crosslinking in perovskites via XB. Fig. 10f shows the interaction modes of TFDIB with the perovskite. As a result, enhanced stability under continuous illumination was obtained without sacrificing the resulting photovoltaic performance.
Interfaces within the PSCs affect charge extraction and transfer, playing vital roles in device performance. In this respect, interfacial engineering, such as introducing a modifier layer at the interface, has been extensively studied.16 The introduction of a modifier is expected to improve the charge transfer, reduce charge recombinations, ameliorate the crystal and electrical structures, and modify the contact of the adjacent layers, leading to excellent device performance and stability. Zhang et al. computationally investigated the effect of an organic modifier (bromoacetate, BrCH2COO−),209 which was experimentally verified to be an effective modifier to improve the device performance, with a perovskite structure of (MA4PbI6)/bromoacetate/TiO2. Along with the –COOH group in the bromoacetate molecule, the XB occurring between the Br atom in bromoacetate and I atom in halide perovskite contributed toward the decent binding and coordination between the perovskite and TiO2, effective electron transfer, and minimizing the heterojunction lattice mismatch.
Until now, there are only a few reports about the application of XB in PSCs. However, it plays a vital role in the improvement of device performance. XB interactions can improve the crystallization of grains, enhance charge transfer, reduce charge recombinations, and therefore, ameliorate the device performance. Numerous molecules have been intentionally designed and utilized via XB interactions in PSCs.
2.5 π effects
π effects, which also originate from electrostatic effects, mainly include ion–π, polar–π, π–π, and π donor–acceptor interactions. The limit of π–π interactions is the vdW radius between the involved atoms. Theoretical studies have revealed that beyond 7 Å, any π–π interactions are unreliable, since the straight line concatenating the ring points in the opposite directions either pass through other atoms or side chains.210 The range of parallel π–π stacking has been estimated to be 3.3–3.8 Å,211 3.21–3.50 Å,212 and even 1.77 Å.213 Although π–π and X–H/π interactions are usually weak (ranging in a couple of kJ mol−1), the system characteristics may be considerably affected by a large number of these simultaneous contacts.101

2.5.1 Polar–π and ion–π interactions. 
In PSCs, polar–π interactions usually build upon π stacking, even along with HB. Polar–π interactions mainly appear in newly fabricated HTMs with an aromatic structure, which exhibit a hydrophobic characteristic. Ion–π interactions play a decisive role in ion migration.
Two potential HTMs of thienothiophene-cored isomers, namely, 4,4′-(thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-diyl)bis-(N,N-bis(4-methoxyphenyl) aniline) (TT-2,5-TPA) and 4,4′-(thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-3,6-diyl)bis-(N,N-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)aniline) (TT-3,6-TPA) (Fig. 11a and b, respectively), developed by Le et al., adopted the same space group (P21/n) and integral π-conjugated HOMO, but they differed in their crystal structures due to better π conjugation of TT-2,5-TPA than that of TT-3,6-TPA.214 The torsion angle of the central π system was approximately 22° in TT-2,5-TPA, while it was 24° in TT-3,6-TPA. Furthermore, the 2,5-isomer contained a longer π bridge (16.06 Å) than that of the 3,6-isomer (14.64 Å). C–H/π interactions were found in both the isomers, although a waved conformation layer was observed in the TT-3,6-TPA single crystal, while the 2,5-isomers are parallel. The parallel distance of the π linkers in the charge transport materials has a large impact on the photoelectrochemical and photovoltaic properties. The layer spacing in TT-3,6-TPA was fairly large (∼7 Å) and there are no π interactions. Consequently, a 2,5-isomer-based device afforded PCE as high as 13.6% owing to π stacking and π–π distance of 3.34 Å. However, the 3,6-counterpart-based device afforded PCE of only 0.7%.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Molecular structures of the thienothiophene-based HTMs of TT-2,5-TPA and TT-3,6-TPA, respectively. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Chemical structure of a peri-xanthenoxanthene-centered organic semiconductor and (d) its crystal structure along the a-axis. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Schematic illustration of the cation–π interaction between rubrene and organic cations of perovskite. (f) FTIR spectra of perovskite films with and without a rubrene layer; the rubrene film was in the range of ∼600–4000 cm−1. All these films were fabricated on ITO substrates. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
With regard to polar–π and HB interactions, a more complex stacking type has been formulated, generating a peri-xanthenoxanthene-centered organic semiconductor (Fig. 11c).215 In addition to the strong core-to-core π–π interactions, each layer was further stapled in a staggered fashion. One column linked to another adjacent one with multifold C–H/π and C–H⋯O interactions afforded a three-dimensional (3D) network (Fig. 11d). The whole π-conjugated skeleton is essential for intermolecular hole extraction. The performance of the corresponding device was approximately similar to that of the reference device based on the state-of-the-art spiro-OMeTAD, with PCEs of 19.8% versus 19.9%, respectively.
Wei et al. reported the inhibition of ion migration via supramolecular cation–π interactions between aromatic rubrene and organic cations in perovskites (Fig. 11e).216 The strength of MA+–π interactions between rubrene and perovskite was calculated to be 1.53 eV (35.4 kcal mol−1) and chelation-like interactions were over 1.30 eV between MA+ and rubrene. They are nearly 3 times stronger than the barrier for the MA+ cation migration around ∼0.5–0.8 eV. The presence of MA+–π interaction was verified by the diminished IR peaks of C–H and N–H on MA+ and C–C and CC on rubrene. MA+ cations drew the nearing polarizable π electrons from rubrene (σN–H*–πrubrene), affording continuous electron distribution at the MA+–rubrene junction (Fig. 11f). Further, DFT calculations showed that FA+ cations and rubrene could interact with each other. They claimed that the cation–π interactions between rubrene and perovskite could effectively immobilize organic cations, reduce defects, enhance interfacial charge transfer, and therefore, lead to outstanding device performance and stability.
It is well known that halide anion migration is a critical factor for device performance and stability. In the device with fullerene (C60/PC61BM) as the ETM, halide migration is closely related to the fullerene, which is actually a strong electron acceptor that can activate halide anions and initiate n-doping resulting from the halide anion (I−)–fullerene π interactions.74 This anion–π interaction exhibits large binding energies of −143.1, −123.2, and −113.1 kJ mol−1 for I−, Br−, and Cl−, respectively, which are the same level as that for HB. Sun et al. claimed that anion–π interactions can facilitate charge transport and ameliorate device performance.74 Besides, the use of a halide-ion-blocking material between the perovskite and PC61BM has been suggested to act as an interfacial layer to suppress halide migration.


2.5.2 π–π interactions. 
π–π interactions in aromatic systems have been extensively studied, and they play critical roles in chemistry, material, and biological fields. Herein, we introduce a variety of materials based on π–π interactions such as HTMs, ETMs, dopants, and modifiers.
2.5.2.1 π–π interactions in HTMs with dopants. 
Spiro-OMeTAD is the most utilized HTM in highly efficient PSCs. However, due to its synthesis complexity and requirement of additives, many efforts have been focused on the development of new materials, such as materials with benzene or full-carbon fused rings as the core moiety, small molecules involving N- or S-containing aromatic rings, and so on.
Kang et al. developed a series of star-shaped carbazole-based HTMs (Table 1, entries 1–3),217 which include extended π-conjugated central cores with a methoxy group at the electron-donating diarylamine position to improve π–π stacking for efficient charge transport. Owing to the rigid chemical structure resulting from the methyl group, the solubility of the as-obtained HTMs was poor. In order to ameliorate the solubility, a hexyloxy group was utilized to replace the methyl group. As a result, the highest PCE of the devices based on these types of HTMs is 13%, which is 94% of that of the device based on the classic spiro-OMeTAD (13.76%).
Table 1 Summary of the HOMO, LUMO, and μh values of HTMs and the corresponding device structures and performances




Entry
HTM
HOMOa/eV
LUMOb/eV

μ
h

/cm2 V−1 s−1
Device structure

V
OC/V

J
SC/mA cm−2
FF/%
PCEd/%
Ref.





a If not mentioned, the HOMO levels were measured by cyclic voltammetry (CV).
b If not mentioned, ELUMO = EHOMO + Eg, where the Eg data were based on the onset absorption wavelengths or optical gaps.
c If not mentioned, the μh values were calculated by the SCLC method.
d All the photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs were obtained from the best devices.
e The HOMO levels were adjusted from the original CV data, i.e., EHOMO = −[4.8 + (Eox − Eox,Fc)] eV.
f HOMO levels determined by photoelectron yield spectroscopy.
g HOMO and LUMO levels in Co(III)-doped spin-coated films.
h Theoretically calculated HOMO and/or LUMO levels.
i Prepared by a sequential two-step solution method.
j Fabricated using a one-step method (toluene dropping).
k LUMO energy levels were determined using the UV-vis absorption edge of the solution.
l Ionization potential.
m HOMO levels were calculated from UPS measurements.
n Thin-film μh.
o Theoretically calculated μh.





1



−5.00e
−1.98
—
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.938
18.63
62.65
10.96

217



2



−5.02e
−2.03
—
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.984
18.55
67.2
12.61

217



3



−4.99e
−1.99
—
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.997
18.60
67.2
13.00

217



4



−5.05fg
−3.56g
2.1 × 10−4
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.04
20.7
73
15.7i

218



−5.04
1.08
21.7
71
16.5j


−4.23h










5



−5.22fg
−3.55g
7.6 × 10−5
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.91
15.9
67
9.7i

218



−5.12


−4.42h


6



−5.35fg
−3.66g
6.3 × 10−6
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.91
17.3
54
8.5i

218



−5.42


−4.60h


7



−5.44fg
−2.46g
2.4 × 10−5
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.70
2.31
28
0.45i

218



−5.27


−4.61h


8



−5.17
−2.06
7.05 × 10−5
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.97
20.3
55
10.9

219



9



−5.08
−2.43
8.94 × 10−5
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.00
21.8
66
14.4

219



10



−5.23
−2.93
1.69 × 10−3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/IDIDF/Au
1.06
23.6
79.2
19.8

220



11



−5.25
−2.10
1.025 × 10−4
ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
0.92
21.86
69.9
12.43

221



12



−5.33
−2.52
5.482 × 10−4
ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.03
22.79
73.7
16.97

221



13



−5.27
−3.86
1.78 × 10−4
FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.1
20.7
76.0
17.3

222



14



−4.9
−2.4k
9.53 × 10−5
FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.04
21.78
61.4
13.9

223



−4.31h


15



−5.0
−2.5k
6.46 × 10−4
FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/MAPbI3/HTM/Au
1.05
21.25
70.5
15.7

223



−4.33h


16



−4.82
−2.61
3.48 × 10−5
FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15/PMMA/HTM/Au
1.094
22.66
74.1
18.37

224



−4.25h
−4.12h


−4.94l




17



−4.82
−2.61
2.16 × 10−4
FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15/PMMA/HTM/Au
1.135
22.82
78.7
20.38

224



−4.25h
−4.12h


−5.04l




18



−5.08m
−3.41
6.49 × 10−3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag
0.83
20.92
65.9
11.44

225



19



−4.71m
−3.10
1.55 × 10−3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag
0.73
18.30
60.3
8.06

225



20



—
—
—
ITO/oCVD PEDOT/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag
0.96
24.10
78
18.04

226



21



−5.07f
−3.85
1.17 × 10−4
FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(MA0.13FA0.87)0.95Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/HTM/Au
1.06
22.31
71.34
16.87

227



1.0 × 10−4n


22



−5.32f
−4.04
1.16 × 10−5
FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(MA0.13FA0.87)0.95Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/HTM/Au
0.95
19.92
36.04
6.82

227



0.0n


23



−5.28m
−2.69
3.3 × 10−2o
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.875(MAPbBr3)0.075(CsPbI3)0.05 (PbI2)0.03/HTM/Au
1.125
24.60
76.4
21.1

233



6.26 × 10−4n


24



−5.21m
−2.97
6.1 × 10−3o
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.875(MAPbBr3)0.075(CsPbI3)0.05 (PbI2)0.03/HTM/Au
1.100
24.58
73.2
19.8

233



1.97 × 10−4n




Four two-dimensionally expanded systems 1–4 (Table 1, entries 4–7, respectively) with a sheet-shaped structure were obtained, where the four oxygen-bridged triarylamines that contained alkoxy groups to enhance the solubility were attached to an azulene core or biphenyl core.218 DFT calculations showed that 1 and 2 were delocalized over the entire π-conjugated skeleton, including the azulene core. The high charge collection ability of 1 was verified by measuring the transient decay of time-resolved microwave conductivity, revealing the horizontal, face-on molecular orientation of the HTMs on the perovskite layer. Such facilitated charge collection was most possibly enhanced by the two-dimensionally expanded molecular shape of the π-conjugated skeleton in tetrasubstituted azulene 1 relative to the disubstituted azulene 2 that contained a smaller π system, as well as spiro-OMeTAD that exhibited a spherical shape. Together with the higher mobility of 1 (2.1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) as compared to that of spiro-OMeTAD (2.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), 2 (7.6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1), 3 (6.3 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1), and 4 (2.4 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1), the PCE value of the device with 1 as the HTM was 16.5% and they were 13.6%, 9.7%, 8.5%, and 0.45% for spiro-OMeTAD-, 2-, 3-, and 4-based devices, respectively.
Triazole-cored TAZ-[MeOTPA]2 and TAZ-[MeOTPATh]2 (Table 1, entries 8 and 9, respectively) were synthesized as the HTMs for mesoporous n–i–p devices (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au).219 The HOMO levels of TAZ-[MeOTPA]2 and TAZ-[MeOTPATh]2 were well matched with that of MAPbI3 (−5.17 and −5.08 versus −5.43 eV). An additional thiophene π bridge in TAZ-[MeOTPATh]2 strengthened the intermolecular π–π stacking in the solid state and afforded a better spectral response at both shorter and longer wavelengths, which affected the HOMO levels, determined by the disparity between the quasi-Fermi levels of TiO2 and the HOMO of the HTM and therefore improving the VOC of the device. The PCE increased from 10.9% of TAZ-[MeOTPA]2-based device to 14.4% of the TAZ-[MeOTPATh]2-based device, which was comparable to that of the spiro-OMeTAD-based reference device (14.7%).
Cho et al. designed and synthesized two indolo[3,2-b]indole-based HTM candidates (Table 1, entry 10).220 However, only the four-fluoride derivative of indolo[3,2-b]indole difluoride (IDIDF) was comprehensively investigated since a single crystal of it was obtained. The strong intramolecular interactions of C–F⋯H (2.276 Å) were the key factor to minimize the distortion between the IDID core and the adjacent thiophene, thereby promoting the planarity of the elongated molecule. The fluorinated IDID backbone enabled the tight molecular arrangement via strong π–π interactions (3.480 Å), leading to higher μh (1.69 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) than that of the state-of-the-art HTM spiro-OMeTAD (2.17 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) with a spherical shape and amorphous morphology. Nine molecules formed intriguing clusters with π–π contacts within 3.362 Å, affording some short contacts of aliphatic side chains, namely, H⋯H (2.388 and 2.312 Å) and S⋯H (2.985 Å), which might result in IDIDF forming a single crystal. Together with the proper HOMO level (−5.23 eV) and narrow bandgap (2.30 eV), the device (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/IDIDF/Au) showed PCE of 19.8%, which was higher than that of the device with spiro-OMeTAD (16.8%) as the HTM.
2.5.2.2 π–π interactions in HTMs without dopants. 
Two thermally stable compounds, namely, HPB-OMe and HTB-OMe, both with amorphous films similar to commercial spiro-OMeTAD, were synthesized (Table 1, entries 11 and 12, respectively) as the HTMs for n–i–p-structured PSCs (ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au).221 The HOMO levels of HPB-OMe and HTB-OMe were estimated to be −5.25 and −5.33 eV, respectively. Both these compounds could extract holes effectively from the MAPbI3 layer (VB of −5.43 eV) and deliver to the gold electrode (VB of −5.1 eV) due to a smooth change in the HOMO levels. However, the HTB-OMe film exhibited higher μh (5.482 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) than HPB-OMe (1.025 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), because the thiophene ring afforded stronger π–π stacking in HTB-OMe and better electroconductivity than the benzene rings in HPB-OMe. Consequently, stabilized PCEs of 16.97% and 12.43% for HTB-OMe- and HPB-OMe-based devices were obtained, respectively.
A hydrophobic donor–acceptor (D–A)-type compound, DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2, was reported (Table 1, entry 13) for use as the HTM in planar n–i–p PSCs (FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au).222 Because of the effective π–π stacking (3.55 Å), which was one of the shortest π–π-stacking distances reported for organic semiconductors, the gigantic molecular size and π structure of DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2 were suitable for fabricating a high packing-density film and therefore improved the charge transport properties. The μh value of the DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2 film, determined by using the SCLC technique, was 1.78 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was comparable to that of the Li-TFSI-doped spiro-OMeTAD (1–5.2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). Furthermore, the HOMO energy level of DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2 (−5.27 eV) was deeper than that of the intrinsic spiro-OMeTAD (−5.13 eV) and doped spiro-OMeTAD (−5.22 eV); therefore, it was better matched with the VB of MAPbI3 (−5.43 eV). The average PCE values were 15.77 ± 0.94% for DFBT(DTS-FBTTh2)2-based devices, slightly higher than those of spiro-OMeTAD-based devices (15.68 ± 0.99%).
Facilitated by their extended π-conjugated system and strong electron-donating blocks, IDT-TPA and IDTT-TPA have been designed and utilized as HTMs in PSCs (Table 1, entries 14 and 15, respectively).223 In comparison with IDT-TPA, IDTT-TPA comprised a longer thiophene π bridge and therefore stronger π–π interactions, which facilitated hole transport. The corresponding μh values were 6.46 × 10−4 and 9.53 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. The calculated HOMO levels of IDT-TPA (−4.31 eV) and IDTT-TPA (−4.33 eV) were approximately that of spiro-OMeTAD (−4.31 eV), which were expected to be efficient HTMs. The planar n–i–p PSCs (FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/perovskite/HTM/Au), exhibited champion PCE values of 15.7%, 13.9%, and 17.0% with IDTT-TPA-, IDT-TPA-, and Li-TFSI-doped spiro-OMeTAD as the HTMs, respectively, where the devices that contained IDTT-TPA exhibited less hysteresis.
Two dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole (DTP)-cored p-type semiconductors, namely, DTPC8-ThTPA and DTPC13-ThTPA, (Table 1, entries 16 and 17, respectively) were developed as the HTMs in n–i–p-structured PSCs (FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15/polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)/HTM/Au).224 The planar conjugated building blocks enhanced the intermolecular π–π-stacking effect, which facilitated hole transport with μh values of 2.16 × 10−4 and 3.48 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for DTPC13-ThTPA and DTPC8-ThTPA, respectively, which were comparable to that of spiro-OMeTAD (3.43 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). Moreover, the electron-rich N atom increased the stability in the oxidized state and decreased the bandgap, which was 2.21 eV for both the new molecules. This was much narrower than that of spiro-OMeTAD (2.95 eV). The additional Pd2+⋯S interactions were expected to passivate the surface defects of perovskites by interacting with the undercoordinated Pd2+ cations. As a result, the devices showed satisfactory PCE values of 20.38%, 18.37%, and 19.85% for DTPC13-ThTPA, DTPC8-ThTPA, and doped spiro-OMeTAD as the HTMs, respectively.
Li et al. exploited zinc chlorophylls (Chl-1 and Chl-2; Table 1, entries 18 and 19, respectively) for HTMs in mesoporous n–i–p PSCs (FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag).225 These compounds self-assembled into highly orientated and organized π-stacking aggregates via a simple spin-coating process. Sharp reflections in the XRD spectrum confirmed the high crystallinity of the Chl-1-aggregated films with low surface roughness measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SEM. Similar to naturally occurring chlorophylls, Chl-1 and Chl-2 also possessed two absorption peaks in the long- and short-wavelength ranges. The HOMO levels of Chl-1 and Chl-2 were −5.13 and −4.71 eV, respectively. The former is close to that of P3HT (−5.10 eV). The μh values of Chl-1 (6.49 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) and Chl-2 (1.55 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) were even higher than that of P3HT (5.10 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). The PSCs based on Chl-1, Chl-2, and doped P3HT afforded PCE values of 11.44%, 8.06%, and 8.94%, respectively.
Semicrystal poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT; Table 1, entry 20) with a lower degree of disorder was obtained by oxidative chemical vapor deposition (oCVD).226 Although orthogonal edge-on orientation is commonly seen, face-on orientation parallel to the substrate can facilitate the formation of tighter π–π stacking. To improve intrachain transports, only face-on crystallite orientation was expected to be obtained by tailoring the oCVD conditions. The face-on-oriented PEDOT with strong π–π stacking exhibited the highest electrical conductivity and lowest degree of disorder. As a result, the inverted device using PEDOT (obtained by oCVD) as the HTM afforded PCE of 18.04% as compared to that of a PEDOT:PSS-based device (16.20%).
Titanyl phthalocyanine (TiOPc) derivatives were designed as dopant-free HTMs for planar n–i–p-structured PSCs (FTO/SnO2/perovskite/HTM/Au).227 Owing to the different sites of eight n-hexylthio groups, the newly developed compounds were named as non-peripheral (NP-SC6-TiOPc; Table 1, entry 21) and peripheral (P-SC6-TiOPc; Table 1, entry 22). NP-SC6-TiOPc was more beneficial than P-SC6-TiOPc, affording better film quality and better hole extraction and transportation, because of its more compact molecular stacking resulting from the stronger intermolecular π–π interactions. The champion PCEs of the peripheral and non-peripheral devices were 6.82% and 16.87%, respectively. Although the PCE value of spiro-OMeTAD-based reference device was 19.20%, the NP-SC6-TiOPc-based device offered the highest durability under ambient conditions (with 75% RH).
2.5.2.3 π–π interactions in ETMs. 
Owing to the mismatched energy level and improper solubility, only a few organic ETMs have been reported as compared to the numerous organic HTMs reported for use in PSCs. Therefore, it is challenging to develop organic ETMs. Jung et al. designed and synthesized a series of chiral stereoisomers of N,N′-bis-[2-(ethanoic acid sodium)]-1,4,5,8-naphthalene diimide (NDI) derivatives with two chiral substituents as ETM candidates for use in PSCs, as shown in Fig. 12.228 As discussed above, face-to-face π–π stacking in semiconducting materials is beneficial for charge transport. In these NDI-ID derivatives, NDI-ID (RR) and NDI-ID (RS) showed the largest overlapped area due to the face-to-face π–π stacking of NDI cores. According to the Hirshfeld surface analysis of the NDI cores, NDI cores in NDI-ID (7.6% for NDI-ID (RR) and 8.6% for NDI-ID (RS)) showed higher C⋯C atom contacts than that in NDI-TN (4.3% for NDI-TN (RR) and 0.3% for NDI-TN (RS)) and NDI-PhE (4.6% for NDI-PhE (RR) and 5.2% for NDI-PhE (RS)). Besides, there are two-way face-to-face π–π stacking directions in NDI-ID (RR) as compared to the one-way direction in NDI-ID (RS). In this case, the edge-to-face π–π interactions are stronger than those in NDI-ID (RR). As a result, NDI-TN (RS) is expected to exhibit the highest electron mobility. Along with good solution processability and high phase-transition temperature, the PSCs with NDI-ID (RR) and NDI-ID (RS) as the ETMs showed high performance and stability, where 20.1% and 19.6% of the initial PCE was retained and 18.2% and 16.2% PCE was obtained after 1000 h of continuous illumination, respectively, in a controlled chamber with humidity of 20% and temperature of 100 °C. The development of chiral stereoisomerism of organic semiconductors as ETMs is a promising concept.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of NDI-based enantiomers (RR) and mesomers (RS) with homochiral and heterochiral N-substituted side groups, as well as PDI-based enantiomer and mesomer. Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
2.5.2.4 π–π interactions in dopants. 
Graphdiyne (GD), a novel 2D carbon material, is expected to be employed in the photovoltaic field for its networks with delocalized π systems and unique conductivity advantage.229 Xiao et al. introduced GD to dope the P3HT HTM, where GD afforded relatively strong π–π-stacking interactions between the GD particles and P3HT.230 Here, π–π stacking lowered the HOMO level from −4.7 eV for pristine P3HT to −4.9 eV, which smoothened the charge transfer between the perovskite and P3HT. GD aggregates exhibited scattering, thereby enhancing the light absorption and hole extraction abilities of the device in the long-wavelength range. As a result, the performances of devices based on GD-doped P3HT were not only superior to those based on pristine P3HT, they also exhibited good stability and reproducibility.
GD possesses both sp- and sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, affording the tunability of its properties with changes in the external environment.231 Kuang et al. doped PC61BM with GD to improve its conductivity, electron mobility, and charge extraction ability, due to the networks with delocalized π systems of GD.229 Besides, GD could possibly assist in the elimination of recombinations by passivating the GB of the perovskite and reducing the trap states of the perovskite surface. Although the VOC values of PC61BM:GD-based devices were slightly diminished as compared to those of the control devices, a higher average PCE value of PC61BM:GD-based device was observed with 28% enhancement (13.9% versus 10.8%) and marginal standard deviation as compared to those based on pristine PC61BM-based ones.
2.5.2.5 π–π interactions in modifiers. 
Lin et al. introduced a π-conjugated Lewis base (IDIC) as the interfacial layer and carbonyl (CO) and cyan (CN) formed the Lewis acid–base adducts with undercoordinated Pb2+, thereby passivating the trap states in PSCs.232 In comparison with PC61BM, IDIC thin films showed stronger self-aggregation and better π–π stacking, which resulted in effective charge transport and small energy disorder in the electronic states. As a result, there was small VOC loss in MAPbI3/IDIC-based solar cells. Consequently, IDIC yielded higher efficiency of electron extraction from perovskite layers than PC61BM and PL quenching of MAPbI3 of 87%, which was larger than that observed for PC61BM (70%). The MAPbI3/IDIC-based device yielded a high PCE value of 19.5% as compared to that of the reference device (∼18%). In addition, better stability of devices was also obtained based on MAPbI3/IDIC with 90% versus 80% after storage for 30 days.


2.5.3 Synergistic π effects. 
Two donor–π–donor (D–π–D)-type molecular semiconductors of N5,N5,N9,N9-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)dinaphtho[2,1-b:1′,2′-d] thiophene-5,9-diamine (T5H-OMeDPA; Table 1, entry 23) and N3,N3,N10,N10-tetrakis (4-methoxyphenyl)perylo[1,12-bcd]-thiophene-3,10-diamine (PET-OMeDPA; Table 1, entry 24) were designed and synthesized for use as HTMs in PSCs.233 There are several intermolecular noncovalent interactions (NCIs) in both these semiconductors. For T5H-OMeDPA, there are multiple NCIs, including three kinds of π–π interactions, four types of C–H/π interactions, one kind of S⋯π interaction, two kinds of C–H⋯S interactions, one type of S⋯O interaction, and five kinds of H⋯H interactions (Fig. 13a–f). For PET-OMeDPA, there are six forms of C–H/π interactions, two types of S⋯π interactions, one kind of O⋯π interaction, one kind of C–H⋯S interaction, one kind of C–H⋯O interaction, and four kinds of H⋯H interactions (Fig. 13g–l). The synergistic effect of all these NCIs results in excellent electronic properties, such as HOMO values, μh values, hole extraction ability, and so on. As a result, T5H-OMEDPA- and PET-OMEDPA-based PSCs have afforded PCEs of 21.1% and 19.8%, respectively.
 Fig. 13  Molecular graphs elaborating the intermolecular interactions from single crystals. (a–f): PET-OMeDPA. (g–l): T5H-OMeDPA. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.6 IB
The energy of an IB is almost the same as that of a CB, but it is higher than that of a HB. The strong interactions between the various molecules with perovskites via IB are expected to improve the device performance and stability. According to the sources of as-exploited molecules or ions, we discussed the two directions in this section, including inorganic molecules or ions and organic molecules.

2.6.1 Inorganic molecules or ions. 
Inorganic molecules/ions have been proven to be effective factors to interact with ions and/or charged defects in perovskites via IB. Na+ ions have been the first reported metal ions that exhibited passivation effects on perovskite grains and surfaces. Bi et al. showed that Na+ within the conducting ITO substrate could diffuse into the perovskite grains over time234 and then interact with negatively charged halide ions in the perovskite to form an IB or be absorbed at the MA+ vacancies. This interaction can lead to reduced trap density and prolonged lifetime of perovskite films. Abdi-Jalebi et al. were the first to introduce K+ (KI) into a (Cs,MA,FA)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 system to reduce nonradiative losses and photoinduced ion migration in perovskite films.235 After the introduction of KI, the external photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) increased from 8% to 66%, and the corresponding internal PLQE exceeded 95%. This improvement resulted from the passivation of K+ to I− and Br− vacancies in the perovskite through ionic interactions, as shown in Fig. 14a. This ionic interaction mode has also been supported by another report, which showed that KPbI3 and KX (X = I, Br, or Cl) could exist after KI doping in perovskites due to ionic interactions, as verified by 39K solid-state NMR analyses.236 Cao et al. introduced a series of alkali cations, such as Cs+, Rb+, K+, Na+, and Li+, into perovskites to occupy the interstitial vacancies.237 This interstitial occupancy depended on the size of ions revealed by DFT calculations, and K+ doping afforded the best results. They claimed that alkali cation doping could suppress ion migration, affording reduced hysteresis, weakened poling effects, and improved photostability of perovskite films. Son et al. pointed out that the notorious hysteresis of PSCs originated from the iodide Frenkel defects,238 which occur near the cathode because of electron accumulation. KI doping in perovskites can reduce such electron accumulation and/or prevent I− ion migration. Besides, K+ ions are energetically preferred to occupy the interstitial sites. KI doping, therefore, can reduce the trap density of perovskite films and hysteresis of devices. Alkali cations (such as K+) doping can surely lead to an improvement in the trap density of perovskite films. However, the reported metal ion position in perovskite films is not unified. Therefore, more efforts are needed to focus on researching the mechanism involving the effect of metal ions on the perovskite. Recently, Wu et al. introduced CdI2 to modify the perovskite film. Cd2+-stabilizing iodine ions in perovskites via Cd–I IB,239 along with the filling of surface halide vacancies with the introduction of I−, could considerably improve the device performance and stability.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the cross-section of a film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halides, where surplus halides are immobilized by complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the GBs and surfaces. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration for enhancing the HB between the halogen and MA+/FA+ ions, as well as strengthening the IB between the halogen and metal ions, by increasing the electronegativity of the halogen. (c) Net atomic charges of I− and Pb2+ ions on the FAPbI3 surface by the incorporation of NaI species (FA-I) or NaF species (FA-F) and without any incorporation (FA). (d) Formation energy of a surface FA vacancy in clean FAPbI3 (FA) surfaces and surfaces incorporated with NaI (FA-I) or NaF (FA-F) species. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Li et al. proposed the idea of binding cations of perovskites (such as MA+, FA+, and Pb2+) via chemical bonds.240 They introduced halides (NaX) into (Cs0.05FA0.54MA0.41)Pb(I0.98Br0.02)3 perovskites to passivate cations and/or halide anion vacancies. As shown in Fig. 14b, F− in the halide series exhibited the strongest IB and HB with Pb and H in the perovskites, respectively. NaF was chosen to ameliorate the defects in perovskites. The ionic charge on Pb ions nearby F sites increased, indicating that F− ions form stronger IBs (Fig. 14c). Additionally, the incorporation of Na+ ions increases the ionic charge surrounding the I− ions (Fig. 14d). The introduction of NaF, consequently, could restrain ion migration and effectively block perovskite degradation.


2.6.2 Organic molecules. 
Ding et al. introduced diethylenetriamine iodide (NH3+C2H4NH2+C2H4NH3+I3, DETAI3) as an additive into CsPbI3 to stabilize the α-CsPbI3 phase via IB between DETA3+ and I− of [PbI6]4−.241 Moreover, according to the geometric tolerance factor rule, DETA3+ with a more appropriate ionic size was proposed to crosslink the perovskite grains and therefore stabilized α-CsPbI3, as shown in Fig. 15a. Besides, FA+ and guanidinium cation (C(NH2)3+, Gua+) were used as references to further verify that NH3+ or RNH2+ groups worked in their entirety to form IB with I− of [PbI6]4−. Ding et al. reported a similar strategy using p-phenylene diammonium iodide (PPDI) to stabilize α-CsPbI3via IB between NH3+ in PPDI and I− in [PbI6]4−,242 which can prevent octahedral tilting and maintain Pb–I–Pb bonds at 180° via crosslinking the adjacent CsPbI3 grains (Fig. 15b). XPS and PL verified the existence of IB between NH3+ in PPDI and I− in [PbI6]4−. As a result, the phase stability of α-CsPbI3 films was enhanced.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the surface passivation of DETAI3, IDs, and octahedral tilting. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of the PPDI-induced phase stabilization of CsPbI3 perovskites and contact angle measurement of CsPbI3 films. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Effects of BDPSO dopants to passivate defects and facilitate charge transfer between grains and at the interface. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the major surface passivation mechanism of the surface defects on MAPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs). Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
PEI has been utilized as an additive or modifier for perovskites in order to improve the performance and stability of PSCs.243,244 Wei et al. introduced PEI as an additive into a perovskite precursor solution.245 Containing amino and imine groups, PEI could be easily protonated into PEI-H+, which was then bound to I−via IB at the GBs of perovskite films. The introduction of PEI-H+ cations could regulate the crystal growth of the perovskites and improve the quality of perovskite films. In addition, PEI-H+ could reduce and/or prevent direct contact between the perovskite grains and water molecules. Zhou et al. developed an organic/inorganic hybrid semiconductor, namely, a bis-sodium salt of fluorinated tetraarylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b,]dipyrrol-1,5-ylalkanediyl bissulfonate (BDPSO, Fig. 15c),246 which was expected to improve the device performance and stability. Bissulfonate anions in BDPSO might bind positively charged defects in the perovskite and/or ITO via IB. Besides, sodium ions could passivate negatively charged halide ions, as reported elsewhere.120 As a result, the trap density of MAPbI3 films was considerably reduced from 3.21 × 1016 cm−3 to 4.83 × 1015 cm−3 after the introduction of BDPSO. Accordingly, the performance (from 13% to 17%) and stability (maximum power point tracking under 1 sun illumination at 35 °C for 1000 h from maintaining 20% to 93% of the initial values) of the PSCs were improved.
There is possibly the simultaneous existence of positively (Pb2+ or MA+) and negatively (I−) charged ionic defects in perovskite films. Therefore, it would be promising to passivate both kinds of charged defects via chemical interactions. Xu et al. exploited phosphonic acids (PAs) and APTES ligands to achieve this goal.247 Through IB, resulting from the protonation and deprotonation of APTES and PA interacting with I− and Pb2+ or MA+ (Fig. 15d), an effective dual passivation has been conducted, affording devices with higher stability. Apart from the existence of various defects, the position of defects including the perovskite surface and interior of the perovskite GBs should also be considered. Yang et al. introduced D-4-tert-butyl-phenylalanine (D4TBP) as an additive to a perovskite system to improve the device performance.248 Due to the presence of –NH2 and –COOH in D4TBP, the IB was speculated to form with both negatively and positively charged defects, respectively. Along with the possible Lewis interactions between the aromatic benzene ring of D4TBP with iodine in the perovskite, the defects were effectively passivated, and therefore, the VOC deficit could be considerably reduced in these devices.

2.7 vdW interactions
The vdW interactions, originating from a transient shift in the electron density, is a distance-dependent force between the molecules or atoms. It plays a fundamental role in various fields, such as supramolecular chemistry, surface science, polymer science, nanotechnology, and so on. Although the vdW force is only 0.4 to 4.0 kJ mol−1, the interaction among the different molecules becomes very sturdy, e.g., vdW heterojunctions. The vdW interactions are widespread in perovskites so that they are always considered in various calculation modes. Actually, vdW interactions have been extensively explored to improve PSC performances.
It has been reported that 2D/3D (PEA2PbI4/MAPbI3) perovskites fabricated from phenylethyl ammonium iodide (PEAI) could improve device stability.249 Due to the strong vdW interactions between the organic molecules (PEAI), higher energy (0.36 eV) is needed for removing PEAI than MAI from the perovskite. According to DFT simulations, after the introduction of PEAI into a perovskite system, the decomposition rate of the perovskite film reduced by around 1000 fold. Aharon et al. introduced different lengths of alkylammoniums to modify perovskite nanoparticles (NPs).250 Both computational and experimental results revealed that vdW interactions within different alkylammoniums were the main reason for the differences in the physical and optical properties of perovskite NPs. Besides, 2D perovskites were fabricated from different alkylammoniums and MAPbX3 with the formula of (CmH2m+1NH3)2(MA)n−1PbnX3n+1 (m = 8, 12, or 18; n = 1, 2, or 3; X: = Br or I). They claimed that the crystalline structures and optical properties of these 2D perovskites considerably depended on the vdW interactions among the different alkylammoniums. Tan et al. reported the use of a mixed organic spacer cation to construct a 2D perovskite.251 Owing to the strong vdW interactions, it is not difficult for butylammonium iodide (BAI) to assemble 2D layer perovskites, such as BA2MA3Pb4I13. Along with 2,2,2-trifluoroethylamine iodide (F3EAI), BAI and MAPbI3 were also employed to fabricate 2D [BA1−x(F3EA)x]2MA3Pb4I13. Milić et al. introduced a supramolecular (adamantan-1-yl) methanammonium (A) to fabricate 2D layered RP A2FA2Pb3I10 perovskites.252 Due to the strong vdW interactions between the adjacent hydrophobic A layers (Fig. 16a), the 2D perovskites exhibited higher stability. Besides, vdW contact has been extensively exploited to assemble 2D/3D heterojunction structures, particularly vdW perovskite heterojunction devices. Generally, these kinds of devices are expected to exhibit high performance because of interfacial modifications and effective stability due to the presence of a 2D protective layer.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representations of crystal packing with A2FA2Pb3I10 perovskite compositions. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Corresponding 1H NMR spectra showing changes in the resonance signals arising from the H protons of NDI-graphene upon the addition of MAI or FAI solution in deuterated water at 298 K. (c) Representation of the supramolecular weak vdW interaction in MAI- or FAI-containing NDI-graphene. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
PSC performance largely depends on the interfacial properties of the adjacent layers. Interfacial engineering is an effective strategy to improve the device performance. NDI-modified graphene has been introduced as an interfacial layer to ameliorate the interface between SnO2 and perovskite.253Via vdW interactions, the hydrogen in the NDI can interact with the iodine of perovskite crystals at the interface between the modified SnO2 and perovskite. This interaction can be verified by NMR analysis, as shown in Fig. 16b. As compared to the proton signal of NDI-graphene, the proton signals of MAI⋯NDI-graphene and FAI⋯NDI-graphene apparently moved to lower values, i.e., from δ = 8.49 to 8.45 and 8.44 ppm, respectively (Fig. 16c). Such vdW interactions between modified SnO2 and perovskite was also affirmed by DFT calculations. After the introduction of modified graphene, the electrons in the perovskite were dragged closer to the graphene side, indicating the existence of vdW interactions. Such vdW interactions are universal between graphene or modified graphene and the perovskite. Sylwia took advantage of the first-principles model to investigate the interfacial properties of graphene/MAPbI3, graphene oxide (GO)/MAPbI3, C60/MAPbI3, and C60(OH)24/MAPbI3.254 Together with Pauli repulsion, vdW attraction could affect the contact between graphene or modified graphene and perovskite, thereby leading to charge reorganization, charge transfer, or electronic state hybridization. Besides, Zuo et al. reported that owing to the vdW interactions between benzoic acid (BA) and perovskite, the introduction of BA onto the SnO2 surface could lower the work function of SnO2255 and therefore facilitate interfacial charge transfer.
3. Summary and outlook
OIHPs have shown promising potential for next-generation solar cells due to their low-cost materials, facile fabrication techniques, and constantly increasing PCEs. However, the existence of deep state defects considerably limits the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency and device stability. To overcome this issue, increasingly precise fabrication processes for absorber layers, which lower the defect density and use of passivation agents that can passivate inevitable defects, are needed.
In this paper, we have provided a general review of the bonding and intermolecular interactions between the intrinsic and extrinsic molecules and ions in perovskites. The IBs and HBs between the CH3+ cations and halide anions, CBs between Pb and I, and vdW interactions between halides play important roles in the arrangement and formation of ABX3 perovskite structures. Additionally, when preparing perovskite films, solvents and molecules having interactions with the perovskite precursors can help in regulating the perovskite crystallization process, resulting in high-quality films with low defect densities. In addition, the bonding and interactions enable the passivation of defects in perovskite films by passivation agents, which contribute toward reduced nonradiative recombinations and improved device performance. Moreover, as the library of effective molecules for both crystallization regulation and passivation is still limited, this review provides inspiration on how to purposefully seek for molecules with desired functionalities. However, although impressive device performance has already been achieved, stability issues caused by ion migration and defect sites, which relate to bonding and intermolecular interactions, still need to be investigated further. By giving this comprehensive review of bonding and interactions in perovskites, we hope to arouse more in-depth discussions on the degradation mechanism from an essential intermolecular interaction aspect.
The following perspectives on future research directions will be of importance for further ameliorating device performance and stability.
(1) It is said that an ounce of prevention is a pound of cure. A perovskite film with low defect density is always desirable for solar cell applications. A list of solvents and additives used to make high-quality and large perovskite grains and their working mechanisms of intermolecular interactions have been reviewed in this article. However, a more comprehensive study of the potential additives is still necessitated to further optimize the quality of perovskite films, particularly when making thick films for effective light absorption.
(2) Although theoretical calculations have shown the formation energies of different defects in PSCs, the underlying mechanism of how deep defect states generate and what types of interactions they have with their surroundings remain to be fully understood. A better understanding can help the selection of more suitable strategies for perovskite passivation.
(3) Additionally, benefiting from various interactions in the perovskites, molecules utilized to improve perovskites and device stability can be specifically designed, such as specific groups through HBs to bond with volatile methylamine ions and XBs to fix halogens.
(4) Ion migration usually causes phase segregation, interfacial interaction, and accelerated decomposition. To suppress ion migration in perovskites is extremely important for device stability. A more comprehensive study of how to avoid and suppress ion migration is highly needed in the future.
(5) Tandem solar cells show better prospects toward higher PCEs due to the ability of integrating wider solar spectrum into multiple bands that can be more efficiently absorbed by separate devices. Integrating PSCs and c-Si/CIGS solar cells into a tandem device is regarded as an effective tactic to overcome the Shockley–Queisser limit. In this respect, except for each subcell, more attention should be paid toward the interlayers that may cause connection problems. A more detailed study on the bonding and interactions at each interlayer can contribute toward achieving enhanced carrier transport and reduced recombinations.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Taishan Scholars Project of Shandong Province.
References
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. d. Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xiao, C. Bao, Y. Fang, J. Dai, B. R. Ecker, Y. Lin, S. Tang, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, X. Zheng, Y. Gao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705176 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Moon, A. Gharajeh, R. Haroldson, R. Hawkins, W. Hu, A. Zakhidov and Q. Gu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10968–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html
        .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 3–15 Search PubMed .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T.-W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. N. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. X. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1927, 60, 1263–1268 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., 2008, B64, 702–707 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5253–5264 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, T. Gould, J. F. Dobson, H. Zhang, H. Yang, X. Yao and H. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1424–1429 RSC .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y.-Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Varadwaj, P. R. Varadwaj and K. Yamashita, J. Comput. Chem., 2017, 38, 2802–2818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger and L. Kronik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2728–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi and S. Sanvito, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581–4610 RSC .
M. D. Bastiani, E. Aydin, T. Allen, D. Walter, A. Fell, J. Peng, N. Gasparini, J. Troughton, D. Baran, K. Weber, T. P. White and S. D. Wolf, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800500 Search PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 RSC .
F. Wang, S. Bai, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and F. Gao, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 22 CrossRef .
G. Vladilo and A. Hassanali, Life, 2018, 8, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Heyns, K. R. Hirsch and W. B. Holzapfel, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 73, 105–119 CrossRef CAS .
T. Glaser, C. Müller, M. Sendner, C. Krekeler, O. E. Semonin, T. D. Hull, O. Yaffe, J. S. Owen, W. Kowalsky, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2913–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop and J. B. Macdonald, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 581–582 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Q. Xie, T.-Y. Zhang, L. Chen, N. Guo, Y. Wang, G.-K. Liu, J.-R. Wang, J.-Z. Zhou, J.-W. Yan, Y.-X. Zhao, B.-W. Mao and Z.-Q. Tian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 18112–18118 RSC .
M. Park, N. Kornienko, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, M. Lai, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang and R. A. Mathies, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4151–4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Weller, O. J. Weber, P. F. Henry, A. M. Di Pumpoac and T. C. Hansen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4180–4183 RSC .
S. Sun, F. H. Isikgor, Z. Deng, F. Wei, G. Kieslich, P. D. Bristowe, J. Ouyang and A. K. Cheetham, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3740–3745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Varadwaj, P. R. Varadwaj and K. Yamashita, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 449–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, E.-H. Kong and H. M. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 11033–11038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe and L. Kronik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 573–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, L. Kronik and A. M. Rappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12437–12441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Klinkla, V. Sakulsupich, T. Pakornchote, U. Pinsook and T. Bovornratanaraks, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 13161 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Müller, T. Glaser, M. Plogmeyer, M. Sendner, S. Döring, A. A. Bakulin, C. Brzuska, R. Scheer, M. S. Pshenichnikov, W. Kowalsky, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7835–7841 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. A. M. Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 RSC .
Z. Zhu, V. G. Hadjiev, Y. Rong, R. Guo, B. Cao, Z. Tang, F. Qin, Y. Li, Y. Wang, F. Hao, S. Venkatesan, W. Li, S. Baldelli, A. M. Guloy, H. Fang, Y. Hu, Y. Yao, Z. Wang and J. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7385–7393 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Anderson and P. L. Morgan, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1964, 60, 930–937 RSC .
Y.-B. Lu, C. Guan, H. Sun, W.-Y. Cong, H. Yang and P. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11862–11869 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Hoehn, J. S. Francisco, S. Kais and A. Kachmar, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 668 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Arakcheeva, D. Chernyshov, M. Spina, L. Forró and E. Horváth, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2016, 72, 716–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, V. D’Innocenzo, E.
R. Dohner, N. Martino, A. R. S. Srimath Kandada, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, H. I. Karunadasa, E. T. Hokee and A. Petrozza, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 7305–7310 RSC .
Y.-B. Lu, W.-Y. Cong, C. Guan, H. Sun, Y. Xin, K. Wang and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27469–27474 RSC .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aphrham, Q. Pan, S. F. Zaccarine, K. M. Felter, J. Thieme, K. J. H. van den Nieuwenhuijzen, J. E. ten Elshof and A. Huijser, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 3320–3324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Butler, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 228–231 RSC .
A. Halder, D. Choudhury, S. Ghosh, A. S. Subbiah and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3180–3184 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ruess, F. Benfer, F. Böcher, M. Stumpp and D. Schlettwein, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1505–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, E. A. Gaml, B. Vaagensmith, K. M. Reza, S. A. A. Mabrouk, S. Gu, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2693–2703 RSC .
J. You, Y. (Micheal) Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli, M. Saliba and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14753–14760 RSC .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
D. B. Mitzi, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2001, 1–12 RSC .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44–60 CrossRef CAS .
R. Arai, M. Yoshizawa-Fujita, Y. Takeoka and M. Rikukawa, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2333–2336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ashari-Astani, F. Jahanbakhshi, M. Mladenović, A. Q. M. Alanazi, I. Ahmadabadi, M. R. Ejtehadi, M. I. Dar, M. Grätzel and U. Rothlisberger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3543–3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Passarelli, D. J. Fairfield, N. A. Sather, M. P. Hendricks, H. Sai, C. L. Stern and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7313–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
A. D’Annibale, R. Panetta, O. Tarquini, M. Colapietro, S. Quaranta, A. Cassetta, L. Barba, G. Chita and A. Latini, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 5397–5407 RSC .
E. V. Campbell, B. Dick, A. L. Rheingold, C. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. V. Vardeny and J. S. Miller, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 222–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. L. H. Williams, Nitrosation Reactions and the Chemistry of Nitric Oxide, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1st edn,  2004, ch. 2, pp. 35–56 Search PubMed .
D. H. Sin, S. B. Jo, S. G. Lee, H. Ko, M. Kim, H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18103–18112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, J. Liu and Y. Han, Org. Electron., 2018, 62, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, H. Huang, P. Cui, J. Ji, S. Dou, E. Jia, S. Sajid, M. Cui, L. Chu, Y. Li, B. Jiang and M. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1228–1235 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. Jiang, C. Chen, J. Guo, X. Kong, Y. Feng, S. Wu, X. Gao, X. Lu, Q. Wang, G. Zhou, Y. Chen, J.-M. Liu, K. Kempa and J. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, J. Lin, X. Liu, X. He, Y. Wang, T. Noda, T. Wu, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, M. I. Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Nimens, S. J. Lefave, L. Flannery, J. Ogle, D.-M. Smilgies, M. T. Kieber-Emmons and L. Whittaker-Brooks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13912–13921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Lim, Q. Li, T. Zhang, T. Thomay, A. N. Cartwright, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ou, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. A. Yuwono, R. Wang, Z. Dai, W. Li, C. Zheng, Z.-Q. Xu, X. Qi, S. Duhm, N. V. Medhekar, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705792 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, L. Y. Ji, W. W. Chen, X. Guo, H. H. Wang, M. Lei, Q. Wang and Y. F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20720–20728 RSC .
J. H. Heo, S.-C. Lee, S.-K. Jung, O.-P. Kwon and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20615–20622 RSC .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. (Micheal) Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 75–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Shen, D. Wang, W. Wei and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12806 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, B. J. Kim, X. Ren, D. G. Lee, G. J. Bang, J. B. Jeon, W. B. Kim and H. S. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802763 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Proppe, M. Wei, B. Chen, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14180–14189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Yuan, B. Li, W. Wen and J. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22229–22234 RSC .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Shin, M. H. Jang, M. L. Lee, M. G. Kang and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21146–21152 RSC .
G. Gritzner, J. Mol. Liq., 1997, 73, 487–500 CrossRef .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S.-H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Brandt, J. R. Poindexter, P. Gorai, R. C. Kurchin, R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Nienhaus, M. W. B. Wilson, J. A. Polizzotti, R. Sereika, R. Žaltauskas, L. C. Lee, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, M. Bawendi, V. Stevanović and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4667–4674 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 528–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, C. Aranda, O. M. Bakr, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1477–1481 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono and T. Kamiya, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18900–18903 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Pan, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Zhang, J. Chen and W. Lei, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2020, 1900784 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C.-P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-J. Tong, L. Li, L.-M. Liu and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3060–3068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, F. Ji, B. Zhang and G. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3828–3831 RSC .
C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, E. Bandiello, E. M. Hutter, M. Sessolo, K. Lederer, J. Blochwitz-Nimoth and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3456–3463 RSC .
D. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Qin, Y. Zhang, S. Liu and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9401–9405 RSC .
L. Gil-Escrig, C. Momblona, M.-G. La-Placa, P. P. Boix, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703506 CrossRef .
M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, Y. Kato, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18742–18745 RSC .
M. R. Leyden, M. V. Lee, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16097–16103 RSC .
Y. Jiang, M. R. Leyden, L. Qiu, S. Wang, L. K. Ono, Z. Wu, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703835 CrossRef .
J. C. Hamill, J. Schwartz and Y.-L. Loo, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Lee, J. S. Yun, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Chen, Y. Cho, X. Deng, J. Seidel, S. Lim, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 647–654 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wharf, T. Gramstad, R. Makhija and M. Onyszchuk, Can. J. Chem., 1976, 54, 3430–3438 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Chang, Y. Zong, L. Etgar, G. Cui, N. P. Padture and S. Pang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7674–7678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 RSC .
H. Jiang, J. Feng, H. Zhao, G. Li, G. Yin, Y. Han, F. Yan, Z. Liu and S. F. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801117 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, Q. Xue, M. Liu, Z. Zhu, J. Tian, Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Yan, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802509 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Song, D. Zhao, C. Xiao, B. Subedi, N. Shrestha, M. M. Junda, C. Wang, C.-S. Jiang, M. Al-Jassim, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803135 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, K. Xiao, Z. Qin, Q. Han, C. Zhang, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, J. Xu, M. Xiao, A. Li, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 864–873 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, Q. Tu, I. Hadar, X. Li, G. S. Shekhawat, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8627–8637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, M. Zhu, L. Mao, I. Spanopoulos, J. Liu, O. Y. Kontsevoi, M. Chen, D. Sarma, Y. Zhang, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701293 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, P. M. Hangoma, W. I. Park, J. H. Lim, Y. K. Jung, J. H. Jeong, S. H. Park and K. H. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 11, 170–177 Search PubMed .
Y. Jo, K. S. Oh, M. Kim, K.-H. Kim, H. Lee, C.-W. Lee and D. S. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500768 CrossRef .
J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T. H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh, D. Di Carlo, J. H. Ko, H. D. Maynard and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-L. Ho, Chem. Rev., 1975, 75, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Pearson and J. Songstad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 1827–1836 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, C. Li, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, Y. Yao and J. Wei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19804–19810 RSC .
L. Zhi, Y. Li, X. Cao, Y. Li, X. Cui, L. Ci and J. Wei, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 632 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Li, F. Fang, X. Cui, Y. Yao, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32868–32875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, F. Zhang, Y. Xiao, S. Wang and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4971–4980 RSC .
C. Fei, B. Li, R. Zhang, H. Fu, J. Tian and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602017 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, Y. Xu, P. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20874–20881 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, D. T. Moore, Y. Yan, E. M. Miller, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16207 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. J. M. C. Buonassisi, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yun, J. Seidel, J. Kim, A. M. Soufiani, S. Huang, J. Lau, N. J. Jeon, S. I. Seok, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
F. Fu, S. Pisoni, Q. Jeangros, J. Sastre-Pellicer, M. Kawecki, A. Paracchino, T. Moser, J. Werner, C. Andres, L. Duchêne, P. Fiala, M. Rawlence, S. Nicolay, C. Ballif, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3074–3088 RSC .
B.-W. Park, N. Kedem, M. Kulbak, D. Y. Lee, W. S. Yang, N. J. Jeon, J. Seo, G. Kim, K. J. Kim, T. J. Shin, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and S. I. Seok, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3301 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tumen-Ulzii, C. Qin, D. Klotz, M. R. Leyden, P. Wang, M. Auffray, T. Fujihara, T. Matsushima, J.-W. Lee, S.-J. Lee, Y. Yang and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, M. Maeda, Y. Jiang, Z. Hawash and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9604–9612 RSC .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, W. H. Fang, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1164–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chaudhary, A. Kulkarni, A. K. Jena, M. Ikegami, Y. Udagawa, H. Kunugita, K. Ema and T. Miyasaka, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2473–2479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hadadian, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. K. Goharshadi, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J. Luo, S. Gholipour, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8681–8686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kim, J. Chen, J. Y. Seo, D. H. Kang and N. G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25372–25383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. Geng, Y. Zhou, H. H. Fang, C. J. Tong, M. A. Loi, L. M. Liu and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9986–9992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Cao, J.-P. Wang, H.-H. Fang, M. A. Loi, N. Zhao and C.-P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701048 CrossRef .
W. Liao, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. R. Grice, C. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, P. Schulz, W. Meng, K. Zhu, R. G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Prasanna, T. Leijtens, S.
P. Dunfield, J. A. Raiford, E. J. Wolf, S. A. Swifter, J. Werner, G. E. Eperon, C. de Paula, A. F. Palmstrom, C. C. Boyd, M. F. A. M. van Hest, S. F. Bent, G. Teeter, J. J. Berry and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 939–947 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kamarudin, D. Hirotani, Z. Wang, K. Hamada, K. Nishimura, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5277–5283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, S. R. Raga, E. J. Juarez-Perez, X. Yao, Y. Jiang, L. K. Ono, Z. Ning, H. Tian and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703670 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, P. Qin, G. Fang and G. Li, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800055 CrossRef .
M. Sun, F. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Li, Y. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13448–13456 RSC .
Y. Zhang, P. Gao, E. Oveisi, Y. Lee, Q. Jeangros, G. Grancini, S. Paek, Y. Feng and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14380–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Fairfield, H. Sai, A. Narayanan, J. V. Passarelli, M. Chen, J. Palasz, L. C. Palmer, M. R. Wasielewski and S. I. Stupp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1687–1699 RSC .
H. Xiong, G. DeLuca, Y. Rui, B. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and E. Reichmanis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35385–35394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, M. Liu, Z. Li, T. Shi, Y. Yang, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, iScience, 2018, 9, 337–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706576 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, S. Dai, F. Meng, J. Shi, Y. Li, J. Wu, Q. Meng and X. Zhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21414–21421 RSC .
E. Aktas, J. Jimenez-Lopez, C. Rodriguez-Seco, R. Pudi, M. A. Ortuno, N. Lopez and E. Palomares, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2702–2711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, K. Liu, S. Dai, J. Shi, H. Zhang, X. Xu, D. Li and X. Zhan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1079–1086 RSC .
M. Qin, J. Cao, T. Zhang, J. Mai, T.-K. Lau, S. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, Y.-J. Hsu, N. Zhao, J. Xu, X. Zhan and X. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703399 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Li, G. Zheng, K. Liu, M. Qin, H. Zhou and X. Zhan, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700025 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alberti, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna and C. Spinella, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2196 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, M. Jiang, Z. Liu, A. Jamshaid, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903696 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Song, D. Wei, P. Cui, M. Li, Z. Duan, T. Wang, J. Ji, Y. Li, J. M. Mbengue, Y. Li, Y. He, M. Trevor and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6091–6097 RSC .
J. C. Hummelen, B. W. Knight, F. LePeq, F. Wudl, J. Yao and C. L. Wilkins, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
R. Haddon, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1993, 343, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Risko, J. H. Seo, C. Campbell, G. Wu, J. L. Bredas and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12410–12413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J. P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, D. Bi, N. Pellet, C. Xiao, Z. Li, J. J. Berry, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3480–3490 RSC .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Carcia, R. S. McLean, M. H. Reilly and G. Nunes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1117–1119 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, K. C. Park and D. Y. Ma, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 7764–7772 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and T. L. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, Q.-D. Yang, J. Xiao, Q. Xue, H.-W. Li, Z. Guan, H.-L. Yip and S.-W. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19986–19993 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Wang, H. Sarvari, D. Liu, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17368–17378 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Duan, Y. Hui, T. T. Chuong, D. Ou, F. Han, F. Cheng, X. Huang, B. Wu and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 541–547 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Shen, Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. Zhao, M. Tai, J. Li, J. Li, X. Li and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7826–7833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, H. Yan and Q. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28948–28954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Shallcross, S. Olthof, K. Meerholz and N. R. Armstrong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32500–32508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Schloemer, J. A. Christians, J. M. Luther and A. Sellinger, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1904–1935 RSC .
T. Ye, W. Chen, S. Jin, S. Hao, X. Zhang, H. Liu and D. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14004–14010 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ye, J. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Yang and D. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17923–17931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, P. S. Ho, L. Kloo, A. C. Legon, R. Marquardt, P. Metrangolo, P. Politzer, G. Resnati and K. Rissanen, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1711–1713 CAS .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Su and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 23536–23541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bi, H. Wang, J. Zhou, S. You, Y. Zhang, X. Shi, Z. Tang and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6840–6848 RSC .
M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, D. J. Kubicki, A. Hofstetter, L. McGovern, M. H. Futscher, A. Ummadisingu, R. Gershoni-Poranne, S. M. Zakeeruddin, B. Ehrler, L. Emsley, J. V. Milić and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1645–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and Y. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 502, 144274 CrossRef CAS .
D. Piovesan, G. Minervini and S. C. E. Tosatto, Nucleic Acids Res., 2016, 44, 367–374 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Janiak, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2000, 21, 3885–3896 RSC .
C. R. Martinez and B. L. Iverson, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2191–2201 RSC .
S. Alvarez, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 8617 RSC .
T. H. Le, Q.-D. Dao, M.-P. Nghiêm, S. Péralta, R. Guillot, Q. N. Pham, A. Fujii, M. Ozaki, F. Goubard and T.-T. Bui, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 1302–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, Y. Li, R. Wu, R. Zhu, J. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, H. Li, Z.-S. Li, M. Grätzel and P. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 945–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, F. Ma, R. Wang, S. Dou, P. Cui, H. Huang, J. Ji, E. Jia, X. Jia, S. Sajid, A. M. Elseman, L. Chu, Y. Li, B. Jiang, J. Qiao, Y. Yuan and M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707583 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Kang, S. D. Sung, I. T. Choi, H. Kim, M. Hong, J. Kim, W. I. Lee and H. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22213–22217 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishimura, N. Ishida, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya, A. Saeki, L. T. Scott and Y. Murata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15656–15659 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, H. Jo, S. Paek, K. Koh, H. M. Ko, J. K. Lee and J. Ko, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 548–554 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cho, N. J. Jeon, O. K. Kwon, D. W. Kim, E. H. Jung, J. H. Noh, J. Seo, S. I. Seok and S. Y. Park, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 734–741 RSC .
B.-B. Cui, Y. Han, N. Yang, S. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Jia, L. Zhao, Y.-W. Zhong and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41592–41598 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, S. Park, S. H. Im and H. J. Son, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39511–39518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Yao, Q. Zhang, G. Fang, Z.-K. Chen, W. Huang and Z.-X. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Yin, Z. Dong, A. Ali, Z. Song, N. Shrestha, S. S. Bista, Q. Bao, R. J. Ellingson, Y. Yan and W. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13717–13721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Li, S. Sasaki, J. Song, C. Wang, H. Tamiaki, W. Tian, G. Chen, T. Miyasaka and X.-F. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2862–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Gharahcheshmeh, M. M. Tavakoli, E. F. Gleason, M. T. Robinson, J. Kong and K. K. Gleason, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, e0414 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hu, E. Rezaee, M. Li, Q. Chen, Y. Cao, M. Mayukh, D. V. McGrath and Z.-X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36535–36543 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Jung, J. H. Heo, B. M. Oh, J. B. Lee, S.-H. Park, W. Yoon, Y. Song, H. Yun, J. H. Kim, S. H. Im and O.-P. Kwon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1905951 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kuang, G. Tang, T. Jiu, H. Yang, H. Liu, B. Li, W. Luo, X. Li, W. Zhang, F. Lu, J. Fang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2756–2762 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, J. Shi, H. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Lv, Y. Luo, D. Li, Q. Meng and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401943 CrossRef .
G. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Li and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3256–3258 RSC .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. Zeng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xu, A. Zheng, Y. Wei, Y. Yuan, J. Zhang, M. Lei and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3418–3426 RSC .
C. Bi, X. Zheng, B. Chen, H. Wei and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1400–1406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7232–7238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C.-P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Ni, C. H. V. Brackle, H. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3989–3996 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, H. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Ma, S. Dai, S. Yang and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18258–18266 RSC .
X. Ding, M. Cai, X. Liu, Y. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Wu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37720–37725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-x. Xu, F. Li and L. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3131–3138 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, F. Huang, S. Wang, L. Zhou, P. Jin, Y. Xin, Z. Cai, Z. Yin, Q. Pang and J. Z. Zhang, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 649–655 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Z. Qiang, T. Sakamaki, I. Takei, R. Shang and E. Nakamura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22603–22611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, E. T. Vickers, L. Rao, S. A. Lindley, A. C. Allen, B. Luo, X. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5014–5021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781–5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aharon, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1387–1393 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, N. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Li, G. Liu, P. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Lu, W. Sun, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803024 Search PubMed .
J. V. Milić, J.-H. Im, D. J. Kubicki, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, Y. Li, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater, 2019, 9, 1900284 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, L. Tao, H. Li, W. Huang, P. Sun, J. Liu, S. Liu, Q. Sun, Z. Cui, L. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2442–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Klejna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25020–25031 RSC .
L. Zuo, Q. Chen, N. D. Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, H. Chen, P. Sun, S.-Y. Chang, H. Zhao, S. Dong and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 269–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  ABX3 perovskite structure exhibiting (a) BX6 octahedral and (b) AX12 cuboctahedral geometries. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Graphical summary of pairwise vdW energies, EABvdW, between the atom sites A and B in the unit cell of MAPbI3. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Calculated absorption spectra plotted for different orientations of MA+, clearly showing the impact of organic cation rotation. Blue refers to MA+ aligned along the (111) direction, while yellow refers to the (011) direction. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Scheme 1  HB is an attractive interaction between a hydrogen atom from a molecule or a molecular fragment D–H, where D is more electronegative than H, and an atom or a group of atoms, A, is the same or a different molecule. Copyright 2018, Molecular Diversity Preservation International.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Influence of cubic cell volume change on the phase transitions of MAPbI3. (b) Analysis of HBs between I atoms and H atoms within different structures: P4mm with a = b = 6.375 Å and c = 6.253 Å; Pmm with a = b = c = 6.455 Å; and Pnma and I4/mcm with a = 8.98 and c = 12.57 Å (I4/mcm) and 12.30 Å (Pnma). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) An isosurface of MLWF, where yellow and turquoise represent positive and negative values, respectively. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Possible decomposition pathway of hybrid halide perovskites in the presence of water. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) HBs in a hydrated MAPbI3 crystal. The system of N–H⋯I HBs connecting the MA+ cation with the [PbI6]4− framework is shown. The four N atoms correspond to the four orientations of the cation. Three corresponding H atoms are shown for each N position. Six bonds (brown lines) corresponding to cation 2 (N2) are presented with 29.5% probability and six bonds (yellow lines) corresponding to cation 1 (N1) are presented with 16.5% probability for each instance. The O–H interactions (black dotted lines) are presented with a probability of 8.8%. The probabilities of the bonds are defined by the probability of the cation orientations and O occupancy. The dashed black contour indicates the most probable part of the structure, which leads to its decomposition. The dashed black arrow between N1 and N2 indicates the compensation of the leaving part. Copyright 2016, International Union of Crystallography. (c) Optimized geometrical structures of 4MAPbI3·H2O. HBs are noted as red and blue dotted lines. The red lines denote the HBs between the H of H2O and I− (O–H⋯I), while the blue lines refer to HBs between the O of H2O and H of N (N–H⋯O). Light blue, violet, green, blue, red, and white represent Pb, I, C, N, O, and H, respectively. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Illustration of the penetration trace of H2O near the surface of MAPbI3. The red dashed curve and red arrow denote the guidelines for the penetration path and initial orientation of the MA+ cation without the penetrated H2O molecule, respectively. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) IR spectra of 300 nm-thick MAPbI3 on a Si substrate measured in a vacuum (3 mbar) and under ambient conditions (45% RH; 22 °C) (f) IR spectra of 200 nm MAPbI3 on Si in different gas environments. (g) Up: Integrated area of the O–H stretching vibration mode in the range of ∼3360–3600 cm−1 for the same film as a function of RH. For calculating the area, the spectra are corrected with the help of a linear baseline, and the spectrum in a pure nitrogen atmosphere was subtracted from each spectrum. The uncertainty in RH is 5%. Symbol size corresponds to the error bar along the y-axis. Bottom: Peak positions of the N–H stretching vibrations as a function of RH. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (h) IR spectrum shows the appearance and disappearance of O–H stretching upon heating and cooling the material, thereby revealing the role of moisture in the fabrication of the thermochromic perovskite MA4PbI6·2H2O. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Changing process of the perovskite structure from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞), where the RP phase (An+1BnX3n+1, n ≥ 2) exists between them. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. Schematic view of 2D perovskites containing (b) RNH3+ and (c) carboxy groups. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) DFT (PBEsol)-optimized structures for a combination of AVA+via HBs. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of transporting holes and electrons in (pyrene-O-propyl)2PbI4. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (f) View normal to the ab plane of the unit cell structure of α-(N2H5)PbI3 (50% electron density), revealing a Pb2I4 ribbon and the locations of the hydrazinium cations. (g) Pb2I4 ribbon along c. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic mechanism of MAPbI3 conversion on the ZnO and ZnO:PEG layers. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Water-resistant property of the perovskite with β-CD. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 1H NMR spectra of PVA, PVA + SnI2, and PVA + FAI in DMSO-d6 solution. Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of two neighboring grain structures crosslinked by 4-ABPACl HB interactions (O–H⋯I and N–H⋯I) of the iodide from the iodoplumbate complex with phosphonic acid (–PO(OH)2) and ammonium (–NH3+) end groups of the 4-ABPACl species. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic representation of BDBA crosslinking two perovskite crystals via HBs. (c) IR spectra of pristine and BDBA-crosslinked MAPbI3−xClx crystals. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (d) Enlarged (at 8 ppm) 1H NMR spectra of MAI (9.5 mM), MAPbI3 (9.5 mM MAI + 10 mM PbI2) with or without GA (1 mM), as well as GA (1 mM), in DMF-d7 are shown. Asterisks (*) represent the residual solvent peaks of DMF-d7. The ammonium proton peaks were assigned to –NH3+. Copyright 2018, Science-Direct. (e) Device structure of perovskite planar heterojunction solar cells and a schematic illustration for the crosslinking of C60-SAM with a silane coupling agent. ET: electron transfer. (f) Images of the devices based on conventional PC61BM and (g) 10D-CLCS ETLs after exposure to water droplets for 4 min. The scale bars in both the images are 0.5 cm. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustrating the process of 2D/3D heterostructures using the VBABr ligand. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Three proposed PVP passivation configurations of (b) excess Cs ions and (c) undercoordinated Pb ions. (d and e) Charge difference density images of PVP–Cs halide and PVP–Pb halide interfaces, respectively, with an isosurface of 0.00635 e Å−3. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Chemical interactions between the PET substrate and graphene sheet by the APTES interlayer. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transition energy levels of (a) intrinsic acceptors and (b) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c) DN values of the solvents. Higher DN increases the coordination with Pb2+. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the perovskite layers deposited from (d) pure GBL and (e) mixed solvent comprising GBL/DMSO with dripping toluene. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. SEM images of perovskite films from (f) PbI2·DMSO and (g) PbI2·NMP precursors via intramolecular exchange. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Thiophene or pyridine passivation of undercoordinated Pb2+ and (b) simulation cells showing optimized geometries of (left) the Cl-doped MAPbI3(001) surface and the same surface with adsorbed (middle) pyridine and (right) thiophene molecules. Both molecules connected to the undercoordinated Pb atom; however, this coordinate bonding is stronger through the nitrogen atom of pyridine than that through the sulfur atom of thiophene. This difference has a notable influence on the localization of the electron wave function. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Passivation of PC61BM on PbI3− antisites. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of QAHs assembled on perovskite defect sites. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Coordination of the BCF and PTAA HTLs. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  XB is an attractive interaction between an electrophilic region R–X associated with a halogen atom Y in a molecular entity and a nucleophilic region in another, or the same, molecular entity. Copyright 2018, Molecular Diversity Preservation International.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the XB interactions between the IPFB (XB donor) and a generic halogen anion (X− = I−, Br−, Cl−, and XB acceptor) with sp3-hybridized valence electrons. (b) Schematic of the IPFB assembly on the crystal surface. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the XB interactions between C4F8I2/C4H8I2 (XB donor) and iodine anions (XB acceptor) in the MAPbI3 precursor solution. (d) Top-view SEM images of neat TiO2 and various MAPbI3 films after thermal annealing. All the images have the same scale bar (200 nm). (e) Comparison of the J–V characteristics of various MAPbI3 solar cells under 100 mW cm−2 illumination attained in the forward (F) and reverse (R) scan directions. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Upper left: Schematic representation of XB between an XB acceptor (A) and donor (X). Lower left: Structure and optimized geometry (DFT calculations at the B3LYP/def2tzvp level of theory) of TFDIB, with the corresponding top and side views of the electrostatic potential surface, highlighting the σ-hole. Right: Envisaged modes of interactions of TFDIB with a hybrid perovskite; asymmetric surface passivation (top) and symmetric crosslinking (bottom) of the perovskite grains. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Molecular structures of the thienothiophene-based HTMs of TT-2,5-TPA and TT-3,6-TPA, respectively. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Chemical structure of a peri-xanthenoxanthene-centered organic semiconductor and (d) its crystal structure along the a-axis. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Schematic illustration of the cation–π interaction between rubrene and organic cations of perovskite. (f) FTIR spectra of perovskite films with and without a rubrene layer; the rubrene film was in the range of ∼600–4000 cm−1. All these films were fabricated on ITO substrates. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 


1	

	−5.00e	−1.98	—	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.938	18.63	62.65	10.96	
217

2	

	−5.02e	−2.03	—	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.984	18.55	67.2	12.61	
217

3	

	−4.99e	−1.99	—	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.997	18.60	67.2	13.00	
217

4	

	−5.05fg	−3.56g	2.1 × 10−4	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.04	20.7	73	15.7i	
218

−5.04	1.08	21.7	71	16.5j
−4.23h	
	
	
	

5	

	−5.22fg	−3.55g	7.6 × 10−5	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.91	15.9	67	9.7i	
218

−5.12
−4.42h
6	

	−5.35fg	−3.66g	6.3 × 10−6	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.91	17.3	54	8.5i	
218

−5.42
−4.60h
7	

	−5.44fg	−2.46g	2.4 × 10−5	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.70	2.31	28	0.45i	
218

−5.27
−4.61h
8	

	−5.17	−2.06	7.05 × 10−5	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.97	20.3	55	10.9	
219

9	

	−5.08	−2.43	8.94 × 10−5	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.00	21.8	66	14.4	
219

10	

	−5.23	−2.93	1.69 × 10−3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/IDIDF/Au	1.06	23.6	79.2	19.8	
220

11	

	−5.25	−2.10	1.025 × 10−4	ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	0.92	21.86	69.9	12.43	
221

12	

	−5.33	−2.52	5.482 × 10−4	ITO/SnO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.03	22.79	73.7	16.97	
221

13	

	−5.27	−3.86	1.78 × 10−4	FTO/TiO2/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.1	20.7	76.0	17.3	
222

14	

	−4.9	−2.4k	9.53 × 10−5	FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.04	21.78	61.4	13.9	
223

−4.31h
15	

	−5.0	−2.5k	6.46 × 10−4	FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/MAPbI3/HTM/Au	1.05	21.25	70.5	15.7	
223

−4.33h
16	

	−4.82	−2.61	3.48 × 10−5	FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15/PMMA/HTM/Au	1.094	22.66	74.1	18.37	
224

−4.25h	−4.12h
−4.94l	

17	

	−4.82	−2.61	2.16 × 10−4	FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI2.85Br0.15/PMMA/HTM/Au	1.135	22.82	78.7	20.38	
224

−4.25h	−4.12h
−5.04l	

18	

	−5.08m	−3.41	6.49 × 10−3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag	0.83	20.92	65.9	11.44	
225

19	

	−4.71m	−3.10	1.55 × 10−3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/HTM/Ag	0.73	18.30	60.3	8.06	
225

20	

	—	—	—	ITO/oCVD PEDOT/Cs0.15FA0.85PbI3/C60/BCP/Ag	0.96	24.10	78	18.04	
226

21	

	−5.07f	−3.85	1.17 × 10−4	FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(MA0.13FA0.87)0.95Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/HTM/Au	1.06	22.31	71.34	16.87	
227

1.0 × 10−4n
22	

	−5.32f	−4.04	1.16 × 10−5	FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(MA0.13FA0.87)0.95Pb(I0.87Br0.13)3/HTM/Au	0.95	19.92	36.04	6.82	
227

0.0n
23	

	−5.28m	−2.69	3.3 × 10−2o	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.875(MAPbBr3)0.075(CsPbI3)0.05 (PbI2)0.03/HTM/Au	1.125	24.60	76.4	21.1	
233

6.26 × 10−4n
24	

	−5.21m	−2.97	6.1 × 10−3o	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.875(MAPbBr3)0.075(CsPbI3)0.05 (PbI2)0.03/HTM/Au	1.100	24.58	73.2	19.8	
233

1.97 × 10−4n

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of NDI-based enantiomers (RR) and mesomers (RS) with homochiral and heterochiral N-substituted side groups, as well as PDI-based enantiomer and mesomer. Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular graphs elaborating the intermolecular interactions from single crystals. (a–f): PET-OMeDPA. (g–l): T5H-OMeDPA. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the cross-section of a film showing halide-vacancy management in cases of excess halides, where surplus halides are immobilized by complexing with potassium into benign compounds at the GBs and surfaces. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration for enhancing the HB between the halogen and MA+/FA+ ions, as well as strengthening the IB between the halogen and metal ions, by increasing the electronegativity of the halogen. (c) Net atomic charges of I− and Pb2+ ions on the FAPbI3 surface by the incorporation of NaI species (FA-I) or NaF species (FA-F) and without any incorporation (FA). (d) Formation energy of a surface FA vacancy in clean FAPbI3 (FA) surfaces and surfaces incorporated with NaI (FA-I) or NaF (FA-F) species. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the surface passivation of DETAI3, IDs, and octahedral tilting. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of the PPDI-induced phase stabilization of CsPbI3 perovskites and contact angle measurement of CsPbI3 films. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Effects of BDPSO dopants to passivate defects and facilitate charge transfer between grains and at the interface. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the major surface passivation mechanism of the surface defects on MAPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots (PQDs). Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representations of crystal packing with A2FA2Pb3I10 perovskite compositions. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (b) Corresponding 1H NMR spectra showing changes in the resonance signals arising from the H protons of NDI-graphene upon the addition of MAI or FAI solution in deuterated water at 298 K. (c) Representation of the supramolecular weak vdW interaction in MAI- or FAI-containing NDI-graphene. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
