Laser ablation ICP-MS for detection of substrate contamination from plated metal contacts in silicon solar cells  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7JA00358G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7JA00358G
(Paper)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2018, 33, 422-430Laser ablation ICP-MS for detection of substrate contamination from plated metal contacts in silicon solar cells

        
          
            J. 
            Colwell
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Hsiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            W. 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            X. 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Akter
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            A. 
            Lennon
          
        
      a
aSchool of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: jack.colwell@unsw.edu.au
bMark Wainwright Analytical Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      28th October 2017
    , Accepted 1st February 2018First published on 1st February 2018AbstractThe use of laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) is introduced for the analysis of substrate contamination from plated metal contacts on silicon solar cells. Solar cells with plated Ni/Cu/Ag contacts were heat treated at 200 °C for up to 1000 hours and the concentration of plated metals in the silicon wafer was determined with LA-ICP-MS. Ablation efficiency was shown to depend strongly on spot size and scan speed, which greatly affected crater properties and transport efficiency. Wet chemical etching using HNO3 + HF/HCl was demonstrated to sufficiently remove surface metals from plated regions for the purposes of metal contamination analysis of solar cells. The LA-ICP-MS technique was successful in demonstrating the penetration of plated metal from the contacts into the silicon wafer during thermal stress testing, and correlating Cu and Ni concentration with an associated exponential reduction in the open-circuit voltage of silicon solar cells, although the individual contributions of each metal were difficult to separate. The large standard deviations (>±50%) in LA-ICP-MS results were theorised to be the result of non-uniformities in the cell processing as well as in the line-scanning method applied in LA-ICP-MS measurements, the latter being able to be addressed by optimisation of laser ablation parameters for silicon solar cells.
Introduction
Improvements in front contact formation for silicon (Si) solar cells can play a significant role in both increasing cell efficiency and reducing manufacturing costs. Copper (Cu) plating is often regarded as the best alternative to current silver (Ag) screen-printing technologies, with forecasts predicting plating will hold increasing market share (10–15%) over the next 10 years.1,2 However, Cu is known to form detrimental impurities in silicon, and even low concentrations of Cu (<ppmw) can result in significant reductions in minority carrier lifetime and cell efficiency.3–5 As a result, most plating strategies employ an intervening metal layer such as nickel (Ni) to prevent Cu penetration into the cell substrate. This barrier layer is often plated as well, and factors such as surface morphology, plating solution chemistry and metallisation rate can result in variability in the plated Ni properties and barrier effectiveness.6–8 Thus, the potential for Cu contamination from plated contacts has contributed to the lower than expected adoption of plated metallisation in industrial cell manufacturing.9
To determine long-term plating reliability, electrical indicators are often used to identify Cu penetration from the plated metal contact into the underlying silicon substrate during extended thermal treatments on cells at different temperatures (150–300 °C).10–13 It is the main assumption of this methodology that the impurity responsible for the observed degradation is Cu. To date, few studies have attempted to confirm the role of Cu in plated cell degradation with elemental analysis techniques and correlate this to weaknesses in the barrier layer. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) have previously been used by Flynn et al. to identify Cu precipitates of varying size (10–50 nm) that had formed in plated cells after thermal exposure and quenching in ethylene glycol.14 However, these techniques are costly, time-consuming and only provide qualitative information on Cu penetration in plated solar cells.
Inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)15 is extensively used in material sciences for quantitative analysis of a wide range of trace elements with high sensitivity (ppb–ppm) and has been previously applied to the study of several impurities in silicon.16–18 However, sample preparation usually requires dissolution of the subject material in a mix of HF/HNO3 and this not only increases risk of contamination19 but also eliminates the possibility of spatially-resolved analysis of the contacted regions of solar cells. With the addition of laser sampling methods, laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS) significantly reduces sample preparation and contamination, providing direct solid sample analysis of ultra-trace impurities in both organic and inorganic materials with a limit of detection (LOD) in the sub ppm range.20 It also has several advantages over other commonly-used techniques in silicon impurity analysis, such as Glow-Discharge Mass Spectrometry (GD-MS), which has a much lower spatial resolution (1–8 mm compared to 10 μm) and Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS), which is limited to spot analysis and suffers from severe matrix effects.21 As a result, LA-ICP-MS has been used in the analysis of impurities in several photovoltaic applications,22–25 and hence shows significant potential for the analysis of contamination from metal contacts in solar cells.
This study details an investigation into the use of LA-ICP-MS for spatially-resolved analysis of metal contamination from plated contacts on silicon solar cells. The applicability of the technique was assessed based on several different factors, including silicon ablation characteristics and the relationship between thermal stress duration, electrical degradation and associated metal impurity signal intensity. The impact and mitigation of surface contamination interference in LA-ICP-MS analysis is also discussed, along with the quantitative capability of this technique in order to evaluate the potential for spatially-resolved analysis of silicon wafer contamination from plated metals using line-scanning LA-ICP-MS.
Experimental
Solar cell processing sequence
Plated p-type passivated emitter and rear (PERC) solar cells26 were fabricated on 156 mm boron-doped 1–3 Ω cm Czochralski (Cz) silicon wafers with random-pyramid texturing. A phosphorus-doped emitter with a sheet resistivity ∼110–120 Ω/□, surface concentration of ∼2 × 1019 cm−3 and junction depth of ∼0.4 μm was formed using POCl3 diffusion. After rear etching, a 75 nm silicon nitride (SiNx) anti-reflection coating was deposited using direct plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) and an aluminium (Al) PERC structure formed the rear contact.
Small cell contact grids (25 mm × 25 mm cell area) were patterned on the front surface of the cells using a 266 nm ps Lumera Super Rapid Nd:YAG laser with a BBO crystal for the 4th harmonic, with an average laser fluence of 0.44 J cm−2 and 37% pulse overlap being used to form both the fingers and busbars. The ablated finger width was 13 μm and a finger spacing of 1 mm (23 fingers in total) was used to form the metal grids. Busbars 1 mm-wide were ablated with a 9 μm pitch between adjacent laser scans. After removal of the native oxide by immersion of the front surface in 1% (w/v) hydrofluoric acid (HF), front contacts were formed on the exposed Si by plating a stack of Ni (∼1 μm) and Cu (8–10 μm) using bias-assisted light induced plating (LIP) with Barrett SN1 Ni sulphamate (MacDermid Inc.) and Helios EP2 Cu (MacDermid Inc.) plating solutions, respectively. Bias currents of 23 mA cm−2 and 40 mA cm−2 were used for Ni and Cu LIP, respectively. Finally, cells were capped with Ag (∼0.3 μm) using a Ag immersion solution (MacDermid Helios Silver IM 452). Each 156 mm cell precursor contained 25 small cells, and individual sample cells were laser cleaved after plating for edge isolation and characterisation. For this study, cells were not sintered after plating to form a Ni silicide as the purpose of the study was to determine where LA-ICP-MS could effectively detect penetrating metal and whether electrical measurements could be correlated with material measurements.
Cells were exposed to 200 °C in a muffle oven with N2 ambient for between 5 and 1000 hours to simulate long-term operation at elevated temperatures (5 samples per time step). After thermal annealing, cells were quenched in ethylene glycol (cooling rate ∼1000 K s−1) within 1–3 seconds after thermal treatment followed by rinsing in DI water. Electrical characterisation before and after thermal exposure included light and dark I–V measurements using a calibrated in-house constant illumination I–V tester under standard test conditions, and Suns-Voc measurements using a Sinton Instruments Illumination-voltage tester.
LA-ICP-MS sample preparation
Following cell characterisation after thermal treatment, 3 of the 5 test samples were immersed in a 1:1 dilution of 70% (w/v) nitric acid (HNO3) in DI water for 10 min to remove bulk metal from the silicon surface. Due to the exothermic nature of the HNO3 solution, the etch rate was observed to decrease with time (discussed in more detail below). To account for this, the temperature was maintained at 40 °C using a hot plate. Residual surface contamination was subsequently removed using a solution of 5% hydrofluoric acid (HF) and 10% hydrochloric acid (HCl) in DI water for 6 min. Samples were then rinsed in DI water before analysis with LA-ICP-MS.
Equipment and measurement conditions
Laser ablation ICP-MS measurements were conducted using a PerkinElmer Nexion ICP-MS integrated with an ESI-NewWave NWR213 Laser Ablation accessory consisting of a pulsed 213 nm laser. Two separate line scans (4 mm in length) were performed along the busbar region of each sample solar cell, and the transport line was flushed for 30 s between consecutive line scans. A summary of the measurement conditions used in this study (unless stated otherwise) are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Operating parameters for LA-ICP-MS measurements of silicon solar cells after thermal treatment





Laser conditions



Wavelength (nm)
213


Scan mode
Line scan


Laser fluence (J cm−2)
12 ± 2


Scan speed (μm s−1)
5


Scan length – NIST614 (μm)
250


Scan length – sample (μm)
4000


Spot size (μm)
10


Repetition rate (Hz)
20



ICP-MS conditions



He gas flow (L min−1)
0.73


Nebulizer (Ar) gas flow (L min−1)
0.62


RF power (W)
1150


Dwell time (ms)
125



Sample conditions



Elements measured

29Si, 11B, 60Ni, 63Cu, 107Ag, 31P, 27Al




The isotopes selected for analysis as detailed in Table 1 were selected based on their abundance, with the impact of interferences (in particular, 40Ar23Na+ and 63Cu) assumed to be negligible. Since no silicon reference materials were available, silica glass NIST614 (concentration range 0.5–50 ppm) was selected as the non-matrix matching external calibration standard for quantitative analysis, whilst 29Si was used as the internal standard element.27 Individual cells were placed on a glass slide with tape to minimise shifting of the sample during analysis. All ICP-MS data processing, including separation of individual sample scans, conversion of counts per second (CPS) to concentration, and integration with the laser time log, was performed using the Iolite software provided in Igor Pro.28
Results and discussion
Influence of laser conditions
Ablation craters were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) for a range of different scan speeds, spot sizes and laser fluences. Crater depth was observed to increase linearly with laser fluence for all spot sizes examined in this study (10, 20, 50, 80 and 110 μm). This was also mostly the case when varying scan speed whilst maintaining constant laser fluence as can be seen in Fig. 1. However, there is a doubling of crater depth for spot sizes greater than 10 μm when reducing to 5 μm s−1 scan speed. This dramatic increase in ablated silicon at slower scan speeds is related to the interaction between silicon and high power density laser pulses during nanosecond (ns) laser ablation. The ablation of silicon can occur via non-thermal mechanisms such as direct breaking of the atomic lattice, or thermally through heating, melting and vaporisation, which all depend on the properties of the laser.29 During ns laser ablation, the occurrence of a molten region is frequently observed and this region can propagate deep in the material. In the case of high intensity ns laser pulses, the material can be heated above the boiling point, resulting in the generation of a metastable liquid phase that leads to an eruption of liquid and vaporised material during ablation, a process which has been described previously.30 This explosive change in crater depth during ns laser ablation of silicon has been observed by Yoo et al.,31 who similarly demonstrated a significant change in crater properties, termed explosive boiling, when the laser intensity was increased above ∼2.2 × 1010 W cm−2. Despite slight differences in the ablation laser used in this study compared to previous studies (213 nm compared to 266 nm), this process of explosive boiling is most likely the cause of the observed increase in crater depth at slower scan speeds. The apparent reduction in crater depth for spot sizes above 80 μm at 5 μm s−1 scan speed is most likely due to a reduction in the energy density across the wider crater, resulting in less explosive boiling and thus a shallower crater depth compared to smaller spot sizes.
 Fig. 1  Crater depth as a function of scan speed for different laser spot sizes and constant laser fluence. 
Another key observation made during the optimisation of the laser ablation process for the study of metal contamination in silicon solar cells was the variation in transport efficiency with different laser parameters. Fig. 2 shows an optical microscope image taken of the silicon sample which had several line scans performed using different spot sizes and scan speeds at a constant laser fluence of 12 ± 2 J cm−2. A significant amount of ablated material can be seen to accumulate on the surface after LA-ICP-MS measurements, with the total ablated mass remaining on the surface increasing significantly with increasing spot size. The transport of material from the ablated cell to the ICP-MS setup (known as transport efficiency) depends largely on the ablated particle size distribution.32 The particle size distribution is subsequently dependent on both the laser ablation process as well as the transport gas mixture. It has been demonstrated previously that use of helium (He) as a transport gas results in a larger distribution of smaller particles compared to when argon (Ar) is used, resulting in improved sensitivity of the ICP-MS due to reduced elemental fractionation effects.33 It was suggested that the reduced laser-induced plasma along with the higher heat conductivity of a He environment in the ablation cell helps prevent the condensation and agglomeration of ablated particles which cannot be effectively transported to the ICP-MS instrument. This agglomeration of ablated material, coupled with the explosive boiling effects discussed earlier, most likely explains the significant build-up of re-solidified silicon on the wafer surface with increasing spot size. In future studies involving silicon ablation, this can be improved with the use of picosecond (ps) and femtosecond (fs) lasers, which can reduce thermal effects and improve transport efficiency of ablated material.34,35 Thus, an optimum spot size of 10 μm was selected for the analysis of the plated solar cells in this study due to the limitations of the equipment available.
 Fig. 2  Optical microscope image (5× magnification), showing increasing agglomerated silicon build-up on wafer surface with increasing spot size (spot size increasing from bottom to top of image). 
The SEM cross-sectional images in Fig. 3 show the crater dimensions for a series of different scan speeds with a spot size of 10 μm and a laser fluence of 12 ± 2 J cm−2, which were the laser parameters selected for the quantitative measurements in this study. All the craters show a clear lip along the edges of the line scan due to re-solidification of silicon during laser ablation.35 The crater depth varies from ∼25 μm to ∼5 μm with increasing scan speed, whilst the height of the re-solidified silicon region follows a similar trend. Although not examined in detail, it is expected that fluctuations of the laser during line-scanning is reflected by non-uniformities in the ablation along the length of the line scan. This is somewhat visible in the 5 μm s−1 SEM image in Fig. 3, and may also be reflected in the quantitative LA-ICP-MS results reported below. Since substrate contamination of silicon solar cells was the focus of this study, 5 μm s−1 was selected as the scan speed for all quantitative LA-ICP-MS measurements.
 Fig. 3  SEM cross-sections of LA-ICP-MS line scans at different scan speeds with a 10 μm spot size. 
Optimisation of surface preparation for LA-ICP-MS
Since the region of most interest in this study is the exposed silicon directly underneath the contacts, an appropriate method of removing the plated metal from the silicon surface had to be performed in order to eliminate surface contamination from interfering with LA-ICP-MS measurements of the silicon substrate. This has previously been done using a pre-ablation step to remove a surface layer before measurement,22 however the high likelihood of metal contamination within 1–2 μm of the silicon surface necessitated an alternative method of sample surface preparation. Consequently, a chemical solution was chosen based on etching and cleaning of the silicon surface.
Nitric acid (HNO3) is an effective reagent for etching various metals, including Ni, Cu and Ag,36,37 and was able to effectively remove the bulk of the metal contact after 10 min immersion. However, cooling of the 1:1 dilution in DI water significantly impacted the etch rate when processing multiple samples. Fig. 4(a) shows an example EDS map taken on the busbar/finger region of a sample cell after 10 min immersion in HNO3 at room temperature. It is clear from the EDS map that a significant amount of residual surface Ni remains after etching, and this is reflected in the associated LA-ICP-MS measurement results presented in Table 2. Although the LA-ICP-MS Cu signal is low, the EDS map inset in Fig. 4(a) suggests that some residual Cu also remains on the surface. By maintaining the temperature of the HNO3 solution at 40 °C to achieve a constant etch rate, this signal was reduced significantly.
 Fig. 4  EDS maps of Ni and Si signal from the busbar region of a plated solar cell, (a) after room temperature HNO3 etch, and (b) after HNO3 etch at 40 °C followed by HF/HCl clean. The insets show the Cu signal from the same region. 
Table 2 Comparison of measured metal concentrations with LA-ICP-MS averaged along a 4 mm line scan for different surface preparation methods, including a control measurement with full plated contacts




Sample
Ni (ppm)
Cu (ppm)
Ag (ppm)




Cell with contacts
17098 ± 16110
28948 ± 26222
347 ± 433


HNO3 etch only (RT)
7725 ± 1700
0.54 ± 0.02
2.26 ± 0.09


HNO3 (40 °C) + HF/HCl
76 ± 48
0.85 ± 0.09
4.28 ± 0.33




The addition of a second metal cleaning step involving HF/HCl was able to more effectively remove all metals from the sample surface, including metal oxides that had formed during the initial HNO3 etch.37 The effectiveness of this second cleaning step was assumed to be due to the ability of the Cl ion to chelate free metal ions and prevent them from galvanically plating back to the silicon surface.38 The subsequent EDS maps recorded on samples undergoing the full cleaning procedure (see Fig. 4(b)) showed no significant Ni or Cu signal, and this was also determined with LA-ICP-MS as seen in Table 2 above.
Despite the aforementioned risk of contamination when using solution-based sample preparation methods,19 the results in this study indicate that a suitable level of surface preparation for LA-ICP-MS analysis of plated solar cells can be achieved using solution-based methods involving acidic etchants.
Quantitative analysis of contamination in plated solar cells
Quantitative LA-ICP-MS results for metal contamination detected after thermal stress testing of plated solar cells examined in this study are summarised in Fig. 5. Due to the variability in concentration along the line scan (discussed in more detail later in this paper), the median concentration of Ni and Cu along the line scan was examined and is presented in Fig. 5(a and b) respectively, averaged across all the line scans performed on cells in that time step (6 measurements in total). Since the Ag signal was within the background noise for this LA-ICP-MS setup, it was not included in this paper. It is apparent that Ni and Cu follow a similar trend in terms of concentration determined by LA-ICP-MS, both showing an overall increase in measured concentration with thermal treatment duration and local peaks observed both at 200 and 750 hours, except the peaks are more distinct for Cu than Ni. The effectiveness of the pre-cleaning process in eliminating surface contamination was evident by the fact that no Ni or Cu was detected in the control cells (no thermal treatment).
 Fig. 5  (a) Plot of median Ni concentration as a function of thermal treatment duration, and (b) plot of median Cu concentration as a function of thermal treatment duration. The values presented here are the average median values across all line scans for each time step, and their associated standard deviations. 
The increase in detected Ni after ∼50 hours of thermal stress at 200 °C may be due to the formation of Ni silicide during thermal stress testing. Typically Ni/Cu/Ag-plated silicon solar cells are sintered at 350 °C after plating to induce silicidation of the Ni layer which acts to improve contact adhesion and resistivity.39,40 Several different silicide phases exist at different annealing temperatures,41 and while NiSi is the silicide phase often desired in solar cell manufacturing due to its lower resistivity,42 Ni2Si is known to form at approximately 200 °C. Since the cells processed in this study did not undergo sintering prior to thermal treatment at 200 °C, it was suspected that Ni2Si is responsible for the high Ni signal observed. This was confirmed by Raman spectroscopy which showed peaks corresponding to Ni2Si as seen in Fig. 6. No peaks associated with Cu were observed, indicating that Cu was not present at the Si surface. This also explains the relatively high Ni concentration (max. 610 ± 261 ppm) compared to Cu (max. 302 ± 164 ppm) measured in this study.
 Fig. 6  Raman spectrum recorded at busbar region of a non-sintered plated cell after 750 hours of thermal treatment at 200 °C. 
Not only do the Ni and Cu concentrations measured with LA-ICP-MS follow the same trend in relation to thermal stress duration, but on closer examination of individual line scans, it can be seen that Ni and Cu concentration follow similar trends along each line scan as can be seen in Fig. 7. This may indicate that Ni and Cu migrate along the same diffusion pathways during thermal treatment, and this is potentially related to the surface morphology of the exposed silicon regions. It has been observed in previous studies that laser ablation patterning for solar cells can induce local crystal defects in the silicon which provide diffusion pathways for deep silicide formation.43,44 Copper is also known to preferentially diffuse along defect pathways and has been shown to diffuse through both Ni as well as Ag during thermal treatments.45–47 Thus, it is likely that both Ni and Cu penetrate the silicon through the same diffusion pathways, although future studies will be required to confirm this behaviour.
 Fig. 7  Example LA-ICP-MS line scan result for a sample cell after 750 hours of thermal treatment at 200 °C. The black curve denotes the ratio of Ni to Cu along the scan, demonstrating minimal deviation from unity (red line). 
Large standard deviations exist in these measurements as seen in Fig. 5 (sometimes greater than 100%). The deviations may be due to non-uniformities that can influence both the penetration of metal into the silicon as well as the LA-ICP-MS measurements themselves. As mentioned previously, non-uniformities in the laser-patterning (to create openings in the dielectric for metal plating) can result in a localised distribution of crystal defects and diffusion pathways, resulting in localised increased migration of metals into the silicon substrate during thermal treatment. Nickel barrier thickness can vary significantly with plating current density and factors such as local variations in emitter resistivity can result in significant differences in plating rate and subsequent Ni thickness.8,9 Not only this, but variations in the Ni barrier layer properties (grain structure, impurities, etc.) can also impact Cu diffusion into the silicon wafer.48 Thus, these non-uniformities can result in large standard deviations both within and between cells undergoing the same thermal treatment. In terms of quantitative capabilities, the lack of any existing matrix-matched silicon standards limits the quantitative strength of LA-ICP-MS for silicon sample analysis. In-house silicon standards with known impurity concentrations can help improve the quantitative accuracy of LA-ICP-MS,22 although this was not investigated in this study. However, the values obtained in this study are comparable to previous quantitative analyses of impurities in silicon using LA-ICP-MS,22,23 and thus this work demonstrates the usefulness of the technique in understanding and analysing metal penetration from plated contacts on silicon solar cells.
To determine whether metal contamination within the silicon correlated with electrical solar cell performance degradation, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and pseudo fill-factor (pFF) of cells were also measured before LA-ICP-MS measurements. While Voc is a strong indicator of substrate contamination,49 pFF has previously been used in the analysis of plated solar cells as a measure of metal penetration close to the solar cell junction.10Fig. 8 shows the correlation between Voc and pFF measurements with detected Ni and Cu concentration. In terms of pFF, no clear linear correlation was evident between both Ni or Cu concentration and pFF reduction as seen in Fig. 8(a and c). This is not unexpected, since previous studies examining pFF during thermal stress testing of Cu-plated solar cells have shown that pFF will remain stable until a threshold state following which Cu defects (in the form of precipitates) increase in concentration at the junction sufficiently to begin to impact the pFF. Once this threshold is reached then a more rapid decline in pFF tends to follow.10–13 Although this study resulted in too few samples with very high Ni and/or very high Cu concentration to be conclusive about the trend of pFF with more extensive metal contamination, the results suggested that pFF was more sensitive to high Cu concentrations than Ni concentrations. The variability of the data for samples with high metal concentrations both along individual line scans and between different samples, as visible from the large error bars in Fig. 8, suggests that Ni and Cu penetration and indeed the impact of that penetration may be very sensitive to how the metal stacks are plated, although the risk of non-uniform laser ablation of Si during LA-ICP-MS may also impact the observed variability. For example, small differences in laser ablation process parameters or plating parameters may result in significantly different metal penetration effects. From an examination of Voc, it can be seen there is an approximate linear decrease in Voc with increasing Ni concentration (see Fig. 8(b)), whilst there is almost an exponential decrease in Voc with increasing Cu concentration (see Fig. 8(d)). This observation is consistent with the theory that metal, which has penetrated into the silicon, has increased the recombination in the solar cell. It is possible that the ethylene glycol quenching results in the Cu concentration in the silicon increasing above its threshold for precipitation in the p-type base where it is more likely to impact the Voc than the pFF. Copper precipitation in the silicon of the cell was only observed by Flynn et al. after heat treatment if cells were quenched in ethylene glycol.14 They hypothesised that the absence of precipitates when cells were allowed to cool slowly was due to Cu out-diffusing to the solar cell surface where it did not impact the cell's electrical performance. Future LA-ICP-MS studies which compare rapid cooling with ambient cooling of plated solar cells after thermal treatment may be able to confirm this hypothesis. In this particular case, it is difficult to separate the effects of Cu and Ni on Voc. However, the relative concentrations of Cu and Ni as a function of thermal treatment duration suggest that Cu has a stronger effect on cell degradation than Ni.
 Fig. 8  Relative reductions in (a) pFF and (b) Voc as a function of median Ni concentration, and (c and d) as a function of median Cu concentration. The errors bars on the x-axis represent the interquartile range (IQR) of the dataset obtained in each line scan. 
Conclusions
The capabilities of LA-ICP-MS for spatially-resolved analysis of metal penetration from plated contacts on silicon solar cells were assessed in this study. The influence of laser conditions on the ablation efficiency of silicon showed that high intensity laser pulses can result in a doubling of crater depth with reduced scan speed due to explosive boiling which can result in significant losses of ablated material during transport from the ablation substrate to the ICP-MS instrument and a build-up of re-solidified silicon on the wafer surface. Larger spot sizes also decreased transport efficiency with the LA-ICP-MS setup used in this study. Use of ps or fs lasers rather than the ns laser used in this study could increase transport efficiency and reduce thermal effects during laser ablation of silicon.
Since the region underneath the contacts was of most interest for this LA-ICP-MS analysis, the surface had to be adequately cleaned to remove surface metals without removing any silicon material, since metal impurities were expected within the first 1–2 μm of silicon. A combination of HNO3 and HF/HCl etching was shown to adequately clean the exposed silicon surface of plated metal providing that the temperature of the HNO3 etch was maintained at 40 °C.
Quantitative LA-ICP-MS measurements of plated solar cells exposed to thermal treatments at 200 °C for up to 1000 hours showed an increase in both Ni and Cu concentration with increasing thermal treatment duration. Whilst the Ni signal was most likely indicative of silicide formation during thermal processing, the increased Cu signal represents penetration of plated metal into the silicon wafer. The similar trends in Ni and Cu concentration along line scans suggest that both metals may follow the same diffusion pathways when migrating into the silicon substrate. Large standard deviations both along individual line scans as well as between different cells undergoing the same duration of thermal treatment are theorised to be the result of variability in the plating quality as well as ablation efficiency along the line scan. Correlating measured Cu and Ni concentration to electrical degradation showed an exponential decay in Voc with increasing Cu concentration and a more linear decrease with Ni concentration, whilst no clear trend was observed for pFF for either metal.
This study has demonstrated that LA-ICP-MS can be applied to the analysis of metal contamination during thermal treatment of Ni/Cu/Ag plated solar cells. It is also possible to extend the technique to the analysis of metal layer uniformity directly after plating, providing more information on the uniformity of plated barrier metals. With further refinement of the analytical method, improved standardisation and optimisation of the laser properties and ablation conditions, the technique can prove a powerful tool for the improved understanding of metal diffusion paths at metal–semiconductor interfaces and deconstructing potential failure mechanisms in silicon semiconducting devices, such as silicon solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Australian Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) and Trina Solar through ARENA grant 2014/RND003. The Australian Government, through ARENA, is supporting Australian research and development in solar photovoltaic and solar thermal technologies to help solar power become cost competitive with other energy sources. The views expressed herein are not necessarily the views of the Australian Government, and the Australian Government does not accept responsibility for any information or advice contained herein. Laser ablation was performed with the assistance of the OptoFab node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF). The authors also acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance of the Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre at the University of New South Wales. Jack Colwell acknowledges receipt of an Australian Postgraduate Research Award, from the Australian Government.
References
G. Schubert, G. Beaucarne, L. Tous and J. Hoornstra, Energy Procedia, 2016, 98, 12–22 CrossRef .

          ITRPV, International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaics, ITRPV,  2017, pp. 1–37 Search PubMed .
A. A. Istratov, H. Hedemann, M. Seibt, O. F. Vyvenko, W. Schröter, T. Heiser, C. Flink, H. Hieslmair and E. R. Weber, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3889–3898 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sachdeva, A. A. Istratov and E. R. Weber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2937–2939 CrossRef CAS .
G. Coletti, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 1163–1170 CAS .
M. R. Pinnel and J. E. Bennett, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 1976, 7, 629–635 CrossRef .
E. J. O'Sullivan, A. G. Schrott, M. Paunovic, C. J. Sambucetti, J. R. Marino, P. J. Bailey, S. Kaja and K. W. Semkow, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1998, 42, 607–620 CrossRef .
A. Sugianto, O. Breitenstein, B. S. Tjahjono, A. Lennon, L. Mai and S. R. Wenham, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 452–462 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lennon, S. Flynn, T. Young, N. Nampalli, M. Edwards, R. Evans, Y. Yao, P. Hsiao, X. Wang and V. Allen, in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Conference, Australian Solar Energy Society,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. Bartsch, A. Mondon, K. Bayer, C. Schetter, M. Hörteis and S. W. Glunz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, H942 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Mondon, J. Bartsch, B.-J. Godejohann, M. Hörteis and S. W. Glunz, Advanced Front Side Metallization for Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells Based on a Nickel-Silicon Contact,  2010 Search PubMed .

          R. Labie, J. L. Hernandez, J. Govaerts, C. Allebe, L. Tous, A. U. De Castro, R. Russel, I. Gordon and K. Baert, 26th Eur. Photovolt. Sol. Energy Conf. Exhib.,  2011, pp. 1195–1198 Search PubMed .
A. Kraft, C. Wolf, J. Bartsch, M. Glatthaar and S. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 136, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Flynn and A. Lennon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Montaser, Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, J. Wiley,  1998 Search PubMed .
A. Krushevska, S. Tan, M. Passer and X. R. Liu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1211–1216 RSC .

          K. Ong, Determination of Impurities in Silica Wafers with the NexION 300S ICP-MS, Singapore,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Balski, H. Kipphardt, A. Berger, S. Meyer and U. Panne, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 77–85 RSC .
J. S. Becker, R. S. Soman, T. Becker, V. K. Panday and H. J. Dietze, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1998, 13, 983–987 RSC .
J. S. Becker, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57, 1805–1820 CrossRef .
J. S. Becker and H. J. Dietze, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228, 127–150 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luigi Buldini, A. Mevoli and J. Lal Sharma, Talanta, 1998, 47, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pisonero, I. Kroslakova, D. Günther and C. Latkoczy, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386, 12–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee and H. B. Lim, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26, 1534 RSC .
S. Chakraborty, M. L. Manalo, J. M. Ali, A. G. Aberle and J. B. Li, Energy Procedia, 2017, 124, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hollocher and J. Ruiz, Geostand. Newsl., 1995, 19, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
C. Paton, J. Hellstrom, B. Paul, J. Woodhead and J. Hergt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26, 2508 RSC .
R. E. Russo, X. Mao, J. J. Gonzalez, V. Zorba and J. Yoo, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 6162–6177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Martyniuk, Tech. Phys., 1974, 44, 1262–1270 Search PubMed .
J. H. Yoo, S. H. Jeong, R. Greif and R. E. Russo, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 1638–1649 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guillong and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17, 831–837 RSC .
I. Horn and D. Günther, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 207, 144–157 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Chichkov, C. Momma, S. Nolte, F. von Alvensleben and A. Tünnermann, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1996, 63, 109–115 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, X. L. Mao, R. Greif and R. E. Russo, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Rawdon and M. G. Lorentz, Sci. Pap. Bur. Stand., 2007, 16, 641–668 CrossRef .
H. S. Rawdon and M. G. Lorentz, Sci. Pap. Bur. Stand., 2007, 17, 636–676 Search PubMed .
K. R. Williams, K. Gupta and M. Wasilik, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2003, 12, 761–778 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lennon, Y. Yao and S. Wenham, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 1454–1468 CrossRef .
A. Mondon, M. N. Jawaid, J. Bartsch, M. Glatthaar and S. W. Glunz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 209–213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tinani, A. Mueller, Y. Gao, E. A. Irene, Y. Z. Hu and S. P. Tay, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.--Process., Meas., Phenom., 2001, 19, 376 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Kale, E. Beese, T. Saenz, E. Warren, W. Nemeth, D. Young, K. Florent, S. K. Kurinec, S. Agarwal, P. Stradins, W. Lafayette and N. Renewable, in Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC),  2016, pp. 2913–2916 Search PubMed .
A. Büchler, S. Kluska, M. Kasemann, M. Breitwieser, W. Kwapil, A. Hähnel, H. Blumtritt, S. Hopman and M. Glatthaar, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 385–389 CrossRef .
S. Kluska, C. Fleischmann, A. Büchler, W. Hördt, C. Geisler, S. Hopman and M. Glatthaar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 323–331 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Pinnel and J. E. Bennett, Metall. Trans. A, 1976, 7, 629–635 CrossRef .
H. G. Tompkins and M. R. Pinnel, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 3804–3812 CrossRef CAS .
J. Colwell, P. Hsiao, X. Shen, W. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Lim and A. Lennon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nicolet, Thin Solid Films, 1978, 52, 415–443 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Aberle, P. P. Altermatt, G. Heiser, S. J. Robinson, A. Wang, J. Zhao, U. Krumbein and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 3491–3504 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Currently with Microsystem and Terahertz Research Center, Chengdu, China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Laser conditions

Wavelength (nm)	213
Scan mode	Line scan
Laser fluence (J cm−2)	12 ± 2
Scan speed (μm s−1)	5
Scan length – NIST614 (μm)	250
Scan length – sample (μm)	4000
Spot size (μm)	10
Repetition rate (Hz)	20

ICP-MS conditions

He gas flow (L min−1)	0.73
Nebulizer (Ar) gas flow (L min−1)	0.62
RF power (W)	1150
Dwell time (ms)	125

Sample conditions

Elements measured	
29Si, 11B, 60Ni, 63Cu, 107Ag, 31P, 27Al

 	Fig. 1  Crater depth as a function of scan speed for different laser spot sizes and constant laser fluence.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical microscope image (5× magnification), showing increasing agglomerated silicon build-up on wafer surface with increasing spot size (spot size increasing from bottom to top of image).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM cross-sections of LA-ICP-MS line scans at different scan speeds with a 10 μm spot size.	 

 	Fig. 4  EDS maps of Ni and Si signal from the busbar region of a plated solar cell, (a) after room temperature HNO3 etch, and (b) after HNO3 etch at 40 °C followed by HF/HCl clean. The insets show the Cu signal from the same region.	 

Cell with contacts	17098 ± 16110	28948 ± 26222	347 ± 433
HNO3 etch only (RT)	7725 ± 1700	0.54 ± 0.02	2.26 ± 0.09
HNO3 (40 °C) + HF/HCl	76 ± 48	0.85 ± 0.09	4.28 ± 0.33

 	Fig. 5  (a) Plot of median Ni concentration as a function of thermal treatment duration, and (b) plot of median Cu concentration as a function of thermal treatment duration. The values presented here are the average median values across all line scans for each time step, and their associated standard deviations.	 

 	Fig. 6  Raman spectrum recorded at busbar region of a non-sintered plated cell after 750 hours of thermal treatment at 200 °C.	 

 	Fig. 7  Example LA-ICP-MS line scan result for a sample cell after 750 hours of thermal treatment at 200 °C. The black curve denotes the ratio of Ni to Cu along the scan, demonstrating minimal deviation from unity (red line).	 

 	Fig. 8  Relative reductions in (a) pFF and (b) Voc as a function of median Ni concentration, and (c and d) as a function of median Cu concentration. The errors bars on the x-axis represent the interquartile range (IQR) of the dataset obtained in each line scan.	 
Footnote
† Currently with Microsystem and Terahertz Research Center, Chengdu, China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
