Lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions for novel electronic devices  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS01092A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS01092A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4000-4022Lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions for novel electronic devices

        
          
            Simian 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaonan 
            Deng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yifei 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuqi 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengxian 
            Ke
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shishu 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruitao 
            Lv
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengcao 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Qihua 
            Xiong
          
          
        
      *bcd and 

        
          
            Chen 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Fine Processing, Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. E-mail: zcli@tsinghua.edu.cn; chenwang0101@tsinghua.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chips, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
cFrontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing, 100084, China
dBeijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing, 100193, China. E-mail: qihua_xiong@tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      10th January 2022
    First published on 28th April 2022AbstractLayered semiconductors, represented by transition metal dichalcogenides, have attached extensive attention due to their unique and tunable electrical and optical properties. In particular, lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions, including homojunctions, heterojunctions, hybrid junctions and superlattices, present a totally new degree of freedom in research on electronic devices beyond traditional materials and their structures, providing unique opportunities for the development of new structures and operation principle-based high performance devices. However, the advances in this field are limited by the precise synthesis of high-quality junctions and greatly hampered by ambiguous device performance limits. Herein, we review the recent key breakthroughs in the design, synthesis, electronic structure and property modulation of lateral semiconductor multijunctions and focus on their application-specific devices. Specifically, the synthesis methods based on different principles, such as chemical and external source-induced methods, are introduced stepwise for the controllable fabrication of semiconductor multijunctions as the basics of device application. Subsequently, their structure and property modulation are discussed, including control of their electronic structure, exciton dynamics and optical properties before the fabrication of lateral layered semiconductor multijunction devices. Precise property control will potentially result in outstanding device performances, including high-quality diodes and FETs, scalable logic and analog circuits, highly efficient optoelectronic devices, and unique electrochemical devices. Lastly, we focus on several of the most essential but unresolved debates in this field, such as the true advantages of few-layer vs. monolayer multijunctions, how sharp the interface should be for specific functional devices, and the superiority of lateral multijunctions over vertical multijunctions, highlighting the next-phase strategy to enhance the performance potential of lateral multijunction devices.
Simian Zhang
Simian Zhang received his BS Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China in 2021. Currently, he is a PhD researcher at Tsinghua University. His research interests include next-generation electronic devices, semiconductor process development, 3D MEMS, and nanoelectronics.
Xiaonan Deng
Xiaonan Deng received her BS Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China in 2021. She is currently a PhD researcher at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests focus on the controllable synthesis of novel semiconductors and multifunctional applications of heterostructures devices.
Ruitao Lv
Ruitao Lv is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He received his PhD Degree in 2009 from Tsinghua University. He was a Visiting Scholar in Kyushu University (Japan) and a Postdoctoral Researcher at Pennsylvania State University (USA). He joined Tsinghua University as a faculty member since 2013. His research interests include the defect engineering of two-dimensional materials for clean energy storage/conversion, electrocatalysis, molecular sensing, etc.
Zhengcao Li
Zhengcao Li is currently a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He obtained his Bachelor's Degree in 1999 and Doctoral Degree in 2003 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Before joined Tsinghua University in 2006, he joined the Department of Quantum Engineering and Systems Science, the University of Tokyo as an Assistant Professor in 2003. Currently, he is the Vice Chairman and an Expert Committee Member of the Nuclear Energy Professional Committee of China Energy Research Society, the Deputy Secretary-General and Standing Director of the Youth Working Committee of the Chinese Society for Materials Research, etc.
Qihua Xiong
Qihua Xiong is currently a Professor of Physics at Tsinghua University and Fellow of the American Physical Society and Optical Society of America. He received his PhD from Penn State University in 2006, and then conducted postdoctoral research at Harvard University. From 2009–2020, he worked at Nanyang Technological University. His group is specializes in optical spectroscopy investigations of light-matter interactions in low-dimensional quantum matter. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for Nano Letters and international advisory board and editorial board for many prestigious journals, such as ACS Photonics, Nano Research, Science China Materials, and eSciences.
Chen Wang
Chen Wang is a Principle Investigator at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He received his PhD Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from University of California Los Angeles, USA. Before joined Tsinghua University, he led a few research projects in Lam Research CA, Intel Corp CA, USA for next-generation semiconductor process and chip development. His current research focus is developing emerging chip materials, novel semiconductor devices, next-generation highly-integrated functional nanosystems and smart chips.
Introduction
The past decade has witnessed tremendous progress in layered semiconducting materials. Since the first report on obtaining monolayer graphene by mechanical exfoliation in 2004,1 researchers have been devoted to the synthesis methods,2,3 novel physical properties4–6 and device applications7,8 of monolayer, bilayer and few-layer graphene. However, the zero-bandgap characteristic1 of graphene makes its use in semiconductor devices intrinsically difficult despite its considerable mobility. Alternatively, layered semiconductors, represented by transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), can potentially maintain a suitable bandgap with relatively high mobility, offering a totally new material platform for novel electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Layered TMDs, especially group VI transition metal dichalcogenides formed as MX2, where M is Mo and W and X is typically S and Se, exhibit a bandgap comparable to that of silicon (for example, 1.55 eV for monolayer MoSe2)9 and a relatively high carrier mobility (∼102 cm2 V−1 s−1 for monolayer WSe2).10 Furthermore, the transition from an indirect bandgap in bulk11 and few-layer12 TMDs to a direct bandgap in monolayer12 TMDs offer new opportunities for fundamental13–15 and technological16,17 research beyond silicon optoelectronics. Besides, the electronic structures and properties of monolayer TMDs can be further tuned and designed via surface doping,18 alloying,19–21 strain,22–24 external fields,25 and forming Janus TMDs,26–29 making them desirable for functional and customized device applications. Specifically, the construction of heterostructures can be a very effective and novel route to modulate the electronic structure and corresponding device physics. Among them, the synthesis of vertical TMD heterostructures, which interact via van der Waals (vdW) force, has been demonstrated, such as by mechanical exfoliation and restacking.30–32 Without the requirement of component lattice matching, any layered semiconductor can be mixed or assembled into vertical heterostructures, powering a wide range of application scenarios. However, the unavoidable interlayer pollution caused by the transfer process and the challenging synthesis of large-scale high-order vertical heterostructures greatly restrict their application in research labs. In contrast, lateral multijunctions, a multi-concept including lateral heterojunctions consisting of two or more types of different layered materials, lateral homojunctions consisting of one chemical composition with different doping concentrations, their lateral superlattices and any of their combinations, arising from the unique intrinsic geometry of layered materials, can mostly avoid these drawbacks via their direct large-scale in-plane lateral epitaxial growth.33,34 Additionally, lateral multijunctions can realize performance regulation at the single atomic layer limit, beyond the reach of traditional semiconductor heterostructures.
Here, lateral multijunctions can be classified by a few criteria, such as homojunction and heterojunction by composition, and single-junction, hybrid junction and superlattice by structure. The typical morphologies and characteristics of different types of multijunctions are summarized in Fig. 1. Fig. 1A shows heterojunctions consisting of two or more components but horizontally spliced together. The simplest junction is the A–B lateral type (Fig. 1AI).33,35,36 A more complex A–B–A junction epitaxies the third component of A outside the second B component37 (Fig. 1AII), and further, the lateral superlattice can be formed by an A–B–A–B–A–B… periodic structure34,37 (Fig. 1AIII). The hybrid junction is a mixed lateral multijunction, which is laterally spliced by more than two types of materials, exhibiting an A–B–C–D… structure34 (Fig. 1AIV). Another track is the so-called alloyed junction, which is composed of TMD alloys with a tunable composition ratio across its structure. This type of alloyed junction can be further categorized into abrupt and gradual junction, as its name implies, with either a sharp or gradual interface (Fig. 1AV and VI).
 Fig. 1  Different types of lateral multijunction. Schematic diagrams of (A) (I) A–B lateral junction; (II) A–B–A lateral junction; (III) superlattice; (IV) hybrid junction; (V) abrupt alloyed junction and (VI) gradual alloyed junction. (B) Selected-area surface-induced junction. (C) Area field-modulated junction. (D) Substrate-modulated junction. (E) Hetero-phase junction. (F) Layer number-modulated junction. (G) Janus junction. (H) Partial intercalated junction. 
Beyond heterojunctions consisting of different components, homojunctions with the same chemical composition are also of great research interest. Horizontal differences in their electronic structure can be achieved by selective-area surface doping with external species, thus forming a partial doping-induced junction38–42 (Fig. 1B). Similarly, given that the band diagram of TMDs shifts in response to external stimulation, a field-modulated junction can be formed by applying different external fields in separate regions (Fig. 1C). The external field includes an electric field,25,43 force field,44 magnetic field, and even light field,45 providing a general solution for the development of field-modulated lateral homojunctions. A special case to fabricate field-modulated junctions is substrate-modulated bandgap renormalization, using substrates with different dielectric constants under one TMD monolayer46 or Fermi-level mismatch between the bottom semiconductors (Fig. 1D).
Besides, another research focus is phase separation-based lateral junctions or hetero-phase lateral junctions, given that most TMDs possess few metallic or semiconducting phases. The most classic one is 2H/1T hetero-phase lateral junctions, which are often used in electrical devices to achieve Ohmic contacts, where the 1T metallic phase is treated as the contact region with the 2H semiconductor phase47 (Fig. 1E). Furthermore, considering the electronic structure evolution between monolayer and multilayer TMDs, it is feasible to design a type of lateral junction constructed by monolayer and multilayer TMDs (Fig. 1F). Similarly, considering the electronic structure difference between vertical heterojunctions with different stacking orders,48 a novel lateral homojunction can be spliced of two vertical heterojunctions with the same component but different stacking orders. Besides the aforementioned types, lateral layered semiconductor Janus junctions and lateral partial intercalated junctions have emerged as two new representatives of lateral multijunctions. Recently, Janus TMDs, a special type of TMDs with two layers of non-metallic atoms as different chalcogenide atoms, have attracted interest from researchers. H2 striping and thermal selenization have been used to synthesize MoSSe,26 and sulfurization of MoSe2 has been proved to yield the same product.27 A step further, it has been proven that it is possible to obtain MoSH via H2 plasma treatment.28 In the case of multijunctions, vertical Janus WSSe/MoSSe heterostructures49 and lateral MoS2/MoSSe/MoSe2 junctions29 have been achieved. A step further, the new structure of lateral Janus junctions can be constructed by synthesizing two Janus crystal regions with an opposite atomic layer configuration, where one layer of S (Se) atoms is replaced by Se (S) atoms to form an MSSe structure (Fig. 1G). A pioneering structure is the partially intercalated lateral hybrid junction consisting of a pristine multi-layer region and a molecular intercalated superlattice region, showing clear type-I diode characteristics50 (Fig. 1H).
It should be emphasized that super lateral multijunctions with multi-mode-tuned junction can be designed by combing any two or more of the aforementioned basic modes of lateral junctions, such as double-tuned lateral junctions with selected-area surface doping and selected-area field modulation or triple-tuned Janus lateral junctions with hetero-phases and separately gated by an external electrical field. These super lateral multijunctions will greatly expand the research frontier to new device physics and novel optoelectronics applications, offering unique opportunities for next-generation novel devices.
Thus, in this review, firstly, we summarize the methods for the synthesis of lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions, which are classified into two categories, i.e., chemical synthesis and external source-induced synthesis. Additionally, the electronic structure and exotic modulation of lateral multijunctions will be discussed in the second part. Combining the novel structure with unique property modulation can result in special device physics and technological applications. We will highlight a couple of applications of lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions, including high-quality diodes and FETs, scalable logic and analog circuits, highly efficient optoelectronic devices, and unique electrochemical devices. Finally, we focus on several of the most essential but unresolved debates in this field, such as the true advantages of few-layer vs. monolayer multijunctions, how sharp the interface should be for a given functional device, and the superiority of lateral multijunctions over vertical multijunctions, highlighting the next-phase strategy to enhance the performance potential of lateral multijunction devices.
Synthesis of highly designable lateral multijunctions
Considering the in-plane bonding of lateral heterojunctions with an atomically one-dimensional interface, the traditional mechanical exfoliation and restacking methods are no longer applicable. Accordingly, employing direct synthesis using chemical methods, such as one-step or multi-step chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods and liquid-phase synthesis methods, lateral heterojunctions with a tunable interface width, stress and alloying can be acquired with designable components or structures. In the case of traditional homojunctions, most fabrication processes are based on one piece of layered semiconductor flake, constructing lateral multijunctions via external stimulation and modulation methods, such as surface doping, external field modulation, and intercalation, or CVD homoepitaxial synthesis. In this section, we examine the representative works on the controllable synthesis of lateral multijunctions starting from 2014, when our group and two other groups reported the first results of lateral heterojunctions, and provide an overview of the key distinguished synthetic strategies, structure characteristics, unique advantages, and further challenges.
Chemical methods for the synthesis of designable multijunctions

Chemical vapor deposition synthesis of highly controllable multijunctions. 
The CVD method is a widely used method for the synthesis of layered materials such as graphene,2,51,52 black phosphorus,53 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)54 and TMDs.55–59 At present, the wafer-level large-scale TMD synthesis of typical n- and p-type semiconductors has been reported,60–63 which lays the foundation for the growth of high-quality heterostructures. For example, wafer-scale n-type MoS260 and WS261 have been synthesized on sapphire via atomic steps on its surface, and large-scale p-type MoSe2 has been grown from inkjet-printed aqueous precursors directly on an SiO2/Si surface.62 Naturally, this universal and powerful method was first adopted for the synthesis of lateral heterostructures.33,64,65 In the CVD process, after the growth of the first grain, the second grain epitaxially grows to form a lateral heterojunction. As summarized in Table 1, differentiated by the process flow, the CVD methods for the synthesis of lateral multijunctions can be grouped into two categories, i.e., direct sequential epitaxial growth and patterned epitaxial growth, which include patterning of the first material before the shape-controlled epitaxy of the second material, resulting in the formation of a structure more designable than that by direct sequential epitaxial growth.
Table 1 Summary of CVD routes for various representative lateral multijunctions




Direct sequential epitaxial growth


Component
Synthesis method
Precursors
Temperature
Atmosphere
Highlights
Application
Ref.




WS2/WSe2
Thermal CVD
WS2 and WSe2 powders
1057 °C for WS2; 1190 °C for WSe2
Atmospheric pressure; 70 sccm Ar
—
Photodiode; CMOS inverter

33



WS2/MoS2
Thermal CVD
S, W and MoO3 powders; Te is mixed with W
650 °C
Atmospheric pressure; 100 sccm Ar
Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure
FETs

65



MoSe2/WSe2
LPCVD
MoSe2 and WSe2 powders
950 °C
10−3 torr, 400 sccm H2
Synthesis in one heating process
FETs

64



WS2/MoS2
Hydroxide-assisted CVD
Ammonium molybdate, sodium tungstate and KOH solution; S powder
700 °C for MoS2; 780 °C for WS2
Ar for MoS2; Ar/5% H2 for WS2
Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure
FETs

36



MoS2/WSe2
Thermal CVD
WO3, MoO3, NaI, S and Se powders
—
60 sccm H2/Ar (10% H2)
Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure
FETs

66



WS2/MoS2
LPCVD
MoO3, WO3 and S powders
710 °C for MoS2; 1050 °C for WS2
350 mTorr, 60 sccm Ar, 5 sccm H2
Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure
FETs

68



1H-MoS2/1T′-MoTe2
Promoter-assisted CVD
Ammonium heptamolybdate, sulfur and tellurium powders
700 °C
1000 sccm N2 for MoS2; 25 sccm H2/400 sccm N2 for WS2
—
FETs with low contact resistance

72



1L/2L WSe2
Promoter-assisted CVD
Sodium cholate, NaCl and ammonium metatungstate solution; selenium powder
900 °C
350 sccm of N2 and 15 sccm H2
Controllable layer number
FETs, diodes

77



WS2/WS2(1−x)Se2x
Thermal CVD
WS2 and mixed WS2/WSe2 powders
1050 °C for WS2, 1000 °C for alloy
60 sccm Ar
Controllable Se mole fraction x
—

78



WS2/WSe2/WS2/WSe2 superlattice
Thermal CVD
WS2 and WSe2 powders
1150 °C for WS2
50 sccm Ar for WS2
Atomically sharp interface
—

34



WSe2/MoSe2/WSe2/MoSe2 superlattice and WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure
Thermal CVD
WSe2 and MoSe2 powders
1060 °C for precursor, 700–810 °C for substrate
N2 + H2O for MoSe2; Ar + H2 for WSe2
—
FETs, photodiodes

37







Patterned epitaxial growth


Component
Etching method
Epitaxy method
Precursor
Temperature and Atmosphere
Highlights
Applications






Graphene/h-BN
lithography and RIE on h-BN
CVD
CH4
950 °C
—
FETs; split closed-loop resonators

79



WSe2/WS2
FIB on WS2
CVD
WO3 and Se
925 °C, 90 sccm Ar and 5 sccm H2
Mask-free etching
FETs

80



MoSe2/MoS2
EBL
Selective sulfurization of MoSe2
Sulfur plume
700 °C, 400 sulfur pulses
Non-etching process
FETs

81



MoSe2/MoS2
Direct laser writing oxidation
Thermal selenization of MoOx
Selenium powder
700 °C, 2 sccm H2/18 sccm Ar
—
FETs

82





Due to its simplicity and flexibility, direct sequential epitaxial growth was first used to grow lateral heterostructures. In 2014, Duan, Wang and Shaw et al. reported an in situ source-switched CVD strategy to grow lateral MoS2/MoSe2 and WS2/WSe2 heterostructures (Fig. 2A).33 With a pair of magnets providing the force to pull and push boats containing the WS2 and WSe2 solid precursors, the sources could be moved back and forth along the quartz tube to control the synthesis order. Raman and PL mapping images showed a clear boundary between WSe2 and WS2, indicating the formation of a lateral heterostructure (Fig. 2B and C). Around the same time, Ajayan's group adapted another single-step method to synthesize WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.65 W, MoO3 and S powder served as precursors, and additional Te powder was used to promote the vaporization of W powder (Fig. 2D and E). This work made use of the differences in the nucleation and growth rates between two TMDs, which were also used to grow lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures with MoSe2 and WSe2 powders, in which MoSe2 evaporated and nucleated much quicker initially, and then changed to WSe2.64 By controlling the growth temperature at ∼650 °C, Ajayan et al. achieved the selective synthesis of a lateral heterostructure.
 Fig. 2  Direct CVD synthesis methods of highly controllable heterostructure. (A) Schematic diagram of the process for the synthesis of an A–B lateral junction.33 (B and C) Raman and PL maps of the lateral WS2/WSe2 heterostructure.33 (D) Schematic of the WS2/MoS2 synthetic process.65 (E) Optical image of a lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure.65 (F) Hydroxide-assisted synthetic process.36 (G and H) Optical image of lateral and vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.36 (I and J) Optical image and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy of lateral 1H-MoS2/1T′-MoTe2 heterostructure.72 (K) Optical image of CoSe/WSe2 heterostructure.76 (L) Schematic of the 1L/nL synthetic process.77 (M) Optical image of a 1L/2L WSe2 heterostructure.77 (N) Illustration of alloyed WS2/WS2(1−x)Se2x junction synthesis.78 (O) PL spectra of the alloy region with different component ratios.78 (P) Schematic diagram of flow-direction-changed CVD process.34 (Q) Raman map of WS2/WSe2/WS2/WSe2 superlattice.34 (R) Schematic diagram of H2O-assisted CVD method.37 (S) Optical image of the WSe2/MoSe2/WSe2/MoSe2 superlattice.37 
This selectiveness in in-plane growth can be realized not only via the intrinsic mechanism but also by external control during the synthetic process. Zhu et al. demonstrated a novel growth strategy of temperature-modulated transition assisted by hydroxide.36 This method adopted a mixed solution of ammonium molybdate, sodium tungstate and potassium hydroxide as the Mo and W precursors. KOH was used to provide extra hydroxide. During the synthesis, OH− attached to the surface of the first-synthesized MoS2, leading to MoS2/OH bilayers. Lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructures were acquired at the relatively low temperature of ∼780 °C to prevent the desorption of OH− (Fig. 2F–H). This synthetic strategy introduces hydroxide as the inhibitor of vertical growth, allowing the temperature-modulated growth switching method to have wider applicability for different TMDs. Similarly, another method controlled by the ratio between metal and chalcogen precursors was reported by Li et al., where a lower W/Se ratio led to the formation of lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures.66 A very recent work verified by Wang and co-workers demonstrated a CVD process for the fabrication of multilayer WS2/WSe2 lateral heterostructures based on a similar principle of regulating the metal/chalcogen ratio in the precursors.67 The effect of H2 gas on the growth mode was discovered by Yoo et al. With the assistance of H2, researchers obtained monolayer MoS2 with ultraclean surface, acting as the seed for the in-plane growth of WS2, finally leading to a lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure.68
Another driving force in the development of lateral junctions is high-performance electronic and optoelectronic device applications, where the contact resistance can be reduced by using a metallic 1T or 1T′ phase to bridge the metal electrodes and semiconductor. This type of hetero-phase lateral structure is usually realized via external induction,47,69–71 which will be discussed later. Obviously, the metallic phase can also be directly epitaxial-synthesized via the CVD method. Naylor et al. demonstrated a promoter-assisted CVD method to fabricate the monolayer hetero-phase 1H-MoS2/1T′-MoTe2 heterostructure.72 Ammonium heptamolybdate, sulfur and tellurium powders were used as the Mo, S and Te sources, respectively. The Si/SiO2 substrate was first spin-coated with sodium cholate as the growth promoter73–75 before the synthesis. The 1T′ region showed a needle-like morphology (Fig. 2I), ensuring the lowest system energy. The tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy result showed the successful formation of a lateral heterostructure (Fig. 2J). Besides 1T′-MoTe2, other metallic TMDs such as CoSe76 have been epitaxially grown beyond a TMD monolayer core (Fig. 2K).
As shown above, the CVD method is a general method for the direct synthesis of TMDs, which can be employed to fabricate layer-number modulated homojunctions. Making use of the growth promoters sodium cholate and sodium chloride, Mandyam and co-workers achieved the fabrication of lateral layer-number modulated homojunctions (Fig. 2L).77 Organic aromatic molecules were applied to lower the nucleation energy and promote the growth of monolayer flakes, while the volatilization stimulated by NaCl was beneficial for the formation of a multilayer structure. This method was successfully employed to synthesize a 1L/2L WSe2 homojunction composed of a middle 2L region and edge 1L region (Fig. 2M).
In addition to the direct synthesis of heterostructures with different components, the CVD process can also accomplish the proportion-adjustable growth of alloyed heterostructures.19 Zheng and co-workers developed a gas-flow tunable CVD method for the controllable synthesis of WS2/WS2(1−x)Se2x with variable x.78 WS2 and mixed WS2/WSe2 powders were placed at different sides of the furnace to act as sources. The growth stage was changed by switching the direction of the gas flow (Fig. 2N). Different mixing ratios between WS2 and WSe2 generated various proportionality values (x), which were proven by PL spectroscopy (Fig. 2O).
Besides the relatively simple A–B lateral heterostructures, the CVD method can also be expanded to more complex heterostructures such as hybrid heterostructures and superlattices. Duan's group demonstrated a general strategy for the growth of TMD hybrid heterostructures and superlattices using a home-built CVD system with switchable gas direction.34 The forward gas flow was beneficial for synthesis at the growth temperature, while the reverse flow protected the products from thermal degradation caused by the temperature swing with a change in temperature (Fig. 2P). The Raman map showed a clear boundary at the interfaces of each region in the WS2/WSe2/WS2/WSe2 superlattice (Fig. 2Q). The synthesis of the TMD superlattice can also be achieved by switching the composition of the carrier gas. Using MoSe2 and WSe2 powders as precursors, Sahoo et al. proved that using N2 + H2O as the carrier gas would promote the growth of MoSe2, while using Ar + H2 as the carrier gas would turn the growth condition to WSe2,37 and consequently the WSe2/MoSe2/WSe2/MoSe2 superlattice was acquired using this method (Fig. 2R and S).
Beyond direct CVD synthesis, shape-controlled lateral heterostructure growth has flourished due to its more highly designable structure, which is beneficial for the subsequent device design and performance regulation. Patterned growth was first applied to the growth of lateral graphene/hBN heterostructures for the fabrication of a monolayer-integrated circuit. In 2012, Levendorf and co-workers exhibited an approach for the patterned growth of hBN on pre-grown graphene.83 The patterning process was achieved by photolithography and O2-reactive ion etching. This method has been proven to be feasible for fabricating graphene transistor arrays. Liu et al. demonstrated another method with a similar result by patterning monolayer hBN, and then filling with graphene.79 Photolithography and Ar-reactive ion etching were used to realize patterning (Fig. 3A). This method could be used to form complex structures such as ring (Fig. 3B), comb and bar patterns, which were further used as split closed-loop resonators.
 Fig. 3  Highly designable lateral multijunction by patterned growth methods and liquid-phase synthesis methods. (A) Schematic diagram of a patterned CVD process by reactive-ion etching.79 (B) SEM image of a ring pattern formed by graphene/h-BN heterostructure.79 (C and D) AFM image and Raman mapping of the WSe2/WS2 lateral heterostructure synthesized by focused ion beam patterned CVD process.80 (E) Schematic of the sulfuration process to fabricate a lateral heterostructure.81 (F) Raman map of MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure. Inset is the optical image.81 (G) Illustrative diagram of mask-patterned sulfuration process to synthesize abrupt alloyed heterostructure.84 (H–J) Illustration of laser-patterned selenization synthesis method.82 (K and L) Cross-sectional HR-STEM image and low-magnification STEM-EDX element map of ALD MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.88 (M and N) STEM images of liquid-phase-synthesized 2H-/1T-Mo1−xWxS2 heterostructure.90 (O) EDX mapping of SnS2/Sn0.5Mo0.5S2 lateral heterostructure.91 (P) Schematic diagram of self-assembly process of MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.92 (Q) STEM image of self-assembled MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.92 
In principle, this strategy of pattern etching before selective epitaxial growth is also applicable to TMD lateral heterostructures. Li and co-workers grew WSe2 on a WS2 monolayer to form a lateral heterostructure.80 The triangular WS2 flakes were first directly etched by focused ion beam, followed by a CVD process to grow WSe2 both at the etched region and along the edge of the WS2 flakes (Fig. 3C and D). The mask-free direct etching process avoided possible contamination caused by the resist, mask or conductive coating. A shorter etching time resulted in the formation of WSxSey alloys, while a longer time led to partial filling. Low voltages and currents resulted in the formation of unclear boundaries. Thus, precise control of the synthetic conditions is essential for obtaining high-quality lateral multijunctions with tunable clean interfaces.
One more step beyond etching growth, considering the stability differences between sulfides and selenides, Samani et al. explored a new method to selectively replace Se within the patterned regions of MoSe2 flakes with S.81 The patterns were well-defined by e-beam lithography (EBL), with the other regions protected by PMMA. Then, the replacement was performed in a vacuum atmosphere, where the sulfur powder was laser-vaporized to sulfur plume (Fig. 3E). The green arrays in the Raman map represent MoS2 (403 cm−1) and the red arrays represent MoSe2 (238 cm−1) (Fig. 3F). This novel method can also be used to fabricate sharp alloy junctions, which was proven by Taghinejad and co-workers.84 The original MoSe2 flake protected by SiO2 mask was annealed under an S atmosphere to realize the element replacement. By controlling the degree of sulfurization, the ratio “x” in the alloy MoS2xSe2(1−x) could be modulated. An abrupt alloyed heterostructure could be synthesized simply by selectively sulfurizing MoS2xSe2(1−x) to MoS2ySe2(1−y) (Fig. 3G).
Laser is another simple but powerful tool for patterning. A recent work reported by Wang and co-workers developed a new mechanism for selective growth based on laser-induced oxidation.82 Monolayer MoS2 flakes were initially synthesized via the CVD method, and then processed by laser to form an oxidation region on their surface, which was further selenized in an Ar/H2 atmosphere (Fig. 3H–J). MoOx is more easily selenized compared to original MoS2, which is attributed to the lower selenization temperature.
As reported, atomic layer deposition (ALD) has been applied to prepare TMD flakes.85–87 A recent study proved that it can also be integrated into the process of growing lateral heterostructures. Sharma et al. synthesized MoOx or WOxvia the ALD method with (NtBu)2(NMe2)2Mo or (NtBu)2(NMe2)2W as the metal precursor. The oxide was then thermally sulfurized to form MoS2 films. Two EBL and patterned ALD growth resulted in an MoOx/WOx heterostructure, which was sulfurized to a lateral MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. Cross-sectional The HR-STEM image (Fig. 3K) and low-magnification STEM-EDX element map (Fig. 3L) showed the successful synthesis of this heterostructure.88


Liquid-phase massive synthesis of lateral multijunctions. 
Although vapor-phase synthesis represented by CVD has become the mainstream method for the bottom-up synthesis of highly controllable lateral multijunctions, liquid-phase synthesis methods have been studied because of their unique advantages such as the ability to allow the mass production of large-scale products via a simple process under mild conditions.89 For example, the synthesis of a hetero-phase TMD alloy is hard to achieve via one CVD or ALD step because the high growth temperature is beneficial for the formation of a 2H phase. However, employing a single-step hydrothermal reaction, Yang et al. successfully synthesized an MoxW1−xS2 alloy with a hybrid 1T/2H phase.90 The Cs-corrected STEM images reveled the crystal structure as a stitching of 2H and 1T regions (Fig. 3M and N). Recently, Wang and co-workers achieved the hydrothermal epitaxial synthesis of Sn0.5Mo0.5S on the edges of SnS2 nanoplates to form SnS2/Sn0.5Mo0.5S lateral heterostructures (Fig. 3O) and SnS2@Sn0.5Mo0.5S core@shell heterostructures when introducing polyvinylpyrrolidone.91 Furthermore, self-assembly has been identified as a fast way to synthesize lateral heterostructures, for example, Yun et al. used exfoliated MoS2 and WS2 flakes to achieve self-assembly synthesis.92 The flakes were separated in water and self-assembled at the surface of the water after adding ethyl acetate (EA). Convection caused by the evaporation of EA delivered nanoflakes to the air-water surface, where the flakes assembled laterally into a monolayer driven by the Marangoni effect (Fig. 3P). The STEM image showed the formation of a lateral MoS2/WS2 heterostructure (Fig. 3Q).

Induced synthesis for extraordinary lateral multijunctions
In addition to the spatial composition difference-defined lateral multijunctions, for given layered semiconductor flakes, an external field, phase transition or surface chemical species can be the difference producer to obtained extraordinary lateral multijunctions. To some extent, this type of electronic structure tunability by induced synthesis may be more suitable for diode and transistor devices, requiring a flexible doping level for modulation of the device characteristics. Thus, in this section, induced synthesis will be discussed in three parts.

Phase transition-based synthesis. 
As discussed before, hetero-phase 2H/1T heterostructures have been used in low contact resistance devices. To fabricate this type of hetero-phase lateral junction, external inductions are widely adopted. For example, Li+ ion intercalation is an extensively used approach for exfoliating TMD monolayers in the liquid phase.93,94 The charge transfer from Li+ to MoS2 induced a structural change from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2.95 Eda et al. reported the 2H/1T hetero-phase structure of Li-exfoliated monolayer MoS2,13 and further studied the phase transition process during intercalation.69 Using high-resolution STEM, direct observation of the different phases including the inhomogeneity of the structure and additional distorted 1T region was achieved, as shown in Fig. 4A. One step further, Lin et al. revealed the atomic mechanism of the phase transition from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2.70 The MoS2 specimen doped with 0.6% Re began the phase transition after being scanned by the electron beam and monitored by in situ STEM. The whole process involved the Mo atoms aligning as zigzag chains (Fig. 4B), Mo and S atoms gliding to shape the core 1T phase and driving the β-boundary to migrate (Fig. 4C), where the γ-boundary consisted of two MoS2 zigzag chains formed at the boundary between the 2H phase and 1T phase as the γ-boundary migrated to enlarge the 2H region (Fig. 4D).
 Fig. 4  Induced synthesis methods. (A) Schematic diagram (top) and STEM images (bottom) of 2H (left), 1T (middle) and 1T′ (right) phases of MoS2.69 (B–D) Schematic diagram of phase transition process from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2.70 (E and F) Schematic diagram and Raman maps of FET with 2H-MoTe2 channel and 1T′-MoTe2 contact region.96 (G) Arrhenius plots of the conductance of hetero-phase and intrinsic FETs.96 (H) Optical image (top) and schematic diagram (bottom) of an electric field-modulated p–n junction.25 (I) I–V plot of the electric field-modulated p–n junction.25 (J) Schematic of NO2-doped WSe2 FET.38 (K) IDS–VGS plot of NO2-doped WSe2 FET.38 (L) Schematic diagram of an intercalated lateral BP/MPMS heterostructure.50 (M) Ids–Vds plot of the BP/MPMS partial intercalated diode.50 
Besides, the phase transition can also be induced by other stimulations such as laser. Cho et al. demonstrated a novel method using a laser to form a lateral hetero-phase 2H-/1T′-MoTe2 junction.96 DFT calculation and subsequent studies attributed the phase transition to the Te vacancies induced by laser irradiation. A schematic diagram and Raman map of the FET based on the hetero-phase lateral junction are shown in Fig. 4E and F, respectively. The Ohmic contact between the 1T′-MoS2 and electrodes with a much lower energy barrier was beneficial to the performance of the device (Fig. 4G). In recent years, methods that cause phase transition have received continuous attention from researchers. Organolithium,47 CO271,97 and plasma98 have been shown to cause a phase transition in layered TMDs, which will inspire further study on phase transition-induced lateral multijunctions.


Doping-induced synthesis. 
External doping is a mature technology in the traditional semiconductor industry to adjust the carrier type and its concentration. Beyond external doping, the surface doping of TMD can introduce charge transfer from surface-adsorbed molecules due to its atomically thin thickness. Similar to traditional semiconductor devices, electric field modulation via a gate voltage offers an opportunity to control the in-plane carrier concentration of partial monolayer TMD to form a lateral p–n junction.
In reality, Baugher and co-workers demonstrated an electric field-modulated heterostructure using two separate gates under a monolayer of WSe2 with an HfO2 dielectric layer (Fig. 4H) to achieve electrostatic control.25 Four states, i.e., NN, PP, NP and PN, could be achieved by adjusting the voltage applied to two gates, proving that electrostatic doping can play a role in polarity modulation in partial-gated lateral junctions (Fig. 4I). The charge transfer in the vertical heterojunction of different layered materials can cause different doping levels and even change the polarity of the constituent materials. Recently, Xu et al. used InSe as a substrate for carrier transfer in WSe2/InSe to form an n-doped WSe2 region, which together with the connected primitive WSe2 formed a substrate-modulated homojunction with a maximum rectification ratio of up to 1.5 × 103.99
Another effective way to surface dope monolayer TMD is by charge transfer. The dopant can be gas molecules,38 organic molecules41 and atoms.39,42 Fang et al. used NO2 molecules as a dopant to achieve the fabrication of p-doped WSe2 FETs.38 Due to its strong oxidizing capability, NO2 can attract electrons and form a high hole concentration in WSe2. Using this method to selectively dope the region near Pd/Au electrodes on the WSe2 channel of an FET (Fig. 4J), the on/off ratio, on current and especially sub-threshold swing improved significantly (Fig. 4K).


Intercalation-modulated synthesis. 
Considering that the interlayer decoupling of some types of layered semiconductors from multilayer to monolayer leads to a change in bandgap and even a transformation from indirect bandgap to direct bandgap, in principle, the partial decoupling of a multilayer will form a lateral homojunction. In 2018, Wang et al. achieved the pioneering demonstration of a partial intercalated lateral junction via the intercalation of black phosphorus (BP) with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to form a monolayer phosphorene molecular superlattice (MPMS) (Fig. 4L).50 The CTAB molecules, which isolated and decoupled the adjacent monolayer BP, resulted in a significant increase in the bandgap in the intercalation region (inset in Fig. 4M). The Ids–Vds plot showed obvious rectifying characteristics, indicating the formation of a partial intercalated lateral homojunction (Fig. 4M).

Lateral structure-driven property modulation
As the strategies to construct lateral multijunctions become more diverse and highly designable, as discussed in Section 2, exploring the rich physics and unique materials science and property modulation by more complex lateral multijunctions have become a new research hotspot. Especially, in unique lateral heterostructures, the stress, composition, and layer number correlation with electronic structure modulation are the most interesting and meaningful directions.
Controllable electronic structure modulation
The electrical and optoelectrical properties of heterostructures are closely related to their electronic structures. Therefore, it is crucial for researchers to find the most appropriate method to effectively modulate the electronic structure of these materials. Generally, strain has been proven to be a useful tool for electronic structure modulation. In lateral heterostructures, lattice mismatch leads to in-plane strain, providing the possibility of band regulation. Kang et al. used first-principles calculation to identify the influence of in-plane strain in lateral MoS2/WS2 heterostructures on the band alignment and charge localization.100 The results showed that when the WS2 area was strained, the CBM of WS2 became lower and a transition from type-II to type-I band alignment occurred (Fig. 5A). Subsequently, the influence of in-plane strain was directly investigated by Zhang and co-workers via scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS).101 WSe2/MoS2 on a graphene substrate showed severe lattice mismatch and dislocations at the interface. The tensile strain εaa and εbb were measured from the Moiré pattern (Fig. 5B). The dI/dV map measured by STS exhibited a strong variation along the direction perpendicular to the interface in the valence band of MoS2, with the bandgap decreasing by ∼0.5 eV per 1% εaa strain (Fig. 5C).
 Fig. 5  Electronic structure modulation in a lateral multijunction. (A) Band alignment for different strains applied on WS2 in MoS2/WS2 heterostructures.100 (B) Calculated εaa and εbb of MoS2 in WSe2/MoS2 heterostructure on a graphene substrate. The black dots, triangular markers and curves represent the measurement results, average values of results and fitness of triangular markers, respectively.101 (C) Band profile map measured by STS.101 (D) Plot of WS2/WSe2 superlattices numbered from I to V with different ρ.102 (E) PL spectra of intrinsic WS2 and WS2 in superlattices I to V. Inset is the PL spectra of WS2 and WSe2 region in superlattice showing the peak shift.102 (F) False-color SEM images of superlattices I to V.102 (G) PL maps of three MoS2xSe2(1−x)/MoS2ySe2(1−y) alloyed structures with different x and y.84 (H) Schematic illustration of band alignments of the MoS2xSe2(1−x)/MoS2ySe2(1−y) alloyed structures with different x and y.84 (I) PL spectra of monolayer MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2. Insets are PL mappings of MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2 flakes at 1.85 eV, 1.72 eV, and 1.60 eV, respectively.29 (J) Band structures of MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2 obtained by DFT calculation.29 (K) Schematic illustration of band alignments of 1L/nL WS2 homojunctions with different n.104 
Around the same time, Xie et al. invented another method to modulate the electronic structure by regulating the period of superlattices.102 The interface of WS2 and WSe2 had a lattice mismatch of approximately 4%, and thus a smaller ρ = dWS2/dWSe2 (dWS2 and dWSe2 represent the supercell dimensions of WS2 and WSe2, respectively) would result in an increment in the tensile strain in WS2 and reduction in compressive strain in WSe2. Five superlattices with different dWS2 and dWSe2 were fabricated and studied (Fig. 5D and F, where the numbers in Fig. 5D represent the ρ values). The PL spectrum of WS2 showed a red-shift with an increment in ρ, indicating a decrease in the optical bandgap (Fig. 5E). Beyond these two methods, tuning the element composition of lateral multijunctions is another well-established way to regulate their electronic structure. Taghinejad et al. synthesized abrupt alloyed structure MoS2xSe2(1−x)/MoS2ySe2(1−y) and proved the modulation function on the bandgap by changing the values of x and y (x < y).84 The PL maps (Fig. 5G) and calculation results (Fig. 5H) showed a controllable change in the optical bandgap of the lateral alloy junction. Janus TMDs formed by the replacement of a single chalcogenide atom layer can be treated as a special alloy structure, and thus can also tune the energy bandgap. For example, the optical bandgap of MoS2 and MoSe2 is 1.85 eV and 1.60 eV, respectively. However, the mixed MoSSe Janus structure showed a median value of 1.72 eV. DFT calculation of the band structure of these three gave a similar result (Fig. 5I and J),29 providing the unlimited possibility of Janus-based lateral multijunctions. In addition, a recent work showed that the connecting angle between two components may influence the electronic structure of lateral heterostructures. Dai's group revealed this result by performing calculations on a graphene/hBN lateral heterostructure. The results showed that with a change in the connecting angle from 0° to 180°, the bandgap suffered a cyclic variation from less than 0.05 eV to larger than 0.4 eV, almost from metal to semiconductor.103
In layer number-modulated junctions, the layer number becomes a new dimension for property modulation. Xia et al. investigated the relationship between layer number of a 1L/nL TMD homojunction and its electronic properties using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) method.104 The results showed that all the 1L/nL MX2 homojunctions presented type-I band alignment and the conduction band offset and valence band offset were both enlarged with an increase in the value of n, which would obviously further modulate their optoelectrical properties (Fig. 5K).
Exciton dynamics and optical property modulation
Together with electronic structure modulation, lateral multijunctions are also a great platform to study the modulation of exciton transport properties and optical properties. Lau and co-workers calculated the interface exciton states of MoSe2/WSe2 lateral heterojunctions.105 Owing to the typical type-II alignment, the electrons and holes will be spatially separated to form one-dimensional interface excitons. The variation in the binding energy, Eb, and effective radius, ab, of the excitons at the interface with band offset, Vo, is shown in Fig. 6A and B, respectively, where the curves with different colors represent different on-site electrostatic energies (U). With an increase in the band offset, the binding energy and optical dipole ratio became lower, while the effective radius became larger, clearly revealing that adjusting the band offset would control the properties of the interface excitons.
 Fig. 6  Exciton dynamics and optical property modulation in lateral multijunctions. (A and B) Binding energy, Eb, and exciton radius, ab, versus the band offset, Vo, for different on-site electrostatic energies, U, respectively.105 (C) Laser-PEEM images (top) and schematic diagram (bottom) of four measured regions: 1T′-MoTe2 (T), 2H-MoTe2 (H), 1T′ region near the interface (JT) and 2H region near the interface (JH).106 (D and E) PEI versus time delay for the T, H, JT, and JH regions. Inset in figure E: plot within ∼2 ps.106 (F) Relation curve between Sc (top) and Sc’ (bottom) and the location on MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.108 (G) Optical image of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure with atomically sharp surface. The locations of laser excitation in WS2 (red star), out-coupling site at SiO2 nanosphere (orange dot) and a groove on Ag plate (blue stie) are labelled.109 (H) PL spectra taken at the SiO2 nanosphere and groove on Ag plate.109 (I) Photocurrent versus time under solar stimulated illumination without bias for WS2 before and after 1×, 2× and 3× laser treatments.110 (J) Voltage decay rate of WS2 before and after 1×, 2× and 3× laser treatments.110 
Lateral heterostructures are also special systems to study exciton transportation. Hu et al. used time-resolved photoemission electron microscopy (TR-PEEM) to study the transfer of photogenerated carriers in a lateral 1T′-/2H-MoTe2 heterostructure.106 Four typical regions were detected including 1T′-MoTe2 (T), 2H-MoTe2 (H), 1T′ region near the interface (JT) and 2H region near the interface (JH) (Fig. 6C). The photoexcited electrons transfer from 1T′-MoTe2 to 2H-MoTe2 because the electrons in 1T′-MoTe2 possess a higher energy than that in the 2H-MoTe2. After light stimulation, the JH region has a longer accumulation time of photoemission intensity (PEI) compared to the JT region, owing to the charge or energy transfer from the JT region to the JH region and additional electron-depleting channels in the JT region. The relaxation time of the JH region also indicates the charge or energy transfer. The relaxation lifetime at the JH region is longer than that of the pristine H region, also indicating the charge or energy transfer process (Fig. 6D and E). This type of charge transfer at the interface of a hetero-phase junction was observed in a hetero-phase lateral superlattice consisting of 1T/2H-WS2 by Yang et al. PL mapping of the superlattice showed a much stronger signal in the 2H regions than that in the 1T regions, which resulted from the photo-electron concentration in the potential wells in the 2H regions.107
Even in lateral homojunctions, the behavior of excitons can be different from that of pristine TMDs. The photoconductivity in lateral MoS2/WS2 heterostructures was analysed by Berweger et al. via near-field scanning microwave microscopy (SMM), where observation of the high photoconductive regions would become brighter.108 When irradiation was complete, the photoconductivity of the specimen showed a slow decay. The observation conducted at the interface region showed that the photoconductivity of both the multilayer WS2 and MoS2 regions was n-type. Especially, the photoconductivity decayed away from the interface (Fig. 6F).
Shi and co-workers reported the long exciton transfer distance via the assistance of surface plasmon polaritons (SPP).109 A lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure was first transferred to a single-crystalline Ag substrate covered with an Al2O3 layer. The laser-produced excitons in WS2 rapidly excited the SPPs in Ag, which transferred to the MoS2 region and out-coupled to stimulate the generation of excitons. In the heterostructure with an atomically sharp interface, after laser irradiation, the out-coupling sites at the adjacent MoS2 region and even at the neighbouring WS2 region captured the significant signal (Fig. 6G and H), demonstrating minimal energy loss and effective long-distance exciton transfer.
The formation of lateral heterojunctions can also directly enhance the light response of materials, thereby improving the device performance. Ma et al. reported an enhanced photocurrent density in a WS2/WO3 heterostructure.110 The photocurrent density of the heterostructure was much higher than that of the pristine WS2, which continually increased with a longer laser irradiation period (Fig. 6I). The electron lifetime also became much longer after irradiation because the type-II band alignment of the WS2/WO3 heterostructure separated the photogenerated electrons and holes into different regions and slowed down their recombination (Fig. 6J). The results fully demonstrated the unique role of lateral heterojunctions in the improved performance of optoelectronic devices.
Thus, by carefully designing lateral multijunctions, regulation of the electronic structure, exciton behavior and optical properties of TMDs can be achieved, making it possible to further optimize devices with better electronic and optoelectronic performances and more diverse functionality.
Novel lateral multijunction-based device applications
Based on the unique intrinsic structure characteristics, highly controllable synthetic methods, and rich strategies to construct lateral junctions and their capability of electronic structure modulation, new operating principle devices can be expected, such as diodes and FETs, scalable logic and analog circuits, highly efficient optoelectronic devices, and unique electrochemical devices, which will be highlighted and covered in the following section.
Before the introduction of device applications, the band alignment and carrier behaviour at interface under different bias and illumination need to be analyzed first, as shown by the classic example in Fig. 7A. The MoS2/MoTe2 heterojunction shows a typical type-II band alignment. At zero bias, electrons transfer from the MoS2 region to MoTe2, causing the Fermi levels on both sides to become equal and reach thermal equilibrium. Under illumination, the photogenerated carriers are separated by a built-in field at the interface. When applying a forward bias to the heterojunction, the built-in field is weakened by the external field, and the energy barrier becomes lower for carriers to overcome. Under illumination, electrons are excited to shift to MoTe2, while holes shift to MoS2 to form a strong photocurrent. The recombination of a high concentration photogenerated carriers at the interface will occur. When applying a reverse bias, the built-in field is strengthened, and thus it is harder for the carriers to overcome the increased potential barrier, causing only a small drift current to be formed. Under illumination, an obvious decrease in the light response time will occur.111 For other types of lateral multijunctions, a similar band structure evolution analysis is critical for device functionality design and performance optimization.
 Fig. 7  Lateral junction-based electronic devices and circuits. (A) Band alignment and carrier behaviour at the interface of MoS2/MoTe2 heterojunction under different bias and illumination.111 (B and C) Transfer characteristics in linear and log coordinates of lateral and vertical MoS2/WS2 heterojunction diodes.36 (D) Resistance vs. channel length for a hetero-phase FET. Inset: Percentage change in Rcversus Vgs and a schematic diagram of a hetero-phase FET.47 (E) Transfer characteristics in linear and log coordinates of hetero-phase 2H-/1T-MoS2 FET (blue curves) and pristine 2H-MoS2 FET (black curves). Red curve represents the 1T-channel FET.47 (F) Output-input curve (black) and voltage gain (red) of the WS2/WSe2 heterojunction-based inverter. Inset: Optical image of the inverter.33 (G) Voltage gain versus VIN of the doped inverter. Inset: Schematic diagram of the doped inverter.112 (H) Partial Isd–Vsd curves of a synaptic device. Inset: Isd–Vsd curve of the steady state.115 (I) Illustration of the image memory of a letter T before and after 10 (II), 20 (III) and 40 (IV) electric pluses, and after standing for 300 s (V).115 (J) Schematic of a lateral 2H-/1T/1T′-MoS2-based Schottky diode.116 (K) Power efficiency of rectification versus input power in the Wi-Fi band.116 (L) Output voltage versus frequency of input power in Wi-Fi band.116 (M) Optical image of a graphene/MoS2 FET array fabricated in one growth process.117 (N) Schematic illustration and corresponding optical images of the fabrication process of 2H-/1T′-MoTe2 array.118 
High-quality lateral junction diodes and transistors
Diode devices based on the band misalignment of lateral heterostructures were the first type of lateral junction electronic devices.33 Recently, a study illustrated a hydroxide-assisted CVD synthesis method to grow lateral MoS2/WS2 heterojunctions.36 Surprisingly, the as-grown lateral diode showed a much greater carrier mobility of 58 cm2 V−1 s−1 than that of monolayer MoS2 (25 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a vertical diode (13 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Fig. 7B and C). This was because the hydroxide adsorbed on the surface protected the lateral heterojunction from being etched and oxidized. Different from bulk semiconductor heterojunctions, the atomically thin channel of layered semiconductor heterojunctions can be effectively controlled by a gate to realize on/off switching. In this work, the on/off ratio of the lateral heterojunction was obviously better than that of the vertical heterojunction because its whole channel was single layer and could be better regulated by the gate.
One step further, lateral multijunctions can operate under a gate field to make a new type of transistor, i.e., a lateral junction transistor. In semiconductor devices, a Schottky barrier is often formed at the interface between the semiconductor and metal. The high resistance of the interface hinders the embodiment of semiconductor characteristics in the channel material itself. However, the solution of heavily doping the contact region is more challenging in atomically thin layered semiconductors. Therefore, researchers began to consider using metallic layered semiconductor materials as contact sites with metal, allowing lateral hetero-phase junctions to be used to improve the contact between the TMD channel and metal electrodes in hetero-phase FETs. Kappera et al. used organolithium as an electron donor to induce a transition from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2 and established a lateral 2H-/1T-MoS2 hetero-phase FET, where the 1T phase regions were used to contact electrodes with 5 times lower contact resistance than the pure 2H-MoS2 channel (Fig. 7D).47 The hetero-phase FET also showed a higher current density, on/off ratio and transconductance (Fig. 7E). In short, this simple design utilizing a lateral junction fully manifests the enhancement in the transistor performance by lateral metallic/semiconductor hetero-phase junctions.
Additionally, lateral TMD heterojunction-based diodes and transistors provide a multi-purpose platform for the construction of functional logic devices. Duan, Wang and Shaw et al. presented their results on the construction of a CMOS inverter using a lateral WS2/WSe2 heterojunction (inset of Fig. 7F).33 The inverter showed a high voltage gain as large as 24, indicating the advantage of lateral junction-based devices (Fig. 7F). Recently, Ke et al. exhibited a surface oxidation method to fabricate a p–n junction by heating few-layer MoTe2 directly in air, and further fabricated it into an inverter (inset of Fig. 7G).112 It showed a high voltage gain of ∼108 at VDD = 3V and a low static power consumption in the range of 0.1–15 nW, further improving the lateral junction-based logic device performance (Fig. 7G).
In addition to advanced logic devices based on transistors and diodes with improved performances, TMD lateral heterojunctions are also widely used in other types of electronic devices. For example, the MX2/MOδ heterostructure has been studied as a favorable material for the conductive channels in memristors.113,114 Recently, Liu's group demonstrated a direct-laser-writing oxidation technique to synthesize monolayer MoS2/MoS2−xOδ heterojunctions for memristive synaptic devices.115 Fabricated as an FET, the device showed a high resistance state (HRS) and low resistance state (LRS) in one cycle (Fig. 7H), and also exhibited an image-processing and image memory function (Fig. 7I). Furthermore, their applications have expanded to analog devices. For example, Zhang et al. fabricated a Schottky diode-based rectifier with a 2H-/1T/1T′-MoS2 heterojunction, which could be integrated with a Wi-Fi-band antenna to achieve wireless energy harvesting.116 A Pd electrode was used to generate a Schottky contact with 2H-phase MoS2 to fabricate a Schottky diode (Fig. 7J). The nanoscale thickness of the channel and lateral configuration would minimize the capacitance. Consequently, the circuit showed a high conversion efficiency of 40.1% at −0.7 dBm input power in the Wi-Fi band (2.4 and 5.9 GHz) (Fig. 7K). At 5 mW RF power, the output voltage was 3.5 V with the cut-off frequency of 10 GHz (Fig. 7L).
By introducing patterned growth synthesis, heterojunction device arrays can also be realized. Zhao et al. established a graphene/MoS2 array via oxygen plasma etching and perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt (PTAS)-assisted seeded CVD growth.117 Subsequently, FETs were fabricated by depositing Pd/Au electrodes on graphene and ZrO2 dielectric on MoS2 (Fig. 7M). The FET array showed a carrier mobility of 17.2 ± 3.9 cm2 V−1 s−1 for one hundred devices, indicating the good performance and high consistency of the lateral junction device. Similarly, a hetero-phase junction array was fabricated by Xu and co-workers with RIE, as a large-scale, spatially controlled chemical assembly of a 2H-/1T′-MoTe2 array (Fig. 7N).118 The arrays showed an average carrier mobility of 20–24 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 100 FETs, which proved the good electrical properties of the hetero-phase junction array, paving the way for highly scalable integrated circuits. Inspired by high performance lateral junction electronic devices, it is worth exploring the application of lateral junctions in optoelectronic devices.
Lateral multijunction-based optoelectronic devices
The optimization of the electronic structure of lateral multijunctions not only results in higher performances in electronic devices, but also excellent photoelectric devices. Furthermore, layered semiconductor multijunctions have many unique photoelectric properties, triggering more intensive research on lateral junction based optoelectronic devices.
The optoelectronic application of lateral layered semiconductor heterojunctions has attached much attention for a long time. Back in 2014, Duan, Wang and Shaw et al. demonstrated that the lateral WS2/WSe2 heterojunction could be used as a raw material for building photodiodes.33 Under a 514 nm laser of 30 nW energy, the diode showed an obvious photovoltaic effect, with an open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current and internal quantum efficiency of ∼0.47 V, ∼1.2 nA, and ∼43%, respectively (Fig. 8A). Gong et al. also made use of lateral WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunctions in photoelectric devices, with the internal quantum efficiency reaching 91% and open-circuit voltage of 55 mV (Fig. 8B).35 A recent study in 2020 by Tsai et al. introduced a WSe2/WS2 heterojunction as the main body of a photodetector with graphene flakes as transparent electrodes (Fig. 8C).119 A high responsivity of 1.7 A W−1 and short response time of 1.46 ms for the rise process and 1.42 ms for the decay process were observed, indicating the excellent photoelectric performance of the novel WSe2 nanodot-embedded heterojunction (Fig. 8D). These excellent photoelectric properties reveal the application potential of layered semiconductor multijunctions in the photoelectric field. Similarly, Li et al. used a one-step liquid-phase CVD method to fabricate a lateral monolayer MoS2/WS2 heterojunction-based photodetector with a responsivity of 567.6 A W−1.120 Besides lateral heterojunctions, doping-induced homojunctions can be employed in photoelectric devices. A recent study showed that direct plasma treatment resulted in the doping of WS2 and fabrication of a p–i–n lateral homojunction as a photodiode (Fig. 8E).121 The lateral p–i–n junction presented a high short-circuit current of 0.57 μA under the light power of 3.3 mW cm−2, a large linear dynamic range of about 48 dB, and extremely short response time of 264 ns for a rise time and 450 ns for the fall time (Fig. 8E), which was partly due to the minimal cross-sectional area of the atomic-thick few-layer WSe2 channel with a small capacitance.
 Fig. 8  Lateral junction-based optoelectronic devices. (A) Output characteristics of the lateral WS2/WSe2 heterojunction diode in the dark (black) and under illumination (red). Inset: Temporal photocurrent response under periodic laser pulse.33 (B) I–V curves of the WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction in the dark (black) and under optical illumination of 86 mW m−2 (red) and 619 mW m−2 (green). Inset: Schematic diagram of WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction electronic structure and photoexcitation process.35 (C) Schematic of the WSe2/WS2 heterojunction photodetector.119 (D) Photoresponse time in an on/off switch.119 (E) Photoresponse time at 20 kHz. Inset: Optical image of the doped p–i–n homojunction device.121 (F) I–V characteristics of the diode under a light density of 1400 W m−2. Top inset: schematic diagram of the experiment. Bottom inset: P (electrical power) versus voltage under optical illumination of 1400 W m−2.43 (G) Electroluminescence emission spectra for currents of 50, 100 and 200 nA.43 (H) Illustration, SEM image and energy band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction photovoltaic devices.122 (I) PCE versus light intensity of WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction photovoltaic devices.122 (J) EL image under a 4 V forward bias and 3.5 μA current.123 (K) PL spectra at 240 K (top) and EL spectra at 4 V voltage and different temperatures (bottom).123 
For photovoltaic devices, lateral multijunctions also show interesting device characteristics. As early as 2014, Mueller's group established a doped p–n junction in monolayer WSe2 by partial electric field modulation as a building block for optoelectronic devices.43 By opposite electrostatic doping, the diode set at the p–n state exhibited a photovoltaic effect. Under a light density of 1400 W m−2, the device showed the highest output power of 9 pW and the power conversion efficiency of about 0.5% (Fig. 8F). Furthermore, the diode could also serve as a light-emitting diode, with the electroluminescence efficiency of 0.1% (Fig. 8G). Tsai et al. assembled two photovoltaic cells in parallel with lateral WSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions, yielding an open-circuit voltage of 0.39 V, short-circuit current of 1.27 nA, and the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.56% (Fig. 8H and I).122 Furthermore, the device showed extraordinary omni-directional light harvesting ability, only suffering a 5% decrease with a change in the angle of incidence from 0° to 75°, given that the large active area of the lateral heterojunctions could efficiently absorb light in all directions, fully demonstrating the advantage of lateral junction-based optoelectronic devices.
In addition, the outstanding electroluminescence (EL) properties of lateral TMD heterojunctions have been characterized. Li et al. synthesized a lateral WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction for EL research, showing an EL effect when VDS reached 3 V.123 The luminescence position was mainly at the heterojunction interface, indicating that the luminescence originated from the junction (Fig. 8J). The main energy of the emitted photons was 1.82 eV, which was the A exciton emission from MoS2 (Fig. 8K).
Other lateral junction-based applications
Layered semiconductor multijunctions can be used for electrochemical applications, such as catalysis and sensing. Monolayer 2H-MoS2 has been proven theoretically to be a great candidate as an effective photocatalyst for photo-splitting reactions of water due to its large bandgap for light absorption and suitable band edge, containing the redox potentials of water.124 In 2017, Cui et al. used a 2H-/1T′-MoS2/graphene hybrid heterojunction to enhance the photocatalysis ability of MoS2.97 The hetero-phase 2H-/1T′-MoS2 flakes and graphene flakes were stacked through vdW interaction to form a lateral vertical hybrid heterojunction, which showed an obvious photocurrent response of 51 μA cm−2. The function of 1T′-MoS2 was to form better coupling with the graphene layers and conducting electrons. A recent study in 2020 further made use of highly active grain boundaries in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Specifically, Zhu et al. developed the strain-driven synthesis of MoS2 nano-channels on monolayer MoSe2 and tested the HER performance of this multi grain boundary heterojunction.125 The heterojunction showed a smaller over-potential of −266 mV and smaller Tafel slope of 90 mV dec−1 than that of the pristine MoS2 flake and single-grain boundary MoS2. The results indicated the enhancement effect from the multi-grain boundary lateral heterostructures on the HER. In a recent study, lateral multijunctions were extended the field of multifunctional sensors. Wang et al. synthesized NbS2–Nb2O5 by direct laser writing oxidation and fabricated humidity/temperature/NH3 sensors.126 The device measured a significant current change from 10−12 A to 10−8 A under a relative humidity variation from 30% to 100% at 25 °C, suggesting its high humidity sensitivity. Furthermore, the NH3 in a moist environment was also detected because the adsorption of OH− released by NH3·H2O on Nb2O5 promoting its conductivity. This work revealed a new mechanism of TMD–TMO heterojunctions for their application as multifunctional sensors, which is expected to inspire further research in this field.
Inspired by the unique structural characteristics of lateral multijunctions, intensive devices research based on lateral junctions has been conducted in the last 8 years, proving the significant device potential of this new type of lateral multijunctions, highlighting a feasible route for lateral junction-based high-performance and functional-customized device applications. However, a few key issues still exist in this field, such as industry-level mass synthesis, irreplaceable device characteristics, and high-integrated device development. Therefore, we will technically discuss several basic debates in this field, targeting the further elaboration of the lateral multijunction structure and device characteristics, finally bridging the basic device research with applied device development.
Strategies and debate for improved lateral device performances
After the initial reports of TMD lateral junctions in 2014, the study of various layered semiconductor lateral heterostructures and their devices has been widely explored. The research focus covers their adjustable synthesis, flexible property modulation and high-performance device application. However, there are still no unified conclusions about the true advantages and key limitations of this type of lateral multijunction. Here, we will pick several key debates to analyse in depth and provide a strategy for further research.
Monolayer junction versus few-layer junction
In most studies on the synthesis of lateral heterostructures, researchers tend to synthesize monolayer products. However, from a device performance point of view, it is not straightforward whether bilayer or few-layer heterojunctions can perform better than monolayer heterojunctions. Generally, when the typical TMD is reduced from bilayer to monolayer, it will undergo a transition from an indirect, narrow band gap to a direct, wider one, which potentially with greatly shift the photo-electron interaction quantum efficiency.127 However, for logic devices, such as transistors, bilayer or few-layer TMD may have more advantages such as higher mobility due to their high-quality channels and higher open current density due to their thicker conductive channels.128 Thus, it is not pertinent to only focus on monolayer lateral junctions before taking a closer look at bi- or few-layer lateral multijunctions.
Different from monolayer lateral structures, bi- or few-layer lateral heterostructures can introduce stacking order as a new degree of freedom, which may have a great impact on the electronic structure of heterostructures. Hu et al. calculated the influence of the stacking order on the electronic properties of bilayer lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures.48 In the model, five different stacking orders in the bilayer lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructure were studied (Fig. 9A). Direct bandgap behavior was observed in the AA (two layers had same horizontal position, i.e., W (Mo) over W (Mo) and Se over Se) and A'B (staggered with Se over Se compared with 2H phase) structures. The other three showed indirect bandgap behavior, with significantly smaller bandgaps than the first two (Fig. 9B). The difference in layer interaction caused by the different stacking orders led to a stronger electronic structure modulation, significantly re-shaping the application maps. The large layer spacing in the AA and A′B modes led to a weak interaction between layers, and the electronic structure could be regarded as a simple superposition of two monolayer bands. On the contrary, the small interlayer distances in the other structures led to strong interlayer interactions. In the case of high-performance optoelectrical devices, some bilayer junctions potentially behave better than monolayer junctions. Sahoo et al. fabricated a bilayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction and characterized its photoelectric properties. The photodiode exhibited a photocurrent of about 600 nA under a light power of 9.0 μW and Vds of 1.5 V (Fig. 9C).129 As a comparison, a monolayer MoSe2/WSe2 photodiode showed a similar photocurrent of 0.8 μA under 9.0 μW power and Vds of 3 V (Fig. 9D).37 For a long time, it was believed that bilayer materials may not be suitable for optoelectronic devices due to their indirect bandgap with a certain stacking order. However, it is easy to argue that external effects such as the interaction with substrates and adsorbates has a much lower effect on bilayer devices than monolayer devices. Furthermore, bilayer heterojunctions show much higher environmental stability and synthesis uniformity. After exposure to a dry atmosphere for 20 months, the monolayer heterojunctions exhibited considerable damage, whereas the bilayer heterojunctions were still stable (Fig. 9E).129
 Fig. 9  Comparison between monolayer and bilayer junction, sharp interface and gradual interface. (A) Schematic diagram of five types of stacking orders in bilayer lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures. The blue, yellow and red balls represent W, Se and Mo atoms, respectively.48 (B) Calculated electronic structure (top) and corresponding charge transfer of the five stacking orders.48 (C) Ids–Vds curves of bilayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction photodiode under different light power. Inset: Short-circuit current of this photodiode.129 (D) Ids–Vds curves of monolayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction photodiode under different light power. Inset: Schematic of the heterojunction and its electronic structure.37 (E) Optical image of monolayer and bilayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions after 20 months under a controlled dry atmosphere.129 (F) e–h recombination dynamics of lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions with sharp (red) and gradual (black) interface, and that of pristine MoSe2 (blue).130 (G–I) Schematic diagrams of interfaces with ideal sharp interface, slightly alloyed interface and highly alloyed interface. (J) Thermal conductivity of lateral graphene/h-BN heterojunction vs. L.131 
Although it is hard to draw a conclusion whether monolayer lateral junctions are better due to their electronic structures and application diversity, it may be misleading to only focus on monolayer lateral devices and ignore bilayer or few-layer heterostructures. Bilayer or few-layer heterostructures may bring new research opportunities in stacking structures, specific device layouts, and application requirements. In the future, more focus could be shifted to bi- or few-layer lateral heterostructures, which are less studied presently.
The sharp interface versus gradual interface
For many years, one of the key motivations to study the synthesis of lateral multi-component heterostructures was to improve the sharpness of the heterostructure interface, even extremely atomic sharp interfaces. In another view, the question of whether sharp interfaces impact the high performance of devices remains unclear.
Firstly, it is necessary to define the concept of interface sharpness. There is no transition zone at an ideal sharp interface, which is hard to realize in lateral heterostructures, where the interline of two different components can be distinguished accurately at the single-atom scale (Fig. 9G). For the actual heterojunction interface, there is mostly an alloying region with either a narrow (Fig. 9H) or wide transition region (Fig. 9I).
Recently, a study used density functional theory and non-adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations to calculate the influence of sharp or gradual MoSe2/WSe2 interfaces on the device performance in optoelectronic devices.130 It showed that interface-coupled states leading to the delocalization of electrons at the CBM and holes at VBM existed in the gradual interface but not the sharp interface. The photoexcited carrier separation in the gradual interface was slightly faster than that in the sharp interface due to the larger overlap of the donor-acceptor wave function in the alloyed interface. In the case of electron and hole recombination, the recombination lifetime of the gradual interface was significantly shorter than that of the sharp interface (Fig. 9F). The authors finally claimed that the sharp interface is beneficial to the photoelectric and photovoltaic properties of heterostructures. However, there is less direct systematic experimental validation of interface sharpness vs. optoelectronic device performance, for example, a solar cell based on a WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction with a sharp interface without inter-diffused atoms exhibited a PCE of up to 2.56%.122 In addition, a study used molecular dynamics simulation to demonstrate that the thermal conductivity of a lateral graphene/h-BN interface could be adjusted by the width of the alloyed interface. The experimental results showed that the thermal conductivity, κ, decreased with an increase in the width of the alloy region, L, for the four models (Fig. 9J). Further calculation showed that the phonon transmission distance decreased with an increase in L, which led to an increase in the obstruction of thermal transmission. This work inspires gradual interface-facilitated applications in thermoelectric devices and thermal insulators.131
In summary, gradual junctions and abrupt junctions may have different applications in different devices, but it is highly desirable to have gradual junctions for some electroluminescence devices due to their short exciton lifetime and thermoelectric devices owing to their potentially higher thermal conductivity. Conversely, sharp junctions may be more appropriate for photoelectric and photovoltaic devices.
The lateral junction versus vertical junction
It is a classic debate whether lateral junctions are superior to vertical junctions. However, a direct performance comparison between these two structures has been rarely reported, which will be carefully inspected here.
In the case of photoluminescence characteristics, the type-II band alignment of heterostructures will form inter-laminar excitons in the photoluminescence (PL) process. For example, in the PL spectra of a vertical WS2/MoSe2 heterostructure, the PL spectrum in the stacked region showed a characteristic interlaminar exciton emission peak at 875 nm, different from that of monolayer WS2 (630 nm) or MoSe2 (680 nm) (Fig. 10A). However, it was almost impossible to observe the interlaminar exciton emission peak from any lateral WS2/MoSe2 heterostructure. Correspondingly, the peak position of the lateral heterostructure at the alloyed interface moved continuously from 630 nm to 680 nm, that is, excitons with intermediate energies were generated (Fig. 10B).65
 Fig. 10  Comparison between lateral and vertical junctions. (A) PL spectra of monolayer MoS2 (1 and 2) and vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructure (3 and 4).65 (B) PL spectra taken from five points on lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. Inset: Optical image of the lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure with points corresponding to PL spectra.65 (C) Comparison of band alignment of stacked and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterojunctions.132 (D and E) Calculation results of PDOS of vertical and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures.133 (F) Calculated electron-hole recombination dynamics of vertical and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures. Inset: Pure-dephasing functions.133 (G) Schematic diagram of the pump-probe configuration of vertical MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure.134 (H) Differential reflection signal versus probe delay measured from the vertical heterostructure (purple) and the multilayer MoS2 (blue).134 (I) Schematic diagram of the pump-probe configuration of lateral MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure.135 (J) Differential reflection signal versus probe delay measured from the lateral heterostructure (orange) and the multilayer MoSe2 (blue).135 (K and L) AFM height images of mechanically stacked three-layer MoS2 fabricated under vacuum and in air.32 
The differences in electronic device characteristics between these two structures have been predicted by theoretical calculations. Using direct supercell calculations, Guo et al. demonstrated a result that vertical and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures both exhibited type-II band alignment. However, the energy differences between the CBM and VBM of the two materials in the vertical heterostructure were very large, ranging from 0.6 to 0.8 eV, while that in the lateral heterostructure was as small as 0.2 eV (Fig. 10C).132 A subsequent study showed that the vertical MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure demonstrated type-II band alignment but no energy offsets between the CBM and VBM of the two materials in lateral heterostructure (Fig. 10D and E). The vertical heterostructure also exhibited a 2.5 times longer election–hole recombination lifetime than the lateral heterostructure (Fig. 10F), which was due to the faster loss of coherence (inset of Fig. 10F). The authors finally concluded from the perspective of band alignment that the vertical and lateral heterostructures are beneficial for a high open circuit voltage and luminescence efficiency, respectively.133 The type-I band alignment of the lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure, which is inconsistent with the above-discussed type-II alignment,122 and also different from the vertical heterostructure, was further observed in the experiment,101 partly proving the correctness of the above-mentioned calculation results. This phenomenon can be attributed to the in-plane stress caused by the lattice mismatch of the lateral heterostructure crystals.101,132
The difference in photoelectron lifetime between the lateral heterostructure with type-I band alignment and the vertical heterostructure with type-II band alignment has also been experimentally proved. Excited by a laser pulse, the vertical MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure with type-II band alignment (Fig. 10G) showed a higher differential reflection signal and slower decay rate compared to multilayer MoS2 (Fig. 10H).134 However, the lateral heterostructure with type-I band alignment (Fig. 10I) showed a much lower signal and faster decay time (Fig. 10J).135 The experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretical results, although the fabrication process control and material selection may introduce significant uncertainty. Besides, from the perspective of device structure, lateral junctions may be beneficial for photovoltaic devices. Tsai et al. considered that monolayer lateral heterojunction solar cells have a large active area and atomic thickness for high-efficient omnidirectional light harvesting without scattering on their upper layer, which will lead to a high light absorption efficiency. In contrast, vertical solar cells would scatter or reflect light at their top surface.122
In addition to the intrinsic electronic structure and the related photoelectric properties, there is more complexity considering their synthesis. For vertically stacked vdW heterostructures and superlattices, the heterostructures are assembled via the weak physical vdW interactions. Therefore, vertical layered semiconductor heterostructures and superlattices can be formed usually by stacking monolayer TMDs through mechanical stacking.136 Common transfer methods may easily introduce contamination and bubbles between layers, which will weaken the coupling between layers and affect the optical and electrical properties of heterostructures.137 In this regard, vacuum transfer was introduced to reduce pollution (Fig. 10K and L).32 Nevertheless, the epitaxy of lateral heterostructures still relates to interatomic bonding, and thus their synthesis mostly relies on chemical methods. The edges of monolayer TMDs easily adsorb impurities and become passivated, and thus ingenious design processes are needed to maintain the epitaxial activity of the edges as much as possible.138 The difference in fabrication also leads to changes in device structure and design. The vdW interaction allows researchers to control the component and stacking sequence of vertical heterostructures to a considerable extent, thus enabling the fabrication of designed devices and realization of novel functions. For example, ultrahigh-speed non-volatile memory devices have been fabricated consisting of silicon, silicon oxide, multilayer graphene, h-BN and InSe from the bottom to top, which serve as a control gate, control gate dielectric, floating gate, tunnel barrier and channel, respectively.139 However, it is almost impossible to integrate so many functional layers in lateral heterostructures due to their limitation of lattice matching requirement and process compatibility.
If we focus on CVD synthesis for both lateral and vertical junctions, given that monolayer TMD materials are usually fragile, it is likely that the bottom layer will be damaged when the vertical heterostructure is grown via the CVD method. Therefore, the preparation of vertical superlattices via CVD is rarely reported. On the contrary, the process for the CVD growth of lateral heterostructures is relatively mild, and the successful synthesis of lateral superlattices has been reported.34,102
Based on the above discussion, it is too arbitrary to make a judgment between lateral and vertical junctions. To some extent, for certain applications, vertical heterostructures may be suitable for light absorption devices given that their type-II band alignment results in a much longer photoelectron lifetime, while lateral heterostructures perhaps are more suitable for luminescent devices due to their shorter photoelectron lifetime. However, from the perspective of device structure, the photovoltaic application of lateral junctions has relatively more potential. In addition, for some devices with extremely complicated structures, the adoption of vertical heterostructures will allow their convenient fabrication.
Conclusions
In this review, we first classified lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions based on their construction mode, and then summarized the methods for the synthesis of the different types. Chemical epitaxy methods such as CVD, liquid-phase synthesis and ALD are widely adapted methods for nearly all types of lateral multijunctions, while induced synthesis methods are more suitable to prepare homojunctions with customized electronic structures. Based on the unique synthesized lateral multijunctions, we shifted discussion to lateral junction-driven property modulation, especially electronic structures, which can be modulated by controlling the stress, composition, layer number and even contact angle. Novel exciton transportation and photon-electron interaction can be studied in lateral multijunctions, serving as a marvelous material platform to study exciton dynamics. Naturally, we put our final bet on novel lateral multijunction-based device applications including scalable logic circuits, low-power synaptic devices, functional analog devices, and highly efficient optoelectronic devices. Beyond electronic devices, lateral multijunctions can be applied for low over-potential HER and multifunctional sensors. Finally, our aim was to trigger an open discussion on several key debates of lateral heterostructures, that is, monolayer junction vs. few-layer junction, sharp interface vs. gradual interface, and lateral junction vs. vertical junction. By sharing our insights, analysis and debate, we hope to provide a next-phase strategy for further research.
Lateral TMD multijunctions show obviously novel characteristics different from any other single material and vertical multijunction. On the one hand, researchers are constantly striving to synthesize lateral heterojunctions with atomic sharp interfaces and more complex structures. On the other hand, the lateral multijunctions obtained via field modulation, phase transition, and surface doping have been widely used for high-performance devices. In short, lateral layered semiconductor multijunctions show unique properties, powering a range of high-performance electronics and optoelectronic devices and providing a new platform for basic research in materials science and device physics.
However, although researchers have made many achievements in this field, there are still many steps before lateral multijunctions can be applied in commercial electronic equipment. The methods for the preparation of lateral heterostructures with completely atomic sharp heterogeneous interfaces remain challenging. The device performance limits are also not clear given that we keep pushing the frontier of lateral multijunction-based devices. One extra challenge is the mass production of wafer-scale highly uniform lateral multijunctions with controlled doping and interface and high-density. Luckily, some pioneering works on industrialized large-scale growth technology for single-layer semiconductors60,61 and wafer-level vertical heterostructures140,141 have been reported, which undoubtedly lay the foundation for the growth of large-scale lateral multijunctions. It is strongly believed that as a new material research platform, lateral structures, together with lateral multijunction-based devices will present the research community with unlimited fresh ideas for next-generation semiconductor synthesis, device layout design, new operating principle device developments and highly integrated electronic and optoelectronic systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFA1200800 & 2020YFB2008704), the National Natural Science Foundation of China 62004114 & 62174098 and Tsinghua-Foshan Innovation Special Fund (2021THFS0215).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, W. J. Yu, L. Liu, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2096 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cao, D. Rodan-Legrain, O. Rubies-Bigorda, J. M. Park, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2020, 583, 215–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2018, 556, 43–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, R. C. Ashoori and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2018, 556, 80–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jang, Y. J. Park, X. Chen, T. Das, M.-S. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4184–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 849–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, K. Lo, T. S. Matthews, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5576–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, Z. Lin, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 709–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Kam and B. A. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Lee, S.-W. Min, Y.-G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3695–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, M. Zhu, G. Peng, X. Zheng, F. Miao, S. Bai, X.-A. Zhang and S. Qin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704539 CrossRef .
X. Duan, C. Wang, Z. Fan, G. Hao, L. Kou, U. Halim, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Jiang, A. Pan, Y. Huang, R. Yu and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 264–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Chen, J. Y. Xi, D. O. Dumcenco, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, D. Wang, Z. G. Shuai, Y. S. Huang and L. M. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4610–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Gong, Z. Liu, A. R. Lupini, G. Shi, J. H. Lin, S. Najmaei, Z. Lin, A. L. Elias, A. Berkdemir, G. You, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, R. Vajtai, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, J. Lou, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 442–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yun, S. W. Han, S. C. Hong, I. G. Kim and J. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 033305 CrossRef .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. B. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Conley, B. Wang, J. I. Ziegler, R. F. Haglund, Jr., S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3626–3630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. H. Baugher, H. O. H. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-Y. Lu, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, C.-P. Chuu, Y. Han, M.-H. Chiu, C.-C. Cheng, C.-W. Yang, K.-H. Wei, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, P. Yang, D. A. Muller, M.-Y. Chou, X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 744–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Jia, I. Kholmanov, L. Dong, D. Er, W. Chen, H. Guo, Z. Jin, V. B. Shenoy, L. Shi and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8192–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, E. Chen, J. Yao, M. Gao, X. Miao, S. Wang, Y. Gu, S. Xiao, R. Zhan, K. Chen, Z. Chen, X. Zeng, X. Gu and J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 20319–20331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Lin, K. Xie, B. Yuan, J. Zhu, P.-C. Shen, A.-Y. Lu, C. Su, E. Shi, K. Zhang, C. HuangFu, H. Xu, Z. Cai, J.-H. Park, Q. Ji, J. Wang, X. Dai, X. Tian, S. Huang, L. Dou, L. Jiao, J. Li, Y. Yu, J.-C. Idrobo, T. Cao, T. Palacios and J. Kong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2106124118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, X. Cao, H. Fang, D.-H. Lien, P. Zhao, Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh, J. Guo and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2071–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, K.-H. Lee, Y. Han, H. Gao, S. Xie, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 229–233 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Lei, G. Ye, B. Li, Y. He, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Lou, Z. Liu, R. Vajtai, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6135–6141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, W. Li, R. Huang, L. Ma, H. Sun, J.-H. Choi, L. Zhang, Y. Cui and G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16276–16284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Sahoo, S. Memaran, Y. Xin, L. Balicas and H. R. Gutiérrez, Nature, 2018, 553, 63–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, M. Tosun, G. Seol, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, J. Guo and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1991–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, H. Yuan, C.-L. Wu, P. Tang, S.-Z. Yang, A. Yang, G. Li, B. Liu, J. van de Groep, M. L. Brongersma, M. F. Chisholm, S.-C. Zhang, W. Zhou and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 294–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chamlagain, S. S. Withanage, A. C. Johnston and S. I. Khondaker, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 12970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, S. Chen, W. Li, M. Pi, T. Wu and D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9560–9567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. W. Contryman, X. Qian, S. M. Ardakani, Y. Gong, X. Wang, J. M. Weisse, C. H. Lee, J. Zhao, P. M. Ajayan, J. Li, H. C. Manoharan and X. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. X. Wu, Y. Xie, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. D. Hu, J. Liu, C. W. Zhou and D. H. Zhang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. B. Utama, H. Kleemann, W. Zhao, C. S. Ong, F. H. da Jornada, D. Y. Qiu, H. Cai, H. Li, R. Kou, S. Zhao, S. Wang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Tongay, A. Zettl, S. G. Louie and F. Wang, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, L. Kou and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Trivedi, G. Turgut, Y. Qin, M. Y. Sayyad, D. Hajra, M. Howell, L. Liu, S. Yang, N. H. Patoary, H. Li, M. M. Petrić, M. Meyer, M. Kremser, M. Barbone, G. Soavi, A. V. Stier, K. Müller, S. Yang, I. S. Esqueda, H. Zhuang, J. J. Finley and S. Tongay, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2006320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. He, U. Halim, Y. Liu, E. Zhu, Z. Lin, H. Xiao, X. Duan, Z. Feng, R. Cheng, N. O. Weiss, G. Ye, Y.-C. Huang, H. Wu, H.-C. Cheng, I. Shakir, L. Liao, X. Chen, W. A. Goddard Iii, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2018, 555, 231–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Smith, D. Hagaman and H.-F. Ji, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 215602 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Jang, J. Youn, Y. J. Song and S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C.-S. Lai and L.-J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Elias, N. Perea-Lopez, A. Castro-Beltran, A. Berkdemir, R. Lv, S. Feng, A. D. Long, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo, H. R. Gutierrez, N. R. Pradhan, L. Balicas, T. E. Mallouk, F. Lopez-Urias, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5235–5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, L. Yu, H. Wang, W. Fang, X. Ling, Y. Shi, C.-T. Lin, J.-K. Huang, M.-T. Chang, C.-S. Chang, M. Dresselhaus, T. Palacios, L.-J. Li and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1852–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. I. B. Utama, J. Lin, X. Gong, J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. T. Pantelides, J. Wang, Z. Dong, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2419–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Xia, H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Lei, D. Wu, F. Liu, Q. Fu, Q. Zeng, C.-H. Hsu, C. Yang, L. Lu, T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Liu, K. Suenaga, G. Liu and Z. Liu, Nature, 2018, 556, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, W. Guo, L. Ma, W. Li, Z. Yu, Z. Han, S. Gao, L. Liu, D. Fan, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, W. Lin, Z. Luo, X. Chen, N. Dai, X. Tu, D. Pan, Y. Yao, P. Wang, Y. Nie, J. Wang, Y. Shi and X. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1201–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Xu, T. Cheng, L. Gu, R. Qiao, Z. Liang, D. Ding, H. Hong, P. Zheng, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Zhang, G. Cui, C. Chang, C. Huang, J. Qi, J. Liang, C. Liu, Y. Zuo, G. Xue, X. Fang, J. Tian, M. Wu, Y. Guo, Z. Yao, Q. Jiao, L. Liu, P. Gao, Q. Li, R. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Tang, D. Yu, E. Wang, J. Lu, Y. Zhao, S. Wu, F. Ding and K. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, X. Miao, J. Yao, S. Wang, F. Shao, S. Xiao, R. Zhan, K. Chen, X. Zeng, X. Gu and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, N. Li, J. Tang, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang, Q. Jia, Y. Lu, Z. Wei, H. Yu, Y. Zhao, Y. Guo, L. Gu, G. Sun, W. Yang, R. Yang, D. Shi and G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 7193–7199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Feng, Z. Li, C. Ma, J. Qu, X. Wu, D. Li, X. Zhang, T. Yang, Y. He, H. Li, X. Hu, P. Fan, Y. Chen, B. Zheng, X. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Duan and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901351 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, Z. Zhang, B. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, M. Liu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1198–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoo, Z. P. Degregorio and J. E. Johns, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14281–14287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, B. Yan, Y. Ren and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Naylor, W. M. Parkin, Z. Gao, J. Berry, S. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. B. McClimon, L. Z. Tan, C. E. Kehayias, M.-Q. Zhao, R. S. Gona, R. W. Carpick, A. M. Rappe, D. J. Srolovitz, M. Drndic and A. T. C. Johnson, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8619–8627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Lin, W. Fang, L. Yu, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 464–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Naylor, W. M. Parkin, J. Ping, Z. Gao, Y. R. Zhou, Y. Kim, F. Streller, R. W. Carpick, A. M. Rappe, M. Drndić, J. M. Kikkawa and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4297–4304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Han, N. J. Kybert, C. H. Naylor, B. S. Lee, J. Ping, J. H. Park, J. Kang, S. Y. Lee, Y. H. Lee, R. Agarwal and A. T. C. Johnson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, K. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, J. Li, B. Zhao, C. Dai, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, X. Yang, B. Li, Y. Liu, X. Duan and X. Duan, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Mandyam, M.-Q. Zhao, P. Masih Das, Q. Zhang, C. C. Price, Z. Gao, V. B. Shenoy, M. Drndić and A. T. C. Johnson, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10490–10498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, C. Ma, D. Li, J. Lan, Z. Zhang, X. Sun, W. Zheng, T. Yang, C. Zhu, G. Ouyang, G. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Wang and A. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11193–11197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, G. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Gong, S. Lei, X. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, K. P. Hackenberg, A. Babakhani, J.-C. Idrobo, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, P. Li, J.-K. Huang, M.-Y. Li, C.-W. Yang, Y. Shi, X.-X. Zhang and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10516–10523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, M.-W. Lin, K. Wang, A. R. Lupini, J. Lee, L. Basile, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. Yoon and D. B. Geohegan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Wu, E. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Sun, D. Fu, Y. Sun and K. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 26143–26151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Levendorf, C.-J. Kim, L. Brown, P. Y. Huang, R. W. Havener, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2012, 488, 627–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Taghinejad, M. Taghinejad, A. A. Eftekhar, Z. Li, M. P. West, M. H. Javani, S. Abdollahramezani, X. Zhang, M. Tian, T. Johnson-Averette, P. M. Ajayan, E. M. Vogel, S.-F. Shi, W. Cai and A. Adibi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6323–6330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Keller, A. Bertuch, J. Provine, G. Sundaram, N. Ferralis and J. C. Grossman, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2024–2032 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balasubramanyam, M. J. M. Merkx, M. A. Verheijen, W. M. M. Kessels, A. J. M. Mackus and A. A. Bol, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 511–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nam, S. Seo and H. Kim, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2020, 38, 030803 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma, R. Mahlouji, L. F. Wu, M. A. Verheijen, V. Vandalon, S. Balasubraman, J. P. Hofmann, W. M. M. Kessels and A. A. Bol, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 255603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, A. Yin, J. Mao, Y. Xia, N. Kempf, Q. He, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, V. Ozolins, Z. Ren, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600993 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yang, X. Wang, H. Li, B. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Li, N. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Huang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5102–5109 RSC .
X. Wang, Q. Chen, C. Shen, J. Dai, C. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, Q. Song, L. Wang, H. Li, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Luo, X. Huang and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12171–12179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yun, J.-S. Kim, J. Shim, D. S. Choi, K. E. Lee, S. H. Koo, I. Kim, H. J. Jung, H.-W. Yoo, H.-T. Jung and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang and R. F. Frindt, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1996, 57, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Py and R. R. Haering, Can. J. Phys., 1983, 61, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. J. Chang, K. Suenaga, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee and H. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, S. Xu, B. Yan, Z. Guo, Q. Xu, B. G. Sumpter, J. Huang, S. Yin, H. Zhao and Y. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700024 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Yu, N. Li, J. Zhang, J. Meng, M. Liao, J. Zhao, X. Lu, L. Du, R. Yang, D. Shi, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10216–10219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, Y. Li, Z.-Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, L. Yang, F. Gao, P.-A. Hu, L. Zhen and C.-Y. Xu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2100584 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, H. Sahin and F. M. Peeters, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9580–9586 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, M.-Y. Li, J. Tersoff, Y. Han, Y. Su, L.-J. Li, D. A. Muller and C.-K. Shih, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 152–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, L. Tu, Y. Han, L. Huang, K. Kang, K. U. Lao, P. Poddar, C. Park, D. A. Muller, R. A. DiStasio and J. Park, Science, 2018, 359, 1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Feng, Y. Ma, Y. Tang, L. Ruan, Y. Wang and X. Dai, Phys. E, 2021, 131, 114751 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, W. Xiong, J. Du, T. Wang, Y. Peng, Z. Wei, J. Li and Y. Jia, Small, 2018, 14, 1800365 CrossRef PubMed .
K. W. Lau, Z. Gong, H. Yu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2018, 98, 115427 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hu, X. Xu, W. Liu, S. Xu, Z. Xue, B. Han, S. Wang, P. Gao, Q. Sun, Q. Gong, Y. Ye and G. Lu, Commun. Mater., 2020, 1, 61 CrossRef .
W. Yang, T. Huang, J. He, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, W. Liu, X. Ge, R. Zhang, M. Qiu, Y. Sang, X. Wang, X. Zhou, T. Li, C. Liu, N. Dai, X. Chen, Z. Fan and G. Shen, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berweger, H. Zhang, P. K. Sahoo, B. M. Kupp, J. L. Blackburn, E. M. Miller, T. M. Wallis, D. V. Voronine, P. Kabos and S. U. Nanayakkara, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14080–14090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, M.-H. Lin, I. T. Chen, N. Mohammadi Estakhri, X.-Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, C.-A. Chen, C.-K. Shih, A. Alù, X. Li, Y.-H. Lee and S. Gwo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 35 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, L. Zeng, L. Tao, C. Y. Tang, H. Yuan, H. Long, P. K. Cheng, Y. Chai, C. Chen, K. H. Fung, X. Zhang, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3125 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, F. Wang, L. Liu, X. He, J. Chen, Y. Li and T. Zhai, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ke, D. Qi, C. Han, J. Liu, J. Zhu, Y. Xiang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 920–926 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, M. Ding, J. Li, L. Yang, X. Lou, Z. Xie, W. Zhang and H. Chang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 143687 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. He, R. Yang, H.-M. Huang, F.-F. Yang, Y.-Z. Wu, J. Shaibo and X. Guo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 380–387 RSC .
X. Wang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Sun, E. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Wu, L. Gu, H. Li and K. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Grajal, J. L. Vazquez-Roy, U. Radhakrishna, X. Wang, W. Chern, L. Zhou, Y. Lin, P.-C. Shen, X. Ji, X. Ling, A. Zubair, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, M. Dubey, J. Kong, M. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nature, 2019, 566, 368–372 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Ye, Y. Han, Y. Xia, H. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Wang, D. A. Muller and X. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 954–959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Liu, B. Han, Y. Han, K. Yuan, W. Xu, X. Yao, P. Li, S. Yang, W. Gong, D. A. Muller, P. Gao, Y. Ye and L. Dai, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6845–6852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Tsai, Z.-Y. Liang, Y.-C. Lin, C.-C. Wang, K.-I. Lin, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4559–4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, J. Zhu, W. Du, Y. Huang, H. Xu, Z. Zhai and G. Zou, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2021, 16, 123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Ma, C. Zhao, W. Hong, C. Nie, Z.-J. Qiu and S. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4405–4415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, M.-Y. Li, J. R. D. Retamal, K.-T. Lam, Y.-C. Lin, K. Suenaga, L.-J. Chen, G. Liang, L.-J. Li and J.-H. He, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701168 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, J. Pu, J.-K. Huang, Y. Miyauchi, K. Matsuda, T. Takenobu and L.-J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706860 CrossRef .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, M. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. He, Q. Zeng, Y. Deng, S. Guo, M. Xu, J. Shi, W. Zhou, L. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Hu, Z. Zhang, W. Guo and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, H. Luo, X. Wang, E. Wang, Y. Sun, Y.-C. Tsai, J. Dong, P. Liu, H. Li, Y. Xu, S. Tongay, K. Jiang, S. Fan and K. Liu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2035–2043 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Gutiérrez, N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, B. Wang, R. Lv, F. López-Urías, V. H. Crespi, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3447–3454 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ghatak, A. N. Pal and A. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7707–7712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Sahoo, S. Memaran, F. A. Nugera, Y. Xin, T. Díaz Márquez, Z. Lu, W. Zheng, N. D. Zhigadlo, D. Smirnov, L. Balicas and H. R. Gutiérrez, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12372–12384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Niu, G. Wu and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20621–20628 RSC .
Y. Ni, H. Zhang, S. Hu, H. Wang, S. Volz and S. Xiong, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 144, 118608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 233104 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W.-H. Fang and R. Long, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5771–5778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ceballos, M. Z. Bellus, H.-Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12717–12724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Bellus, M. Mahjouri-Samani, S. D. Lane, A. D. Oyedele, X. Li, A. A. Puretzky, D. Geohegan, K. Xiao and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7086–7092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Q. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, S. Kim, Y. Cui, L. Zhong and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6961–6967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Chiu, M.-Y. Li, W. Zhang, W.-T. Hsu, W.-H. Chang, M. Terrones, H. Terrones and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9649–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
L. Wu, A. Wang, J. Shi, J. Yan, Z. Zhou, C. Bian, J. Ma, R. Ma, H. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Zhou, L. Bao, M. Ouyang, S. J. Pennycook, S. T. Pantelides and H.-J. Gao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 882–887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-U. Kim, M. Kim, Y. Jin, Y. Hyeon, K. S. Kim, B.-S. An, C.-W. Yang, V. Kanade, J.-Y. Moon, G. Y. Yeom, D. Whang, J.-H. Lee and T. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, R. Wu, Z. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Ma, W. Dang, Z. Wei, K. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Yan, M. Sun, B. Li, X. Pan, J. Luo, G. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Nature, 2020, 579, 368–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† S. Zhang and X. Deng contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Simian Zhang
	Simian Zhang received his BS Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China in 2021. Currently, he is a PhD researcher at Tsinghua University. His research interests include next-generation electronic devices, semiconductor process development, 3D MEMS, and nanoelectronics.

Xiaonan Deng
	Xiaonan Deng received her BS Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China in 2021. She is currently a PhD researcher at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests focus on the controllable synthesis of novel semiconductors and multifunctional applications of heterostructures devices.

Ruitao Lv
	Ruitao Lv is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He received his PhD Degree in 2009 from Tsinghua University. He was a Visiting Scholar in Kyushu University (Japan) and a Postdoctoral Researcher at Pennsylvania State University (USA). He joined Tsinghua University as a faculty member since 2013. His research interests include the defect engineering of two-dimensional materials for clean energy storage/conversion, electrocatalysis, molecular sensing, etc.

Zhengcao Li
	Zhengcao Li is currently a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He obtained his Bachelor's Degree in 1999 and Doctoral Degree in 2003 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Before joined Tsinghua University in 2006, he joined the Department of Quantum Engineering and Systems Science, the University of Tokyo as an Assistant Professor in 2003. Currently, he is the Vice Chairman and an Expert Committee Member of the Nuclear Energy Professional Committee of China Energy Research Society, the Deputy Secretary-General and Standing Director of the Youth Working Committee of the Chinese Society for Materials Research, etc.

Qihua Xiong
	Qihua Xiong is currently a Professor of Physics at Tsinghua University and Fellow of the American Physical Society and Optical Society of America. He received his PhD from Penn State University in 2006, and then conducted postdoctoral research at Harvard University. From 2009–2020, he worked at Nanyang Technological University. His group is specializes in optical spectroscopy investigations of light-matter interactions in low-dimensional quantum matter. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for Nano Letters and international advisory board and editorial board for many prestigious journals, such as ACS Photonics, Nano Research, Science China Materials, and eSciences.

Chen Wang
	Chen Wang is a Principle Investigator at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He received his PhD Degree in Materials Science and Engineering from University of California Los Angeles, USA. Before joined Tsinghua University, he led a few research projects in Lam Research CA, Intel Corp CA, USA for next-generation semiconductor process and chip development. His current research focus is developing emerging chip materials, novel semiconductor devices, next-generation highly-integrated functional nanosystems and smart chips.

 	Fig. 1  Different types of lateral multijunction. Schematic diagrams of (A) (I) A–B lateral junction; (II) A–B–A lateral junction; (III) superlattice; (IV) hybrid junction; (V) abrupt alloyed junction and (VI) gradual alloyed junction. (B) Selected-area surface-induced junction. (C) Area field-modulated junction. (D) Substrate-modulated junction. (E) Hetero-phase junction. (F) Layer number-modulated junction. (G) Janus junction. (H) Partial intercalated junction.	 


WS2/WSe2	Thermal CVD	WS2 and WSe2 powders	1057 °C for WS2; 1190 °C for WSe2	Atmospheric pressure; 70 sccm Ar	—	Photodiode; CMOS inverter	
33

WS2/MoS2	Thermal CVD	S, W and MoO3 powders; Te is mixed with W	650 °C	Atmospheric pressure; 100 sccm Ar	Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure	FETs	
65

MoSe2/WSe2	LPCVD	MoSe2 and WSe2 powders	950 °C	10−3 torr, 400 sccm H2	Synthesis in one heating process	FETs	
64

WS2/MoS2	Hydroxide-assisted CVD	Ammonium molybdate, sodium tungstate and KOH solution; S powder	700 °C for MoS2; 780 °C for WS2	Ar for MoS2; Ar/5% H2 for WS2	Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure	FETs	
36

MoS2/WSe2	Thermal CVD	WO3, MoO3, NaI, S and Se powders	—	60 sccm H2/Ar (10% H2)	Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure	FETs	
66

WS2/MoS2	LPCVD	MoO3, WO3 and S powders	710 °C for MoS2; 1050 °C for WS2	350 mTorr, 60 sccm Ar, 5 sccm H2	Controllable vertical/lateral heterostructure	FETs	
68

1H-MoS2/1T′-MoTe2	Promoter-assisted CVD	Ammonium heptamolybdate, sulfur and tellurium powders	700 °C	1000 sccm N2 for MoS2; 25 sccm H2/400 sccm N2 for WS2	—	FETs with low contact resistance	
72

1L/2L WSe2	Promoter-assisted CVD	Sodium cholate, NaCl and ammonium metatungstate solution; selenium powder	900 °C	350 sccm of N2 and 15 sccm H2	Controllable layer number	FETs, diodes	
77

WS2/WS2(1−x)Se2x	Thermal CVD	WS2 and mixed WS2/WSe2 powders	1050 °C for WS2, 1000 °C for alloy	60 sccm Ar	Controllable Se mole fraction x	—	
78

WS2/WSe2/WS2/WSe2 superlattice	Thermal CVD	WS2 and WSe2 powders	1150 °C for WS2	50 sccm Ar for WS2	Atomically sharp interface	—	
34

WSe2/MoSe2/WSe2/MoSe2 superlattice and WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure	Thermal CVD	WSe2 and MoSe2 powders	1060 °C for precursor, 700–810 °C for substrate	N2 + H2O for MoSe2; Ar + H2 for WSe2	—	FETs, photodiodes	
37



Graphene/h-BN	lithography and RIE on h-BN	CVD	CH4	950 °C	—	FETs; split closed-loop resonators	
79

WSe2/WS2	FIB on WS2	CVD	WO3 and Se	925 °C, 90 sccm Ar and 5 sccm H2	Mask-free etching	FETs	
80

MoSe2/MoS2	EBL	Selective sulfurization of MoSe2	Sulfur plume	700 °C, 400 sulfur pulses	Non-etching process	FETs	
81

MoSe2/MoS2	Direct laser writing oxidation	Thermal selenization of MoOx	Selenium powder	700 °C, 2 sccm H2/18 sccm Ar	—	FETs	
82


 	Fig. 2  Direct CVD synthesis methods of highly controllable heterostructure. (A) Schematic diagram of the process for the synthesis of an A–B lateral junction.33 (B and C) Raman and PL maps of the lateral WS2/WSe2 heterostructure.33 (D) Schematic of the WS2/MoS2 synthetic process.65 (E) Optical image of a lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure.65 (F) Hydroxide-assisted synthetic process.36 (G and H) Optical image of lateral and vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.36 (I and J) Optical image and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy of lateral 1H-MoS2/1T′-MoTe2 heterostructure.72 (K) Optical image of CoSe/WSe2 heterostructure.76 (L) Schematic of the 1L/nL synthetic process.77 (M) Optical image of a 1L/2L WSe2 heterostructure.77 (N) Illustration of alloyed WS2/WS2(1−x)Se2x junction synthesis.78 (O) PL spectra of the alloy region with different component ratios.78 (P) Schematic diagram of flow-direction-changed CVD process.34 (Q) Raman map of WS2/WSe2/WS2/WSe2 superlattice.34 (R) Schematic diagram of H2O-assisted CVD method.37 (S) Optical image of the WSe2/MoSe2/WSe2/MoSe2 superlattice.37	 

 	Fig. 3  Highly designable lateral multijunction by patterned growth methods and liquid-phase synthesis methods. (A) Schematic diagram of a patterned CVD process by reactive-ion etching.79 (B) SEM image of a ring pattern formed by graphene/h-BN heterostructure.79 (C and D) AFM image and Raman mapping of the WSe2/WS2 lateral heterostructure synthesized by focused ion beam patterned CVD process.80 (E) Schematic of the sulfuration process to fabricate a lateral heterostructure.81 (F) Raman map of MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure. Inset is the optical image.81 (G) Illustrative diagram of mask-patterned sulfuration process to synthesize abrupt alloyed heterostructure.84 (H–J) Illustration of laser-patterned selenization synthesis method.82 (K and L) Cross-sectional HR-STEM image and low-magnification STEM-EDX element map of ALD MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.88 (M and N) STEM images of liquid-phase-synthesized 2H-/1T-Mo1−xWxS2 heterostructure.90 (O) EDX mapping of SnS2/Sn0.5Mo0.5S2 lateral heterostructure.91 (P) Schematic diagram of self-assembly process of MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.92 (Q) STEM image of self-assembled MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.92	 

 	Fig. 4  Induced synthesis methods. (A) Schematic diagram (top) and STEM images (bottom) of 2H (left), 1T (middle) and 1T′ (right) phases of MoS2.69 (B–D) Schematic diagram of phase transition process from 2H-MoS2 to 1T-MoS2.70 (E and F) Schematic diagram and Raman maps of FET with 2H-MoTe2 channel and 1T′-MoTe2 contact region.96 (G) Arrhenius plots of the conductance of hetero-phase and intrinsic FETs.96 (H) Optical image (top) and schematic diagram (bottom) of an electric field-modulated p–n junction.25 (I) I–V plot of the electric field-modulated p–n junction.25 (J) Schematic of NO2-doped WSe2 FET.38 (K) IDS–VGS plot of NO2-doped WSe2 FET.38 (L) Schematic diagram of an intercalated lateral BP/MPMS heterostructure.50 (M) Ids–Vds plot of the BP/MPMS partial intercalated diode.50	 

 	Fig. 5  Electronic structure modulation in a lateral multijunction. (A) Band alignment for different strains applied on WS2 in MoS2/WS2 heterostructures.100 (B) Calculated εaa and εbb of MoS2 in WSe2/MoS2 heterostructure on a graphene substrate. The black dots, triangular markers and curves represent the measurement results, average values of results and fitness of triangular markers, respectively.101 (C) Band profile map measured by STS.101 (D) Plot of WS2/WSe2 superlattices numbered from I to V with different ρ.102 (E) PL spectra of intrinsic WS2 and WS2 in superlattices I to V. Inset is the PL spectra of WS2 and WSe2 region in superlattice showing the peak shift.102 (F) False-color SEM images of superlattices I to V.102 (G) PL maps of three MoS2xSe2(1−x)/MoS2ySe2(1−y) alloyed structures with different x and y.84 (H) Schematic illustration of band alignments of the MoS2xSe2(1−x)/MoS2ySe2(1−y) alloyed structures with different x and y.84 (I) PL spectra of monolayer MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2. Insets are PL mappings of MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2 flakes at 1.85 eV, 1.72 eV, and 1.60 eV, respectively.29 (J) Band structures of MoS2, Janus MoSSe, and MoSe2 obtained by DFT calculation.29 (K) Schematic illustration of band alignments of 1L/nL WS2 homojunctions with different n.104	 

 	Fig. 6  Exciton dynamics and optical property modulation in lateral multijunctions. (A and B) Binding energy, Eb, and exciton radius, ab, versus the band offset, Vo, for different on-site electrostatic energies, U, respectively.105 (C) Laser-PEEM images (top) and schematic diagram (bottom) of four measured regions: 1T′-MoTe2 (T), 2H-MoTe2 (H), 1T′ region near the interface (JT) and 2H region near the interface (JH).106 (D and E) PEI versus time delay for the T, H, JT, and JH regions. Inset in figure E: plot within ∼2 ps.106 (F) Relation curve between Sc (top) and Sc’ (bottom) and the location on MoS2/WS2 heterostructure.108 (G) Optical image of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure with atomically sharp surface. The locations of laser excitation in WS2 (red star), out-coupling site at SiO2 nanosphere (orange dot) and a groove on Ag plate (blue stie) are labelled.109 (H) PL spectra taken at the SiO2 nanosphere and groove on Ag plate.109 (I) Photocurrent versus time under solar stimulated illumination without bias for WS2 before and after 1×, 2× and 3× laser treatments.110 (J) Voltage decay rate of WS2 before and after 1×, 2× and 3× laser treatments.110	 

 	Fig. 7  Lateral junction-based electronic devices and circuits. (A) Band alignment and carrier behaviour at the interface of MoS2/MoTe2 heterojunction under different bias and illumination.111 (B and C) Transfer characteristics in linear and log coordinates of lateral and vertical MoS2/WS2 heterojunction diodes.36 (D) Resistance vs. channel length for a hetero-phase FET. Inset: Percentage change in Rcversus Vgs and a schematic diagram of a hetero-phase FET.47 (E) Transfer characteristics in linear and log coordinates of hetero-phase 2H-/1T-MoS2 FET (blue curves) and pristine 2H-MoS2 FET (black curves). Red curve represents the 1T-channel FET.47 (F) Output-input curve (black) and voltage gain (red) of the WS2/WSe2 heterojunction-based inverter. Inset: Optical image of the inverter.33 (G) Voltage gain versus VIN of the doped inverter. Inset: Schematic diagram of the doped inverter.112 (H) Partial Isd–Vsd curves of a synaptic device. Inset: Isd–Vsd curve of the steady state.115 (I) Illustration of the image memory of a letter T before and after 10 (II), 20 (III) and 40 (IV) electric pluses, and after standing for 300 s (V).115 (J) Schematic of a lateral 2H-/1T/1T′-MoS2-based Schottky diode.116 (K) Power efficiency of rectification versus input power in the Wi-Fi band.116 (L) Output voltage versus frequency of input power in Wi-Fi band.116 (M) Optical image of a graphene/MoS2 FET array fabricated in one growth process.117 (N) Schematic illustration and corresponding optical images of the fabrication process of 2H-/1T′-MoTe2 array.118	 

 	Fig. 8  Lateral junction-based optoelectronic devices. (A) Output characteristics of the lateral WS2/WSe2 heterojunction diode in the dark (black) and under illumination (red). Inset: Temporal photocurrent response under periodic laser pulse.33 (B) I–V curves of the WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction in the dark (black) and under optical illumination of 86 mW m−2 (red) and 619 mW m−2 (green). Inset: Schematic diagram of WSe2/MoSe2 heterojunction electronic structure and photoexcitation process.35 (C) Schematic of the WSe2/WS2 heterojunction photodetector.119 (D) Photoresponse time in an on/off switch.119 (E) Photoresponse time at 20 kHz. Inset: Optical image of the doped p–i–n homojunction device.121 (F) I–V characteristics of the diode under a light density of 1400 W m−2. Top inset: schematic diagram of the experiment. Bottom inset: P (electrical power) versus voltage under optical illumination of 1400 W m−2.43 (G) Electroluminescence emission spectra for currents of 50, 100 and 200 nA.43 (H) Illustration, SEM image and energy band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction photovoltaic devices.122 (I) PCE versus light intensity of WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction photovoltaic devices.122 (J) EL image under a 4 V forward bias and 3.5 μA current.123 (K) PL spectra at 240 K (top) and EL spectra at 4 V voltage and different temperatures (bottom).123	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparison between monolayer and bilayer junction, sharp interface and gradual interface. (A) Schematic diagram of five types of stacking orders in bilayer lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures. The blue, yellow and red balls represent W, Se and Mo atoms, respectively.48 (B) Calculated electronic structure (top) and corresponding charge transfer of the five stacking orders.48 (C) Ids–Vds curves of bilayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction photodiode under different light power. Inset: Short-circuit current of this photodiode.129 (D) Ids–Vds curves of monolayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction photodiode under different light power. Inset: Schematic of the heterojunction and its electronic structure.37 (E) Optical image of monolayer and bilayer MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions after 20 months under a controlled dry atmosphere.129 (F) e–h recombination dynamics of lateral MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions with sharp (red) and gradual (black) interface, and that of pristine MoSe2 (blue).130 (G–I) Schematic diagrams of interfaces with ideal sharp interface, slightly alloyed interface and highly alloyed interface. (J) Thermal conductivity of lateral graphene/h-BN heterojunction vs. L.131	 

 	Fig. 10  Comparison between lateral and vertical junctions. (A) PL spectra of monolayer MoS2 (1 and 2) and vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructure (3 and 4).65 (B) PL spectra taken from five points on lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. Inset: Optical image of the lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure with points corresponding to PL spectra.65 (C) Comparison of band alignment of stacked and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterojunctions.132 (D and E) Calculation results of PDOS of vertical and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures.133 (F) Calculated electron-hole recombination dynamics of vertical and lateral MoS2/WSe2 heterostructures. Inset: Pure-dephasing functions.133 (G) Schematic diagram of the pump-probe configuration of vertical MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure.134 (H) Differential reflection signal versus probe delay measured from the vertical heterostructure (purple) and the multilayer MoS2 (blue).134 (I) Schematic diagram of the pump-probe configuration of lateral MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure.135 (J) Differential reflection signal versus probe delay measured from the lateral heterostructure (orange) and the multilayer MoSe2 (blue).135 (K and L) AFM height images of mechanically stacked three-layer MoS2 fabricated under vacuum and in air.32	 
Footnote
† S. Zhang and X. Deng contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
