Photoelectrochemistry of colloidal Cu 2 O nanocrystal layers: the role of interfacial chemistry   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA06026B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA06026B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22255-22264Photoelectrochemistry of colloidal Cu2O nanocrystal layers: the role of interfacial chemistry†

        
          
            Yuval 
            Ben-Shahar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kathy 
            Vinokurov
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Héloïse 
            de Paz-Simon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yosef 
            Gofer
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Matan 
            Leiter
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Uri 
            Banin
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yaron S. 
            Cohen
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Chemistry and the Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 91904. E-mail: yaronc@nrcn.org.il
bDepartment of Chemistry, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel 52900
cDepartment of Chemistry, Nuclear Research Centre Negev, P.O.B. 9001, Beer-Sheva, Israel 84190
Received 
      11th July 2017
    , Accepted 28th September 2017First published on 28th September 2017AbstractColloidal Cu2O nanocrystal layers on Au substrates are studied as photocathodes in the context of solar electrochemical water-splitting applications. The photoelectrochemical response of the nanocrystal layers in aqueous solutions under simulated solar light conditions depends strongly on the interfacial chemistry and its impact on the transport of the charge carriers across the Au/nanocrystals/liquid interfaces. The Cu2O nanocrystals are originally stabilized with octadecylamine ligands. While octadecylamine is an efficient capping ligand for the colloidal synthesis of highly uniform nanocrystals, its low conductivity impedes the charge transport across the Au/nanocrystals/liquid interfaces. The photoresponse of the nanocrystals can be enhanced by the replacement of the octadecylamine ligands with more conductive and hydrophilic molecules, such as 1,2-ethanedithiol and benzene-1,4-dithiol. The conductivity and hydrophilicity of the ligands were investigated and found to be important for the photo-induced charge separation and transport across the Au/nanocrystals/liquid interfaces and transfer to the liquid. Furthermore, the interfacial energetics of the Au/nanocrystals/liquid junction and the resulting photoresponse of the Cu2O nanocrystal photocathode can be optimized by rational design of the exchanging ligands with desired functionalities and dipoles at the specific interfaces. A comparison of the photoresponse of Cu2O nanocrystal layers to that of electrodeposited Cu2O layers shows that the former is, yet, lower, due to the apparent low conductivity of the ligands. However, the nanocrystal organic ligands impart high hydrophobicity, which prevents the contact of the aqueous solution with the nanocrystals and improves their stability against photocorrosion and reduction to Cu0, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction measurements.
Introduction
In the quest for sustainable and environmentally friendly alternative energy sources, the interest in converting renewable solar energy to a chemical fuel, in particular to hydrogen, has grown in the past decade.1,2 Hydrogen can be generated via a photocatalytic water splitting reaction mediated by semiconductor nanoparticles as light absorbers optimally tuned to the solar spectrum.3,4 Utilization of such nanoparticles is possible in two different approaches: as freestanding colloidal suspensions in solution5–7 or as thin films on photoelectrodes.8,9 The latter strategy offers photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting with the ability to enhance the photocatalytic activity by using an applied bias.3,10,11 In addition, PEC conveniently allows separation of the reduction and oxidation processes into two half-cell reactions,12 with semiconducting photoanodes promoting water oxidation,13–16 or photocathodes allowing the reduction of water and the formation of hydrogen.17–19
Efficient photocatalytic decomposition of water by solar energy requires that the bandgap of the photocatalyst would spectrally fit the solar spectrum to allow optimal energy harvesting. Additionally, the photocatalyst material should have suitable positions of the conduction and/or valence band levels to allow for its function in water reduction and/or oxidation, respectively.3 Moreover, additional physical and chemical properties are required. The photocatalyst needs to be stable against (photo)corrosion in aqueous electrolytes under the reaction conditions.18–21 It should enable good electrical conductivity for efficient photogenerated charge carrier separation and transfer. This particularly depends on the photocatalyst interfaces with the electrode and the solution. For wide-scale future implementation, the photocatalyst material should be earth-abundant and environmentally compatible.
Among the explored photocatalytic materials for solar water splitting, cuprous oxide (Cu2O) is an interesting candidate that addresses the above-detailed demands.18,19 It is an abundant and non-toxic material, and can be easily synthesized in different geometries and configurations, e.g. thin films and nanocrystals (NCs), using several preparation approaches.22–25 Cu2O is a p-type semiconductor with a direct bandgap of 1.9–2.2 eV and a conduction band at ca. −0.7 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)26,27 that positions the excited photoelectrons with enough energy to reduce water and, thus, can be utilized as a photocathode sensitizer. Theoretically, Cu2O can deliver a solar to hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of up to 18% for water splitting, which corresponds to a maximum photocurrent of 14.7 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 illumination.28 Grätzel and co-workers reported photocurrents of 7.6 mA cm−2 (at 0 V/RHE, AM 1.5) and even higher for electrodeposited Cu2O-based photocathodes.17–19
However, there are two major issues that should be tackled in order to promote the utilization of Cu2O as an efficient and durable photocathode material for water splitting. First, Cu2O has low stability in aqueous solution.19,20,26 The redox potentials for the reduction and oxidation of Cu2O to Cu0 and CuO, respectively, lie within the bandgap of Cu2O and therefore the redox reactions may be carried out by the photoexcited charge carriers.20 In such a case, the photocorrosion process is favored over the water splitting route. In order to avoid the photocorrosion of Cu2O, the contact of the electrolyte aqueous solution with the photocatalyst surface should be minimized by, for instance, depositing passivation layers. This strategy has been shown to improve the photocatalyst stability via surface protection of electrodeposited Cu2O layers with oxide overlayers grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD).17,29
The second issue relates to the collection efficiency of the photogenerated carriers in Cu2O.19 An efficient sunlight absorbance requires at least 1 μm thick Cu2O films, while the minority carrier (electron) diffusion length is less than 200 nm.17,18,30 The unfavourable ratio of the carrier diffusion length over the light absorption thickness results in inefficient collection of the photogenerated carriers and hence low photocurrent density. A possible way to address this issue is by morphological engineering and nano-structuring of the Cu2O absorbing film. Nanostructures feature a large surface area that leads to increased exposure of catalytic sites and accelerated reaction kinetics.19,23 In addition, the dimensions of the nanostructures correspond to the low diffusion length of the charge carriers. For example, nanowire structures combine both efficient light harvesting along their longitudinal direction and short diffusion distance in their radial direction.31,32 Hence, these nano-scale dependent properties lead to a short collection length and can promote an efficient photoresponse.33–36
Here we study the PEC performance of thin layers of colloidal Cu2O nanocrystals (NCs) with relevance for water splitting applications. Their small size (<30 nm) addresses the need for a short collection length of the photogenerated carriers. These colloidal NCs are overcoated by an organic ligand layer forming a hydrophobic film on the Cu2O surface. Consequently the contact at the water/photocatalyst interface is decreased and photocorrosion is somewhat impeded. Nevertheless, the organic ligands also suppress the charge transport through the NCs/solution interface and the electron transfer to the electrolyte solution.37 The carrier transport through the NC layer is thus strongly affected by the nature of the interface. The use of colloidal NCs allows control over the type and properties of the surface ligand layers via ligand exchange methods and the charge transport through the surface layers can then be modulated.38,39
Specifically, a comparison between different organic ligands in both the electrode/photocatalyst and photocatalyst/liquid interfaces was carried out to investigate the effect of the surface ligands on the PEC performance. Both the conductivity and hydrophilicity of the ligands were found to be important for the photo-induced charge separation and transport across the Au electrode/NCs/liquid interfaces and transfer to the liquid. The interfacial energetics of the Au/NCs/liquid junction and the resulting photoresponse of the Cu2O NCs photocathode are affected by the surface chemistry, as well, and can be optimized by a judicious choice of the exchanging ligands with desired functionalities and dipoles at the specific interfaces. The organic ligands impart high hydrophobicity to the NCs, which prevents the contact of the aqueous solution with the NCs and improves their stability against photocorrosion and reduction to Cu0, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction measurements. The control and understanding of the surface chemistry of both interfaces is important for the rational design of semiconductor NC-based photoelectrodes for future water splitting applications.
Experimental section
All chemical precursors used for this study were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. See ESI† for more details.
Cu2O nanocrystal synthesis
Cu2O NCs were synthesized according to the recipe of Paolella et al.24 A mixture of copper(II)acetylacetonate (0.130 g, 0.5 mmol), octadecylamine (ODA, 0.80 g, 3 mmol) and 1-octadecene (ODE, 10 mL) was evacuated in a round flask at room temperature and heated to <150 °C. The color of the reactant solution before heating was blue, which indicates the presence of cupric (Cu2+) ions. When the temperature reached 120–150 °C, the solution became dark green, most likely due to the formation of cuprous (Cu+) ions. After complete dissolution of the reactants at <150 °C, the solution was cooled down back to 120 °C and re-evacuated and filled with Ar. After 10 min, the solution was heated again at 200–220 °C until the color was changed to brown-yellow, and after an additional 30 min it cooled down. At the end of the synthesis, the NCs were washed and centrifuged in isopropanol several times.
Au substrate preparation
The Cu2O NCs and continuous electrodeposited layers were deposited on Au substrates. 200 nm Au was thermally evaporated on indium-tin oxide (ITO) coated glasses (Sigma Aldrich) with a Cr adhesion layer of 20 nm. The Au substrates were rinsed with methanol and chloroform and dried in air, prior to any chemical activations and photocatalyst material deposition. Prior to NC deposition, 1,2-ethanedithiol or benzene-1,4-dithiol was self-assembled onto the Au substrates, by immersion in 0.5 M linker-molecule/chloroform solutions for 1 h, followed by rinsing with ethanol and drying with N2.
Cu2O NC layer deposition
Thin layers of Cu2O NCs were prepared by the slow evaporation method.37 For photoelectrochemical measurements, imaging and diffraction measurements, chemically activated Au substrates were dipped in a Cu2O NCs/chloroform solution (∼1 mg ml−1) in an open vial for a few hours. After the NC solution was totally evaporated, the Au substrates were washed with ethanol and dried with N2. The resulting covered area was generally 0.9–1.1 cm2. For UV-visible absorption spectroscopy measurements, thin layers of Cu2O NCs were deposited in a similar manner on 1,2-ethanedithiol activated fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO)-covered glasses (Delta T Delta Technologies, LTD).
Cu2O NC-based photocathode ligand exchange
Ligand exchange on top of the Cu2O NCs was done after the deposition of the NCs onto the Au substrates, by immersion of the NC layers in 0.5 M solutions of the desired replacing ligands in chloroform for 60 min. The ligands used were 1,2-ethanedithiol, benzene-1,4-dithiol, benzenethiol, 4-methylbenzenethiol, 4-chlorothiophenol, 4-fluorothiophenol and 4-nitrobenzenethiol. Successful ligand exchange was first confirmed with contact angle measurements. The static contact angles (freestanding drop) of the Cu2O NCs and electrodeposited layers were measured with an OCA 15 EC Dataphysics goniometer and analyzed with software from the same company, using a 5 μL drop of Milli-Q water. The values in the text are the average for 4–5 different measurements on the prepared layers. The standard deviation values appear as the error of the measurements. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements were also done to ensure the ligand exchange process. The FTIR absorption measurements were conducted with a Bruker vertex 70v FTIR spectrometer under vacuum. The as-synthesized Cu2O NCs were deposited on activated Au substrates by slow evaporation as previously described, and then ligand-exchanged with 1,2-ethanedithiol or benzene-1,4-dithiol. The layer was then scratched, mixed and pressed with KBr for FTIR analysis. The amounts of Cu2O NCs and KBr were approximately 1–2 mg and 100 mg, respectively.
Cu2O electrochemical thin film deposition
Cu2O thin layers were electrodeposited from an alkaline solution of lactate-stabilized copper sulphate on Au substrates.22 The plating bath was 0.2 M CuSO4 and 3 M lactic acid solution in deionized water. The pH of the solution was adjusted to >10 by adding a controlled amount of 2 M KOH solution. The plating bath was placed in a silicon oil bath in order to facilitate a constant temperature during the electrodeposition process. The temperature of the silicon oil bath was maintained at 40 °C using a heating plate with an in situ temperature probe. The Cu2O thin films were electro-deposited in a galvanostatic mode with a constant current density of −0.1 mA cm−2 for 330 s, which resulted in a calculated film thickness of ∼40 nm. A potentiostat (Bio-Logic, model SP-150) in a three-electrode configuration was used. A Pt coil and Ag/AgCl electrode (eDAQ, model ET072) were used as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively.
Characterization methods
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) were performed on a Tecnai™ T12 G2 Spirit from FEI. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) characterization was performed using a FEI Tecnai™ F20 G2. The size statistics of the NCs were done on 150 NCs from the TEM images with the aid of “Scion Image” software. Samples of the NCs for TEM were prepared by deposition of a drop of NC-chloroform solution onto a carbon-coated copper grid. Lamella samples for cross-section thickness measurements by TEM imaging and diffraction were prepared using a focused (gallium) ion beam (FIB) with a Helios NanoLab 460F1 from FEI. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken with the same machine prior to the preparation of the lamella samples for TEM. X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using Cu Kα photons from a Philips PW1830/40 diffractometer, operated at 30 mA and 40 kV. UV-visible optical absorption spectra were collected with a Jasco V-770 spectrophotometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was carried out before and after ligand exchange by using a Kratos Axis HS spectrometer (England) with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray radiation source (photon energy 1486.6 eV). Survey and high resolution spectra were acquired at pass energies of 80 eV and 40 eV, respectively, and a source power of 150 W. The binding energies of all of the elements were recalibrated by setting the CC/CH component of the C 1s peak at 285 eV, unless otherwise specified. Quantitative surface chemical analysis was performed using high-resolution core-level spectra after the removal of a nonlinear Shirley background.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
The PEC performance of the Cu2O photoelectrodes was studied in a three-electrode configuration in an optical glass cuvette from Starna Scientific LTD (334–2500 nm) as the electrochemical cell under front-side solar simulated AM 1.5 illumination using a solar simulator from Newport. The electrolyte was a 0.5 M Na2SO4 N2 purged solution (pH 6, at all measurements). Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl (eDAQ, model ET072) was used as a reference electrode and a Pt coil as the counter electrode. The potentials have been corrected and referenced to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale by the following expression:VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197V + 0.059V × pH.
Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements were conducted between 0 V and −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The scan rate was 10 mV s−1. The LSV and photoresponse were measured under chopped irradiation (0.5 Hz) from a 150 W ozone free Xe arc lamp (Newport, model 6255) through an AM 1.5 filter, and calibrated with a Si photodiode (Newport, model 71675) to simulate the AM 1.5 illumination power (∼100 mW cm−2). The illumination power and the location of the glass electrochemical cell and electrodes were identical during all photoelectrochemical measurements. Photocurrent stability tests were carried out by measuring the photocurrent produced under constant light irradiation at a fixed electrode potential of −0.6 V versus Ag/AgCl. Photovoltage measurements were conducted at the open circuit voltage (OCV) state under constant light irradiation. For high reliability of the results, the photoelectrochemical measurements were done on batches of Au substrates that were chemically activated and NC layer devices that were self-evaporated or ligand-exchanged together in the same vessels, as much as it was possible for identical treatments.
Results and discussion
Uniform colloidal Cu2O NCs with narrow size distribution were obtained according to a previously reported procedure by thermal decomposition of Cu-acetylacetonate organometallic precursors in the presence of octadecylamine (ODA).24 The photoelectrochemistry of the Cu2O NCs is studied in the form of thin compact layers deposited on Au electrodes. Analytical characterization of cuprous oxide NCs suggests a truncated octahedral shape structure, as reported previously,24,40 with an average edge length of 28(±3) nm as can be seen from the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 1a). X-ray diffraction (XRD) data presented in Fig. 1d show bulk stick spectra for Cu, CuO and Cu2O in black lines along with the experimental data for both the Cu2O NCs and electrodeposited layer. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) measurements supported this crystalline and facet structure, as well (Fig. S1†).24 Small peaks that appear around 2θ values of 43 and 50 degrees correspond to traces of Cu0 (111) and Cu0 (200) phases, respectively. Additional peaks in the electrodeposited Cu2O thin film spectrum are attributed to the substrate (e.g. Au and ITO. See Fig. S6†). Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements show a strong absorption peak at 628 cm−1, which is attributed to the Cu(I)–O rather than Cu(II)–O vibration, confirming the presence of the Cu2O structure rather than CuO, before and after ligand exchange (Fig. S2†).41 Similarly, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements on deposited layers of the nanocrystals before and after ligand exchange show distinct peaks centered at 932.7 and 952.5 eV which correspond to Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 in Cu2O, respectively.42,43 Moreover, the absence of satellite peaks associated with CuO at relatively higher binding energies, typically at 942.9 and 954.2 eV, also indicates the existence of the Cu2O phase solely44 (for detailed XPS measurements see Fig. S7 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM imaging of Cu2O NCs. (b) SEM and (c) TEM cross-section of a slowly evaporated Cu2O NC film on the Au substrate. The sample for the cross-section imaging was prepared by FIB. (d) XRD pattern for Cu2O NCs (blue) and the electrodeposited Cu2O thin film (red), compared with Cu2O database card 01-078-2076, CuO database card 00-041-0254 and Cu database card 04-009-2090 (all in black). The strong signal around 38 degree is contributed by the Au substrate. The dashed lines mark the positions of the Cu2O peaks. Additional peaks in the electrodeposited Cu2O spectrum that are attributed to the substrate (e.g. Au and ITO) are marked with asterisks and dots. See Fig. S6† for detailed Au and ITO spectra. (e) Normalized UV-visible absorption spectra of Cu2O NCs/chloroform solution (blue) and a slowly evaporated Cu2O NC film on the FTO coated glass substrate (red), after chemical activation in 1,2-ethanedithiol/chloroform solution for 60 min. 
Next, the approach of spontaneous slow evaporation from a chloroform solution was adopted and resulted in a compact arrangement of the Cu2O NC thin layer geometry on Au substrates (Fig. 1b). A thickness of 60–80 nm was achieved as observed by TEM imaging of the Au/NC interface cross-section prepared by focused ion beam milling (Fig. 1c and S1†). UV-visible absorption spectra of colloidal Cu2O NC solution and the deposited thin layers are shown in Fig. 1e. Their onset around 550 nm corresponds to an estimated 2.2 eV bandgap, in agreement with previous reports.20,23 The optical absorption of the NC thin layers is lower than that of the NC solution and red-shifted as a result of the NC aggregation in the film arrangement.
Prior to the NC deposition, the substrate was activated by different types of di-thiol linker molecules with short alkyl-chains or aromatic spacers. Subsequently, post-deposition ligand exchange of Cu2O NC films was done with different thiolated ligands including alkyl chain and benzene-based molecules with different terminal groups. Ligand-exchanged NC-based films were followed by contact angle measurements. Both native ODA ligands and the different exchanging ligands create a hydrophobic layer on top of the Cu2O photocatalyst layer, as presented by its extremely high contact angles of the original replacing ligands (>120°). This is in contrast to the measured contact angle of the electrodeposited Cu2O non-ligated and extremely hydrophilic film (<20°). Slight changes in the contact angle of the NC-based films are due to the apparent partial ligand exchange and relatively hydrophilic nature of the thiol and other functional moieties. Complementary FTIR and XPS measurements support the ligand exchange process. The disappearance of alkyl chain vibration modes and appearance of C–C aromatic stretching modes are clear signs for successful ligand exchange from ODA to BDT. For EDT, CH stretching and bending are still present, though, at lower intensity, in agreement with the replacement of long octadecyl by shorter ethyl chains on top of the NCs (Fig. S2†). Likewise, a strong sulphide peak was observed for EDT and BDT (S 2p at 162 eV), and a small, but discernible N peak (N 1s at 400 eV) was detected for ODA (Fig. S7†).
The photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation reaction (HER) is associated with the development of photocurrent that follows the light absorption by the NC layers. The absorbed photons at the NC layer form excited electron–hole pairs (excitons), which swiftly relax to the lower conduction band state and the highest valence band state, respectively. The formation of an electric field at the semiconducting NCs/liquid interface, due to band bending, along with the applied negative overpotential, leads to charge separation over the substrate/NC/electrolyte junctions.3,45 The minority carriers (excited electrons, in this case) are transferred from the photocatalyst NC layer to the electrolyte solution and promote water reduction via a 2-electron reaction process. The majority carriers (generated holes) are drawn to the solid Au substrate and reduced by the cathode or, alternatively, transferred to the anode for completion of the second half cell reaction of the oxidation process.20 As the applied overpotential is increased, the kinetics of the electrochemical reduction are faster, and the electron–hole separation efficiency also increases.46 Therefore, the photocurrents are expected to increase until saturation. Since the thickness of the resulting nanocrystal layers is in the order of the nanocrystal size – it is assumed that under the electric field at the substrate/NCs/liquid interface – the charge would transfer dominantly across that interface rather than hoping between particles in parallel to the substrate. It is expected, then, that the substrate/NC and NCs/liquid interfaces would have an important role and clear impact on the photocurrent response.

Scheme 1 illustrates the PEC hydrogen generation reaction, showing the relaxation routes of the excited charge carriers with the relative corresponding energies of their excited states and the standard water reduction potential. Note that both interfaces, Au/NCs and NCs/liquid, can be modified by the choice of the linker molecules or surface ligands, respectively. This modular system allows a systematic investigation of the effect of the interfacial chemistry on the PEC activity and efficiency of the studied Cu2O NC based photocathodes.
 Scheme 1  An illustration of the PEC hydrogen generation reaction including relevant excited charge carrier energies versus the standard water reduction potential, at the interfaces of the Cu2O NC photocathode/liquid junctions. 
Photoresponse currents were recorded at applied negative overpotentials and under triggered on-off illumination. The total currents are composed of dark currents and over-riding photo-induced cathodic currents. The dark currents result from non-faradaic processes, such as chemisorption, charging and majority carrier forward currents.47 Surface charge recombination processes are plausibly also enhanced by the presence of inter-particle boundaries.
The additional photo-induced cathodic currents reflect the charge transfer to the solution. The applied potential does not exceed the thermodynamic potential for the hydrogen evolution reaction (<0 V vs. the RHE), so the currents that are observed are not associated with faradaic reduction of hydrogen (Fig. S4†). A comparison of the PEC response, for the first and second cycles, of photocathodes consisting of as-synthesized Cu2O NC films with their native ODA ligands (black and blue curves, respectively) and surface ligand exchanged layers with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow and red curves, respectively) is presented in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Linear sweep voltammetry (backward sweeps #1 and #2, scan rate 10 mV s−1) of ODA–Cu2O NCs that were slowly evaporated on Au substrates, before (black and blue curves) and after ligand exchange with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow and red curves). Prior to the NC deposition, the Au substrates were chemically activated in 1,2-ethanedithiol. The measurements have been conducted under solar simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination. The arrow and the squared wave mark the voltage sweep direction and the triggered on–off excitation, respectively. 
Native ODA coated NCs showed relatively high dark currents and low photoresponses in both the first and second applied potential cycles. These low currents can be explained by the presence of ODA ligands in both substrate/NCs and NCs/electrolyte interfaces acting as low-conducting regions, given that charge transport through linear alkyl-chain molecules is strongly dependent on the chain length.48 A significant improvement in the photoresponse of almost two orders of magnitude (1st cycle) is seen following ligand exchange from ODA to benzene-1,4-dithiol ligands. Following ligand exchange, the dark currents are reduced and the photocurrents are substantially increased, due to the shorter and more conductive benzene-1,4-dithiol ligands at the NCs/electrolyte interface. In this case, charge separation and transfer to the liquid are apparently favored over charge recombination.47 Note that the currents at the first cycles are higher than in the following cycles, due to charging and trapping phenomena. Therefore, in the scope of this study, we compare the second rather than the first cycles upon saturation of the surface states, in an attempt to probe the molecular electronic effects on the charge transport from NCs to the liquid. Additionally, we compare and present further the net photocurrent response to illumination, namely, the dark currents are subtracted from the overall photoresponse.
Since the deposited layers consist of colloidal NCs, both substrate/NCs and NCs/electrolyte interfaces are mediated by the original (ODA) surface ligands. Therefore, the effect of the organic region, in each of these interfaces, on the charge transport and the PEC activity could be explored separately. At the Au/NCs junction, Cu2O NCs, physically adhered without any linker molecules or di-thiolated layers, resulted in a lower photoresponse than after chemical activation of the gold electrode with conductive molecules such as 1,2-ethanedithiol or benzene-1,4-dithiol (Fig. S3†). At the NCs/liquid interface, post-deposition ligand exchange with different moieties of di-thiolated ligands is compared further for its effect on the PEC performance and response.

Fig. 3a presents the surface coating effect of different ligands on Cu2O NC-based photocathodes deposited on the activated Au substrate with 1,2-ethanedithiol. Native Cu2O NCs with ODA capping ligands show the lowest photoresponse (1.1 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. the RHE). Exchanging the native ligands with 1,2-ethanedithiol molecules leads to increased photocurrents by an order of magnitude (13 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. the RHE). The highest photocurrent was measured for the Cu2O NC layer coated with benzene-1,4-dithiol ligands (24 μA cm−2 at 0 V vs. the RHE). This observed trend is attributed to the conductivity properties of the tested organic molecules. While ODA has a long 18-carbon alkyl chain that suppresses the charge transport between the NC layer and the water molecules, in the case of a shorter alkyl chain, such as 1,2-ethanedithiol, the resistance decreases and higher photocurrents are achieved. When introducing conductive molecules, such as benzene-1,4-dithiol, the resonance electrons contribute to the transport of free charge carriers and increase the conductivity of the NC layer.49 Accordingly, when both interfaces, Au/NCs and NCs/liquid, are ligated with benzene-1,4-dithiol, the resulting photoresponse is higher than that obtained by 1,2-ethanedithiol ligand exchange treatment of both interfaces (Fig. S5†).
 Fig. 3  Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of slowly evaporated ODA–Cu2O NCs on Au as follows: (a) Au substrate activated with 1,2-ethanedithiol followed by deposition of ligand-unexchanged ODA–Cu2O NCs (blue), and ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with 1,2-ethanedithiol (red) and with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). (b) Au substrate activated with benzene-1,4-dithiol followed by deposition of ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with 1,2-ethanedithiol (blue) and benzene-1,4-dithiol (red) and the Au substrate activated with 1,2-ethanedithiol followed by deposition of ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). (c) Au substrate activated with benzene-1,4-dithiol followed by deposition of ligand-unexchanged ODA–Cu2O NCs (blue), and ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with benzenethiol (red) and with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). The measurements have been conducted under solar simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination at 10 mV s−1 scan rate. 2nd sweeps are presented. 
Interestingly, when the ligand exchange is done asymmetrically, with 1,2-ethanedithiol at the Au/NCs interface and benzene-1,4-dithiol at the NCs/liquid interface, the photoresponse is even further enhanced (Fig. 3b). Conversely, when the ligand exchange is done in the opposite manner, with benzene-1,4-dithiol at the Au/NCs interface and 1,2-ethanedithiol at the NCs/liquid interface, the photoresponse is reduced. This trend can be explained by the higher conductivity of the aromatic molecules, alongside their lower highest-occupied-energy-level (HOMO), relative to the alkyl HOMO level at about 0.3 eV.38,50 This implies that asymmetric ligand exchange at the couple of interfaces induces a preferred surface dipole and energy band edge alignment of the Au/NCs junction by the organic ligands. These improve the charge separation and orient the photogenerated electron relaxation towards the liquid.
The contribution of the thiol termination group at the NCs/liquid interface to the photoresponse was found to be significant, as shown in Fig. 3c. While both exchanging ligands, benzenethiol and benzene-1,4-dithiol, improve the photoresponse of the NCs, the latter is superior and presents higher photocurrents even at low cathodic overpotentials. This can be explained by the formation of protonation/deprotonation sites at the NCs/liquid interface after ligand exchange with benzene-1,4-dithiol. These sites contribute and enable the reduction of water, in a similar manner to the electrodeposited Cu2O layers that are covered with hydroxyl groups in aqueous solutions.51 Moreover, the addition of the thiol end-groups provides a relatively hydrophilic nature for the NCs/liquid interface (Fig. S2†), and hence, allows better adsorption of the water molecules to the electrode. This is in contrast to ligand exchange with benzenethiol which produces a more hydrophobic interface that reduces the contact with the liquid and impedes the charge transport from the NCs to the liquid.
On top of the prominent photoresponse to light, cathodic transient photocurrents are observed and developed after the Au/NCs substrate is activated with 1,2-ethanedithiol linkers at the high overpotentials or after activation with benzene-1,4-dithiol molecules at all potentials (Fig. 3a). The appearance of transient photocurrents when light is on, followed by reverse discharge transient photocurrents after it ends, is evidence for the presence of surface states and their charge and discharge actions.47 The absence of transient photocurrents in the non-modified Au/NC photocathodes may indicate a better quality of the NC surface passivation by the ODA ligands and lack of surface states (Fig. S3†). This might correlate with the observed higher dark currents due to the enhancement of surface recombination processes (Fig. 2). Ligand exchange at the NCs/liquid interface with conductive molecules produces surface states that can trap the photogenerated electrons and prioritize charge separation and surface states charging over charge recombination (Fig. 2). It should be noted that reverse discharge photocurrents that appear when light is turned off are probed only for the thiol terminated films at the NCs/liquid interface (Fig. 3a and c), implying that the discharge of the surface states is dominated by charge transfer to the liquid, due to the higher hydrophilic character of the interface. In the absence of a sufficient hydrophilic interface, surface recombination is apparently preferred.
The interfacial energy band alignment and electronics of the Cu2O NC-based photocathode and the resulting photoresponse can be optimized by a judicious choice of the surface ligands. The chemical structure of the ligands determines the surface functionality and dipole across the NCs/liquid junction.3,52–54 The ability to manipulate the interfacial band alignment and energetics, as well as the surface electronic passivation character, via ligand exchange is attributed to the direct connection of the ligands to the NCs. In this manner, the molecular effects are not screened by the solution and therefore can be clearly probed by electrochemical measurements. Regarding surface electronic passivation, a relatively delayed photoresponse to both on and off illumination states is projected by the slow increase and decrease of the open circuit voltage (OCV) that is developed upon excitation of electrons for the non-chemically activated Au/NCs devices, as presented in Fig. 4a. This supports the lack of surface states that induces charge surface recombination over separation. The prior activation of the Au surface and surface ligand exchange with more conductive ligands after the NC deposition increase the surface state densities at the Au/NCs/liquid interfaces. These facilitate a faster increase of the OCV upon illumination due to favored charging of the surface states and charge separation over recombination, alongside faster decrease of the OCV by the induced electron decay transfer to the liquid when light is turned off (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  (a) Open circuit voltage measurements of an electrodeposited Cu2O layer (40 nm thickness, black curve) and slowly evaporated layers of ODA–Cu2O NCs on non-activated Au substrates (blue curve); an ODA–Cu2O NC layer on activated Au substrates with 1,2-ethanedithiol (red curve); and after ligand exchange with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow curve). (b) Open circuit voltage measurements of slowly evaporated ODA–Cu2O NC layers on chemically activated Au substrates with 1,2-ethanedithiol and after ligand exchange. The exchanging ligands used were 4-methylbenzenethiol (red curve), benzenethiol (orange), 4-chlorothiophenol (yellow), 4-fluorothiophenol (green) and 4-nitrobenzenethiol (blue). All measurements were carried out in Na2SO4/H2O solution in the dark and under solar simulated AM 1.5G constant illumination. The arrows mark the triggered on-off excitation. 
The manipulation of the interfacial energetics by functionalized ligand exchange with different end groups is demonstrated in Fig. 4b. The measured OCV values of the photocathodes are compared at both dark and under illumination states with X-benzenethiol molecules (X = CH3, H, Cl, F and NO2) as the exchanging ligands at the NCs/liquid interface. The OCV of the functionalized ligand-exchanged NC layer changes at the dark state and even in a more pronounced manner under excitation, according to the electron withdrawing/donating character of the terminal group, as follows: by the use of more deactivating (electron withdrawing) terminal groups on the surface ligands, the NCs become more oxidative towards the photogenerated electrons and the measured OCV becomes more anodic. This can be explained by the surface dipole that the functionalized ligands induce electrostatically on the NCs, namely, the dipole formed between the surface atom of the NCs and the binding group of the ligand and, mostly, the intrinsic dipole moment of the ligand itself due to the functional group, which shifts the NC valence band maximum and the conduction band minimum positions relative to vacuum.38,39 In such a way, band edge alignment of the Au/NCs/liquid junction can be obtained by the replacement of only the terminal group of the organic ligands, in order to improve the charge separation and orientation of the photogenerated electron relaxation towards the liquid. Similarly, upon ligand exchange on the NCs/liquid interface, from the original ODA ligands to benzene-1,4-dithiol, the OCV is lowered, as shown in Fig. 4a. This behavior originates from the electron activation character of the amine bond of the ODA ligand and of the thiol terminal group (electron withdrawing group and electron donating group, respectively) that affect the NC oxidation potential. Moreover, after ligand exchange with the thiol terminated groups, the OCV is lowered towards the OCV of the electrodeposited Cu2O layer, as hydroxyl groups cover the oxide surface.
In addition to their pronounced impact on the interfacial energetics and electronics, the organic ligands can increase the stability of the Cu2O NCs towards photocorrosion, which is a major drawback of Cu2O as a photocatalyst material for water splitting applications.19,20,26 The photoresponse of an unprotected electrodeposited Cu2O layer on the Au substrate decreases dramatically upon cycling by an order of magnitude, as depicted in Fig. 5a. We followed the photoresponse of an (unprotected) electrodeposited Cu2O layer on Au and of an Au-colloidal Cu2O NC device for 1 h in Na2SO4/H2O solution under constant illumination and applied overpotential (0 V vs. the RHE). XRD measurements of both photocathodes, post PEC activity, revealed the presence of Cu (111) in the case of the electrodeposited Cu2O layer, which was not detected in the Cu2O NC layers (Fig. 5b). The formation of metallic Cu is enhanced by the high hydrophilic character of the electrodeposited Cu2O layers (Fig. S2†) and direct contact with the liquid that lead to negligible stability against photocorrosion. In contrast, the organic ligands that inherently cover the Cu2O NCs in the form of a monolayer supply a hydrophobic protective sheath that prevents the contact with the liquid and increase their stability. Nevertheless, relatively some loss of the photoresponse upon illumination or cycling does happen with the Cu2O colloidal NCs, due to trapping and surface state charging phenomena.
 Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of electrodeposited Cu2O thin films (40 nm) on Au substrates without prior chemical activation, first (yellow) and second (black) backward sweeps at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 (b) XRD patterns of a Cu2O NC based photocathode (blue) and an electrodeposited Cu2O thin film (red). The measurements were performed post-PEC activity in the presence of Na2SO4/H2O solution under constant solar simulated AM 1.5G illumination and 0 V vs. the RHE for 1 h. The measured diffractograms are compared with Cu2O database card 01-078-2076 and Cu database card 00-004-0836. The strong signal around 38 degree is contributed by the Au substrate. 
Conclusions
Surface organic ligands are integral constituents of colloidal NCs and play an important role, starting from the NC synthesis stage up to their utilization and functionality in different applications. In this study, we have demonstrated the effect of surface ligands at both substrate/NCs and NCs/electrolyte interfaces on the PEC performance alongside with improved passivation against photocorrosion, in the context of the solar water splitting reaction. Photoelectrochemical measurements show a significant improvement of the cathodic current photoresponse upon exchange of the native ODA ligands with alkyl-dithiolated ligands. Higher photocurrents, by an order of magnitude, were observed after replacement with benzene-based ligands, reaching a few tens of μA cm−2. These trends were attributed to the conductive nature of the exchanging organic ligands and to their role in the energy band alignment of the Au/NCs/electrolyte junction. The ability to design interfacial properties, (e.g. energetics and electronics) and chemical properties of surfaces (e.g. hydrophobicity) by molecular treatments demonstrates the potential advantages in using colloidal NCs as photocatalysts and electronic components. Moreover, the ligand surface coating grants the NC layers an inherent stability against photocorrosion, in comparison to electrodeposited Cu2O layers. Yet, the obtained photocurrent density with NC layers is still low in comparison to the photoresponse of electrodeposited Cu2O layers, and may be improved, for example, by the deposition of metal co-catalysts directly on top of the NCs.5
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 1560/13) and U. B. thanks the Alfred & Erica Larisch memorial chair. Y. B. S. acknowledges support by the Ministry of Science, Technology & Space, Israel. The authors thank Dr Inna Popov from the unit for nanocharacterization of the Hebrew University center for nanoscience and nanotechnology for TEM and HRTEM measurements, Mr Atzmon Vakahi from the unit for nanofabrication of the Hebrew University center for nanoscience and nanotechnology for assistance in FIB and lamella fabrication, Dr Benny Bogoslavsky for XRD measurements, Dr Yorai Amit for SEM imaging, and Dr Yossi Semesh for enlightening discussions.
Notes and references
P. P. Edwards, V. L. Kuznetsov, W. I. F. David and N. P. Brandon, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4356–4362 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
Y. Ben-Shahar, F. Scotognella, N. Waiskopf, I. Kriegel, S. Dal Conte, G. Cerullo and U. Banin, Small, 2015, 11, 462–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kalisman, Y. Nakibli and L. Amirav, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1776–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shemesh, J. E. Macdonald, G. Menagen and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. U. M. Khan and J. Akikusa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7184–7189 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. Bao, T. Yu, Y. Hu, W. Luo, W. Zhu, G. Fu, Z. Li, H. Gao, F. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26482–26490 CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
R. I. Pinhassi, D. Kallmann, G. Saper, H. Dotan, A. Linkov, A. Kay, V. Liveanu, G. Schuster, N. Adir and A. Rothschild, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Landman, H. Dotan, G. E. Shter, M. Wullenkord, A. Houaijia, A. Maljusch, G. S. Grader and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 646–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Segev, H. Dotan, K. D. Malviya, A. Kay, M. T. Mayer, M. Grätzel and A. Rothschild, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1500817 CrossRef .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673 CAS .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wick and S. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26243–26257 CAS .

          Z. Chen, H. N. Dinh and E. Miller, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2013 Search PubMed .
T. D. Golden, M. G. Shumsky, Y. Zhou, R. A. VanderWerf, R. A. Van Leeuwen and J. A. Switzer, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2499–2504 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, C.-K. Wu, Y. Lou, C. Burda, J. T. Koberstein, Y. Zhu and S. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9506–9511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paolella, R. Brescia, M. Prato, M. Povia, S. Marras, L. De Trizio, A. Falqui, L. Manna and C. George, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2745–2751 CAS .
M. Salavati-Niasari and F. Davar, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 441–443 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kang, T. W. Kim, S. R. Kubota, A. C. Cardiel, H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12839–12887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-B. Ma, J. P. Hofmann, A. Litke and E. J. M. Hensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, L. Tsui, N. Swami and G. Zangari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11551–11556 CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Musselman, A. Marin, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2202–2208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dai, J. Xie, M. T. Mayer, X. Yang, J. Zhan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11119–11123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, L. Gao, X. Song and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, X. Li, X. Zou, X. Quan and G. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 858–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Shi and W. Teng, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 362–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, X. Li, Q. Zhao, T. Li, M. Tade and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6025–6034 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, M. Liu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16016 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Yao, X. M. Yin, T. H. Wang and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6131–6144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zhang, J. Y. Tang, G. L. Wang, M. Zhang and X. Y. Hu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 294, 278–282 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2952 RSC .
A. A. Dubale, C.-J. Pan, A. G. Tamirat, H.-M. Chen, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, J. Rick, D. W. Ayele, B. A. Aragaw, J.-F. Lee, Y.-W. Yang and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12482–12499 CAS .
H. Azimi, S. Kuhri, A. Osvet, G. Matt, L. S. Khanzada, M. Lemmer, N. A. Luechinger, M. I. Larsson, E. Zeira, D. M. Guldi and C. J. Brabec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7233–7236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Leatherdale, C. R. Kagan, N. Y. Morgan, S. A. Empedocles, M. A. Kastner and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 2669–2680 CrossRef CAS .
L. Onsager, Phys. Rev., 1938, 54, 554–557 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerischer, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1983, 150, 553–569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salomon, T. Boecking, C. K. Chan, F. Amy, O. Girshevitz, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 266807 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Salomon, D. Cahen, S. Lindsay, J. Tomfohr, V. B. Engelkes and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1881–1890 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Brown, D. Kim, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, J. C. Grossman and V. Bulović, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5863–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Van De Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer, US, Boston, MA,  2012, vol. 102 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652 RSC .
S. Yang, D. Prendergast and J. B. Neaton, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 383–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Wang and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 4276–4280 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06026bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197V + 0.059V × pH.

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM imaging of Cu2O NCs. (b) SEM and (c) TEM cross-section of a slowly evaporated Cu2O NC film on the Au substrate. The sample for the cross-section imaging was prepared by FIB. (d) XRD pattern for Cu2O NCs (blue) and the electrodeposited Cu2O thin film (red), compared with Cu2O database card 01-078-2076, CuO database card 00-041-0254 and Cu database card 04-009-2090 (all in black). The strong signal around 38 degree is contributed by the Au substrate. The dashed lines mark the positions of the Cu2O peaks. Additional peaks in the electrodeposited Cu2O spectrum that are attributed to the substrate (e.g. Au and ITO) are marked with asterisks and dots. See Fig. S6† for detailed Au and ITO spectra. (e) Normalized UV-visible absorption spectra of Cu2O NCs/chloroform solution (blue) and a slowly evaporated Cu2O NC film on the FTO coated glass substrate (red), after chemical activation in 1,2-ethanedithiol/chloroform solution for 60 min.	 

 	Scheme 1  An illustration of the PEC hydrogen generation reaction including relevant excited charge carrier energies versus the standard water reduction potential, at the interfaces of the Cu2O NC photocathode/liquid junctions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Linear sweep voltammetry (backward sweeps #1 and #2, scan rate 10 mV s−1) of ODA–Cu2O NCs that were slowly evaporated on Au substrates, before (black and blue curves) and after ligand exchange with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow and red curves). Prior to the NC deposition, the Au substrates were chemically activated in 1,2-ethanedithiol. The measurements have been conducted under solar simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination. The arrow and the squared wave mark the voltage sweep direction and the triggered on–off excitation, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of slowly evaporated ODA–Cu2O NCs on Au as follows: (a) Au substrate activated with 1,2-ethanedithiol followed by deposition of ligand-unexchanged ODA–Cu2O NCs (blue), and ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with 1,2-ethanedithiol (red) and with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). (b) Au substrate activated with benzene-1,4-dithiol followed by deposition of ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with 1,2-ethanedithiol (blue) and benzene-1,4-dithiol (red) and the Au substrate activated with 1,2-ethanedithiol followed by deposition of ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). (c) Au substrate activated with benzene-1,4-dithiol followed by deposition of ligand-unexchanged ODA–Cu2O NCs (blue), and ligand exchanged Cu2O NCs with benzenethiol (red) and with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow). The measurements have been conducted under solar simulated AM 1.5G chopped illumination at 10 mV s−1 scan rate. 2nd sweeps are presented.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Open circuit voltage measurements of an electrodeposited Cu2O layer (40 nm thickness, black curve) and slowly evaporated layers of ODA–Cu2O NCs on non-activated Au substrates (blue curve); an ODA–Cu2O NC layer on activated Au substrates with 1,2-ethanedithiol (red curve); and after ligand exchange with benzene-1,4-dithiol (yellow curve). (b) Open circuit voltage measurements of slowly evaporated ODA–Cu2O NC layers on chemically activated Au substrates with 1,2-ethanedithiol and after ligand exchange. The exchanging ligands used were 4-methylbenzenethiol (red curve), benzenethiol (orange), 4-chlorothiophenol (yellow), 4-fluorothiophenol (green) and 4-nitrobenzenethiol (blue). All measurements were carried out in Na2SO4/H2O solution in the dark and under solar simulated AM 1.5G constant illumination. The arrows mark the triggered on-off excitation.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements of electrodeposited Cu2O thin films (40 nm) on Au substrates without prior chemical activation, first (yellow) and second (black) backward sweeps at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 (b) XRD patterns of a Cu2O NC based photocathode (blue) and an electrodeposited Cu2O thin film (red). The measurements were performed post-PEC activity in the presence of Na2SO4/H2O solution under constant solar simulated AM 1.5G illumination and 0 V vs. the RHE for 1 h. The measured diffractograms are compared with Cu2O database card 01-078-2076 and Cu database card 00-004-0836. The strong signal around 38 degree is contributed by the Au substrate.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta06026b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
