Solar light harvesting with multinary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00029H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00029H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5354-5422Solar light harvesting with multinary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals

        
          
            Oleksandr 
            Stroyuk
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Alexandra 
            Raevskaya
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Nikolai 
            Gaponik
          
          
        
      b
aL.V. Pysarzhevsky Institute of Physical Chemistry, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 03028 Kyiv, Ukraine. E-mail: alstroyuk@ukr.net
bPhysical Chemistry, Technical University of Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: nikolai.gaponik@chemie.tu-dresden.de
Received 
      17th February 2018
    First published on 25th May 2018AbstractThe paper reviews the state of the art in the synthesis of multinary (ternary, quaternary and more complex) metal chalcogenide nanocrystals (NCs) and their applications as a light absorbing or an auxiliary component of light-harvesting systems. This includes solid-state and liquid-junction solar cells and photocatalytic/photoelectrochemical systems designed for the conversion of solar light into the electric current or the accumulation of solar energy in the form of products of various chemical reactions. The review discusses general aspects of the light absorption and photophysical properties of multinary metal chalcogenide NCs, the modern state of the synthetic strategies applied to produce the multinary metal chalcogenide NCs and related nanoheterostructures, and recent achievements in the metal chalcogenide NC-based solar cells and the photocatalytic/photoelectrochemical systems. The review is concluded by an outlook with a critical discussion of the most promising ways and challenging aspects of further progress in the metal chalcogenide NC-based solar photovoltaics and photochemistry.
Oleksandr Stroyuk
Oleksandr Stroyuk is presently a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellow at the TU Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller and an acting Head of the Laboratory of Organic Photovoltaics and Electrochemistry at L. V. Pysarzhevsky Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC), National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. He received his PhD in chemistry (2003) from IPC under supervision of Prof. S. Ya. Kuchmiy and a degree of Doctor of Sciences in physical chemistry from IPC (2011) for a series of works “Semiconductor nanophotocatalysis: nature, features, photocatalytic systems and reactions”.
Alexandra Raevskaya
Alexandra Raevskaya is a senior staff scientist at the Department of Photochemistry, L. V. Pysarzhevsky Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC), National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. She received her PhD in chemistry (2004) from IPC under supervision of Prof. S. Ya. Kuchmiy. Currently she is a visiting scientist at the TU Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller. Her present research is focused on the synthesis, photoluminescence and photochemistry of semiconductor nanocrystals.
Nikolai Gaponik
Nikolai Gaponik is an ad personam Professor at the TU Dresden (Germany). He received his PhD in chemistry (2000) from the Belarussian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. D. V. Sviridov. He was a visiting scientist at the LMU in Munich in 2000 (with Prof. J. Feldmann and Prof. M. Gao), a DAAD-fellow and later a research scientist in the group of Prof. H. Weller at the University of Hamburg in 2000–2005, and an IKERBASQUE-Fellow at the Center of Materials Physics, San Sebastian, Spain, in 2011. He habilitated at TU Dresden in 2013.
Introduction
In the broadest terms a solar light-harvesting system can be defined as a combination of light-sensitive moieties (molecules, metal complexes, supramolecular complexes, bulk or nanodimensional inorganic/organic semiconductors, bio-molecules and their assemblies) with various electron mediators, co-catalysts, etc. This system serves to absorb the incoming solar light and to convert the electromagnetic energy into the electrical or chemical form available for future utilization or for immediate chemical/electrochemical reactions.
The solar light harvesting can be formally divided into two parallel and sometimes intertwined areas. One is the realization of the conception of artificial photosynthesis, that is, the endothermic light-assisted conversion of extensively abundant compounds – water, N2, CO2, etc. into chemical products that can be processed later releasing the accumulated energy or used as valuable chemical raw materials for synthetic purposes. Alternatively, the solar energy can be used directly as a driving force for various, mostly destructive, photocatalytic transformations of chemical species, for example, to decompose various persistent organic and inorganic contaminants and harmful biota in air and water. The second area is the solar light energy conversion into electric power that occurs in solar cells. The main component of a solar cell is a light absorber which supplies photogenerated electrons and electron vacancies – holes into an electric circuit, thus resulting in the photocurrent generation.
Numerous studies carried out worldwide in the last 3–4 decades showed that both types of light harvesting systems can be successfully realized by using photosensitive semiconductor materials. Indeed, some semiconductors show characteristics ideal for the solar light harvesting. The semiconductors have continuous absorption bands that cover the entire ultraviolet (UV), visible, and sometimes, near infrared (NIR) ranges of the solar spectrum. This absorption results from electron transitions between a continuously filled valence band (VB) and a completely vacant conduction band (CB) under the excitation with light of any energy higher than the difference between CB and VB, i.e. the bandgap Eg. Typically, the semiconductors are chemically robust and reveal incomparably higher photochemical stability than light-harvesting molecular species and metal coordination compounds. Finally, some of the semiconductor materials used to convert solar light are composed of extremely abundant components, such as silicon, iron oxide, or kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4.
The semiconductor-based light-harvesting systems can be attributed to three major groups depending on the character of the utilization of the photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 1). The first group encompasses the photovoltaic systems where the light absorption results in a spatial separation of the CB electrons and VB holes facilitated by the internal electric field of a single p/n heterojunction or a “cascade” of multiple heterojunctions. The photoelectrons are forwarded from the light-harvester into the electric circuit, while the VB holes get filled from the circuit reestablishing the original state of the photosensitive semiconductor. The p/n junction can be organized as a 2D contact between two (or more) adjacent thin films or as multiple microscopic (nanoscopic) p/n junctions in a mixture of a donor and an acceptor in the bulk heterojunction solar cells. Thus, the light absorption results in the generation of a photovoltage and, consequently, a photocurrent, but no chemical transformation takes place in the photovoltaic system.
 Fig. 1  Basic types of semiconductor solar-light-harvesting systems. 
The same principle of charge separation is realized in the photoelectrochemical systems but here the charge carriers participate in the electrode reactions. The system can be designed in such a way that a product of a cathodic reductive reaction is subsequently oxidized in an anodic reaction on the counter electrode and this process proceeds reversibly with no chemical changes in the electrolyte, thus producing only an electric current. This principle is realized in the photoelectrochemical solar cells with liquid electrolytes, or the liquid-junction solar cells.
A photoelectrochemical system can be used to yield chemical products with spatially separated anodic and cathodic semi-reactions, for example, water can be split into hydrogen and oxygen in such photoelectrocatalytic regime. In this case, the photoelectrochemical system is aimed at the accumulation of the solar energy in the chemical form and an external bias can additionally be applied to the electrodes to facilitate the light-driven chemical reactions.
Finally, the photoelectrochemical cycle can be confined to a single semiconductor crystal with both anodic and cathodic reaction taking place on the same or different crystal faces, or separated spatially on different components of a composite heterostructure. If the rates of the anodic and cathodic reactions are balanced the semiconductor acts as a photocatalyst accelerating the reaction between an electron donor and an electron acceptor at the expense of the solar energy. Depending on the nature of the target process, the photocatalytic reaction can be regarded as a photosynthetic one, if it leads to the accumulation of the light energy in the energy-rich products (reduction of H2O, CO2, N2, decomposition of H2S, etc.), or as a photodestructive one, if the light energy is used to decompose the donors/acceptors present in the system.
From the historical perspective, the semiconductor-based photocatalytic, photovoltaic, and photoelectrochemical systems stem from the same roots. For example, the photocatalytic water splitting can be realized in a combined photochemical/photoelectrochemical system in a water splitting solar cell.1–3 A breakthrough in the area was inspired by the works of A. Fujishima and K. Honda on the photoelectrochemical splitting of water on a biased titanium dioxide electrode.1–3 However, titania is only sensitive to the UV light which constitutes only a small portion (around 5%) of the solar irradiation reaching the Earth surface. This utter limitation inspired numerous concepts and methods for the sensitization of TiO2 to the visible light by coupling it with highly-absorbing species or by altering its band structure imparting the TiO2 crystals with the sensitivity to visible light. Alternatively, new semiconductor materials with narrower bandgaps suitable for the visible-light-harvesting were constantly explored and tested, especially among the metal chalcogenide (MC) semiconductors.
In the recent two to three decades, the photochemistry of semiconductor materials experiences an explosive growth associated with the miniaturization of the semiconductor crystals to nanometer dimensions. A transition from the micro- to the nano-scale opens tremendous perspectives and potential of tailoring/designing the properties of semiconductor light harvesters via variations in the nanocrystal (NC) size, shape, coupling mode, surface chemistry, doping, etc. NCs with a diameter d smaller than the double Bohr exciton radius (aB), (also named quantum dots, QDs) reveal pronounced dependencies of the electronic structure and properties on the crystal size. As a result, size dependencies of photophysical properties, such as the position and intensity of absorption and photoluminescence (PL) bands, the energy and rate of the interfacial transfer of charge carriers, etc. are observed.
MC NCs with size-dependent properties are currently broadly used in various applications, including photodetectors and photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, luminescent bio-sensors, photochemistry, etc.4–29 Specifically, large absorption coefficients (104–105 cm−1), broad and continuous absorption bands combined with the size-dependence of the absorption threshold and energy of the photogenerated charge carriers make the MC NCs very promising as light harvesters for solar cells.
Despite the diversity of available metal chalcogenide semiconductor materials, the studies of MC NCs were mostly confined to cadmium CdX and lead PbX chalcogenides (X = S, Se, Te) that exhibit photoresponses and PL in the visible (CdX) and NIR (PbX) ranges. The CdX and PbX QDs were successfully employed as highly luminescent bio-markers and components of solar cells, however, the lucrative optical and photovoltaic properties of CdX- and PbX-based materials are counter-weighted by the acute toxicity of cadmium and lead. The toxicity problem exists also in the case of the other “rising star” of photovoltaics – hybrid organo–inorganic Pb-based perovskites30–32 that exhibit an unrivaled efficiency of light conversion (higher than 20%) but suffer from “dark” and photochemical instability.
In this view, a constant search for new non- or less-toxic MC semiconductor compositions is constantly continued. One of the most promising directions of the search is associated with ternary indium-based and quaternary Sn-based MC NCs. The most typical multinary CuInS2 (CIS) and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) semiconductors have the bandgaps of around 1.5 eV and, therefore, they are perfectly suited for the solar light harvesting.33,34
Similar to cadmium and lead chalcogenides, the multinary MC (MMC) exhibit quite strong quantum confinement effects when prepared in the form of NCs as small as several nanometers thus opening possibilities for a tuning of the spectral response by varying the NC size. When passivated with protective shells (like ZnS) the ternary MC NCs emit quite intense PL with the reported quantum yields (QYs) reaching 60–70%. The multinary NCs are currently intensely studied as light harvesters in the liquid-junction/solid-state solar cells showing promising light conversion efficiencies. The highest efficiency reported for a certified ternary NC-based solar cell is as high as 12.75%35 and comparable with the best dye-sensitized Grätzel-type photoelectrochemical solar cells (∼12%).4
The MMC NCs are studied and reported in a remarkable versatility of compositions and morphologies. The basic In(Ga)-based carcass of the ternary MC NCs and the Sn(Ge)-framework of the quaternary MC NCs tolerates extremely broad deviations from the stoichiometry, the isomorphic substitution of the metal and chalcogenide constituents, as well as the abundant doping with “alien” metal ions. In the simplest classification, the multinary NCs can be assigned to three groups: A–EIII–X, A–EIV–X, and A–EV–X, where X is a chalcogen, E is the lattice-forming metal (In, Ga, Sn, Ge) and A is a variable metal or a combination of two metals (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Overview of the MMC NCs used for light-harvesting applications. 
In the first A–EIII–X group the lattice is formed by InIII or GaIII, much rarer – with AlIII and BIII, while the chalcogen X can be varied from S to Se to Te.5,8,10,12,14–18,24,36–43 Typically, A is copper(I) or silver(I) or a CuI/AgI combination, however AII can also be introduced into the MC structure resulting in AIn2S4 compounds. The EIII elements can be mixed producing all kinds of alloyed solid-solution compounds with the molar ratio of the second EIII element varied in a continuous manner from 0 to 1. Finally, “alien” ions can be incorporated into the ternary MC NCs lattice, most often, Zn2+, modifying considerably the optical and electrophysical properties of the doped MC compounds but not compromising the general tetragonal chalcopyrite structure.
The quaternary A–EIV–X NCs12,17,18,24,34,41,44–49 are typically based on EIV = Sn, rarer – on Ge and Sn/Ge mixtures, while Si-based compounds remain quite exotic (Fig. 2). The EIV lattice framework can be “filled” with A = Cu2Zn producing the most popular kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 phase that also reveals a variety of non-stoichiometric compounds within the same lattice symmetry. This group encompasses also compounds with A = Ag2Zn (quite rare up to date) and Cu2M with M = Ba, Fe, Co, Ni, etc. manifesting the typical kesterite motif. A number of ternary compounds is based on the SnIV carcass with M being bivalent, like Cu2+, Zn2+, or even trivalent, as In3+. Such compounds have a different lattice symmetry than the quaternary kesterite-like formulations, but they also reveal the typical and distinguishable features of MMC NCs – a broad variability of compositions and the capability to accommodate copious dopants.
The same characteristic features allow to enlist into the MMC family also a group of A–EV–X compounds, mostly based on Sb and Bi, rarely on As, with complementary Cu(I) and Ag(I) ions in the lattice (Fig. 2). Of interest for the photovoltaic/photochemical applications are the MC with X = S, Se,12,37,41 while the tellurides have too low bandgaps for the efficient light conversion.
Along with the versatility of compositions and stoichiometries the MMCs reveal a plethora of possible stable and metastable phases, the latter often found in the nanocrystalline MMCs.17,21,41 Typically, bulk and nanosized ternary In-based MMC NCs crystallize in the stable chalcopyrite or metastable CuAu-like structures that both can be derived from the zinc blende binary MCs by substituting pairs of MII atoms with MI + MIII atoms (Fig. 3a). Further substitution of pairs of MIII atoms with MII + MIV atoms in chalcopyrite and CuAu lattices results in stable kesterite and stannite phases (Fig. 3a). Both phases have a low formation enthalpy making possible a considerable disorder in the Cu/Zn sublattice without losses in the crystallinity. Equal number of metastable phases can also be derived from wurtzite modification of binary MCs by substituting two MII with MI + MIII (wurtzite-chalcopyrite and wurtzite-CuAu-like phases) and two MII – with MII + MIV atoms (wurtzite-kesterite and wurtzite-stannite structures).17,21,41 The A–EV–X compounds also manifested a versatility of possible phases depending on the atomic composition and stoichiometry. Fig. 3b exemplifies this phase richness for the Cu–Sb–S system.50
 Fig. 3  (a) Evolution of zinc blende lattice of binary MCs into different lattices of ternary and quaternary MMCs. (b) Lattice cells of some of the members of Cu–Sb–S MMC family. Reprinted/adapted from ref. 17 (a) and ref. 50. Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Because of a vast diversity of possible compositions of the light-harvesting MMC NCs, some of them having quite bulky formulations, a broad utilization of abbreviations, such as CIS for copper indium sulfide or CZTS for copper zinc tin sulfide, is observed in the original reports on the multinary compounds. Typically, the abbreviations are composed from the first letters of the atoms forming a MC compound both in their English and Latin transcription (compare CIS and AIS for copper and silver indium sulfides). The usage of abbreviations seems to be helpful since in a major part of the cases non-stoichiometric compounds are examined and the MMC NC composition is intentionally tuned to achieve an optimal ratio of the constituents for the most efficient light harvesting. At that, some of the abbreviations became generally accepted, though not being systematic. For example, zinc-doped copper indium sulfide and silver indium sulfide compounds are typically referred to as CIZS and ZAIS (not AIZS), and, therefore, no specific meaning is associated with the order of letters in the abbreviations.

Table 1 shows a collection of the abbreviations adopted in the present review and used to refer to MMCs. The abbreviations for the corresponding selenides and tellurides are typically derived by substituting S with Se or Te, or by using several chalcogen symbols in the cases of mixed MC compounds (for example, CIS, CISe, CITe, CISSe for copper indium sulfide, selenide, telluride and sulfo-selenide, respectively).
Table 1 Abbreviations typically used to refer to the multinary metal sulfide compounds




Abbreviation
Name
Composition
Most typical stoichiometric form




AIS
Silver indium sulfide
Ag–In–S
AgInS2


AIGS
Silver indium gallium sulfide
Ag–In–Ga–S
Ag(In,Ga)S2


CAIS
Copper silver indium sulfide
Cu–Ag–In–S
(Cu,Ag)InS2


CBS
Copper bismuth sulfide
Cu–Bi–S
CuBiS2, Cu3BiS3


CBTS
Copper barium tin sulfide
Cu–Ba–Sn–S
Cu2BaSnS4


CFTS
Copper iron tin sulfide
Cu–Fe–Sn–S
Cu2FeSnS4


CGS
Copper gallium sulfide
Cu–Ga–S
CuGaS2


CIS
Copper indium sulfide
Cu–In–S
CuInS2


CIGS
Copper indium gallium sulfide
Cu–In–Ga–S
Cu(In,Ga)S2


CGZS
Copper gallium zinc sulfide
Cu–Ga–Zn–S
—


CIZS, ZCIS
Copper indium zinc sulfide
Cu–In–Zn–S
—


CTS
Copper tin sulfide
Cu–Sn–S
Cu2SnS3


CZGS
Copper zinc germanium sulfide
Cu–Zn–Ge–S
Cu2ZnGeS4


CZTS
Copper zinc tin sulfide
Cu–Zn–Sn–S
Cu2ZnSnS4


CZTGS
Copper zinc tin germanium sulfide
Cu–Zn–Sn–Ge–S
Cu2Zn(Sn,Ge)S4


ZAIS
Zinc silver indium sulfide
Zn–Ag–In–S
—


ZIS
Zinc indium sulfide
Zn–In–S
ZnIn2S4




The present review aims at encompassing the state of the art in the synthesis of multinary (ternary, quaternary and more complex) MC NCs and their applications as light absorbing or auxiliary components of the light-harvesting systems, including solid-state and liquid-junction solar cells, photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical systems. The review comprises four sections covering (i) the general aspects of the light absorption and photophysical properties of MMC NCs (relevant to the light-harvesting applications), (ii) the modern state of the synthetic strategies applied to the production of MMC NCs and related nanoheterostructures, (iii) the state of the art in the MMC NC-based solar cells, and (iv) the photocatalytic/photoelectrochemical systems with the MMC NCs as light absorbers and photocatalysts.
We intentionally combined photovoltaic and photocatalytic (photoelectrochemical) systems based on MMC NCs in this review. The recent progress of both fields shows that frequently the photocatalysis “hints” to the photovoltaics which MC materials are the most suitable for light harvesting in terms of the charge carrier energy and charge generation/transport efficiency. At the same time, the photovoltaics often brings the focus on new materials, typically tested as microcrystalline thin-film light absorbers, which later find applications in the photocatalytic/photoelectrochemical systems in nanocrystalline forms.
The review is concluded by an outlook with a critical discussion of the most promising ways and challenging aspects of the further progress in MC-based solar photovoltaics and photochemistry.
1 Light absorption, photophysical and electrophysical properties of multinary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals

1.1 Absorption spectra – influence of composition and size. 
The MMC NCs reveal an exceptionally broad variability of the light absorption range and the parameters of absorption spectra. The diversity of spectral properties stems from a combination of various variable factors and effects,13,14,20 in particular (i) from the possibility of a broad deviation from the stoichiometry; (ii) the quantum size effects for small NCs (d < 5–10 nm) affecting the band gap and the oscillator strength and modifying the optical properties of MC NCs; (iii) the possibilities of introduction of various dopants, the most popular being probably Zn2+; (iv) the possibility of alloying via the partial substitution constituents, such as S with Se, In with Ga, Sn with Ge, etc.
One of the unique properties of ternary In (Ga) – based and quaternary Sn (Ge) – based MC NCs is the possibility of a broad variation of the NC composition, sometimes very far from the stoichiometry, with the preservation of the crystallinity and the crystal lattice type. This feature is especially vivid for ternary CIS and AIS compounds.
For example, the Cu–In–S NCs retain a tetragonal chalcopyrite structural motif, similar size and size distribution in a broad range of compositions and Cu:In ratios – from the stoichiometric NCs at 1:1 to the copper-poor NCs with the ratio of 1:10. Recent findings made by the high-resolved scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) showed that even for the stoichiometric CuInS2 NCs there exist In-enriched and Cu-enriched areas within each single nanocrystal.51 These results are discussed in more details in Section 2.
Similar findings on the composition fluctuations were recently reported for CIGSe absorbers basing on the results of atom probe tomography.52 A combined high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and nuclear magnetic resonance studies on 77Se and 119Sn atoms of alloyed CZTS–CZTSe films showed that the lattice ordering and composition homogeneity are not long-range phenomena irrespectively on the film composition and the temperature of the preliminary thermal treatment.53 A composition inhomogeneity of microcrystalline annealed CZTS films on the nano-scale was clearly visualized by using the low-temperature cathodoluminescence in a scanning electron microscopic (SEM) mode.54 Therefore, one can speak about the stoichiometry or phase composition of multinary NCs only in the first approximation or as about the collective properties characterizing the NC ensemble as a whole but varying for each microscopic point of each separate NC.
The analysis of reports on the light-harvesting systems based on MMC NCs shows that in many cases the highest efficiencies of light conversion are observed for the non-stoichiometric NCs and the dependence of the light harvesting efficiency on the NC composition (the latter expressed as a molar fraction of one of the constituents) typically is dome-shaped. In the case of CIS and AIS compounds, the filled copper 3d and Ag 4d orbitals contribute into the VB top and, therefore, the variations in the copper/silver content have a drastic effect on the light absorption capabilities of CIS/AIS NCs. For example, the intensity and structure of the absorption band of CIS NCs stabilized in water by thioglycolic acid (TGA) changes considerably with an increase of the copper content (Fig. 4a). For the CIS and core/shell CIS/ZnS NCs synthesized at Cu:In:S = x:5:10 the integral absorbance of colloidal NCs depends almost linearly on x (Fig. 4a, inset).55 The linear relationship of the absorption intensity on the copper content is a clear indication of the direct involvement of copper ions into the interband electron transitions. A magneto-optical study of the non-stoichiometric CIS NCs56 revealed the ground state of the NCs to be diamagnetic consistent with the presence of Cu+ ions in the NC lattice. The photoexcitation results in the appearance of magnetically-active Cu2+ centers clearly indicating the transitions of a copper d-electron into the conduction band.56
 Fig. 4  (a) Absorption spectra of colloidal CIS NCs (a) prepared at a Cu:In:S ratio of x:5:10 with x = 0.2 (curve 1), 0.6 (2), 1.0 (3), 1.5 (4), 2.0 (5), and 2.5 (6). Inset in (a): integral absorbance of CIS NCs (curve 1) and CIS/ZnS NCs (curve 2) as a function of x. Adapted with permissions from ref. 50. (b) Absorption spectra of size-selected CZTS NCs (the average size is given in figure). Inset: Spectral curves in the Tauc coordinates for the determination of Eg. (c) Diffuse reflectance spectra of CuGaxIn1−xS NCs with a varied x. (d) Absorption spectra of alloyed (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 NCs with a varied x. (e) Bandgap of alloyed Cu2ZnSnS1−xSex as a function of x. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 64 (b), ref. 73 (c), ref. 74 (d), and ref. 75 (e). Copyright (2011, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2016, 2017) Elsevier (c and d); (2013) Nature Publishing Group (e). 
Simultaneously with the growth of absorbance an increase in Cu content results in a “red” shift of the absorption threshold indicating the bandgap narrowing (Fig. 4a).
Similar spectral changes were interpreted by Kamat et al.56 in terms of the possibility of two optical transitions, one responsible for the spectral maximum and the second contributing to the absorption “tail” and arising from the transitions with the participation of subbandgap sates. As the Cu:In ratio increases the second transition dominates resulting in a red shift of the absorption band.51 Therefore, the narrowing of the optical bandgap can originate not from the size quantization effect but from the subbandgap state-related electronic transitions. A very similar spectral evolution is observed with an increase of the Ag content in aqueous TGA-stabilized AIS and AIS/ZnS NCs,57 indicating a general character of the relationship between the absorption intensity and the d10 metal content in the ternary NCs.
Ligand-free stoichiometric AIS NCs revealed a band edge at energies lower than the bulk bandgap of AgInS2.58 As the thermal treatment of such NCs resulted not in the expected red shift but, inversely, in a blue shift of the absorption edge, it was concluded that the band edge originates from the electron transitions with the participation of subbandgap states (the so-called Urbach absorption) gradually extincted at the thermal treatment.58 A strong contribution of the subbandgap-state-related absorption was recently reported for the aqueous size-selected AIS NCs:59 the Urbach “tail” masked the band edge and even made impossible an accurate Eg determination directly from the absorption spectra. A similarly strong contribution of the subbandgap states into the absorption band edge prohibiting the accurate Eg determination from the optical data was also observed for the kesterite CZTS and CZTSe films60–62 showing this phenomenon to be of general nature for the MMC NCs.
At the same time, CIS (AIS) NCs produced at different Cu:In (Ag:In) ratios reveal unchanged chalcopyrite crystalline structure and roughly the same NC size in a broad x range.59,63 As discussed below, an increase in the Cu:In (Ag:In) ratio results in a decrease of absolute values of the CB and VB levels and, therefore, simply by varying the d10 metal content the optical properties and electron structure of CIS/AIS NCs can be changed fundamentally without noticeable changes in the NC morphology.
Another way of the tuning of the absorption range of MMC NCs is in “coming down” to a few-nanometer-sized crystals for which the quantum confinement is observed. As the NC size becomes comparable to and smaller than the doubled Bohr exciton radius 2aB for a given semiconductor the photo-generated exciton as well as dissociated free charge carriers experience spatial confinement in the NC volume. The confinement results in a series of effects, in particular, in a broadening of the bandgap with a corresponding change of the absolute values of the CB and VB potentials. For example, the bandgap of kesterite CZTS NCs increases from the bulk-like value of 1.5 eV to 1.8 eV as the NC size is reduced from 7 nm to 2 nm (Fig. 4b).64 The Bohr exciton radius of 2.5–3.4 nm is reported for CZTS NCs64–67 and therefore, the 5–7 nm CZTS NCs are not expected to reveal appreciable size-dependence of the bandgap, which is vividly observed for smaller 2.5 nm and 2 nm NCs (Fig. 4b, inset).64 This example shows that the doubled Bohr exciton radius can be used as a quantitative measure of a threshold size below which the quantum confinement can be expected. Table 2 illustrates the aB values for selected MC compounds along with the effective masses of CB electron (me*) and VB hole (mh*).
Table 2 Bulk bandgap, Bohr exciton radius and effective masses of charge carriers for selected multinary metal chalcogenides




MC

E
bulkg, eV

a
B, nm

m
e*/m0

m
h*/m0
Ref.




CIS
1.45–1.53
4.1
0.16
1.3

68, 69, 72 and 80–82



CISe
1.04–1.07
10.6
0.09
0.73

70, 71 and 82



CGS
2.44
Not reported (n/r)
0.13
0.69

70



CGSe
1.68
n/r
0.14
1.20

70



AIS
1.83–1.87
3.6–5.5
0.15
1.36

72 and 83–85



AISe
1.23
5.5
0.12
0.39

70 and 81



CZTS
1.45–1.5
2.5–3.4
0.18
0.71

64–67



CZTSe
1.0
6.4–13.3
n/r
n/r

66



AZTS
2.0
n/r
0.14–0.16
1.16

86



AZTSe
1.34
n/r
0.06–0.07
0.89

86





For all listed substances the effective electron mass is comparatively low (below 0.2m0) and therefore it can be expected that the quantum confinement effects will strongly affect the properties of free photogenerated CB electrons, in particular the CB “bottom” energy (ECB) and the dynamics of the interfacial electron transfer to other components of the light-harvesting systems.
The values of effective masses can be used to estimate the bandgap of MMC NCs of a given size d using the effective mass approximation. This model envisages Eg scaling as 1/d2, or, vice versa, the size of MC NCs can be estimated using a bandgap determined from the absorption spectra. However, in many cases the effective mass approximation results in an over-estimation of the NC size and, therefore, it should be applied with a caution. For example, the model predicts a bandgap of 2.3–2.4 eV for ∼3.5 nm CIS NCs, while the experiments showed that such NCs are characterized by Eg = ∼2.1 eV.68 In this view, the effective mass approximation can be modified, in particular, by assuming a finite depth of the potential well thus making the estimations more realistic. Currently, Eg(d) calibration curves were reported for CIS NCs,69,70 CISe NCs,70,71 and AIS NCs.72
In a close relation to the exceptional tolerance to the non-stoichiometry, the MMC NCs can also tolerate copious doping and substitution of the core elements, for example, In with Ga in CIS/AIS NCs, Zn with various transition metals in CZTS NCs as well as S with Se in all kinds of MMC NCs, thus providing an remarkably broad variability of the optical and electrophysical properties at a more or less unchanged morphology of NCs (size, shape, phase, etc.). In particular, indium ions in ternary CIS/AIS NCs can be partially replaced with gallium(III) resulting in a blue shift of the absorption band edge proportional to the substitution extent (Fig. 4c).73 In this way the optical response of CIGS/AIGS NCs is smoothly varied in a broad range (from ∼900 nm to 500 nm) without changes in the lattice structure and NC size/shape. The Ga incorporation increases the CB and VB energies making the substituted NCs more active donors of the photogenerated electrons and holes. As a rule, the increased driving force of the interfacial charge transfer of CIGS/AIGS NCs is counterbalanced by a narrower spectral response resulting in dome-shaped dependences of the light-harvesting efficiency on the Ga content.
The lattice of non-stoichiometric CIS/AIS NCs is abundant with In and copper/silver vacancies allowing another “alien” cations to diffuse into the NC forming solid solutions. This phenomenon is most often exploited to produce alloyed CIS–ZnS (CIZS) and AIS–ZnS (ZAIS) NCs. Similarly to the In-to-Ga substitution, the Zn2+ introduction results in a gradual blue shift of the absorption band edge proportional to the dopant content providing unprecedented variability of the spectral sensitivity range (Fig. 4d).74
Finally, the chalcogenide sublattice of all MMC NCs can be formed by a mixture of two chalcogens, typically sulfur and selenium allowing to vary the bandgap of the alloyed NCs between the bandgaps of individual MMC compounds. For example, kesterite CZTSSe NCs revealed a linear (Vegard-like) dependence of the bandgap on the S:Se ratio (Fig. 4e)75 with the morphological properties of the alloyed NCs (size, shape, phase) unchanged throughout the entire x range.


1.2 Determination of CB and VB levels of MMC NCs. 
The applications of MMC NCs in the light-harvesting systems require accurate data on their photophysical, electrophysical, and electrochemical characteristics. Among them the positions of the conduction band “bottom” (ECB) and the valence band “top” (EVB) as analogs of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels of molecular species are of paramount importance for the rational design of the photovoltaic and photochemical systems and devices. In particular, the accurate CB and VB positions of the MC NCs introduced into the bulk-heterojunction solar cells either as a light absorber or as a transport layer are necessary to select/adjust the energy levels of the other components of the cell so that the charge separation and efficient electrons/holes flow to the electron/hole transport layers can be organized. The CB/VB positions of MC NCs introduced as spectral sensitizers into the liquid-junction photoelectrochemical solar cells are primary parameters for the selection of the sensitizer in such a way that the photogenerated CB electrons can be injected into the lower-lying CB of the wide-bandgap metal oxide scaffold, while the photogenerated VB holes of MC NCs – filled with electrons from the redox-species in the electrolyte. Finally, the CB/VB levels of a nanocrystalline MC photocatalyst are vital parameters allowing to predict and to explain the photoinduced events in a photocatalytic system with a set of a given photocatalyst, an electron acceptor, mediators, and an electron donor. Therefore, the accurate determination of CB and VB parameters is a general and crucial goal for the rational design of any kind of the light-harvesting systems based on the MMC NCs.
The CB and VB positions of bulk metal chalcogenide crystals can be considered to be more or less constant depending weakly on the pH of surrounding aqueous electrolytes (the most often case for the photocatalytic systems and liquid-junction solar cells) and showing Nernstian behavior in the solutions of potential-determining ions, such as S2− or Se2−.76 However, for the MC NCs smaller than or comparable to 2aB in the given material the bandgap and CB/VB positions become functions of the NC size.77–79
In theory, both the size and the size-dependent CB and VB levels (ENCCB, ENCVB) can be estimated using the effective mass approximation from the optical bandgap ENCg of the MC NCs derived from absorption spectra. In particular, the offsets of the CB/VB positions of MC NCs relative to the corresponding “bulk” values, that is the differences ΔECB = ENCCB − EbulkCB, and ΔEVB = ENCVB + EbulkVB can be calculated as ΔECB = ΔEg × mh*−1 and ΔEVB = ΔEg × me*−1, respectively, where ΔEg = ENCg − Ebulkg.78,79
In contrast to the “conventional” photoactive binary MC NCs, such as cadmium and lead chalcogenides, for ternary In-based and quaternary Sn-based MC NCs the accurate determination of the size-dependent CB and VB levels becomes much more complicated and tricky. Indeed, the photophysical and electrophysical properties of NCs depend both on the NC composition and size and for the NCs experiencing the quantum confinement effects both dependences are typically intertwined and very hard to discriminate. Therefore, the above-discussed estimation approach can be applied only to the stoichiometric MC NCs, such as CuInS2 or AgInS2 with the well-reported “bulk” electrophysical constants, which is quite a rare case because typically the highest light-harvesting efficiencies are observed for the non-stoichiometric multinary compounds.
In this view, the issue of the reliable determination of the CB and VB level positions of MMC NCs varying both in composition and size becomes an even more urgent and vital than it is for the binary MC NCs and can be resolved only by some direct or indirect experimental measurements. Basically, two different approaches are currently applied to assess the CB and VB positions of composition- and size-selected MC NCs, in particular, the electrochemical methods and photoelectron spectroscopic methods.
The first electrochemical group includes studies of the current–voltage characteristics of MC NCs registered in dark or under the illumination and the analysis of the Mott–Schottky dependences combined with the bandgap determination from the absorption or photoaction spectra.70–92 The second group includes X-ray photoelectron (XPS) and UV-light photoelectron (UPS) spectroscopic studies.59,93–99
The most straightforward way to assess the CB/VB levels of MC NCs is by studying the current–voltage characteristics in a broad range of potentials. It is expected that the NCs attached to an electrode (for example glass carbon) exhibit oxidation peaks at positive potentials and reduction peaks at negative potentials corresponding to the hole injection into the VB and electron injection into the CB (Fig. 5a). This cyclic voltammetry (CV) approach has a general character and was successfully applied to a variety of semiconductor NCs including Si,100 PbS,101,102 CdSe,103–105 CdTe,104 and ZnO,106,107 indicating a broad applicability and credibility of the CV results.
 Fig. 5  (a) Current–voltage curves produced by the cyclic voltammetry of the size-selected CIS NCs. (b and c) CB and VB levels for the size-selected (b) and composition-selected (c) CIS NCs. (d) (a and b) CB and VB potentials of size-selected CISe NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 80 (a and b), ref. 108 (c), and ref. 87 (d). Copyright (2010, 2015, 2016) American Chemical Society. 
The onset potentials of the oxidation and reduction peaks of the size-selected CIS NCs (Eox, Ered, measured versus Ag/AgCl) can be converted into the vacuum scale by using the equations EHOMO = EVB = −Ip = −(Eox + 4.71 eV) and ELUMO = ECB = −Ea = −(Ered + 4.71 eV), were Ip and Ea denote the ionization potential and electron affinity, respectively (Fig. 5b).80 A 4.71 eV constant should be replaced with 4.50 eV if the potentials are expressed relative to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Additionally, the exciton binding energy in MC NCs can be derived as a difference between the electrochemical bandgap (EVB − ECB) and the optical band gap ENCg determined from the NC absorption/photoaction spectra.80
A similar procedure can be applied to assess the CB and VB positions of larger CIS NCs differing in composition, that is in the Cu:In ratio but exhibiting no quantum confinement effects.108 As the copper content in the non-stoichiometric CIS NCs increases, the distance between the onset potentials of the oxidation and reduction peaks of the composition-selected CIS NCs corresponding to the VB/CB levels decreases proportionally to the decrease of the optical bandgap (Fig. 5c).
The CV was applied to evaluate the CB/VB positions of a number of MMC NCs including CIS and CIZS,109 CISe,87 ZISe,110 CuSbS2,111 Cu12Sb4S13,112 CTS,113 CTSe,114 CZTS,91,92,115 Cu2MSnS4 (M = Zn, Ni Co),90 CZTSSe.75,116,117
The size-dependence of CB/VB potentials of CISe NCs (Fig. 5d) determined by the CV was indispensable for the interpretation of their size-dependent photocatalytic activity in the phenol oxidation.87
A CV study of polytypic CZTSSe NCs with different lattice symmetry showed the CB/VB levels to be phase-dependent and increasing from zinc blende to kesterite to wurtzite modification.117 The variation of Se fraction in kesterite CZTSSe NCs from 0 to 1 was found to result in a considerable CB shift from −3.90 eV to −4.61 eV, while the VB position was affected by the chalcogen variation in a much moderate manner, changing from −5.40 eV to −5.73 eV.75 The CB/VB positions of mixed CZTSSe NCs determined by the CV are in a satisfying accordance with the results of other alternative methods, in particular, the Mott–Schottky measurements, UPS and semiempirical calculations, the UPS systematically yielding ∼0.2 eV lower values as compared to other methods.116
The CB/VB positions can also be derived from the current–voltage curves registered in a much narrow range under the illumination. For example, the size-selected AIS NCs produced by the photoetching technique exhibited a size-dependence of the photocurrent onset potential when illuminated on the surface of FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) electrode.72 The onset potential shifted from −0.60 to −1.00 V (versus Ag/AgCl) with the NC size decreasing from 5.1 nm to 2.7 nm. The photocurrent onset potential of the n-conducting AIS NCs can be assumed to be equal to the Fermi potential EF and very close to ECB as reported for many n-type semiconductors.76,78 The EVB potential can then be derived using the equation Eg = EVB − ECB + EC, where Eg is the bandgap determined from the absorption or the external quantum efficiency (EQE or photoaction) spectra of AIS NCs of a selected size d, and EC is the Coulomb energy of the electron–hole interaction, EC = −1.8e2 × (2πεrε0d)−1, εr and ε0 are the electric permittivity of the AIS and of the free space.72 The size-dependent CB and VB of AIS NCs evaluated by this approach are presented in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  (a) CB and VB potentials of the size-selected AIS NCs (solid lines drawn only as an eye-guide). (b) Mott–Schottky dependences for the bare TiO2 nanotube arrays and TiO2/CIS composites in the dark and under the illumination. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 72 (a) and ref. 118 (b). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society (a); (2014) Elsevier (b). 
The position of EF, which is close to ECB for the individual n-doped MC NCs but becomes a collective property in the binary and more complex heterostructures, can be assessed via the measurements of the capacitance–voltage dependences. The capacitance C of the NC/electrolyte interface is given by the equation 1/C2 = 2 × (e0ε0εrND)−1 × (E − EF − kT/e0), where e0 is the elemental charge, ND is the charge carrier density, E is the applied potential, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature.78 By plotting 1/C2versus E, EF can be estimated as a cross point between the linear section of this Mott–Schottky dependence and the abscissa axis (Fig. 6b). The slope of 1/C2–E dependence is proportional to the charge carrier density allowing to estimate the efficiency of the charge photogeneration from the Mott–Schottky curves. For example, illumination of a TiO2/CIS nanoheterostructure results in a shift of the Fermi level indicating the accumulation of the photocarriers and an increase of the 1/C2–E curve slope, showing that the TiO2/CIS composite is characterized by a considerably higher charge carrier density under the illumination than bare titania nanotube array.118 The Mott–Schottky method was also applied to assess the CB position of ZAIS,88 ZIS,119 and CdIn2S4 NCs.89
The photoelectron spectroscopy is a powerful alternative to the CV measurements of the CB and VB positions of MC NCs. Typically, the band structure of NCs is probed by UPS and less frequently – by XPS, the latter providing a much lower resolution. The incoming UV or X-ray irradiation results in the photoelectron ejection thus supplying the information on the HOMO (EVB) position. The LUMO (ECB) level can then be estimated by using bandgaps determined by the complementary absorption or EQE spectroscopies.
An attractive version of this method is the photoelectron spectroscopy in air (PESA) allowing to study MC NCs in the ambient conditions and, therefore, probe the NCs with volatile ligands or solvent residuals that hamper the conventional XPS/UPS measurements. In this version, the VB top level (ionization energy) is determined as a threshold from the dependence between the photoelectron yield and excitation photon energy (Fig. 7a).93 The PESA was successfully applied for the determination of the VB positions of size- and composition-selected ZAIS NCs.93 These NCs showed a steady increase in EVB with a decrease of the average NC size from 8.5 nm to 3.9 nm (Fig. 7b) and the x value – from 1.0 to 0.2 (Fig. 7c). In a similar way, the VB positions of composition-selected ZAISe were also evaluated by the PESA in the whole range of x values94 as well as the VB/CB levels of Ag8SnS6,120 Ag2ZnSnS4,120 and CZTS NCs.121
 Fig. 7  (a) Determination of the VB position of CZTS NCs using PESA; (b and c) VB and CB levels of the size-selected (b) and composition-selected (c) ZAIS NCs determined by the PESA. (d) VB and CB levels of CIS NCs anchored to the TiO2 surface (the size-selected CIS NCs were prepared at a different temperature from 90 to 170 °C as indicated on the figure). Reprinted and adapted with permissions from ref. 121 (a), ref. 93 (b and c) and ref. 95 (d). Copyright (2013, 2015) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
In some cases, the results of the photoelectron spectroscopy of MC NCs supported on metal or semiconducting substrates should be taken with a caution because of the possibility of the so-called “pinning” of the NC Fermi level to the EF of the substrate with a much higher electron density. For example, UPS studies revealed more or less the same VB level position for the size-selected CIS NCs anchored to the TiO2 surface122 and the authors concluded that the entire size-dependent bandgap increment comes into the negative shift of the CB level (Fig. 7d). A very similar situation was recently observed for the size-selected AIS and AIS/ZnS NCs supported on gold and on FTO plates.59 Oppositely to the above-discussed results on ZAIS and ZAISe NCs, both titania-supported CIS NCs122 and gold-supported AIS NCs55 were capped with small ligands, formic acid and TGA, respectively. Therefore, a strong electron interaction between the NC and support can be envisaged resulting in the EF pinning and compromising the accurate EVB determination. Similar EF pinning phenomena were observed also for the 3.7–6.0 nm CdTe NCs on gold123 and the 2.1–4.2 nm CdSe NCs on the ZnO substrates124 indicating a general character of this effect.
The EF pinning may be regarded as favorable for the light-harvesting applications because the entire size-dependent ΔEg contributes into the increase of the absolute ECB value thus potentially enhancing the interfacial electron transfer. However, the CB/VB values affected by pinning should be taken cautiously as a kind of effective properties of the NC–support composite, not the individual NCs themselves. The pinning effect is expected to depend on various factors, such as the state of TiO2 surface, ligand type, the NC size and composition, deposition mode, etc. For example, CIZS NCs96 and CIGS NCs98 capped with mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) and anchored to TiO2 surface revealed the expected upward shifts of the VB level due to the Zn and Ga insertion as compared with pristine CIS NCs96 indicating that the pinning is absent or weak in these cases.


1.3 Photophysical properties of MC NCs. 
The photogenerated charge carriers in MC NCs can participate in several competing processes, in particular, in the interfacial charge transfer to electron/hole acceptors, the radiative electron–hole recombination with PL emission and the non-radiative recombination processes resulting in the thermal dissipation of the photoenergy without any chemical events in the light-harvesting system. Typically, the major efforts are directed at the inhibition of the latter processes as they are responsible for the losses of the photogenerated charge carriers. As the efficiency of both PL emission and the interfacial charge transfer are determined by the competing non-radiative recombination, the PL can serve as a diagnostic tool to assess the “quality” of MC NCs, that is, the efficiency of all processes that compete with the non-radiative relaxation. Indeed, as discussed in the next sections, the PL QY quite often follows the light conversion efficiency – the higher is the PL QY, the more efficient light conversion can be achieved.
The character and possible mechanisms of the PL emitted by various MMCs have been discussed in details in a series of recent review papers (see, for example, ref. 8, 10, 13, 14, 18, 31, 38, 40, 41, 69 and 125) and, therefore, here we focus only on some special features especially relevant for the understanding of the MMC NC-based light-harvesting systems.
The ternary MC NCs typically emit in the visible/NIR spectral range in broad bands characterized by a spectral width of more than 100 nm and a considerable Stokes shift. The PL decay of CIS, AIS and related doped/alloyed NCs occurs in several hundreds of nanoseconds revealing a dependence of the decay rate on the energy of emitted light quanta. Taking this into account, the PL of these NCs is attributed to the so-called “donor–acceptor” recombination, when one or both charge carriers are captured by “deep traps” – the lattice defects and vacancies with the corresponding electronic states lying in the forbidden band.13,14,20,81,126 In terms of such model the spectral width of the PL band is attributed to several distributions – (i) a NC size distribution in a NC ensemble with size-dependent bandgaps; (ii) a distribution of the deep traps by energy (depth), and (iii) a distribution of distances between captured electrons and holes providing for a different Coulomb interaction between them and affecting the rate and energy of the emitted PL quanta. However, it was found that the donor–acceptor model meets some inconsistencies when applied to the ternary MC NCs. A precise control of the NC size and size distribution achieved by the hot injection/heating up syntheses (see next section) allowed to synthesize highly monodisperse CIS and AIS NCs still revealing broad PL bands.14,69 The highly monodisperse AIS NCs produced by the size-selected precipitation showed the same (or even higher) spectral PL band widths as the original polydisperse ensemble.59 These facts allow to exclude the size distribution of ternary NCs as a major contributor to the broadband PL. Recent single-particle PL studies of CIS NCs127 and AIS NCs128 showed them to have more or less equally broad PL bands indicating the large PL spectral width to be an intrinsic property of each single ternary NCs.
Typically, the defect states in NCs participate both in the radiative and non-radiative recombination and thus the QY of donor–acceptor PL is expected to be quite low, in contrast to the direct interband (excitonic) radiative recombination. However, recent efforts aimed at the synthesis of brightly emitting CIS and AIS NCs showed the feasibility of the production of NCs with ∼40–70% PL QY,14,33,59,129 which is obviously not consistent with the model of defect-related emission. The donor–acceptor model with e–h pairs distributed by the distance also contradicts to the reported temperature and excitation power dependences of the PL emission. The spectral PL parameters remain unchanged at low temperatures130 and very small light intensities,81,129 while a strong dependence of the PL band shape both of temperature and excitation power is expected for the donor–acceptor model. In this view, alternative models are under development, in particular, the model assuming a strong electron–phonon interaction typical for the MMC NCs to be responsible for the large PL band width; the entire PL band is formed by phonon replicas of the interband electron transition.81,126 This model seems to be more realistic and does not necessarily assume that ternary NCs are abundant with defects to emit the broadband PL. These findings are as striking as the capability of non-stoichiometric and highly doped CIS/AIS NCs to emit bright luminescence and, taken in ensemble, they evidence a unique character of such NCs differing drastically from “conventional” binary MC NCs, such as cadmium and lead chalcogenides, where even a minor structural disordering or the introduction of dopants typically deteriorates the PL properties. As a result, the broadband PL of ternary MC NCs appears to be as characteristic of the efficiency of competing electron/hole transfer events as does the excitonic PL in the case of CdX and PbX NCs (where X = S, Se).
For example, the studies of the PL quenching of MMC NCs contacting with metal oxide scaffolds63,131 supply indispensible information on the rate of the interfacial electron transfer and efficiency of the MMC NCs as spectral sensitizers in the light-harvesting systems. The interfacial electron/hole transfer rate constant ket can be derived from a comparison of the characteristic radiative life times of MMC NCs attached to an electron acceptor (TiO2)63 or an electron donor (NiO),131τ1rad, and to some dielectric substrate with a similar surface chemistry, for example, glass or silica, τ0rad, as ket = 1/τ1rad − 1/τ0rad (Fig. 8a).
 Fig. 8  (a) PL decay curves of Zn2+-doped CISSe NCs anchored to NiO and glass123 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Time-resolved transient absorption spectra recorded following 387 nm laser pulse excitation of CIS NCs on SiO2 substrate at different delay times (b) and kinetic curves of the CIS NC bleaching decay (recorded at 590 nm) on SiO2 and TiO2 (c). (d) Dependence of the charge separation efficiency (ΦCS) and PL QY on the average size of CIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 97 (b and c) and ref. 124 (d). Copyright (2013, 2014) American Chemical Society. 
The rate constant of the electron transfer from NiO scaffold to the Zn-doped CIS and CISSe NCs was found to be 5.4 × 107 s−1 and 8.2 × 107 s−1, respectively.131 This clearly shows that the enhanced photoresponse of the CISSe-based solar cell originates not only from the broader light absorption range of CISSe NCs, as compared to CIS, but also from the more efficient hole transfer to the NiO electrode.
The rate constant of the electron transfer from the size-selected AIS NCs to TiO2 was found to increase from 5.6 × 106 s−1 to 6.6 × 106 s−1 as the size-dependent bandgap of AIS NCs increased from 2.5 eV to 2.75 eV.63 It should be noted, that the PL quenching results provide a lower range of ket because the radiative recombination in the MMC NCs occurs with the constant rates of an order of 106 s−1.14,59,64,69,126 Only those electrons survived in faster processes can contribute into the competition between PL and the charge transfer. To assess the faster events, the MC NCs are typically probed with the femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy.56,96,97,132–135
The laser photoexcitation of MC NCs with ∼150 fs pulses results in the transfer of the VB electrons into the CB filling some portion of vacant states near the CB “bottom”. These states become unavailable for the interband electron transitions till the CB electrons are not consumed in some secondary processes – the recombination or the interfacial charge transfer. As a result, the interband VB-to-CB electron transition in such excited NCs requires a higher energy, the fact reflecting in a transient blue shift of the absorption band edge observable as a negative transient bleaching band in the differential spectra (Fig. 8b).56,97,132
The bleaching decay reflects the extinction dynamics of the photoexcited CB electrons allowing to assess the rate of the interfacial charge transfer similar to the above-discussed PL quenching method. The possibility of the CB electron transfer to titania NCs in the TiO2/CIS composite results in a faster bleaching decay as compared with reference SiO2/CIS heterostructures (Fig. 8c) providing comparative data for the ket determination. The charge transfer rate constant ket = 5.75 × 1011 s−1 determined from the kinetic curves shown in the figure provides an upper limit of the charge injection rates,97 similar as the above-discussed PL data provide a lower rate limit for this process. A close rate constant of 2.08 × 1011 s−1 determined from the transient bleaching decay was reported for CIS NCs on TiO2/SiO2 scaffolds.133 As a ZnS shell is deposited on CIS NCs ket decreases to 0.35 × 1011 s−1 and further – to 0.14 × 1011 s−1 with the increasing shell thickness, indicating that the ZnS shell constitutes a barrier for the interfacial electron transfers.133 However, the shell simultaneously blocks the surface defects of CIS NCs and thus the overall performance of TiO2/CIS/ZnS photoanodes appears to be higher than for the uncovered analog, despite the losses in the charge transfer efficiency.133
A slowing of the transient bleaching decay of CIS/ZnS NCs in the presence of an active electron donor – ascorbic acid135 was attributed to the efficient filling of the VB hole thus suppressing largely the electron–hole recombination, allowing the NCs to act as an active photocatalyst of the water reduction even without additional co-catalysts. The increase of the bleaching lifetime was accompanied with the PL quenching additionally supporting the conclusion of the suppressed e–h recombination.135
The rate constant of the electron transfer from CISe NCs to a titania scaffold measured from the transient bleaching recovery was found to be 2.4 × 1010 s−1 and increasing to 9.1 × 1010 s−1 after doping the NCs with Zn2+ ions as a result of the surface trap states passivation96 in accordance with the above-discussed PL quenching studies of Zn-doped CISSe NCs.131
The transient bleaching spectroscopy allows also to assess the efficiency of charge separation within individual size-selected MMC NCs. Kamat et al. studied a series of 2.9–5.3 nm CIS NCs and found that the efficiency of charge stabilization, that is, the ratio of initial bleaching intensity to that measured in 50 ps after the photoexcitation depends in a non-monotonic way on the NC size being maximal for the 4 nm CIS NCs (Fig. 8d).132 The same size-dependent trend was exhibited by the PL QY indicating that the 4 nm NCs reveal an optimal balance between the charge trapping and recombination resulting in superior light-harvesting capacities of such NCs as compared to smaller and larger CIS NCs.132

2 Synthesis of MMC NCs
The ideology and practice of the syntheses of MMC NCs8,10–18,22,28,29,38–41,43,46,49,128–130,136–138 stem directly from those well-established now for various binary MC compounds broadly used in the light-harvesting systems, such as CdS, CdSe, ZnS, PbS, PbSe, Bi2S3, Sb2S3, MoS2, etc. Similar to the binary compounds, the colloidal NCs of ternary and quaternary MC are most often synthesized by the well-known heating up and hot injection methods in a variety of high-boiling-temperature non-coordinating and coordinating organic solvents. To render such NCs soluble in the polar solvents as well as to avoid barriers for the photoinduced electron transfers between MMC NCs and other components of the light-harvesting systems, various post-synthesis ligand-exchange and solvent-exchange procedures were developed for the multinary compounds. Simultaneously, the direct syntheses of MMC NCs in water and other polar solvents provide a useful alternative to the “classic” heating-up/hot-injection approaches.
The nanocrystalline films of MMC NCs, similar to their binary counterparts, are typically produced from the NC “inks” with appropriate modifications, such as additional sulfidation/selenidation, ligand exchange, and annealing aimed at an increase in the crystallinity. Additionally, a broad arsenal of physical and physical/chemical methods is applied for the film formation, including the vapor deposition and sputtering techniques, thermal treatment of molecular and metal-complex precursors, electrochemical and electrophoretic deposition, etc.
Finally, the nanocrystalline powdered MC samples are often produced by the solvothermal/hydrothermal methods allowing to tune the NC size, phase composition, the morphology of final products (NC shape, porosity, the shape of secondary NC aggregates, etc.). These methods typically yield powdered products with high crystallinity and surface area suitable for the photocatalysis and other light-harvesting applications.

2.1 Heating-up synthesis. 
In the heating-up synthesis a single precursor or a mixture of metal precursors combined with a chalcogen source are subjected to heating in the high-boiling-point and stable organic solvents such as oleylamine (OLA), octadecene (ODE), or trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO). In many cases, in particular, with OLA and oleic acid, the solvent acts simultaneously as a surface-capping agent which controls the growth of MMC NCs. Another popular medium for the heating-up synthesis of metal sulfide NCs is 1-dodecanethiol (1-DDT) acting simultaneously as a dispersive medium, a capping ligand, and a sulfur source.97,139 In the simplest heating-up synthesis of CIS NCs, copper(I) iodide and In(ac)3 are heated at around 200 °C in 1-DDT resulting in the well crystallined and quite monodisperse 1-DDT-capped NCs.139,140 In the case of the heating-up synthesis of AgInS2 and ZAIS NCs a variation of the 1-DDT content allows to tune the average size of resulting NCs from 4 to 7–8 nm (Fig. 9a).84,93,129,141 By adjusting the ratio of Ag and In precursors, the shape and composition of the ZAIS NCs can be influenced in a complex way. At a lowered Ag content the synthesis yields rod-like In-enriched NCs (3 nm × 10 nm) as a result of a higher In3+ reactivity. With increasing Zn concentration the reactivities of both metal precursors equalize and the synthesis results in smaller 2–4 nm NCs enriched with Zn.84
 Fig. 9  (a) Dependence of the average size of ZAIS NCs on the 1-DDT content during the heating-up synthesis. (b and c) TEM of rod- and rice-shaped ZAIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 (a) and ref. 157 (b and c). Copyright (2015, 2016) American Chemical Society. 
Along with the 1-DDT concentration, the heating duration plays a key role in the growth of the CIS NCs. For example, the average size of CIS NCs can be increased from 3.5 nm to 7.3 nm by increasing the heating exposure time from around 20 to 120 min.142
Since the long alkyl chain of 1-DDT can hamper charge transfers from CIS NCs in the photovoltaic systems, smaller ligands are probed as stabilizing agents such as octanethiol143 or 2-mercapto-5-n-propylpyrimidine.144 The above-discussed general procedure with some variations was applied to synthesize CIS,56,80,82,97,132,142,145,146 AIS,147 CIZS,148–150 ZAIS,74,151 CIGS,152 CGS and CGZS NCs.153
The phase of CIS NCs produced by the heating-up can be controlled by the composition of the high-boiling-point dispersive medium. In particular, the metastable zinc blende CIS NCs form in ODE or oleic acid, while the synthesis in the coordinating solvents – OLA or TOPO yields stable wurtzite CIS NCs.154 Such phase-selective approach was also extended to the synthesis of zinc blende/wurtzite CTS and CZTS NCs.154
The multinary metal sulfide NCs are often synthesized by the heating up of a solution of metal diethyldithiocarbamates (dedtc) in the high-boiling solvents. In this way, alloyed ZAIS wurtzite nanorods (NRs) were produced.155 At first, the hexagonal Cu2S NCs form serving as the nucleation sites for the following formation of ZAIS NRs.155 The thermal decomposition of a mixture of Sn:In dedtc complexes in OLA at a Sn:In ratio of 1:4 was shown to yield 3.8 nm-thin In4SnS8 nanosheets.156
Similarly, the CIS and CIGS nanoribbons were produced from the corresponding dedtc complexes in a mixture of 1-DDT and oleic acid.158 Here also Cu1.75S NCs form on the primary synthesis stage. A high mobility of Cu+ generates vacancies in the CuxS NCs that can be filled with In(III) and Ga(III) thus inducing the alloying and growth of CIS/CIGS nanoribbons.
The thermal decomposition of single-molecule precursors containing all the necessary elements in a pre-defined proportion is a reliable way for the synthesis of MC NCs with a precise stoichiometry. In the case of metal sulfide NCs the precursor is typically formed by dithiocarbamates. In particular, ∼5 nm ZAIS NCs were produced by the thermal decomposition of (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CNEt2)4 complexes with a varied x in octylamine.72,159–162
Depending on the precursors and solvent used, the co-decomposition of copper and antimony diethyldithio-carbamates yields NCs with a variety of compositions and shapes, in particular rectangular CuSbS2, pyramidal Cu12Sb4S13, and rhombic Cu3SbS3.163
The thermal decomposition of a mixture of Cu, Zn, In, and Cd diethyldithiocarbamates in toluene in the presence of oleic acid and OLA is a versatile approach to various multicomponent NCs, such as Zn2x(CuIn)1−xS2, (CuIn)1−xCd2xS2, and (ZnS)x(CuInS2)y(CdS)z.164
Recently, OLA-capped 3 nm CIS NCs were reported to form even at room temperature as a result of the interactions between the amine and Cu(I) and In(III) xanthates in toluene.165,166 Similar approaches were applied to synthesize CIGS NCs from molecular complex bimetallic precursors.167
Colloidal OLA-capped CISe and CIZSe NCs were synthesized by the heating-up approach at 180 °C using elemental selenium dissolved in diphenylphosphine96,168 or OLA.82,169,170 Typically, CISe NCs evolve in coordinating solvents such as OLA via an intermediary step of the formation of CuSe and InSe NC phases while in the non-coordinating solvents (ODE) the intermediary Cu2xSe (0 < x < 0.5) and In2Se3 NCs were observed.169 The CISe NCs were synthesized by reacting OLA complexes of Cu+ and In3+ with oleylammonium selenocarbamate formed in situ from Se and CO.171
The alloyed ZAISe NCs with average sizes of 3.5–6.2 nm were produced through the heating-up of metal acetates with selenourea in hot OLA.99 The anisotropic ZAIS NCs with a precise shape control were synthesized in OLA/1-DDT using a solution of S8 and dibutylthiourea in 1-DDT as a complex sulfur source.165 The precursor composition was comparatively rapidly (with an increment of 1.2 °C per s) heated up to 250 °C and maintained at this temperature. The short heating (less than 5 min) produced rod-shaped ZAIS NCs, while a longer heating-up procedure yielded a mixture of rod-shaped and rice-shaped NCs. The latter can be shape-selectively separated by adding methanol as a “poor” solvent inducing the preferential precipitation of nanorods and allowing to separate both fractions (Fig. 9b and c).
Orthorhombic AgGaS2 NCs form during the thermal decomposition of a mixture Ag(I) and Ga(III) dithiocarbamate complexes in coordinating solvents.172 Thermal decomposition of a single-precursor [Ga(acda)3Cu(PPh3)2]NO3 (acda = 2-aminocyclopentene-1-dithiocarboxylic acid, PPh3 = triphenylphosphine) in a OLA/ODE/TOPO/1-DDT mixture was reported to yield CuGaS2 NCs.173
Ternary Cu2SnS3 NCs were synthesized by the heating-up approach starting from CuI, SnAc4 and 1-DDT. The average NC size increased smoothly from 2.7 nm to 3.6 nm as the heating was prolonged from 5 min to 30 min.113 Highly monodisperse CTS NCs were produced by the thermal treatment of copper and tin salts with diphenylselenide in OLA/ODE.174
By performing the heating-up synthesis in a flow tubular reactor instead of the conventional batch reactors the heating duration can be reduced to several minutes and the NC size distribution narrowed considerably (Fig. 10a). The latter effect results from a very efficient heat transfer typical for the flow reactors and shows good perspectives for the commercial scaling up of such approach. The heating-up protocol was also adapted for the flow synthesis of CZTS NCs.175
 Fig. 10  (a) Size distributions of CIS NCs synthesized using the heating-up approach in a conventional batch reactor (curve 1) and in a flow reactor (curve 2). (b) TEM of CuInTe2 nanosheets (inset: a photograph of colloidal CITe solution showing the scattering of a laser beam). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 140 (a) and ref. 180 (b). Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The 17–18 nm silver tin sulfide Ag8SnS6 NCs were produced by the heating-up method using ethylene glycol as a solvent and a capping agent at 160 °C.176 A similar approach was applied to form CIS NCs at 200 °C177 and CZTS NCs at 450 °C.178
The thermal treatment of a ODE/OLA solution of AgNO3, sulfur, and GeCl4 at 200 °C resulted in Ag8GeS6 NCs.179 A fast heating up procedure was applied to produce ultrathin 1-DDT-capped CuInTe2 nanoplates (Fig. 10b).180 The nanoplates formed via the 2D assembly and recrystallization of primary CITe nano-seeds. Luzonite Cu2AsS4 NCs with an average size of 7 nm were prepared by the heating-up from AsCl3 and S/OLA at 175 °C.181
The copper sulfide NCs that often form on the first stage of both heating-up and the hot-injection syntheses are abundant with copper vacancies which, in combination with a comparatively high mobility of Cu+ ions can be used to incorporate alien metal ions into the NC lattice and/or to partially exchange copper(I) ions in the lattice thus producing various MMC NCs. For example, by the sequential ion incorporation/ion exchange with In3+ and Zn2+ in the original Cu2S NCs a series of core/shell CIS/ZnS and CIZS/ZnS NCs was produced109 (Fig. 11a). In this way Zn2+ ions introduced on the second stage mainly form a shell around CIS NCs, but a partial incorporation of Zn2+ occurs inevitably as an inherent feature of both CIS and AIS compounds. Alternatively, if both In3+ and Zn2+ are simultaneously introduced to Cu2S NCs the synthesis yields homogeneously alloyed CIZS NCs.109
 Fig. 11  (a) A scheme of ion exchange synthesis of core/shell CIS/ZnS and alloyed CIZS NCs from Cu2S NCs. (b–e) TEM images of CuSe NCs transforming gradually into CIGS NCs as a result of Ga ion incorporation at 130 °C (b), 160 °C (c), 200 °C (d), and 230 °C (e). (f) A schematic of the transformation. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 109 (a) and ref. 175 (b–f). Copyright (2012, 2015) American Chemical Society. 
By varying the heating duration the average size of CuxS NCs growing in ODE/TOPO/1-DDT mixtures was varied from 3 nm to 8 nm.182 This size-selected copper sulfide NCs were then applied as a sacrificial precursor for the synthesis of CIS NCs via the In3+ incorporation/exchange. The In3+ inclusion occurs already at room temperature, but can be accelerated substantially by carrying the process at 125 °C.182
Triangular CuSe NCs were used as a sacrificial template to produce CIGSe NCs via the incorporation of In ions in hexadecylamine at 230 °C in an oxygen-free environment.183 The TEM studies of the probes taken at different growth moments clearly exemplify the process of CuSe transformation into smaller CIGS NCs (Fig. 11b–f).
Since the copper sulfide and CIS have almost the same atom arrangement the transformation of CuxS nanoplates into CIS (CIGS) nanoplates by introducing the In (In/Ga) precursor at 260 °C proceeds with the preservation of the original template morphology.184 In turn, CIS nanoplates can be used as a sacrificial template for the synthesis of CZTS nanoplates by the complete substitution of Cu ions with a combination of Sn and Zn ions.184 The final CZTS nanoplates crystallize as a kesterite/stannite mixture and have a lateral size of around 150 nm and a thickness of ∼12 nm.
The gradual incorporation of Zn and Sn ions into the pre-formed CuxS NCs at 220 °C in ODE/OLA mixtures was used to synthesize quaternary Cu-poor kesterite CZTS NCs.185 In the presence of 1-DDT the bullet-shaped wurtzite CZTS predominantly forms in this system. The synthesis can be upscaled to yield gram amounts of the CZTS NCs and thus is very perspective for the commercial implementations in the photovoltaics.185
The ion incorporation/ion exchange was applied to introduce In3+ ions into Ag2S NCs converting them into AIS NCs of roughly the same size.186 The size of “template” Ag2S NCs can be relatively simply varied from ∼3 to ∼14 nm by adjusting the Ag:S ratio during the formation of silver sulfide NCs in OLA/toluene. On the example of the ion exchange with 4.1 nm Ag2S NCs converting into the 3.9 nm AIS NCs, it was shown that the NC size is reduced by ∼14% as expected for three Ag+ ions exchanged with a sole In3+ ion.186 A similar approach was developed for the transformation of Ag2Se NCs into the nanocrystalline ZAISe by the simultaneous diffusion of Zn2+ and In3+ into the silver selenide nano-template.187 Tadpole-shaped AgGaSe2 NCs were reported to form as a result of the diffusion of Ga3+ ions into the lattice of Ag2Se NCs.188 The same mechanism is responsible for the formation of spherical AgGaS2 NCs189 and, most probably, also elongated wurtzite CuGaS2 NCs in the presence of 1-DDT.190,191
A variety of morphologies of CuSbS2 NCs, in particular, nanocubes, nanobricks and nanoplatelets, can be produced by tailoring the composition of a complex coordinating solvent including OLA, ODE and oleic acid.111
The heating-up approach is frequently used for the post-synthesis modifications of MMC NCs aimed at the deposition of various shells and the formation of functional composites. In particular, CZTS and Ga-doped CZTS NCs can be produced by the heating-up of metal acetylacetonate (acac) complexes in OLA as a solvent and a capping agent,192–197 as well as in combinations of OLA with glycerol75,198 and thioacetamide (TAA),199 and in benzyl alcohol.200 The synthesis yields NCs with an irregular shape that grow as the heating duration is increased (Fig. 12). The compositional studies of the NCs showed that the primary fast nucleation growth stage when the precursors are totally consumed lasts for ∼0.5 h and then the Oswald ripening of the NCs becomes a dominating growth mechanism.
 Fig. 12  TEM and size distribution of CZTS NCs produced by the heating-up with a different heating duration (indicated on figures). Reprinted and adapted with permissions from ref. 192. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
Oleylamine was used as a universal medium for the heating-up synthesis of a family of CZTX (X = S, Se, Te) NCs from corresponding elemental chalcogens.201 The composition-tuned Cu2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 NCs were produced by the heating-up in OLA/DTT with diphenylselenide as a Se source.66 A combination of 1-DDT and (C6H5)2Se yields exclusively wurtzite NCs, contrary to the similar synthesis with elemental S and Se producing predominantly zinc blende CZTSSe NCs.66 Pure wurtzite 10 nm CZTS NCs were also produced from metal acetates by using thiourea and diethanolamine as a sulfur source and a solvent, respectively.202 The heating-up synthesis of CZTS NCs can be made “green” and sustainable by using natural vegetable oils as a high-boiling-point solvent and a source of capping ligands.203,204
The detailed studies of the CZTS and CZTSSe NC growth in different mixtures of high-boiling-temperature solvents revealed the phase and shape of the NCs to be a complex function of the coordinating abilities of the solvent, the nature of copper precursor and the duration and temperature of the synthesis.205 Thus, in the coordinating solvents such as OLA and TOPO multi-faceted cubic/hexagonal NCs can be produced, while the heating-up in the non-coordinating ODE yields mostly polygonal wurtzite NCs (Fig. 13a). Also, the stability of the Cu complex determined the Cu:Se ratio in the final CZTSSe NCs.
 Fig. 13  (a) A scheme depicting various geometries and phases of CZTS NCs produced by the heating-up synthesis. (b) TEM and size distribution of CZTS NCs synthesized at an increased starting concentration of the precursors. (c) Schemes of reactions between CS2 and OLA and OLA/1-DDT. (d) Absorption spectra and photographs of colloidal (Cu2Sn)x/3Zn1−xS NCs with a varied composition (x values given in the insert). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 205 (a), ref. 206 (b), ref. 121 (c), and ref. 208 (d). Copyright (2013–2016) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2010) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
By increasing the concentration of reactants by a factor of 6–8 higher than typically used in the heating-up method, the highly monodisperse CZTS can be produced (Fig. 13b).206 In view of the above-discussed results indicating a fast consumption of the reactants already in the first minutes of the synthesis, the narrow size distribution observed in this case may be attributed to a highly increased rate of the primary nuclei formation.
A versatile single-reactor heating-up approach to synthesize CZTS NCs was proposed by Chesman et al.121 who produced in situ metal dithiocarbamate and trithiocarbonate complexes of Cu, Zn, and Sn via reactions between CS2 and OLA or 1-DDT, respectively (Fig. 13c). The thermal decomposition of both kinds of complexes on the primary synthesis stage at 100 °C results in 1–2 nm nuclei which then grow at 250 °C at the expense of the 1-DDT decomposition. The decoupling of the nucleation and nuclei growth stages allows to reach highly concentrated colloidal products as well as to exert a precise control of the NC properties.121 A similar approach was reported for the preparation of wurtzite CZTS nanocones.207
The Zn-doped copper tin sulfide sphalerite (Cu2Sn)x/3Zn1−xS NCs can be synthesized by the heating-up of metal chlorides and thiourea in OLA at 200 °C in a broad compositional range of 0 < x < 0.75.208 The variation of x from zero to 0.75 is accompanied by a narrowing of the bandgap from 3.48 eV (ZnS) to 1.23 eV and a shift of the absorption threshold down to ∼1000 nm (Fig. 13d).
The metal-CZTS nanoheterostructures can be produced by the heating-up with Au, Pd and Pt NCs.209 In this case, the reaction in the non-coordinating ODE yields core/shell CZTS/metal NCs (Fig. 14a) while the utilization of the coordinating OLA results in dimer heterostructures (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  (a and b) TEM images of the core/shell (a) and binary (b) CZTS/Pd nanoheterostructures. (c) TEM of CZTS–Pt nanoheterostructures. (d) Au/Cu2FeSnS4 core/shell nanoheterostructures. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 209 (a and b), ref. 215 (c), and ref. 218 (d). Copyright (2014–2017) American Chemical Society. 
CZTS NRs can be produced by the heating-up in a mixture of linear 1-DDT and tert-DDT (t-DDT) (Fig. 11a) acting both as surfactants and sulfur sources.195,210–213 The formation of elongated (15 nm × 8 nm) wurtzite CZTS NCs was observed at the thermal decomposition of a mixture of Cu, Zn, and Sn–dedtc complexes in a mixture of trioctylamine and hexadecanethiol.214 By changing hexadecanethiol to OLA the synthesis can be routed to the exclusive formation of the tetragonal zinc blende CZTS NCs.
The average size of Ag8SnS6 (ATS) NCs synthesized by the thermal decomposition of a mixture of the metal dedtc complexes in OLA was found to increase from ∼6 to ∼12 nm as the solvent temperature was elevated from 150 to 350 °C.120
The monodisperse CZTS NCs synthesized by using the 1-DDT/t-DDT mixture in OLA were used as seeds to form CZTS–Au and CZTS–Pt heterostructures. In particular, platinum deposition was performed by injecting a mixture of CZTS NCs and Pt(II)–acac complex into phenyl ether at 200 °C.215 The procedure resulted in several ∼2 nm Pt NCs deposited on each ∼12 nm CZTS NC (Fig. 14c). Uniform kesterite ∼10–15 nm Cu2ZnGeS4 and Cu2ZnGeSe4 NCs were synthesized by the heating-up from copper and zinc acetylacetonates, a dioxane–GeCl2 complex and S(Se)/OLA solution at around 300 °C.216 In a similar procedure, Cu2ZnGeS4 NCs were produced using Cu and Zn dedtc complexes and 1-DDT at 300 °C.217
The heating-up deposition of Cu2FeSnS4 on the surface of pre-formed Au NCs at 140 °C triggered by the injection of the 1-DDT/t-DDT mixture results in the core/shell Au/Cu2FeSnS4 nanostructures with the core size of 10 nm and shell thickness of 10–20 nm (Fig. 14d).218
A special version of the heating-up procedure was reported when a precursor mixture containing Cu+, Sn4+, Zn2+ (or Co2+), thiourea, and tetramethylammonium hydroxide was introduced into the molten KSCN at 450 °C.219 The decomposition of potassium thiocyanate produces CN− and sulfur followed by the reduction of sulfur to sulfide by cyanide ions and the formation of highly crystalline Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu2CoSnS2 NCs.
The CZTS NRs can be manipulated to produce self-assembled photosensitive layers. In particular, by the addition of a polar 2-propanol side-by-side assembly of the NRs into 2D sheets was triggered via the dipole–dipole interactions.210,220 The 2D aggregates can be then disassembled by modifying the NRs with tetradecylphosphonic acid. Finally, both assembled and individual CZTS NRs can be deposited by the electrophoresis as the NR layers with a different geometry (Fig. 15a). An alternative way to the assembly of CZTS NRs grown by the heating-up approaches in 1-DDT/t-DDT mixtures is in doping them with Sb3+ that triggers the coupling and gradual fusing of NRs into 2D sheets (Fig. 15b and c).221 The aspect ratio of CTS and CZTS NRs formed in the presence of 1-DDT/t-DDT can be tuned from 3 to ∼1.9 by decreasing the concentration of a copper (or copper + tin in the case of CZTS) precursor with the rest of component concentrations kept constant.222
 Fig. 15  (a) A scheme illustrating the assembling/disassembling of CZTS NRs. (b and c) Dark-field TEM images of separate CZTS NRs (b) and their 2D assemblies (c). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 210 (a) and ref. 221 (b and c). Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a); (2017) American Chemical Society (b and c). 
The phase of CTS NCs can also be controlled by the nature of sulfur precursor. The heating-up synthesis with S/OLA and 1-DDT was reported to lead selectively to the zinc blende and wurtzite modifications of Cu2SnS3 NCs, respectively.223 The CTS NCs was then converted into CZTS by the substitution of Cu with Zn/Sn with the preservation of the phase composition of the original CTS template.223


2.2 Hot-injection synthesis. 
In the hot injection synthesis the metal precursors are typically dissolved in OLA, oleic acid and other media at around 100 °C, then the temperature is rapidly increased to 180–200 °C and a chalcogen source (for example sulfur solution in OLA – S/OLA or 1-DDT) is injected to trigger the nucleation of MC NCs. The solution is kept at this temperature for a certain period of time to allow the primary nuclei to grow to a desired size and then the temperature is sharply reduced thus arresting the further NCs growth and ”freezing” the existing size distribution. Therefore, in the hot-injection method, the variation of the heating duration after the injection event is most frequently used to tailor the average size of the resulting NCs.83,126,224 For example, the average size of AIS NCs growing in 1-DDT increases from 1.9 nm just after the S/OLA injection to 2.3 nm after a 30 s treatment and to 3.1 nm – after the heating for 20 min.224
CIS NCs are typically produced by the hot-injection technique from Cu+ and In3+ chlorides or acetates dissolved at 80–90 °C in Ar- or N2-saturated OLA or other coordinating solvent to yield amine complexes. The sulfide source is then rapidly injected at 240–280 °C and the mixture is kept at this temperature for a given time to increase the NC size.133,225–227 After the CIS NC formation a protective ZnS shell is often deposited by the secondary hot-injection of zinc(II) acetate and an additional heating cycle.226
AIS NCs were synthesized by the hot-injection procedure with 1-DDT as a capping ligand.81,126,228,229 The NCs formation was induced by the S/OLA injection at 110 °C. When the Ag-to-In ratio is reduced the synthesis yields AgIn5S8 NCs. An increase in the In:Ag ratio from 1:1 to 5:1 was reported to forward the hot-injection synthesis towards the preferential formation of cubic AgIn5S8 NCs with a well-defined stoichiometry.230 Similar methods were applied to synthesize copper-diffused AIS NCs and CIS NCs. The 1-DDT ligands reduce in situ Cu(II) to Cu(I) which diffuses into the AIS lattice during the incubation of the reaction mixture at 180 °C.231
The shape of CIS NCs formed by the hot-injection can be changed from polygonal to elongated bullet-like one by adding OLA to the TOPO solvent (Fig. 16a and b). Oleylamine decreases the concentration of monomeric CIS available for the NC growth favoring to the elongated NC shape.232 Additionally, phase-selected wurtzite and zinc blende CIS NCs can be synthesized with different sulfur sources – 1-DDT and S/OLA, respectively. By adjusting the composition of the dispersive media, the phase-selected tetragonal and orthorhombic 7–25 nm AISe NCs were synthesized.233 The type of crystalline lattice of AIS NCs grown by the hot-injection can be easily changed from orthorhombic to tetragonal by elevating the after-injection temperature from 120 to 180 °C.230 In the intermediate temperature range, both phases co-exist.83
 Fig. 16  (a and b) TEM of CIS NCs produced by the hot-injection in different dispersive media. (c) Elemental maps of Cu and In for single CIS NCs (scale bar 2 nm). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 223 (a and b) and ref. 51 (c). Copyright (2011) Springer (a and b). 
Recent findings made by the high-resolution STEM coupled to the electron energy loss spectroscopy51 showed that the highly crystalline and stoichiometric CIS NCs produced by the classical heating-up/hot-injection methods comprise inhomogeneities of copper and indium distribution within each single NCs. The CIS NCs showed the presence of Cu-rich and In-rich areas (Fig. 16c) without any apparent discontinuity of the chalcopyrite lattice structure.51 These findings indicate that the unambiguous assignment of the CIS/AIS NC structure to some certain lattice type is tricky and obviously does not reflect the real picture on the atomic scale.
The thiol ligands bind strongly to the MMC NC surface presenting obvious difficulties for the post-synthesis ligand exchange and introduction of the NCs into the light-harvesting systems. In this view, various thiol-free hot-injection approaches are probed. In particular, the thiol-free CIS NCs were successfully prepared by hot-injecting bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide into the solution of copper and indium halides in OLA/TOP/ODE.95,234
CuInSe2 (CISe) NCs form in a 1-DDT/ODE mixture from metal oleates after the injection of tributylphosphine selenium at 200 °C.71,235 The average size of CISe NCs can be varied by the post-injection heating duration in the range of 2.5–3.5 nm.235 Similar syntheses of CISe NCs were realized with selenourea.236 A more reactive selenium precursor – diphosphine selenide allowed to tune the CISe NC size from less than 2 to 7 nm.237 Mixed CISSe NCs with a varied composition were formed by combining 1-DDT and TOP-Se as sulfide and selenide source, respectively.238
Alloyed CuInxGa1−xSe2 NCs can be produced in the entire x range from 0 to 1 by the hot-injection in hexadecylamine-based mixtures by injecting Se/hexadecylamide precursor with metal–amine complexes at 240 °C.239
Alternatively, CIGS NCs can be formed by introducing Ga(acac)3 and Se/OLA240–242 or diphenylphosphine selenium.98 Alloyed Cu2Ge(S3−xSex) NCs were synthesized by the injection of GeCl4/OLA into the OLA precursor of copper followed by the second injection of S/Se dissolved in OLA.243 The average size of NCs increased from 11 nm to 19 nm as S was completely substituted with Se. Moreover, the bandgap was found to depend linearly on the S:Se ratio.243
A general approach to the synthesis of CITe and AITe NCs was developed244 utilizing TOP-Te complex as a telluride ion source. The 10 nm CdIn2S4 NCs were prepared by the hot-injection of S/OLA into the mixture of Cd(II) and In(III) OLA complexes at 180 °C.245 The antimony-based Cu12Sb4S13 and Cu3SbS4 NCs were produced by injecting bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide into the hot solution of copper(I) and Sb(III) chlorides in ODE/oleic acid at 190 °C.246
By injecting S/OLA into a mixture of Cu2+ and Sn2+ OLA complexes at 240 °C, CTS NCs were synthesized with an average size of 10–11 nm.247 Similarly, CTS NCs were produced by the hot-injection in TOPO/OLA mixtures with the elemental sulfur dissolved in OLA or ODE as a sulfide ion source.248 The hot-injection synthesis in ethylene glycol at 190 °C yields CTS nanoflakes with a lateral size of around 100 nm.249 Hexadecylamine was used as a universal reaction medium for the formation of Cu2+ and Sn2+ precursor complexes, dissolution of selenium and stabilization of ∼20 nm Cu2SnSe3 NCs.114
A selection of the solvent composition and selenium precursor can forward the hot-injection synthesis of Cu2SnSe3 either to hexagonal or to cubic CTSe NCs.117,250 In particular, the hot-injection of a Sn–OLA complex into a mixture of diphenylselenide and Cu–OLA at 240 °C yields predominantly wurtzite CTSe NCs, while the injection of separately prepared Cu– and Sn–OLA complexes into the hot Se/OLA solution produces cubic CTSe NCs. The time profiles of the NC evolution showed that in each case the ternary NCs form as a result of the Sn ions insertion into the primary copper selenide NCs.250
The phase-selective hot-injection syntheses of kesterite, wurtzite and mixed CZTS NCs were realized by using elemental sulfur, 1-DDT, and thioacetamide as sulfur sources, respectively.115 The key stage of the kesterite phase formation is the H2S release in a reaction between elemental sulfur and OLA.115
By adjusting the ratio of 1-DDT and sulfur the phase composition and purity of CZTS NCs can be controlled.251 As the 1-DDT-to-S ratio increases, the CZTS NCs gradually evolve from kesterite nanoplates to wurtzite nanorods, the NCs becoming smaller and more uniform. A similar effect of the 1-DDT/S ratio on the NC phase and morphology was observed in the hot-injection synthesis of CZTS NCs from Sn(II) ethyl hexanoate.252 This precursor is stable in air and can be easily mixed with the solvents commonly used in the hot-injection procedure.
The hot-injection approach is universal and can be extended to complex MMC compositions. In particular, the CZTS NCs with a varied stoichiometry and a size of 4–5 nm were produced by the hot-injection using dioctylamine complexes of metals and 1-DDT injected at 230 °C.253 Similar syntheses of CZTS NCs were realized in OLA with S/OLA92,211,254–265 as well as in ethylene glycol266 and triethylene glycol.267 The method was generalized to synthesize CIS267 and Cu2−xAgxZnSnS4 NCs.267,268 A mixture of Cu, Zn, and Sn diethyldithiocarbamates injected into the hot OLA at 290–320 °C serves as a universal source of both metal and sulfide ions for the CZTS NC growth.269
Similar to the heating-up approach, the injection results in the formation of primary CuxS NCs followed by the incorporation of Zn2+ and Sn4+ ions regardless of the injection temperature.211 However, an increase in the heating temperature from 200 °C to 300 °C allows to tune the average NC size from ∼5 nm to 8 nm.211 At that, the variation of the bandgap of the resulting CZTS NCs with the injection/heating temperature does not necessarily reflect only the size variation of the NCs but can also originate from variations of the phase composition and stoichiometry of CZTS NCs.254
Alloyed CZTSSe NCs can be prepared by the hot-injection by using mixtures of elemental S and Se dissolved/suspended in OLA.270–274 Using solely Se/OLA results in quaternary CZTSe NCs.275 NaBH4 is sometimes added as a reducing agent to enhance the solubility of selenium in hot OLA and to ensure the homogeneity of the mixed S/Se precursor.116,276,277 Alternatively, selenium can be reduced by 1-DDT to the OLA-soluble oleylammonium selenide that was used for the hot-injection synthesis of CISe and CZTSe NCs.278 Apparently, the NCs may contain some sulfur admixtures from the 1-DDT decomposition.
The metastable wurtzite CZTS NCs were produced by the hot-injection of a 1-DDT/t-DDT precursor into a mixture of OLA complexes of Cu2+, Zn2+, and Sn2+.279 A similar approach was applied to form wurtzite Cu2ZnGeS4 NCs.280 The post-synthesis heating of wurtzite CZTS NCs transforms them into very stable cubic zinc blende modification.117
OLA was found to decrease the temperature of the thermal decomposition of metal dedtc complexes as a result of the coordination to thiocarbonyl carbon atoms of dedtc. This effect was exploited64 to produce small (2–7 nm) CZTS NCs from the mixtures of dedtc complexes of Cu, Zn, and Sn, that have different decomposition temperatures. The hot injection of OLA at a temperature lower than the decomposition temperature of any of the individual three complexes but higher than the decomposition temperature of such complexes dissolved in OLA triggers simultaneous decomposition of all three complexes and the formation of stoichiometric CZTS NCs. It was found that the concentration of primary nuclei and, therefore, the size of final NCs depends on the OLA concentration, varying from 2 to 7 nm as the OLA content is increased.64
The injection of copper, tin, and zinc diethyldithiocarbamates into hot OLA results in rapid nucleation and growth of CZTS NCs finishing within 10 min.281 By elevating the OLA temperature 150 to 340 °C the average size of kesterite NCs can be gradually increased from around 2 to ∼40 nm.
Kesterite Cu2FeSnS4 NCs with an average size of 14 nm were prepared by the hot-injection in OLA using acac complexes of metals and S/OLA (Fig. 17a).282,283 The product contained admixtures of FeS and Cu2SnS3 phases and thus the synthesis conditions need to be further optimized. Similar hot-injection approaches were used to synthesize Cu2(FexZn1−x)SnS4,284 Cu2NiSnS4,285 Cu2CdSnS4 and Cu2MnSnS4,259 as well as Cu2CoSn(S,Se)4 NCs.274
 Fig. 17  (a) TEM of Cu2FeSnS4 NCs (inset: the NC size distribution). (b) TEM of CZTS/Au–Ag nanoheterostructures produced with a different duration of the metal deposition (indicated on the figure). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 282 (a) and ref. 286 (b). Copyright (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a); (2017) American Chemical Society (b). 
Alloyed Cu2Zn(Ge,Sn)S4 (CZTGS) NCs revealed a dependence of the average NC size on the germanium precursor used in the hot-injection procedure.287 While the CZTGS NCs synthesized using Ge–citrate complex have an unimodal size distribution centered at 15 nm, the NCs produced from GeCl4 or complexes of germanium(IV) with glycine and tartrate ions have a bimodal size distribution with maxima at ∼5 nm and ∼15 nm. The citrate-mediated synthesis, which is a preferable one due to a better control of the NC morphology, allows to tune a Sn:Ge ratio as well as the optical band of the produced NCs from 1.6 eV for pure CZTS to 2.7 eV for CZGS.287 The mixed tin–germanium CZTGS NCs were formed using two-step sequential Ge–OLA and S–OLA injections at 130 °C and 280 °C, respectively.288 The hot injection of a mixture of 1-DDT and t-DDT into TOPO/OLA metal precursor yields wurtzite/stannite 18 nm Cu2CdGeS4 NCs.289
A general approach to a series of Cu2ZnAS4−x and CuZn2AS4 (A = Al, Ga, In) NCs was developed73 based on the hot-injection of a mixture of 1-DDT/t-DDT into OLA complexes of corresponding metals. Similar to the ternary MC NCs, this combination of sulfur precursors, acting simultaneously as capping agents and sulfur sources leads to the 50–60 nm long and 10 nm thick CZTS NRs.
By two consecutive hot-injection procedures, first CZTS NCs and then binary CZTS/Au–Ag heterostructures can be produced.286 At that, by varying the duration of the second hot-injection stage of metal deposition the average size of the silver–gold alloyed NCs was smoothly increased from around 2 nm for 5 s heating exposure after the precursor injection to about 5 nm – for the 1 h thermal treatment (Fig. 17b). In a similar way, PtCo–Cu2ZnGeS4 nanocomposites were synthesized.280
The ternary CuSbS2 NCs were formed by hot-injecting S/OLA into Cu(acac)2 + SbCl3 solution in OLA at 230 °C.290 The synthesis yields nanoplates with the length/width/thickness of 50–120 nm/20–40 nm/6–9 nm, respectively. In this method, various CAS phases can be formed by varying the copper-to-antimony ratio, including CuSbS2, Cu3SbS3, Cu3SbS4, and Cu12Sb4S13.291 The average size of Cu12Sb4S13 NCs was reported to grow from 4 to 16 nm as the synthesis temperature was elevated from 150 to 230 °C.112
Relatively low-temperature hot-injection syntheses of AgBiS2 NCs were performed at 100 °C from metal oleates and hexamethyldisilathiane292 and trimethylsilylsufide293 as sulfur sources.


2.3 Ligand exchange. 
The heating-up/hot-injection procedures are typically followed with ligand exchange aimed at replacing bulky organic capping agents with much smaller bifunctional species containing simultaneously carboxylic and thiol group, such as TGA or MPA, or a combination of thiol, COOH and amino groups as in the case of cysteine or glutathione (GSH). The new ligand binds strongly on the surface of MC NCs by the thiol group while the carboxylic group becomes deprotonized rendering NC soluble in the polar solvents, specifically, in water and providing an electrostatic barrier for the NC agglomeration. Also, the carboxylic group serves as a “bridge” for the attachment of MC NCs to the surface of titania or zinc oxide.
The substitution of OLA/1-DDT ligands with GSH or MPA in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) yields water-dispersible CIZS NCs stable for months and showing a hydrodynamic size of less than 10 nm.294 The process is scalable and can be upgraded to the gram-scale synthesis. The exchange of bulky OLA ligands with 1,2-ethanediol binding together the adjacent NCs allows to form very compact films of ∼7 nm CISe NCs236 and therefore such approach should have good perspectives for the preparation of NC inks for the jet-printed photovoltaics. The ligand exchange with MPA followed by the anchoring of MC NCs to the surface of titania was applied to produce the titania heterostructures with CIS NCs,295 CIZS NCs,133 CISe NCs,168 and CIZSe NCs.96,296 Similar ligand exchange procedures were performed with less stable to oxidation but smaller TGA molecules yielding photoactive TiO2/CIZS nanocomposites.148 The above-discussed general ligand exchange methodology was applied to produce water-soluble CIS,142,297–299 AIS,72 CIGS,242,300 CIGSe,98 CTSe,174 CZTS,213,258,301–305 and CZTSSe NCs.271
The ligand exchange using 5-amino-1-pentanol yielded the concentrated and stable CZTS inks in ethanol or n-propanol with the NC content of up to 200 mg mL−1.306 OLA ligands on the CZTS NC surface were also substituted with smaller tert-butylpyridine by the solvothermal treatment at 90 °C.91
Copper antimony sulfide NCs produced by the heating-up approach and deposited as a film on the ITO (indium-tin oxide) surface can be stripped from the surface OLA ligand by contacting the film with the Meerwein's agent (C2H5)3OBF4,307 however, no details on the chemistry of this process were reported. As discussed in ref. 308, the contact of OLA-capped CZTS NCs with (C2H5)3OBF4 or (CH3)3OBF4 results in the amine elimination and the modification of the NC surface with BF4− anions.
Recently a very promising synthesis strategy was developed by Talapin et al.309 profiting from the ligand exchange of bulky organic moieties like OLA with charged metal chalcogenide complexes (MCC), like In2Se42−. In this approach, the OLA-capped Cu2−xSe (x = 0–0.2) NCs were transferred from hexane to dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)/ethanolamine solvent by the ligand exchange with In2Se42− and a charge-compensating N2H5+ cation. Such MCC-capped NCs are soluble in a variety of solvents including formamide, DMF, DMSO, ethylacetate, etc. The annealing at 500 °C transforms the MCC-capped NC films into uniform CISe layers with only 2–3% of mass loss309 making such colloidal NCs an ideal ink for the jet-printing of thin-film solar cells. The approach is very versatile and can be universally used for the preparation of a variety of MMC nanomaterials. In particular, by replacing In2Se42− with an equivalent amount of gallium selenide MCC, CIGS layers were produced in a similar way.292 Only 0.1 mol equivalent of In2Se42− or a more complex [In2Cu2Se4S3]3− MCC was reported to be sufficient for the complete substitution of OLA ligands on the surface of 16 nm CISe NCs producing concentrated NC inks. Moreover, by combining Cu2−xSe and ZnS NCs both stabilized by a Sn2S64− MCC, the high-quality CZTS films can be fabricated by this approach. The composition of the CZTS layer can be easily adjusted by varying the molar ratio of MCC-capped NCs. The same procedure can be reproduced for ZnSe and Cu2−xSe NCs stabilized by Sn2Se64− to synthesize phase- and composition pure CZTSe thin films, while the mixtures of the S- and Se-containing NCs yield alloyed CZTSSe layers with a predefined S:Se ratio.309


2.4 Precursor deposition and annealing. 
This method is based on the heating-driven transformation (reduction, decomposition, hydrolysis, etc.) of a chalcogenide precursor in a solution containing simultaneously metal ions.310 The nucleation occurs on the surface of a substrate – the optically transparent electrode (OTE) or a semiconductor substrate. The nucleation and growth can be controlled by the rate of the chalcogen precursor decomposition as well as by introducing complexing agents that bind metal ions and reduce the concentration of free cationic species. In this way, Zn-, Sb-, and Ni-doped nanocrystalline CIS films were formed at 80 °C311 as well as CuBiS2 NCs on titania at room temperature.312 Nanocrystalline CuSbS2 and Cu12Sb4S13 films on glass or mesoporous TiO2 and ZrO2 were synthesized by annealing a mixture of metal xanthates at 300 °C in nitrogen atmosphere.313
Nanocrystalline MMC films can be relatively easily produced by spin coating of a liquid layer of molecular precursors on a chosen substrate, in particular, ITO, FTO, or the Mo layer on the soda lime glass. The spin coating is followed by the solvent evaporation and annealing resulting in the dense nanocrystalline MC films. In this way, the nanocrystalline films of CTS314 were prepared. The CIS NCs with a size of around 25 nm can be entrapped in a 3D carbon network by the thermal decomposition of chicken eggshell membranes impregnated by copper and indium salts and thiourea in nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C.315
A molecular precursor for the synthesis of CTS NCs was prepared by dissolving copper(I) and tin(II) sulfides in 1,2-ethanedithiol.314 In a sol–gel version of this method the precursor sol is first prepared, then it is transformed into the gel and into the final NCs by the annealing. For example, a sol for the CTS NCs deposition was produced from Cu(II) and Sn(II) chlorides, thiourea and methoxyethanol.316 Similar sol was used for the synthesis of nanocrystalline Cu2CdSnS4 films.317 The sol precursor of Cu2FeSnS4 NCs based on thiourea/methoxyethanol combination with metal salts was spin-coated onto the ZnO/ZnS nanorod array, preheated at 150 °C to produce a xerogel and then annealed at 250 °C. This procedure can be repeated several times to increase the thickness of the MMC layer. The method was also applied to form Cu2CoSnS4 and Cu2NiSnS4 layers.318
The spin coating of metal salts with thiourea in ethanol/water mixtures onto nanocrystalline titania followed by the annealing in sulfur vapors was applied to produce TiO2/CZTS nanoheterostructures.319 The films were subjected to the post-synthesis treatment with concentrated HCl leaving intact selectively kesterite CZTS phase. In a similar way, ternary ZnO/CdS/CZTS320 and ZnO/Ag/CIS321 nanoheterostructures were synthesized. The water/ethanol Cu–Zn–Sn–S NC precursor can also be spray-coated on conductive substrates and annealed sequentially in the N2 and Se vapor atmosphere to yield CZTSSe films.322
The light-harvesting MMC films are often produced from the NC inks subjected to the high-temperature sulfidation/selenidation. This method was applied to synthesize the films of CTZS and CZTSe,323–326 CZTSSe,327 Cu2FeSnS4 and Cu2CdSnS4.328 Especially uniform and compact CZTSSe films were formed by the annealing of aqueous NC inks produced by the stabilization of copper and zinc sulfide NCs with Sn2S64− and Sn2S76− MCCs.329 The inks can be relatively easily prepared by dissolving elemental Sn and S in aqueous (NH4)2S solutions with the following addition of Cu2+ and Zn2+ ions. The ∼10 nm CuxS and ZnS NCs are securely stabilized by the electrostatic repulsion of negatively charged MCCs that have a strong affinity to the metal sulfide NC surface.329 The annealing of electrospun polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) fibers soaked with a precursor solution yields highly crystalline kesterite CZTS nanofibers.330
The precursors for CTZSe films typically contain metal chlorides, Na2SeO3 and a reducing agent, such as hydrazine.331 Alternatively, the selenide species in the precursor can be generated during the annealing.332 By this method, the nanocrystalline CTZSe films with a grain size of 20–30 nm were formed at moderate temperatures of ∼180 °C.331 Alternatively, the CTZSe films can be produced using selenourea at much higher annealing temperatures (∼500 °C in Se atmosphere).333 Powdered CZTS NCs were synthesized by the sulfidation of a milled mixture of nanocrystalline CuxS, SnS, and ZnS.67 The grain size of the final CZTS powders depends on the sulfidation temperature increasing from ∼14 nm (300 °C) to 85 nm (450 °C).
The sols containing metal dithiocarbamates were used to form Cu2MSnS4 (M = Co2+, Ni2+) NC thin films subsequently converted to selenides by the thermal treatment in Se vapors.334


2.5 Hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis. 
Formally, this method is a version of the heating-up procedure but carried out under a much higher pressure, when the precursor mixture is confined into an autoclave and heated above the boiling point of the solvent for a prolonged time. For example, the aqueous precursor solutions are typically heated at 180–220 °C for 12–48 h. As the reaction medium is characterized by high temperatures and pressures that cannot be reached in the conventional heating-up process, the products of the hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis can reveal quite unexpected morphology and phase composition. The chalcogens X are typically introduced in the form of stable compounds releasing chalcogenide ions as a result of the precursor hydrolysis (and reduction) to X2− during the treatment.140 The solvothermal treatment can also be adapted for continuous flow syntheses of MC NCs.335
The hydrothermal treatment (HTT) and similar solvothermal (STT) procedures typically yield microscopic secondary agglomerates of primary MC NCs. To control the morphology (size, shape, porosity, etc.) of the secondary agglomerates various structure-directing agents are introduced during the HTT/STT such as multi-functional molecular species (TGA,336,337 MPA,338 cysteine,339–343 cystine,151 GSH344), organic polymers such as PVP345–350), and surfactants (sodium dodecylsulfonate,351 cetyltrimethylammonium bromide,352 Triton X-100,353etc.).
Highly monodisperse microspheres composed of CIS NCs (Fig. 18a) were produced by the HTT of aqueous suspensions of Cu2O, In(OH)3 containing thioacetamide as a sulfide source and PVP.354 Such scheme excludes any potential impurities such as halide ions and can be applied universally to synthesize various MMC NCs. Using a similar composition of precursors, Cu2O, ZnO, and In(OH)3, mesoporous hierarchical CIZS microspheres composed of 7 nm NCs were produced by the STT in ethanol.355 The synthesis was performed in the presence of CS2 and ethanolamine which in situ formed ethanoldithiocarbamic acid serving as a capping ligand, a structure-directing agent, and a sulfur source.
 Fig. 18  (a and b) SEM image of CIS microspheres produced by the HTT. (b) SEM of CIS, CISe, and CITe nanocubes produced by the HTT. (c) A unit cell of a crystal formed by [Cu5In30S56H4]13− cluster anions and HTEA+ cations. The cation is depicted with violet circles. (d) SEM of hierarchical ZnIn2S4 microspheres. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 354 (a), ref. 372 (b), ref. 373 (c), and ref. 374 (d). Copyright (2013, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and c); (2014, 2017) Elsevier (b and d). 
The HTT/STT is broadly applied to produce nanocrystalline CIS,356–362 CIZS,338,352,363 AIS,160,364 ZAIS,365 ZIS,366,367 and CISe.368 By performing the STT of copper and indium chlorides with thioacetamide in OLA or ethylenediamine, the selective formation of respectively zinc blende and wurtzite 10–20 nm NCs was observed.359
The aggregates of CIS NCs were produced by the STT of a mixture of CuCl2, In2O3, oxalic acid and thiourea without additional solvents.369 As the autoclave was kept at 230 °C for 5 days the molten thiourea served as a solvent, while oxalic acid neutralized releasing OH− ions inhibiting the formation of metal hydroxides.
The growth of CIS NCs during the solvothermal synthesis can be restricted by introducing graphene oxide (GO) sheets that supplied the nucleation sites by adsorbing Cu2+ ions and anchored the growing CIS NCs thus inhibiting the agglomeration and growth processes.370 Simultaneous reduction of GO occurs in the autoclave yielding final CIS nanocomposites with reduced graphene oxide (RGO). A similar method was applied for the synthesis of CZTS/RGO heterostructures.202
A reliable control over the stoichiometry of CIX (X = S, Se, Te) materials produced by the HTT/STT can be achieved by using single-molecular precursors containing Cu, In and X in desired proportions. This approach was successfully applied to prepare CIS and CISe from [(Ph3P)2CuIn(SEt)4] and [(Ph3P)2CuIn(SePh)4] complexes, respectively.371
The HTT of a suspension of elemental chalcogens, metallic indium and CuCl2 is a universal method for the preparation of large (100–200 nm) CIX particles crystallized in a cube-like morphology (Fig. 18b).372 The solvothermal synthesis of CIS NCs in OA with a very large excess of sulfur (Cu:In:S = 1:1:100) allows to reach a burst-like nucleation already at 110 °C and produce nearly stoichiometric CIS NCs with a rather small size of 3.5 nm increasing to 4.8 nm as the treatment temperature is elevated to 170 °C.68 The enhanced nucleation also results in a narrow NC size distribution of 7–11%, quite untypical for the solvothermal syntheses.
The HTT of an aqueous suspension of CuI, In2O3, and triethylamine (TEA) at 160 °C for 5 days was reported to yield macrocrystals composed of atomically-resolved anionic pyramidal [Cu5In30S56H4]13− clusters compensated with HTEA+ cations (Fig. 18c).373 A strong binding between the cluster and HTEA+ makes the crystals unsoluble in most solvents but an increase in the ionic strength by adding LiBr results in the fast dissolution of the crystals in DMF. Therefore, the results on further structural and optical characterizations of these ultra-small CIS particles can be expected to appear in the near future. Similar to the successful stabilization of multinary NCs with highly charged MCCs, it can be anticipated that such highly charged CIS anions can potentially be used for the stabilization of larger NCs allowing to produce dense nanocrystalline films for solar light harvesting applications.
Solvothermal synthesis of alloyed Cu(InxB1−x)Se2 NRs in diethylenetriamine at 180 °C allows to vary the composition of the products from CISe to pure CuBSe2 and in this way to tune the NC bandgap from 3.13 (x = 0) to 1.04 eV (x = 1).375
The hydrothermal/solvothermal approaches are broadly applied for the preparation of ternary ZIS materials as well as related compounds with other cations. In particular, the hierarchical ZIS and CdIn2S4 microspheres were prepared by the HTT with TAA as a sulfur source (Fig. 18d).374 Thiourea was used as a sulfur source for the HTT synthesis of nanocrystalline CaIn2S4.376 Copper-doped ZIS nanosheets were produced by the STT from layered Cu-doped NaInS2 nanosheets in the presence of zinc(II) chloride.377
A partial Zn2+ ion exchange with Ag+ in the mesoporous ZnIn2S4 microspheres produced by the HTT results in a transformation of the surface layer of the ZIS microspheres into AgIn5S8378 which forms preferentially in Ag-deficient AIS systems. According to the XPS results, the depth of Ag+ penetration into the ZIS, that is, the thickness of the AIS shell, depends on the starting Ag:In ratio and increases from around 90 nm for Ag:In = 0.5 to 160 nm for Ag:In = 1.25.378 The samples preserve their hierarchical microspheroidal morphology during the ion exchange (Fig. 19a–c). As a result of the transformation the absorption threshold of the microspheres shifts from around 550 nm for ZIS to ∼900 nm for the Ag-ZIS samples with the highest silver content (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a–c) SEM images of ZIS microspheres (a, insert shows a resemblance between the microspheres and a flower) and the products of ion exchange with Ag+ for Ag:In ratio of 0.5 (b) and 1.25 (c). (d) Absorption spectra of ZIS microspheres and ion exchange products (Ag:In = 0.5 (H1), 0.75 (H2), 1.0 (H3), and 1.25 (H4)). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 378. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The morphology of AgGa1−xInxS2 nanoaggregates forming during the HTT at 180 °C is strongly affected by the introduction of alcohols – pentanol or heptanol resulting in the highly porous hierarchical AIGS microspheres composed of nanosheets and nanorods.379 By adjusting the ratio of metal precursors x can be varied from 0 to 1 with the bandgap changing from 2.71 eV to 1.93 eV.
The HTT of zinc and indium acetates combined with GSH and TAA yields ZIS NCs with an average size increasing from 3.2 nm to 7.5 nm as the HTT temperature is elevated from 120 °C to 160 °C.344 The authors assume that TAA serves not only as a S2− source but also forms various chelate complexes with Zn2+ and In3+ ions that gradually combine to form the nuclei and favor in this way the isotropic growth of spherical NCs with the lowest relative surface energy.
The introduction of tartaric acid forwards the HTT process to the preferential formation of cubic ZIS films, while the hexagonal ZIS with an admixture of In(OH)3 is typically obtained with no special additions.380 The latter process can be used for the formation of ZIS/In(OH)3 heterojunctions with the indium hydroxide selectively assembling on the rims of ZIS nanosheets.381 The self-assembling of MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of ZIS nanosheets during the solvothermal reduction of sodium molybdate in the presence of thiourea was observed377 resulting in a very close contact between both layered compounds.
The ZIS replicas of 3D structure of aquatic weed hydrilla that have a high specific surface area can be produced by the HTT using the hydrilla as a sacrificial template.382
A cysteine-assisted HTT was found to produce ultra-thin one-unit-cell ZIS layers.340 An electron paramagnetic study of such nanolayers showed them to be rich with Zn vacancies when the synthesis is performed at 200 °C in contrast to the similar samples produced at a slightly lower temperature of 180 °C.340 The HTT of an inverted micellar aqueous Zn and In salt solution in an ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate containing thiourea was found to yield the mesoporous ZIS microspheres composed of separate ZIS NCs.353
A two-step HTT process was proposed to anchor cubic 3–6 nm ZIS NCs on the surface of hexagonal 5–8 μm ZIS microspheres.339 The hexagonal carrier was first synthesized by the HTT in glycerol/ethanol solutions in the presence of cysteine, and then the cubic ZIS NCs were formed by the second HTT round in aqueous TAA solutions.339
Ternary Cu2SnS3 microspheres consisting of nanocrystalline platelets were synthesized in triethylene glycol using elemental sulfur reduced during the solvothermal process most probably by the solvent.383 By introducing PVP as a structure-directing agent, the individual 3 nm CTS NCs,346 mesoporous 120–140 nm CTS nanospheres and hexagonal CTS sheets with a lateral size of 0.5–2 μm345 were synthesized in the solvothermal regime. The spherical aggregates of Cu2Zn1−xFexSnS4 NCs were reported to form in the presence of PVP during the HTT with thiourea as a sulfur source.384 The variation of iron content x from 0 to 1 resulted in a bandgap narrowing from 1.52 to 1.21 eV thus increasing the optical response of the kesterite NCs. Similar PVP-assisted solvothermal approach was applied to synthesize alloyed Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 NCs with the bandgap varying from 1.11 eV (x = 0) to 1.49 eV (x = 1).350
Nanocrystalline Cu12Sb4S13 samples with a high phase purity and a tunable morphology were synthesized by the STT of a mixture of copper and antimony dedtc complexes in 1-DDT.385
Single-crystalline Cu4Bi4S9 nanoribbons were grown by the STT of toluene suspensions of CuCl, BiCl3, and dodecylamine as a structure-directing agent.386 To form the MMC NCs, CS2 was injected into the autoclave and the mixture kept at 200 °C for 30 h. The nanoribbons are believed to grow via the layer-by-layer stacking of thin Cu4Bi4S9 sheets separated by the dodecylamine linkers, the ribbon thickness depending on the amine concentration.386
AgBiS2 NCs with an average size of ∼8 nm were synthesized in a solvothermal regime in a mixture of cyclohexane and 1-decyl alcohol with CS2 as a sulfur source.387
Similar to the ternary compounds, the hydrothermal/solvothermal preparation of quaternary kesterite-type compounds also typically yields microspherical aggregates of nanocrystal-line primary building blocks – petals, rods, wires, etc. In particular, CZTS microspheres were produced by the STT of metal precursors in ethylene glycol in the presence of thiourea388 and triethylene glycol with the elemental sulfur.389 The microspheres are composed of micropetals which, in turn, are built of 3–5 nm CZTS NCs (Fig. 20a and b).
 Fig. 20  SEM of nanocrystalline CZTS microspheres (a and b) and nanosheets (c and d). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 389 (a and, b) and ref. 407 (c and d). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society (a and b); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c and d). 
The 5–10 nm kesterite NCs were produced by the HTT in the presence of sodium dodecylsulfonate as a structure-directing agent and capping ligand in water and water/ethylenediamine mixtures.351 The resulting CZTS phase contains admixtures of SnS, Sn2S3, and ZnS (depending on the solvent composition) that can be removed by the annealing of the NC films at 500 °C in the sulfur vapor atmosphere.351 The kesterite NCs were also synthesized by the STT of metal chlorides with thiourea in ethylene glycol, OLA, and ODE.348
The choice of the solvent can be crucial for the morphology and phase composition of kesterite NCs produced by the solvothermal methods. In particular, the synthesis in triethylenetetramine yields predominantly 160 nm kesterite crystals, while ethylenediamine favors to the formation of wurtzite/kesterite mixtures with a reduced grain size.390 The treatment in ethylene glycol yields kesterite nanoplates with a thickness of around 45 nm, while the synthesis in oleic acid produces mostly the flower-like micro-aggregates of CZTS NCs.390 Similar solvothermal syntheses were abundantly reported for of CZTS NCs,91,349,391–404 Cu2NiSnS4 NCs,405 CZTSe NCs.350,406 The selenide kesterite NCs are typically produced using a Se/N2H4 complex406 or selenium solutions in monoethanolamine350 as Se2− sources.
The phase composition of the products of the hydrothermal syntheses of nanocrystalline kesterites depends considerably on pH of the autoclaved solution. In particular, the formation of pure-phase CZTS NCs was observed only at pH 7, while at a lower pH (4.3–5) and a higher pH (9) additional CTS, Cu2−xS, SnS2, and Sn2S3 phases appeared.394 The average size of CZTS NCs produced by the HTT can be tailored from 3 to 10–11 nm by varying the treatment duration from 6 to 48 h.65
The introduction of TGA during the HTT results in a very uniform size distribution of final kesterite NCs. The thio-acid reduces Cu2+ to Cu+ and provides primary Cu2−xS nuclei for the formation of CZTS NCs via the heating-assisted diffusion of Zn2+ and Sn4+ ions into the bulk of copper sulfide particles.336
A surfactant-free hydrothermal approach to ∼12 nm CZTS NCs was proposed based on the ammonia addition to the conventional aqueous solutions containing metal chlorides and TAA as a sulfur source.408 The ammonia plays a crucial and manifold role. First, the presence of NH3 governs the kinetics of TAA hydrolysis and enhances the S2− release thus providing abundant nuclei for the NC growth. Then, ammonia binds Cu2+ and Zn2+ ions into stable complexes and keeps to a minimum the concentration of free ions thus allowing for a slow NC growth. In this way, the combination of fast nucleation and the slow growth yield small and uniform CZTS NCs without additional surfactants.408
A general approach to CuInS2, Cu2ZnSnS4, and Cu2CoSnS4 NCs was found301,409 based on the STT in ethylene glycol, ethanol, or 2-propanol in the presence of thiourea and tetramethylammonium hydroxide. The post-synthesis ball milling of the products yields 150–250 nm aggregates of 5–8 nm MMC crystals.409 Hierarchical Cu2FeSnS4 microspheres consisting of ∼100 nm-thick stannite nanosheets were synthesized by the STT in ethylene glycol with L-cystine acting both as a capping agent and a sulfur source.151 The HTT of FTO plates in a water/ethanol solution of CuAc2, ZnAc2, SnCl4 and thiourea at 200 °C for 24 h yields films of nanocrystalline CZTS microplatelets composed of 10–30 nm kesterite NCs.410 The kesterite nanosheets were also produced by the STT of electrochemically deposited mixture of Cu, Sn, and Zn in ethanol suspension of elemental sulfur at 200 °C (Fig. 20c and d).407
The HTT of Cu2S nanowire arrays in the presence of InCl3 and TAA as a sulfur source results in the incorporation of In3+ ions into the lattice of copper sulfide nanowires and their transformation into CIS nanowires composed of nanosheets (Fig. 21a and b).411
 Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM of Cu2S (a) and CIS nanowires (b) produced by In3+ incorporation during the HTT. (c and d) TEM of CuxS NCs (c) and CuGaS2 NCs (d) produced by the solvothermal incorporation of Ga ions. (e) TEM of CdS nanowires decorated with CdIn2S4 nanosheets. (f) Cross-sectional SEM of Si nanowire/TiO2/ZnIn2S4 nanostructure. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 411 (a and b), ref. 412 (c and d), ref. 415 (e), and ref. 416 (f). Copyright (2017) Elsevier (a and b); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c and d); (2017, 2015) Springer (e and f). 
The CuxS NCs grown in OLA were used as a template for the growth of CuGaS2 NCs by Ga incorporation in the solvothermal regime.412 The procedure took place in OLA at 210 °C with the participation of Ga(acac)3 complexes and resulted in a change of the NC shape from roughly spherical for CuxS to elongated NR-like for CGS NCs (Fig. 21c and d).
Hierarchical CIS microspheres grown by the solvothermal synthesis in ethylene glycol were also found to form from primary copper sulfide microspheres acting as a sacrificial template and translating the characteristic “microsphere-of-nanoplatelets” morphology to the resulting ternary copper indium sulfide.413
The interaction of Cu2O nanocubes with tin-sulfide MCCs [Sn2S6]4− or [Sn2S7]6− converts the former into the hollow CuxS nanoboxes capped by the tin complexes414 which can be converted into the hollow kesterite (at pH 12) or wurtzite (at pH 7) CZTS nanoboxes upon the introduction of Zn2+ salts and the HTT at 190 °C.
The ternary CuS/CdIn2S4/ZnIn2S4417 and ZnS–In2S3–CuS418 composites synthesized respectively by the microwave-assisted HTT403 and the STT in pyridine,418 most probably, also started to form from the primary copper sulfide NCs. This reaction appeared to be incomplete and yielded complex nanoheterostructures. In a reverse way, Cu+ can be incorporated into the In2S3 nanoplates in the solvothermal regime and the optical properties of the resulting CIS nanoplates tuned by varying the Cu:In ratio.108,419 The spinel In3−xS4 NCs were used as a sacrificial precursor of 5–10 nm CIS NCs in a solvothermal synthesis with Cu(dedtc)2 at 180 °C.420 The synthesis showed a remarkable phase selectivity yielding wurtzite CIS, zinc blende CIS, and spinel CuIn5S8 NCs when performed in DDT, OLA, and a mixture of OLA with oleic acid, respectively.
The hydrothermal/solvothermal processes are broadly used for the synthesis of various binary and more complex heterostructures. For this purpose, the formation of MC NCs is carried out in the presence of a prospective carrier, for example, TiO2 or other wider-bandgap semiconductor. Alternatively, both components of the desired heterostructure can be formed simultaneously in the autoclave. In particular, TiO2/CIS composites were synthesized by the STT of titania sols in ethanol suspension of copper and indium chlorides with thiourea as a sulfur source.421 In a similar way, TiO2/CIS422 and TiO2/AIS423 heterostructures based on the commercial nanocrystalline TiO2 were produced.
The solvothermal treatment of CdS nanowires suspended in ethylene glycol with InCl3 and cysteine at 200 °C results in the modification of the nanowire surface with CdIn2S4 nanosheets (Fig. 21e).415 A similar procedure was developed for the synthesis of CdS nanowires decorated with ZnIn2S4 nanosheets.424
The HTT deposition of ZIS onto the nanocrystalline titania films results in a uniform cover composed of ZnIn2S4 nanosheets with a thickness of 20 nm and a lateral size of around 20 μm.425 Similar ZIS microflakes form during the HTT on the titania-coated Si nanowires416 (Fig. 21f), TiO2 NRs,119 and hollow titania microspheres,426 indicating that the sheet-like morphology is general for the ternary In-based compounds with Zn and Cd, regardless of the substrate used for the deposition.
The solvothermal approaches were applied to produce numerous nanocomposites of multinary NCs with TiO2,427–430 ZnO,431,432 g-C3N4,337,433–437 and carbon nanomaterials.438–444 The HTT of Zn/In/Ag salts and TAA in the presence of MoS2 flakes at 180 °C results in the ZAIS/MoS2 heterostructures with the MMC component having a nominal composition of Ag0.26In0.8Zn4S5.33.88
A multi-stage HTT approach was developed to produce ITO/ZnO NR/CAIS nanocomposites.445 The synthesis starts with the “seeding” of a ZnO NC layer on the ITO surfaces by the sol–gel/annealing followed by the HTT in aqueous solutions of zinc nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine. The latter procedure is a generally accepted protocol for the synthesis of ZnO NR arrays. In the next step, the ITO/ZnO/ZnS heterostructure was produced by the HTT in the aqueous TAA solution followed by the ion exchange with silver(I) to yield a ITO/ZnO/Ag2S composite. Finally, the films were subjected to the HTT in triethylene glycol for the In3+ incorporation and exposed to the aqueous Cu2+ solution to form the final ITO/ZnO/CAIS heterostructure. A similar multi-stage process was applied to form ZnO/CIS (ZnO → ZnO/ZnS → ZnO/CuS → ZnO/CIS),446 ZnO/AgSbS2 (ZnO → ZnO/ZnS → ZnO/Ag2S → ZnO/AgSbS2),447 and ZnO/Ag–Cu–Sb–S (ZnO → ZnO/ZnS → ZnO/CuS → ZnO/CuS/Ag2S → ZnO/Ag–Cu–Sb–S) composites.448
Ultra-thin CIZS nanosheets with a varied Cu:In ratio were deposited onto the surface of TiO2 nanotube arrays by the STT in triethylene glycol at 180 °C.449 The CZTS nanosheet arrays were formed exploiting the titania nanosheets as a structure-directing template by the STT in ethylene glycol in the presence of PVP.347
A binary BiVO4–BiFeO3 heterostructure was sensitized with CuInS2 NCs by the solvothermal deposition in ethanol in the presence of thiourea and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide.450
The STT of lanthanum titanate in ethylene glycol suspension of Cu, Sn, and Zn chlorides with TAA yields La2Ti2O7/CZTS nanocomposites with ∼50 nm kesterite NCs attached to the 10 nm thin titanate nanosheets.451


2.6 Aqueous synthesis. 
As discussed above, the conventional heating-up, hot-injection and solvothermal approaches typically produce MMC NCs capped with protecting ligands and surfactants that impede the interfacial electron transfer in the NC-based light-harvesting systems. To increase the efficiency of the photoinduced charge transfers as well as to render the MMC NCs soluble in polar solvent the original bulky organic stabilizers such as OLA, 1-DDT and others are substituted with smaller multifunctional ligands, such as mercaptocarboxylic acids by ligand exchange procedures. Summarily, the synthesis of MMC NCs ready for the implementation as sensitizers and light-harvesting moieties includes also the procedures of post-synthetic purification and ligand exchange leaving behind a lot of wastes to be recycled and/or disposed off. In view of the fact, alternative methods of the direct synthesis of MMC NCs in polar media, in particular, in water are incessantly searched and optimized. As the synthesis temperature in such systems is naturally limited by the solvent boiling temperature (100 °C for aqueous syntheses) and the reactivity of various metal ions can be considerably inhibited by partial hydrolysis or solvation effects, the preparation of crystalline products with a controlled NC size and a reasonably narrow size distribution becomes a challenge for many MMC compounds.
Typically aqueous syntheses are based on the interaction between metal complexes with mercaptocarboxylic acids or other multifunctional molecules (cysteine, GSH, etc.) and a chalcogenide source. In this approach, CIS NCs were produced from mercaptoacetate (thioglycolate) complexes of Cu and In and Na2S.452,453 Such synthesis typically yields relatively small, 2–3 nm, colloidal CIS NCs that show a crystalline motif of the tetragonal chalcopyrite.55,453 As discussed in the previous section, the light absorption properties of CIS NCs are determined mostly by the copper content. For the non-stoichiometric NCs, which is the most often case for aqueous syntheses, the NC composition can be conveniently expressed by a molar ratio Cu:In:S = xCu:yIn:zS. The molar fraction of copper, xCu, can be varied in a broad range yielding a spectrum of non-stoichiometric CIS and CIZS NCs with a band edge shifting toward smaller wavelengths (and the bandgap – to lower energies) as xCu is elevated (Fig. 4a).55
The light absorbance in the visible range increases almost linearly with an increase in the copper content (Fig. 4a, inset). Similar trends were observed for the TGA-capped AIS and ZAIS NCs.59,63 The heating of the precursor solution results in a gradual growth of TGA-capped CIS and AIS NCs reflecting in a red shift of the absorption threshold and PL band (Fig. 22a). At that, the synthesis in mixed water/glycerol media allows to increase the post-synthesis heating temperature to ∼120 °C thus achieving deeper crystallization and NC growth as compared to pure aqueous AIS colloids.63
 Fig. 22  (a) PL spectra and photographs of AIS NCs in water/glycerol mixtures before (curve 1) and after heating at 120 °C for 5 (2), 10 (3), 15 (4), 20 (5), 25 (6), 30 (7), 35 (8), and 40 min (9). (b) Relative population of the size-selected AIS NCs in fractions produced by the size-selective precipitation (upper panel) and a photograph of the size-selected AIS/ZnS NCs under the UV excitation (fraction numbers given under the image). (c) Size distribution of ZAIS NCs in two of the size-selected fractions. (d) Atomic In-to-Ag and Zn-to-In ratios determined by XPS for the size-selected TGA-capped AIS/ZnS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 63 (a) and ref. 59 (b–d). Copyright (2015) Springer (a) and (2017) American Chemical Society (b–d). 
Interaction between copper and indium iodides and Na2S in pyridine in the absence of any capping ligands yields amorphous CIS nanoparticles that were used as the precursor inks for the preparation of CISe films.122
CIS and CIZS NCs were synthesized from the MPA-complexes of metal ion precursors with Na2S and kept at ∼100 °C to finish the crystallization.454 As a second step, a ZnS shell was deposited onto the NCs to enhance their stability toward the aggregation and corrosion and to increase considerably the PL efficiency.454 A similar approach was applied to produce aqueous GSH-capped AIS,455 CIS and CZTS NCs.456
ZAIS NCs with an excellent stability were produced directly in aqueous solutions of a mixture of polyacrylic acid and MAA.457
An elegant way of the post-synthesis size control of AIS NCs was proposed by Torimoto et al.72 and based on the size-selective photoetching. An original ensemble of multi-sized NCs is illuminated in the oxygen-saturated water with a laser wavelength corresponding to the absorption band edge of a fraction of larger NCs (Fig. 23a). The oxidative photocorrosion, that can be described by a brutto-equation: AgInS2 + 4O2 = Ag+ + In3+ + 2SO42−, results in gradual dissolution of such NCs and then more shorter-wavelength laser light is applied to photocorrode the next fraction of smaller NCs. By repeating this procedure consecutively with a decreasing excitation wavelength (increasing quantum energy), several fractions of the size-selected AIS NCs can be isolated with an average size varying from 5.1 (Eg = 1.8 eV, Fig. 23b) to 3.0 nm (Eg = 2.4 eV, Fig. 23c).72
 Fig. 23  (a) Absorption spectra of original and photoetched AIS NCs (the laser wavelength used for the photoetching is displayed on the figure). (b and c) Size distribution of original (b) and the smallest photoetched AIS NCs (c). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 72. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
The post-synthesis separation of differently sized fractions of aqueous colloidal CIS and AIS NCs can also be performed by the size-selective precipitation. The method is based on a size dependence of the coagulation kinetics of colloidal NCs – upon the addition of a non-solvent, the larger NCs coagulate and precipitate faster than smaller NCs. By repeating additions of the non-solvent (2-propanol in this particular case59,455) with the separation of the precipitated NCs and their redispersion in aqueous solutions, at least ten size-selected fraction of AIS and ZAIS NCs can be extracted from the original TGA-stabilized aqueous AIS and ZAIS colloids.59
As the average size in the separated AIS/ZAIS fractions decreases, the population of the fractions becomes lower (Fig. 22b) while the absorption band edge and the PL band maximum shift to shorter wavelength resulting in a spectacular change of the PL properties (photograph on Fig. 22b). It should be noted that the size-selective precipitation allows separating NCs with very small differences in the average size. For example, the series of 10 fractions depicted in Fig. 22b shows an average size varying from around 2 to 3.5–4 nm (Fig. 22c). At the same time, the composition of such size-selected AIS (ZAIS) remains roughly the same, indicating the uniform distribution of elements in the original polydisperse NC solutions.59
Colloidal AIS NCs passivated by only the surface charge were produced via a reaction between silver(I) and indium(III) nitrates and (NH4)2S in formamide with an excess of sulfide ions.58
ZAIS NCs in water were synthesized in the presence of GSH via prolonged heating of the precursor solution at ∼100 °C.458
Similar to the heating-up and solvothermal syntheses, the ternary/quaternary Ag-based NCs can also be produced in water by the partial ion exchange. For example, colloidal Ag2S NCs stabilized by bovine serum albumin were exposed to heating at 90 °C in the presence of GSH and In3+ resulting in the indium penetration into the lattice and the formation of AIS NCs.459 By introducing Zn2+/GSH at room temperature a ZnS shell on the surface of AIS NCs can be formed, while heating of such core/shell NCs at 100 °C results in the penetration of Zn into the core and the formation of alloyed ZAIS NCs.459 The average size of original “template” Ag2S NCs can be varied from 2.5 nm to ∼7 nm by adjusting the Ag/S ratio, thus opening the possibilities of the size-selective synthesis of AIS and ZAIS NCs.459
Various multi-functional molecules were also successfully applied for the syntheses of quaternary Cu2ZnSnS4 NCs in aqueous solutions, including TGA, MPA, and GSH. In particular, aqueous colloidal 5–20 nm CZTS NCs were produced from a mixture of MPA complexes of Cu2+, Zn2+, and Sn2+via a mild thermal treatment at ∼90 °C at pH 10 for 24 h.330 Similar syntheses were reported with TGA460 and GSH.461
The content of organics in the CZTS NCs prepared in aqueous solutions can be minimized by applying a mixture of thiourea and Sn2S64− anions as stabilizers.462


2.7 Ion exchange. 
The ion exchange method can be applied for the preparation of MC-containing heterostructures from zinc oxide nanoarchitectures. The broad utilization of zinc oxide in solar cells and other light harvesting systems is largely compromised by its chemical instability in acids and alkalis as well as in sulfide/polysulfide solutions typically used in the NC-sensitized liquid-junction solar cells. At the same time, the instability of ZnO can be used to produce new composite nanoheterostructures by the partial or complete ion exchange of both oxygen anions and zinc cations with elements forming less soluble metal chalcogenides.
For example, ZnO can be partially converted into ZnS by the HTT in the presence of thioacetamide. In this way ZnO NT arrays were converted into ZnO/ZnS NT arrays and then – into ternary ZnO/ZnS/Ag2S nanotubular composites by a partial Zn2+ exchange in zinc sulfide with Ag+.463 Finally, by incorporating In3+ ions the ternary composite can be converted into ZnO/AgInS2 nanotube (NT) arrays preserving the morphology of the original zinc oxide substrate.463
A partial exchange of Zn2+ with Cu2+ in 2D ZnIn2S4 nanosheets grown on titania surface yields CIZS nanosheets with an increased light sensitivity in the visible spectral range.464 The CZTS–Ag2S heterostructures were produced by the partial Cu+-to-Ag+ exchange in CZTS NCs.195 CdIn2S4 was synthesized from the nanocrystalline cadmium sulfide by the gas-phase cation exchange.89


2.8 Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction. 
The successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) is one of the most simple and, at the same time, potent and versatile methods of the preparation of various oxide-chalcogenide heterostructures with “conventional” binary MC NCs, such as CdS or PbS used in the photocatalysis and the liquid-junction semiconductor-sensitized solar cells (SSSCs). The method is based on the alternating immersion of a metal oxide film into a solution of metal salt and a solution of a chalcogenide ions source. This procedure results in the formation of a metal chalcogenide layer on the metal oxide surface and is referred to as a single SILAR cycle. By repeating the SILAR cycle many times, the content of MC can be controllably increased. Simultaneously, the size of MC NCs and their optical properties can be tuned as well.
The SILAR procedure was successfully adapted for the preparation of heterostructures based on MMC NCs by using several metal precursor solutions or a single solution containing a mixture of metal ions in a pre-set proportion. In particular, layers of CIS NCs can be formed on the surface of mesoporous titania (Fig. 24a),465 TiO2 NT arrays (Fig. 24b),466,467 and TiO2 NRs468 by the SILAR procedure from aqueous precursor solutions. The 10–12 nm-thick CIS nanosheets were produced by the SILAR on the surface of TiO2-coated FTO substrates followed by the annealing at 370–500 °C. The post-SILAR annealing in the N2 atmosphere is a typical procedure and aims at an increased crystallinity of CIS NCs.468,469 In the case of titania NT arrays an additional ultrasound treatment can be applied to enhance the penetration of SILAR solutions into the nanotube voids and to ensure a uniform coverage with CIS NCs.470 To gain a better control over the MMC NC size and shape, the SILAR procedure is often performed after the preliminary decoration of the metal oxide surface with ex situ formed “seed” NCs. In this way, the CIS NCs were grown by the SILAR on TiO2 seeded with 2.5 nm CIS NCs.295
 Fig. 24  (a and b) TEM of CIS NCs deposited by the SILAR on the surface of mesoporous titania (a) and TiO2 NT arrays (b). (c) SEM of SILAR-deposited AIS NCs on the titania NT arrays. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 465 (a), ref. 467 (b), and ref. 471 (c). Copyright (2016, 2011) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2015) Elsevier (c). 
The SILAR procedure was successfully used for the decoration of TiO2 NT arrays with 15 nm AIS NCs (Fig. 24c).471 At that, the Ag2S and In2S3 layers were consecutively deposited onto the titania NTs each in a single SILAR cycle and the AIS NCs formation apparently occurred spontaneously as a result of the metal ion interdiffusion. Similarly, TiO2/AIS heterostructures can be produced from layered TiO2/Ag2S/In2S3 precursor with the silver sulfide layer produced by the SILAR and the indium sulfide NCs formed by the chemical bath deposition. TiO2/In2S3/AIS composites form also as a result of Ag+ diffusion into the indium sulfide layer of the binary TiO2/In2S3 nanowires synthesized by the SILAR.472
The post-synthesis alloying approach can be applied to other ternary NCs containing mobile Ag+ ions. In particular, TiO2/AgSbS2 films were produced by the annealing of a TiO2/Ag2S/Sb2S3 heterostructure with both metal sulfides deposited by the SILAR.473 The alloying of SILAR-deposited Ag2S and Bi2S3 NCs into a nanocrystalline AgBiS2 layer on titania occurs already at a moderate annealing temperature of 150 °C in the ambient air conditions.474
A three-layer ZnO NR/CuS/Sb2S3 structure was converted into ZnO/CuSbS2 composite via the annealing at 350 °C necessary for the activation of a solid-state reaction 2CuS + Sb2S3 = 2CuSbS2 + S.475,476


2.9 Electrodeposition. 
The electrodeposition is a convenient method of the formation of nanocrystalline and bulk MC films on conducting substrates. The method is used in two versions – the electrodeposition of MC NCs or the electrodeposition of metals constituting the MC compounds followed by sulfidation/selenidation of the metallic deposits. In particular, CIS NCs were electrodeposited from aqueous solutions of Na2S2O3 and metal chlorides at −1 V versus Ag/AgCl and then annealed to increase the crystallinity of the MC layer.477 The electrodeposition of CIS NCs from DMSO solutions containing elemental sulfur and GO is accompanied by the electrochemical GO reduction and yields RGO/CIS heterostructures.478 Porous nanocrystalline CISe layers were electrodeposited from aqueous solutions containing copper and indium chlorides, selenite ions and additions of potassium hydrophthalate and sulfamic acid aimed at the equilibration of the redox-potentials of all the precursors of CISe NCs.479,480 CISe nanowire arrays (Fig. 25a) were prepared by the electrochemical deposition of the MMC NCs into the pores of anodized alumina membranes using H2SeO3 as a selenium source followed by the chemical etching of the original template membrane.481
 Fig. 25  (a) SEM of CuInSe2 nanowire arrays produced by the electrodeposition. (b) SEM of ZnO NR arrays with a CuInS2 layer electrodeposited in a pulse regime with a different pulse frequency (indicated on the figure). (c) SEM of titania NT arrays and electro-deposited TiO2/CIS NT arrays. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 481 (a), ref. 482 (b), and ref. 483 (c). Copyright (2017, 2011) Elsevier (a and c); (2015, 2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b). 
The pulse electrodeposition was shown to be more beneficial for the uniformity and quality of the deposited CIS layer as compared with the stationary electrodeposition.482 The rectangular pulses with a frequency of 1 KHz with alternating deposition voltage and the relaxation voltage (V = 0) allow for the continuous nucleation/deposition and diffusion of fresh reactants, respectively. At that, both too high (1 MHz) and too low (1 Hz) pulse frequencies compromise the quality of the electrodeposited CIS layer on the surface of ZnO nanorod arrays (Fig. 25b) indicating that a balance between the electrochemical reaction and the reactant diffusion into the nanorod arrays should be maintained.482
The pulsed electrodeposition was also reported to produce smooth layers of CIS NCs on the surface of TiO2 NT arrays used as a working electrode.483,484 The CIS NC load depends on the number of applied half-second pulses. The pulse regime favors to the formation of uniform 20 nm CIS NCs and avoids clogging of the NT entrances (Fig. 25c). A similar effect was achieved by alternating the stationary electrodeposition with an ultrasound treatment of the TiO2 NT arrays in the precursor solution which favors the uniform penetration of the electrolyte into the voids of the titania NTs.109 In both cases, Na2S2O3 was used as a sulfur source.
Ce-Doped nanocrystalline tetragonal CIS with a grain size of 35–50 nm was electrodeposited from triethanolamine solutions with a cerium content varying up to 15 molar% with respect to In.485
A nanocrystalline Cu2SnS3 layer was electrodeposited from aqueous solution containing Na2S2O3 and trisodium citrate at room temperature on the surface of ZnO NR array on FTO serving in this synthesis as a working electrode.486 The citrate anions were introduced to balance the reduction rates of copper(II) and tin(II). Thin films of CdIn2Se4 were potentio-statically electrodeposited on the stainless steel from acidic solutions containing H2SeO3.487
The p-type CIS films were produced by the sulfidation of electrodeposited copper and indium metallic layers.488–490 Sodium citrate is typically introduced into the electrolyte to equalize the rates of copper and indium deposition, since the ions have different reduction potentials.490 To exclude the presence of CuxS phases in the final CIS films they were additionally etched in an aqueous KCN solution.490
The CZTS nanosheet films were prepared by the STT of the electrodeposited metal mixture in ethanol suspensions of sulfur.407,491 The deposition results in a ∼350 nm layer of CZTS nanosheets with an average thickness of 30 nm.
The nanocrystalline CZTS/CZTSe films were produced by the co-electrodeposition of copper, zinc, and tin492–496 followed by the sulfidation at ∼600 °C in the H2S/S atmosphere, or the selenization via the STT in ethanol suspension of elemental Se at 200 °C.492 Similar to the case of ternary compounds, sodium citrate was introduced in the precursor solutions to level off the rates of the Cu, Zn, and Sn electrodeposition.
Polycrystalline dense Cu3BiS3 films were electrodeposited onto Mo-covered glass using thiourea as a sulfur source.497 The CBS has a direct bandgap of 1.6 eV favorable for the light-harvesting applications and therefore future progress of the electrodeposition toward the formation of nanocrystalline films with a controlled morphology can be envisaged for this ternary semiconductor.


2.10 Microwave treatment. 
The microwave heating of liquid dispersive media becomes a popular method of the preparation of nanocrystalline MMC compounds. The method is very fast as only a few-minute treatment is sufficient for the formation of well crystallized products due to the rapid and uniform heating of the dispersive medium in the microwave field. For example, GSH-capped 2–3 nm CIS498 and AIS/ZAIS355 NCs were produced in water by the microwave heating of the precursor solution of corresponding metal complexes with GSH. The microwave heating was used as an assisting procedure in the aqueous synthesis of cysteine- and TGA-capped CIS NCs,499 CIGS NCs in benzyl acetate,167 CZTS NCs in OLA500,501 and TOPO/OLA mixtures.502 In the latter case, the application of the microwave irradiation allowed to reduce the synthesis temperature and time to 165 °C and 10 min respectively.
The microwave synthesis of CIS NCs in propylene glycol can be carried out with a variety of sulfide sources, in particular, thiourea, TGA, Na2S2O3, cystine, and thiosemicarbazide.503 Similar sulfur sources were probed for the microwave-assisted synthesis of orthorhombic AIS NCs in ethylene glycol.504 The 3 nm CIS and CISe NCs were prepared in water in the presence of TGA by the microwave heating of a solution of metal chlorides and sodium sulfide or selenide.505
CZTS NC inks were produced by the microwave heating with thioacetamide as a sulfur source.506–508 Because of the rapidity of the synthesis, it can be realized in a flow regime with methylethylketone/1-DDT mixtures as solvents.509 The introduction of TGA allows decreasing of the size of flow-synthesized CZTS NCs down to 3–5 nm.509 A combination of thiourea and TGA was used to form alloyed Cu2(Zn1−xCox)SnS4 NCs (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) in ethylene glycol under the microwave heating.510


2.11 Other methods. 
A solid state reaction occurring in a mortar between Cu2S, Ag2S, Ga2S3, and In2S3 results in CuGa2In3S8 and AgGa2In3S8 powders with spectral responses extending to 600–650 nm.511 Presumably, such reactions may lead to nanocrystalline products with unexpected properties when conducted in the presence of suitable surfactants or/and capping agents.
The nanocrystalline CISe layers grown by the pulsed laser deposition512 are characterized by a gradient structure, the layer composition changing from In2Se3 to CISe along the film cross-section. Such gradient structure, that can be varied by adjusting the deposition conditions,512 is very favorable for the directed transport of the photogenerated charge carriers in the solar cells – the fact making the pulsed laser deposition a promising alternative to other synthetic protocols. This method was also applied to produce quaternary CZTS NCs.513,514 By combining the pulsed laser deposition with simultaneous electrophoresis, the CZTS NC films on Mo substrates can be formed by this method.513 The stoichiometry of the kesterite phase produced from an amorphous CuS/SnS/ZnS precursor depends on the intensity (fluence) of the laser irradiation (Fig. 26a).
 Fig. 26  (a) Composition of the CZTS films produced by the pulsed laser deposition as a function of the laser fluence. (b–d) SEM of CBTS NC film produced by the sputtering (b), CISe nanowires formed by the molecular beam epitaxy (c), and CuSbS2 film synthesized by the atomic layer deposition (d). (e and f) AFM image (e) and roughness profile (f) of the single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 514 (a), ref. 520 (b), ref. 521 (c), ref. 524 (d), and ref. 529 (e and f). Copyright (2017) Elsevier (a); (2016, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b, c, e and f); (2017) American Chemical Society (d). 
Various evaporation/sputtering techniques are broadly applied for the deposition of both nanocrystalline and compact MMC films for the photovoltaic applications, in particular, CIGS,515 (ZnSe)0.85(CIGS)0.15,516 CZTS,517 Cu3SbS4,518 and Cu2BaSnS4.519,520 Cu2BaSnS4 kesterite was deposited in the form of a 100 nm-thick film with a grain size of 100–200 nm (Fig. 26b) exhibiting a bandgap of around 2 eV and intrinsic Cu deficiency leading to the p-type conductivity.519
Highly crystalline CISe nanowires were synthesized by using the molecular beam epitaxy (Fig. 26c).521 The stoichiometry of CISe nanowires was controlled by adjusting the evaporation rates of copper and selenium. ZnIn2S4 nanosheets assembled into the hierarchical microspheres were grown on {100} silicon substrates by the chemical vapor deposition using InP and ZnS as raw materials heated at 1100 °C.522
Bulk chalcostibite samples produced by the mechanochemical alloying of the elemental precursors were used as a source for the electron beam evaporation and deposition of thin CuSbSe2 films with absorption coefficients higher than 105 cm−1 and a bandgap of 1.18 eV.523 Similar films were also deposited by the atomic layer deposition524 (Fig. 26d) and the radio-frequency magnetron sputtering from Cu2S and Sb2S3 targets.525 The CuSbS2 films can be formed in a two-stage process combining the thermal evaporation/re-deposition of a copper layer onto the surface of a Sb2S3 film produced by the chemical bath deposition followed by the annealing in the sulfur atmosphere.526
Thin films of CIS NCs can be produced by the spray deposition of mixed aqueous solution of metal chlorides and thiourea onto glass substrates followed by the heating at 300 °C.527 Nanocrystalline Cu2SnS3 films with a Cu:Sn ratio varying from 0 to 1 and a grain size of 10–30 nm were deposited by the spray pyrolysis with thiourea as a sulfur source.528
The free-standing single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets were produced by the thermal elimination of hydrazine molecules from the interlayer galleries of a layered MnSb2S4(N2H4)2 precursor (Fig. 26e and f).529 The bandgap of MnSb2S4 nanosheets, 1.69 eV, is favorable for potential applications in the light-harvesting systems.
The CIS NCs were synthesized by a high-energy mechano-chemical treatment in a planetary ball mill from elemental Cu, In, and S constituents in the argon atmosphere.530 The procedure yielded comparatively large 17–24 nm CIS particles. Nanocrystalline CTS powders with a grain size of around 45 nm can also be produced by the mechanical ball milling of a mixture of elemental copper, tin, and sulfur in ethanol in the H2S atmosphere.531,532 By adding PVP and water the stable inks suitable for the jet – printing of Cu2SnS3-based light-harvesting layers were prepared. A gram-scale mechanochemical synthesis of CZTS NCs from elemental precursors with no solvents or additives was proposed by D. K. Le et al.533 The synthesis takes only 0.5 h to finish indicating that a self-propagating solid-state chemical reaction is induced by the mechanochemical treatment.

3 Solar cells based on MMC NCs
The attempts of the light energy conversion into the electric power stem from the photoelectric effect discovered by Henri Bequerel in 1839.533,534 It should be noted that Bequerel observed illumination-induced electric currents between two electrodes immersed in a liquid electrolyte. Later, the photoeffect was also observed for solid electrolytes and a focus of the solar cell studies was turned to solid photovoltaic materials for many decades to come, till the liquid-junction dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were introduced.
The first to appear were the silicon-based solar cells. Silicon has a bandgap of 1.1 eV which is close to the optimal value of ∼1.3 eV (the solar irradiation spectrum peak) necessary for the achievement of the highest photoconversion efficiency. Moreover, Si is a photostable, low-toxic and earth-abundant material.5,536,537 The Si-based solar cells, typically referred to as the first-generation semiconductor solar cells, though being unrivaled in terms of the ratio of conversion efficiency vs. production cost, have a number of shortcomings. First, the silicon solar cell technology requires a huge amount of very pure silicon. Typically, the photovoltaic technologies used rejected materials from the semiconductor industry and the necessary amount of raw materials can be maintained only if both industries are developed with the same rate, which is doubtful in view of a recent drastic growth of interest to the solar energy harvesting. The solar cells based on amorphous silicon, which is much less expensive, emerged in 1960s–1970s.535 Another fundamental shortcoming of silicon is the indirect character of the interband electron transitions resulting in a comparatively low linear absorption coefficients. At least a 100 μm-thick silicon layer is required for the complete solar light absorption on the Earth surface thus putting limitations on the minimal thickness (and, therefore, the cost) of the solar cells.
The above shortcomings stimulated a search for new light-harvesting materials, in particular, among the visible and NIR light sensitive MC semiconductors, such as binary cadmium, lead, and copper chalcogenides, ternary indium-based MCs, and more complex quaternary compositions.6,14,17,21,22,42,45–48,535 It was found already in mid-1980s that some of the materials, in particular, Cu2S and CdTe (studied since 1960s), CuInSe2, CuGaSe2, CuInS2 and their alloys CIGS/CIGSe (studied from 1970s), and kesterite CZTS (studied from 1990s), sputtered as thin films can be used as the solar cell light absorbers.5–11,14,15,17,21,22,37,38,40,42,44–48,125,534,538 Most of such compounds are direct-bandgap semiconductors with high absorption coefficients and, therefore, much thinner (1–2 μm) absorber layers are required for the efficient solar light harvesting.536 Additionally, the alloying of several components can be used for a precise variation of the absorber bandgap. The thin-film cells are typically referred to as the second-generation semiconductor cells and showed efficiencies of 20% and higher.42,45,46,48,539 However, the cell production puts very rigorous requirements to the purity of sources used for the thin-film sputtering, and therefore, the second-generation cells are very expensive and found applications mostly in the aerospace industry,42,45,535,540 where the cell cost is not so critical.
Recently, the thin-film solar cell technology gained a new impetus by discovering the possibility of using NC or molecular precursor “inks” for the preparation of nanocrystalline MC thin-film absorbers.4–6,8,9,11,21,22,36,45,46 The ternary and quarternary compounds can be prepared by using well-established methods of the colloidal chemistry and concentrated to the form of inks. In a similar way, other components of the solar cell (metal contact, n-type component, barrier layers, etc.) can also be prepared as the NC inks so that the entire solar cell can be produced by using the ink-jet printing technologies making such solar cells competitive to the conventional silicon-based devices.4,22,46,541–544 In the simplest layout, the NC-based thin-film solar cell comprises a layer of the light-harvesting MC NCs “squeezed” between an electron transporting layer and a hole transporting layer that facilitate the extraction and transport of the photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 27a, upper structure).
 Fig. 27  Outline of the MMC NC-based solid-state (a) and liquid-junction (b) solar cells. 
Alternatively, the MC NCs can be blended with another light-sensitive components, such as conjugated polymers, fullerene derivatives, hybrid organo–inorganic perovskites, etc. to form bulk p/n heterojunctions (Fig. 27a, lower structure). The photoexcitation of one or both components results in the generation of charge carriers spatially separated by the electric field originating from the p/n heterojunction. As shown below, in some cells the MC NCs can simultaneously act as a light absorber and a charge transporting layer.
The idea of devising of a solar cell with two electrodes – a light-sensitive photoanode/photocathode and a catalytically-active counter electrode, both connected by a liquid electrolyte stems directly from the Bequerels experiments on the photoelectric effect.534,545 This idea was first realized by Fujishima and Honda in their photoelectrochemical cell for the water splitting on a single rutile crystal coupled to Pt.
The sensitization of wide-bandgap semiconductors, like TiO2, with external molecular absorbers is also one of the oldest conceptions of the solid-state photochemistry introduced by Vogel in 1883 for silver halide emulsions used in the photographic process.534,545 A combination of a liquid-electrolyte- (“liquid-junction”-) based photoelectrochemical cell with the dye sensitization approach gave rise to the DSSCs belonging to the third-generation solar cells, according to the generally accepted classification.
The sensitization effect was also observed long ago for the narrow-bandgap semiconductors deposited to/formed on the surface of wider-bandgap semiconductors, for example, for Ag2S produced by an ion exchange on the surface of AgBr (AgI).546 It is, therefore, logical that the conception of DSSCs was later extended to the SSSCs with the same liquid-junction architecture as in the DSSCs.4–9,11,14,16,19,21,22,25,37,38,40,547,548
The DSSC research was strongly stimulated by the fuel crisis of 1973 and over a thousand papers on DSSCs emerged in a few years from the start of the studies attesting to an explosive growth of the DSSC field.534,545,549,550 The solar light is absorbed in the DSSCs by a molecular sensitizer – a dye or a metal complex anchored to a wide-bandgap semiconductor, like TiO2 or ZnO with a highly developed surface area. The DSSC concept is a good example of a system, where the performance of the overall device is better than that of the separate components.16 Indeed, the mesoporous titania cannot absorb efficiently the solar light and also does not conduct electric current. The conventional Ru–bipyridyl complex sensitizers degrade very quickly when illuminated in solutions without any oxide support and redox-shuttles. However, a combination of all the components into a united system results in a solar cell that can generate the electric current densities of up to 20 mA cm−2 and exhibits stable performance for more than 15 years in the outdoor solar illumination.550 The toughest challenge for the DSSCs still to be met is to surpass a threshold of 15% efficiency.550 Indeed, quite spectacular efforts applied in the field of DSSC in two recent decades resulted in only ∼11% efficiency for the best performing cells. However, we have to mention here a very promising 28.9% efficiency under ambient illumination (but only 11.3% under the AM1.5G sunlight) achieved very recently by Grätzel et al. for a DSSC with two sensitizers.551 A limited success in the efficiency improvement observed in recent years stimulated the studies of other liquid-junction cell designs, in particular, the SSSCs with the semiconductor sensitizer introduced in the form of NCs.7–9,16,19,21,22,25,40,548
The working principle of the SSSCs is essentially based on a combination of the light-driven photocatalytic processes on a photoanode (photocathode) and the electro-catalytic processes on a counter electrode (Fig. 27b). The incoming light is absorbed by the NCs of a narrow-bandgap semiconductor, for example, CuInS2 (the photosensitizer NCs), resulting in the electron transfer to a wider-bandgap porous semiconductor metal oxide layer (TiO2 or ZnO). The VB hole of the sensitizer NCs is then filled at the expense of the oxidation of sulfide ions – one of the components of the redox couple present in the liquid electrolyte and having a high affinity to the surface of the sensitizer NCs. The elemental sulfur produced as a result of the S2− photooxidation is converted into polysulfide species and diffuses to the CuxS counter electrode where it is reduced by the electrons arriving from the photoanode and with this the photoelectrochemical cycle is finished. The SSSCs started with a modest few-percents efficiency of the light harvesting but showed an accelerated growth and achieved in 2018 efficiencies over 12%. At that, the potential of such cells is still to be realized to a full extent.
This section reviews consecutively the solid-state solar cells based on the MMC NCs (both thin-film and bulk-heterojunction types) and the liquid-junction solar cells with MMC NC-sensitized photoanodes/photocathodes.

3.1 Solid-state solar cells based on MC NCs. 
The simplest design of the multinary NC-based solid-state solar cells includes a MMC NC layer sandwiched between an ETL and an HTL. Typically, CIS or CISe layers are formed on semi-transparent Mo-coated glass as an ETL, and covered consecutively with a buffer CdS layer and a layer of intrinsically doped and aluminium doped ZnO NCs as an HTL. The structure is finished by a top metallic layer (Au, Ah, or Ni–Al). Such configurations showed light conversion efficiencies of ∼1% for CIS NCs,166 3.4% for CISSe NCs,552 0.74% for CISe NCs.359 A similar design was also realized with the absorber layer formed by mixed Cu(InxB1−x)Se2 NCs.375

Tables 3 and 4 summarize some of the reported solid-state solar cells based on various MMC NCs and placed in the order of increasing light conversion efficiency for each light absorber. The tables show the schematic cell composition and the most important photovoltaic parameters of the cells, in particular, the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc), the open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), the fill factor of the current–voltage characteristics (FF), and the power conversion efficiency (η).
Table 3 Photovoltaic parameters of selected solid-state solar cells based on A–EIII,V–X NC




MMC
Cell composition

J
sc, mA cm−2

V
oc, mV
FF

η, %
Ref.




Notes: the accuracy of values is preserved as reported in the corresponding references; IZO – intrinsic conductive transparent ZnO, AZO – Al-doped ZnO; spiro-OMeTAD – N2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis-(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine; P3HT – poly-3-hexylthiophene; PTB7 – poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethyl-hexyl)-oxy]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)-carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-diyl]]; PCBM – [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester; PEDOT:PSS – poly-3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene doped with polystyrene sulfonate; TMSC – trimethylsilyl cellulose.




CIS
Glass/Mo/CIS/CdS/ZnO/Al-doped ZnO
13.59
190
0.28
0.74

359



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TMSC–CuInS2/Al
5.48
479
0.377
0.99

166



FTO/TiO2/CIS/Au
4.32
700
0.38
1.16

95



FTO/TiO2/CIS/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
5.34
640
0.41
1.41

465



FTO/TiO2/CdS/CIS/Au
17.80
590
0.64
6.72

358



ITO/ZnO/CIS/PTB7:PCBM/MoO3/Ag
15.65
750
0.72
8.51

568



CIS/perovskite
FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CIS/ZnS/Au
18.6
924
0.487
8.38

226



Cu–In–B–Se
Glass/Mo/Cu(InxB1−x)Se2/CdS/iZO/ITO
25.9
265
0.34
2.34

375



CAIS
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT + CAIS/Al
6.74
540
0.31
1.13

231



ITO/ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2/P3HT/Pt
6.93
499
0.53
1.80

445



AIS
ITO/ZnO NRA/ZnS/AIS/P3HT/Pt
7.5
512
0.55
2.11

463



CISSe
Mo/CISSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ni–Al
14
521
0.463
3.4

552



CISe
Mo/CISe/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Ni/Al
39.2
404
0.632
10.01

479



Mo/CISe/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Al
35.2
460
0.67
10.85

122



CIGS
Mo/CIGS/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Ni–Al
20.9
526
0.489
6.09

561



CIGSSe
glass/Mo/CIGSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO
28.8
630
0.657
12.0

240



CIGSe
Mo/CIGSe/CdS/TiO2/FTO
18.34
490
0.62
5.57

553



Glass/Mo/CIGSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ni–Al
23.9
501
0.54
6.5

559



Glass/Mo/SiO2/CIGSe/CdS/ZnO/AZO
27.5
589
0.703
11.4

569



Cu–Ge–S–Se
Au/MoO3/CGSSe/CdS/FTO
1.31
570
0.28
0.2

243



Cu2SnS3
Mo/CTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al
20.12
327
0.42
2.77

249



CuSbS2
ITO/TiO2/CBS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
0.04
313
0.31
0.02

524



ITO/CdS/CBS/Ag
1.35
665
0.62
0.60

526



iZO/AZO/CdS/CBS/Mo
5.20
350
0.55
1.02

525



ITO/ZnO/CBS/P3HT/Pt
5.87
491
0.56
1.61

475



AgBiS2
ITO/ZnO/AgBiS2/P3HT/Au
16.7
460
0.56
4.1

293



ITO/ZnO/AgBiS2/PTB7/MoO3/Ag
18.0
500
0.65
5.84

292





Table 4 Photovoltaic parameters of selected solid-state solar cells based on A–EIV–X NC




MC
Cell composition

J
sc, mA cm−2

V
oc, mV
FF

η, %
Ref.




Notes: the accuracy of values is preserved as reported in the corresponding references.




CZTS
ITO/TO2/MEH-PPV/CZTS/PEDOT:PSS/Au
1.06
650
0.37
0.26

91



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT–PCBM/CZTS/LiF/Al
4.91
520
0.369
0.95

395



Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al
7.44
493
0.452
1.66

281



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/Al
10.69
420
0.385
1.73

92



Al foil/Mo/CZTS/ZnS/IZO/ITO/Al–Ni
8.91
484
0.451
1.94

349



FTO/TiO2/CdS/CZTS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
13.9
312
0.462
2.0

319



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al
12.58
471
0.41
2.44

266



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al
8.1
450
0.70
2.5

348



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ag
11.34
460
0.44
2.29

263



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/Ni–Al
30.28
272
0.352
2.89

223



FTO/ZnO/ZnO NRA/CdS/CZTS/MoO3/Au
13.97
500
0.484
3.34

258



Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al
23.28
431
0.356
3.6

262



ITO/ZnO/P3HT–CZTS–PCBM/MoOx/Ag
10.67
610
0.55
3.65

404



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO
21.5
532
0.428
4.9

332



Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ag
18.55
513
0.517
4.92

506



Glass/Mo/MoS2/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO/MgF
17.6
616
0.479
5.2

514



Glass-Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO
18.94
556
0.567
6.0

279



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al
31.5
448
0.644
9.08

325



ITO/CZTS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag
20.7
920
0.81
15.4

308



In:CZTS
Glass/Mo/CZTS/In2S3/ZnO/ITO/Al
20.0
621
0.545
6.9

562



CZTS + CAIS
ITO/CZTS/CAIS/Ca/Al
5.87
460
0.417
1.126

305



Cu2NiSnS4
Glass/Mo/CNTS/CdS/AZO
0.52
424
0.43
0.09

285



Cu2BaSnS4
FTO/CBTS/CdS/ZnO/AZO
4.37
522
0.49
1.60

558



CZTSe
Mo/CZTSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al
31.6
423
0.457
6.11

533



CZTSSe
Glass/ITO/TiO2/CdS/CZTSSe/Au
6.83
363
0.447
1.11

275



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO
29.1
360
0.428
4.48

502



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/AZO
23.9
478
0.45
5.14

329



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al
29.6
360
0.507
5.4

323



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ag
22.7
424
0.622
6.0

327



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/Ni–Al
30.4
420
0.527
7.23

273



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al
32.9
410
0.569
7.68

306



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al
31.2
401
0.628
7.9

256



Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO
30.9
460
0.60
8.6

322



Ag:CZTSSe
Ag/ITO/i-ZnO/CdS/CAZTSSe/Mo/glass
35.19
448
0.657
10.36

564



CZTGS
Mo/CZGSSe/CdS/iZO/ITO/Ni–Al
21.5
640
0.49
6.8

288





The CIS/CISe NC absorber layer in the solid-state solar cells can be formed by the direct electrodeposition from molecular precursor solutions479 or by the electrophoretic deposition of the pre-formed NCs.358 The cells formed by the electrophoretic deposition of alloyed CIGS NCs showed the highest photocurrent conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.57% at a 25% molar fraction of gallium.553
The development of an efficient bulk-heterojunction solid-state solar cell with MC NCs is a multiple task when variations of any possible parameters of the cell (geometry, composition, mixing of the components, thickness of layers, etc.) affect the cell performance to a lesser or larger extent. Among the major factors are (i) the “right” cell geometry allowing for the efficient charge extraction and transport to the opposite electrodes and (ii) the matching of energy levels between the donating and accepting components of the cells. This conception is exemplified by the bulk-heterojunction solar cells based on AIS463 and CAIS NCs445 mixed with P3HT, the mixture deposited onto the surface of ZnO NR array (Fig. 28a). The cell illumination can excite both CAIS NCs and P3HT and a “cascade” electron transfer occurs from P3HT to CAIS and further to ZnO, while the photogenerated holes move in the opposite direction. In this way, the efficient charge separation and directed transport are organized, while the P3HT HTL actively participates in the photogeneration of charge carriers (Fig. 28b). The ZnO NR array acts as a perfect electron carrier allowing for the directed electron flow to ITO and out into the electric circuit.445,463 The copper ions occupy the vacant states in the AIS lattice and increase the NC conductivity resulting in a decreased internal resistance of the bulk heterojunctions between CAIS NCs and P3HT polymer.231 The cells based on the CAIS NC/P3HT bulk-heterojunction reveal a higher PCE of 1.13%, than similar composites with individual CIS and AIS NCs (0.25% and 0.47%, respectively).231
 Fig. 28  (a and b) A scheme (a) and current–voltage characteristics (b) of the solid-state solar cells based on ZnO NR array and ZnO/CAIS/P3HT heterostructures. (c and d) A schematic layout (c) and energy diagram (d) of the cell based on CZTS NC/MEH-PPV (poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) bulk-heterojunction. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 445 (a and b) and ref. 91 (c and d). Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The 1-DDT/OLA-capped CIS NCs produced by the hot injection can be easily mixed with solutions of conjugated polymers, for example, P3HT resulting in a NC/polymer bulk-heterojunction.554 The heterojunction quality and the efficiency of the charge transfers between the bulk-heterojunction components can be increased considerably by the post-deposition ligand exchange.554
The composites of RGO with CIS NCs were applied as an ETL and, simultaneously, as a co-absorber in the bulk-heterojunction with MEH-PPV.370 The RGO nanosheets increased the cell productivity as a result of the directed electron transfer along the RGO basal plane and a percolating effect of the nanosheets.370
The bulk heterojunctions of 3–5 nm CZTS NCs with P3HT also have favorable mutual CB and VB positions allowing for the efficient electron transfer from the photoexcited polymer to NCs and the hole transfer from the photoexcited NCs to the polymer (Fig. 28c and d). As a result, the systems can efficiently absorb the visible light at wavelengths shorter than 900 nm.91 The introduction of CZTS NCs into the bulk-heterojunction of P3HT with a fullerene derivative – PCBM increases the light absorption efficiency and the electrical conductivity of the bulk-heterojunction resulting in an improvement of the cell performance from 3.30% to 3.65%.404 Mixed kesterite CZTSSe NCs can be used instead of the conjugated polymers in a bulk-heterojunction with PCBM acting as a sole light absorber, but the cell efficiency is low (0.01%) in this configuration.270
The light conversion efficiency of 9.51% was reported for “inverted” solar cells based on the bulk-heterojunction of PTB7 conjugated polymer with PCBM and an additional buffer layer of 7 nm CIS NCs placed between a ZnO ETL and the light-harvesting bulk-heterojunction.555 The CIS layer plays multiple roles including additional light absorption, a reduction of the roughness of ZnO/bulk-heterojunction interface as well as an acceleration of the electron transport between the junction and ETL.555
The configuration and performance of the TiO2/CIS-composite based bulk-heterojunction solar cells depends considerably on the titania scaffold morphology.95,465 In the case of a dense TiO2 layer the Zn-doped CIS NCs form a separate layer on top of the titania scaffold (Fig. 29a and b) and thus the junction forms only on the interface between the titania edge and the closest layer of CIS/CIZS NCs, while other sensitizer NCs have no direct contact with the titania. Such cell demonstrated a meager PCE of 0.30%.95 In the case of mesoporous titania scaffolds, the CIZS NCs penetrate the entire volume of TiO2 film and thus each sensitizer NC potentially has a direct contact with the titania NCs (Fig. 29c and d). In such configuration the PCE of the cell increases to 1.16% as a result of the simultaneous increase in the Jsc (Fig. 29e), FF and a 10-fold rise of the EQE.95 The ideality factor (FF) of the cell was found to be much higher for the porous layer-based bulk-heterojunction as compared with the flat-bilayer indicating strongly reduced electron–hole recombination in the porous bulk-heterojunction.
 Fig. 29  Cross-sectional SEM (a), element distribution maps (b and c), current–voltage characteristics (d), and EQE spectra in the Urbach coordinates (e) for flat-bilayer and porous TiO2/CIS composites. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The possibility of charge transfer between CIS and ZnO NCs together with the light scattering capabilities of anisotropically-shaped zinc oxide nanoformations were elegantly used to enhance the performance of conventional silicon solar cells.431 The ZnO nanopyramids attached to the silicon surface decreased the light reflectance to 10–15% as compared to 25–40% of the bare Si, thus enhancing the cell performance from 4.5% to 6.6%. In the case of CIS NC-capped ZnO nanopyramids, the cell performance can further be impressively increased to 10% at the expense of the light-harvesting by CIS NCs and the cascade charge transfer from CIS NCs to ZnO to silicon.431
A comparison between compact and porous TiO2-based cells95 provides an excellent illustration of another special feature of the light-harvesting systems based on MMC NCs differing quite drastically from the “conventional” binary MC light harvesters, such as cadmium and lead chalcogenide NCs. As discussed in Section 1, the absorption band edge of CIS and AIS NCs is dominated by the absorbance on the subbandgap states – lattice defects, vacancies and other irregularities abundant in the multinary NCs. It was found that such subbandgap states can take active participation in the light conversion and thus the EQE spectra also show distinct absorption “tails” below the bandgap. These tails can be linearized in the Urbach equation coordinates “ln(EQE) − (hv − Eg)” (Fig. 29f). Quite surprisingly, the characteristic Urbach energy EU being proportional to the density and distribution width of the mid-bandgap states is almost twice lower for the solar cells based on the porous TiO2/CIS layers as compared with the compact bilayer analog.
This phenomenon was explained95 by a partial filling of the mid-bandgap states near VB of CIS NCs with electrons coming from titania. It is well known that the n-conducting TiO2 has an excess of electrons that can cause, for example, “dark” reductive processes even without the photoexcitation events.556 The partial filling of the mid-bandgap states in the porous TiO2/CIS heterostructures lowers an energy barrier for the electron extraction and can be the reason for the enhanced PCE in such devices as compared with the compact architecture.95
The photovoltaic devices produced via the spray-coating deposition of CISe NCs (the cell configuration is Au/CISe/CdS/ZnO/ITO) showed a large and size-dependent Voc reaching around 850 meV for the NCs with Eg = 1.46 eV, that is, 65–70% of the open-circuit voltage theoretically possible for such bandgap.237 It is claimed to be the highest Voc reported for the NC-based solar cells exceeding by far the values reported for CdSe and PbS NC-based solar cells. Contrary to the above-discussed TiO2/NC-based architectures, the large size-dependent Voc is considered to show that the midbandgap states of CISe NCs do not dominate the cell performance.237 It can be speculated from these contradictory results that the surface chemistry of MC NCs may play a crucial role in the charge transfer dynamics thus allowing for or excluding the possibility of the participation of the NC midbandgap states in the photocurrent generation.
The CIS NCs incorporated into the solid-state solar cells with ZnO NCs as a charge extraction layer (the cell configuration is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CIS/ZnO/Al) reveal a “light soaking” effect when the cell efficiency increases under the illumination (Fig. 30a).557 The effect was found to be considerably enhanced with the UV light being added to the illumination spectrum indicating the involvement of ZnO NCs. Moreover, the effect is reversible indicating a dynamic character of the photoinduced changes. A similar but much more modest light-soaking enhancement effect was observed for the CZTSe-based solid-state solar cells where the PCE increased during the illumination from 6.7% to 7.2%.273 In contrast, for the above-discussed ZnO/CIS heterostructure-based solar cell the light-soaking-induced enhancement of the light conversion efficiency is tremendous as the PCE increases during the illumination from around 2 to 8% (Fig. 30b) indicating that the photoinduced changes affect mostly the wide-bandgap ZnO scaffold. A detailed analysis of possible losses in a CIS/ZnO heterojunction557 revealed two major loss sources: (i) a barrier for the charge extraction at the CIS/ZnO interface lowered by the light-soaking effect and (ii) the recombination of the charge carriers in CIS NCs via the trap states. The latter is unaffected by the incoming light557 and needs to be addressed in other ways, in particular by adjusting the NC synthesis conditions and NC surface passivation.
 Fig. 30  Current–voltage characteristics (a) and EQE spectra (b) of ZnO/CIS composite based solid-state solar cells subjected to the illumination with a mixture of “white” light (WL) and UV light. Inset in (b): PCE as a function of the “light-soaking” duration. Reprinted from ref. 557 – Published by the PCCP Owner Societies. 
A typical design of kesterite-based solar solid-state cells262,263,281,322,327,329,533 includes a semi-transparent molybdenium layer sputtered on the soda lime glass, on top of which a kesterite (CZTS, CZTSSe, CZTSe) micrometer-thick layer is formed by the deposition of various precursors followed by the sulfidation/selenidation at 400–500 °C. Then, a thin (30–50 nm) buffer CdS layer is typically deposited by the chemical bath deposition, followed by the deposition/sputtering of a layer of intrinsically doped ZnO NCs (IZO) and, optionally, an AZO layer. The final top layer of the solar cell is made of ITO NCs covered by the vapor-deposited/sputtered metal (Au, Ag, Ni–Al, etc.) layer.
The kesterite Cu2MSnS4 (M = Fe, Co, Ni) NCs deposited onto the ZnS-coated ZnO nanorod array (Fig. 31a) act as spectral sensitizers enabling the entire visible light harvesting in simple solid-state ITO/ZnO/ZnS/kesterite/Au solar cells with an efficiency of 2.71%, 2.73%, and 3.23% for the Ni-, Fe-, and Co-based NCs, respectively.318 The CB levels of the cell components are properly aligned to induce a cascaded photoelectron transfer from the kesterite NCs to the intermediate ZnS layer, further to the ZnO scaffold and, finally, to ITO (Fig. 31b).318
 Fig. 31  (a) SEM of CFTS NC-coated ZnO/ZnS NR array. (b) Energy diagram of a CFTS NC-based solar cell. (c) Cross-sectional SEMs of a glass/Mo/CZTS NC layer at different stages of the selenidation. The scale bar in (c) is 500 nm. Figures denote thicknesses of the layers. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 318 (a and b) and ref. 306 (c). Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2014) American Chemical Society (c). 
The kesterite CZTS NCs deposited onto the titania NR arrays from water/ethanol suspensions and coupled with a CdS buffer layer and a spiro-OMeTAD HTL exhibited a light conversion efficiency of 2%.319 The rate of electron transfers in the bulk-heterojunction of CZTS and inorganic oxide semiconductors expectedly depends on the NC ligand nature. By exchanging bulky OLA ligands with S2−, the PCE of completely inorganic ZnO/CdS/CZTS/MoO3/Au cell was increased from 1.83% to 3.34%.258
The bulky insulating ligands can be efficiently removed from the surface of CZTS NCs by reacting them with strong alkylating agents, such as methyliodide or the Meerwein's agent (C2H5)3OBF4. The treatment converts primary amines (OLA, dodecylamine, etc.) into the corresponding quaternary amines that have a much lower affinity to the NC surface while not affecting the crystalline structure of the CZTS NCs.193
Cu2NiSnS4 NCs285 and Cu2BaSnS4 NCs558 were reported as light-harvesting layers of the solid-state solar cells with a general configuration Mo/MMC/CdS/IZO/AZO.
A nanocrystalline CZTS layer with a thickness of around 400 nm deposited by the pulsed laser deposition was applied as a light-harvesting component of the solid-state cells with a PCE of 5.2%.514 A similar cell with CZTS NCs synthesized by the liquid-phase pulsed laser/electrophoretic deposition revealed a PCE of 4.77%.513
Solar cells produced from the NC inks. 
One of the most attractive and promising directions in the solid-state photovoltaics based on the MMC NCs is the ink-jet printing of the cells on various substrates (both rigid and flexible) by using pre-formed NC inks. The method allows for unprecedented flexibility in the variation of the ink composition and rheology, substrate nature, as well as the conditions of the post-printing annealing in a sulfur- or selenium-rich atmosphere required for the formation of compact and high-quality MC absorber layers.
The inks composed of amorphous CIS NC with copper and indium monoethanolamine complexes were used to form CISe-based solar cells with a PCE of 10.85%.122 The selenidation of CIS NC inks was recently established as a reproducible method of the production of thin-film solar cells.227
The solid-state solar cells with CIGS absorber layers were successfully formed by the ink-jet printing of CIGS NCs followed by rapid annealing in selenium vapors.559,560 The film uniformity and performance depend crucially on the ink formulation requiring a combination of a low-boiling-point (hexanethiol) solvent and a high-boiling-point (dodecanethiol) solvent in a specific proportion providing a trade-off between the viscosity and volatility of the CIGS NC inks.559 By using three different CIGS inks with a varied In/Ga ratio, a composition-graded absorber layer can be easily formed by the consecutive jet-printing procedures.561 The graded Mo/CIGS/CdS/IZO/n-ZnO/Ni/Al solar cell showed almost twice higher efficiency (PCE of 7.29%) as a non-graded analog.561
The doctor blade deposition of a layer of CIGS NC inks in alkanethiols followed by the selenidation was applied to produce CIGSSe absorber layers.240 The phase of the nanocrystalline inks can be varied from chalcopyrite to sphalerite. Also, NaCl additions were introduced into the NC inks resulting in a uniform distribution of Na+ ions in the final CIGS films. The presence of Na+ positively affects the CIGSSe crystallization producing larger and more densely packed absorber grains and increasing the cell performance from 7.7% up to 12.0%.240 In a similar way, thin CZTSSe films were produced by the doctor blade deposition of CZTS NC inks and annealing in the presence of selenium.256,324 The incorporated Na+ ions were assumed not only to affect the CZTS crystallization kinetics but also to passivate grain surface defects and to increase the charge carrier density thus resulting in ∼50% enhancement of the solar cell performance.260
A typical approach for the formation of light-harvesting kesterite layers of the solid-state solar cells is the annealing of CZTS NC inks in a sulfur263,266,279 or selenium273,306,322,323,325,332 atmosphere at 400–500 °C. The sulfidation/selenidation results in the formation of compact micron grains, the grain size d increasing with the annealing time and temperature.266,323 In the case of CZTSe-based cells the highest PCE of ∼5% was observed in intermediate ranges of both annealing duration (20 min, d = 0.2–0.5 μm) and temperature (500 °C, d = 0.5–1.0 μm).323
Uniform precursor CZTS NC films on Mo-coated glass (Fig. 31c, fragment 1) were produced by the layer-by-layer deposition with the annealing at 350 °C after each consecutive spin coating of the NC ink solution.306 As the selenidation starts, the compact CTZSe layer forms with the front between new CZTSe phase and the precursor CTZS NC phase moving from the outer NC film surface to the Mo layer (Fig. 31c, fragments 2 and 3). This movement resulted in the formation of a dense 550–600 nm-thick CZTSe layer over a residual nanocrystalline Cu- and Se-rich CZTS layer (Fig. 31c, fragment 4) that resists to further selenidation. In this way, the composition and morphology of the absorber layer can easily be controlled by varying the Se treatment duration.
Annealing of a CZTS wurtzite NC ink precursor in a mixed sulfur/SnS vapor atmosphere yielded an absorbing layer with 6.0% efficiency of light conversion.279
“Green” aqueous CZTS NC inks developed by Tang et al.329 can easily be deposited onto Mo-glass substrates and converted into the compact CZTSSe layers by annealing at 400 °C in the presence of a mixture of elemental S and Se. The composition of the final absorber layers depends on a molar S/Se ratio during the annealing. The highest PCE of 5.15% at Voc = 478 mV and a FF of 45% (Fig. 32a) was achieved for the CZTSSe layers with a bandgap of 1.22 eV, intermediate between the pure CZTS and CZTSe phases.329 The cell can harvest the visible and NIR light to ∼1020 nm (Fig. 32b). The colloidal CZTS NCs produced in water/ethanol mixtures were used as inks sprayed non-pyrolytically onto Mo-glass substrates and then annealed either in N2 or in the Se-saturated atmosphere producing compact CZTS and CZTSSe layers with a PCE of 5.0% and 8.6%, respectively.322
 Fig. 32  (a and b) Current–voltage characteristics (a) and EQE spectrum (b) of the CZTSe-based cell produced from the aqueous CZTS NC inks. Inset in (b): EQE spectrum presented in the Tauc coordinates to assess the bang gap of the light absorber layer. (c) Cross-sectional SEM and photographs of flexible CZTS-based cell constructed on the Al foil. (d) Atomic composition of In-diffused CZTS/In2S3 film as shown by the Auger spectroscopic analysis (the etching rate was ∼4 nm × min−1). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 329 (a and b), ref. 349 (c), and ref. 562 (d). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society (a, b and d); (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c). 
The ITO/TiO2/CdS/CZTSSe/Au cells produced from ethoxycellulose/CZTSe NC inks showed a higher uniformity of the absorber layer and light conversion efficiency than similar devices formed from CZTSe NC dispersion in ethanol.275 An ethanol-suspended CZTS NC ink was designed for the roll-to-roll printing of NC layers on the flexible Mo-coated Al foil.349 After consecutive procedure of the annealing with sulfur vapour, the chemical bath deposition of a CdS layer and the sputtering of IZO, ITO, and Ni–Al layers, a flexible solar cell with a PCE of 1.94% was produced (Fig. 32c).349 All of the cell components can be printed opening perspectives for the industrial production of such devices.
The uniformity and crystallinity of CZTS thin films (and, therefore, their light-harvesting capability) can be enhanced considerably by combining a NC ink with a molecular precursor ink, as discussed earlier for CIS NCs, the latter ink containing acetates/chlorides of copper, zinc and tin in methoxyethanol.506 The sulfidation of the films produced by the consecutive spin-coating of 10 layers of the NC ink with 5 layers of the molecular ink was found to produce the most active light-harvesting layers surpassing by the activity (4.92%) both similar films formed exclusively from the NC inks (2.10%) and solely from the molecular inks (2.80%).506
By combining two NC inks containing CZTS NCs and SnS/Ag2S NCs, the Ag-doped CZTSe films were formed by the rapid selenidation at 500 °C.563 The introduction of Ag+ dopant resulted in an accelerated growth of the kesterite grains, a higher charge carrier density and life time as well as suppressed sub-bandgap absorption indicating reduced formation of defects.563,564
The light conversion efficiency of CZTSSe absorber layers produced by the partial selenization of CZTS NC inks can be enhanced by post-synthesis etching treatments aimed at the elimination of impurity CuxS(Se) phases. The procedure is typically performed by using KCN etching agent but can be made “greener” and safer by applying a combination of ethylenediamine and 2-mercaptoethanol that selectively dissolves copper chalcogenide phases while etches only slightly the kesterite and wurtzite CZTS NCs.565
The inks composed of separate sulfide NCs (CuS, SnS, ZnS, Cu7S4, Cu2SnS3, etc.) were also applied as precursors for the light-harvesting kesterite layers produced by sulfidation/selenidation under annealing conditions.327 The selenidation of the NC mixtures yields compact alloyed CZTSSe layers with a bandgap of around 1.1 eV corresponding to the light sensitivity threshold of around 1100 nm.327
Annealing of a layer of spin-coated OLA-capped CZTS NC inks in a sulfur or selenium atmosphere yields CZTS/CZTSSe light-absorbing layers containing the residuals of the ligand pyrolysis, such as graphitic carbon and thiophene/selenophene moieties that enhance the electrical conductivity of the films.257
A combination of the doctor blading of a NC ink and the selenidation was applied to form multinary Cu–Zn–Sn–Ge–S–Se light-harvesting layers with the bandgap depending on the Sn/Ge ratio in the starting Cu2Zn(Sn1−xGex)S4 NCs.288 By preparing the NC inks with a Cu deficiency and an excess of Zn at Ge/(Ge + Sn) = 0.7, the composition-gradient (in terms of the Ge distribution) CZTGSSe films were produced showing a much higher PCE of 6.8% as compared to 0.51% for the stoichiometric absorber.288 The reported efficiencies for the kesterite solar cells produced from the NC inks vary from 1.66% to 6.0% for CZTS NCs,262,263,266,279,281,348,562 from 4.48% to 9.08% for the alloyed CZTSSe NCs,306,325,329,502 and reach 6–7% for CZTSe NC-based cells.273,533
Alternatively to the jet-printing, the inks can be sprayed upon the substrates followed by the sulfidation/selenidation. In this way, the CIS NC-359 and CZTS NC-based269,502 solid-state solar cells were fabricated. The quality of the CZTS coating was found to depend on the size of CZTS NCs, being optimal for the 15 nm NCs but deteriorating for larger NCs.269 Other techniques were also applied for the CZTS NC inks deposition, including radio frequency magnetron sputtering.348
The electrodeposition coupled to various post-deposition thermal treatments was found to be quite efficient, scalable and reproducible method for the formation of light-harvesting kesterite layers. For example, the electrodeposited CZTS films with a top In2S3 barrier layer subjected to the post-synthesis heat treatment showed a PCE of 6.9%.562 The treatment was found to induce the indium diffusion into the CZTS layer. The surface of the In-doped CZTS sample was etched for different times and the atomic composition was determined by the Auger photoelectron spectroscopy thus providing a “depth” profile of the In distribution (Fig. 32d). The indium incorporation results in a narrowing of the CZTS bandgap from 1.47 eV to 1.40 eV, thus enhancing the photosensitivity and PCE of the cells. The heat treatment of the CZTS film without the In2S3 layer does not affect the PCE, the fact clearly indicating the role of the In diffusion for the cell performance. The In atoms filling the voids between the CZTS grains allow for a more efficient charge transport increasing the charge density of the p-conductive CZTS layer.562
Two types of MMC NCs differing in the conductivity type – p-conducting CZTS NCs and n-conducting copper-diffused AIS NCs were coupled to form a p/n junction with the CB/VB levels allowing for the efficient separation of the photogenerated charge carriers.305 A depletion region forming at the p/n junction creates an electric field favoring to the drift of the minority carriers across the junction. The CZTS and CAIS layer thickness can be adjusted to match the exact length of the depletion region, which can be determined from the capacitance–voltage characteristics of the junction.305 In this way, the undepleted parts of the junction contributing to the internal resistance are eliminated.
Along with the principal light-harvesting function, the MMC NCs were found to be capable of charge transport and, therefore, can combine the charge photogeneration and charge transport functions, thus allowing to exclude additional organic hole transporting layers.
The ZnS-coated CIS NCs were applied to form an HTL on top of the hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite (Fig. 33a).226 The mutual positions of CB/VB layers of TiO2, perovskite and CIS NCs favor to the electron extraction into TiO2 and the hole extraction into the CIS layer (Fig. 33b) allowing to achieve a PCE of 8.38% without additional organic hole transporting materials.
 Fig. 33  (a and b) Schematic layout (a) and energy diagram (b) of the TiO2/MAPbI3/CIS/Au solar cell. (c) Cross-sectional SEMs of a FTO/CBTS/MaPbI3/PCBM solar cell. (d) Energy diagram of a P3HT/PCBM-based cell with a CZTS transport layer. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 226 (a and b), ref. 520 (c), and ref. 395 (d). Copyright (2014, 2015) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
The p-conducting kesterite CZTS297 and CBTS NCs520 are promising HTL materials for the CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3)-based solar cells. The CBTS NCs combine a high chemical stability with a high carrier mobility of around 10 cm2 V−1 s−1. For the comparison, the carrier mobilities of two typical HTLs – organic spiro-OMeTAD and inorganic CuSCN are 4 × 10−5 and 0.01–0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.520 The insertion of a 100 nm-thick CBTS layer between FTO and the light-harvesting perovskite layer (Fig. 33c) allows to reach a PCE of ∼10%.
The hole transporting properties were reported for Cu2CdSnS4 NCs introduced as a HTL in a P3HT/PCBM bulk-heterojunction solar cell.317 This nanocrystalline HTL enhances the cell performance from 3.08% to 3.63%.
Kesterite CZTS nanospheres introduced as a buffer layer into the bulk-heterojunction solar cells with mixed P3HT/PCBM absorbing layers can act both as an additional light absorber and as an ETL that accepts the photogenerated charge carriers from P3HT/PCBM heterojunction and relays them to the metal electrode (Fig. 33d).395 Although the overall light conversion efficiency of the ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT–PCBM/CZTS/LiF/Al cell is rather small (0.95%) it is almost 8 times higher than PCE of a similar cell produced without the kesterite NCs (0.12%).
One of the current trends in MC photovoltaics is to trade-off the cost of the cell components against the absorber efficiency. It is assumed that the utilization of an abundant, low-toxic and low-cost absorber materials, such as the above-discussed kesterite may compensate for a comparatively low light conversion efficiency. By this reason, new MMC compositions and phases are constantly probed as light-harvesting components of the solid-state solar cells. In particular, ternary CTS NCs are considered as a very affordable alternative to the conventional MC absorbers.249,316 The cells produced from CTS NC inks subjected to additional annealing in the sulfur vapor revealed a reasonable PCE of 2.77% and a high stability to degradation during a 50 day testing in the ambient air conditions.249 The composition-tunable CGSSe NCs were also introduced into the solid-state solar cells operating with a 0.2% efficiency.243 Alternatively, CGS NCs can be used as an HTL in perovskite-based bulk-heterojunction solar cells.566
A CuSbS2 NC-based thin-film solar cell prepared by the spin-coating of the NC ink precursor exhibited a PCE of 0.01%.307 Alternatively, CuSbS2 NCs can be grown on titania by the atomic layer deposition.524 Despite low efficiencies achieved to date, the copper antimony sulfide materials attract growing attention due to a bandgap of around 1.5 eV that matches perfectly the solar spectrum as well as high absorption coefficients (104–105 cm−1). Such properties, along with a broad abundancy of constituents and a low raw material and production costs,524–526 allow to anticipate a progress with this light absorber in the near future. Despite a considerable difference in the lattice type as compared to chalcopyrite and kesterite NCs, the chalcostibite CuSbS2 also reveals a tendency to the non-stoichiometry, in particular, showing a tunable VB hole density of 1016–1018 cm−3 depending on the Sb2S3 excess during the synthesis.525 Recently, a CuSbS2 NC-based solar cell with a PCE of 0.6% produced from a bilayer precursor Cu/Sb2S3 composite was reported.526 The cell composed of ZnO/CuSbS2 and Pt electrodes connected by the solid P3HT electrolyte exhibited an even higher PCE of 1.61%.475 Both mentioned results show a distinct and fast progress with this light harvesting material. Similarly, the preliminary studies of the nanocrystalline Cu4Bi4S9 (Eg = 1.14 eV)386 and Cu3BiS3 (Eg = 1.47 eV)567 attested to a high potential of these semiconductors for the solid-state photovoltaics.


3.2 Photoelectrochemical solar cells based on MMC NCs. 
The heterostructures of MMC NCs with the wide-bandgap semiconductors like TiO2 and ZnO are typically formed either by the ex situ and in situ methods. Table 5 summarizes the light conversion efficiencies of some of the reported liquid-junction NC-sensitized solar cells.
Table 5 Photovoltaic parameters of selected MMC NC-sensitized liquid-junction solar cells




MC
Cell configuration and preparation details

J
sc, mA cm−2

V
oc, mV
FF

η, %
Ref.




Notes: the accuracy of values is preserved as reported in the corresponding references; PA – photoanode, PC – photocathode; RC – redox couple, FA – formamide; ED – electrophoretic deposition; CBD – chemical bath deposition.




CIS
PA: TiO2 NT/CdS + CIS, SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Na2S
5.18
710
0.38
1.42

466



PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, dip-coating, CE/RC: carbon/Sx2−
8.12
489
0.37
1.47

453



PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, dip coating + SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
7.72
570
0.42
1.84

295



PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, ED/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS–RGO/Sx2−
10.10
501
0.47
2.38

132



PA: TiO2, ED of CIS NCs (∼3 nm), CE/RC: RGO–CuxS/agarose gel with Sx2−
10.75
584
0.47
2.97

139



PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, ED/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS–RGO/Sx2−
15.65
529
0.47
3.91

97



PA: TiO2/CIS/In2S3/ZnS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: carbon/Sx2−
9.76
860
0.524
4.39

452



PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: PEDOT-carbon/S2−
16.07
912
0.356
5.15

573



PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, dip-coating, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
9.73
580
0.58
6.66

133



CIS/CdS
PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS/ZnS, dip coating/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
16.9
560
0.45
4.2

570



CIS/CdSe
PA: TiO2/CIS/CdSe/ZnSe, SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
17.0
575
0.465
4.55

579



CISe
PA: TiO2/CISe/Mn–CdS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
16.10
590
0.41
3.96

168



PA: TiO2/CISe/ZnS, soaking with NC colloid/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
26.93
528
0.57
8.10

171



CISSe
PA: TiO2/CISSe/CdSSe, dip-coating, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
10.5
550
0.604
3.45

238



CIZS
PA: TiO2/CIZS/ZnS, dip-coating + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
22.62
613
0.61
8.47

650



CIZSe
PA: TiO2/CIZSe/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: Ti-carbon/Sx2−
25.18
742
0.624
11.66

96



PA: TiO2/CIZSe/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
25.97
752
0.644
12.57

296



PA: TiO2/(CdSe + CIZSe)/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
27.39
752
0.619
12.75

35



CIZSSe
PC: NiO/CIZSSe, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
9.13
350
0.39
1.25

131



CIGSe
PA: TiO2/CIGSe/ZnS/SiO, drop-casting, CE/RC: carbon on Ti/Sx2−
25.01
740
0.621
11.49

98



AIS
PA: TiO2/AIS/In2S3/ZnS, ion exchange/SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Sx2−
7.87
320
0.28
0.70

575



PA: TiO2, drop-casting of AIS NCs (size 5–6 nm) in FA, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−
4.62
450
0.39
0.80

58



PA: TiO2/AIS/ZnS, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
9.75
432
0.646
2.62

499



ZAIS
PA: ZnO NRs, ZAIS NC (∼5 nm) adsorption from octylamine, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)
3.8
540
0.35
0.72

161



PA: ZnO/ZAIS, dip-coating, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)
3.8
540
0.35
0.72

159



ZAISe
PA: TiO2/ZAISe/CdS, adsorption from colloid + SILAR of CdS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
8.8
500
0.43
1.9

94



ZAISe
PA: TiO2, dip-coating with ZAISe NCs (size 3.2–3.5 nm), passivation with ZnS (8 SILARs), amorphous TiO2 and SiO2 layers; CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
16.03
381
0.59
3.57

187



CdIn2S4
PA: FTO/CdIn2S4, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−
3.5
331
0.415
0.48

245



ZnIn2S4
PA: TiO2/ZnIn2S4, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−
2.55
430
0.385
0.42

425



AgSbS2
PA: TiO2/AgSbS2, SILAR, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−
2.42
320
0.436
0.34

473



CuBiS2
PA: TiO2/CuBiS2,CBD, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
6.87
250
0.361
0.62

312



AgBiS2
PA: TiO2/AgBiS2, SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Sx2−
7.61
180
0.386
0.53

474



CZTS
PA: TiO2/CZTS, drop casting, CE/RC: Pt/tetrabutylammonium perchlorate
0.36
283
0.286
0.03

208



PA: TiO2/RGO-CZTS, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)
0.411
560
0.576
0.133

196



ZnSe/CZTS
PA: ZnO/ZnSe/CZTS, ion exchange + spin coating of CZTS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−
10.46
490
0.43
2.2

197





In the ex situ option, the mesoporous wide-bandgap oxide is decorated by separately prepared MMC NCs stabilized by the surface ligands capable of covalent of electrostatic binding to the oxide surface, most often TGA and MPA. Sodium or potassium salts of the acids are typically used for the phase transfer of hydrophobic MMC NCs from organic solvent into polar media (water, DMF, etc.) or used for the direct synthesis of MMC NCs in aqueous solutions, as discussed in Section 2. The sulfur atom of –SH group of the acid binds to a cationic site on the surface of NCs while the ionized carboxyl group can readily attach to the positively charged sites on the surface of titanium or zinc oxides. This bonding enables a strong interaction between the oxide surface and the sensitizer NCs while the electrostatic repulsion between adjacent negatively-charged NCs favors to a uniform coverage of the wide-bandgap semiconductor surface. As the TGA anion is prone to the oxidation by air oxygen to disulfides as well as to the hydrolysis, MPA is a more often used option. An alkyl chain longer than –(CH2)2– hinders strongly the electron transfer from the photoexcited MMC NCs to the oxide scaffold and so the choice of available mercaptocarboxylic “linker” molecules is typically confined either to a less-stable but shorter TGA or to a longer but more stable MPA. This method was applied to produce titania heterostructures with CIS NCs,133,570,571 CIZS NCs,572 ZAISe NCs,187etc. The TiO2/CIS NC photoanode produced from the MPA-capped CIS NCs and combined into a liquid-junction cell with a CuxS counter electrode (CE) and polysulfide electrolyte showed a certified PCE of 6.66% with a champion device reaching 7.04% efficiency.133
Alternatively, the titania scaffolds can be modified by bifunctional molecules, like TGA that adsorbs via the carboxylic groups and can serve as a binder for the sensitizer NCs when the TiO2 film is immersed into the NC colloid. This way was applied to prepare TiO2/CIS68,171,573 and TiO2/AIS heterostructures.141
The PCE of TiO2/CIS photoanodes prepared from the ex situ synthesized cysteine-capped CuInS2 NCs can be enhanced quite drastically by using thiol co-adsorbent on the stage of the soaking TiO2 films in the NC solution.499 By adding GSH or TGA, the PCE of resulting TiO2/CIS photoanode can be increased from 0.29% (no additives) to 2.37% for GSH and to 4.20% for TGA. A PL quenching study showed that the rate constant of the electron transfer from CIS NPs to TiO2 is the highest one for the cysteine linker, 9.5 × 1010 s−1, decreasing to 7.1 × 1010 s−1 for a more bulky GSH.499 In a similar AIS NC-based system the PCE increases from 0.19% to 2.72% in the presence of TGA indicating a general character of the additive influence.499 The effect was attributed to the inhibition of the cysteine oxidation to disulfides on the NC surface resulting in an increased NC loading and enhanced electron transfer from NCs to TiO2 (accounting for a Jsc increase). Simultaneously, a shift of the titania band edges causes an increase in Voc.499
A photoanode can be prepared by soaking of a scaffold with a concentrated NC solution followed by the removal of excessive NCs on the stage of washing. The colloid concentration should be carefully adjusted to avoid a too high loading of the sensitizer NCs that can block the mesopores of TiO2 (ZnO) and hinder the electron transport from outer layers of the photoanode toward the OTE. In this way, the titania electrodes were decorated with the MPA-capped CIS NCs,568 CISe and CIZSe NCs.96,296 The incorporation of Zn ions into the lattice of CISe induces an upward shift of the CB level (Fig. 34a) favoring to a more efficient transfer of the photogenerated CB electron to the titania scaffold. As a result, the electron transfer rate constant increases from 2.4 × 1010 s−1 for CISe NCs to 9.1 × 1010 s−1 for CIZSe NCs, while the PCE of corresponding cells grows from 9.54% (CISe) to 11.66% (CIZSe). An even more drastic enhancement of the photoinduced electron transfer rate induced by Zn2+ incorporation was recently reported for TiO2/CIS nanostructures – from ∼0.3 × 1010 s−1 for pristine CIS NCs to ∼3 × 1010 s−1 for Zn-doped CIS NCs.572
 Fig. 34  (a) Energy diagram of TiO2/CISe and TiO2/CIZSe nanocomposites. (b) Absorption spectra of TiO2/(ZnSe)1−x(AISe)x photoanodes with a different x (given on the figure). (c) Absolute positions of CB and VB levels of the composition-selected ZAISe NCs relatively to the CB level of TiO2. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 96 (a) and ref. 94 (b and c). Copyright (2014, 2016) American Chemical Society. 
The partial substitution of In with Ga in CISe results in a considerable shift of the NC CB level – from −3.88 eV to −3.63 eV versus vacuum level for the 50 mol% gallium fraction.98 The shift results in an increase of the driving force of the photoinduced electron transfer from CIGSe NCs to the TiO2 scaffold. The liquid-junction solar cells with the TiO2/CIGSe photoanode, and CuxS or Ti/carbon CEs showed unprecedentedly high PCEs of up to 11.49% under the AM1.5G illumination versus 9.46% for the undoped CISe NCs.98
The sensitizer NCs can be deposited onto the surface of oxide scaffolds regardless of the NC ligand shell nature and surface charge by the electrophoretic deposition, when a relatively strong electric field (typically higher than 150–200 V × cm−1) is applied between the oxide electrode and a CE forcing the NCs to adhere to the oxide surface. For example, the method was successfully applied to form TiO2/CIS photoanodes.97,139,568
Probably the most straightforward of the ex situ approaches is the direct synthesis of MMC NC in aqueous solutions resulting in TGA-, MPA-, or GSH-capped NCs that can be adsorbed or dropcasted onto the surface of metal oxide scaffolds. In this way TiO2/CIS photoanodes were prepared by using aqueous TGA-capped CIS NCs.452,453 The TGA-stabilized 3–5 nm CIS/ZnS NCs synthesized directly in aqueous solutions55 penetrate uniformly the volume of mesoporous TiO2 films revealing a homogeneous composition of the resulting TiO2/CIS both along the cross section of the films (Fig. 35a and b) and over the outer film surface (Fig. 35c). Both stability and photoactivity of CIS NCs increase upon the deposition of a thin ZnS shell on the CIS NC surface. The TiO2/CIS/ZnS composites act as visible-light-sensitive photoanodes in the SSSCs with polysulfide electrolyte and copper sulfide-based CEs with a total conversion efficiency of around 8%.55
 Fig. 35  Cross-sectional SEM images of FTO/TiO2/CIS/ZnS photoanode (a and b); elements distribution across the photoanode (b) and on the outer surface (c). Adapted and reprinted from ref. 55 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The 5 nm ZAIS NCs were tested as a spectral sensitizer for the ZnO scaffolds manifesting a PCE of 0.72% in the cells with a Pt CE and iodide/triiodide redox-couple.159 The liquid-junction cells with the I−/I3− shuttle were also built on ZnO NR photoanodes sensitized with AIS and ZAIS NCs.161 The TiO2/AIS photoanodes produced by soaking titania with the ligand-free AIS exhibited a PCE of 0.8% in a cell with the polysulfide electrolyte and a gold CE.58
The solid-solution ZAISe NCs immobilized on porous titania scaffolds modified with MPA acted as a spectral sensitizer extending the light sensitivity range of the photoelectrode into the visible range to 900 nm.94 The CB and VB energies of the sensitizer NCs grow continuously as the molar fraction of ZnS is increased (and the x value decreased), thus providing higher driving forces for both the photoinduced electron transfer to titania and the hole transfer to the electrolyte species (Fig. 34c). At the same time, the light absorption range of the sensitizer NCs is reduced for smaller x and thus an optimal ZAISe composition exists, corresponding to ZnSe:AISe = 1:1, at which the light harvesting efficiency η reaches the highest value of 1.9%.
A balance between the CB/VB levels and the light-harvesting range always exists in series of solar cells based on differently-sized MMC NCs. As the NC size d is decreased in a critical range roughly corresponding to d < 2aB, the CB and VB energies of MMC NCs increase as a result of the quantum confinement and, therefore, the driving force of the interfacial electron/hole transfer to other cell components increases as well. However, a size-dependent broadening of the bandgap reduces the visible-light-harvesting capacity of the NCs similar as it happens in the above-discussed case of the solid-solutions of the MMC semiconductors.
As a result, there exists an optimal NC size at which the photoanodes exhibit the highest performance. For example, the largest photoresponse of TiO2/CISSe photoanodes was observed in the case of 4.2 nm sensitizer NCs, being smaller for 3.9 nm and 4.9 nm NCs (Fig. 36a).170
 Fig. 36  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of TiO2/CISSe photoanodes with the sensitizer NC of a different size. (b and c) Size-dependence of the EQE spectra (b), PCE (c, red bars) and PL quantum yield (c, blue bars) for TiO2/CIS photoanodes with size-selected CIS NCs. (d) Photocurrent density (curves 1 and 2) obtained for TiO2/CIS (1) and TiO2/CIS/ZnS (2) photoanodes and PL intensity of colloidal CIS/ZnS NCs (curve 3) as a function of the CIS NC composition Cu:In:S = xCu:5:10. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 170 (a), ref. 132 (b and c), and ref. 55 (d). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
For a series of 2.9–5.3 nm CIS NCs electrophoretically deposited onto the porous TiO2 photoanodes the highest PCE and the broadest light harvesting range (Fig. 36b and c, blue bars) were observed for the intermediate-size 4.3 nm NCs.132 The cell studies were supported by laser flash photolysis and PL investigations that showed such CIS NCs accumulating a higher charge under illumination and revealing a larger rate of the radiative recombination than the smaller and larger NC mates. These results show that the above-discussed intuitively simple balance between the light-harvesting capability and the size-dependent CB/VB levels of the sensitizer NCs is accompanied by a balance of the size-dependent electron–hole recombination. This balance along with the charge accumulation properties of CIS NCs can be decisive for the defect-rich and non-stoichiometric CIS NCs.132
A size-dependence of η for the TiO2/CIS photoanodes follows the size variation of PL emission intensity of original colloidal CIS NCs (Fig. 36c, red bars)132 because both the light emission and the photocurrent generation compete with the non-radiative electron–hole recombination. It should be noted that a distinct correlation between compositional dependences of the PL intensity and photocurrent generation efficiency was observed for the non-stoichiometric TGA-stabilized CIS and CIS/ZnS NCs (Fig. 36d).55 A good agreement between the efficiencies of PL and light conversion for a variety of sizes and compositions of CIS NCs indicates that the PL spectroscopy is a reliable diagnostic tool for assessing of the light-harvesting capability of the ternary MC NC-based photoanodes.
The modification of TiO2/CdS photoanodes with an atomically-resolved tetrahedral [Cu5In30S56H4]13− cluster with a triethanol ammonium counter cation exhibiting the light sensitivity down to 700 nm results in a drastic increase of the photocurrent density showing a great potential of such molecular-like sensitizers,373 especially if they will be combined with conventional multinary NCs by the electrostatic interactions.
The harvesting efficiency of titania NT array-based photoanodes loaded with complementary light harvesters – CdS and CIS NCs, can be increased considerably by using a double-sided array with the NTs formed on both sides of the ITO plates.466
The kesterite CZTS NCs were applied as a co-sensitizer together with N719 complex dye-sensitizer to enhance the visible-light response of mesoporous titania electrodes.574 Both sensitizers can participate in the photoinduced electron transfer into the titania CB, as the electron can come via CZTS NCs in the case of the photoexcitation of the dye adsorbed on the kesterite NC surface. The cell exhibited a light conversion efficiency of 8.10% outperforming similar devices containing only the N719 complex.574
CZTS NCs were attached to the titania electrodes by using thiolated RGO as a bridge instead of conventional MPA/TGA.196 The most efficient liquid-junction cell with the TiO2/RGO/CZTS photoanode, I−/I3− shuttle and a Pt CE exhibited a PCE of 0.133%, which is around 30% higher than for a similar photoanode with the MPA linker.196
The arrays of ZnS- and ZnSe-decorated zinc oxide NRs were sensitized by CZTS NCs and introduced as photoanodes in the liquid-junction cells with a CuxS CE and polysulfide electrolyte exhibiting a PCE of 0.85% and 2.2% for the ZnO/ZnS and ZnO/ZnSe scaffolds, respectively.197
Copper bismuth sulfide NCs were applied as a spectral sensitizer for the titania photoelectrodes.312 When combined with the aqueous polysulfide electrolyte and a CuxS CE, the TiO2/CBS photoanode showed a PCE of 0.62%.
Cu3SnS4 NCs deposited from the gas-phase on the surface of mesoporous titania revealed a bandgap of 1.2 eV and photocurrent generation capacity under the visible-light illumination.518
The in situ methods of the sensitizer NCs deposition are used to a much lesser extent for MMC NCs as compared to the solar cells based on binary cadmium and lead chalcogenides. In particular, TiO2/AIS NC composites prepared in situ via the In3+ incorporation into the TiO2/Ag2S heterostructure were applied as photoanodes in a combination with a Pt CE and polysulfide electrolyte revealing a top PCE of 0.70%.575 A similar two-stage approach was applied to form TiO2/AgBiS2 nanocomposite. The feasibility of using this material as a light-harvesting component of liquid-junction solar cells with polysulfide electrolyte and Au or Pt CE was shown.473,474 The best AgBiS2-based cells showed a PCE of 0.34% at AM1.5G illumination473 and a spectral sensitivity range extending down to 800 nm.474 A NaSbSe2 NC-sensitized TiO2 photoanode with a bandgap of ∼1.5 eV produced by the SILAR manifested a PCE of 2.22% with an Au CE and aqueous polysulfide electrolyte.576
The ZnIn2S4 nanosheets deposited in situ onto the TiO2 surface by the HTT extend the light sensitivity range of the titania photoanode to 600 nm and exhibit a PCE of 0.42% in a liquid-junction solar cell with polysulfide electrolyte and Au CE.425
A combined ex situ/in situ approach to TiO2/CIS photoanodes was developed295 including the adsorption of primary small CIS NCs on the titania surface followed by the SILAR deposition of additional CIS layers to increase the sensitizer loading. The primary nuclei provide the nucleation sites forcing the growth of pre-adsorbed CIS NCs and preventing the formation of new nuclei. For the same CIS content, the ex situ/in situ photoanode manifested an increased PCE (1.84%) as compared with two analogs produced exclusively by the deposition of the ex situ sensitized CIS NCs (0.64%) and solely by the in situ SILAR deposition (1.27%).295
Depending on the composition and synthesis conditions the MMC NCs can inherit both n- and p-type electrical conductivity. The n-conductive NCs are typically used as a photoanode component that fills the photogenerated VB hole at the expense of the oxidation of S2− species in the electrolyte. In its own turn, the p-conducting NCs can be applied as sensitizers of photocathodes, where the NC photoexcitation results in the transfer of a photogenerated VB hole into the electric circuit, while the CB electron is transferred to the sulfur species in the electrolyte.131 Correspondingly, the wider-bandgap metal oxide scaffold should also have the p-type electrical conductivity, while the counter electrode should be catalytically active towards the oxidation of S2− species to complete the photoelectrochemical cycle in the cell. Such “inverted” solar cells can be combined with regular solar cells with the NC-sensitized photoanodes to obtain cumulatively increased Voc values and in this way, the Shockley–Queisser limit of the single cell performance can theoretically be overmounted.
In recent years, an extensive search for transparent and stable p-type metal oxide scaffolds for the photocathodes is performed with nickel oxide being currently the most active and promising material. The CE materials used in such “inverted” liquid-junction solar cells are similar to those applied in the usual cells and include Pt, CuxS, carbon allotropes, etc. Indeed, typically the CEs reveal simultaneously the catalytic activity for both sulfide oxidation and sulfur reduction, as, for example, shown by catalytic experiments for copper sulfide NCs.577 However, contrary to the binary MC NC probed quite extensively as the photocathode sensitizers, in the case of MMC NCs only scarce reports can be found. In particular, a stable and efficient photocathode for the liquid-junction solar cell can be constructed with a mesoporous NiO layer sensitized by CIS or CISe NCs and combined with the aqueous polysulfide electrolyte and a CuxS CE.131,578 The rates of hole injection from the sensitizer NCs to the NiO scaffold are comparable (on the order of 108 s−1) with the electron injection rates in conventional NC-based photoanodes and the maximal PCE is 1.25%.131
The cascade design of the light-harvesting photoelectrodes is another broadly used concept for the rational design of the binary MC NC-based photoelectrodes, which is still to be realized to the full extent for the MMC NCs. In most cases, the light-harvesting efficiency of the liquid-junction cell photoanodes is limited by the photoinduced charge separation between the wide-bandgap metal oxide scaffold and narrow-bandgap MC sensitizer NCs. To achieve the efficient charge separation, both components are typically chosen so that the CB level of the sensitizer NCs is more negative and the VB level – less positive than ECB and EVB of the metal oxide, respectively. Such conditions favor to the transfers of the photogenerated electrons from MC NC to titania and the VB holes – from titania to the sensitizer NCs. Therefore, the final charge-separated state of the composite does not depend on which component absorbs the incoming light. This principle can be extended for multi-sensitizer systems, where several light-harvesting components are used with the CB energies descending (by the absolute value) from the outer components of the photoanode to the inner components and so the photogenerated electrons flow from the photoanode/electrolyte interface to TiO2, further to OTE and, finally to the electric circuit. Such “cascade” design can be realized in several ways, in particular, (i) by using different semiconductor photoelectrode materials with appropriate CB and VB level offsets; (ii) by using alloyed solid solution compounds with a varied or even spatially gradient structure to create a CB (VB) offset from the outer surface of the photoelectrode toward OTE, and (iii) by combining NPs of the same semiconductor but of different size that reveal a strong size-dependence of CB and VB levels and placing them in the order of decreasing of the absolute CB potential from the outer photoelectrode surface toward OTE.
Only the first of these approaches seems to be probed for the MMC NCs. For example, the deposition of a CdSe layer on top of TiO2/In2Se3/CIS photoanodes was reported to result in an increase of the light conversion efficiency from 1.35% to 3.15% as a result of the formation of a cascade CdSe → CuInS2 → In2Se3 → TiO2 → OTE structure.579 This cascade can be extended by the deposition of an outer ZnSe layer with the highest CB level that serves simultaneously as a protector against the charge leakage into the electrolyte and as an additional light absorber, enhancing the PCE of the corresponding cell up to 4.55%.579 The protection of TiO2/CIS photoanodes with a CdS layer not only passivates the surface of CIS NCs but also creates conditions for the cascaded electron phototransfer from CdS to CIS and further to TiO2.97
A CIS NC layer placed between the titania NT array and a layer of CdS NCs on the NT surface acts simultaneously as a co-sensitizer supplying the photogenerated charge carriers to the titania layer, transferring the photogenerated electrons from the adjacent CdS NC layer to the TiO2 nanotube array and serves as a barrier for the electron recombination with the electrolyte species (Fig. 37a).467,570 The co-sensitization was found to increase the PCE up to 4.2% as compared to 1.8% for the binary TiO2/CdS heterostructure (Fig. 37b).540
 Fig. 37  (a) Energy diagram of a TiO2/CIS/CdS photoanode. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of the liquid-junction solar cells with TiO2/CdS, TiO2/CIS and combined TiO2/CIS/CdS photoanodes. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of a TiO2/CISSe photoanode-based liquid-junction solar cell. (d) Light conversion efficiency η and open-circuit voltage Voc in the cells based on TiO2/CIS photoanodes with different MC buffer layers. Reprinted/adapted with permissions from ref. 467 (a), ref. 570 (b), ref. 238 (c), and ref. 579 (d). Copyright (2011, 2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2013) American Chemical Society (c and d). 
It should be noted that despite the above-discussed broad variability of the stoichiometry and composition of MMC NCs, the photoelectrodes of the liquid-junction solar cells with the cascaded charge transfers between the alloyed NCs of a different composition were still not reported. Also, a great potential of the size-dependent variability of the CB/VB levels of MMC NCs in the regime of quantum confinement was also not explored to the true extent for the formation of cascaded sensitizer layers.
The photocurrent generation efficiency of both solid-state and liquid-junction NC-based solar cells is limited to a far extent by the electron–hole recombination in the sensitizer MC NCs. In the case of the liquid-junction photoelectrochemical solar cells, the additional possibilities of the charge losses exist due to the recombination on the interfaces between the sensitizer NCs and the wide-bandgap scaffold as well as between the photoanode as a whole and the electrolyte species. To suppress the recombination and minimize losses of the photogenerated charges various approaches are developed. One of the most simple and, at the same time, efficient is the formation of additional “protective” (or “buffer” or “barrier”) semiconductor layers either on the sensitizer NC surface, between the sensitizer and the oxide scaffold, or between the metal oxide and OTE.19
The recombination in the sensitizer NCs occurs predominantly via the structural defects introducing additional states in the NC bandgap and allowing for the thermal or radiative dissipation of the light excitation energy. These defects (unsaturated bonds, cation/anion vacancies, etc.) can be passivated by appropriate ligands or a shell of other metal chalcogenide semiconductor, typically with a larger bandgap, such as ZnS. The passivating layers can be very conveniently deposited by the SILAR procedure allowing for a quite precise control over the thickness of the barrier layer. For example, TiO2/CIS photoanodes are routinely covered with a ZnS55,295 or CdS97,453 shell to enhance the chemical/photochemical stability of the sensitizer NCs and to suppress the non-radiative recombination by passivating NC surface defects.295
The modification of TiO2/CIS photoanodes with a CdS layer increases the PCE of a cell with the aqueous polysulfide electrolyte and CuxS CE from 1.14% to 3.91%.97 The SILAR deposition of a CdS layer on ZAISe NCs immobilized on the TiO2 scaffold resulted in a more than an order of magnitude increase in the light conversion efficiency.94 The passivation of CISe NCs by a layer of Mn-doped CdS was shown to enhance the light conversion efficiency from 0.8% up to 3.96%.168
The successive adsorption of In3+ and S2− on the surface of TiO2/CIS photoanodes reduces the number of surface vacancies in the sensitizer NCs resulting in a cathodic shift of the Fermi level of the photoelectrode.452
The SILAR deposition of a ZnS layer was found to affect considerably the light conversion efficiency of TiO2/CISe NC photoanodes resulting in a PCE of 8.10%.171 The impedance studies revealed that the ZnS coating does not alter the energy characteristics of the photoanode but enhances the kinetic characteristics of the charge carrier transfers, resulting in the strong reduction in the efficiency of both non-radiative recombination in the CISe NCs and the recombination on the photoanode/electrolyte interface.171 At the same time, the ZnS shell does not impede the interfacial electron transfer from CISe NCs to titania as confirmed by the cell performance and the efficient PL quenching after the CISe/ZnS NCs deposition onto the titania scaffold.
A thin CdSxSe1−x layer forming as a result of the copper-to-cadmium ions exchange on the surface of CISSe NCs enhances the PCE of the passivated TiO2/CISSe photoanode up to 3.45% (Fig. 37c).238 It should be noted that this photoanode revealed a fill factor of more than 60%238 indicating a high efficiency of the passivating procedure. Similarly high FFs, 58% and 62%, observed for a Zn-doped CIS NC-based photoanode133 and for a Ga-doped CISe NC-based photoanode,98 respectively, are rather an exception, than a steady tendency. In most cases and oppositely to the DSSCs, the NC-sensitized solar cells reveal modest fill factors amounting to around 40%, much rarer – to 50%. The reasons for this moderate performance are considerable recombinative losses in the sensitizer NCs and on the interfaces between the MC NCs and the metal oxide scaffolds, as well as between the photoanode and electrolyte.
Provided the CB levels of the sensitizer NCs and TiO2 (ZnO) are favorable for the electron transfer from NCs to oxide, the photoexcitation of the sensitizer NCs results in extremely fast electron transfer to neighboring TiO2 (ZnO) layer, leaving a hole in the NC valence band. Potentially, the electron injected in the titania CB can recombine with the hole in the sensitizer VB, similar as it occurs in the DSSCs after the electron injection from the photoexcited dye-sensitizer to the titania scaffold. To prevent such charge losses, a blocking layer is often introduced between the sensitizer NCs and TiO2 (ZnO) constituting a potential barrier for the injected electron on its way back to MC NCs. For example, a screening study of interfacial buffer layers for TiO2/CIS heterostructure among various MC materials (Fig. 37d, orange bars) showed In2Se3 to be the most efficient buffer layer enhancing the photocurrent generation by about 120% and increasing the PCE from 0.58% for binary TiO2/CIS photoanode to 1.35% for TiO2/In2Se3/CIS heterostructure.579 An increase in the open-circuit voltage for the cells having an intermediary MC layer (Fig. 37d, green bars) indicates quite clearly that the PCE enhancement effect comes not from (or not only from) the additional light absorption by the buffer layer, but from the inhibition of the recombination at the scaffold/sensitizer interface.
After the injection from the photoexcited sensitizer NCs to the adjacent mesoporous TiO2 (ZnO) layer, the electron starts to migrate through the network of contacting metal oxide NCs till it reaches OTE and comes into the electric circuit. An efficient design of the photoanode of SSSCs requires a high contact area between the photoanode surface and the electrolyte, however, the coverage of the TiO2 surface with the sensitizer NCs is typically not complete. As a result, a possibility exists for the electron to be captured by the components of the electrolyte, for example, by water, S0 or H3O+ ions that can reduce the photoanode performance considerably. To avoid such losses, the TiO2/NCs heterostructures can be covered with an additional protective layer of a wide-bandgap material, most often, zinc sulfide that creates a barrier for the electron to reach the electrolyte. The protective ZnS layer also serves to provide a stronger contact between sensitizer NCs and TiO2 (ZnO) as well as to protect the light-harvesting MC NCs from corrosive processes during the photoelectrochemical events in the SSSC. For example, a leakage of the photogenerated charge carrier was efficiently suppressed by the deposition of ZnS layers onto TiO2/CIS452,570 and TiO2/ZAISe187 photoanodes. In the case of ZAIS NCs, the photoanode was additionally passivated with amorphous TiO2 and SiO2 layers. This final treatment resulted in a PCE increase from 3.41% to 3.57%.187
The insulation of a TiO2/CIS/CdSe photoanode with an outer ZnS or ZnSe layer results in a PCE increase from 3.15% to 3.27% or to 4.55%, respectively.579 A higher efficiency of the ZnSe-coated photoanode is explained by the contribution of ZnSe into the total light absorption.


3.3 Multinary NCs in counter electrodes of solar cells. 
MMC NCs emerged recently as relatively active electrocatalytic materials for the counter electrodes of both DSSCs and SSSCs.25,547,548 For example, CIS NCs supported by a three-dimensional carbon fiber network produced by the egg shell carbonization revealed an activity as a DSSC counter electrode outperforming the bare carbon fiber network and producing photocurrents comparable to those in a similar DSSC with a Pt CE.315,580 Modification of the carbon fibers with RGO resulted in a better dispersion of CIS NCs over the fiber surface and further increased the catalytic activity of the CE.549 Reasonably efficient DSSC CEs were also prepared from CIS NCs on FTO,108,298 CuIn(Al)S2 NCs,581 CIS nanoflakes on Mo substrates,354 CIS nano-sheets grown on CuS,469 and composites of CIS NCs with PEDOT:PSS.225 The exchange of 1-DDT ligands with S2− opened the surface of CIS NCs to the electrolyte species resulting in a drastic increase of the catalytic activity of CIS NC/FTO films toward the triiodide ions reduction.298
Carbon/CIS NC composites were found to be more efficient CEs for the liquid-junction solar cells with TiO2/CdS/CdSe photoanodes than both carbon (a mixture of carbon black and activated carbon) and CIS NCs360 taken separately.
The catalytic activity of a CE can be quite straightforwardly assessed from the slope of the “dark” current–voltage characteristics in a three-electrode scheme with the same electrolyte/redox-couple as used in the solar cell. At that, the steeper is the J–V curve the higher is the catalytic activity of a CE material (Fig. 38a). Another informative method of the assessment of the CE activity is the impedance spectroscopy. A more active CE material is characterized by a lower charge transfer resistance (Rct) and a smaller radius of the semi-circular Nyquist plot. The carbon/CIS example shows that the maximal activity as a CE can be expected with a composite having CIS:carbon weight ratio of 1:1 (Fig. 38b), in accordance with the results of the solar cell trials.360
 Fig. 38  (a) Dark current–voltage characteristics of CIS NCs, carbon and carbon/CIS composites. (b) Nyquist plots for CIS NCs and carbon/CIS with a different component ratio. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of DSSCs based on Pt, CZTS, and CZTSe CEs. (d) “Dark” current–voltage characteristics of FTO/CZTSSe films immersed into the aqueous polysulfide solution. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 360 (a and b), ref. 492 (c), and ref. 271 (d). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society (a, b and d); (2017) Elsevier (c). 
Tetragonal Cu2SnS3 NCs revealed “universal” catalytic activities toward the redox-couples traditionally used both in the dye-sensitized and NC-sensitized solar cells – I−/I3−, Co(phen)33+/Co(phen)32+,296 and S2−/Sx2−.383 Remarkably, the CTS NCs outperformed both Pt CE in DSSCs (10.26% for CTS versus 9.31% for Pt)314 and CuxS microspheres in NC-sensitized solar cells (4.05% for CTS versus 3.65% for CuxS).383
The kesterite CZTS and CZTSe NCs were proposed as alternatives for the conventional Pt CEs in the DSSCs with I−/I2 redox-couple.492 The kesterite-based CEs slightly outperform the platinum electrode (Fig. 38c) and exhibit a long operational life-time. A CZTS nanofiber-based DSSC CE revealed almost doubled activity as compared to FTO/Pt CE (PCE of 3.9% versus 1.72% for platinum).582 Similarly, the Cu2MSnS4 NCs (M = Fe, Cd,328 and Co274) showed a catalytic effect toward the triiodide anions reduction, similar to that of Pt CEs. A high catalytic activity in the DSSC CE was also found for CZTS(Se) NCs on FTO,274,277,333,392,406,410 CZTS nanoplate arrays,407 CZTS nanosheets,583 CZTS NCs anchored on the multi-wall carbon NTs,584 wurtzite/stannite Cu2CdGeS4 NCs,289 Ag8GeS6 NCs,179 as well as for CZTS/RGO585 and Pt–Co/Cu2ZnGeS4.280
The alloyed kesterite Cu2ZnSnSxSe1−x NCs exhibited a catalytic activity toward the S2−/S0 redox couple transformations when coupled to a NC-sensitized TiO2 photoanode.75,271 The catalytic current of the CE immersed into the polysulfide solutions (Fig. 38d) and the overall solar cell performance depend on the S/Se ratio in the kesterite NCs, being maximal for x = 0.5. The enhanced catalytic activity of CZTSSe NCs was explained by their increased porosity as compared to other compositions.271 The catalytic activities as CEs in the polysulfide-based NC-sensitized solar cells were also reported for the hierarchical CZTS microspheres.389
It should be noted that in most cases the catalytic activity of kesterite and related nanomaterials is compared with bare FTO and Pt, which is not an optimal electrode for the polysulfide electrolyte. At the same time, comparisons with the most frequently used and one of the most active CE materials for the polysulfide electrolytes – copper sulfide are typically not reported, thus making impossible the evaluation of the efficiency and perspectives of such materials for the applications in the NC-sensitized solar cell with the polysulfide electrolytes.

4 Photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic processes with MMC NCs
A photocatalytic process starts when a semiconductor NC absorbs a light quantum with the energy hv equal to or (typically) higher than the bandgap energy Eg (process 1 in Fig. 39a). The photogenerated charge carriers rapidly (in tens-hundreds fs) dissipate the energy excess hv − Egvia the electron–phonon interactions acquiring the chemical potentials equal to ECB and EVB levels.
 Fig. 39  A scheme of the working principle of (a and b) photocatalytic systems based on a MC NC/metal NC composite (a) and a binary NC heterostructure (b), and (c) photoelectrochemical system with a MC NC sensitized photoanode. 
A major part of the CB electrons and VB holes recombines either via the radiative pathway 2 emitting PL or in nonradiative processes 3 providing a vibrational energy to the NC lattice. Some portion of the charge carriers migrates and reaches the NC surface prior to the recombination (processes 4) where the carriers get “trapped” by various lattice defects (vacancies, adatoms, undercoordinated atoms, etc.) as well as by the adsorbed species. The photogenerated VB hole typically has a high oxidation potential and gets filled with an electron from various donor species present in the system, for example from water molecules or from a sacrificial electron donor introduced for this purpose such as sulfide ions (Fig. 39a). The photogenerated CB electrons can transfer directly to the electron accepting species through the NC/electrolyte (NC/gas) interface or accumulated on a co-catalyst coupled to the semiconductor NCs (Pt NCs in Fig. 39a). Many vital photocatalytic reactions, such as the reduction of water, CO2, or N2, are multi-electron processes and characterized by relatively high over-voltages of the rate-determining stages.586–590
A co-catalyst is typically required to accumulate the photogenerated charge carrier and to reduce the over-potentials thus increasing tremendously the efficiency of the photocatalytic transformations.76,587–589 As both CB electron and VB hole are consumed the semiconductor NC regains its original state. Provided that fresh donors and acceptors are constantly supplied to the photocatalyst surface it works continuously in a cyclic manner resembling a “pump” transferring electrons from the donors to the acceptors at the expense of the solar light energy.
To avoid the electron–hole recombination, the visible-light-harvesting nanocrystalline MC photocatalyst is typically coupled to another semiconductor having a less negative ECB and a more positive EVB levels (Fig. 39b). In this way the CB electron photogenerated in MC NCs can transfer across the interface to another semiconductor (process 5 in Fig. 39b). The interfacial transfer is typically very fast (occurring in the range of ps or even down to tens–hundreds fs) and results in a lowering of the CB electron chemical potential thus making impossible (or very improbable) the reverse transfer to MC NCs. The VB hole remains separated from the transferred CB electron due to a potential barrier between the valence bands of both components and in this way the electron–hole recombination is efficiently suppressed. Typically, the binary and MMC NCs are coupled to metal oxide, such as TiO2 or ZnO or metallate (titanate, tungstate, vanadate, etc.) semiconductors with a larger bandgap and a lower CB level.
The direct photoexcitation of such wide-bandgap semiconductor also results in a charge-separated state, i.e. the VB hole transfers irreversibly into the less positive VB of the MC NCs (process 5′, Fig. 39b). In this way, the same charge-separated state is produced irrespectively of which component of the heterostructure is photoexcited. Alternatively, the components of the photocatalytic system (semiconductor and metal or two semiconductors) can be physically separated in space and connected via an electric circuit.
Thus, the reactions with the participation of electrons and holes take place in different electrolytes connected via a bridge/membrane (Fig. 39c) and the photoexcitation results in the photocurrent generation. A photoelectrochemical mode is especially beneficial for the processes where recombination can occur between the intermediates or final products of the reaction as, for example, in the water splitting. The two-electrode photoelectrochemical system can also be externally biased allowing to reduce the potential barriers and increase the efficiency of photocatalytic transformations.
Pioneer reports on the semiconductor-mediated photocatalytic processes appeared as early as in 1920s–1930s dealing mostly with the photobleaching of dyes in the presence of titania crystals. In the late 1960s Fujishima and Honda reported on the water photoelectrolysis on externally-biased rutile TiO2 single-crystal electrode coupled to Pt and illuminated with the UV light.76,587,588 Afterwards, the miniaturization of semiconductor crystals to several microns and the direct deposition of Pt NPs on the titania surface allowed to compose suspension-based photocatalytic systems where both water reduction and oxidation took place on the suspended microparticle aggregates. Such systems can function without an external bias as the photogenerated electrons can migrate through the net of contacting crystals thus avoiding the electron–hole recombination.
As titania can harvest less than 5% of the solar light various ways of spectral sensitization of TiO2 micro- and nanocrystals were developed including doping with metal ions and non-metals (N,C,S) as well as coupling to molecular dyes and metal complexes and to narrow-bandgap MC and metal oxide NCs. The latter studies stimulated the development of the photochemistry of individual MC NCs and showed a great potential of these semiconductors for a variety of important processes, including the reduction of water and CO2 with sacrificial electron donors and the transformation of ionic inorganic species and various organic compounds aimed both on the total decomposition and on the formation of some specific synthetic products.
In recent years, nanocrystalline MMC semiconductors and related heterostructures showed an ever-increasing contribution into the development of various photocatalytic systems, including the reduction of water to molecular hydrogen and the destructive degradation of various organic species.11,23,24,36,38,40,41 The MMC NCs are quite broadly studied as light-harvesting components of the photoelectrochemical systems, operating similarly to the liquid-junction solar cells but aimed not at the photocurrent production but on the photooxidation/photoreduction of selected organic/inorganic species.

4.1 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with MC NCs. 
Typically, the MC NC-based photocatalytic systems for the hydrogen evolution contain noble metal co-catalysts, such as Pt NCs, that can be formed in situ via the photocatalytic reduction of metal precursors on the surface of MC NCs. This process results in a MC/Pt heterostructure which then acts as a photocatalyst of the water reduction. Both the Pt precursor and water are reduced at the expense of sacrificial electron donors, among the most efficient ones being sulfide and sulfite ions that can strongly adsorb on the NC surface and efficiently fill the VB holes inhibiting the oxidative photocorrosion of semiconductor NCs. The role of a sacrificial donor is often delegated to methanol, ethanol, triethanolamine and other organic substances.
Efficient systems for the hydrogen production were organized using CIS NCs without additional co-catalysts135,456 and decorated with Ru NCs,361 AIS NCs with the photodeposited Pt,364 ZAIS NCs coupled to MoS2 nanosheets,458 CZTS NCs coupled to Au NCs215 and Pt NCs,215,302 and CZTS/CdS nanostructures.591
Early studies of the photocatalytic properties of “classical” semiconductor photocatalysts, such as TiO2, showed that the nanocrystalline semiconductors typically reveal a much higher photocatalytic activity than the bulk counterparts even after the normalization of the H2 evolution rate to the surface area of the photocatalyst.587–589 This effect originates from a balance between the rates of the charge carriers migration to the crystal surface and their recombination which is much more favorable for the photocatalytic reactions in the case of the nanocrystalline materials.76,78 At the same time, among the nanocrystalline materials the highest efficiencies of the photocatalytic H2 evolution were observed for various loosely aggregated materials, such as mesoporous microaggregates of NCs, hollow microspheres, mesoporous NTs, etc. The advanced photocatalytic activity of such materials stems from the possibility of the migration of the photogenerated electrons along the network of contacting NCs that reduces considerably the probability of recombination events. Moreover, the effects of multiple light scattering and absorption within the mesoporous NC aggregates as well as accessibility of the loosely aggregated NCs to the electron donor moieties also contribute to the increased photoactivity.
The arsenal of the above-discussed approaches is broadly and fruitfully applied for the MMC NCs. In particular, the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from aqueous donor solutions under the illumination with the visible light was reported for mesoporous spherical microaggregates of CIS NCs,413 CIZS NCs,418,592 AgGa1−xInxS2 NCs,379 and ZnIn2S4.366
Similar to the photocatalytic systems based on binary MC NCs, the MMC NCs require the presence of co-catalysts, typically metal NCs and, therefore, steady and considerable efforts are applied to replace the noble metal co-catalysts with less expensive and available species. The most successful examples are MoS2,88,377,403,458,593 RGO,438–441,443 carbon NTs,444 Ni2P,594 and [Co(bpy)3]2+ complex.74 Both molybdenium disulfide and RGO nanosheets feature a high activity in the hydrogenation/dehydrogenation processes, a large available surface area and excellent electron-accepting capacities.595–598
The catalytic activity of MoS2 was found to increase after Li+ intercalation during the hydrothermal synthesis of ZIS/MoS2 composites. The Li+ intercalation was found to transform hexagonal (2H) MoS2 into a metallic (1T) LixMoS2 form with a much higher electron-accepting capacity.599
It was found that growth of a-few-layer MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of ZIS starts on the sulfur vacancies abundant on the outer layers of ZIS particles.593 The components of the ZIS/MoS2 composite are, therefore, connected by common sulfur atoms resulting in a very efficient transport of the photogenerated electrons from ZIS to MoS2 particles, where water reduction takes place.
The activity of RGO as a hydrogen evolution co-catalyst was found to be far superior to that of carbon nanoparticles and carbon NTs.443 Typically, the dependence of the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate on the RGO content is dome-shaped439,441 with the maximal rate observed at around 1 wt% RGO (rel. to the photocatalyst load),441 most probably because of the light-shielding effect of RGO at higher loadings.
[Co(bpy)3]2+ complex can bind strongly to the MMC NC surface and has a more negative potential of the CoII/CoI transition (–0.95 V versus NHE) than the water oxidation potential (−0.41 V at pH 7). As a result, this complex acts as an electron relay accepting CB electrons from the NCs and transferring them to the water molecules in the outer coordination sphere.74
The quaternary Cu2MSnS4 (M = Zn, Co, Ni) NCs were reported to serve as a co-catalyst of the hydrogen evolution in the presence of Eosine Y as a light-harvesting species and triethanolamine as a sacrificial donor.90,600,601 The photoexcited dye has a redox-potential E = −1.1 V (NHE) and can inject an electron into the CB of kesterite NCs positioned at −0.88 V (Cu2NiSnS4), −0.83 V (Cu2CoSnS4), and −0.65 V (Cu2ZnSnS4) versus NHE. The NCs act as an electron relay transferring the charge to adsorbed water molecules (−0.53 V, pH 9).90,600
The amount of noble metals can also be reduced by a partial substitution of Pt or Pd with catalytically-active transition metals, such as cobalt. The Co/Pt NC-modified CZTS NCs showed twice as high photocatalytic activity in the water reduction as the CZTS/Pt composites with the same nominal metal content (Fig. 40a).213
 Fig. 40  (a) Rate of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the presence of CZTS NCs and their composites with Pt and PtCo NCs. (b) Photoaction and absorption spectra of the single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets, inset: a scheme for the photocatalytic hydrogen production over the MnSb2S4 monolayer. (c) Photoaction and absorption spectra of TiO2/CuGa2In3S8 nanoheterostructure. (d) Efficiency and selectivity of the photocatalytic NO3− reduction to N2 over CIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 213 (a), ref. 524 (b), ref. 241 (c), and ref. 356 (d). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society (a); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b and d); (2016) Elsevier (c). 
Another strategy stemming from the binary semiconductor photocatalysts is the application of various anisotropic MMC NCs, such as nanorods and nanowires. Single-crystalline character of such NCs coupled with the enhanced mobility of the photogenerated charge carriers along a long NC axis allows for a more efficient charge separation and related reactivity, than in the case of isotropic (spherical) NCs. Efficient hydrogen evolution was reported for Pt-decorated CIZS NRs,149 ZAIS NRs,157,602 CdS nanowires decorated with 2D CdIn2S4 nanosheets,415 CZTS NRs and nanoplates,603 ultra-thin CZTS nanosheets604 and the single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets.524 The latter compound has a layered structure with a [MnS2]2− sub-layer sandwiched between two [SbS]+ sublayers (inset in Fig. 40b). The calculations showed that the VB of MnSb2S4 is predominantly formed by the d-orbitals of Mn and the p-orbitals of sulfur, while the CB is composed mainly of the p-orbitals of Sb localized on the nanosheet surface.524 Therefore, the photoexcitation directly supplies photoelectrons to the adsorbed water molecules and protons. The VB holes are simultaneously extracted from the middle [MnS2]2− layer by Ce3+ acceptor. The photocatalyst is composed of broadly available and relatively low-toxic elements, it has a bandgap of 1.69 eV appropriate for the solar light harvesting, and can evolve H2 when illuminated by the visible light to 650 nm (Fig. 40b).
Ternary MC NCs are often combined with other, typically, wider-bandgap semiconductor NCs in composites with balanced CB and VB levels. These heterostructures possess a much higher photocatalytic/photoelectrochemical activity than the separate components taken summarily. For example, the graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) decorated with CIS and Pt NCs revealed a high photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution from aqueous Na2S/Na2SO3 solutions, which is ∼3 and ∼6 times higher than the activity of GCN and CIS NCs taken alone, respectively.433 The rate of H2 evolution reaches ∼1.3 mmol g−1 h−1 in this system. Both components of the heterostructure can be excited in different sections of the visible spectrum resulting in the charge separation between CIS and GCN (Fig. 41a) and consequent spatial separation of the water reduction and the oxidation of sacrificial donors. A similar activity enhancement was observed for GCN/ZnIn2S4 heterostructures,434–436,605 where the photogenerated CB electron is transferred from GCN (ECB = −1.12 V, NHE) to ZIS NCs (ECB = −0.68 V, NHE), while the VB holes can decrease their energy by coming from the ZIS VB (+1.62 V, NHE) to the GCN VB (+1.57 V, NHE).429
 Fig. 41  Energy diagrams of the photocatalytic systems for (a and b) hydrogen evolution based on GCN/CIS (a) and cubic/hexagonal ZnIn2S4 (b) composites; (c) CO2 reduction based on CZTS/TiO2 heterostructure; (d) energy levels in TiO2–CaIn2S4 system. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 433 (a), ref. 339 (b), ref. 264 (c), and ref. 430 (d). Copyright (2017, 2015) American Chemical Society (a and d); (2016, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b and c). 
Similar to cadmium sulfide, ZnIn2S4 can crystallize in cubic and hexagonal forms having different CB/VB positions (hexagonal – ECB/EVB = −1.1/1.5 V, cubic – ECB/EVB = −1.5/0.9 V, NHE382) and thus a heterostructure with offset CB and VB levels forms between the cubic and hexagonal ZIS NCs (Fig. 41c).339,382 The composite can evolve hydrogen without additional co-catalyst, the efficiency of this photocatalytic process being 7.3 times and 3.2 times higher than in the case of sole cubic and hexagonal ZIS NCs, respectively.339
Efficient hydrogen evolution from the solutions of sacrificial donors under the visible light excitation was reported for TiO2/CIS361,422 and TiO2/AIS,428 BiVO4/CIGS606 and BiVO4/RGO/ZIS,440 In(OH)3/ZIS,381,607 ZIS/MoS2,377 ZIS/CdIn2S4/CuS,417 ZnFe2O4/ZIS and ZnFe2O4/ZIS/CdS,341 AIS/ZIS,608 TiO2/Cu3BiS3,609 CZTS/MoS2,403 and CZTS NCs loaded onto silica nanospheres.610 Recently, the combination of ZIS NCs with metal–organic frameworks was demonstrated to be a promising strategy for the design of new H2-evolving photocatalysts.611
To increase the driving force of the interfacial CB electron transfer from CIS NCs various methods of “the band design” can be applied, in particular, a partial substitution of In with Ga that results in a bandgap increment proportional to the gallium content.242,606 The mixed CIGS NCs revealed a higher photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution from aqueous Na2S/Na2SO3 solutions, as compared to pure CIS NCs. A similar effect was also observed for AIGS compounds.511 At the same time, the bandgap increase shifts the light sensitivity threshold of CIGS NCs to shorter wavelengths as the Ga fraction is increased, thus reducing the visible-light-harvesting capabilities of the alloyed NCs. Both tendencies produce a dome-shaped dependence of the hydrogen evolution efficiency on the composition of CIGS NCs (Fig. 42a). The highest photoactivity is observed for CuIn0.3Ga0.7S2 (Eg = 1.75 eV).242 The modification of CIGS NCs with 1 wt% Pt results in a 3-fold increase of the H2 evolution rate reaching ∼1.7 mmol × g−1 × h−1.
 Fig. 42  (a and b) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate as a function of (a) molar Ga fraction x in CuIn1−xGaxS2 NCs and (b) molar Zn fraction x in (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 microspheres. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 242 (a) and ref. 352 (b). Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a), (2010) Elsevier (b). 
A dome-shaped dependence of the hydrogen evolution QY on the solid solution NC composition is therefore a general phenomenon observed for a variety of MMC compounds, in particular CIZS,149,363,418,592 (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (peak activity reported at x = 0.574 and at x = 0.35–0.45157), and AgGa1−xInxS2 NCs (peak at x = 0.1).379
The noble metal co-catalysts for CIGS can be replaced with Ni(II),300 which is, most probably, reduced in situ to Ni0 NCs as it happens in CdS and CdxZn1−xS NC-based systems.598 The composition-optimized CuGa2In3S8 NCs showed a maximal QY of the H2 evolution from aqueous ascorbic acid solutions of 12% at 540 nm and the spectral sensitivity to 600–650 nm. It is also notable, that CIGS/Ni2+ system displayed the steady H2 evolution for a prolonged term of around 50 hours while the noble-metal-containing photocatalysts gradually lost the photoactivity, most probably due to the poisoning with the products of ascorbic acid oxidation.300
The highest photocatalytic activity in the water reduction for CIGS NCs deposited into the nanocrystalline titania was observed for a particular composition of CuGa2In3S8 NCs.241 The MMC acts in this system as a spectral sensitizer that absorbs the visible light and supplies the photogenerated electrons to titania where the hydrogen evolution occurs with the participation of Ru NCs. The sensitization effect is unambiguously confirmed by a close matching of the absorption spectrum of CIGS NCs and the photoaction spectrum of the TiO2/CIGS nanoheterostructure (Fig. 40c).
The Ru-loaded 4 nm Ga-enriched CIGS crystals revealed a photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution under the illumination with the visible light up to 700 nm with an apparent QY of 6–7% at 560 nm.191,612
A similar dome-shaped dependence of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate on the composition was observed for the alloyed (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 solid solution microspheres with x varied in a range of 0.01–0.5 (Fig. 42b).352 The hybridized 4s4p orbitals of Zn2+ contribute to the CB of the alloyed NCs and, therefore, the introduction of zinc ions increases the bandgap and the photogenerated CB electron energy thus favoring the water reduction to H2. At the same time, the Eg increase reduces the capability of CIZS microspheres to absorb the visible light resulting in a compromise composition, x = 0.20 (Eg = 1.84 eV), at which the highest QY of the H2 formation, ∼15.5% at 420 nm, is observed. The in situ photodeposited Ru NCs acted as a co-catalyst enhancing the photoactivity of CIZS microspheres by more than an order of magnitude (Fig. 42b).352
A combination of CuGaS2 NCs with ZnS creates a p/n hetero-junction with enhanced separation of the photogenerated charge carriers between the components.412 As a result, the CGS/ZnS heterostructure is a 15-times more active photocatalyst of the hydrogen evolution than sole CGS approaching the photoactivity of “classical” CdS.412
The formation of a p/n heterojunction at the CZTS/ZnS core/shell interface imparted such composite with the photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution exceeding by an order of magnitude the activity of a mechanical mixture of the kesterite and ZnS NCs.401
Colloidal (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 NCs revealed distinct dependences of the photocatalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution from aqueous Na2S solutions both on the NC size and NC composition.93 The authors of ref. 93 selected a synthetic protocol yielding NCs of roughly the same size for different compositions allowing to analyze both types of dependences separately. The dependence of the photoactivity on the composition is “classical” for MMC NCs and similar to that discussed above for copper-based NCs. As the Zn content is increased, the photocatalytic activity of ZAIS NCs increases, reaches a summit at x = 0.5 and then decreases due to a balance between an increase of the CB electron energy and a loss of the light-harvesting capability (Fig. 43c).93 Almost for any studied x the dependence of the H2 evolution rate on the ZAIS NC size also features a maximum explained by another balance between the size-dependent driving force of the photoinduced CB electron transfer to water molecules and an increase in the surface disorder and charge trapping with a decreased NC size.93 In general, the highest photoactivity was observed for the ZAIS NCs with an average size of 4.2–5.5 nm and a bandgap of 2.3–2.4 eV (Fig. 43d).
 Fig. 43  (a and b) Dependence of the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate R(H2) on the average size (a) and bandgap (b) of ZAIS-x NCs prepared at different x. (c and d) Efficiency of the photocatalytic phenol decomposition as a function of the bandgap/size of CISe NCs (c) and the driving force of the photoinduced CISe CB electron transfer to O2 (d). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 (a and b) and ref. 87 (c and d). Copyright (2015, 2016) American Chemical Society. 
The calculations of the electron parameters of multinary Ag2ZnSnS4 and Ag2ZnSnSe4 compounds showed them to have a combination of suitable bandgaps and small electron effective masses (me* = 0.14m0–0.16m0 for sulfide, me* = 0.06m0–0.07m0 for selenide).86 These values are very beneficial for the photocatalytic water splitting, though the feasibility of using such compounds for the hydrogen production was experimentally verified only for 100–200 nm AZTS crystals decorated with Pt.613 The introduction of Ag2ZnSnS4 into a ternary Cu2ZnSnS4–Ag2ZnSnS4–ZnS heterostructure was found to impart it with the n-type conductivity and to facilitate the in situ photodeposition of Ru NC co-catalyst.614 The incorporation of ZnS results in an upward shift of the CB level of the heterostructure entailing it with the photocatalytic activity of H2 evolution from aqueous S2−/SO32− solution under the AM1.5G illumination.614
The nanocrystalline AIS and ZAIS microassemblies combined with the sheet-like MoS2 serve as efficient photocatalysts of the hydrogen evolution from aqueous lactic acid solutions.88 As shown by Mott–Schottky measurements, the CB potentials of the studied ZAIS compounds and MoS2 are −0.6 V and −0.1 V (NHE), respectively.88 Thus, the molybdenium disulfide nanosheets can accept the photogenerated ZAIS CB electrons acting as an electron-collecting co-catalyst.
The photocatalytic activity of ZAIS NCs in the hydrogen evolution from water/2-propanol mixtures can be enhanced by Au NCs covered with a protective SiO2 shell.162 The enhancement factor depends on the thickness of the silica shell and can be higher than 1.5 (Fig. 44a). As the insulating SiO2 shell prevents the direct electron transfer from ZAIS NCs to Au NCs, the latter act not as a typical metallic co-catalyst, but rather by enhancing the light absorption and charge separation in ZAIS NCs subjected to the electro-magnetic field created in Au/SiO2 NCs as a result of the photoinduced surface plasmon resonance (SPR). The Au-induced enhancement effect becomes stronger as the overlapping between the SPR band of gold NCs and the absorption band of ZAIS NCs is increased via a tuning of the NC composition.162 Noteworthy, a mechanical mixture of ZAIS and Au/SiO2 NCs did not show any enhancement of the photocatalytic activity indicating on a crucial role of the immobilization of the ZAIS NCs on the surface of silica-coated gold NCs.
 Fig. 44  (a) SPR-induced enhancement factor fenhance of the photocatalytic activity of ZAIS NCs by Au/SiO2 particles as a function of the silica shell thickness. (b) Kinetic curves of the photocatalytic hydrogen formation in the presence of sole CaIn2S4 NCs and their composites with Au and Pt NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 162 (a) and ref. 616 (b). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society (a); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A near-field enhancement of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution caused by the SPR excitation was observed for Au/Cu2FeSnS4 composites with a gold core and a 20–30 nm-thick kesterite shell218 as well as for the core/shell Au/CZTS composites formed by the kesterite NRs or nanoplates.603
An effect of the plasmonic enhancement of the photocatalytic hydrogen production was also observed for binary CaIn2S4 composites with alloyed Au–Cu NCs615 and for ternary CaIn2S4/Au/Pt heterostructures.616 In the latter case, the enhancement effect was explained by the transfer of “hot” electrons from the SPR-excited Au NCs into the conduction band of CaIn2S4 and then – to Pt NCs, where the water reduction to H2 took place.616 The term “hot” refers to the electrons with the energy higher than the Fermi level of the CaIn2S4/Au heterostructure that can be generated by the plasmonic pumping of the light energy into the Au NCs. The assumption on the participation of the hot electrons was supported by the fact of hydrogen evolution at the illumination of the CaIn2S4/Au/Pt composite, while no H2 was observed at the same conditions for the non-plasmonic CaIn2S4/Pt heterostructure (Fig. 44b).616
The CZTS NCs revealed a phase-dependence of the photocatalytic activity in the water reduction, being almost 3 times higher for the kesterite modification than for the wurtzite NCs.617 The phenomenon was attributed to differences in the facet population on the NC surface. The dominantly exposed kesterite facets were {112} with an unbalanced charge of exposed anions and cations tending to compensate at the expense of the anions/cations adsorption. At the same time, the wurtzite showed much less polarized {100} facets selectively exposed. The preferential adsorption of protons and sulfide ions on the polar {112} facets of the kesterite CZTS NCs is considered to be the main reason for their enhanced photocatalytic activity.617


4.2 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 and various ionic species. 
In general, the reported examples of these reactions are quite rare for the MMC NCs but a growing interest for such photoinduced transformations can be envisaged in the light of the abatement of CO2 emissions and related environmental issues.
The mesoporous CZTS coupled to the titania was reported as a photocatalyst of the CO2 reduction to CH4 under the solar irradiation.264 The CZTS NCs act as a spectral sensitizer excited by the visible light and transferring the CB electrons to lower-lying CB level of the nanocrystalline TiO2 (Fig. 41c).
The photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO was reported for the one-unit-cell-thick ZnIn2S4 nanosheets.340 The key point defining the efficiency of the CO2 reduction is the presence of Zn vacancies on the nanosheet surface. Therefore, the photocatalytic activity of ZIS nanosheets decreased by a factor of almost 4 when the HTT conditions were adjusted to decrease the number of Zn vacancies.340 The photocatalytic activity of ZIS nanosheets can be further enhanced by coupling to the TiO2 nanobelts to form cascaded heterostructures.618 The alloying of ZnIn2S4 with CaIn2S4 results in variations of both CB and VB levels depending on the NC composition and producing the most negative ECB for a Zn0.4Ca0.6In2S4 compound.99 The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methane and CO with the participation of this compound is respectively ∼17 and ∼8 times faster than for ZnIn2S4 and ∼7 and ∼4 times faster than for CaIn2S4.99
The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methanol and further to methane was observed for titania nanowires covered with CIS nanoplates.619 Isotopic experiments with 13CO2 attested carbon dioxide to be the source of carbon atoms in the final products.
CIS NCs simultaneously loaded with Pt, Ru, and Au NCs were found to be an excellent UV- and visible-light-driven photocatalyst of the nitrate anion reduction to N2 with oxalic acid.356 The process is relatively fast and not accompanied by side processes of ammonia formation or H2 evolution. The highest apparent QY, ∼24%, was observed at 500 nm for the Pt co-catalyst, while the highest selectivity – for Pd NCs (Fig. 40d). The photocatalytic activity of the nanocrystalline CIS in the nitrate reduction by oxalic acid was reported to be equal to that of the nanocrystalline TiO2 Evonik P25,369 which is broadly used as a reference sample for comparing the photoactivity of various semiconductor nanomaterials.
The surfactant-free aqueous CZTS NCs revealed photocatalytic properties in the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) with only ∼5% loss in activity after ten consecutive cycles of the photocatalytic test.402 The TiO2/CIS/ZnS composites were also reported as a photocatalyst of Cr(VI) reduction in aqueous solutions. The stability of the heterostructure was considerably increased by covering it with an amorphous TiO2 layer.620,621


4.3 Photocatalytic decomposition of organic dyes and other compounds. 
The photodecomposition of organic dyes is often used as a test reaction to assess the photocatalytic properties of MC nanomaterials and compare them with other semiconductor materials. Typically, persistent dyes are used in these studies, that is, the dyes stable to the photochemical and thermal oxidation in the absence of photocatalysts, in particular, methylene blue, methyl orange, Rhodamine B, etc. The photocatalytic properties in the dye degradations were reported for CIS/ZnS,146 CIZS/ZnS NCs150 and CIZS NRs,155 AIS and ZAIS NCs,461 ZIS,353,417,622 CTS,174,532 CZTS178,209,215,388,393,399,402,403,623,624 and CZGS NCs,217 Fe-, Mn-, Co-, Ni-doped CZTS,388 and CFTS NCs,151 In4SnS8 nanosheets,156 CuGaS2 NCs,190 AgGaS2 NCs,172 AgGaSe2 NCs,188 and Ag8SnS6 NCs,176 as well as a variety of nanoheterostructures – TiO2/CIS145 and TiO2/CIZS,625 ZnO/CIS82,177 and ZnO/CIS/GO,432 ZnO/Cu2SnS3,486 ZnO/CISe,82 CdS/ZIS,424 ZIS/AgIn5S8,378 ZIS/CdIn2S4374 and ZIS/CdIn2S4/CuS,417 GCN/BiVO4/ZIS,437 carbon NT/CaIn2S4444 and Au/CaIn2S4,376 GCN/CdIn2S4,337 RGO/Cu2SnS3,442 TiO2/CZTS347 and La2Ti2O7/CZTS.451
The deposition of noble metal NCs (Pd, Au) on the surface of CZTS NCs was found to accelerate the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue.209,626 This study showed that the presence of a sole co-catalyst NC on the surface of a CZTS NC is preferential than the deposition of multiple smaller metal NCs (Fig. 45a). The most probable reason for this phenomenon is the enhanced electron–hole recombination on the multiple boundaries between CZTS and metal NCs in the latter case.
 Fig. 45  (a) Methylene blue conversion efficiencies with CZTS and CZTS/Pd(Au) heterostructures. (b) A scheme of NIR light upconversion by the NaYF4:Yb,Tm phosphor coupled to CZTS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 209 (a) and ref. 623 (b). Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society (a); (2017) Elsevier. 
In the studies of the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes the reported data on the photoactivity of semiconductor materials can be compromised by a self-sensitization effect, when the dye decomposes as a result of the photoexcitation and the electron transfer to the semiconductor NCs present in the system.627 In some cases this pathway can even be dominating, as for the Rhodamine B decomposition over a ZAIS/MoS2 heterostructure, where the photoexcitation of the adsorbed dyes molecules results in the cascade electron transfers from Rhodamine B to ZAIS to MoS2 and, finally, to oxygen.365
Similar to the hydrogen evolution systems, the dyes decomposition processes often reveal a dome-shaped dependence on the MC NC composition. A typical example is the photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B over TiO2/(ZnS)x(CuInS2)1−x composites where the highest activity was observed for NCs with x = 0.8 corresponding to Eg = 2.14 eV.625 The dependence originates from a lower light-harvesting capability at smaller x and a lower bandgap at higher x.
A proof-of-concept experiment on the expansion of the light-harvesting range of CZTS-based photocatalysts into the NIR domain by the up-converting approach was reported by Que et al.623 The CZTS NCs were deposited onto the nanocrystalline ZnO support and coupled to the NaYF4:Yb,Tm microplates. The NIR light absorption by the microplates populates higher-lying terms of the dopant atoms followed by the discharging of much more energetic visible and UV light quanta that are supposed to be absorbed by the neighbouring CZTS NCs (Fig. 45b) acting as a photocatalyst of the methylene blue degradation.623
The water-soluble CISe NCs capped with differently-sized polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecules with the terminal –SH groups revealed photocatalytic properties in the oxidation of a series of organic compounds – phenol, N,N-dimethyl-4-phenylenediamine, methylene blue, and thiourea under the illumination with the visible light.87 The universal action of the CISe NCs stems from the same primary and rate-determining step of the photoinduced CB electron transfer to molecular oxygen converting it to the superoxide anion-radical O2˙−. The superoxide-radical protonation to HO2˙ followed by the recombinative decomposition yields hydrogen peroxide that readily decomposes to very active HO˙ radicals:587,588,628,629HO2˙ + HO2˙ = H2O2 + O2,H2O2 = 2HO˙.
The oxygen reduction rate depends on the CB position of CISe NCs and increases as the size of NC is decreased due to the quantum confinement effect. In particular, the photocatalytic phenol conversion increased from 30% to 60% with a decrease of the average CISe NC size from 5.3 nm to 1.8 nm and an increase of the electrochemical (determined by the CV) bandgap from 1.4 eV to around 1.85 eV (Fig. 43a). At that, the phenol conversion efficiency follows almost linearly an increase of the thermodynamic driving force (free Gibbs energy difference, −ΔG) observed for the CISe NCs of a decreasing size (Fig. 43b). Another, but less important, factor limiting the photocatalytic activity of CISe NCs is the capping ligand size. The phenol conversion was found to be slightly (by around 10%) decreased when the number n of elementary (OCH2CH2) fragments in the thiolated PEG ligand increased from 6 to 18.87 At that, the photoactivity of PEGylated (n = 6) CISe NCs was at least 4 times higher as compared to the OLA-capped NCs.
The composites of nanocrystalline titania with microspherical aggregates of CaIn2S4 NCs revealed photocatalytic properties in the oxidation of two pharmaceuticals – isoniazid and metronidazole under the illumination with the visible light.430 The CB and VB levels of both components allow for the electron and hole separation (Fig. 41d). The electrons localized on TiO2 NCs reduce oxygen, while the holes are consumed in the direct oxidation of organic compounds and water to hydroxyl radicals. All three intermediates (O2˙−, h+VB, and HO˙) were confirmed to be active oxidizing species by the radical trapping experiments.430 The metronidazole was also photocatalytically destructed over the composites of hollow TiO2 microspheres with ZIS NC microaggregates.426
The composites of GCN with ZnIn2S4 NCs343,630 and CdIn2S4337 showed photocatalytic properties in the oxidation of antibiotic tetracycline under the visible light illumination. The GCN/ZIS nanoheterostructures were also reported to act as a photocatalyst of methyl orange and phenol oxidation.434
The ternary BiVO4/BiFeO3/CIS nanoheterostructures revealed an increased photocatalytic activity in the degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol.450 The photoactivity enhancement (as compared to separate CIS and BiVO4/CIS) is associated with the inner polarization introduced by the bismuth ferrite NCs and facilitating the photoinduced electron transfer from CIS to bismuth vanadate. The introduction of RGO into the TiO2 NT array/CIS heterostructures enhances their photocatalytic activity in the 2,4-dichlorophenol degradation by around 40%.484 ZIS microwires composed of nanosheets with preferentially exposed (006) facets showed a high photocatalytic activity and stability in the oxidation of tetracycline and 2,4,6-tribromophenol.622
TiO2/CIS nanoheterostructure immobilized on glass can be used as an active and stable photocatalyst of the 4-nitrophenol oxidation.631 The photocatalytic properties in the 2-nitro-phenol degradation were also reported for AIS nanoplates.632
The TiO2 NT/CIS heterostructures can be applied as a photocatalyst of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid degradation under the visible light illumination.483 The TiO2/CIS composites were used as a photocatalyst for the degradation of soil fumigant 1,3-dichloropropene.148,633 To protect the composite in the aggressive conditions of the photoprocess it was covered with a ∼1.3 nm-thick layer of Al-doped ZnS.
A difference between the CB levels of titania (−0.4 V, NHE) and Ag–In–S NCs (−0.57 V, NHE) coupled into a TiO2/AIS nano-heterostructure enables efficient transfer of the photogenerated electrons from AIS to TiO2 resulting in a high photocatalytic activity of such composite in the visible-light-driven gas-phase degradation of 1,2-dichlorobenzene.423
Selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to corresponding aldehydes driven by the visible light was reported for ZnO/Zn3In2S6 heterostructure.367 The effect of selectivity is attributed to a cooperative catalytic action of zinc oxide that weakens the C–H and O–H bonds of the alcohols with a photocatalytic effect of ZIS NCs supplying oxidants – the photogenerated h+VB and O2˙−.
Mo-Doped ZIS NCs were reported to be an efficient photocatalyst of the cyclization of aromatic amines into imidazoles.634


4.4 Photoelectrochemical/photoelectrocatalytic processes with MMC NCs. 
The photocurrent generation in a photoelectrochemical systems based on MC NCs results from two simultaneous processes – the oxidation of water or additional sacrificial electron donor on a NC-sensitized photoanode and the reduction of water (or other acceptor species) on a counter-electrode (Fig. 39c). The photocurrent density is proportional to the amount of the H2 evolved on the counter electrode and can be adopted as a quantitative measure of the water splitting efficiency.
An effect of the spectral sensitization of photocurrent generation was observed for titania NT arrays decorated with CIS NCs,470 CIZS nanosheets,449 and AIS NCs;471 TiO2 NR arrays with CIS NCs427 and CZTS NCs,203 TiO2 nanowire/In2S3/CIS,472 TiO2/ZnIn2S4/CdS,429 ZnO nanowire arrays decorated with CIS NCs321 or CuSbS2 NCs,476 ZnO NRs with CIS NCs,446,482 Cu2SnS3,486 and AgSbS2 NCs,447 ZnO NTs with Ag–Cu–Sb–S NCs,448 as well as for CdS nanowire/CdIn2S4 heterostructure.89,415
The TiO2 nanowire arrays covered with a buffer In2S3 layer and decorated with CIS NCs revealed unprecedentedly high stability during at least twenty consecutive current–voltage sweeps in an aqueous KOH electrolyte in the absence of typical sulfide-containing sacrificial donors.472 The high MMC stability originates, most probably, from very efficient charge separation and transfers. A similar effect of fast hole transfer was deemed to be responsible for a very high photocorrosion stability of CdS/CdIn2S4 photoelectrodes.89
The MMC NC-based photoanodes are often modified with additional MC shells both to enhance the light-harvesting efficiency and to protect the MC layer from the chemical/photochemical corrosion. For example, a protective ZnS shell was deposited onto the TiO2/CIZS photoanode,464 while the deposition of a Bi2S3 layer over the TiO2/CIS heterostructure increases the photoelectrochemical activity by a factor of 1.5 as a result of an increased light absorbance and a possibility of the cascade charge separation.468 A buffer layer of zinc oxysulfide placed between the TiO2 nanorod array and a layer of the CZTS sensitizer NCs resulted in a photocurrent density of ∼15 mA cm−2 (at 1.23 V versus NHE) which is a record for the CZTS NC-based photoelectrodes.203
The ZnIn2S4 nanosheets were tested as light-harvesting components of a photoelectrochemical system without additional semiconductors and showed a promising light-to-current conversion efficiency.380,522 With the n-type conductivity and a bandgap of 2.6 eV this material can be a good alternative to toxic cadmium sulfide which is broadly applied in the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical light-harvesting systems. The deposition of a layer of ZnIn2S4 nanosheets on the surface of Si nanowires increased the light conversion efficiency by a factor of 64.416
Along from the water splitting, many other processes can be realized in a photoelectrochemical regime with physically separated reduction and oxidation stages, for example, the visible-light-driven 2-chlorophenol oxidation on the surface of TiO2 NT/CIS photoanode.118
Conventional binary photoactive MC NCs, such as cadmium, zinc and lead chalcogenides reveal usually the n-type conductivity and participate, therefore, in the oxidation reactions with the electrolyte components, while the photogenerated electrons are transferred to a metal oxide scaffold and then – via the circuit to a CE. As opposite, the multinary In, Ga, and Sn-based MC compounds typically have the p-type conductivity that opens the possibilities of constructing photocathodes releasing the photogenerated electrons to the electrolyte species and holes – into the external circuit and on a CE. For example, a p-conductive CIS NC layer was used as a photocathode in a photoelectrochemical system for the selective reduction of CO2 to methanol with pyridinium ions as a co-catalyst.478,489 The process requires an external bias of 20 mV to compensate for the CO2 reduction overpotential and shows a Faradaic efficiency of 97%.
The photoelectrochemical activity of the nanocrystalline CIS is affected by the stoichiometry and the presence of “alien” ions. In particular, the Cu-rich CIS NCs showed a much higher activity in the presence of methylviologen (4,4′-dimethylbipyridyl bication) as an electron acceptor as compared to the Cu-poor CIS NCs.144 The highest photoelectrochemical activity of the non-stoichiometric CIS deposited on ITO was observed at a Cu/In ratio of 0.28.477
The Zn-, Sb-, or Ni-doped CIS films evolve H2 from aqueous S2−/SO32− solutions when illuminated with the visible light,311 the highest activity observed for the Zn-doped films. Doping with Ce was also found to increase the photoelectrochemical activity of the nanocrystalline CIS films; the highest light conversion efficiency was reported for 10 mol% Ce.485
A composite GCN/CIS photocathode evolves hydrogen from 0.1 M H2SO4, the presence of polymeric GCN sheets enhancing considerably the stability of CIS toward the photocorrosion and revealing steady performance for at least 22 h.635 A similar stabilizing effect of S-doped GCN was observed for the CIS/CdS photocathodes.636
The photoelectrochemical efficiency of CIS NC-based photo-cathodes can be multiplied in the presence of Pt,490,637 Au or Ag NCs,635 and additional protective layers, such as In2S3490 and CdS.411,490,637 The introduction of RGO sheets into the CIS-based photoelectrode results in a 2-fold increase of the photogenerated current density.478
The deposition of n-type CdS and TiO2 NCs on the surface of porous CIS results in the formation of p/n junctions enhancing the cathodic photocurrent and increases the apparent light-to-hydrogen conversion to 1.82%.488
CIGS is a popular MC material for the photocathodes with a broad spectral response covering the entire UV, visible and partially NIR range to ∼1200 nm.635,638,639 The CIGS films on the optically transparent electrodes can generate the cathodic photocurrent as a result of the reduction of dissolved molecular oxygen with the simultaneous oxidation of water (or sacrificial donor) on a counter electrode. The photoactivity of CIGS layers can be enhanced drastically by the deposition of Pt NCs acting as relays of the electron transfer to O2 (Fig. 46a). A further acceleration of the cathodic process as well as an enhancement in the photocathode stability can be achieved by the deposition of a ZnS shell onto the CIGS surface prior to the anchoring of Pt NCs (Fig. 46a).638 The generation of cathodic photocurrents in the absence of additional sacrificial donors was also reported for alloyed ZnSe-CIGSe electrodes.516,640
 Fig. 46  (a) Current–voltage curves registered under the chopped illumination for CIGS photocathode, as well as CIGS/Pt and CIGS/ZnS/Pt heterostructures. (b) An energy level scheme of Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO photocathode for the water splitting. (c) SEM/scheme of TiO2 NR/ZnIn2S4/CdS photoanode. (d) Energy diagram of FTO/TiO2/ZnIn2S4/CdS photoanode. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 638 (a), ref. 641 (b), ref. 642 (c), and ref. 119 (d). Copyright (2014, 2015) American Chemical Society (a and b); (2017) Elsevier (c); (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d). 
An enhancement of the photocurrent generation on the CIGS photocathodes was observed after the deposition of CdS, TiO2, and ZnxSnyOz layers as a result of the formation of p/n junctions.515 The best CIGS/CdS/TiO2/Pt photocathode exhibited a light-to-current conversion efficiency of 2.63%.515 However, this composite gradually lost the photoelectrochemical activity as a result of the interdiffusion of Pt atoms into the film and the CIGS constituent – in the outer layer as well as the degradation of the protective oxide layer.
A ternary photocathode was formed on the surface of co-evaporated CIGS layer on the Mo-covered glass by depositing consecutively layers of CdS and ZnO (Fig. 46b).641 The CIGS and CdS phases having the p- and n-type conductivity, respectively, form a p/n heterojunction enabling the efficient electron/hole separation and electron transport in the bulk of CdS layer. Then, due to a CB level offset between CdS and ZnO the electron is forwarded to the photocathode/electrolyte interface where it can reduce water to hydrogen. The electrodeposition of a Pt layer onto ZnO enhances the latter process producing the cathodic photocurrents as high as −32.5 mA cm−2.641 Simultaneously, the water oxidation to O2 occurs on the Pt CE thus making this system similar to the natural photosynthesis systems. This principle was also realized in water-splitting systems with hydrogen-evolving TiO2/CdS/CZTS326 and Pt/TiO2/CdS/CBTSSe643 photocathodes.
A photoelectrochemical cell with Ru-modified CGZS photocathode and CoOx-modified BiVO4 photoanode, both absorbing in the visible spectral range, can split water without the application of an external bias.606 Recently, a tandem cell with a ZnSe–CIGSe photoanode and a BiVO4 photoanode was reported to yield 1% efficiency of the water splitting in an unstirred electrolyte.644
Recently, the selective six-electron photoreduction of nitrobenzene to aniline was reported for a nanocrystalline CZTS photocathode put under a small bias.645
One of the rapidly evolving directions of NC-based photo-electrochemistry is the development of various photodriven sensors, in particular immunosensing platforms. For example, a photoelectrochemical immunosensor exploiting simultaneously semiconductor photoanode and photocathode was reported by Zhang et al.646 The sensor comprised an ITO/TiO2/CdS:Mn photoanode and an ITO/CIS photocathode modified by an antibody complementary to a prostate-specific antigen. The photocathode surface free from the antibody is blocked by a layer of chitosan/bovine serum albumine. After the introduction of target species that specifically interact with the photocathode-anchored antibody, the photocathode surface gets completely blocked by the bulky organic molecules that impede the photocathodic oxygen reduction (Fig. 47a). The blocade decreases the photocurrent proportionally to the logarithm of the target concentration allowing the determination in a concentration range of 1 pg mL−1 to 100 ng mL−1 with a detection limit of 0.32 pg mL−1.646 The design of the sensor allows to solve the problem of a low selectivity of typical photoanode-based sensors caused by indiscriminative oxidation of all present organic species by the photogenerated holes. In the present system the molecular oxygen is the sole electron acceptor and the photocathodic process is not interfered by any side reactions.
 Fig. 47  (a) A scheme of the CIS-based photoelectrochemical immunosensor, Ab – complementary antibody, Ag – target antigen, BSA – bovine serum albumin. (b) An energy diagram of the FTO/ZnO/CdS/CZTS photoanode. (c) Chronoamperograms registered for FTO/TiO2, FTO/TiO2/CZTS and FTO/TiO2/CZTS/Ag2S photoanodes with a different size of Ag2S NCs (explanation of H1–H3 designations provided in the text). (d) An energy diagram of the FTO/CZTS/ZnSe/CdS/CdSe photocathode. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 646 (a), ref. 320 (b), ref. 195 (c), and ref. 261 (d). Copyright (2014–2016) American Chemical Society (a, c and d); (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b). 
The ZnIn2S4 NCs reveal the n-type conductivity, similarly to binary ZnS and CdS and can be combined with other n-type semiconductor NCs into the heterostructured photoanodes. For example, the titania NR arrays were decorated by the nanocrystalline ZnIn2S4 nanosheets and converted by the partial ion exchange into the ZIS/CdS heterostructure642 (Fig. 46c). The light-harvesting layer was then decorated with an efficient hole acceptor – Ni(OH)2 that enhanced the electron/hole separation and increased the anodic photocurrent. The fast withdrawal of the photogenerated VB holes by nickel hydroxide imparts the photoanode with a high stability toward the oxidative photocorrosion.642
A combination of TiO2, ZIS and CdS with the CB levels at −0.3 V, −0.4 V, and −0.5 V (NHE), respectively, creates a cascade structure with the CB potential decreasing from the outer CdS layer to the inner TiO2 scaffold allowing for a directed flow of the photogenerated electrons from the electrolyte species through the photoanode components and further – into the external circuit.119 Simultaneously, the VB offsets of the components allow for a directed flow of the photogenerated VB holes in the opposite direction – toward the electrolyte species (Fig. 46d). As a result, the photoelectrochemical activity of the ternary TiO2/ZIS/CdS composite exceeds that of binary TiO2/CdS and TiO2/ZIS heterostructures by 2 and 3 times, respectively.
A similar cascaded charge transfer occur also in the FTO/ZnO/CdS/CZTS photoanodes allowing for the efficient photocurrent generation at the expense of the oxidation of S2−/SO32− and the hydrogen evolution on the Pt CE (Fig. 47b).320 The latter reference reported an original “two-storey” photoanode composed of a ZnO/CdS/CZTS film with an upper layer of stainless steel grid covered with the same ternary heterostructure. The grid absorbs both incident light and the photons reflected/scattered from the bottom FTO/ZnO/CdS/CZTS layer and thus the combined structure produces a much higher photocurrent (∼12.6 mA cm−2) than the separate layers (∼6.3 mA cm−2 and ∼9.6 mA cm−2 for the mesh- and FTO-supported heterostructures, respectively).320
Nanocrystalline kesterite CZTS can be used as a photocathode material for the water reduction after the deposition of protective layers of CdS, Al-doped ZnO, and TiO2, and the decoration with co-catalyst Pt NCs.493 The best Mo/CZTS/CdS/AZO/TiO2/Pt photocathodes showed a photocurrent density of ∼1 mA cm−2 under the AM1.5 illumination and a long-term stability.493 CZTS NCs decorated by the in situ photodeposited Pt NCs revealed a photoelectrochemical activity in the water reduction in aqueous S2−/SO32− solutions.408 The photoelectrochemical activity of alloyed Cu2(FexZn1−x)SnS4 NCs can be modulated by varying the NC composition, the highest photocurrents observed at x = 0.4.284
A nanocrystalline CZTS photocathode was combined with different photoanodes composed of TiO2, WO3 and BiVO4 NCs.494,496 In such Z-scheme the photocathode is capable only of the water reduction, the VB potential being insufficiently positive for the water oxidation to O2. The coupling to a photoanode allows to combine the H2 evolution on the CZTS photocathode with the O2 evolution on the photoanode when both are connected by a salt bridge and a Fe2+/Fe3+ electron-shuttling redox-couple.494
The CZTS NC-based Mo/Cu2ZnSnS4/CdS/Pt photocathode was applied to reduce toluene to methylcyclohexane under the illumination with the visible light.495 This process, along with the benzene reduction to cyclohexane, is considered to be a very promising way of the hydrogen storage in the form of liquid molecular hydrides, because H2 can be recovered relatively easily from these compounds under mild conditions and a corresponding metal catalyst.495
Binary CZTS/Ag2S NCs was used as a spectral sensitizer for the nanocrystalline TiO2 photoanodes.195 Silver sulfide NCs were produced by the partial cation exchange in the parent CZTS NCs and the size of Ag2S NCs varied from 2 nm to 4 nm and to 7 nm (samples H1, H2, and H3 in Fig. 47c) by increasing the Ag+ precursor amount. The peak photocurrent was observed for the 4 nm Ag2S NCs, being by an order of magnitude higher than for the pristine CZTS sensitizer NCs (Fig. 47c). The boosted photoefficiency was attributed to the cascaded electron transfers from CZTS to Ag2S and to TiO2 coupled to the directed hole transfer in the opposite direction.195 The deterioration of the photocurrent generation efficiency for larger Ag2S NCs is explained by possible changes in the crystalline structure of CZTS NCs due to Ag+ inclusions as well as by the depletion of CZTS phase (transforming into Ag2S during the ion exchange) acting as a perfect electron/hole relay in the ternary TiO2/CZTS/Ag2S composite.
In the design of composite MC NC-based photocathodes, a reverse cascade of CB positions is typically organized. The CB potential decreases (in the absolute value) from the inner components of the photocathode to its outer components to facilitate the electron transport to the acceptor species in the electrolyte. The CZTS/ZnSe/CdS/CdSe heterostructure reported by Sivula et al.261 serves as a perfect example of this strategy (Fig. 47d). The transfer of the photogenerated electrons to the accepting Eu3+ species in solution is facilitated by a declining CB in the CZTS/CdS/CdSe cascade, while for the ZnSe layer the authors suggest a midgap-state-mediated electron transfer. The quaternary structure exhibits a higher photocurrent than any other possible binary or ternary combination of the components.261
Nanocrystalline Cu2BaSnS4 with a bandgap of around 2 eV was reported to be a promising material for the water-reducing photocathodes,558 a similar cascade effect being realized in the photoelectrochemical water splitting system with the Cu2BaSnS4 photocathode decorated by consecutive layers of CdS, ZnO, and TiO2.519
The p-conducting nanocrystalline Cu12Sb4S13 and Cu3SbS4 films on ITO revealed a photoelectrochemical activity when coupled with a Pt CE and immersed in an aqueous Eu3+ acceptor solution.246 The modification of Cu2SbS4 films with a layer of In2S3 creates a p/n junction resulting in an enhancement of the photocathodic hydrogen evolution over the Pt-decorated Cu3SbS4/In2S3 film coupled to a Pt CE.497 A photoelectrochemical activity was also observed for the p-type CuSbS2 NCs (Eg = 1.40 eV) on FTO290 and for CuAsS2 NCs (1.25 eV) deposited on Mo/glass substrates.181 Cu2SnS3 NCs formed a Schottky junction with Au NCs allowing for the transfer of the photogenerated CB electrons to the metal NCs and favoring the photocurrent generation.174

Conclusions and outlook
Numerous reports discussed in this review show unambiguously that the MMC NCs differ in many aspects from their binary MC “relatives” when applied as the light-sensitive and auxiliary components of various light-harvesting systems. These distinctions stem mostly from a unique capability of MMC NCs to tolerate a broad variability of compositions and stoichiometries while exhibiting the same and unified structural motif. This feature is multiplied by two other distinctive characteristics of MMC NCs, in particular, the unprecedented capability of forming solid solutions by the partial substitution of either metal or chalcogenide ions as well as the unique tolerance to doping.
The tolerance to the non-stoichiometry allows to vary optical, photophysical and electrophysical properties of ternary and quaternary MC NCs in a broad range providing potent means of tailoring both their optical response and the properties of the photogenerated charge carriers. Apart from the energy characteristics, the conductivity type, the charge carrier density and the structure of the surface double electric layer can be affected by the phase composition and the ratios of components of the MMC NC varied within a certain set of elements – Cu–In–S, Cu–Zn–In–S, Cu–Zn–Sn–S, etc.
Along with the tolerance to the non-stoichiometry, the optical and electrophysical properties of MMC NCs can be affected in a decisive manner by alloying several types of cations/anions. The NC characteristics change gradually and in a continuous manner with the partial substitution of the “central” metal ions, e.g. In with Ga in CIS or Sn with Ge in CZTS. Similar trends are observed if a combination of two chalcogenide ions is introduced simultaneously in a multinary NC compound.
Finally, the doping can be applied to achieve various aims, in particular, to affect the energies of the photogenerated charge carriers and to fill the lattice vacancies like in the case of AIS NC doping with zinc or copper ions. Moreover, the doping can induce a controlled aggregation, as in the case of Sb3+ in CZTS NCs or affect the charge transport properties as in the case of indium doping of CZTS NCs.
These three features – the non-stoichiometry, the alloying and the doping taken together define a specific landscape of the studies of the light-harvesting systems based on the MMC NCs making it quite different from “conventional” binary NC such as cadmium or lead chalcogenides. However, despite the discussed differences the basic principles of the light-harvesting system design, the ideology of enhancing the efficiency of the light conversion and minimizing the losses of the photogenerated charge carriers as well as the protocols for the synthesis of MMC NCs are generally the same as devised and tested for the binary MC NCs.
From the synthetic viewpoint, the multinary NC sensitizers for the solar cells and photocatalysts for the visible-light-driven redox-reactions are produced most often via the heating up/hot injection syntheses and the hydrothermal/solvothermal treatments, respectively – similarly as it happens with the binary MC NCs. However, a much more intricate chemistry lies behind the formation of ternary, quaternary and even more complex MC NCs as compared to the binary counterparts, arising from a different reactivity of metal ion-constituents, the possibilities of ions migration and intermixing, the formation of different phases (even within the single NCs) and solid solutions, etc. In this view, a precise control of the MMC NC size, shape, composition, surface chemistry and other parameters becomes a much more challenging task. The need of the post-synthesis ligand exchange and phase transfer procedures makes handling of these NCs even more difficult. Therefore, even the case of “conventional” heating up/hot injection syntheses cannot be considered as a “done and closed” one. Indeed, further studies on the mechanism of the multinary NC nucleation and growth, the parameters governing the NC shape, phase and composition as well as the routes of more efficient ligand exchange, which is vital for the light-harvesting applications, are still necessary and will undoubtedly be continued in the future.
Also, a broad field for new methods is open for the syntheses of multinary NCs. In particular, the syntheses of concentrated MC NC “inks” directly in polar solvents with relatively small multifunctional capping ligands and a defined composition/size can boost the development of both bulk-heterojunction and liquid-junction solar harvesters and make them much more competitive relative to the organic bulk-heterojunction and dye-sensitized liquid-junction cells. For both cell types, the self-assembly of light-absorbing MC NCs into highly ordered and dense layers with a pre-defined thickness and symmetry is a crucial task requiring the development of new approaches to the NC surface modification. A very promising step in this direction was made by stabilizing the MMC NC with highly charged metal chalcogenide complexes that allow for the self-assembly of the NCs and the conversion of the capping MCC ligands into a conducting interconnecting layer after the thermal treatment.22 A further progress in the chemistry of NC-MCC composites may have far-reaching consequences for the progress of the NC-based solar cells as well as for other fields dealing with the self-assembled NC-based solids.27
The multinary MC NCs were successfully introduced into the solid-state bulk-heterojunction solar cells both as light absorbers and charge transport layers. As the MMC NC are intrinsically rich with lattice vacancies and/or defects with the corresponding electron/hole states lying in the bandgap, the solar light can be harvested not only in the “classical” range of hν ≤ Eg, but also below the bandgap as a result of the light absorption involving the defect-related states. This feature opens the possibilities of the NC design aimed at an optimization of such light absorption and an expansion of the light harvesting range.
The morphology of wide-bandgap metal oxide scaffolds housing the MMC NCs in the solar cells can affect not only the charge separation and transport efficiency but also the character of such below-bandgap absorbance95 and, therefore, the further optimization/design of the oxide scaffold is expected to be one of the major factors affecting the efficiency of MMC NC-based bulk-heterojunction solar cells as it is in the case of hybrid organo-inorganic perovskites.30–32
Additionally to the light harvesting, the MMC NC can also perform as a hole transport layer when introduced in combinations with conjugated polymers and hybrid perovskites. The latter combination seems especially attractive because the MMC NC acts as a second light absorber that enhances the light harvesting of the cell and even extends it to the NIR range. A hint at the perspectives of combining the hybrid perovskites with the MMCs was provided in 2014 by a report of Todorov et al.647 where the solar cells with adjacent layers of the microcrystalline CIGSe or CZTSSe and the hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite manifested light conversion efficiencies exceeding 20%. It is expected that by extending this strategy to the bulk heterojunctions of nanocrystalline MMC materials even higher light-harvesting efficiencies can be achieved.
The development of the technologies of ink-jet printing of some components of the bulk-heterojunction solar cells or even the entire cell including the ETL, HTL and conducting contact layers is of paramount importance for the progress of such devices. In view of special features of the MMC NCs, this method is expected to yield especially highly efficient cells when applied for the consecutive deposition of NC differing in composition and size. This will produce gradient structures with the CB/VB levels of the absorbing layers inclined to one or other charge transport layer thus enhancing the primary separation and migration of the photogenerated charge carriers as compared to “conventional” devices with a constant composition of the NC absorber layer.
The simplicity and efficiency of the jet printing can be combined with broadly available multinary NC compounds, such as copper/silver bismuth sulfide to produce inexpensive solar cells. Such compounds manifested up to now quite modest light-to-current conversion efficiencies, however a trade-off between the low production cost, low toxicity, high availability and moderate light-conversion efficiency can make such devices a real competitor to both high-production-cost thin-film MC solar cells and the inherently toxic lead-containing perovskite solar cells.
The MMC NCs were found to be quite efficient spectral sensitizers for the wide-bandgap oxide photoanodes in the photoelectrochemical liquid-junction solar cells, similarly to the case of binary CdX/PbX-based cells. The broad variations of the CB/VB levels and the spectral sensitivity range by adjusting the composition and size of MC NCs promised unprecedently versatile possibilities of the design of such cells. These designs may be further extended if coupled to the accumulated knowledge of the basic principles of the optimal cell morphologies and the prevention of charge losses by various additional blocking/buffer layers gained previously for the SSSCs with binary CdX/PbX NCs.
However, the “classical” design of such cells implies the utilization of a photoanode and therefore the sensitizer NCs should preferably have an n-type electrical conductivity along with the correspondence between the CB levels of the MMC and metal oxide NCs. The combination of these requirements de facto restricted the scope of available MMC sensitizers to the n-conducting CIS/AIS compounds and their derivatives, while the highly promising kesterite family did not show acceptable activities in the liquid-junction solar cells. Nevertheless, this restriction can be avoided in alternative cell design, where the light is harvested with a NC-incorporating photocathode, where the sensitizer supplies the VB holes to the p-conducting metal oxide scaffold and accepts electrons from a redox-shuttle in the electrolyte. This design was shown to be efficient for lead chalcogenide absorbers, but only pioneer works appear to be published starting from 2016 on the multinary CIS/CISe NC-based photocathodes of the liquid-junction SSSCs.131 It may be expected that a further development of such cell design and broad involvement of other MC compositions, such as kesterite CZTS/CZTSe NCs will allow to realize more completely a huge potential of multinary MC NCs as the light harvesting components of the liquid-junction SSSCs. The perspectives of this direction are vividly exemplified by a variety of photocathodes applied in the photoelectrochemical light-harvesting systems for hydrogen generation as well as in the photoelectrochemical immunosensors.
This strategy can also be extended to the cells combining a photocathode and a photoanode both absorbing the solar light and contributing to the photocurrent generation. A careful optimization of such tandem cells (a successful example can be found for a PbS-based tandem liquid-junction SSSC648) is expected to add the photovoltages of both electrodes and bring the cell efficiency above the Schockley–Queisser limit.
Among the photocatalytic light-harvesting systems based on multinary MC NCs the most vivid progress was achieved in the area of water splitting/hydrogen evolution systems both in photocatalytic and photoelectrocatalytic versions. The multinary MC compounds are tested as the water-splitting photocatalysts for over three decades now and the photocatalyst crystal size coming into the nanometer range brought a new dimensionality and impetus to these studies. Similar photosynthetic systems for CO2 and nitrogen reduction are not as high developed as for the binary MC photocatalysts but a surge of interest for such systems is expected in view of recent apprehension of the global risks and challenges posed by the over-abundant anthropogenic CO2 emissions and the associated global climate regulation initiatives.649
Various photocatalytic reactions with the MMC NCs can also be used as a test for new and emerging compounds as potential light-harvesters for the solar cells. Indeed, the MMC materials typically used in the solar cells, such as chalcopyrites CIS/AIS and kesterites CZTS/CZTSe appeared to serve as excellent photocatalysts both in the individual state and when introduced into the heterostructures with other nanocrystalline semiconductors, 2D materials, and metals. At that, the range of MMC materials tested as photocatalysts is even broader than that of light-harvesting solar cell components. In this view, the photocatalytic reactions with MMC NCs should serve as an inspiration for the development of new solar cells, as the photocatalytically active MC NCs will most probably appear to be also efficient light absorbers. Some of the multinary compounds gained a reputation as efficient and quite universal photocatalysts with the activity close to or exceeding that of “classical” semiconductor photocatalysts – TiO2 and CdS, but many of such MC compounds were only scarcely tested in the solar cells; the layered zinc indium sulfide is probably the most vivid example. It is expected that the simultaneous development of the MMC NC-based photocatalysis and photovoltaics will be a source of mutual enrichment with new materials and ideas.
Complete list of abbreviations and symbols

AM1.5GSolar spectrum near the Earth surface
2D/3DTwo-/three-dimensional
AISSilver indium sulfide (Ag–In–S)
AIGSSilver indium gallium sulfide (Ag–In–Ga–S)
AZOAluminium-doped zinc oxide
CAISCopper silver indium sulfide (Cu–Ag–In–S)
CBConduction band
CBSCopper bismuth sulfide (CuBiS2)
CBTSCopper barium tin sulfide (Cu–Ba–Sn–S)
CECounter electrode
CFTSCopper iron tin sulfide (Cu–Fe–Sn–S)
CGSCopper gallium sulfide (Cu–Ga–S)
CISCopper indium sulfide (Cu–In–S)
CIGSCopper indium gallium sulfide (Cu–In–Ga–S)
CGSCopper gallium sulfide (Cu–Ga–S)
CGZSCopper gallium zinc sulfide (Cu–Ga–Zn–S)
CIZSCopper indium zinc sulfide (Cu–In–Zn–S)
CTSCopper tin sulfide (Cu2SnS3)
CVCyclic voltammetry
CZTSCopper zinc tin sulfide (Cu–Zn–Sn–S)
1-DDT/t-DDT1-/tert-Dodecanethiol
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMSODimethylsulfoxide
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
ETLElectron transport layer
EQEExternal quantum efficiency
FTOF-Doped tin oxide
GCNGraphitic carbon nitride
GSHGlutathione
GOGraphene oxide
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HRTEMHigh-resolution TEM
HTLHole transport layer
HTTHydrothermal treatment
ITOIndium tin oxide
IZOIntrinsically doped zinc oxide
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MCMetal chalcogenide
MMCMultinary metal chalcogenide
MCCMetal chalcogenide complex
MEH-PPVWith poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)
MPAMercaptopropionic acid
NRNanorod
NCNanocrystal
NIRNear infrared
NTNanotube
OLAOleylamine
ODEOctadecene
OTEOptically transparent electrode
P3HTPoly-3-hexylthiophene
PCBM[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PESAPhotoelectron spectroscopy in air
PLPhotoluminescence
PTB7Poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethyl-hexyl)-oxy]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)-carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-diyl]]
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
RGOReduced graphene oxide
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SILARSuccessive ionic layer adsorption and reaction
Spiro-OMeTAD
N
2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis-(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine
SPRSurface plasmon resonance
SSSCSemiconductor-sensitized solar cell
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
STTSolvothermal treatment
TAAThioacetamide
TEATriethylamine
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TGAThioglycolic (mercaptoacetic) acid
TMSCTrimethylsilylcellulose
TOPOTrioctylphosphine oxide
UPSUV photoelectron spectroscopy
UVUltraviolet
VBValence band
QYQuantum yield
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZAISSilver zinc indium sulfide (Zn–Ag–In–S)
ZISZinc indium sulfide (ZnIn2S4)
acacAcetylacetonate

a
B
Exciton Bohr radius
dedtcDiethyldithiocarbamate
EtEthyl
eCB−Conduction band electron

h
VB
+
Valence band hole

hν
Light quantum energy

E
a
Electron affinity

E
g
Bandgap

E
CB
Conduction band potential

E
F
Fermi energy

E
VB
Valence band potential
FFFill factor of a current–voltage characteristic

J
sc
Short-circuit photocurrent density

I
p
Ionization potential

k
et
Electron transfer rate constant

m
e*Effective electron mass

m
h*Effective hole mass

η
Power conversion efficiency (PCE)

R
ct
Charge transfer resistance

V
oc
Open-circuit photovoltage

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
O. S. acknowledges the financial support of the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 701254).
Notes and references
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef .
W. Y. Teoh, J. A. Scott and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 629–639 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908–918 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ruhle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Debnath, O. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4870–4881 Search PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Hetsch, X. Xu, H. Wang, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1879–1887 CrossRef .
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8506–8514 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3033–3087 RSC .
S. V. Kershaw, L. Jing, X. Huang, M. Gao and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 155–205 RSC .
P. Reiss, M. Carrière, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. klimov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sandroni, K. D. Wegner, D. Aldakov and P. Reiss, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1076–1088 CrossRef .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 Search PubMed .
D. Sharma, R. Jha and S. Kumar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 294–322 CrossRef .
F. J. Fan, L. Wu and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 190–208 Search PubMed .
S. R. Thomas, C. W. Chen, M. Date, Y. C. Wang, H. W. Tsai, Z. M. Wang and Y. L. Chueh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60643–60656 RSC .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 406–417 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. Knowles, K. H. Hartstein, T. B. Kilburn, A. Marchioro, H. D. Nelson, P. J. Whitham and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10820–10851 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrançois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756–3776 RSC .
R. Wang, Y. Shang, P. Kanjanaboos, W. Zhou, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1130–1143 Search PubMed .
C. Gadiyar, A. Loiudice and R. Buonsanti, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 074006 CrossRef .
M. D. Regulacio and M. Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 511–519 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ye, X. Gao, X. Hong, Q. Liu, C. He, X. Liu and C. Lin, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 217–1231 Search PubMed .
G. Zu, S. Zeng, B. Zhang, M. T. Swihart, K. T. Yong and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12234–12327 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Chistyakov, M. A. Zvaigzne, V. R. Nikitenko, A. R. Tameev, I. L. Martynov and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4129–4139 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, N. Pradhan and H. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 435–445 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 414–445 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. S. Manser, M. I. Saidaminov, J. A. Christians, O. M. Bakr and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 330–338 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef .
A. V. Kozytskiy, O. L. Stroyuk, A. E. Raevskaya and S. Ya. Kuchmiy, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2017, 53, 145–179 CrossRef .
W. Wang, W. Feng, J. Du, W. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, Y. Li and X. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705746 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang and L. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1672–1690 Search PubMed .
Z. Zheng, H. Ji, P. Yu and Z. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 266 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Torimoto, T. Kameyama and S. Kuwabata, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 336–347 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gupta, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6923–6944 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. P. Leach and J. E. MacDonald, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 572–583 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibáñez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ramanujam and U. P. Singh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1306–1319 Search PubMed .
O. Yarema, M. Yarema and V. Wood, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1446–1461 CrossRef .
S. Zhuk, A. Kushwaha, T. K. S. Wong, S. Masudy-Panah, A. Smirnov and G. K. Dalapati, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 171, 239–252 CrossRef .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3134–3159 Search PubMed .
H. Zhou, W. C. Hsu, H. S. Duan, B. Bob, W. Yang, T. B. Song, C. J. Hsu and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2822–2838 Search PubMed .
B. Pejjal, V. R. M. Reddy, S. Gedi and C. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2790–2831 CrossRef .
K. Kaur, N. Kumar and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3069–3080 Search PubMed .
L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10852–10887 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liang, K. Huang, X. Ren, W. Zhang, R. Xie and S. Feng, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3703–3710 RSC .
A. J. Harvie, M. Booth, R. L. Chantry, N. Hondow, D. M. Kepaptsoglou, Q. M. Ramasse, S. D. Evans and K. Critchley, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16157–16161 RSC .
A. Stokes, M. Al-Jassim, D. Diercks, A. Clarke and B. Gorman, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14163 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bais, M. T. Caldes, M. Paris, C. Guillot-Deudon, P. Fertey, B. Domenges and A. Lafond, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 11779–11786 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Mendis, A. A. Taylor, M. Guennou, D. M. Berg, M. Arasimowicz, S. Ahmed, H. Deligianni and P. J. Dale, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 65–76 CrossRef .
A. Raevskaya, O. Rosovik, A. Kozytskiy, O. Stroyuk, V. Dzhagan and D. Zahn, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 100145–100157 RSC .
D. H. Jara, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1452–1459 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Raevskaya, O. Rosovik, A. Kozytskiy, O. Stroyuk and N. Gaponik, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2017, 53, 237–243 Search PubMed .
K. P. Kadlag, P. Patil, M. J. Rao, S. Datta and A. Nag, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3605–3612 RSC .
A. Raevskaya, V. Lesnyak, D. Haubold, V. Dzhagan, O. Stroyuk, N. Gaponik, D. R. T. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9032–9042 Search PubMed .
S. Siebentritt, G. Rey, A. Finger, D. Regesch, J. Sendler, T. P. Weiss and T. Bertram, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 126–129 CrossRef .
T. Gokmen, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 103506 CrossRef .
T. Gershon, D. Bishop, P. Antunez, S. Singh, K. W. Brew, Y. S. Lee, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. Todorov and R. Haight, Curr. Opi. Green Sustainable Chem., 2017, 4, 29–36 CrossRef .
A. E. Raevskaya, M. V. Ivanchenko, O. L. Stroyuk, S. Ya. Kuchmiy and V. F. Plyusnin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 135 CrossRef .
A. Khare, A. W. Wills, L. M. Ammerman, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11721–11723 RSC .
W. C. Liu, B. L. Guo, X. S. Wu, F. M. Zhang, C. L. Mak and K. H. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3182–3186 Search PubMed .
F. J. Fan, L. Wu, M. Gong, G. Liu, Y. X. Wang, S. H. Yu, S. Chen, L. W. Wang and X. G. Gong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1454–1463 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang and H. Gong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, H800–H803 CrossRef .
T. L. Li and H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3656–3664 RSC .
D. V. Talapin, J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T. K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Materials, 2010, 3, 2260–2345 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, Z. Wang, E. Bovero, Z. Lu, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12396–12402 Search PubMed .
T. Torimoto, M. Tada, M. Dai, T. Kameyama, S. Suzuki and S. Kuwabata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 21895–21902 Search PubMed .
A. Ghosh, S. Palchoudhury, R. Thangavel, Z. Zhou, N. Naghibolashrafi, K. Ramasamy and A. Gupta, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 264–267 RSC .
Y. J. Yuan, D. Q. Chen, M. Xiong, J. S. Zhong, Z. Y. Wan, Y. Zhou, S. Liu, Z. T. Yu, L. X. Yang and Z. G. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 58–66 CrossRef .
S. Ji, T. Shi, X. Qiu, J. Zhang, G. Xu, C. Chen, Z. Jiang and C. Ye, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2733 CrossRef PubMed .

Energy Resources through Photochemistry and Catalysis, ed. M. Grätzel, Academic Press, Inc., New York,  1983 Search PubMed .

          S. V. Gaponenko, Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,  1998 Search PubMed .
A. I. Kryukov, S. Y. Kuchmiy and V. D. Pokhodenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2000, 36, 63–81 CrossRef .
O. L. Stroyuk, A. I. Kryukov, S. Y. Kuchmiy and V. D. Pokhodenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2005, 41, 207–228 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, Y. Li, Y. Ding, Y. Li and G. D. Scholes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5253–5262 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki and T. Kuzuya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1786–1792 Search PubMed .
F. Shen, W. Que, Y. He, Y. Yuan, X. Yin and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4087–4092 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Park, J. H. Oh, N. S. Han, H. C. Yoon, S. M. Park, Y. R. Do and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25677–25683 Search PubMed .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, J. Herbich, B. Golec, I. Wielgus and A. Pron, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5002–5012 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Huang and C. Persson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 591, 189–192 CrossRef .
T. Jing, Y. Dai, X. Ma, W. Wie and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27900–27908 Search PubMed .
A. Jana, K. N. Lawrence, M. B. Teunis, M. Mandal, A. Kumblar and R. Sardar, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1107–1120 CrossRef .
T. Huang, W. Chen, T. Y. Liu, Q. L. Hao and X. H. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 12254–12261 CrossRef .
J. P. Song, P. F. Yin, J. Mao, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Du, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6296–6310 RSC .
F. Ozel, E. Aslan, B. Istanbullu, O. Akay and I. H. Patir, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 67–73 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, W. Meng, C. Dong, C. Liu, Z. Qiu, J. Qi, J. Chen and M. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 90217–90225 RSC .
Z. Gong, Q. Han, J. Li, L. Hou, A. Bukhtiar, S. Yang and B. Zou, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 663, 617–623 CrossRef .
T. Kameyama, T. Takahashi, T. Machida, Y. Kamiya, T. Yamamoto, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24740–24749 Search PubMed .
T. Kameyama, Y. Douke, H. Shibakawa, M. Kawaraya, H. Segawa, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 29517–29524 Search PubMed .
D. So, S. Pradhan and G. Konstantatos, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16776–16785 RSC .
J. Du, Z. Du, J. S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Santra, P. V. Nair, K. G. Thomas and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 722–729 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Peng, J. Du, Z. Pan, N. Nakazawa, J. Sun, Z. Du, G. Shen, J. Yu, J. S. Hu, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5328–5336 Search PubMed .
C. Zeng, H. Huang, T. Zhang, F. Dong, Y. Zhang and Y. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27773–27783 Search PubMed .
Z. Ding, B. M. Quinn, S. K. Haram, L. E. Pell, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Science, 2002, 296, 1293–1297 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Cuharuc, L. L. Kulyuk, R. I. Lascova, A. A. Mitioglu and A. I. Dikusar, Surf. Eng. Appl. Electrochem., 2012, 48, 193–211 CrossRef .
S. Chen, L. A. Truax and J. M. Sommers, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3864–3870 CrossRef .
D.l Martín-Yerga, D. Bouzas-Ramos, M. Menéndez-Miranda, A. R. Montoro Bustos, J. Ruiz Encinar, J. M. Costa-Fernández, A. Sanz-Medel and A. Costa-García, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 100–106 CrossRef .
M. Amelia, C. Lincheneau, S. Silvi and A. Credi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5728–5743 RSC .
S. N. Inamdar, P. P. Ingole and S. K. Haram, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 2574–2579 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Jesper Jacobsson and T. Edvinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5497–5504 Search PubMed .
T. Jesper Jacobsson and T. Edvinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12061–12072 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, S. Chang, D. Li, L. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Chen, B. Zou, H. Zhong and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5949–5956 CrossRef .
Q. A. Akkerman, A. Genovese, C. George, M. Prato, I. Moreels, A. Casu, S. Marras, A. Curcio, A. Scarpellini, T. Pellegrino, L. Manna and V. Lesnyak, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 521–531 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, J. Xu, X. Zhang, S. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Mo, L. Li and S. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16978–16984 Search PubMed .
S. Moosakhani, A. A. Sabbagh Alvani, R. Mohammadpour, J. Sainio, Y. Gee and S. Hannula, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 1527–1535 RSC .
K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen, P. Zhou, F. He and Y. Liu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 999–1005 CrossRef .
S. Dias, K. L. Kumawat, S. Biswas and S. B. Krupanidhi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23301–23308 RSC .
M. Ahmadi, S. S. Pramana, S. K. Batabyal, C. Boothroyd, S. G. Mhaisalkar and Y. M. Lam, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 1722–1728 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, A. L. Kar Lui, K. H. Lam, L. Xi and Y. M. Lam, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10874–10880 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. A. Yadhav, P. R. Thakur and S. K. Haram, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 273–279 CrossRef .
S. Singh, M. Brandon, P. Liu, F. Laffir, W. Redington and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5055–5062 CrossRef .
T. Li, X. Li, Q. Zhao, Y. Shi and W. Teng, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 362–370 CrossRef .
M. A. Mahadik, P. S. Shinde, M. Cho and J. S. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23597–23606 Search PubMed .
T. Kameyama, S. Fujita, H. Furusawa and T. Torimoto, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 1122–1126 CrossRef .
A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden, N. W. Duffy, N. A. S. Webster and J. J. Jaseniak, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 1712–1720 Search PubMed .
S. Ahn, S. Rehan, D. G. Moon, Y. J. Eo, S. Ahn, J. H. Yun, A. Cho and J. Gwak, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1268–1277 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z. Xie, G. Gotesman, L. Wang, B. P. Bloom, T. Z. Marcus, D. Oron, R. Naaman and D. H. Waldeck, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17464–17472 Search PubMed .
B. Carlson, K. Leschkies, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8419–8423 Search PubMed .
A. P. Litvin, I. V. Martynenko, F. Purcell-Milton, A. V. Baranov, A. V. Fedorov and Y. K. Gun’ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13252–13275 Search PubMed .
Y. Hamanaka, K. Ozawa and T. Kuzuya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14562–14568 Search PubMed .
P. J. Whitham, A. Marchioro, K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, P. J. Reid and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17136–17142 Search PubMed .
B. Cichy, R. Rich, A. Olejniczak, Z. Gryczynski and W. Stręk, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4151–4159 RSC .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki, K. Ozawa and T. Kuzuya, J. Lumin., 2013, 133, 121–124 CrossRef .
Y. K. Kim, S. H. Ahn, K. Chung, Y. S. Cho and C. J. Choi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1516–1520 RSC .
J. Park, M. T. Sajjad, P. H. Jouneau, A. Ruseckas, J. Faure-Vincent, I. D. W. Samuel, P. Reiss and D. Aldakov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 827–837 Search PubMed .
D. H. Jara, S. J. Yoon, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7221–7228 CrossRef .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Sero, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dana, T. Debnath and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3206–3214 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, W. Hu, J. Ludwig and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19031–19035 Search PubMed .
L. Jing, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Li, X. Huang, Y. Li, A. L. Rogach and M. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10623–10730 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. Girma, M. Z. Fahmi, A. Permadi, M. A. Abate and J. Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 6193–6216 RSC .
K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen, Q. Zhong, T. Yang, X. Yang, C. Deng and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12470–12478 RSC .
E. Raphael, D. H. Jara and M. A. Schiavon, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6492–6500 RSC .
T. Akdas, M. Haderlein, J. Walter, B. Apeleo Zubiri, E. Spiecker and W. Peukert, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10057–10063 RSC .
K. C. Cheng, W. C. Law, K. T. Yong, J. S. Nevins, D. F. Watson, H. P. Ho and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 515, 254–257 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Shen, C. Zhou, N. Li, H. Wang and L. S. Li, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2802 CrossRef .
S. Wepfer, J. Frohleiks, A. Hong, H. S. Yang, G. Bacher and E. Nannen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11224–11230 Search PubMed .
A. Tapley, L. Liu, X. Cui, L. Zuin, D. A. Love, J. Zhou, T. K. Sham and Z. Ding, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20967–20974 Search PubMed .
F. Shen, W. Que, Y. Liao and X. Lin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 9131–9137 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, A. Xiao, K. Yan, Y. Liu, Z. Yan and J. Chen, Catal. Lett., 2017, 147, 1631–1639 CrossRef .
B. Cichy, D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Samoc and W. Stręk, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 149–158 RSC .
L. Yan, J. Qin, L. Kong, H. Zhi, M. Sun, G. Shen and L. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77777–77785 RSC .
C. Ye, M. D. Regulacio, S. H. Lim, S. Li, Q. H. Xu and M. Y. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9514–9519 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang and X. Zhong, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 4065–4072 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhong, Q. Wang, D. Chen, L. Chen, H. Yu, H. Lu and Z. Ji, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 343, 28–32 CrossRef .
J. D. Wu, L. T. Wang and C. Gau, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 404–408 CrossRef .
B. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. H. Lee, E. P. Jang, C. Y. Han, J. H. Jo, H. S. Jang and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4088–4091 RSC .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5612–5619 RSC .
C. Ye, M. D. Regulacio, S. H. Lim, Q. H. Xu and M. Y. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11258–11263 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shen, L. Li, Z. Wu, M. Sun, Z. Tang and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4555–4562 RSC .
T. Torimoto, Y. Kamiya, T. Kameyama, H. Nishi, T. Uematsu, S. Kuwabata and T. Shibayama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27151–27161 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Zhai, C. Zou, X. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Chen and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1638–1648 RSC .
T. Sasamura, K. Okazaki, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 552–559 RSC .
T. Torimoto, T. Adachi, K. Okazaki, M. Sakuraoka, T. Shibayama, B. Ohtani, A. Kudo and S. Kuwabata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12388–12389 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen, N. Pradhan and H. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 435–445 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takahashi, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata, A. Ishikawa, H. Ishihara, Y. Tsuboi and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2511–2520 Search PubMed .
D. Xu, S. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Gu and Q. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 12958–12962 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Pan, D. Weng, C. Y. Low, L. Rice, J. Han and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17293–17297 Search PubMed .
C. Buchmaier, T. Rath, F. Pirolt, A. C. Knall, P. Kaschnitz, O. Glatter, K. Wewerka, F. Hofer, B. Kunert, K. Krenn and G. Trimmel, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 106120–106129 RSC .
D. Reishofer, T. Rath, H. M. Ehmann, C. Gspan, S. Dunst, H. Amenitsch, H. Plank, B. Alonso, E. Belamie, G. Trimmel and S. Spirk, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3115–3122 CrossRef .
C. Sun, J. S. Gardner, G. Long, C. Bajracharya, A. Thurber, A. Punnoose, R. G. Rodriguez and J. J. Pak, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2699–2701 CrossRef .
I. Mehmood, Y. Liu, K. Chen, A. H. Shah and W. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 33106–33112 RSC .
M. Kar, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17239–17247 CrossRef PubMed .
H. McDaniel, A. Y. Koposov, S. Draguta, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16987–16994 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, J. Yang, J. H. Yu, W. Baek, C. H. Lee, H. J. Son, T. Hyeon and M. J. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11286–11295 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Fan, M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, Y. Zheng, Q. H. Xu, A. W. Xu and M. Y. Han, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7128–7131 RSC .
A. Brata Ghosh, N. Saha, A. Sarkar, A. Kumar Dutta, J. Satra and B. Adhikary, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 1071–1081 RSC .
W. Wang, T. Ding, G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Yu and Q. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15106–15110 RSC .
A. Shavel, D. Cadavid, M. Ibañez, A. Carrete and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1438–1441 CrossRef PubMed .
B. H. Shambharkar and A. P. Chowdhury, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10513–10519 RSC .
H. Fakhri, A. R. Mahjoub and A. H. C. Khavar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 318, 65–73 CrossRef .
X. Hou, Y. Li, J. J. Yan and C. W. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 60, 628–633 CrossRef .
Q. He, T. Qian, J. Zai, Q. Qiao, S. Huang, Y. Li and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20359–20365 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Yang, Z. Guo, G. Su, R. Gao, W. Wang, B. Dong and L. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5878–5881 RSC .
R. B. Balow, E. J. Sheets, M. M. Abu-Omar and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2290–2293 CrossRef .
C. Xia, J. D. Meeldijk, H. C. Gerritsen and C. de Mello Donega, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4940–4951 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, S. S. Pramana, L. Xi, C. Boothroyd, Y. M. Lam and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8202–8209 Search PubMed .
X. J. Wu, X. Huang, X. Qi, H. Li, B. Li and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 9075–9079 CrossRef .
S. K. Verma, R. Verma, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, W. Chen, C. Hu, T. A. Emmanuel, M. Wang and X. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 2013–2020 RSC .
H. Doh, S. Hwang and S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8123–8127 CrossRef .
G. Halder and S. Bhattachatyya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11746–11755 Search PubMed .
G. Prusty, A. K. Guria, B. K. Patra and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2421–2426 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Paderick, M. Kessler, T. J. Hurlburt and S. M. Hughes, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 62–65 RSC .
M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, Y. Zheng, Q. H. Xu and M. Y. Han, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5214–5217 RSC .
T. A. Kandiel, D. H. Anjum, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers and K. Takanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8896–8904 Search PubMed .
A. D. Collord and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1855–1862 CrossRef .
S. Suehiro, K. Horita, K. Kumamoto, M. Yuasa, T. Tanaka, K. Fujita, K. Shimanoe and T. Kida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 804–810 Search PubMed .
T. Rath, W. Haas, A. Pein, R. Saf, E. Maier, B. Kunert, F. Hofer, R. Resel and G. Trimmel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 87–94 CrossRef .
X. Yu, J. Liu, A. Genç, M. Ibañez, Z. Luo, A. Shavel, J. Arbiol, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang and A. Cabot, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10555–10561 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Xu, H. Tao, S. Chen, L. Zhu, Y. Zhao, J. Jiang, L. Pan and J. Tao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 15933–15939 CrossRef .
M. A. Akram, S. Javed, M. Islam, M. Mujahid and A. Safdar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 121–128 CrossRef .
H. Yang, L. A. Jauregui, G. Zhang, Y. P. Chen and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 540–545 CrossRef PubMed .
P. An, Z. Liang, X. Xu, X. Wang, H. Jin, N. Wang, J. Wang and F. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 6879–6885 RSC .
S. Khoshmashrab, M. J. Turnbull, D. Vaccarello, Y. Nie, S. Martin, D. A. Love, P. K. Lau, X. Sun and Z. Ding, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 162, 176–184 CrossRef .
K. Wei and G. S. Nolas, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 226, 215–218 CrossRef .
C. Li, E. Ha, W. L. Wong, C. Li, K. P. Ho and K. Y. Wong, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3201–3205 CrossRef .
M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, U. Ghorpade, D. Song, C. W. Hong, S. S. Han, J. Heo, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4695–4709 Search PubMed .
S. Singh, A. K. Katiyar, A. Midya, A. Ghorai and S. K. Ray, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 435704 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Singh, P. Liu, A. Singh, C. Coughlan, J. Wang, M. Lusi and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4742–4748 CrossRef .
A. Shavel, M. Ibañez, Z. Luo, J. De Roo, A. Carrete, M. Dimitrievska, A. Genç, M. Meyns, A. Perez-Rodriguez, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 720–726 CrossRef .
L. Arora, P. Gupta, N. Chhikara, O. P. Singh, N. Muhunthan, V. N. Singh, B. P. Singh, K. Jain and S. Chand, Appl. Nanosci., 2015, 5, 163–167 CrossRef .
P. Dai, X. Shen, Z. Lin, Z. Feng, H. Xu and J. Zhan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5749–5751 RSC .
A. Ganai, P. S. Maiti, L. Houben, R. Bar-Ziv and M. B. Sadan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7062–7068 Search PubMed .
P. Liu, S. Singh, G. Bree and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11587–11590 RSC .
A. Irkhina, S. Levcenko, V. Hinricht, P. Plate and T. Unold, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 11752–11760 RSC .
S. S. Shinde, J. Semicond., 2015, 36, 073001 CrossRef .
X. Yu, X. An, A. Genç, M. Ibañez, J. Arbiol, Y. Zhang and A. Cabot, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 199, 21882–21888 Search PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, M. Bosman, E. Ye, S. Chen, Q. H. Xu and M. Y. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3127–3131 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, A. Shavel, X. An, Z. Luo, M. Ibañez and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9236–9239 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi and P. Yin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 13607–13611 RSC .
C. M. Fan, M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, S. K. Lua, Q. H. Xu, Z. Dong, A. W. Xu and M. Y. Han, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3247–3253 RSC .
E. Ha, L. Y. S. Lee, H. W. Man, S. C. E. Tsang and K. Y. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9072–9077 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Chane-Ching, A. Gillorin, O. Zaberca, A. Balocchi and X. Marie, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5229–5231 RSC .
A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir and K. M. Ryan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2910–2913 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Singh, A. Singh, G. K. Ong, M. R. Jones, D. Nordlund, K. Bustillo, J. Ciston, A. P. Alivisatos and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3421–3428 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Wang, P. Liu and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13810–13813 RSC .
Y. X. Wang, M. Wei, F. J. Fan, T. T. Zhuang, L. Wu, S. H. Yu and C. F. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5492–5498 CrossRef .
B. Mao, C. H. Chuang, J. Wang and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8945–8954 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, S. Pang, X. Zhou, S. Dong, X. Chen and G. Gui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6242–6246 Search PubMed .
M. Lv, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Shao, Y. Xu and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17482–17488 Search PubMed .
G. M. Ford, Q. Guo, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 523–528 CrossRef .
W. Xiang, C. Xie, J. Wang, J. Zhong, X. Liang, H. Yang, L. Luo and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 588, 114–121 CrossRef .
S. Peng, S. Zhang, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8523–8529 RSC .
S. P. Hong, H. K. Park, J. H. Oh, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18939–18949 RSC .
A. Guchhait and A. J. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4181–4189 Search PubMed .
M. Kruszynska, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 5815–5824 CrossRef .
N. D. Abazović, M. I. Čomor, M. D. Nitrić, E. Piscopiello, T. Radetić, I. A. Ranković and J. M. Nedelković, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 810 CrossRef .
D. So and G. Konstantatos, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8424–8432 CrossRef .
H. Zhong, Z. Wang, E. Bovero, Z. Lu, F. C. J. M. von Veggel and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12393–12402 Search PubMed .
A. de Kergommeaux, A. Fiore, N. Bruyant, F. Chandezon, P. Reiss, A. Pron, R. de Bettignes and J. Faure-Vincent, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 539–543 CrossRef .
M. G. Panthani, C. J. Stolle, D. K. Reid, D. J. Rhee, T. B. Harvey, V. A. Akhavan, Y. Yu and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2030–2034 CrossRef PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 355–361 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, S. S. Pramana, C. Boothroyd and Y. M. Lam, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 045708 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 64–71 Search PubMed .
T. A. Kandiel and K. Takanabe, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 264–269 CrossRef .
X. Yu, X. An, A. Shavel, M. Ibañez and A. Cabot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12317–12322 Search PubMed .
C. Yang, B. Zhou, S. Miao, C. Yang, B. Cai, W. H. Zhang and X. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5958–5961 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Yarema, M. Yarema, W. M. M. Lin and V. Wood, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10878–10881 RSC .
S. Peng, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, Mater. Lett., 2012, 79, 216–218 CrossRef .
J. van Embden, K. Latham, N. W. Duffy and Y. Tachibana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11562–11571 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Lokhande, A. Shelke, P. T. Babar, J. Kim, D. J. Lee, I. C. Kim, C. D. Lokhande and J. H. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 33737–33744 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Wang and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1342–1348 CrossRef .
U. V. Ghorpade, M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, I. Kim, S. K. Ahn, J. H. Yun, C. Jeong, S. S. Kolekar and J. H. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3308–3317 CrossRef .
J. Wang, P. Liu, C. C. Seaton and K. M. Ryan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7954–7960 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhou, D. Xia and Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70117–70126 RSC .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, M. Gryszel, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, G. Z. Zukowska, F. Agnese, A. Pron and P. Reiss, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12985–12988 RSC .
Y. Hamanaka, W. Oyaizu, M. Kawase and T. Kuzuya, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 19, 9 CrossRef .
Y. Qu, G. Zoppi, R. W. Miles and N. S. Beattie, Mater. Res. Express, 2014, 1, 045040 CrossRef .
S. Ananthakumar, J. Ram Kumar and S. Moorthy Babu, J. Semicond., 2017, 38, 033007 CrossRef .
N. J. Carter, W.-C. Yang, C. K. Miskin, C. J. Hages, E. A. Stach and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 123, 189–196 CrossRef .
T. R. Martin, J. K. Katahara, C. N. Bucherl, B. W. Krueger, H. W. Hillhouse and C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 135–145 CrossRef .
Z. X. Zhang, Z. J. Zhou, B. Bai, M. H. Liu, W. H. Zhou, D.-X. Kou and S. X. Wu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 463–471 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, X. Su and J. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18377–18384 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, T. B. Song, W. C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. Ye, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15998–16001 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Guijarro, M. S. Prevot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3902–3908 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, K. Woo, I. Kim, Y. S. Cho, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10183–10188 RSC .
E. Gu, C. Yan, F. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Su, K. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Ki and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 1932–1939 CrossRef .
K. Kim, A. Razzaq, S. Sorcar, Y. Park, C. A. Grimes and S. I. In, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38964–38971 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Guo, C. Ji, K. Huang, C. Zha, Y. Wang, L. Shen, A. Gupta and N. Bao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5086 CrossRef PubMed .
U. V. Ghorpade, M. P. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, C. W. Hong, I. Kim, J. H. Moon, J. H. Yun, J. H. Kim and S. S. Kolekar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 19777–19788 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Sun, C. Shao, D. M. Boye and J. Zhao, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245605 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Chen, J. L. Wang, W. H. Zhou, Z. X. Chang, D. X. Kou, Z. J. Zhou, Q. W. Tian, Y. N. Meng and S. X. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2016, 181, 317–320 CrossRef .
B. A. Williams, N. D. Trejo, A. Wu, C. S. Holgate, L. F. Francis and E. S. Aydil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18865–18871 Search PubMed .
M. Kus, F. Ozel, S. Buyukcelebi, A. Aldjabour, A. Erdogan, M. Ersoz and N. S. Sariciftci, Opt. Mater., 2015, 39, 103–109 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. Xiao, J. Y. Jung, H. D. Um, S. W. Jee, H. M. Choi, J. H. Bang and J. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 479–484 Search PubMed .
K. L. Ou, J. C. Fan, J. K. Chen, C. C. Huang, L. Y. Chen, J. H. Ho and J. Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14667–14673 RSC .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W. C. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384–17386 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Özel, A. Sarilmaz, B. Istanbullu, A. Aljabour, M. Kuş and S. Sönmezoğlu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29207 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Wang and A. Manthiram, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 561–568 CrossRef .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15272–15275 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Xie, D. Xiong, W. Chen, X. Xu, M. Wang and Y. B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 359–361 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Yao, L. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7207–7210 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Huang, F. Zhou, F. Liu, J. A. Stride and X. Hao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2110–2121 CrossRef .
S. Huang, Q. He, J. Zai, M. Wang, X. Li, B. Li and X. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8950–8953 RSC .
B. D. Chernomordik, A. E. Beland, N. D. Trejo, A. A. Gunawan, D. D. Deng, K. A. Mkhoyan and E. S. Aydil, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10389–10395 Search PubMed .
C. Yan, C. Huang, J. Yang, F. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2603–2605 RSC .
L. Li, X. Liu, J. Huang, M. Cao, S. Chen, Y. Shen and L. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 133, 688–691 CrossRef .
C. Huang, Y. Chan, F. Liu, D. Tang, J. Yang, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5402–5407 Search PubMed .
S. Rondiya, N. Wadnerkar, Y. Jadhav, S. Jadkar, S. Haram and M. Kabir, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3133–3142 CrossRef .
X. Yu, R. Du, B. Li, L. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6712–6720 Search PubMed .
F. Li, Z. Xia and Q. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16969–16976 Search PubMed .
G. M. Ford, Q. Guo, R. Agrawal and H. W. Hillhouse, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2626–2629 CrossRef .
S. Huang, J. Zai, D. Ma, Q. He, Y. Liu, Q. Qiao and X. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10866–10869 RSC .
C. Yan, Z. Su, E. Gu, T. Cao, J. Yang, J. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10481–10484 RSC .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2891–2899 CrossRef .
M. Bernechea, N.
C. Miller, G. Xercavins, D. So, A. Stavrinadis and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 521–526 CrossRef .
L. Hu, R. J. Patterson, Z. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Li, Z. Chen, L. Yuan, Z. L. Teh, Y. Gao, G. J. Conibeera and S. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 731–737 RSC .
C. Zhao, Z. Bai, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17623–17629 Search PubMed .
C. C. Chang, J. K. Chen, C. P. Chen, C. H. Yang and J. Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11296–11306 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Pan, W. Wang, J. Du, Z. Ren, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21442–21451 Search PubMed .
E. M. Kim, S. T. Lim, M. H. Sohn and H. J. Jeong, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 19, 251 CrossRef .
R. Y. Yao, Z. J. Zhou, Z. L. Hou, X. Wang, W. H. Zhou and S. X. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3143–3148 Search PubMed .
R. Lesyuk, B. Cai, U. Reuter, N. Gaponik, D. Popovych and V. Lesnyak, Small Methods, 2017, 1700189 CrossRef .
T. A. Kandiel, G. A. M. Hutton and E. Reisner, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6536–6541 Search PubMed .
O. Zaberca, F. Oftinger, J. Y. Chane-Ching, L. Datas, A. Lafond, P. Puech, A. Balocchi, D. Lagarde and X. Marie, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 185402 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. X. Chang, R. F. Chong, Y. N. Meng, W. H. Zou, D. X. Kou, Z. J. Zhou and S. X. Wu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 13456–13462 CrossRef .
B. S. Tosun, B. D. Chernomordik, A. A. Gunawan, B. Williams, K. A. Mkhoyan, L. F. Francis and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3549–3551 RSC .
L. Korala, M. B. Braun, J. M. Kephart, Z. Tregillus and A. M. Prieto, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6621–6629 CrossRef .
U. Dasgupta, S. K. Saha and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 79–85 CrossRef .
J. van Embden, A. S. R. Chesman, E. Della Gaspera, N. W. Duffy, S. E. Watkins and J. J. Jasieniak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5237–5240 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Suehiro, K. Horita, M. Yuasa, T. Tanaka, K. Fujita, Y. Ishiwata, K. Shimanoe and T. Kida, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7840–7845 CrossRef PubMed .
L. S. Khanzada, I. Levchuk, Y. Hou, H. Azimi, A. Osvet, R. Ahmad, M. Brandl, P. Herre, M. Distaso, R. Hock, W. Peukert, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8300–8306 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, J. S. Lee and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5010–5013 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Todorov and D. M. Mitzi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 17–28 CrossRef .
E. Garskaite, G. T. Pan, T. C. K. Yang, S. T. Huang and A. Kareiva, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 2584–2591 CrossRef .
N. Suriyawong, B. Aragaw, J. B. Shi and M. W. Lee, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 473, 60–65 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Rath, A. J. MacLachlan, M. D. Brown and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24155–24162 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Hu, X. Ding, J. Zhu, J. Wen, X. Pan, S. Chen, Md. K. Nazeeriddin and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14865–14876 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, J. He, M. Zhou, S. Zhao, Q. Wang and B. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2016, 315, 79–85 CrossRef .
S. Dias, B. Murali and S. B. Krupanidhi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 152–158 CrossRef .
M. Suresh Kumar, K. Mohanta and S. K. Batabyal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 157–161 CrossRef .
A. Ghosh, D. K. Chaudhary, A. Biswas, R. Thangavel and G. Udayabhanu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 115204–115212 RSC .
Z. Wang, R. Gauvin and G. P. Demopoulos, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7650–7665 RSC .
Y. Choi, M. Baek, Z. Zhang, V. D. Dao, H. S. Choi and K. Yong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15291–15299 RSC .
Z. Cheng, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Q. Wang, K. Xu, Q. Liu, C. Jiang, Z. Wang and J. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 81723–81727 RSC .
G. Larramona, S. Bourdais, A. Jacob, C. Chone, T. Muto, Y. Cuccaro, B. Delatouche, C. Moisan, D. Pere and G. Dennler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3763–3767 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, G. Zoppi and N. S. Beatie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 130–137 CrossRef .
A. D. Collord and H. W. Hillhouse, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 141, 383–390 CrossRef .
K. J. Kim, C. Pan, S. Bansal, R. Malhotra, D. H. Kim and C. H. Chang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 267–274 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Oh, J. Kim, M. J. Jeong, J. H. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1127–1136 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, M. S. Denny, Jr., J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, Q. Guo, A. S. Ionkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, H. D. Rosenfeld, K. R. Choudhury and W. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15644–15647 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mokurala and S. Mallick, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 15139–15148 RSC .
J. Zhong, Z. Xia, C. Zhang, B. Li, X. Liu, Y. B. Cheng and J. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3573–3578 CrossRef .
C. C. Kang, H. F. Chen, T. C. Yu and T. C. Lin, Mater. Lett., 2013, 96, 24–26 CrossRef .
P. Kush and S. Deka, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2600–2614 CrossRef .
R. M. Valls, T. S. Lyubenova, I. C. Roures, L. Oliveira, D. F. Chiva and J.B. Carda Castello, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 432–438 CrossRef .
S. J. Yuan, Z. J. Zhou, Z. L. Hou, W. H. Zhou, R. Y. Yao, Y. Zhao and S. X. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10107–10110 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, B. Yao, Y. Li, Z. Ding, Z. Xiao, Y. Jiang, G. Wang and D. Pan, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 685–691 RSC .
J. A. Darr, J. Zhang, N. M. Makwana and X. Wenig, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11125–11238 CrossRef PubMed .
V. T. Tiong, J. Bell and H. Wang, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 438–446 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, F. Shi, D. Jiang, M. Chen and W. Shi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 231–237 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Chen, T. Xia, X. Su and Q. Ma, J. Lumin., 2017, 188, 162–167 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, G. Tian, Y. Xiao, H. Fu and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8451–8460 Search PubMed .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Tian, W. Zhou, Y. Xiao, J. Wang, X. Zhang and H. Fu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 5912–5921 RSC .
S. Vadivel, D. Maruthamani, B. Paul, S. S. Dhar, A. Habibi-Yangjeh, S. Balachandran, B. Saravanakumar, A. Selvakumar and K. Selvam, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 74177–74185 RSC .
F. Guo, Y. Cai, W. Guan, H. Huang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2017, 110, 370–378 CrossRef .
J. Song, C. Ma, W. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Wang, L. Lv, L. Zhu, R. Xia and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7909–7918 RSC .
Z. Shadrokh, A. Yazdani and H. Eshghi, J. Semicond., 2017, 38, 013001 CrossRef .
S. Dias, K. Kumawat, S. Biswas and S. B. Krupanidhi, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2198–2203 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gan, Y. Li, X. Z. Wang, X. T. Wang and C. W. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 408, 60–67 CrossRef .
E. M. Mkawi, K. Ibrahim, M. K. M. Ali, M. A. Farrukh and N. K. Allam, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 608, 393–397 CrossRef .
Q. Tian, X. Xu, L. Han, M. Tang, R. Zou, Z. Chen, M. Yu, J. Yang and J. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3847–3850 RSC .
W. Li, X. Han, Y. Zhao, Y. Gu, S. Yang and T. Tanaka, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 603–608 CrossRef .
S. A. Vanalakar, A. S. Kamble, S. W. Shin, S. S. Mali, G. L. Agawane, V. L. Patil, J. Y. Kim, P. S. Patil and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy, 2015, 122, 1146–1153 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. Du, Z. Zhou and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3313–3321 CrossRef .
A. L. Wang, L. Chen, J. X. Zhang, W. C. Sun, P. Guo and C. Y. Ren, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 2413–2421 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Xie, H. Cui, W. Zhao, C. Yang, Y. Wang, F. Huang and N. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4496–4499 RSC .
W. W. Xiong, G. H. Yang, X. C. Wu and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4160–4165 RSC .
M. Yue, R. Wang, B. Ma, R. Cong, W. Gao and T. Yang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 8300–8308 Search PubMed .
M. Mou, Y. Wu, Q. Niu, Y. Wang, Z. Yan and S. Liao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3357–3360 RSC .
M. R. Golobostanfard, H. Abdizadeh and A. Jannati, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 1–6 CrossRef .
W. C. Huang, C. H. Tseng, S. H. Chang, H. Y. Tuan, C. C. Chiang, L. M. Lyu and M. H. Huang, Langmuir, 2012, 38, 8496–8501 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Gong, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5954–5960 Search PubMed .
T. L. Li, C. D. Cai, T. F. Yeh and H. Teng, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 550, 326–330 CrossRef .
S. Jindal, S. M. Giripunje, S. B. Kondawar and P. Koinkar, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2018, 114, 163–172 CrossRef .
M. Xu, J. Zai, Y. Yuan and X. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23929–23934 RSC .
G. Gong, Y. Liu, B. Mao, L. Tan, Y. Yang and W. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 216, 11–19 CrossRef .
G. Gong, Y. Liu, B. Mao, B. Wang, L. Tan, D. Li, Y. Liu and W. Shi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 99023–99033 RSC .
K. Song, R. Zhu, F. Tian, G. Cao and F. Ouyang, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 232, 138–143 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, S. Meng, X. Ye, C. Ling, S. Zhang, X. Fu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 420–429 CrossRef .
J. Ram Kumar, S. Ananthakumar and S. Moorthy Babu, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 296–305 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, W. Gao, R. Cong and T. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 137, 99–101 CrossRef .
W. Meng, X. Zhou, Z. Qiu, C. Liu, J. Chen, W. Yue, M. Wang and H. Bi, Carbon, 2016, 96, 532–540 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, Y. Huang and J. F. Corrigan, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10810–10817 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sugan, K. Baskar and R. Dhanasekaran, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 1416–1420 CrossRef .
Z. Q. Li, C. J. Mo, Y. Guo, N. N. Xu, Q. Y. Zhu and J. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8519–8525 Search PubMed .
M. Sun, X. Zhao, Q. Zeng, T. Yan, P. Ji, T. Wu, D. Wie and B. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 407, 328–336 CrossRef .
L. J. Chen, J. D. Liao, Y. J. Chuang and Y. S. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3704–3707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, S. Meng, T. Wang, Q. Xu, L. Shao, D. Jiang and M. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 430–437 CrossRef .
Y. J. Yuan, D. Chen, J. Zhong, L. X. Yang, J. Wang, M. J. Liu, W. G. Tu, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15771–15779 Search PubMed .
J. Song, T. Jiang, G. Ji, W. Zhang, X. Cheng, W. Weng, L. Zhu and X. Xu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95943–95952 RSC .
J. Sun, G. Chen, G. Xiong, J. Pei and H. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 10731–10738 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. Tao, G. Wang, J. Ma, Q. Wang, M. Tan and S. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 3619–3625 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hou, Q. Fu, S. Peng and Y. H. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 726–733 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. He, J. Li, M. Mao, Z. Yan, W. Wang and J. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2016, 87, 1–5 CrossRef .
J. Xu, X. Yang, T. L. Wong and C. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6537–6542 RSC .
Z. Shadrokh, A. Yazdani and H. Eshghi, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 045004 CrossRef .
M. D. Regulacio, S. Y. Tee, S. H. Lim, C. P. Teng, L. D. Koh, S. Liu and M. Y. Han, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17865–17876 RSC .
H. Li, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, Y. Wang, B. Zou and H. J. Fan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1299–1305 CrossRef .
N. Liang, W. Chen, F. Dai, X. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Shen, S. Huang, Q. He, J. Zai, N. Fang and X. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 1902–1905 RSC .
H. Guan, H. Shen and A. Raza, Catal. Lett., 2017, 147, 1844–1850 CrossRef .
J. Xu, X. Yang, Q. D. Yang, T. L. Wong and C. S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19718–19723 Search PubMed .
S. Bahramzadeh, H. Abdizadeh and M. R. Golobostanfard, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 642, 124–130 CrossRef .
W. Xie, X. Jiang, C. Zou, D. Li, J. Zhang, J. Quan and L. Shao, Physica E, 2012, 45, 16–20 CrossRef .
J. Shen, D. Zhang, J. Li, X. Li, Z. Sun and S. Huang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2013, 5, 281–288 CrossRef .
Q. Ren, W. Wang, H. Shi and Y. Liang, Micro Nano Lett., 2014, 9, 505–508 Search PubMed .
M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, W. R. Bae, K. Gurav, M. G. Kang, G. Agawane, P. Patil, J. H. Yun, J. Y. Lee, A. Moholkar and J. H. Kim, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1531–1534 CrossRef .
N. S. Arul, D. Y. Yun, D. U. Lee and T. W. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11940–11943 RSC .
X. Yan, E. Michael, S. Komarneni, J. R. Brownson and Z. F. Yan, Ceram. Interfaces, 2014, 40, 1985–1992 CrossRef .
W. Liu, B. Guo, C. Mak, A. Li, X. Wu and F. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 39–43 CrossRef .
M. Pal, N. R. Mathews, R. S. Gonzales and X. Mathew, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 78–82 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, P. Zhang, Y. Lin, E. Ashalley, H. Ji, J. Wu, H. Li and Z. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 477 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Turnbull, S. Khoshmashrab, Z. Wang, R. Harbottle, T. K. Sham and Z. Ding, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 119–125 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, B. Pan, D. You, Y. Zhou, X. Wang and W. Su, Catal. Commun., 2016, 85, 39–43 CrossRef .
P. Kush, K. Deori, A. Kumar and S. Deka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8098–8106 Search PubMed .
G. Gogoi, S. Arora, N. Vinothkumar, M. De and M. Qureshi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40475–40483 RSC .
J. Cheng, Z. Dai, B. Chen, R. Ji, X. Yang, R. Hu, J. Zhu and L. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 550 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pan, L. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Du, C. Feng, Z. Fu, C. Qin and F. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 261, 103–110 CrossRef .
Y. F. Du, J. Q. Fan, W. H. Zhou, Z. J. Zhou, J. Jiao and S. X. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1796–1802 Search PubMed .
S. L. Chen, A. C. Xu, J. Tao, H. J. Tao, Y. Z. Shen, L. M. Zhu, J. J. Jiang, T. Wang and L. Pan, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2793–2801 RSC .
J. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Song and L. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27805–27810 RSC .
O. Zaberca, A. Gillorin, B. Durand and J. Y. Chane-Ching, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6483–6486 RSC .
S. Chen, A. Xu, J. Tao, H. Tao, Y. Shen, L. Zhu, J. Jiang, T. Wang and L. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2652–2659 CrossRef .
M. Li, R. Zhao, Y. Su, J. Hu, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 715–724 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, F. Huang, H. Lin, J. Zhou, J. Xu, Q. Wu and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16670–16676 RSC .
L. Zheng, Y. Xu, Y. Song, C. Wu, M. Zhang and Y. Xie, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4003–4009 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Hu, J. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Wu and J. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9821–9824 RSC .
T. Wang, Y. Chai, D. Ma, W. Chen, W. Zheng and S. Huang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2699–2711 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, F. Wu, F. Gao, L. Chen, X. Xie, W. Wang, W. Tan and L. Li, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3524–3534 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Song and L. Dong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6680–6688 CrossRef .
Y. Li, G. Chen, Q. Wang, X. Wang, A. Zhou and Z. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3390–3398 CrossRef .
W. Yue, F. Wei, C. He, D. Wu and N. Tang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 37578–37587 RSC .
S. Lei, C. Wang, L. Liu, D. Guo, C. Wang, Q. Tang, B. Cheng, Y. Xiao and L. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2991–2997 CrossRef .
S. Z. Kang, Y. K. Yang, W. Bu and J. Mu, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2972–2976 CrossRef .
C. Li, Z. Xi, W. Fang, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 226, 94–100 CrossRef .
B. Liu, X. Li, Q. Zhao, J. Ke, M. Tade and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 185, 1–10 CrossRef .
Q. Tian, W. Wu, J. Liu, Z. Wu, W. Yao, J. Ding and C. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 2770–2777 RSC .
S. Peng, Y. Wu, P. Zhu, V. Thavasi, S. Ramakrishna and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15718–15726 RSC .
Y. Xia, Q. Li, K. Lv and M. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 398, 81–88 CrossRef .
K. Guo, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Liu, Y. Li, B. Wang, T. Cui and C. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16204–16213 RSC .
K. Li, B. Chai, T. Peng, J. Mao and L. Zan, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 170–177 CrossRef .
X. Yin, P. Sheng, F. Zhong, V. Nguyen, Q. Cai and C. Grimes, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 6675–6685 RSC .
W. K. Jo and T. S. Natarajan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17138–17154 Search PubMed .
K. Das, S. Ghosh, K. Chakrabarti, S. Paul, G. Sinha, J. Lahtinen, D. Jana and S. K. De, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 326–334 CrossRef .
H. Fakhri, A. R. Mahjoub and A. H. C. Khavar, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 41, 38–44 CrossRef .
X. Li, K. Xie, L. Song, M. Zhao and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24577–24583 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Jin, Z. Xu, Z. Zhang and D. Ao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 97951–97961 RSC .
J. Ram Kumar, S. Ananthakumar and S. Moorthy Babu, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 46, 296–305 CrossRef .
N. Ding, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Shi, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Catal. Commun., 2017, 100, 173–177 CrossRef .
W. K. Jo and T. S. Natarajan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 482, 58–72 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tang, W. Chen, Z. Zu, Z. Zang, M. Deng, T. Zhu, K. Sun, L. Sun and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18498–18503 RSC .
F. Tian, R. Zhu, J. Zhong, P. Wang, F. Ouyang and G. Cao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 20156–20171 CrossRef .
R. Zhu, F. Tian, G. Cao and F. Ouyang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 17350–17361 CrossRef .
L. Ye, J. Fu, Z. Xu, R. Yuan and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3483–3490 Search PubMed .
S. Vadivel, D. Maruthamani, B. Paul, S. Sankar Dhar, A. Habibi-Yangjeh, S. Balachandran, B. Saravanakumar, A. Selvakumara and K. Selvam, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 74177–74185 RSC .
Y. Xia, Q. Li, K. Lv, D. Tang and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 344–352 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, Q. Li, X. Wu, K. Lv, D. Tang and M. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 565–571 CrossRef .
T. Hong, Z. Liu, W. Yan, J. Liu and X. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30993–30998 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Han and J. Ya, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 15029–15037 CrossRef .
J. Han, Z. Liu, K. Guo, X. Zhang, T. Hong and B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 61–68 CrossRef .
T. Hong, Z. Liu, W. Yan, B. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang and J. Han, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13678–13681 RSC .
Z. Wu, C. Gong, J. Yu, L. Sun, W. Xiao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1292–1299 Search PubMed .
H. Li, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 591–599 CrossRef .
X. Tian, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 8517–8522 RSC .
S. Higashimoto, T. Okada, T. Arase, M. Azuma, M. Yamamoto and M. Takahashi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 867–874 CrossRef .
X. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15903–15905 RSC .
B. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Yang, S. Hu, Y. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. V. Demir, L. Liu and K.-T. Yong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 25133–25141 RSC .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya, F. Spranger, O. Selyshchev, V. Dzhagan, S. Schulze, D. R. T. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018 DOI:10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b00106 .
X. Y. Liu, G. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Li, J. Jiang, Y. T. Long and Z. Ning, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1379–1388 CrossRef .
M. D. Regulacio, K. Y. Win, S. L. Lo, S. Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Y. Han and Y. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2322–2327 RSC .
X. Y. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, Y. Shang, Q. Zhang, W. Li, G. Zhang, J. Su, C. T. Dinh, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Li, J. Jiang, Q. Mi, R. Si, X. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Long, H. Tian, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605646 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Ma, W. Zhang, X. Li, W. Zhang, R. Wu, X. Cheng, A. Ali, M. Yang, L. Zhu, R. Xia and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24826–24836 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. H. Zhou, J. Jiao, Z. J. Zhou and S. X. Wu, Mater. Lett., 2013, 96, 174–176 CrossRef .
Z. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Huang and X. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 27–33 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ritchie, A. S. R. Chesman, M. Styles, J. J. Jasieniak and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 1655–1665 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, Z. Liu, K. Guo, J. Ya, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, T. Hong and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17119–17125 Search PubMed .
Q. Liu, F. Cao, F. Wu, S. Chen, J. Xiong and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26235–26243 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Ma, J. Liu and Y. Mai, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 92869–92873 RSC .
C. Chen, L. Ling and F. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, G. Ali, S. H. Yoo, J. M. Kum and S. O. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16430–16435 RSC .
Y. Wan, M. Han, L. Yu, J. Jia and G. Yi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 78902–78909 RSC .
R. K. Bhosale, S. A. Agarkar, I. Agrawal, R. A. Naphade and S. Ogale, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21989–21996 RSC .
T. Li, X. Li, Q. Zhao and W. Teng, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 59, 227–233 CrossRef .
X. Cui, H. Gu, Y. Guan, G. Ren, Z. Ma, Y. Yin, J. Liu, X. Cui, L. Yao, Y. Yin, D. Wang, G. Jin, S. Rong, L. Tong, J. Hou and M. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 101–106 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, K. Guo, J. Han, Y. Li, T. Cui, B. Wang, J. Ya and C. Zhou, Small, 2014, 10, 3153–3161 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Ho and M. W. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 26, 48–51 CrossRef .
P. C. Huang, W. C. Yang and M. W. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18308–18314 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Huang, J. Han, T. Hong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16615–16620 RSC .
R. R. Su, Y. X. Yu, Y. H. Xiao, X. Yang and W. D. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6040–6058 CrossRef .
M. Gannouni, I. Ben Assaker and R. Chtourou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 7252–7259 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, P. Wang, C. Hao and G. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 1–6 CrossRef .
B. S. Lee, S. Y. L. Park, J. M. Lee, J. H. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Chung and D. K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24585–24593 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Jang, J. M. Lee, J. W. Seo, I. Kim and D. K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19439–19446 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Cheng, N. F. Wang, Y. Z. Tsai, J. J. Lin and M. P. Houng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 631–636 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, P. Wang, J. H. Yun, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15876–15881 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Liu, S. Luo, Y. Teng, L. Yang, R. Yang and Q. Cai, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 2434–2440 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Tang, S. Luo, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen and C. Liu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2013, 262, 22–27 CrossRef .
A. Chihi and B. Bessais, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 29469–29480 RSC .
Y. Guo, X. Yin, Y. Yang and W. Que, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 104041–104048 RSC .
A. B. Bhalerao, B. G. Wagh, R. N. Bulakhe, P. R. Deshmukh, J. J. Shim and C. D. Lokhande, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 336, 69–76 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, L. Zhang, M. Zhong, Gunawan, M. Nakabayashi, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, S. Ikeda, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11808–11812 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan and C. Hao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 170–174 CrossRef .
Gunawan, W. Septina, T. Harada, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16086–16092 Search PubMed .
J. J. Scragg, P. J. Dale and L. M. Peter, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2481–2484 CrossRef .
X. Fu, C. Li, Z. Zhou, J. Liu and Z. Ji, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 17094–17101 CrossRef .
L. Rovelli, S. D. Tilley and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8018–8024 Search PubMed .
P. K. Sarswat, D. Bhattacharyya, M. L. Free and M. Misra, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3788–3803 RSC .
P. Wang, T. Minegishi, G. Ma, K. Takanabe, Y. Satou, S. Maekawa, Y. Kobori, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2469–2472 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Jiang, S. Li, C. Ozaki, T. Harada and S. Ikeda, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1700205 CrossRef .
S. Kamimura, N. Beppu, Y. Sasaki, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10450–10456 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Gu, W. Xiong and M. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 209, 670–676 CrossRef .
J. Y. Chang, C. H. Li, Y. H. Chiang, C. H. Chen and P. N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18878–18890 Search PubMed .
K. C. Wang, P. Chen and C. M. Tseng, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9863–9868 RSC .
X. Yang, J. Xu, L. Xi, Y. Yao, Q. Yang, C. Y. Chung and C. S. Lee, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 931 CrossRef .
W. C. Chen, V. Tunuguntla, M. H. Chiu, L. J. Li, I. Shown, C. H. Lee, J. S. Hwang, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 416–423 CrossRef .
S. M. Hosseinpour-Mashkani, M. Salavati-Niasari and F. Mohandes, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 3800–3807 CrossRef .
A. Tadjarodi, A. H. Cheshmekhavar and M. Imani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 263, 449–456 CrossRef .
R. Bensebaa, C. Durand, A. Aouadou, L. Scoles, X. Du, D. Wang and Y. Le Page, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1897–1903 CrossRef .
W. Wang, H. Shen, L. H. Wong, Z. Su, H. Yao and Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 54049–54053 RSC .
S. W. Chin, J. H. Han, C. Y. Park, A. V. Moholkar, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 516, 96–101 CrossRef .
R. Ahmad, K. S. Nicholson, Q. Nawaz, W. Peukert and M. Distaso, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 19, 238 CrossRef .
T. Martini, C. Chubilleau, O. Poncelet, A. Ricaud, A. Blayo, C. Martin and K. Tarasov, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 657–663 CrossRef .
A. H. Pinto, S. W. Shin, A. Sharma, R. L. Penn and E. S. Aydil, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 999–1008 Search PubMed .
H. Kaga, K. Saito and A. Kudo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3779–3781 RSC .
Z. Zheng, J. Yao and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7288–7296 Search PubMed .
M. Xu, B. Liu, G. Graham and X. Pan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 171–177 CrossRef .
A. Cazzaniga, A. Crovetto, C. Yan, K. Sun, X. Hao, J. R. Estelrich, S. Canulescu, E. Stamate, N. Pryds, O. Hansen and J. Schou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 166, 91–99 CrossRef .
B. Koo, S. W. Nam, R. Haight, S. Kim, S. Oh, M. Cho, J. Oh, J. Y. Lee, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5279–5287 Search PubMed .
H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15329–15333 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Quiroz and A. Dussan, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 051705 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Tian, K. Jiang, J. Huang, H. Wang and Y. Song, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41540–41545 RSC .
J. Ge, P. J. Roland, P. Koirala, W. Meng, J. L. Young, R. Petersen, T. G. Deutsch, G. Teeter, R. J. Ellingson, R. W. Collins and Y. Yan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 916–920 CrossRef .
J. Ge, C. R. Grice and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2820–2928 Search PubMed .
H. Limborço, P. M. P. Salomé, J. P. Teixeira, D. G. Stroppa, R. R. Andrade, N. Nicoara, K. Abderrafi, J. P. Leitão, J. C. Gonzalez and S. Sadewasser, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 7147–7153 RSC .
W. Yang, B. Liu, T. Fang, W. A. Jennifer, L. Christophe, Z. Li, X. Zhang and X. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18197–18203 RSC .
K. J. Tiwari, V. Vinod, A. Subrahmanyam and P. Malar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 418, 216–224 CrossRef .
S. C. Riha, A. A. Koegel, J. D. Emery, M. J. Pellin and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4667–4673 Search PubMed .
F. W. de Souza Lucas, A. W. Welch, L. L. Baranowski, P. C. Dippo, H. Hempel, T. Unold, R. Eichberger, B. Blank, U. Rau, L. H. Mascaro and A. Zakutayev, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18377–18385 Search PubMed .
V. Vinayakumar, S. Shadji, D. Avellaneda, T. K. Das Roy, G. A. Castillo, J. A. A. Martinez and B. Krishnan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 19–27 CrossRef .
M. A. M. Khan, S. Kumar, M. Ahamed and M. S. AlSalhi, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 497–500 CrossRef .
M. Adelifard, M. M. B. Mohagheghi and H. Eshghi, Phys. Scr., 2012, 85, 035603 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, S. Ning, Z. Yang, Z. Zhang, S. Huang, J. Long, H. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13381–13384 RSC .
E. Dutkova, M. J. Sayagues, J. Briančin, A. Zorkovska, Z. Bujňakova, J. Kovač, J. Kovač, Jr., P. Balaž and J. Ficeriova, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 1978–1984 CrossRef .
S. A. Vanalakar, G. L. Agawane, S. W. Shin, H. S. Yang, P. S. Patil, J. Y. Kim and J. H. Kim, Acta Mater., 2015, 85, 314–321 CrossRef .
V. Maheskumara and B. Vidhya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 356, 521–529 CrossRef .
B. I. Park, Y. Hwang, S. Y. Lee, J. S. Lee, J. K. Park, J. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, B. Kim, S. H. Cho and D. K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11703–11711 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Goetzberger, J. Luther and G. Willeke, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 74, 1–11 CrossRef .
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571–6594 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 183–189 Search PubMed .
T. Unold and H. W. Schock, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 297–321 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 69–92 Search PubMed .
H. Azimi, Y. Hou and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1829–1849 Search PubMed .
H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 414–445 RSC .
W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7342–7372 RSC .
C. L. McCarthy and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4888–4902 RSC .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .

          T. H. James, The Theory of The Photographic Process, Macmillan, New York,  1977 Search PubMed .
S. Wang and J. Tian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 90082–90099 RSC .
J. Duan, H. Zhang, Q. Tang, B. He and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17497–17510 Search PubMed .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778–17787 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Freitag, J. Teuscher, Y. Saygili, X. Zhang, F. Giordano, P. Liska, J. Hua, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 372–378 CrossRef .
D. Tiwari, T. Koehler, X. Lin, A. Sarua, R. Harniman, L. Wang, R. Klenk and D. J. Fermin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2301–2308 Search PubMed .
A. Khanaki, H. Abdizadeh and M. R. Golobostanfard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23250–23258 Search PubMed .
C. Krause, D. Scheunemann, J. Parisi and H. Borchert, J. Appl. Physiol., 2016, 118, 205501 CrossRef .
H. Chen, P. Chao, D. Han, H. Wang, J. Miao, H. Zhong, H. Meng and F. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7362–7367 Search PubMed .

          A. I. Kulak, Electrochemistry of Semiconductor Heterostructures, Universitetskoye, Minsk,  1986 Search PubMed .
D. Scheunemann, S. Wilken, J. Parisi and H. Borchert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16258–16265 RSC .
J. Ge and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6406–6419 RSC .
J. Barbé, J. Eid, E. Ahlswede, S. Spiering, M. Powalla, R. Agrawal and S. Del Gobbo, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 379 CrossRef .
M. Singh, P. Prasher and K. Suganuma, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2017, 11, 129–134 CrossRef .
S. J. Park, H. S. An, J. E. Kim, H. S. Jeon, S. S. Yoon, Y. J. Hwang, J. Kim, D.-W. Kim and B. K. Min, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 103439–103444 RSC .
F. Jiang, C. Ozaki, Gunawan, T. Harada, Z. Tang, T. Minemoto, Y. Nose and S. Ikeda, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3283–3291 CrossRef .
C. J. Hages, M. J. Koeper and R. Agrawal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145, 342–348 CrossRef .
Y. Qi, Q. Tian, Y. Meng, D. Kou, Z. Zhou, W. Zhou and S. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21243–21250 Search PubMed .
A. H. Pinto, S. W. Shin, E. S. Aydil and R. L. Penn, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5814–5821 RSC .
X. Jin, X. Lei, C. Wu, G. Jiang, W. Liu, H. Zeng, T. Chen and C. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19884–19891 Search PubMed .
J. Li, X. Han, Y. Zhao, J. Li, M. Wang and C. Dong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 593–598 CrossRef .
Z. Peng, Y. Liu, L. Wu, Y. Zhao, K. Chen and W. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 388, 437–443 CrossRef .
G. Yin, M. Song, S. Duan, P. Manley, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann and M. Schmid, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31646–31652 Search PubMed .
T. L. Li, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315–5324 Search PubMed .
P. Ilaiyaraja, B. Rakesh, T. K. Das, P. S. V. Mocherla and C. Sudakar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 178, 208–222 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, C. Cai, L. Zhai, J. Wang, F. Kong, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, C. Zou and S. Huang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 39443–39451 RSC .
R. K. Kokal, M. Deepa, P. Ghosal and A. K. Srivastava, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 107–120 CrossRef .
R. Tang, Z. Xie, S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Z. Yuan, L. Zhang and L. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22201–22212 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 6, 6185–6192 RSC .
B. A. Aragaw, J. Sun, D. J. Singh and M. W. Lee, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45470–45477 RSC .
A. E. Raevskaya, O. L. Stroyuk, S. Ya. Kuchmii and A. I. Kryukov, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2004, 212, 259–265 CrossRef .
T. J. MacDonald, Y. J. Mange, M. R. Dewi, H. U. Islam, I. P. Parkin, W. M. Skinner and T. Nann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13324–13331 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Chang, J. M. Lin, L. F. Su and C. F. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8740–8752 Search PubMed .
J. He, M. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Zhao, Q. Wang, B. Ding and S. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 626–636 CrossRef .
C. Ravi Dhas, A. Jennifer Christy, R. Venkatesh, S. Esther Santhoshi Monica, S. K. Panda, B. Subramanian, K. Ravichandran, P. Sudhagar and A. Moses Ezhil Raj, Phys. B, 2018, 537, 23–32 CrossRef .
S. S. Mali, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1688–1696 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, S. Dong, L. Shen, A. Gupta and N. Bao, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 248 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, J. Wang, C. Jia, J. Mou and L. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 591–596 CrossRef .
L. Bai, J. N. Ding, N. Y. Yuan, H. W. Hu, Y. Li and X. Fang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 113, 219–222 CrossRef .

          O. Stroyuk, Solar Light Harvesting with Nanocrystalline Semiconductors, Springer, Cham,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Jr, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef .
O. L. Stroyuk, A. I. Kryukov, S. Ya. Kuchmiy and V. D. Pokhodenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2009, 45, 203–233 CrossRef .
O. L. Stroyuk and S. Ya. Kuchmiy, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2017, 53, 359–386 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, J. L. Wang, W. H. Zhou, Z. X. Chang, D. X. Kou, Z. J. Zhou, Q. W. Tian, Y. N. Meng, Y. M. Zhou and S. X. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 3980–3984 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, F. Zhang and D. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22619–22623 RSC .
S. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Liu, S. Luo, L. Wang, T. Cai, Y. Zeng, J. Yuan, W. Dong, Y. Pei and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 751–758 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Li, C. Liu, F. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhao, R. Liu and G. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 219–228 CrossRef .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef PubMed .

Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Perspectives, ed. J. Schneider, D. Bahnemann, J. Ye, G. Li Puma and D. D. Dionysiou, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Fang, Z. Wei, Z. Qin, Z. Jiang and W. Shangguan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1375–1382 Search PubMed .
M. A. Gonce, M. Dogru, E. Aslan, F. Ozel, I. H. Patir, M. Kus and M. Ersoz, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 94025–94028 RSC .
M. K. Gonce, E. Aslan, F. Ozel and I. H. Patir, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 600–605 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Peng, L. Shang, Y. Cao, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, T. Bian, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 485–490 CrossRef .
E. Ha, L. Y. S. Lee, J. Wang, F. Li, K. Y. Wong and S. C. E. Tsang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3496–3500 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Wang and S. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6553–6555 RSC .
B. Lin, H. Li, H. An, W. Hao, J. Wei, Y. Dai, C. Ma and G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 542–552 CrossRef .
T. Kato, Y. Hakari, S. Ikeda, Q. Jia, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1042–1047 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Yan, N. Zhao, X. Li, B. Lu, X. Zhang and H. Yu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 4979–4986 RSC .
Z. Guan, Z. Xu, Q. Lia, P. Wang, G. Li and J. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 512–518 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Han, M. Wang, Y. Zhao and C. Dong, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4114–4120 RSC .
R. Chong, X. Wang, Z. Chang, W. Zhou and S. Wu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 20703–20710 CrossRef .
H. Liu, J. Zhang and D. Ao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 433–442 CrossRef .
T. A. Kandiel, D. H. Anjum and K. Takanabe, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3112–3121 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li, B. Chai, T. Peng, J. Mao and L. Zan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 253–258 RSC .
S. Ikeda, T. Nakamura, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13943–13949 RSC .
J. Dinga, X. Lia, L. Chen, X. Zhang and X. Tian, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 322–329 CrossRef .
J. Ding, X. Li, L. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Sun, J. Bao, C. Gao and X. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12630–12637 Search PubMed .
Z. X. Chang, W. H. Zhou, D. X. Kou, Z. J. Zhou and S. X. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12726–12729 RSC .
G. Yang, D. Chen, H. Ding, J. Feng, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Hamid and D. W. Bahnemann, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 611–618 CrossRef .
F. Xu, J. Zhang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 194–202 CrossRef .
K. Kim, A. Razzaq, S. Sorcar, Y. Park, C. A. Grimes and S. I. In, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38964–38971 RSC .
L. Kong, Z. Li, S. Huang, J. Jia and L. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 403–410 CrossRef .
X. Tu, J. Lu, M. Li, Y. Su, G. Yin and D. He, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4735–4744 RSC .
Y. Yang, W. Que, X. Zhang, X. Yin, Y. Xing, M. Que, H. Zhao and Y. Du, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 402–412 CrossRef .
Z. Han, N. Li, A. Shi, H. Wang, F. Ma, Y. Lv and R. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, F. Zhang, D. Pan, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8759–8763 RSC .
P. S. Dilsaver, M. D. Reichert, B. L. Hallmark, M. J. Thompson and J. Vela, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21226–21234 Search PubMed .
N. Barbero and D. Vione, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 2130–2131 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef .
D. Beydoun, R. Amal, G. Low and S. McEvoy, J. Nanopart. Res., 1999, 1, 439–458 CrossRef .
P. Xiao, D. Jiang, L. Ju, J. Jing and M. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 388–397 CrossRef .
S. Z. Kang, Y. K. Yang, W. Bu and J. Mu, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182, 2972–2976 CrossRef .
F. Deng, F. Zhong, P. Hu, X. Pei, X. Luo and S. Luo, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 19, 14 CrossRef .
L. Yan, Z. Li, M. Sun, G. Shen and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20048–20056 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, L. Li, J. Lu, N. Luo, X. Zhang and F. Wang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5172–5177 RSC .
A. B. Ghosh, N. Saha, A. Sarkar, A. K. Dutta, S. K. Maji and B. Adhikary, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 692–701 RSC .
D. Wang, C. Wang, F. Pelayo Garcia de Arquer, J. Zhong, L. Qian, L. Fang, P. Liu, Y. Pang, M. Liu, M. Liu, G. Zheng, D. Sinton, E. H. Sargent, H. Yang and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3167–3171 Search PubMed .
H. Homura, O. Tomita, M. Higashi and R. Abe, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 699–709 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chae, S. J. Park, S. G. Han, H. Jung, C. W. Kim, C. Jeong, O. S. Joo, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15673–15681 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Luo, X. Wen, Z. Guan and Z. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 445102 CrossRef .
Y. Goto, T. Minegishi, Y. Kageshima, T. Higashi, H. Kaneko, Y. Kuang, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, H. Ishihara, T. Hayashi, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21242–21248 Search PubMed .
M. G. Mali, H. Yoon, B. N. Joshi, H. Park, S. S. Al-Deyab, D. C. Lim, S. Ahn, C. Nervi and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21619–21625 Search PubMed .
M. A. Mahadik, P. S. Shinde, H. H. Lee, M. Cho and J. S. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 475–487 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, D. Shin, E. Ngaboyamahina, Q. Han, C. B. Parker, D. B. Mitzi and J. T. Glass, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 177–183 CrossRef .
T. Higashi, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, H. Kobayashi, M. Zhong, Y. Kuang, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, T. Takata, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11674–11677 RSC .
S. Kamimura, Y. Kubo, T. Tsubota and T. Ohno, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 445–451 CrossRef .
G. C. Fan, X. M. Shi, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 10352–10356 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Todorov, T. Gershon, O. Gunawan, C. Sturdevant and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 173902 CrossRef .
C. Y. Lin, C. Y. Teng, T. L. Li, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1155–1162 Search PubMed .
H. A. Atwater, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 155–157 CrossRef .
L. Yue, H. Rao, J. Du, Z. Pan, J. Yua and X. Zhong, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3637–3645 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Oleksandr Stroyuk
	Oleksandr Stroyuk is presently a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellow at the TU Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller and an acting Head of the Laboratory of Organic Photovoltaics and Electrochemistry at L. V. Pysarzhevsky Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC), National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. He received his PhD in chemistry (2003) from IPC under supervision of Prof. S. Ya. Kuchmiy and a degree of Doctor of Sciences in physical chemistry from IPC (2011) for a series of works “Semiconductor nanophotocatalysis: nature, features, photocatalytic systems and reactions”.

Alexandra Raevskaya
	Alexandra Raevskaya is a senior staff scientist at the Department of Photochemistry, L. V. Pysarzhevsky Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC), National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. She received her PhD in chemistry (2004) from IPC under supervision of Prof. S. Ya. Kuchmiy. Currently she is a visiting scientist at the TU Dresden (Germany) in the group of Prof. Alexander Eychmüller. Her present research is focused on the synthesis, photoluminescence and photochemistry of semiconductor nanocrystals.

Nikolai Gaponik
	Nikolai Gaponik is an ad personam Professor at the TU Dresden (Germany). He received his PhD in chemistry (2000) from the Belarussian State University in Minsk (Belarus) under supervision of Prof. D. V. Sviridov. He was a visiting scientist at the LMU in Munich in 2000 (with Prof. J. Feldmann and Prof. M. Gao), a DAAD-fellow and later a research scientist in the group of Prof. H. Weller at the University of Hamburg in 2000–2005, and an IKERBASQUE-Fellow at the Center of Materials Physics, San Sebastian, Spain, in 2011. He habilitated at TU Dresden in 2013.

 	Fig. 1  Basic types of semiconductor solar-light-harvesting systems.	 

 	Fig. 2  Overview of the MMC NCs used for light-harvesting applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Evolution of zinc blende lattice of binary MCs into different lattices of ternary and quaternary MMCs. (b) Lattice cells of some of the members of Cu–Sb–S MMC family. Reprinted/adapted from ref. 17 (a) and ref. 50. Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

AIS	Silver indium sulfide	Ag–In–S	AgInS2
AIGS	Silver indium gallium sulfide	Ag–In–Ga–S	Ag(In,Ga)S2
CAIS	Copper silver indium sulfide	Cu–Ag–In–S	(Cu,Ag)InS2
CBS	Copper bismuth sulfide	Cu–Bi–S	CuBiS2, Cu3BiS3
CBTS	Copper barium tin sulfide	Cu–Ba–Sn–S	Cu2BaSnS4
CFTS	Copper iron tin sulfide	Cu–Fe–Sn–S	Cu2FeSnS4
CGS	Copper gallium sulfide	Cu–Ga–S	CuGaS2
CIS	Copper indium sulfide	Cu–In–S	CuInS2
CIGS	Copper indium gallium sulfide	Cu–In–Ga–S	Cu(In,Ga)S2
CGZS	Copper gallium zinc sulfide	Cu–Ga–Zn–S	—
CIZS, ZCIS	Copper indium zinc sulfide	Cu–In–Zn–S	—
CTS	Copper tin sulfide	Cu–Sn–S	Cu2SnS3
CZGS	Copper zinc germanium sulfide	Cu–Zn–Ge–S	Cu2ZnGeS4
CZTS	Copper zinc tin sulfide	Cu–Zn–Sn–S	Cu2ZnSnS4
CZTGS	Copper zinc tin germanium sulfide	Cu–Zn–Sn–Ge–S	Cu2Zn(Sn,Ge)S4
ZAIS	Zinc silver indium sulfide	Zn–Ag–In–S	—
ZIS	Zinc indium sulfide	Zn–In–S	ZnIn2S4

 	Fig. 4  (a) Absorption spectra of colloidal CIS NCs (a) prepared at a Cu:In:S ratio of x:5:10 with x = 0.2 (curve 1), 0.6 (2), 1.0 (3), 1.5 (4), 2.0 (5), and 2.5 (6). Inset in (a): integral absorbance of CIS NCs (curve 1) and CIS/ZnS NCs (curve 2) as a function of x. Adapted with permissions from ref. 50. (b) Absorption spectra of size-selected CZTS NCs (the average size is given in figure). Inset: Spectral curves in the Tauc coordinates for the determination of Eg. (c) Diffuse reflectance spectra of CuGaxIn1−xS NCs with a varied x. (d) Absorption spectra of alloyed (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 NCs with a varied x. (e) Bandgap of alloyed Cu2ZnSnS1−xSex as a function of x. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 64 (b), ref. 73 (c), ref. 74 (d), and ref. 75 (e). Copyright (2011, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2016, 2017) Elsevier (c and d); (2013) Nature Publishing Group (e).	 

CIS	1.45–1.53	4.1	0.16	1.3	
68, 69, 72 and 80–82

CISe	1.04–1.07	10.6	0.09	0.73	
70, 71 and 82

CGS	2.44	Not reported (n/r)	0.13	0.69	
70

CGSe	1.68	n/r	0.14	1.20	
70

AIS	1.83–1.87	3.6–5.5	0.15	1.36	
72 and 83–85

AISe	1.23	5.5	0.12	0.39	
70 and 81

CZTS	1.45–1.5	2.5–3.4	0.18	0.71	
64–67

CZTSe	1.0	6.4–13.3	n/r	n/r	
66

AZTS	2.0	n/r	0.14–0.16	1.16	
86

AZTSe	1.34	n/r	0.06–0.07	0.89	
86


 	Fig. 5  (a) Current–voltage curves produced by the cyclic voltammetry of the size-selected CIS NCs. (b and c) CB and VB levels for the size-selected (b) and composition-selected (c) CIS NCs. (d) (a and b) CB and VB potentials of size-selected CISe NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 80 (a and b), ref. 108 (c), and ref. 87 (d). Copyright (2010, 2015, 2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) CB and VB potentials of the size-selected AIS NCs (solid lines drawn only as an eye-guide). (b) Mott–Schottky dependences for the bare TiO2 nanotube arrays and TiO2/CIS composites in the dark and under the illumination. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 72 (a) and ref. 118 (b). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society (a); (2014) Elsevier (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Determination of the VB position of CZTS NCs using PESA; (b and c) VB and CB levels of the size-selected (b) and composition-selected (c) ZAIS NCs determined by the PESA. (d) VB and CB levels of CIS NCs anchored to the TiO2 surface (the size-selected CIS NCs were prepared at a different temperature from 90 to 170 °C as indicated on the figure). Reprinted and adapted with permissions from ref. 121 (a), ref. 93 (b and c) and ref. 95 (d). Copyright (2013, 2015) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) PL decay curves of Zn2+-doped CISSe NCs anchored to NiO and glass123 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Time-resolved transient absorption spectra recorded following 387 nm laser pulse excitation of CIS NCs on SiO2 substrate at different delay times (b) and kinetic curves of the CIS NC bleaching decay (recorded at 590 nm) on SiO2 and TiO2 (c). (d) Dependence of the charge separation efficiency (ΦCS) and PL QY on the average size of CIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 97 (b and c) and ref. 124 (d). Copyright (2013, 2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Dependence of the average size of ZAIS NCs on the 1-DDT content during the heating-up synthesis. (b and c) TEM of rod- and rice-shaped ZAIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 (a) and ref. 157 (b and c). Copyright (2015, 2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Size distributions of CIS NCs synthesized using the heating-up approach in a conventional batch reactor (curve 1) and in a flow reactor (curve 2). (b) TEM of CuInTe2 nanosheets (inset: a photograph of colloidal CITe solution showing the scattering of a laser beam). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 140 (a) and ref. 180 (b). Copyright (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A scheme of ion exchange synthesis of core/shell CIS/ZnS and alloyed CIZS NCs from Cu2S NCs. (b–e) TEM images of CuSe NCs transforming gradually into CIGS NCs as a result of Ga ion incorporation at 130 °C (b), 160 °C (c), 200 °C (d), and 230 °C (e). (f) A schematic of the transformation. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 109 (a) and ref. 175 (b–f). Copyright (2012, 2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM and size distribution of CZTS NCs produced by the heating-up with a different heating duration (indicated on figures). Reprinted and adapted with permissions from ref. 192. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A scheme depicting various geometries and phases of CZTS NCs produced by the heating-up synthesis. (b) TEM and size distribution of CZTS NCs synthesized at an increased starting concentration of the precursors. (c) Schemes of reactions between CS2 and OLA and OLA/1-DDT. (d) Absorption spectra and photographs of colloidal (Cu2Sn)x/3Zn1−xS NCs with a varied composition (x values given in the insert). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 205 (a), ref. 206 (b), ref. 121 (c), and ref. 208 (d). Copyright (2013–2016) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2010) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) TEM images of the core/shell (a) and binary (b) CZTS/Pd nanoheterostructures. (c) TEM of CZTS–Pt nanoheterostructures. (d) Au/Cu2FeSnS4 core/shell nanoheterostructures. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 209 (a and b), ref. 215 (c), and ref. 218 (d). Copyright (2014–2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) A scheme illustrating the assembling/disassembling of CZTS NRs. (b and c) Dark-field TEM images of separate CZTS NRs (b) and their 2D assemblies (c). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 210 (a) and ref. 221 (b and c). Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a); (2017) American Chemical Society (b and c).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a and b) TEM of CIS NCs produced by the hot-injection in different dispersive media. (c) Elemental maps of Cu and In for single CIS NCs (scale bar 2 nm). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 223 (a and b) and ref. 51 (c). Copyright (2011) Springer (a and b).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) TEM of Cu2FeSnS4 NCs (inset: the NC size distribution). (b) TEM of CZTS/Au–Ag nanoheterostructures produced with a different duration of the metal deposition (indicated on the figure). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 282 (a) and ref. 286 (b). Copyright (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a); (2017) American Chemical Society (b).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a and b) SEM image of CIS microspheres produced by the HTT. (b) SEM of CIS, CISe, and CITe nanocubes produced by the HTT. (c) A unit cell of a crystal formed by [Cu5In30S56H4]13− cluster anions and HTEA+ cations. The cation is depicted with violet circles. (d) SEM of hierarchical ZnIn2S4 microspheres. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 354 (a), ref. 372 (b), ref. 373 (c), and ref. 374 (d). Copyright (2013, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and c); (2014, 2017) Elsevier (b and d).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a–c) SEM images of ZIS microspheres (a, insert shows a resemblance between the microspheres and a flower) and the products of ion exchange with Ag+ for Ag:In ratio of 0.5 (b) and 1.25 (c). (d) Absorption spectra of ZIS microspheres and ion exchange products (Ag:In = 0.5 (H1), 0.75 (H2), 1.0 (H3), and 1.25 (H4)). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 378. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM of nanocrystalline CZTS microspheres (a and b) and nanosheets (c and d). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 389 (a and, b) and ref. 407 (c and d). Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society (a and b); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c and d).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM of Cu2S (a) and CIS nanowires (b) produced by In3+ incorporation during the HTT. (c and d) TEM of CuxS NCs (c) and CuGaS2 NCs (d) produced by the solvothermal incorporation of Ga ions. (e) TEM of CdS nanowires decorated with CdIn2S4 nanosheets. (f) Cross-sectional SEM of Si nanowire/TiO2/ZnIn2S4 nanostructure. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 411 (a and b), ref. 412 (c and d), ref. 415 (e), and ref. 416 (f). Copyright (2017) Elsevier (a and b); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c and d); (2017, 2015) Springer (e and f).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) PL spectra and photographs of AIS NCs in water/glycerol mixtures before (curve 1) and after heating at 120 °C for 5 (2), 10 (3), 15 (4), 20 (5), 25 (6), 30 (7), 35 (8), and 40 min (9). (b) Relative population of the size-selected AIS NCs in fractions produced by the size-selective precipitation (upper panel) and a photograph of the size-selected AIS/ZnS NCs under the UV excitation (fraction numbers given under the image). (c) Size distribution of ZAIS NCs in two of the size-selected fractions. (d) Atomic In-to-Ag and Zn-to-In ratios determined by XPS for the size-selected TGA-capped AIS/ZnS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 63 (a) and ref. 59 (b–d). Copyright (2015) Springer (a) and (2017) American Chemical Society (b–d).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Absorption spectra of original and photoetched AIS NCs (the laser wavelength used for the photoetching is displayed on the figure). (b and c) Size distribution of original (b) and the smallest photoetched AIS NCs (c). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 72. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a and b) TEM of CIS NCs deposited by the SILAR on the surface of mesoporous titania (a) and TiO2 NT arrays (b). (c) SEM of SILAR-deposited AIS NCs on the titania NT arrays. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 465 (a), ref. 467 (b), and ref. 471 (c). Copyright (2016, 2011) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2015) Elsevier (c).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) SEM of CuInSe2 nanowire arrays produced by the electrodeposition. (b) SEM of ZnO NR arrays with a CuInS2 layer electrodeposited in a pulse regime with a different pulse frequency (indicated on the figure). (c) SEM of titania NT arrays and electro-deposited TiO2/CIS NT arrays. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 481 (a), ref. 482 (b), and ref. 483 (c). Copyright (2017, 2011) Elsevier (a and c); (2015, 2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Composition of the CZTS films produced by the pulsed laser deposition as a function of the laser fluence. (b–d) SEM of CBTS NC film produced by the sputtering (b), CISe nanowires formed by the molecular beam epitaxy (c), and CuSbS2 film synthesized by the atomic layer deposition (d). (e and f) AFM image (e) and roughness profile (f) of the single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 514 (a), ref. 520 (b), ref. 521 (c), ref. 524 (d), and ref. 529 (e and f). Copyright (2017) Elsevier (a); (2016, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b, c, e and f); (2017) American Chemical Society (d).	 

 	Fig. 27  Outline of the MMC NC-based solid-state (a) and liquid-junction (b) solar cells.	 


CIS	Glass/Mo/CIS/CdS/ZnO/Al-doped ZnO	13.59	190	0.28	0.74	
359

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TMSC–CuInS2/Al	5.48	479	0.377	0.99	
166

FTO/TiO2/CIS/Au	4.32	700	0.38	1.16	
95

FTO/TiO2/CIS/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	5.34	640	0.41	1.41	
465

FTO/TiO2/CdS/CIS/Au	17.80	590	0.64	6.72	
358

ITO/ZnO/CIS/PTB7:PCBM/MoO3/Ag	15.65	750	0.72	8.51	
568

CIS/perovskite	FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/CIS/ZnS/Au	18.6	924	0.487	8.38	
226

Cu–In–B–Se	Glass/Mo/Cu(InxB1−x)Se2/CdS/iZO/ITO	25.9	265	0.34	2.34	
375

CAIS	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT + CAIS/Al	6.74	540	0.31	1.13	
231

ITO/ZnO/Cu0.7Ag0.3InS2/P3HT/Pt	6.93	499	0.53	1.80	
445

AIS	ITO/ZnO NRA/ZnS/AIS/P3HT/Pt	7.5	512	0.55	2.11	
463

CISSe	Mo/CISSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ni–Al	14	521	0.463	3.4	
552

CISe	Mo/CISe/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Ni/Al	39.2	404	0.632	10.01	
479

Mo/CISe/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Al	35.2	460	0.67	10.85	
122

CIGS	Mo/CIGS/CdS/IZO/ZnO/Ni–Al	20.9	526	0.489	6.09	
561

CIGSSe	glass/Mo/CIGSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO	28.8	630	0.657	12.0	
240

CIGSe	Mo/CIGSe/CdS/TiO2/FTO	18.34	490	0.62	5.57	
553

Glass/Mo/CIGSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ni–Al	23.9	501	0.54	6.5	
559

Glass/Mo/SiO2/CIGSe/CdS/ZnO/AZO	27.5	589	0.703	11.4	
569

Cu–Ge–S–Se	Au/MoO3/CGSSe/CdS/FTO	1.31	570	0.28	0.2	
243

Cu2SnS3	Mo/CTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al	20.12	327	0.42	2.77	
249

CuSbS2	ITO/TiO2/CBS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	0.04	313	0.31	0.02	
524

ITO/CdS/CBS/Ag	1.35	665	0.62	0.60	
526

iZO/AZO/CdS/CBS/Mo	5.20	350	0.55	1.02	
525

ITO/ZnO/CBS/P3HT/Pt	5.87	491	0.56	1.61	
475

AgBiS2	ITO/ZnO/AgBiS2/P3HT/Au	16.7	460	0.56	4.1	
293

ITO/ZnO/AgBiS2/PTB7/MoO3/Ag	18.0	500	0.65	5.84	
292



CZTS	ITO/TO2/MEH-PPV/CZTS/PEDOT:PSS/Au	1.06	650	0.37	0.26	
91

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT–PCBM/CZTS/LiF/Al	4.91	520	0.369	0.95	
395

Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al	7.44	493	0.452	1.66	
281

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/Al	10.69	420	0.385	1.73	
92

Al foil/Mo/CZTS/ZnS/IZO/ITO/Al–Ni	8.91	484	0.451	1.94	
349

FTO/TiO2/CdS/CZTS/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	13.9	312	0.462	2.0	
319

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al	12.58	471	0.41	2.44	
266

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al	8.1	450	0.70	2.5	
348

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ag	11.34	460	0.44	2.29	
263

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/Ni–Al	30.28	272	0.352	2.89	
223

FTO/ZnO/ZnO NRA/CdS/CZTS/MoO3/Au	13.97	500	0.484	3.34	
258

Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al	23.28	431	0.356	3.6	
262

ITO/ZnO/P3HT–CZTS–PCBM/MoOx/Ag	10.67	610	0.55	3.65	
404

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO	21.5	532	0.428	4.9	
332

Glass/Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/AZO/Ag	18.55	513	0.517	4.92	
506

Glass/Mo/MoS2/CZTS/CdS/ZnO/ITO/MgF	17.6	616	0.479	5.2	
514

Glass-Mo/CZTS/CdS/IZO/ITO	18.94	556	0.567	6.0	
279

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al	31.5	448	0.644	9.08	
325

ITO/CZTS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ag	20.7	920	0.81	15.4	
308

In:CZTS	Glass/Mo/CZTS/In2S3/ZnO/ITO/Al	20.0	621	0.545	6.9	
562

CZTS + CAIS	ITO/CZTS/CAIS/Ca/Al	5.87	460	0.417	1.126	
305

Cu2NiSnS4	Glass/Mo/CNTS/CdS/AZO	0.52	424	0.43	0.09	
285

Cu2BaSnS4	FTO/CBTS/CdS/ZnO/AZO	4.37	522	0.49	1.60	
558

CZTSe	Mo/CZTSe/CdS/IZO/AZO/Al	31.6	423	0.457	6.11	
533

CZTSSe	Glass/ITO/TiO2/CdS/CZTSSe/Au	6.83	363	0.447	1.11	
275

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO	29.1	360	0.428	4.48	
502

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/AZO	23.9	478	0.45	5.14	
329

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ni–Al	29.6	360	0.507	5.4	
323

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/IZO/ITO/Ag	22.7	424	0.622	6.0	
327

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/Ni–Al	30.4	420	0.527	7.23	
273

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Al	32.9	410	0.569	7.68	
306

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO/Ni–Al	31.2	401	0.628	7.9	
256

Glass/Mo/CZTSSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO	30.9	460	0.60	8.6	
322

Ag:CZTSSe	Ag/ITO/i-ZnO/CdS/CAZTSSe/Mo/glass	35.19	448	0.657	10.36	
564

CZTGS	Mo/CZGSSe/CdS/iZO/ITO/Ni–Al	21.5	640	0.49	6.8	
288


 	Fig. 28  (a and b) A scheme (a) and current–voltage characteristics (b) of the solid-state solar cells based on ZnO NR array and ZnO/CAIS/P3HT heterostructures. (c and d) A schematic layout (c) and energy diagram (d) of the cell based on CZTS NC/MEH-PPV (poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene) bulk-heterojunction. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 445 (a and b) and ref. 91 (c and d). Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  Cross-sectional SEM (a), element distribution maps (b and c), current–voltage characteristics (d), and EQE spectra in the Urbach coordinates (e) for flat-bilayer and porous TiO2/CIS composites. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Current–voltage characteristics (a) and EQE spectra (b) of ZnO/CIS composite based solid-state solar cells subjected to the illumination with a mixture of “white” light (WL) and UV light. Inset in (b): PCE as a function of the “light-soaking” duration. Reprinted from ref. 557 – Published by the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) SEM of CFTS NC-coated ZnO/ZnS NR array. (b) Energy diagram of a CFTS NC-based solar cell. (c) Cross-sectional SEMs of a glass/Mo/CZTS NC layer at different stages of the selenidation. The scale bar in (c) is 500 nm. Figures denote thicknesses of the layers. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 318 (a and b) and ref. 306 (c). Copyright (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2014) American Chemical Society (c).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a and b) Current–voltage characteristics (a) and EQE spectrum (b) of the CZTSe-based cell produced from the aqueous CZTS NC inks. Inset in (b): EQE spectrum presented in the Tauc coordinates to assess the bang gap of the light absorber layer. (c) Cross-sectional SEM and photographs of flexible CZTS-based cell constructed on the Al foil. (d) Atomic composition of In-diffused CZTS/In2S3 film as shown by the Auger spectroscopic analysis (the etching rate was ∼4 nm × min−1). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 329 (a and b), ref. 349 (c), and ref. 562 (d). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society (a, b and d); (2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (c).	 

 	Fig. 33  (a and b) Schematic layout (a) and energy diagram (b) of the TiO2/MAPbI3/CIS/Au solar cell. (c) Cross-sectional SEMs of a FTO/CBTS/MaPbI3/PCBM solar cell. (d) Energy diagram of a P3HT/PCBM-based cell with a CZTS transport layer. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 226 (a and b), ref. 520 (c), and ref. 395 (d). Copyright (2014, 2015) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 


CIS	PA: TiO2 NT/CdS + CIS, SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Na2S	5.18	710	0.38	1.42	
466

PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, dip-coating, CE/RC: carbon/Sx2−	8.12	489	0.37	1.47	
453

PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, dip coating + SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	7.72	570	0.42	1.84	
295

PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, ED/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS–RGO/Sx2−	10.10	501	0.47	2.38	
132

PA: TiO2, ED of CIS NCs (∼3 nm), CE/RC: RGO–CuxS/agarose gel with Sx2−	10.75	584	0.47	2.97	
139

PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, ED/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS–RGO/Sx2−	15.65	529	0.47	3.91	
97

PA: TiO2/CIS/In2S3/ZnS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: carbon/Sx2−	9.76	860	0.524	4.39	
452

PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: PEDOT-carbon/S2−	16.07	912	0.356	5.15	
573

PA: TiO2/CIS/ZnS, dip-coating, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	9.73	580	0.58	6.66	
133

CIS/CdS	PA: TiO2/CIS/CdS/ZnS, dip coating/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	16.9	560	0.45	4.2	
570

CIS/CdSe	PA: TiO2/CIS/CdSe/ZnSe, SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	17.0	575	0.465	4.55	
579

CISe	PA: TiO2/CISe/Mn–CdS, dip-coating/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	16.10	590	0.41	3.96	
168

PA: TiO2/CISe/ZnS, soaking with NC colloid/SILAR, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	26.93	528	0.57	8.10	
171

CISSe	PA: TiO2/CISSe/CdSSe, dip-coating, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	10.5	550	0.604	3.45	
238

CIZS	PA: TiO2/CIZS/ZnS, dip-coating + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	22.62	613	0.61	8.47	
650

CIZSe	PA: TiO2/CIZSe/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: Ti-carbon/Sx2−	25.18	742	0.624	11.66	
96

PA: TiO2/CIZSe/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	25.97	752	0.644	12.57	
296

PA: TiO2/(CdSe + CIZSe)/ZnS, drop casting + SILAR of ZnS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	27.39	752	0.619	12.75	
35

CIZSSe	PC: NiO/CIZSSe, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	9.13	350	0.39	1.25	
131

CIGSe	PA: TiO2/CIGSe/ZnS/SiO, drop-casting, CE/RC: carbon on Ti/Sx2−	25.01	740	0.621	11.49	
98

AIS	PA: TiO2/AIS/In2S3/ZnS, ion exchange/SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Sx2−	7.87	320	0.28	0.70	
575

PA: TiO2, drop-casting of AIS NCs (size 5–6 nm) in FA, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−	4.62	450	0.39	0.80	
58

PA: TiO2/AIS/ZnS, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	9.75	432	0.646	2.62	
499

ZAIS	PA: ZnO NRs, ZAIS NC (∼5 nm) adsorption from octylamine, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)	3.8	540	0.35	0.72	
161

PA: ZnO/ZAIS, dip-coating, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)	3.8	540	0.35	0.72	
159

ZAISe	PA: TiO2/ZAISe/CdS, adsorption from colloid + SILAR of CdS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	8.8	500	0.43	1.9	
94

ZAISe	PA: TiO2, dip-coating with ZAISe NCs (size 3.2–3.5 nm), passivation with ZnS (8 SILARs), amorphous TiO2 and SiO2 layers; CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	16.03	381	0.59	3.57	
187

CdIn2S4	PA: FTO/CdIn2S4, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−	3.5	331	0.415	0.48	
245

ZnIn2S4	PA: TiO2/ZnIn2S4, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−	2.55	430	0.385	0.42	
425

AgSbS2	PA: TiO2/AgSbS2, SILAR, CE/RC: Au/Sx2−	2.42	320	0.436	0.34	
473

CuBiS2	PA: TiO2/CuBiS2,CBD, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	6.87	250	0.361	0.62	
312

AgBiS2	PA: TiO2/AgBiS2, SILAR, CE/RC: Pt/Sx2−	7.61	180	0.386	0.53	
474

CZTS	PA: TiO2/CZTS, drop casting, CE/RC: Pt/tetrabutylammonium perchlorate	0.36	283	0.286	0.03	
208

PA: TiO2/RGO-CZTS, adsorption from colloid, CE/RC: Pt/(I2/I−)	0.411	560	0.576	0.133	
196

ZnSe/CZTS	PA: ZnO/ZnSe/CZTS, ion exchange + spin coating of CZTS, CE/RC: CuxS/Sx2−	10.46	490	0.43	2.2	
197


 	Fig. 34  (a) Energy diagram of TiO2/CISe and TiO2/CIZSe nanocomposites. (b) Absorption spectra of TiO2/(ZnSe)1−x(AISe)x photoanodes with a different x (given on the figure). (c) Absolute positions of CB and VB levels of the composition-selected ZAISe NCs relatively to the CB level of TiO2. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 96 (a) and ref. 94 (b and c). Copyright (2014, 2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Cross-sectional SEM images of FTO/TiO2/CIS/ZnS photoanode (a and b); elements distribution across the photoanode (b) and on the outer surface (c). Adapted and reprinted from ref. 55 – Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of TiO2/CISSe photoanodes with the sensitizer NC of a different size. (b and c) Size-dependence of the EQE spectra (b), PCE (c, red bars) and PL quantum yield (c, blue bars) for TiO2/CIS photoanodes with size-selected CIS NCs. (d) Photocurrent density (curves 1 and 2) obtained for TiO2/CIS (1) and TiO2/CIS/ZnS (2) photoanodes and PL intensity of colloidal CIS/ZnS NCs (curve 3) as a function of the CIS NC composition Cu:In:S = xCu:5:10. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 170 (a), ref. 132 (b and c), and ref. 55 (d). Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society (a–c); (2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Energy diagram of a TiO2/CIS/CdS photoanode. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of the liquid-junction solar cells with TiO2/CdS, TiO2/CIS and combined TiO2/CIS/CdS photoanodes. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of a TiO2/CISSe photoanode-based liquid-junction solar cell. (d) Light conversion efficiency η and open-circuit voltage Voc in the cells based on TiO2/CIS photoanodes with different MC buffer layers. Reprinted/adapted with permissions from ref. 467 (a), ref. 570 (b), ref. 238 (c), and ref. 579 (d). Copyright (2011, 2012) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a and b); (2013) American Chemical Society (c and d).	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Dark current–voltage characteristics of CIS NCs, carbon and carbon/CIS composites. (b) Nyquist plots for CIS NCs and carbon/CIS with a different component ratio. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of DSSCs based on Pt, CZTS, and CZTSe CEs. (d) “Dark” current–voltage characteristics of FTO/CZTSSe films immersed into the aqueous polysulfide solution. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 360 (a and b), ref. 492 (c), and ref. 271 (d). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society (a, b and d); (2017) Elsevier (c).	 

 	Fig. 39  A scheme of the working principle of (a and b) photocatalytic systems based on a MC NC/metal NC composite (a) and a binary NC heterostructure (b), and (c) photoelectrochemical system with a MC NC sensitized photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Rate of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the presence of CZTS NCs and their composites with Pt and PtCo NCs. (b) Photoaction and absorption spectra of the single-layer MnSb2S4 nanosheets, inset: a scheme for the photocatalytic hydrogen production over the MnSb2S4 monolayer. (c) Photoaction and absorption spectra of TiO2/CuGa2In3S8 nanoheterostructure. (d) Efficiency and selectivity of the photocatalytic NO3− reduction to N2 over CIS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 213 (a), ref. 524 (b), ref. 241 (c), and ref. 356 (d). Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society (a); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b and d); (2016) Elsevier (c).	 

 	Fig. 41  Energy diagrams of the photocatalytic systems for (a and b) hydrogen evolution based on GCN/CIS (a) and cubic/hexagonal ZnIn2S4 (b) composites; (c) CO2 reduction based on CZTS/TiO2 heterostructure; (d) energy levels in TiO2–CaIn2S4 system. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 433 (a), ref. 339 (b), ref. 264 (c), and ref. 430 (d). Copyright (2017, 2015) American Chemical Society (a and d); (2016, 2017) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b and c).	 

 	Fig. 42  (a and b) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate as a function of (a) molar Ga fraction x in CuIn1−xGaxS2 NCs and (b) molar Zn fraction x in (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 microspheres. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 242 (a) and ref. 352 (b). Copyright (2014) The Royal Society of Chemistry (a), (2010) Elsevier (b).	 

 	Fig. 43  (a and b) Dependence of the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate R(H2) on the average size (a) and bandgap (b) of ZAIS-x NCs prepared at different x. (c and d) Efficiency of the photocatalytic phenol decomposition as a function of the bandgap/size of CISe NCs (c) and the driving force of the photoinduced CISe CB electron transfer to O2 (d). Reprinted with permissions from ref. 93 (a and b) and ref. 87 (c and d). Copyright (2015, 2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) SPR-induced enhancement factor fenhance of the photocatalytic activity of ZAIS NCs by Au/SiO2 particles as a function of the silica shell thickness. (b) Kinetic curves of the photocatalytic hydrogen formation in the presence of sole CaIn2S4 NCs and their composites with Au and Pt NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 162 (a) and ref. 616 (b). Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society (a); (2016) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) Methylene blue conversion efficiencies with CZTS and CZTS/Pd(Au) heterostructures. (b) A scheme of NIR light upconversion by the NaYF4:Yb,Tm phosphor coupled to CZTS NCs. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 209 (a) and ref. 623 (b). Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society (a); (2017) Elsevier.	 
HO2˙ + HO2˙ = H2O2 + O2,
H2O2 = 2HO˙.

 	Fig. 46  (a) Current–voltage curves registered under the chopped illumination for CIGS photocathode, as well as CIGS/Pt and CIGS/ZnS/Pt heterostructures. (b) An energy level scheme of Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO photocathode for the water splitting. (c) SEM/scheme of TiO2 NR/ZnIn2S4/CdS photoanode. (d) Energy diagram of FTO/TiO2/ZnIn2S4/CdS photoanode. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 638 (a), ref. 641 (b), ref. 642 (c), and ref. 119 (d). Copyright (2014, 2015) American Chemical Society (a and b); (2017) Elsevier (c); (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry (d).	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) A scheme of the CIS-based photoelectrochemical immunosensor, Ab – complementary antibody, Ag – target antigen, BSA – bovine serum albumin. (b) An energy diagram of the FTO/ZnO/CdS/CZTS photoanode. (c) Chronoamperograms registered for FTO/TiO2, FTO/TiO2/CZTS and FTO/TiO2/CZTS/Ag2S photoanodes with a different size of Ag2S NCs (explanation of H1–H3 designations provided in the text). (d) An energy diagram of the FTO/CZTS/ZnSe/CdS/CdSe photocathode. Reprinted with permissions from ref. 646 (a), ref. 320 (b), ref. 195 (c), and ref. 261 (d). Copyright (2014–2016) American Chemical Society (a, c and d); (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry (b).	 
AM1.5G	Solar spectrum near the Earth surface
2D/3D	Two-/three-dimensional
AIS	Silver indium sulfide (Ag–In–S)
AIGS	Silver indium gallium sulfide (Ag–In–Ga–S)
AZO	Aluminium-doped zinc oxide
CAIS	Copper silver indium sulfide (Cu–Ag–In–S)
CB	Conduction band
CBS	Copper bismuth sulfide (CuBiS2)
CBTS	Copper barium tin sulfide (Cu–Ba–Sn–S)
CE	Counter electrode
CFTS	Copper iron tin sulfide (Cu–Fe–Sn–S)
CGS	Copper gallium sulfide (Cu–Ga–S)
CIS	Copper indium sulfide (Cu–In–S)
CIGS	Copper indium gallium sulfide (Cu–In–Ga–S)
CGS	Copper gallium sulfide (Cu–Ga–S)
CGZS	Copper gallium zinc sulfide (Cu–Ga–Zn–S)
CIZS	Copper indium zinc sulfide (Cu–In–Zn–S)
CTS	Copper tin sulfide (Cu2SnS3)
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
CZTS	Copper zinc tin sulfide (Cu–Zn–Sn–S)
1-DDT/t-DDT	1-/tert-Dodecanethiol
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMSO	Dimethylsulfoxide
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
ETL	Electron transport layer
EQE	External quantum efficiency
FTO	F-Doped tin oxide
GCN	Graphitic carbon nitride
GSH	Glutathione
GO	Graphene oxide
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HRTEM	High-resolution TEM
HTL	Hole transport layer
HTT	Hydrothermal treatment
ITO	Indium tin oxide
IZO	Intrinsically doped zinc oxide
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MC	Metal chalcogenide
MMC	Multinary metal chalcogenide
MCC	Metal chalcogenide complex
MEH-PPV	With poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)
MPA	Mercaptopropionic acid
NR	Nanorod
NC	Nanocrystal
NIR	Near infrared
NT	Nanotube
OLA	Oleylamine
ODE	Octadecene
OTE	Optically transparent electrode
P3HT	Poly-3-hexylthiophene
PCBM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
PESA	Photoelectron spectroscopy in air
PL	Photoluminescence
PTB7	Poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethyl-hexyl)-oxy]-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)-carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]-thiophene-diyl]]
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SILAR	Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction
Spiro-OMeTAD	
N
2,N2,N2′,N2′,N7,N7,N7′,N7′-octakis-(4-methoxyphenyl)-9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′,7,7′-tetramine
SPR	Surface plasmon resonance
SSSC	Semiconductor-sensitized solar cell
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
STT	Solvothermal treatment
TAA	Thioacetamide
TEA	Triethylamine
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thioglycolic (mercaptoacetic) acid
TMSC	Trimethylsilylcellulose
TOPO	Trioctylphosphine oxide
UPS	UV photoelectron spectroscopy
UV	Ultraviolet
VB	Valence band
QY	Quantum yield
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZAIS	Silver zinc indium sulfide (Zn–Ag–In–S)
ZIS	Zinc indium sulfide (ZnIn2S4)
acac	Acetylacetonate

a
B
	Exciton Bohr radius
dedtc	Diethyldithiocarbamate
Et	Ethyl
eCB−	Conduction band electron

h
VB
+
	Valence band hole

hν
	Light quantum energy

E
a
	Electron affinity

E
g
	Bandgap

E
CB
	Conduction band potential

E
F
	Fermi energy

E
VB
	Valence band potential
FF	Fill factor of a current–voltage characteristic

J
sc
	Short-circuit photocurrent density

I
p
	Ionization potential

k
et
	Electron transfer rate constant

m
e*	Effective electron mass

m
h*	Effective hole mass

η
	Power conversion efficiency (PCE)

R
ct
	Charge transfer resistance

V
oc
	Open-circuit photovoltage

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
