Linking optical and electrical small amplitude perturbation techniques for dynamic performance characterization of dye solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP21134J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP21134J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12435-12446Show Chemical TermsLinking optical and electrical small amplitude perturbation techniques for dynamic performance characterization of dye solar cells†

        
          
            Janne 
            Halme
          
        
      *
      Aalto University, Department of Applied Physics, P.O. Box 15100, FI-00076 AALTO, Finland. E-mail: janne.halme@tkk.fi
Received 
      11th April 2011
    , Accepted 13th May 2011First published on 8th June 2011AbstractThis paper unifies the analytical models used widely but thus far mostly separately for electrical and optical small amplitude perturbation measurements of nanostructured electrochemical dye solar cells (DSC): electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). The models are linked by expressing the kinetic boundary condition used for solving the time-dependent continuity equation of electrons in IMPS and IMVS analysis in terms of the series and parallel impedance components found in the complete equivalent circuit impedance model of DSC. As a result, analytical expressions are derived for potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS transfer functions of complete DSCs that are applicable at any operating point along the solar cell current–voltage (IV) curve. In agreement with the theory, impedance spectrum calculated as a ratio of IMVS and IMPS transfer functions measured near the maximum power point matches exactly with the impedance spectrum measured directly with EIS. Consequently, both IMPS-IMVS and EIS yield equal estimates for the electron diffusion length. The role of the chemical capacitance of the nanostructured semiconductor photoelectrode in the interpretation of the so-called RC attenuation of the IMPS response is clarified, as well as the capacitive frequency dispersion in IMPS and IMVS.
1. Introduction
Nanostructured semiconductor solar cells have emerged as a promising option for low-cost photovoltaic solar electricity generation. Contrary to the conventional pn-junction devices where the primary steps of photovoltaic energy conversion—light absorption, charge transport, and charge collection—take place in the same semiconductor material phase, in a nanostructured solar cell these processes are separated to different material phases, with the result that some of the costly purity requirements of the active materials and the processing techniques are relaxed.
A classic example is the nanostructured electrochemical dye solar cell (DSC).1,2DSCs have validated efficiency record of 10.4%3 and good long term stability.4 Their low cost materials, printability to flexible substrates and unique design possibilities with respect to color and semi-transparency makes them attractive option for building integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) such as facade elements as well as consumer applications such as solar chargers for portable electronics.
The operation of DSC is based on light-induced charge separation at an interface between a liquid redox electrolyte or a solid hole conductor and nanoparticles of a wide-band gap semiconductor oxide, most commonly TiO2, that form a nanostructured nanoporous photoelectrode. At this interface, a monolayer of dye absorbs photons and injects electrons to the conduction band of the TiO2 particle, which is followed by transport of the electrons by diffusion through the nanoparticle film to the collecting contact.
One of the most remarkable features of the DSCs is that practically all photogenerated electrons can be collected from the highly disordered random network of interconnected semiconductor nanoparticles before they recombine with electron acceptors species in the hole conducting medium surrounding the nanoparticles.1,5,6 The basic reason for this is that the transport of electrons is much faster than their recombination. However, clarifying the physical mechanisms that determine the result of this kinetic competition has remained an active, and sometimes controversial, subject of experimental and theoretical investigations.
Central in these investigations has been an extensive use of dynamic opto-electrical techniques based on small amplitude modulation of the steady state, namely electrochemical impedance (EIS),7–9 intensity modulated photocurrent (IMPS)10,11 and intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS).12,13 In EIS, the AC current response to an AC voltage modulation is measured as a function of the modulation frequency, whereas IMPS and IMVS involve measuring the dynamic photocurrent and photovoltage response of the cell to small amplitude light intensity modulation.
Although it has been shown both theoretically13–15 and experimentally13,16,17 that these techniques give similar dynamic information on the electron transport and recombination, their development has evolved virtually independently: some researchers have focused on EIS while others have used mainly IMPS and IMVS. There has also been a difference in the data analysis techniques used: while it is customary to analyze EIS data with equivalent circuit models, ,7,8 the IMPS and IMVS response has been interpreted using models based on differential equations.11,18–20 Yet, there is no fundamental reason for this, since also equivalent circuit modeling is based on differential equations, and hence, both approaches must give the same mathematical expressions. In fact, as pointed out earlier,21 the EIS, IMPS and IMVS techniques are related by definition simply as (1)where ZCELL is the solar cell impedance, and  and  are the IMVS and IMPS transfer functions of the solar cell measured respectively galvanostatically and potentiostatically at the same conditions as EIS.21
However, due to the lack of a mathematical model applicable for analysis of the IMPS and IMVS data along the whole current–voltage (IV) curve of a complete DSC, the IMPS and IMVS techniques have been applied previously almost exclusively only at respectively short and open circuit conditions. On the other hand, voltage and current dependent EIS has become a standard practice. The purpose of the present paper is to open also IMPS and IMVS technique for similar analysis, by establishing a mathematical link between the equivalent circuit modeling of EIS and differential equation modeling of IMPS and IMVS in light of eqn (1), following an approach similar to Bay and West.15 The result is a quantitative analytical model that unifies the EIS, IMPS and IMVS techniques with each other and with the steady-state-state solar cell IV measurements.
In contrast to recent numerical simulations of the non-linear electron transport and recombination in DSC,19,20,22–27 the IMPS and IMVS modeling here uses linear approximations to arrive at analytical solutions that can be directly compared with the widely used equivalent circuit impedance model of DSC.
2. Theoretical background
Before going to the IMPS and IMVS modeling that is the main topic of the paper, it is worthwhile to write down the basic definitions of the EIS, IMPS and IMVS transfer functions, point out their relation to the IV curve, and briefly summarize the equivalent circuit impedance model of DSC, since we want to express the IMPS and IMVS model in exact consistency with it.
2.1. Opto-electrical transfer functions and their relation to the IV curve
In the EIS measurement, a small amplitude sinusoidal voltage modulation VCELL,AC(ω,t) is superimposed on a constant steady state cell voltage VCELL and the resulting AC current density iAC(ω,t) is recorded as a function of the modulation frequency (ω). The cell impedance is defined as the ratio of the AC voltage and current (2)In intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) the solar cell is held at constant voltage (potentiostatic control) and the AC current response iCELL,AC(ω,t) caused by light intensity modulation is measured and correlated by the AC photon flux signal ΦAC(ω,t) by defining the IMPS transfer function as (3)where qe is the electron charge. The intensity modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) for its part, is carried out at constant DC cell current (galvanostatic control), and the AC voltage signal VCELL,AC(ω,t) caused by light intensity modulation is recorded and contrasted with the AC photon flux (4)Since the modulation amplitude in the measurements is small enough to maintain linearity of the response, eqn (2)–(4) define complex transfer functions in the frequency domain. These transfer functions describe the dynamics of physical processes related to photocurrent and photovoltage generation in the cell.
The relation (eqn (1)) of the IMPS, and IMVS techniques to the EIS and the solar cell IV curve follows directly form eqn (2)–(4), and can be understood with the help of Fig. 1. When the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions are measured at potentiostatic and galvanostatic conditions respectively, and with the same light modulation amplitude and wavelength in both cases, they constitute the orthogonal components of the cell impedance.21 The impedance for its part corresponds to the differential resistance RCELL of the IV curve (at the limit of zero frequency), i.e. its slope of the IV curve at the point (VCELL, iCELL) where the measurements are taken (5)
 Fig. 1  Relation of the IMPS, IMVS and EIS techniques to each other and to the steady state solar cell IV curve (black continuous line). The black dotted lines represent the steady state limit of the IV curve due to modulation of the incident light intensity. The colored arrows show the corresponding modulation of cell current and voltage in IMPS (red, solid and dashed arrows indicating respectively increasing and decreasing light intensity), IMVS (blue), and EIS (green). 
According to the sign convention of the present paper, and consistently with positive RCELL, the short circuit current density (iSC) of the cell is positive and the open circuit voltage (VOC) is negative. Increase of light intensity causes thus an increase in the current (iCELL,AC > 0) in the potentiostatic IMPS measurement, but decreases the cell voltage (VCELL,AC < 0) in the galvanostatic IMVS experiment (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, it is customary and convenient to plot IMVS spectra in the positive real part–negative imaginary part quadrant of the complex plane, so we add minus sign in eqn (4), which places all the three transfer functions of eqn (1) in the same quadrant. Since the above considerations do not involve any assumptions of the type or properties of the solar cell, eqn (1) is valid for any solar cell irrespective of its materials and photovoltaic conversion mechanism.
The relation between the solar cell IV curve and RCELL, measurable with EISe.g. as a function of current density (i = iCELL) can be written as8,28,29 (6)Physical modeling of the differential resistance of each cell component contributing to RCELL allows one to derive values for physical parameters through analysis of experimental EIS data and to predict their effect on the IV curve and cell efficiency.8,9,29Eqn (1) implies that the same must be possible also with IMPS and IMVS. The main goal of the present paper is work out the mathematical equations required for doing it in practice.
2.2. Equivalent circuit modeling of EIS
In the standard equivalent circuit impedance model of DSC,7–9,29 shown in Fig. 2, hindrance of charge transport in the material phases and charge transfer across their interfaces is represented by resistances, and accumulation of charge is accounted for by capacitive circuit elements. Of particular importance to the present paper is the transmission line impedance model,30 developed to describe the photoelectrode of the DSC by Bisquert et al.7,8,31 The model is summarized in more detail e.g. in Appendix I of ref. 29 and in the ESI† of the present paper.
 Fig. 2  Equivalent circuit impedance model of the dye solar cell. rT (Ω m) is the electron transport resistivity, and rREC (Ω m3) and cμ (Ω m−3) the electron recombination resistance and chemical capacitance per unit volume. RCO (Ω m2) and CCO (F m−2) are the contact resistance and capacitance at the interface between the conducting substrate and the TiO2 film; RSU (Ω m2) and CSU (F m−2) the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the substrate–electrolyte interface; RCE (Ω m2) and CCE (F m−2) the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface. ZD (Ω m2) is the electrolyte diffusion impedance at the counter electrode and RS (Ω m2) the Ohmic series resistance of the cell including contributions from the sheet resistance of the substrates, resistivity of the electrolyte and electrical contacts and wiring of the cell. 
2.3. Differential equation modeling of IMPS and IMVS
The differential equation model used for the IMPS and IMVS modeling in this paper is summarized in the Appendix. While it has become recently clear that accurate description of the electron transport and recombination characteristics of DSCs requires numerical modeling that takes explicitly into account non-linear electron recombination,19,20,22–27 electron trapping and detrapping effects,19,20,25,26 and even dye regeneration and ionic transport in the electrolyte,25,32 the present modeling is based on the conventional linear electron continuity equation that neglects these effects. The reason for this choice is that we seek analytical solutions that can be directly compared with the standard EIS equivalent circuit model of DSC7,8,31 which is subject to the same assumptions. At the same time the resulting analytical expressions for the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions of the complete solar cell are readily applicable to fitting to experimental data for parameter estimation, similar to the standard practice of using equivalent circuits to analysis EIS data.
It should be nevertheless kept in mind that due to the linear assumption, some errors will be introduced in the fitted parameter values depending on how well the linear model is applicable to the actual measurement conditions. The magnitude of these errors and their importance for practical performance evaluation of DSC are presently under keen investigations giving both support for and criticism against the applicability of the linear assumption.17,20,22–24,33,34 The analytical solutions presented here serve as a point of comparison for such investigations. Indeed, eqn (A8) and (A9) are the general expressions for the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions of the nanostructured TiO2 photoelectrode film, and thus applicable to any electron transport model, including numerical models.
What brings us to the main topic of the present paper is the fact that the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions defined by eqn (A8) and (A9) are actually not measurable from a complete DSC since the equations neglect the effect of the additional impedance components in the solar cell. The main goal of the paper is to link the time-dependent differential equation model of the photoelectrode to the full equivalent circuit impedance model of DSC so that the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions for the complete solar cell can be found.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Effect of series and parallel impedances on the IMPS and IMVS response
Looking at the equivalent circuit model of DSC (Fig. 2) we can see that there are additional impedance components connected in series and in parallel with the nanostructured TiO2 film, as represented more generally by the simplified circuit in Fig. 3. To model the complete solar cell IMPS and IMVS responses, we need to understand how they influence the boundary condition (eqn (A2)) used for solving the time-dependent continuity equation of electrons in the photoelectrode film.
 Fig. 3  Simplified equivalent circuit transfer function model of the dye solar cell. 
As mentioned in the previous section, the IMPS measurement is taken under external potentiostatic control of the solar cell. This means that while the light intensity is modulated and causes an AC photocurrent to flow in the cell, the cell voltage VCELL is kept precisely at a fixed value with the help of a potentiostat, meaning that AC component of the cell voltage is always exactly zero: VCELL,AC = 0. IMVS measurement for its part is taken under galvanostatic control keeping the cell current constant, so that the AC cell current remains exactly zero: iCELL,AC = 0. The effect of the series and parallel impedances is that they prevent applying externally an exact potentiostatic and galvanostatic control of the photoelectrode film itself. To understand how this influences the IMPS and IMVS response, it is useful to build a mental picture of the situation.
Imagine first, that we were somehow able to assign potentiostatic control directly on the photoelectrode film, i.e. VTiO2,AC = 0. This would mean that also the electron density in the TiO2 film at the contact would be fixed to its steady state value, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. To maintain the electron density constant, all excess photogenerated electrons arriving at the contact would have to be rapidly extracted to the external circuit. In terms of the kinetic boundary condition (eqn (A2)) this would correspond to kEXT = ∞. This condition has been traditionally thought to describe the short circuit condition,11,18 but actually describes potentiostatic condition. Remember that the modeling of the small amplitude response is done only for the AC part of the electron density generated by the modulated light beam, and hence, the DC part can describe any steady state condition, such as any voltage polarization of the photoelectrode. Hence, if ZS and ZP were negligible, the traditional solutions for short-circuit-IMPS11,18 would correctly describe any potentiostatic IMPS experiment.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the modulation of the excess electron density ne in the photoelectrode film in potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS experiments. The thick line represents the steady state ne and the thin dotted lines its modulation (at the limit of zero frequency). If exact external control of (a) photoelectrode voltage and (b) current of the photoelectrode film would be possible, ne and its slope at the contact would be fixed to their steady state values in the IMPS and IMVS measurements, respectively. However, in real complete DSC, the parallel and series impedances ZP, ZS and ZCO in Fig. 3 prohibit this, and as a result, modulation of ne, and its slope, occurs at the contact both in the IMPS and IMVS experiments. This modifies the IMPS and IMVS responses as described in the text. 
The same applies to the IMVS measurements. Having galvanostatic control directly on the photoelectrode film would mean that the AC component of the photogenerated current at the contact would be zero, iTiO2,AC = 0. This means that the slope of the excess electron density at the contact would be fixed to its steady state value as shown in Fig. 4b. In practice, no excess AC light induced electrons would be extracted from the film. This corresponds to kEXT = 0 in eqn (A2), which is traditionally considered as the open circuit condition of the cell, but actually describes galvanostatic condition.
However, what happens in reality is the following. When an AC light modulation induced photocurrent flows in the cell during potentiostatic IMPS measurement, an AC voltage drop (VS,AC + VCO,AC) is induced over the series and contact impedances, ZS and ZCO in Fig. 3. Since in the external potentiostatic control the total cell voltage is held exactly zero (VCELL,AC = 0), an AC voltage equal but opposite to the voltage drop in ZS and ZCO is induced over the photoelectrode film. In other words, while the whole cell is potentiostatically controlled, the photoelectrode film is not, i.e. VTiO2,AC ≠ 0. As a result, not all excess AC light induced electrons are extracted from the film, which decreases the AC photocurrent output of the film, corresponding to decrease in the AC variation of the slope in the electron density (Fig. 4c). Since finite VTiO2,AC is present also at the interface between the photoelectrode substrate and the electrolyte, an AC parallel current iP,AC flows through it, to the direction opposite to the photocurrent iTiO2,AC. This further decreases the AC photocurrent output of the cell, depending on the magnitude of ZP (Fig. 3).
In the IMVS measurement there is a similar situation: even if the external AC cell current is fixed to zero galvanostatically (iCELL,AC = 0), there is AC photocurrent flowing through the photoelectrode contact, and via ZP and ZCO, due to photogenerated electrons leaking to the electrolyte at the substrate–electrolyte interface. This additional loss of electrons decreases their density at the TiO2 film contact (Fig. 4d), which decreases the AC photovoltage VTiO2,AC of the film and thus the whole cell, VCELL,AC. In other words, where the series impedances prevented potentiostatic control of the photoelectrode in the IMPS measurement, the finite parallel impedance prevents its galvanostatic control in the IMVS experiment.
It becomes evident that the series and parallel impedance components determine how the externally controlled and measured cell current and voltage translate to the current flowing in the photoelectrode film and the voltage at its contact, and thus need to be taken into account in the modeling of the whole cell IMPS and IMVS responses. In the following, we show that this can be done simply by replacing the kinetic boundary condition (eqn (A2)) with one related to these impedance components. This needs to be done separately for the potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS measurement conditions.
3.2. 
          IMPS of complete DSC under potentiostatic control
It follows from basic analysis of the circuit in Fig. 3 that, when VCELL,AC = 0, the AC photocurrent of the TiO2 photoelectrode can be expressed in terms of the AC voltage over it as (7)The minus sign in the above equation comes from the fact that while iTiO2,AC > 0, VTiO2,AC < 0 in the IMPS measurement, as it is also in the IMVS measurement (see Fig. 4c and d and 1). Expressing in this equation iTiO2,AC with the Fick's law of diffusion and using the relation of VTiO2,AC to the chemical capacitance at the photoelectrode contact (eqn (A10)), we arrive at the following equation (8)Now, bearing in mind eqn (A7), we can see that the above equation is identical to the kinetic boundary condition (eqn (A2)) with the difference that the parameter kEXT is replaced with an expression that contains the three impedance components of Fig. 3 and the chemical capacitance at the photoelectrode contact: (9)It thus follows very conveniently that the existing and well known solutions of the time-dependent diffusion model of the photoelectrode film, with the kinetic boundary condition,11,18 are entirely valid for potentiostatic IMPS measurements of complete DSCs, even in the presence of arbitrary series and parallel impedances.
The physical background of the rate constant kEXT has been rarely discussed in the literature. It was originally speculated that the extraction of electrons from the photoelectrode film could be controlled by some potential dependent kinetic mechanism,11 but this seems to disagree with the fact that the contact between the nanostructure TiO2 film and the conducting substrate has normally very low bias independent resistance and may be assumed Ohmic by nature, except with ITO-PET and some metal substrates.35,36Eqn (9) shows that kEXT need not be related to any specific kinetic charge transfer mechanism, but instead can be explained more generally by other internal impedance components of the solar cell. Eqn (9) thus gives kEXT an exact yet general physical interpretation. Any non-negligible36 and possibly voltage-dependent contact resistance37,38 can be introduced in it through ZCO.
One reason why kEXT has received little attention is that it has not been needed in practice: the IMPS and IMVS techniques have been applied almost exclusively at the short circuit and open circuit conditions where kEXT disappears from the model solutions explicitly, when it is assigned the values kEXT → ∞ in IMPS and kEXT = 0 in IMVS. However, as already discussed, these conditions fail due to the series and parallel impedances.
To form the expression for the IMPS transfer function of the complete DSC, one merely needs to express the AC current of the complete cell in terms of the AC current of the photoelectrode, based on the circuit of Fig. 3, and use eqn (3) to obtain (10)where (11)is the so-called the “RC attenuation factor” of the IMPS response,11,18,39 and kEXT,IMPS is given by eqn (9). Compared to the specific approximate expressions for FA in the literature,11,39eqn (11) includes all impedance components of complete DSC equivalent circuit (Fig. 2), while being general to allow introduction of other components as well.

Eqn (10) shows that the internal impedance components of the solar cell affect the measured IMPS response of the cell in two ways. Firstly, through the attenuation factor (eqn (11)), and secondly, through the boundary condition at the photoelectrode contact (eqn (9)). Note that this boundary condition is in fact dynamic, since the series and parallel impedances are generally frequency dependent, but this seemingly complex situation becomes correctly accounted for by eqn (9).
Potentiostatic IMPS experiments can be carried out at any point along the solar cell IV curve. The link provided by eqn (9) makes thus all the pre-existing IMPS theories and experiments, used so far only at the short circuit conditions, applicable at any point along the solar cell IV curve.
3.3. 
          IMVS of complete DSC under galvanostatic control
Following similar analysis as above for IMPS, we can write the nonzero AC flux of electrons flowing in the galvanostatic IMVS measurement from the photoelectrode film to the electrolyte via the impedance components ZCO and ZP as (12)Comparison of the above equation to eqn (A2), keeping in mind eqn (A7), shows that the kinetic boundary condition is again valid, but in this case the parameter kEXT is given by (13)and is thus different from the expression for potentiostatically controlled IMPS experiment (eqn (9)).
In this case, because no AC current flows though the series impedance, the whole AC cell voltage drops at the photoelectrode and equals that of the parallel impedance, VCELL,AC = VP,AC. For the same reason, all AC photocurrent flows through the parallel impedance, iTiO2,AC = iP,AC. It thus follows from the circuit of Fig. 3 that the IMVS transfer function measurable from a complete DSC can be expressed in terms of the IMVS transfer function of the photoelectrode as (14)where kEXT,IMVS is given by eqn (13). Alternatively, using eqn (A11) it can be expressed in terms of the IMPS transfer function of the photoelectrode as (15)where one must take care to insert kEXT,IMVS from eqn (13) instead of kEXT,IMPS as the kinetic boundary condition. This may seem odd at first sight, but remember that  simply represents the dynamic current of the photoelectrode film at given condition (here external galvanostatic control, thus evoking kEXT,IMVS), which is related to the cell voltage (represented by ) by eqn (15) when iCELL,AC = 0 (cf.Fig. 3).
With eqn (9)–(11), (13)–(15) any model describing the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions of DSC that uses the kinetic boundary condition (eqn (A2)) can be coupled to any equivalent circuit impedance model of the complete solar cell that can be reduced to the general circuit of Fig. 3. Appendix gives the solutions for the basic optical model of DSC that is the most interesting for practical applications.
3.4. Correspondence of the IMVS/IMPS and EIS models
It is shown in the ESI† that even in the case of arbitrary optical conditions eqn (1) is valid for the general expressions of the IMVS and IMPS transfer functions, and that their ratio yields the following expression for the impedance of the photoelectrode film based on the diffusion model (16)where (17)is the electron diffusion length. This is indeed the impedance expression that can be derived consistently from both the diffusion model and the transmission line model of the photoelectrode film,40 demonstrating the correspondence of the two modeling regimes.
As known from the previous works,41–44 an exact correspondence of parameters between the models is provided by the chemical capacitance cμ per unit volume of the photoelectrode (F m−3) according to the following relations D = (rTcμ)−1(18) τ = rRECcμ(19) (20)where RREC= rREC/d and RT = rTd are the measured recombination and transport resistances in units Ω m2. However, the general form of the transmission line impedance model of the photoelectrode (eqn (S2) in the ESI†) uses constant phase element (CPE) in place of the chemical capacitance to account for the frequency dispersion observed typically in experimental EIS data. Let us therefore arrange the transmission line impedance expression to include the chemical capacitance explicitly.
The CPE is defined as ZCPE = qCPE−1(iω)−βCPE(21)where qCPE and βCPE are the CPE pre-factor and exponent. The equivalent capacitance (in units F m−3) of an electrochemical interface modeled by the parallel connection of the CPE element and a charge transfer resistance (in this case rREC) is28,29,45 cμ = (qCPE)1/βCPE(rREC)1/βCPE−1(22)This relation is obtained by requiring that the RC-relaxation time constant of the parallel resistance–capacitance and resistance–CPE circuits are equal. Rearranging we get an expression for the CPE pre-factor (23)Using this relation, eqn (S3) and (S4) in the ESI†, and eqn (18)–(20), the transmission line impedance expression of the photoelectrode (eqn (S2) in the ESI†) can be arranged to a form that contains only the diffusion model parameters, and the CPE exponent βCPE that is responsible for the frequency dispersion (24)
Comparing this to eqn (16) we can note two differences. The first is obviously the CPE exponent. The comparison shows that the frequency dispersion modeled by it enters the solution of the diffusion model in a way that can be interpreted as a distribution of time-constants (dynamic electron lifetimes) centered at τ.46 The frequency dispersion does not affect the steady state solution (ω = 0), and hence, its absence in the diffusion model does not hamper applicability to steady state data. Nevertheless, since the CPE element is often necessary in the impedance model to achieve good fits to measured impedance spectra, it must in such cases have an effect on the measured IMPS and IMVS responses as well. This can be taken into account in all the solutions for the dynamic IMPS and IMVS responses by replacing eqn (A8) with (25)
It is worth mentioning that the distribution of time constants, originating from the CPE behavior, is not the reason why the IMPS responses cannot be described well by a single RC time constant, in other words, it is not the reason why the IMPS transfer function is typically a distorted arc in the complex plane plot rather than a semi-circle. The shape of the IMPS arc is mainly a geometrical effect of the electron diffusion in the film,18 represented by the transmission line. The frequency dispersion by CPE is an additional effect to this macroscopic geometric dispersion, and its microscopic origin is not well understood.
The second difference is related to the chemical capacitance. To match eqn (24) exactly with eqn (16) the chemical capacitance (per unit volume) has to be assigned with its value at the substrate contact: cμ(0). This is an important point that highlights the condition at which the diffusion model and the transmission line model can be considered physically consistent, in addition to being merely mathematically equivalent. The diffusion model allows the electron density to vary, whereas the transmission line model does not, as it assumes that the resistance and capacitance parameters have constant values along the transmission line. Physical consistency between the models is reached only when the electron density is constant in the whole film. In practice, this is obtained close to open circuit condition, unless leakage current through RSU (cf.Fig. 2) is substantial, or whenever the electron diffusion length is much longer than the film thickness, i.e. the transport of the electrons is much faster than their recombination. This issue is discussed in more detail elsewhere.29,41
3.5. Experimental verification
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the simple relation between EIS, IMPS and IMVS transfer functions (eqn (1)) is valid for any kind of solar cell. In this section we verify this experimentally for DSC.
The measured solar cell was one of the cells reported in our previous publication.47 The cell was a conventional sandwich type glass substrate DSC with organic liquid electrolyte. The nanostructured photoelectrode was 9 μm thick room-temperature compressed TiO2 nanoparticle film (geometric area 0.24 cm2) that was sintered at 450 °C for 60 min.

EIS, IMPS and IMVS measurements carried out on the solar cell at low light intensity, using IM6 Impedance Measurement Unit (Zahner Elektrik GmbH & Co.KG). The light source was four red LEDs controlled by EPot external potentiostat and CIMPS software. The LEDs provided both the DC bias light and its small amplitude AC modulation. The light was incident from the PE side. The EIS and IMPS measurements were taken potentiostatically at VCELL = −0.7 V, whereas IMVS was measured galvanostatically at a current that produced VCELL = −0.7 V. In EIS the modulation amplitude was 10 mV, and the light intensity modulation in IMPS and IMVS was 10% of the bias intensity. To account for possible drift in the IV curve during switching from one measurement to another, five cycles of four consecutive measurements (IMPS, EIS, IMVS, EIS) were taken following right after each other. The transfer function ratio IMVS/IMPS was calculated for each neighboring pair of IMVS and IMPS spectra (nine in total). Note that knowledge of the exact light intensity is not important to these experiments, because the DC light intensity and any optical calibration factors cancel out when calculating the IMVS/IMPS ratio.
After calibration of the CIMPS system, the IMVS/IMPS ratio spectra derived from separate IMVS and IMPS measurement at the same conditions overlapped almost exactly, as predicted by eqn (1). A small 6% constant factor difference remaining was attributed to a small error in the calibration factor and drift in the data during consecutive EIS, IMVS and IMPS measurements (see ESI†). In Fig. 5 and 6 this small error is corrected for to emphasize the fact that the shape of the IMVS/IMPS ratio spectra matches exactly with the impedance spectrum of the cell measured at the same conditions. The correspondence is excellent over the whole frequency range from 100 mHz to 10 kHz, and verifies eqn (1) experimentally.
 Fig. 5  Complex plane plots of (a) EIS, (b) IMVS and (c) IMPS transfer functions of a DSC measured at VCELL = −0.7 V under illumination (iSC = 0.58 mA cm−2, VOC = −0.78 V, FF = 0.77). Red LEDs were used to provide both the DC bias light and its small amplitude AC modulation. The light was incident from the PE side. The error bars represent the minimum and maximum values at each frequency, caused by drift during the consecutive EIS, IMVS and IMPS measurements (cf. Fig. S2). In figure (a) the measured IMVS/IMPS spectrum was divided by a constant factor 2.7, corresponding to an instrument calibration factor. The inset in figure (a) is a magnification close to the origin, showing the characteristic feature of electron transport: a linear part with unit slope. 
 Fig. 6  Imaginary part spectra of (a) EIS, (b) IMVS and (c) IMPS measurements corresponding to Fig. 5. The spectra peak at the characteristic frequency which is for IMVSca. 2 Hz, corresponding to apparent electron lifetime τIMVS = 80 ms, and for IMPSca. 21 Hz, corresponding to apparent electron transport time τIMPS = 7.6 ms. 
The impedance spectrum displays characteristic features typical to a DSC. The peak in the imaginary part of impedance at ca. 2 Hz (Fig. 6a) corresponding to the large semicircle in the complex plane plot (Fig. 5a) arises from interfacial electron transfer (recombination) at the TiO2–electrolyte interface of the nanostructured photoelectrode film. Note the exact correspondence to the peak in the imaginary part of IMVS in Fig. 6b. As shown before for open circuit conditions,13,16,17 this match is expected since both EIS and IMVS measure the electron recombination dynamics at this frequency range, hence giving same dynamic information (trapping influenced electron lifetime).
The IMPS spectrum peaks at much higher frequencies, around 20–30 Hz (Fig. 6c), which means that electron transport from the film to the contact is much faster than their recombination in the film. Consistently with this, the impedance spectrum shows a linear part in the complex plane plot at high frequencies (inset in Fig. 5a), which is a fingerprint of reasonably good quality photoelectrode where the electron diffusion length exceeds the film thickness.7,40 The linear transport part in the impedance spectrum appears at the same frequency range as the IMPS response (Fig. 6a and c), confirming their common origin, namely electron diffusion in the film.
Another way of showing the correspondence of the IMVS and IMPS data to EIS, is to estimate the electron diffusion length from the measured data using eqn (S6)–(S8) in ESI† for IMPS and IMVS and eqn (20) for EIS. Assuming uniform light absorption in the film (a = 0.393 in eqn (S6) in ESI†), and using the known film thickness (d = 9 μm), and the time-constants τIMVS = 80 ms and τIMPS = 7.6 ms estimated from Fig. 6, the IMPS-IMVS-based estimate for the diffusion length is Ln = 18 μm. For the EIS based estimate, the electron recombination resistance can be read from Fig. 5a as the width of the large semicircle (RRECA−1 = 1680 Ω, where A is the geometric photoelectrode area) and the transport resistance as three times the real axis projection of the linear part at high frequencies (RTA−1/3 = 120 Ω), which gives L = 19 μm. This agrees well with the value derived separately from the IMPS and IMVS spectra. This agreement has been reported also by Wang and Peter.17

3.5.1. Experimental evidence from the literature. 
In addition to the above result, there is some direct experimental evidence on the effect of series impedance components on the IMPS response of DSC in the literature.
Liu et al.48 reported that the measured IMPS time constant decreased systematically when current collector grid was deposited on the conducting substrate, Pt was deposited on the TCO glass at the counter electrode, or the distance between the photo and counter electrodes was reduced. These effects are understandable in light of the present paper, since the modifications decrease respectively RS, RCE and RD (Fig. 2), which contribute to the series impedance ZS (Fig. 3) and thus affect the IMPS response (eqn (9) and (A19)–(A20)). Also the negligible effect of the current collectors and Pt on the IMVS time constant reported by Liu et al. is expected, since ZS does not affect the IMVS response (eqn (13) and (A21)–(A22)). Interestingly, contrary to the present theory, decrease in the IMVS time constant was observed upon thinning the electrode gap. The reason may be an increase in the tri-iodide concentration: at given illumination, electrons are transferred from the electrolyte to the TiO2 by photoexcitation of the dye, resulting in production off excess I3− at the open circuit under illumination. This excess I3− is diluted to a higher concentration the thinner the electrolyte is, which promotes faster electron recombination with I3−.

IMPS response has been also shown to slow down considerably when the DC current of the cell is limited by ionic diffusion in the electrolyte, giving rise to an additional time constant corresponding and spiraling of the IMPS response to positive imaginary values.49,50 This is at least qualitatively consistent with the present model that predicts attenuation of the IMPS response when ZS becomes high due to increase of electrolyte diffusion impedance ZD near the electrolyte diffusion limited condition.

3.6. Final remarks

3.6.1. 
            EIS
vs.
IMPS and IMVS techniques. 
An important difference between the EIS, IMVS and IMPS techniques regarding practical applications is that the time constants measured with IMPS and IMVS cannot be readily used to predict the steady state operation and performance of the solar cell,14 whereas EIS yields directly such information as it gives the internal cell resistances that are directly related to the solar cell IV curve (eqn (6), and ref. 8, 28 and 29). As discussed by Bisquert et al.,44 this difference can be understood by the general relation, τ = RC, between time-constant (τ), resistance (R) and capacitance (C). While IMPS and IMVS are normally interpreted in terms of time-constants, EIS yields separately the corresponding resistance and capacitance, i.e. twice as much information as IMPS and IMVS. This is due to the practical reason that in the IMPS and IMVS analysis half of the measured data are usually omitted, namely the real part of the response spectra, and only the imaginary part is used for estimating time constants, as in Fig. 6. Doing so in IMPS, information is lost on how much photocurrent is produced (i.e. the differential IPCE, cf. e.g.ref. 18) and attention is paid only on how fast it follows the photoexcitation. Correspondingly in IMVS, information on the magnitude of the photovoltage modulation is lost when the focus is only on the photovoltage relaxation time.
If also the real part of the IMPS and IMVS spectra was analyzed, a more complete picture of the solar cell function would be obtained, but this would require accounting for the light harvesting and electron injection efficiencies to quantify the AC electron generation rate (eqn (A12) and (A13)). However, taking the ratio of the potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS responses, the photomodulation component cancels out, leaving just the relation between the produced AC current and voltage, which is equal to cell impedance (eqn (1)–(4)). It is interesting to note with this regards that combinations of photocurrent and photovoltage transient measurements are sometimes used to estimate the photoelectrode chemical capacitance.51,52 The fact that same results are obtained as with EIS52 is understandable in light of eqn (1).


3.6.2. Role of the photoelectrode capacitance in the RC attenuation of the IMPS response. 
Voltage dependent IMPS11,16 and equivalent small amplitude photocurrent transient measurements53 have shown that the IMPS time constant increases (photocurrent response slows down) as the solar cell is biased from the short circuit towards the open circuit. The reason for this has been explained to be increasing RC-attenuation due to the photoelectrode (chemical) capacitance cμ increasing with voltage.11,52–54 In fact, this has been considered to set an experimental limitation to the IMPS technique, restricting its use only to short circuit conditions, where the RC attenuation is less pronounced and dominated by the capacitance of the substrate–electrolyte interface.11,16,52–54 Furthermore, the substrate dominated RC attenuation can be corrected for by determination of the attenuation factor (eqn (11)) by separate EIS measurements.11,39,52,53 A question thus arises can the IMPS response be corrected also for the RC-attenuation caused by cμ elsewhere along the IV curve, by removing its contribution from the measured transport time, as sometimes attempted?54

Eqn (11) shows that the attenuation factor is in fact independent of cμ that instead affects the IMPS response via the boundary condition, eqn (9). However, the value entering the expression is not the capacitance of the whole film (in units F m−2), but the chemical capacitance per unit volume (F m−3), at the contact, cμ(0). After all, electron density in the film is turned to externally measurable voltage only at the contact. Moreover, when eqn (9) and (13) and the relation Dcμ(0) = rT(0)−1 (eqn (18)) are used in the general solution of modulated electron density (eqn (S13) in the ESI†), or in the final analytical expressions for the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions (eqn (A19)–(A22)), cμ(0) cancels out, leaving just the electron transport resistance rT(0) (a steady state parameter) explicitly in the expressions. This means that cμ influences the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions only through the frequency dependent term γ (eqn (25) with eqn (18)–(20)), just like it does for the impedance (eqn (24)).
These observations evidence the general theoretical result of Bisquert and Vikhrenko:14 the chemical capacitance of the photoelectrode film is an inseparable property of the dynamic electron transport (diffusion) in the film, and affects the IMPS and IMVS response through the value of the dynamic electron diffusion coefficient Dn (eqn (S6) and (S9)) and lifetime τn (eqn (S7) and (S10); remember our notation D = Dn and τ = τn in this paper). Its influence on the electron transport time cannot thus be removed to yield a more accurate, chemical-capacitance-independent transport time, unless the capacitance (or density) of the conduction band electrons can be distinguished experimentally from that of the trapped electrons, which nevertheless is not possible based solely on EIS, IMVS, and IMPS data.14
The best way to deal with cμ in the dynamic transport measurements is to determine the electron transport resistance rT instead. This can be done by IMPS using eqn (S6) and (18) with additional information on cμ at the same measurement conditions, or directly by equivalent circuit fitting of EIS data. Unlike the dynamic transport time, rT is a steady state parameter that is directly related to the solar cell performance. The same applies to the recombination resistance rREC (measurable by EIS) and τn measurable both by IMVS and EIS,14,44 of which rREC is a steady state and τn a dynamic parameter.


3.6.3. Complementary nature of IMPS, IMVS and EIS. 
The above discussion shows that EIS can give the same, and more useful, information on the DSC operation than IMPS, but this does not mean that the IMPS technique would be dispensable. For example, at the short circuit condition, EIS fails to give information on the electron transport, since the photoelectrode impedance is very high, but IMPS works well yielding estimates for Dn. Also when L < d (bad solar cell), rT and rREC, as well as cμ become immeasurable by EIS (the so called Gerischer impedance case, cf. Appendix I of ref. 29 for discussion of this issue). Yet, estimates for Dn, τn and L may be attainable even in such a case by careful model based IMPS and IMVS analysis.18
It would be fruitful to identify other conditions where the complementary nature of the IMPS, IMVS and EIS techniques gives better resolution of the DSC performance characteristics than a single technique alone. This can be done by a parametric study using the mathematical results of the present paper.


3.6.4. Assumption of linear electron recombination kinetics. 
The IMPS and IMVS model discussed here is based on the linear time-dependent electron continuity equation (eqn (A1)) and this choice was motivated in Section 2.3. The results obtained are nevertheless useful also in the case of non-linear electron recombination. The non-linearity affects only the continuity equation, for which eqn (A2) (with eqn (9) and (13)) is the correct boundary conditions for potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS techniques or their equivalent time-domain counterparts,19,52,55 even in the non-linear case. Moreover, it has been shown that eqn (A1) is formally valid for the analysis of small amplitude responses when homogenous background generation rate and density of electrons in the films is assumed, even in the case of non-linear recombination24,34 and non-negligible direct electron recombination with oxidized dye molecules.34 Such conditions can be approximately found close to open circuit condition using weakly absorbed bias light.

4. Conclusions
The paper unified the analytical models widely used for analyzing experimental electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) data. The main conclusions of the paper can be summarized as follows.
Simple general relation between EIS, IMPS and IMVS, eqn (1), follows directly from the definition of the corresponding transfer functions and is valid for any solar cell or measurement condition in the limit of small modulation amplitude where linear response can be assumed. This means that the three techniques yield very similar dynamic information and can be considered complementary to each other. Here, the relation was verified both theoretically and experimentally for nanostructured electrochemical dye solar cells.
The EIS, IMPS, and IMVS models can be linked by expressing the kinetic boundary condition of the time-dependent continuity equation of electrons used in the IMPS and IMVS modeling in terms of series and parallel impedances found in the equivalent circuit impedance model of the complete solar cell. This also gives the kinetic boundary condition an unambiguous yet general physical interpretation.
It has been previously shown how EIS data can be linked to steady state current–voltage (IV) data of DSC using a common model based only on physical parameters.29 The present paper links the IMPS and IMVS techniques to the same model by providing analytical expressions for potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS transfer functions of complete DSCs applicable at any point along the IV curve. The result is a complete analytical dynamic-static opto-electrical model for DSCs.
The so-called RC attenuation of the IMPS response originates from all internal impedance components of the solar cell connected in series and parallel with the photoelectrode, and does not depend on the chemical capacitance of the nanostructured semiconductor photoelectrode film. As known from previous works of Bisquert et al.,14,43 the chemical capacitance is an inseparable property of the dynamic electron transport and recombination in film. Its influence on the measured dynamic electron diffusion coefficient and lifetime cannot be corrected for based solely on EIS, IMPS and IMVS data.
Capacitive frequency dispersion of the constant phase element (CPE) type enters the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions similar to impedance and can be interpreted as a distribution of relaxation times (dynamic electron recombination time) as distinct from the frequency dispersion due to the electron diffusion process described by the transmission line model.
The theoretical linking of the EIS, IMPS, and IMVS techniques in this paper provides a basis for investigating whether conditions can be found where the complementary nature of the three techniques comes together to give more accurate description of the DSC operation than obtained with single technique alone.
Appendix
Time-dependent differential equation model of IMPS and IMVS
The standard analytical model for the IMPS and IMVS responses is based on solving the time dependent continuity equation for the excess electron density ne in the nanostructured photoelectrode film11 (A1)where D and τ are respectively the electron diffusion coefficient and lifetime, and g = g(x,t) the local rate of electron generation. Note that the total electron density is n = ne − n0 where n0 is the equilibrium electron density in the dark. The basic assumptions needed for analytical solution are that D and τ are constants independent of electron density and position in the film, and that the electron recombination is linear with electron density. See Sections 2.3 and 3.6.4 for discussion on the implications of these assumptions.
The model is most commonly solved subject to a kinetic boundary at the substrate contact (x = 0)11 (A2)where kEXT is the rate constant for electron extraction from the film. This rate constant is discussed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 and given a physical interpretation in terms of the impedance components of the complete solar cell, linking thus mathematically the IMPS/IMVS model to the EIS model.
At the far edge of the film a reflecting boundary condition is applied (A3)where d is the photoelectrode film thickness. The generation term g(x,t) = ηINJΦ(t)fLH(x)(A4)depends on the incident photon flux Φ (m−2 s−1), the quantum efficiency of electron injection ηINJ, and the spatial light harvesting efficiency fLH(x) that has units m−1 and defines the electron generation profile in the photoelectrode film.18 In the IMPS and IMVS experiments one is interested only on the modulated part of the photon flux ΦAC(ω,t) = δΦDCeiωt(A5)where ΦDC is the DC bias photon flux and δ the modulation depth that is typically kept below 0.1 (10%) to maintain linearity of the response. The time-dependent electron generation rate becomes thus (eqn (A4) and (A5)) gAC(x,t) = G(x) = ηINJδΦDCfLH(x)eiωt(A6)The solution for eqn (A1) with this generation term can be written as nAC(x,ω,t) = N(x,ω)eiωt(A7)where N is the local frequency-dependent amplitude of the modulated excess electron density.
The IMPS transfer function of the TiO2 photoelectrode film is obtained from eqn (3), (A5), and (A7) using the Fick's law of diffusion (A8)whereas the IMVS transfer function of the photoelectrode (A9)is obtained from eqn (4) by noting that the electron density and the voltage measurable at the PE contact are related to each other by the chemical capacitance of the TiO2 film per unit volume (F m−3) (A10)at the contact (x = 0). (Note: There is a sign error in the corresponding eqn (14) in ref. 18.) Here, the voltage over the TiO2 film is defined as the difference between the electrical potential (φ) at the contact vs. the electrical potential in the electrolyte VTiO2 = φTiO2(x = 0) – φEL(x = d), and is thus negative at the open circuit condition of the cell. The same applies to cell voltage: VCELL = φPE – φCE. According to the definitions of eqn (A8) and (A9) both IMPS and IMVS transfer functions have positive real part at the limit of zero frequency.
Note that when the IMPS and IMVS transfer functions are calculated using the same value for kEXT, they are related to each other simply as18 (A11)
which can be seen by comparing eqn (A8) and (A9) in light of eqn (A2). This relation proves useful in the mathematical derivations of this paper.
Complete solar cell IMPS and IMVS transfer functions in the case of simple optical model with monochromatic modulated light
According to a basic optical model of DSC (cf. eqn (6), (39) and (40) of ref. 18) the local AC modulated electron generation rate is gAC,PE-side(x) = δΦηINJTTCO[1 − rPE]αDe−αx(A12)when the light is incident from the side of the collecting contact of the photoelectrode (PE illumination) and gAC,CE-side(x) = δΦηINJTCETEL[1 − rPE]αDeα(x−d)(A13)when the light comes from the opposite direction (CE illumination). These expressions assume that the harmonic small amplitude light modulation is provided by monochromatic light absorbed in the photoelectrode film exponentially according to the Beer–Lambert law as determined by a single value for the absorption coefficient α. This is the normal case when e.g. laser or LED is used as a light source for the modulated beam, in addition to a DC background illumination that can be any kind of light.
The IMPS transfer functions of the photoelectrode film for these two cases have been reported elsewhere.18 According to the definition of eqn (3) they can be expressed as (from eqn (6), (11), (39), (40), (42), (45), (47) and (48) of ref. 18) (A14) (A15)where (A16) (A17)and γ is given by (A18)or eqn (25).
Now, using eqn (A14), (A15), and (9)–(11) we can find the corresponding expressions for the complete solar cell. The IMPS transfer function of the complete DSC for the PE side illumination is (A19)and for the CE illumination (A20)The corresponding IMVS transfer functions can be obtained from eqn (13) and (15) with eqn (A14) and (A15). The result for the PE side illumination is (A21)and for the CE illumination (A22)
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Nordic Energy Research (Norden) for the scholarship for his doctoral work during which the initial steps in the development of the theoretical ideas of the paper were taken. The author thanks Dr Michael Multerer from ZAHNER-elektrik GmbH & Co. KG for confirming by experiments the absence of scaling error as well as validity of eqn (1) with newer CIMPS systems (Zennium potentiostat coupled to either XPot or PP211 external potentiostat and controlled by Thales Z1.29 software).
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kalyanasundaram, Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, EPFL Press, Switzerland,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 346–352,  DOI:10.1002/pip.1021 .
R. Harikisun and H. Desilvestro, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1179–1188 Search PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kubo, A. Sakamoto, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004/6/1, 164, 33–39 Search PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117–131 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Graetzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17021–17027 CrossRef .
L. Dloczik, O. Ileperuma, I. Lauermann, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Redmond, N. J. Shaw and I. Uhlendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10281–10289 CrossRef CAS .
G. Franco, J. Gehring, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev and I. Uhlendorf, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 692–698 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert and V. S. Vikhrenko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2313–2322 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bay and K. West, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 613–628 CrossRef CAS .
J. van de Lagemaat, N. G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2044–2052 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18125–18133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20491–20504 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, J. Simiyu, L. Haeggman, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 646, 91–99 Search PubMed .
P. R. F. Barnes and B. C. O'Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19134–19140 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Halme, Performance Limiting Factors in Flexible Dye Solar Cells, Doctoral Dissertation, Helsinki University of Technology, Helsinki,  2009 Search PubMed.
J. P. Gonzalez-Vazquez, J. A. Anta and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8552–8558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Villanueva-Cab, H. Wang, G. Oskam and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 748–751 Search PubMed .
J. Bisquert and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 450–456 Search PubMed .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5798–5816 RSC .
J. Villanueva, J. A. Anta, E. Guillen and G. Oskam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19722–19731 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Anta, F. Casanueva and G. Oskam, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5372–5378 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miettunen, J. Halme, M. Toivola and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4011–4017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210–E234 CrossRef CAS .
G. Paasch, K. Micka and P. Gersdorf, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 2653–2662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, N. S. Ferriols, P. Bogdanoff and E. C. Pereira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. F. Barnes, A. Y. Anderson, M. Juozapavicius, L. Liu, X. Li, E. Palomares, A. Forneli and B. C. O'Regan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3547–3558 RSC .
P. R. F. Barnes, L. Liu, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, H. Kisserwan, T. H. Ghaddar, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O'Regan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3532–3538 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, F. Li and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14665–14674 CAS .
K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, T. Saukkonen, M. Toivola and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B876–B883 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miettunen, X. Ruan, T. Saukkonen, J. Halme, M. Toivola, H. Guangsheng and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B814–B819 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kron, U. Rau and J. H. Werner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13258–13261 Search PubMed .
S. Ruehle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17946–17951 CrossRef .
L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Franco and N. J. Shaw, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 549–560 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pitarch, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2983–2988 RSC .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2323–2332 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360–5364 RSC .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17278–17290 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hsu and F. Mansfeld, Corrosion, 2001, 57, 747–748 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Macdonald, Impedance Spectroscopy: Emphasizing Solid Materials and Systems, Wiley, New York,  1987 Search PubMed .
J. Halme, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and P. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5623–5637 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Hu, S. Dai, L. Guo, N. Jiang and D. Kou, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2338–2343 CrossRef CAS .
H. Paulsson, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 586, 56–61 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. G. Nicholson, L. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14300–14306 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, S. Scully, A. C. Mayer, E. Palomares and J. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4616–4623 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, K. Bakker, J. Kroeze, H. Smit, P. Sommeling and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17155–17160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17715–17718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nissfolk, K. Fredin, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakade, T. Kanzaki, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10803–10807 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Summary based on the previous literature of the transmission line impedance model of complete DSCs, interpretation of the IMPS and IMVS time constant and the solution for eqn (A1) in the general case of arbitrary optical conditions. Proof that eqn (1) holds for this general solution and yields an expression for the photoelectrode impedance identical to that of the transmission line model. Details and experimental data on the determination of the instrumental calibration factor in IMVS/IMPS ratio measurements and drift during the measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp21134jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Relation of the IMPS, IMVS and EIS techniques to each other and to the steady state solar cell IV curve (black continuous line). The black dotted lines represent the steady state limit of the IV curve due to modulation of the incident light intensity. The colored arrows show the corresponding modulation of cell current and voltage in IMPS (red, solid and dashed arrows indicating respectively increasing and decreasing light intensity), IMVS (blue), and EIS (green).	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  Equivalent circuit impedance model of the dye solar cell. rT (Ω m) is the electron transport resistivity, and rREC (Ω m3) and cμ (Ω m−3) the electron recombination resistance and chemical capacitance per unit volume. RCO (Ω m2) and CCO (F m−2) are the contact resistance and capacitance at the interface between the conducting substrate and the TiO2 film; RSU (Ω m2) and CSU (F m−2) the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the substrate–electrolyte interface; RCE (Ω m2) and CCE (F m−2) the charge transfer resistance and double layer capacitance at the counter electrode–electrolyte interface. ZD (Ω m2) is the electrolyte diffusion impedance at the counter electrode and RS (Ω m2) the Ohmic series resistance of the cell including contributions from the sheet resistance of the substrates, resistivity of the electrolyte and electrical contacts and wiring of the cell.	 

 	Fig. 3  Simplified equivalent circuit transfer function model of the dye solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the modulation of the excess electron density ne in the photoelectrode film in potentiostatic IMPS and galvanostatic IMVS experiments. The thick line represents the steady state ne and the thin dotted lines its modulation (at the limit of zero frequency). If exact external control of (a) photoelectrode voltage and (b) current of the photoelectrode film would be possible, ne and its slope at the contact would be fixed to their steady state values in the IMPS and IMVS measurements, respectively. However, in real complete DSC, the parallel and series impedances ZP, ZS and ZCO in Fig. 3 prohibit this, and as a result, modulation of ne, and its slope, occurs at the contact both in the IMPS and IMVS experiments. This modifies the IMPS and IMVS responses as described in the text.	 
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
D = (rTcμ)−1	(18)
τ = rRECcμ	(19)
	(20)
ZCPE = qCPE−1(iω)−βCPE	(21)
cμ = (qCPE)1/βCPE(rREC)1/βCPE−1	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)

 	Fig. 5  Complex plane plots of (a) EIS, (b) IMVS and (c) IMPS transfer functions of a DSC measured at VCELL = −0.7 V under illumination (iSC = 0.58 mA cm−2, VOC = −0.78 V, FF = 0.77). Red LEDs were used to provide both the DC bias light and its small amplitude AC modulation. The light was incident from the PE side. The error bars represent the minimum and maximum values at each frequency, caused by drift during the consecutive EIS, IMVS and IMPS measurements (cf. Fig. S2). In figure (a) the measured IMVS/IMPS spectrum was divided by a constant factor 2.7, corresponding to an instrument calibration factor. The inset in figure (a) is a magnification close to the origin, showing the characteristic feature of electron transport: a linear part with unit slope.	 

 	Fig. 6  Imaginary part spectra of (a) EIS, (b) IMVS and (c) IMPS measurements corresponding to Fig. 5. The spectra peak at the characteristic frequency which is for IMVSca. 2 Hz, corresponding to apparent electron lifetime τIMVS = 80 ms, and for IMPSca. 21 Hz, corresponding to apparent electron transport time τIMPS = 7.6 ms.	 
	(A1)
	(A2)
	(A3)
g(x,t) = ηINJΦ(t)fLH(x)	(A4)
ΦAC(ω,t) = δΦDCeiωt	(A5)
gAC(x,t) = G(x) = ηINJδΦDCfLH(x)eiωt	(A6)
nAC(x,ω,t) = N(x,ω)eiωt	(A7)
	(A8)
	(A9)
	(A10)
	(A11)
gAC,PE-side(x) = δΦηINJTTCO[1 − rPE]αDe−αx	(A12)
gAC,CE-side(x) = δΦηINJTCETEL[1 − rPE]αDeα(x−d)	(A13)
	(A14)
	(A15)
	(A16)
	(A17)
	(A18)
	(A19)
	(A20)
	(A21)
	(A22)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Summary based on the previous literature of the transmission line impedance model of complete DSCs, interpretation of the IMPS and IMVS time constant and the solution for eqn (A1) in the general case of arbitrary optical conditions. Proof that eqn (1) holds for this general solution and yields an expression for the photoelectrode impedance identical to that of the transmission line model. Details and experimental data on the determination of the instrumental calibration factor in IMVS/IMPS ratio measurements and drift during the measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp21134j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
