Enhanced efficiency of planar perovskite solar cells via a two-step deposition using DMF as an additive to optimize the crystal growth behavior   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01517H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01517H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13032-13038Enhanced efficiency of planar perovskite solar cells via a two-step deposition using DMF as an additive to optimize the crystal growth behavior†

        
          
            Jiajie 
            Mo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunfu 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jingjing 
            Chang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Haifeng 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            He 
            Xi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dazheng 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenhua 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jincheng 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yue 
            Hao
          
        
      a
aWide Bandgap Semiconductor Technology Disciplines State Key Laboratory, School of Microelectronics, Xidian University, Xi'an, 710071, China. E-mail: cfzhang@xidian.edu.cn; jjingchang@xidian.edu.cn
bHuanghe Hydropower Solar Industry Technology Co., Ltd, 369 South Yanta Road, China 710061
Received 
      18th February 2017
    , Accepted 17th May 2017First published on 18th May 2017AbstractThe performance of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is extremely dependent on the morphology and crystallization of the perovskite film. However, the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite and controlling the perovskite crystal size as well as its surface morphology are challenging in the conventional two-step sequential deposition method. We herein present a facile method involving the use of a polar solvent additive in an inter-diffusion two-step sequential deposition method to achieve a high-quality perovskite film. The results showed that the addition of a small amount of DMF solvent into the MAI precursor solution could help the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite, and at the same time could also reduce the pinholes, improve the film morphology, increase the grain sizes and enhance the film absorption ability. The improved perovskite film quality results in the boosting performance of PSCs. Consequently, an optimized device with power conversion efficiency as high as 19.2% is obtained. This current method provides a highly repeatable route for enhancing the PSC performance with the inter-diffusion sequential solution deposition method.
Introduction
Organolead halide perovskites are emerging as promising materials with outstanding optoelectronic properties. Solar cells employing this kind of material have received tremendous attention and their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have seen stunning advances from 3.9% to over 22% in only 6 years.1–4 Various mechanism studies about perovskites, such as first-principle modelling,5 molecular motion and dynamic crystal structure,6,7 defect physics,8,9 ionic conductivity,10 hysteresis characteristics,11 device stability,12 have shown that effective controls of the perovskite crystallinity, homogeneity and surface morphology are crucial to improving the PSC performance. A high-quality perovskite should have as few defects, including point defects and grain boundaries, as possible. This could greatly avoid nonradiative recombination, which is highly detrimental to the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and carrier lifetime. A high-quality perovskite should also have a very slow ionic transport and good charge transport properties so that the hysteresis behaviour in current–voltage (I–V) sweep measurements could be avoided and the carriers could be effectively collected by the electrode.13 In order to improve the quality of perovskite, a lot of technologies have been developed. Generally, these methods could be classified into three categories, namely the one-step solution deposition method, the vapour deposition method, and the two-step sequential deposition method.14–16
The two-step sequential deposition of perovskite, which is widely used, provides a low cost but efficient route to fabricate high-performance PSCs. This method was first used in mesoscopic-structure devices and then soon applied to planar-heterojunction devices.1,17 In a typical two-step sequential deposition of perovskites, such as the planar MAPbI3, lead(II) iodide (PbI2) is first deposited on the titanium oxide (TiO2) or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) treated substrates, which are subsequently converted into perovskite film by exposing them to an anhydrous isopropanol (IPA) solution of methylammonium iodide (MAI). In the two-step sequential deposition, the complete conversion of PbI2 and control of the perovskite crystal size as well as the surface morphology are challenging. Usually, the deposited PbI2 from the solution tends to form a layered and dense crystalline film, and the complete conversion of PbI2 into perovskite requires several hours, which leads to the dissolution and peeling-off of the perovskite film. Besides that, it is difficult to control the crystal sizes of perovskite on the planar structure without a mesoporous scaffold. All these challenges make it difficult to fabricate planar structured PSCs by using two-step sequential deposition.
To solve these problems, several strategies have been developed. In order to accelerate the conversion of PbI2 to perovskite, Docampo et al. adopted an elevated reaction temperature.18 In order to achieve better control over the morphology, Park et al. investigated the influence of MAI concentrations on the morphology of perovskite grains.19 Recent work has shown that the properties of PbI2 can greatly affect the quality of perovskite. Wu et al. proposed that by employing a strong coordinative solvent of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), the crystallization of PbI2 could be retarded and then the quality of perovskite could be improved.20 Zhang et al. showed that the use of small additive MAI in PbI2 during the first step of deposition could lead to a reduced crystallinity of PbI2, which resulted in about a 10-fold faster formation of planar MAPbI3 film and thus minimized the negative impact of the solvent isopropanol on the perovskites during the MAI intercalation/conversion step.21 Shi et al. and Zhang et al. showed that the addition of a small amount of TBP into the PbI2 precursor solutions resulted in a porous layer composed of randomly packed PbI2 nanocrystals and subsequently offered a widely enlarged contact area, facilitating interfacial reaction with MAI, and hence led to improved MAPbI3 crystallization.22 Henawey et al. showed that PbI2 films treated with toluene and chlorobenzene vapours have more surface area with which MAI can react.23 Wang et al. showed that employing the DMSO solvent annealing process for PbI2 led to porous PbI2, which facilitated the complete conversion of PbI2.24 Although the porous PbI2 induced by the additives in above methods could accelerate the conversion of PbI2 into perovskite and avoid the residue of unreacted PbI2, it could also cause a rough surface morphology. Instead of dipping in the IPA solution of MAI, Huang et al. demonstrated an inter-diffusion approach to form pinhole-free CH3NH3PbI3 films, which could be considered as a modified two-step sequential deposition.25 In this method, the MAI is deposited on the dense PbI2 films and the perovskite films are formed by the inter-diffusion of MAI on PbI2 films. According to this method, the obtained perovskite crystal size is large and the perovskite film is pinhole free and relatively smooth. However, due to the dense property of PbI2, the inter-diffusion of CH3NH3I on PbI2 requires a long annealing process and the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite is challenging.
Herein, we focus on the requirement for high-quality perovskite film and introduce a modified inter-diffusion two-step sequential deposition method via incorporating a certain ratio of a polar solvent, such as N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF), into an MAI/IPA precursor solution. As far as we know, DMF is a popular polar solvent for PbI2 and perovskites; however, it has never been used in MAI solution to fabricate perovskite in a two-step method, because DMF could easily take PbI2 film away while spin-coating the MAI solution. In this work, it was found that a small amount of DMF in the MAI solution could provide a “wet” environment, which is beneficial for MAI molecules diffusing into the bottom of PbI2 film to form perovskite. Thus, the residue of PbI2 could be avoided. At the same time, it could also efficiently improve the surface morphology and enlarge the crystal size of the perovskite film. By optimizing the device fabrication, a PCE as high as 19.2% was achieved. The addition of another polar solvent in MAI solution also has the same effects. These results provide a facile way towards the deposition of high-quality perovskite film.
Experimental
Materials
All the materials, namely methylammonium iodide (MAI, 99.8%, Dyesol), lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.999%, Alfa), lead(II) chloride (PbCl2, 99.999%, Alfa) phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, 98%, nano-c), poly(3,4-ethy-lenedioxythiophene) poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, Clevios PVP Al 4083), N,N′-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%, Aladdin), chlorobenzene (99.8%, Sigma), isopropanol (99.5%, Sigma) and bathocuproine (BCP) (96%, Alfa) were used as received without further purification.
Film formation and device fabrication
Planar PSCs were fabricated on pre-patterned ITO (indium tin oxide) glass substrates (around 2 × 2.5 cm2 in size, 10 Ω per square). The patterned ITO glass substrates were sequentially ultrasonically cleaned with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol at 50 °C for 20 min, respectively. Then, the ITO substrates were dried with nitrogen and treated in a UV ozone oven for 15 min before a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated on the substrates at 7000 rpm for 40 s and annealed at 140 °C for 15 min. After that, the substrates were transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box. 0.85 M PbI2 and 0.15 M PbCl2 were dissolved in the solvent of DMF and stirred for 2 h at 75 °C. 40 mg MAI were dissolved in the solvent of IPA with/without additionally 0.9 vol% of DMF or GBL, respectively. Around 60 μL PbX2 precursor solution pre-heated to 75 °C was transferred by pipette to the PEDOT:PSS-covered ITO substrates. Briefly, the spin-coating process was programmed to run at 3000 rpm for 45 s. Then, MAI was spin-coated on top of the dried PbI2 layer at room temperature at 3000 rpm for 45 s. All of the films were thermally annealed on the hotplate at 100 °C for 10 min. Next, a layer of PCBM (20 mg mL−1 in chlorobenzene) was spin-coated on the top of the perovskite layer at 2000 rpm for 40 s. After that, a thin layer of BCP (0.5 mg mL−1 in IPA) was spin-coated on the top of the PCBM layer. The devices were finished by the thermal evaporation of 100 nm Ag. All the devices had an effective area of 7 mm2.
Materials and device characterization
The morphology of the perovskite layers was measured by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JSM-7800F). X-ray diffraction (XRD) tests were conducted on a Bruker D8 Advance XRD. The UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded with a UV-visible spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 950). Photoluminescence spectra were collected on an HORIBA R-HR 800, and the excitation wavelength was 633 nm. Photovoltaic performances were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated sunlight from an XES-70S1 solar simulator matching the AM 1.5 G standard with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The system was calibrated against a NREL-certified silicon reference solar cell. Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiencies (IPCEs) of the PSCs were measured by the solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (SCS10-X150, Zolix instrument. Co. Ltd).
Results and discussion
The device structure of the PSCs in this study is structured as glass/ITO (120 nm)/PEDOT:PSS (25 nm)/MAPbIxCl3−x (300–320 nm)/PC61BM (55 nm)/BCP/Ag as shown in Fig. 1, where the PEDOT:PSS and PCBM act as hole and electron transport layers, respectively. Here, an inverted (p–i–n type) planar-heterojunction structure based on the PEDOT:PSS substrate was used instead of the conventional structure based on the TiO2 substrate so that the device could be fabricated with a low-temperature process, which is compatible with the roll-to-roll process. Because the introduction of chlorine could retard the crystallization of perovskite to improve the material quality and could increase the carrier diffusion length and charge mobility, the MAPbI3−xClx was used here.27 BCP was used as an interface layer to aid the transport of electrons to the cathode and to block holes.
 Fig. 1  Device architecture of the perovskite solar cell (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag) and the corresponding energy level diagram26 of the corresponding materials used in the device. The thickness of each layer is not in scale with the real thickness for clarity. 
To fabricate PSCs, first a yellow transparent dense PbI2 film was deposited from a PbI2/DMF solution onto the PEDOT:PSS/ITO substrate, as illustrated in the ESI, Fig. S1.† Then the MAI precursor was spin-coated on the PbI2 film via the inter-diffusion process to form perovskite film.28 It was found that the controlled perovskite film, shown in the ESI Fig. S1,† seemed a bit pale and inconsistent when the pure MAI/IPA solution was used. However, when proper DMF solvent additive was added into the MAI/IPA solution, the morphology and crystal size of perovskite could significantly be improved (Fig. 2(a)). It was thought that proper DMF solvent additive could enhance the MAI diffusion and reaction rate with PbI2, as shown in the Fig. 2(a). Meanwhile, the PbI2 residue and pinholes could be efficiently reduced, which could be proved by XRD measurements, as will be discussed later. Regarding the crystal growth mechanism, it was thought that the DMF additive helps MAI to penetrate into the thick PbI2 to form a thick film with a pure phase and larger crystal grains by slowing down the perovskite crystallization rate since perovskite can be totally but very slowly dissolved in DMF and the dissolving process depends on the amount of DMF.29 Moreover, during the crystal growth process, proper DMF solvent vapour annealing could increase the thin film crystallinity and crystalline domain size since the DMF solvent could induce a second perovskite dissolution and recrystallization process.14 Hence, the crystal grains and quality were enhanced. These results could be further confirmed by our XRD and SEM results, which will be discussed later. In order to further confirm this effect, we also tried other polar solvents, such as DMSO and GBL, and we obtained similar results. Therefore, it could be concluded that the use of a proper polar solvent as an additive in the two-step spin-coating deposition method could improve the perovskite crystallization process.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the inter-diffusion procedure for preparing the uniform and dense perovskite film. (b) The inset shows the pictures, from left to right, of the perovskite films after 10 min of annealing fabricated by spin-coating MAI/IPA solution (top) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (bottom), respectively, with 10 mg mL−1, 20 mg mL−1, 30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1, 50 mg mL−1, 60 mg mL−1 MAI concentrations. 
The concentration variation of the MAI/IPA solution from 10 mg mL−1 to 60 mg mL−1 could not change the situation, as shown in Fig. 2(b). To solve this problem, we tried to add a small amount of polar solvent, such as DMF, into the MAI/IPA solution. Both PbI2 and MAI have a high solubility in DMF and it is inferred that a small amount of DMF solvent could provide a “wet” environment so that PbI2 and MAI could react with each other and a high-quality perovskite could thus be obtained. Fig. S1 and 2(b) in the ESI† show the possible mechanism whereby the perovskite morphology is greatly improved when the polar solvent is added into the MAI solution.
All the devices were fabricated by the same procedures except for the different MAI/IPA solutions with DMF additive. To find the optimized DMF concentration, different volumes of DMF were added into the MAI solution. As shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI,† the device performance was greatly affected by the DMF concentration. When the content of DMF in the MAI solution was small, the corresponding device performance was enhanced with the increasing concentration of DMF. However, when the volume ratio between DMF and IPA was larger than 0.9 vol%, the device performance began to decrease. Thus, 0.9 vol% DMF concentration was used in the following work. At the same time, it was also found that the MAI concentration in IPA/DMF solvent could also greatly affect the device performance. As shown in Fig. S3 in the ESI,† with the variation of the MAI concentration, the device PCE first increased and then decreased. The optimized device performance was obtained when the MAI concentration was 40 mg mL−1, which will used in the following discussion.
Several batches of devices were fabricated, and Fig. 3(a) shows the typical J–V characteristics of the fabricated PSCs. Without DMF additive, the PSC exhibits a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 16.16 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.99 V and a fill factor (FF) of 71.2%, leading to a corresponding PCE of 11.4%. It is obvious that the low JSC and FF are the main factors limiting the PCE. Compared with the PSC without DMF additive, when the DMF was introduced in the MAI solution, the PSC performance was significantly improved, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Consequently, JSC was greatly improved to 20.06 mA cm−2 and the FF improved to 77.1% with a slightly increased VOC (1.00 V), which enhanced the PCE to 15.5%. It is inferred that the DMF solvent in the MAI solution can help to enhance the reaction between PbI2 and MAI and improve the MAPbI3 crystallinity and grain size, and thus could improve the device performance. The incident photo-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves of the PSCs with/without DMF additive are shown in Fig. 3(b). The device with DMF additive clearly shows a higher IPCE value than the device without the DMF additive, which is in agreement with the improved efficiency of the device with DMF additive obtained from the J–V curve measurement.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves with different scanning directions at the condition of IPA and IPA–0.9% DMF. Reverse (1.1 V → −0.2 V) and forward scan (−0.2 V → 1.1 V) measurements, the voltage step is 0.01 V. (b) IPCEs for the PSCs from MAI/IPA (red curves) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (black curves). Steady-state current density and PCE of the devices without (c) and with (d) DMF additive in MAI solution. 
Since the photocurrent hysteresis behaviour is a critical issue in the accurate characterization of device efficiency, the photocurrent hysteresis behaviours of PSCs with/without DMF additive were measured by changing the scanning directions (reverse scan: from a positive bias 1.1 V to a negative bias −0.2 V, and forward scan: from a negative bias −0.2 V to a positive bias 1.1 V). Fig. 3(a) presents the J–V characteristics of PSCs under different scan directions. Negligible photocurrent hysteresis and highly consistent J–V curves were observed regardless of the scan directions. This indicates the validity of our measured device performance. In order to further verify that the measured efficiency is reliable, we also measured the steady-state outputs of the current density and PCE. For the steady-state PCE and J outputs, the measurements were set at the maximum power point. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the device without DMF additive shows a stable current density, yielding a stabilized PCE of 11.4%. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 3(d), the device with DMF additive also shows a stable current density, yielding a stabilized PCE of over 15%. This further verifies the validity of our measured device performance.
The statistic results of the fabricated PSCs are shown in Fig. 4. These statistic parameters clearly reveal that the DMF additive in the MAI solution could efficiently enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. It must be noted that the statistical results were based on 20 perovskite solar cell devices in different batches, which indicates our experiments are reproducible. This confirms the validity of the above discussion. Surprisingly, a best device with a PCE of 19.2% was obtained during the optimization. The corresponding device exhibited a JSC of 23.4 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.03 V and an FF of 79.6%, while a JSC of 16.3 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.01 V and an FF of 74.7% were obtained by the best cell without DMF, as shown in Fig. 5. At the same time, it should be noted that although the above discussion concerns the device with the DMF additive, there was the same trend for the device with the GBL additive, which shows that the method is a general method to enhance the PSC performance.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the histograms of the photovoltaic parameters for the perovskite solar cells based on MAI/IPA (red) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (black) condition. Data from 20 cells were used for the histograms. Perovskite was formed by the inter-diffusion two-step sequential deposition method. 
 Fig. 5  
J–V curves for the best device (with or without 0.9% DMF) under standard AM 1.5 simulated illumination. 

Fig. 6(a) and (b) show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films. The grain size of the perovskite film without DMF additive is small, as shown in Fig. 6(a), while the size distribution of the perovskite grains is large. At the same time, it can be seen that there are many pinholes between the grain boundaries, which are marked with the red circles. These defects severely hamper the charge transport and increase the recombination probability, which leads to the depressed photovoltaic performance, as shown in Fig. 3(a). On the contrary, it can be clearly observed that DMF as an additive effectively eliminates those pinholes that are distributed among the grain boundaries, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Furthermore, the average grain size of perovskite is enlarged and the size distribution becomes small when a small amount of DMF is added to the MAI/IPA precursor. This corresponds to the improved device performance, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Fig. 6(c) and (d) show the cross-sectional images of the perovskite films deposited on the glasses. When the MAI/IPA precursor is used, a perovskite film with low-quality, with the incomplete-reaction PbI2 and a small-size grain size could be formed, as shown in Fig. 6(c). However, by adding DMF into the MAI precursor solution, a perovskite film with a large grain size could be obtained, as shown in Fig. 6(d). Since the boiling point of DMF is 152.8 °C, higher than the boiling point of IPA, it is inferred that a longer period of time for DMF is required to grow large-size grains during annealing on the hotplate at 100 °C. The presence of DMF provides an environment to achieve a high-quality perovskite film.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of perovskite films. (a) Higher-magnification SEM image of the perovskite film without and (b) with DMF additive, (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite film without DMF additive, (d) and with DMF additive. 
XRD measurements were used to characterize PbI2, MAI and perovskite films, as illustrated in Fig. 7(a). As expected, the diffraction peak of PbI2 was at 2θ of 12.8°. As for the MAI, its diffraction peaks were at 2θ of 9.8°, 19.65° and 29.65°, which are consistent with reported results.19,30 For the perovskite film without DMF additive, a diffraction peak at 12.8° was observed, which means that there are PbI2 residues in this film. However, when a small amount of DMF is added to MAI/IPA precursor, no PbI2 diffraction peak could be observed in the formed perovskite film. This means that the presence of a small amount of DMF solvent during the reaction between PbI2 and MAI could improve the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite although the annealing process is only 10 min. At the same time, the peak intensity of perovskite film with DMF additive is also higher than that of perovskite film without DMF additive, which demonstrates that the DMF additive improves the perovskite quality.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD spectra of perovskite with MAI/IPA and MAI/IPA–0.9% DMF, respectively. (b) Normalized intensity X-ray diffraction spectra of perovskite, PbI2 and MAI, respectively (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectra at room temperature. Perovskite films grown on different substrates including glass or PEDOT:PSS. (d) Absorption spectra of the perovskite films, which were fabricated by spin-coating MAI/IPA and MAI/IPA–0.9% DMF on dried PbI2 films. 

Fig. 7(b) shows the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite films with/without DMF additive. The perovskite films were deposited on the glass or the glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates under the same experimental conditions. The excitation light wavelength was 633 nm and PL emission was collected from the perovskite side. To protect the samples during the measurement, the perovskite films were sealed by spin-coating a layer of insulating polymer (PMMA). When the perovskite films were deposited on the glass substrate, it could be clearly observed that the peak intensity at 759 nm was enhanced through adding DMF as an additive in the MAI precursor, which demonstrates that the perovskite film quality is improved and the nonradiative decay is significantly suppressed since there is no charge transfer from the perovskite film to the glass substrate. However, when the perovskite films were deposited on the glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates, obvious PL quenching was observed. This means the charge transfer from the perovskite with the DMF additive to the hole-transporting layer is more efficient. This indicates that the addition of DMF into the MAI solution improves the complete conversion of PbI2 to perovskite and there is no PbI2 residue. Thus the charger transfer from the perovskite film to the PEDOT:PSS is more efficient and then the PL spectrum is quenched. However, for thin film without DMF additive, the quenching efficiency is lower, and this may be due to some PbI2 residues existing between the perovskite film and the PEDOT:PSS layer, thus preventing the efficient charge transfer between these two layers. This is consistent with the obtained XRD results and J–V characteristics.
The UV-Vis absorption spectra of the perovskite films with/without DMF additive were measured and are shown in Fig. 7(c). The light absorption ability of the perovskite films with DMF additive was obviously stronger than the perovskite films without DMF additive for all the absorption wavelength ranges. The complete conversion of PbI2 into perovskite and the improved perovskite film quality should be the reasons for the improved light absorption. These results demonstrate that the DMF additive plays an important role during the chemical reaction between MAI and PbI2 once again.
Conclusions
In conclusion, a strategy to improve PSC performance in the inter-diffusion two-step sequential deposition method was introduced in this work. The addition of a small ratio of DMF solvent into the MAI/IPA solution could help the complete conversion of PbI2 into perovskite, and at the same time, could also reduce the pinholes, improve the film morphology, increase the grain sizes and enhance the film absorption ability. The improved perovskite film quality resulted in a boost in the PSC's performance, especially for JSC and PCE. Using this method, an optimized device with a PCE as high as 19.2% was obtained. These results provide a facile way towards the widespread use of the polar solvent additive in the two-step sequential deposition method for a high-quality perovskite film.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Natural Science Foundation of China (61604119), Young Talent fund of University Association for Science and Technology in Shaanxi, China, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and Class General Financial Grant from the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2016M602771).
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Il Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16048 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902 CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Brivio, A. B. Walker and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042111 CrossRef .
W. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, J. H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926 CAS .

  (a) J. Chang, Z. Lin, H. Zhu, F. Isikgor, Q.-H. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Hao and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16546 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8016 CrossRef .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahnb and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602 CAS .
C. G. Wu, C. H. Chiang, Z. L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725 CAS .

  (a) Y. Zhang, M. Liu, G. E. Eperon, T. C. Leijtens, D. McMeekin, M. Saliba, W. Zhang, M. d. Bastiani, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, H. Lin and H. J. Snaith, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 315 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Chang, J. Xiao, Z. Lin, H. Zhu, Q.-H. Xu, K. Zeng, Y. Hao and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17464 RSC .
X. Sun, C. Zhang, J. Chang, H. Yang, H. Xi, G. Lu, D. Chen, Z. Lin, X. Lu, J. Zhang and Y. Hao, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 417 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Kim, M. H. Choi, M. S. Choi and J. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5663 CAS .
C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18508 CAS .
H. Yang, J. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Chang, Z. Lin, D. Chen, X. Sun, H. Xi, G. Han and Y. Hao, Sol. Energy, 2016, 139, 190 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 CrossRef .
S. M. Park, Y. J. Noha, S. H. Jinb and S. I. Na, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934 CAS .
T. Zhang, M. Yang, Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, X. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Li, H. Lu, T. Ma and C. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22191 CAS .
M. I. El-Henawey, R. S. Gebhardt, M. M. El-Tonsya and S. Chaudhary, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1947 CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Li, P. Zhang, D. Liu, X. Gu, H. Sarvari, Z. Ye, J. Wu, Z. Wang and Z. D. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19654 RSC .
C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18508 CAS .
Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619 CAS .
C. Chiang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and C. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 808 CAS .

  (a) J. Chang, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, Z. Lin, Y. Hao, K. Zeng, Q.-H. Xu and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7943 RSC ; 
  (b) Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 106 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01517hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Device architecture of the perovskite solar cell (glass/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/BCP/Ag) and the corresponding energy level diagram26 of the corresponding materials used in the device. The thickness of each layer is not in scale with the real thickness for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the inter-diffusion procedure for preparing the uniform and dense perovskite film. (b) The inset shows the pictures, from left to right, of the perovskite films after 10 min of annealing fabricated by spin-coating MAI/IPA solution (top) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (bottom), respectively, with 10 mg mL−1, 20 mg mL−1, 30 mg mL−1, 40 mg mL−1, 50 mg mL−1, 60 mg mL−1 MAI concentrations.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves with different scanning directions at the condition of IPA and IPA–0.9% DMF. Reverse (1.1 V → −0.2 V) and forward scan (−0.2 V → 1.1 V) measurements, the voltage step is 0.01 V. (b) IPCEs for the PSCs from MAI/IPA (red curves) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (black curves). Steady-state current density and PCE of the devices without (c) and with (d) DMF additive in MAI solution.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the histograms of the photovoltaic parameters for the perovskite solar cells based on MAI/IPA (red) and MAI/(IPA–0.9% DMF) (black) condition. Data from 20 cells were used for the histograms. Perovskite was formed by the inter-diffusion two-step sequential deposition method.	 

 	Fig. 5  
J–V curves for the best device (with or without 0.9% DMF) under standard AM 1.5 simulated illumination.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of perovskite films. (a) Higher-magnification SEM image of the perovskite film without and (b) with DMF additive, (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite film without DMF additive, (d) and with DMF additive.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD spectra of perovskite with MAI/IPA and MAI/IPA–0.9% DMF, respectively. (b) Normalized intensity X-ray diffraction spectra of perovskite, PbI2 and MAI, respectively (c) photoluminescence (PL) spectra at room temperature. Perovskite films grown on different substrates including glass or PEDOT:PSS. (d) Absorption spectra of the perovskite films, which were fabricated by spin-coating MAI/IPA and MAI/IPA–0.9% DMF on dried PbI2 films.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta01517h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
