Understanding charge transport and recombination losses in high performance polymer solar cells with non-fullerene acceptors   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05865A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05865A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17230-17239Understanding charge transport and recombination losses in high performance polymer solar cells with non-fullerene acceptors†

        
          
            Xuning 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobing 
            Zuo
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Shenkun 
            Xie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianyu 
            Yuan
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aHEEGER Beijing Research & Development Center, School of Chemistry, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn
cJiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Institute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123 Jiangsu Province, P. R. China. E-mail: jyyuan@suda.edu.cn
dX-ray Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA
Received 
      6th July 2017
    , Accepted 24th July 2017First published on 24th July 2017AbstractThe photovoltaic performance of organic solar cells can be enhanced by achieving a fundamental understanding of the key processes that govern the device behaviour. In this work, we comprehensively investigate temperature (T)-dependent charge transport, non-geminate recombination losses and intermolecular stacking based on three representative organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells comprising the polymeric donor of PBDB-T blended with non-fullerene small molecule ITIC and polymeric P(NDI2OD-T2) alongside PC71BM acceptors. Surprisingly, the champion solar cell based on PBDB-T:ITIC, even though exhibiting the most imbalanced transport, produces the highest PCE approaching 10%. We find that such an imbalance is in association with the decrease in the recombination reduction factor with respect to the Langevin rate constant. This beneficially leads to mitigated non-geminate recombination and gains in photoconductivity. In contrast, the all-polymer solar cell using the P(NDI2OD-T2) acceptor displays an excellent balance in mobility while suffering from a more substantial recombination, which causes severe carrier losses and reduced photocurrent. T-dependent mobility measurements indicate that the activation energy for the transport in these BHJ films is low (50–150 meV) which is rationalized by the preferential out-of-plane intermolecular π–π stacking mainly adopted by the donor molecules. The combined results point to an indication that the electron mobility in non-fullerene acceptors may not be a severe restraint while charge recombination losses play a critical role in ultimate photovoltaic characteristics based on these emerging materials.
Bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) comprising the blend of an organic electron donor and an electron acceptor offer an efficient path for charge generation in organic solar cells,1–6 in which charge carrier transport and recombination play a critical role in the processes of charge sweep-out and obtaining ultimate power conversion efficiency (PCE).7–14 It is commonly deemed that the recombination in organic BHJs occurs at the organic donor and organic acceptor interfaces.15,16 The recombination strength (B) is dictated by the recombination coefficient (k) and carrier density described by the relationship B = krecnp, where n and p denote the electron and the hole density in the solar cell.17–19 From Langevin theory, the recombination in a semiconductor is given by20,21 (1)where kL is the Langevin recombination coefficient (or rate constant), q is the elementary charge, ε0εs is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor, and μh and μe are the hole and the electron mobility, respectively. The recombination rate is governed by the encounter probability of electron–hole pairs in their mutual Columbic potential with the upper limit set by Langevin recombination.20 It has been found that in organic BHJ solar cells with nanoscale phase segregation, the recombination does not necessarily follow the trend predicted by the Langevin rate. In many cases, the recombination coefficient (or rate constant, krec) can be lower than kL, leading to the so-called reduction factor γ, defined as γ = krec/kL to describe the degree by which actual recombination decreases with respect to the Langevin process. In organic BHJ solar cells, γ typically varies in the range between 10−3 and 10−1, depending on the energetics, crystallinity, and phase separation in the BHJ.21 Understanding the recombination in BHJ solar cells has become a central topic both from a fundamental perspective and for the sake of attaining satisfactory performance metrics. It has been shown that the bimolecular recombination strength can directly correlate with the open-circuit voltage (Voc) in P3HT:PCBM solar cells.22 A recent study based on BHJ blends with a nematic liquid crystal polymer donor and PC71BM highlighted the capability of boosting the PCE (to ∼10%) through suppressing charge recombination which was found to associate with the reduction in intermolecular charge transfer (CT) states.21
Very recently, electron acceptors based on non-fullerene molecules have emerged as competitive alternatives to fullerene derivatives showing impressive photovoltaic performance.22–33 Improvements in the design of new acceptor materials and relevant device engineering have led to state-of-the art PCEs over 12% (ref. 34 and 35) with a variety of interesting photophysical phenomena including ultra-fast charge dissociation driven by low interfacial energies, high open-circuit voltages (Voc) with reduced energetic losses, charge generation via hole charge transfer from the acceptor molecule, etc.27,28,30,36 In comparison to fullerene derivatives, non-fullerene acceptors generally exhibit a high selectivity with regard to the blended donor molecule to provide expected photovoltaic effects.37 So far, only a handful of small molecule acceptors have shown successfulness which for many cases are based on fused-ring backbones with electron-deficient functional groups.38–41 This structural rigidity can reduce the reorganization energy and enable delocalized electronic states in the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to increase the electronic coupling which benefits electron transport. To date, reported high performance BHJs with fused-ring acceptors typically display an electron mobility in the range of 10−4–10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 in solar cell blends, lower than that of PCBM derivatives.24,42–44 Despite the moderate electron transport, these non-fullerene devices have yielded impressive high fill factors (FFs) and Jsc. This must suggest an efficient charge sweep-out associated with a low recombination under operation. However, to date this aspect has not been thoroughly addressed yet. In terms of the motif of using non-fullerene acceptors, a significant advantage is afforded by the complementary absorption with respect to the solar spectrum to gain photo-harvesting and potentially higher Jsc. To this end, reducing carrier losses via charge recombination is a prerequisite to fully utilize photo-carriers to maximize the photocurrent. As expressed in eqn (1), with increasing the carrier density, which is desired in non-fullerene BHJs with complementary absorbance, the suppression of charge recombination can only be implemented through reducing k. To date, in comparison to the fine tunability of energetics and film morphology optimization achieved in OPV communities of non-fullerene photovoltaics, fundamental understanding of the properties related to recombination and transport yet remains incomplete. In order to advance the performance and fully reach the potential of non-fullerene devices, attaining knowledge regarding these aspects and unravelling how these properties impact ultimate photovoltaic behaviours are of great importance.
In this communication, we comparatively investigate temperature (T)-dependent carrier transport and bimolecular recombination based on three BHJ systems comprising the donor of poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] (PBDB-T) blended with widely spread non-fullerene ITIC41 and P(NDI2OD-T2)45 acceptors alongside PC71BM (see their chemical structures in Fig. 1a). ITIC is a model system for emerging electron acceptors that has generated attractive photovoltaic characteristics.37,41 As a complementary method to time-resolved optical spectroscopy and relevant transient techniques,46–48 we adopted steady-state diode measurements to determine the mobility in the space-charge limited transport regime and its activation energy (Ea). Beneficially, the recombination rate and reduction factor could be readily determined based on the transport analysis, allowing us to attain direct relevance to solar cell behavior. For consistency, all BHJ solar cells in this study were fabricated with a conventional device architecture in the configuration of indium-tin-oxide(ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/BHJ/Ca/Al (see the inset in Fig. 1b for the device architecture). We found that even though exhibiting imbalanced transport with a lower electron mobility, the PBDB-T:ITIC solar cell produces the highest PCE approaching 10%, primarily ascribed to an enlarged short-circuit current. The different photocurrents in these devices are reconciled by the respective reduction factor and recombination coefficient.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of the compounds used in this study. (b) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells measured under standard AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Inset: device architecture of the solar cells. (c) Energy diagram for the three BHJ systems based on different electron acceptors. (d) Normalized UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy of BHJ films. (e) Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the corresponding devices. 
As a background study, we first compare photovoltaic characteristics based on the three BHJ systems. Fig. 1b shows the representative current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of solar cells under standard 1.5 AM G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Detailed device parameters are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI.† The PBDB-T:ITIC solar cell produces the highest PCE of 9.7%, followed by 7.4% and 5.6% for devices with P(NDI2OD-T2) and PC71BM, respectively. The performances of ITIC and PC71BM cells are consistent with the literature based on similar device architectures, while they slightly fall behind that achieved by using an inverted structure.41 As can be seen, all devices have high FFs (∼70%), indicative of a satisfactory diode quality with low leakage currents, which is important for our T-dependent analysis. A Voc of 0.90 V is found for the PBDB-T:ITIC device which is on a par with that obtained using P(NDI2OD-T2) and is slightly larger than that of the PC71BM device. Based on the energy diagram shown in Fig. 1c,41,43,49 the Voc can roughly correlate with the LUMO energy in each acceptor (the LUMO is about −3.78 eV, −3.80 eV and −3.98 eV for ITIC, P(NDI2OD-T2) and PC71BM, respectively). While the absolute difference in Voc does not exactly match the difference in optical bandgaps. The detailed mechanisms of Voc losses in these BHJ devices are beyond the scope of this study which may call for further investigations to elaborate.50 We note that the Jsc is also in line with the film absorption given in Fig. 1d except for PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2). The PBDB-T:ITIC shows an absorption onset at ∼800 nm with resolved vibronic structures associated with an absorption shoulder at ∼705 nm that can be ascribed to aggregations in solid films of PBDB-T:ITIC. Interestingly, the shoulder cannot be observed in pristine PBDB-T or ITIC films (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). In terms of the optical absorbance, the enhanced Jsc (=15.8 mA cm−2) of the ITIC device is primarily ascribed to the extended absorption within 700–800 nm. In contrast, we note an obvious reduction in the Jsc of the P(NDI2OD-T2) cell. This is a surprising result regarding the red-shift in absorption with an onset at ∼890 nm, and thus more severe carrier losses are speculated. Fig. 1e compares incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) spectra for each device. Overall, the IPCE of ITIC and PC71BM cells greatly exceeds that of the P(NDI2OD-T2) cell, suggesting an increased photo-harvesting in the former two cells. Of note, the carriers ascribed to ITIC absorption around 700–800 nm (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†) contribute to the photocurrent with a high quantum efficiency approaching 80%. On the other hand, the reduced IPCE in PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) confirms the server carrier losses in the all-polymer BHJ system.
To gain more in-depth insights into the solar cell behaviour, we explore charge carrier transport in these BHJ films using single-carrier devices which were attained based on a similar structure to those of solar cells by adopting different Au top contacts (for hole-only devices or HO, see the inset in Fig. 2a) or Al bottom contacts (for electron-only devices or EO, see the inset in Fig. 2b) for exclusive charge injections. To quantify krec and γ, the electron and the hole mobility (μe and μh) in BHJ films and the effective double-carrier mobility in solar cells (μdouble) need to be determined from dark transport characteristics in the injection regime. Fig. 2a and b show the double-logarithm J–V curves of single-carrier devices measured at room temperature (RT).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Dark J–V characteristics of single-carrier devices at RT based on PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM BHJ films. Lines are fittings using the Mott–Gurney law in the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) regime. Inset figures in (a) and (b) are illustrated device architectures for hole-only and electron-only diodes. (c and d) Temperature (T)-dependent dark J–V characteristics of hole-only (a) and electron-only (d) devices based on PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM BHJ films. 
For consistency, the thickness of BHJ layers in HO devices was maintained the same as that in solar cells at around 100 nm. For EO devices, we noted that maintaining similar thickness as in solar cells at ∼100 nm (as used for solar cells) was at the expense of causing high leakage currents that complicated our T-dependent analysis. Therefore, we intentionally increase the thickness for EO devices (∼200 nm) which was not expected to induce drastic changes in dark electron transport while satisfactory diode characteristics were obtained. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the current in all devices displays an evident quadratic voltage dependence that is describable by the well-established space-charge limited transport behaviour. This provides a signature of the transport dominated by mobile carriers with insignificant traps in these BHJ films.

Fig. 2c and d display T-dependent J–V characteristics in the dark for HO and EO devices based on the same BHJ films. The corresponding dark J–V curves of the solar cells at different T are shown in Fig. S2 in the ESI.† Among the three types of devices, the solar cells exhibit the most pronounced rectification with low leakage currents (under reverse bias), which partially rationalizes the observed high FFs. The diffusion current (0 < V < Vbi or built-in voltage) displays a weak T-independence which contrasts with the more obvious reduction in the drift current (V > Vbi) with decreasing T. The transport in these two regimes displays a positive T-coefficient, namely a reduced current is found at lower T. Similar to the solar cells, the hole-only devices also have a pronounced rectification effect while the Vbi reduces, due to the smaller anode–cathode work function (WF) difference (see Fig. 2c). In the drift current regime, the T-dependence in the HO devices is stronger than that in the solar cells. As a comparison, Fig. 2d shows the electron current in the EO devices at various T where even larger T-dependence is observed. These results indicate different thermal activation energies (Ea) of the transport for the two carriers which will be discussed in more detail below.
Based on dark transport measurements in single carrier devices at RT and lower T (Fig. 2), we determined the carrier mobility in these blends using the Mott–Gurney law as51 (2)where μ is generalized for μh, μe, or μdouble, and L is the film thickness of the BHJ layer. The determined mobility (εr = 3.5 was used) of holes and electrons is shown in the Arrhenius plots as a function of T in Fig. 3a–c. The mobility in all BHJs exhibits an evident Arrhenius T-dependence, revealed by the satisfactory linearity on the semi-logarithm scale, which agrees with the general observation in organic semiconductors with a characteristic hopping-like transport.52 Surprisingly, the PBDB-T:ITIC blend shows an imbalanced transport with μh = 1.06 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, nearly two orders of magnitude higher than μe (=1.7 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). The trend is reversed in PBDB-T:PC71BM, showing a reduced μh of 5.8 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, compared to a μe of 1.2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1. Among the BHJs, the PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) displays an outstandingly balanced transport with μh = 1.95 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe = 2.0 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is in contrast to the poorest solar cell performance. It is noted that the mobility in the PBDB-T donor varies when blended with different acceptors, e.g. 2-fold difference in μh is found for the two BHJs with small molecule acceptors while in the all-polymer blends, we observe a stronger reduction in μh. As will be detailed, such differences can be interpreted by the molecular stacking in the respective BHJ films. In Fig. 3d, we plot the ratio of the mobility of slow carriers to that of fast carriers. The ratio of PBDB-T:ITIC is 0.017 at RT and slightly increases at 275 K and then becomes nearly unchanged with further decreasing T. In the other two blends, the ratios are larger, reaching ∼10−1. The mobility ratio displays a power-law T-dependence in PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), implicating that the transport by the two carriers may have a larger difference in Ea. In PBDB-T:PC71BM, the T-dependence is weak and does not show clear regularity. It was demonstrated that in organic BHJ solar cells, severely imbalanced transport (with mobility difference >2 orders) could cause the accumulation of slow carriers inside the photoactive layer, resulting in the space-charge limited photocurrent and reductions in FF.53 The mobility ratios in Fig. 3d are in the range between 0.01 and 1 which may not be strong enough to induce the space-charge effect in operating solar cells.
 Fig. 3  Arrhenius plot of SCLC hole and electron mobilities as a function of T along with linear fittings for PBDB-T:ITIC (a), PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) (b), and PBDB-T:PC71BM (c) blends. Inset in (b): illustration of the activation energy (Ea) of transport within the Gaussian density of states (DOS) where E0 is the Gaussian center for the HOMO (or LUMO) in the BHJ, Et is the transport level, and Eq is the equilibrium level. The energetic distance depicted by the red arrow refers to the activation energy. (d) Ratio of the mobility of slow carriers to that of fast carriers in BHJ films with various electron acceptors. 
Activation energy or Ea, as a transport-relevant parameter, has been demonstrated to intimately correlate with charge carrier mobilities in molecular semiconductors with a characteristic hopping-like transport.46,54 As illustrated by the diagram in the inset of Fig. 3b, in the presence of energetic disorder, often described by a Gaussian density of states (DOS) for the HOMO (or LUMO),47Ea is referred to the energetic distance between the equilibrium states (Eq) with respect to the transport levels Et. The value of Ea to some degree correlates with structural ordering. In disordered polymers a higher mobility is often associated with a reduced Ea.52 On the other hand, in BHJ blends with crystalline domains, Ea also reflects the degree of molecular ordering.55 With this knowledge, we investigate the thermal activation energy of the transport to shed light on intermolecular stacking in these BHJ films.46Ea was calculated by fitting the plot of the determined mobility as a function of T to the Arrhenius equation as μ(T) = μ0exp(−Ea/kBT), where μ0 is the mobility prefactor at infinite T and kB is the Boltzmann constant. The determined Ea is summarized in Table 1 and we obtained a comparable Ea between 110 and 150 meV for the hole transport in the three BHJ systems. It is interesting to note that even though the hole mobility varies in response to different acceptors, the corresponding Ea is not substantially affected. This result seems not to be explained by the universal Arrhenius T-dependence with a reverse dependence of Ea on mobility identified in disordered (pristine) polymers.52 In fact, a recent study on BHJs using small molecule donors blended with PC71BM revealed that due to preferential intermolecular packing, Ea may be primarily influenced by the ordering in π–π stacking within the BHJ and thus does not exactly follow the mobility tendency.53 A similar Ea for the hole transport hints an analogous extent for the packing of donor molecules. In contrast, the Ea for counterpart electrons shows system-dependence. Of note, a comparable Ea for the two carriers in PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T:PC71BM films is observed while in PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) the Ea for electrons reduces to half that for counterpart holes. This strongly indicates that the molecular disorder for the electron transport with the polymeric acceptor is reduced, which is consistent with the observation of a low disorder in pristine P(NDI2OD-T2) films.56
Table 1 Thermal activation energy Ea for hole and electron mobilities in BHJs with various acceptors determined from T-dependent transport measurements




(meV)
ITIC
P(NDI2OD-T2)
PC71BM




Hole
150
110
130


Electron
130
57
110




To further unravel the influences of structural order on the transport properties, we performed grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measurements.57Fig. 4a–c show 2D images of GIWAXS patterns for the BHJ films. For all films under study, we observed anisotropic diffraction features in the GIWAXS patterns, indicative of certain degrees of molecular ordering along preferential orientations on the substrates. Fig. 4d–f show the 1D out-of-plane and in-plane scattering profiles cut from the GIWAXS patterns. The peaks of π–π stacking along the out-of-plane orientation (face-on) are located at 1.68, 1.63, and 1.68 Å−1 for BHJ films blended with ITIC, P(NDI2OD-T2), and PC71BM, respectively. Crystal correlation lengths (CCLs) were calculated from the width of the π–π stacking diffraction peaks (CCL = 2π/FWHM, where FWHM denotes the full-width at half-maximum of the peaks). The values of the FWHM were obtained by fitting diffraction peaks with Gaussian functions in this study.28 We obtained CCLs as 2.2 nm for the ITIC blend, 1.8 nm for the P[NDI2OD-T2] blend, and 2.2 nm for the PC71BM blend. The values are nearly one order of magnitude lower than those for highly crystalline small molecule donors.53 Note that we are using CCLs to make relative comparisons among these materials and not as a direct representation of the crystallite size. On this basis, the reduced CCL in the PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) film indicates a reduced range for π–π stacking molecular ordering, which is not useful for vertical charge transport. It is surprising that even though the carrier mobility is strongly imbalanced in PBDB-T:ITIC and PBDB-T:PC71BM films, a comparable CCL is obtained. To better decouple the contribution to these stacking patterns, we performed GIWAXS measurements on pristine PBDB-T, ITIC and P(NDI2OD-T2) (see the results in Fig. S3 and S4, ESI†). In the pristine PBDB-T film, we observe both out-of-plane and in-plane population distributions for π–π stacking while P(NDI2OD-T2) exhibits a preferred face-on orientation with strong π–π stacking appearing in the out-of-plane direction. In contrast, the 2D GIWAXS pattern of ITIC mainly displays diffraction halos indicating a non-crystalline nature, which is similar to that of spherically symmetric PCBM.53 Through comparing the 1D line-cut profile of individual donor/acceptor films and corresponding blends, we assign the out-of-plane π–π stacking in the blends primarily to the donor of PBDB-T in both ITIC and PC71BM based blend films. On this basis, the similar CCL in ITIC and PC71BM agrees with the comparable hole mobility in these two BHJ films. However, the π–π stacking peak in the PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) blend film was mostly contributed by P(NDI2OD-T2). Therefore, it is evident that at the bulk-heterojunction in the all-polymer blend, the donor and acceptor will very likely adapt different packing orientations.53 Specifically, there is a large population of P(NDI2OD-T2) crystallites with the face-on orientation in the all-polymer blend,58 which is beneficial for electron transport the in vertical direction. In contrast, the relatively low portion of face-on oriented PBDB-T crystallites account for the decreased hole transport (∼2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) in the all-polymer blends using PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2). Moreover, we note that the π–π stacking peaks in the out-of-plane direction become much more pronounced in the PBDB-T:ITIC films when compared to that in pristine donor (or acceptor) films. A similar effect was observed on the change of relative intensity in molecular stacking at preferential orientations when forming BHJs which could be ascribed to specific molecular interactions or solubility.42 Across these BHJ systems, the preferential out-of-plane π–π stacking in PBDB-T:ITIC seems to prompt the solar cell operation which relies on carrier transport and separation along the vertical direction.
 Fig. 4  (a–c) 2D patterns of grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measured on BHJ films comprising PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM. (d–f) Out-of-plane and in-plane line cuts from the respective GIWAXS patterns in (a–c). Crystal correlation lengths (CCLs) calculated from the FWHM of the π–π stacking diffraction peaks were also labeled. The black horizontal lines in the GIWAXS patterns arose from dead detector pixels. 
Notwithstanding the favourable intermolecular stacking, the impressive photovoltaic performance with ITIC is still puzzling concerning the strongly imbalanced transport with reduced electron mobility. To unravel this unclearness, we examined charge recombination in these BHJs to attain insights into the carrier losses. It was recently demonstrated by Blom et al. that the reduction factor γ and related recombination rate constant could be assessed directly from steady-state transport measurements without the need to apply complicated transient techniques, which offers a straightforward methodology based on well-established models.59 Within this framework, the relation of γ is given by56 (3)where the mobility of the three devices is determined from dark transport in the space-charge limited current (SCLC) regime. To apply this model, it is essential that the traps do not play a significant role in the recombination, otherwise trap-assisted (Shockley–Read–Hall or SRH) recombination becomes dominant, invalidating the utilization of eqn (3) to determine the rate constant. With this notation, we examined the irradiation (Plight) dependence of Voc in each cell (see Fig. 5a) to verify if SRH recombination is present. Based on the slope of Vocvs. Plight, one is able to disentangle the bimolecular (slope ∼1 kBT/q) from SRH (>1 kBT/q) recombination. We attained slopes of 0.96 kBT/q, 1.18 kBT/q, and 1.14 kBT/q for the three BHJs with ITIC, P(NDI2OD-T2), and PC71BM, respectively. In all cases, the slope approaches 1 kBT/q, suggesting that the SRH recombination or charge trapping effect is insignificant. This result is also consistent with the observation of the dominant SCLC transport shown in Fig. 2a and b, justifying the applicability of eqn (3) in our analysis. Also, we measured irradiation dependent Jsc from the results shown in Fig. 5b. The photocurrent exhibits a power-law dependence as ∼Plightα with α equalling exactly 1 for all devices (on the double-logarithm scale). This is indicative of the first-order recombination present in these devices.60 Note that there are still debates on accounting α for the monomolecular vs. bimolecular recombination and α < 1 may originate from the space-charge effects or variations in mobility between the two carriers.57 The imbalance in mobility in our solar cells does not induce obvious deviation of the power from unity, which agrees with the result of SCLC transport above.
 Fig. 5  (a) Short-circuit current (Jsc) and (b) open-circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of irradiation intensity of BHJ solar cells with different acceptors, and lines are linear fits. (c) Reduction factor of the Langevin recombination rate and (d) recombination coefficient (krec) of the same set of BHJ solar cells measured at different T (dashed lines are guide for the eye). 
The determined mobilities based on the T-dependent J–V characteristics of single-carrier devices (Fig. 2c and d) and solar cells (Fig. S2†) lead to the quantification of the recombination rate constant and reduction factor according to eqn (3) (see the summarized mobilities in Table S2, ESI†). In Fig. 5c, we show the calculated reduction factor γ as a function of T. The γ varies between 0.01 and 1, exhibiting a pronounced T-dependence within 210–300 K, which indicates that bimolecular recombination via free carriers is thermally activated as well. The γ at RT is 0.50, 0.94, and 0.52 for BHJ films with ITIC, P(NDI2OD-T2) and PC71BM, respectively. The relatively large difference in γ between BHJs with small molecule and polymeric acceptors can be correlated with variation in CCLs. Of note, we found that the γ values at RT correlate with the degree of imbalance in mobility. For example, the PBDB-T:ITIC with the smallest mobility ratio is associated with the largest reduction (with the smallest reduction factor) with respect to the Langevin rate.
In organic BHJ solar cells, the deviation from the Langevin process could be related to the present donor–acceptor interfaces within the BHJ where fast carriers have to wait for their slower counterparts before recombining with one another.61 To this end, it appears reasonable that the PBDB-T:ITIC has the strongest reduction in recombination at RT concerning the mobility ratio (Fig. 3d). This result is also in line with a recent simulation study where the lowest Langevin rate constant was identified in the BHJ with strongly imbalanced mobility.62 Through comparing the γ at low T, we note that the γ decreases the most in PBDB-T:ITIC. However the decreased reduction factor at lower T cannot be simply understood in terms of the mobility imbalance, implicative of a complicated nature of γ. As aforementioned, actual recombination strength in BHJs is determined by the product of recombination rate constant krec and carrier density as ∼krecnp. In this regard, assessment of krec tends to be more meaningful to understand the carrier losses and ultimate device parameters. Based on the result of γ, we calculated krec according to the relationship γ = krec/kL and the determined krec is shown in Fig. 5d. Consistent with the reduction factor, the PBDB-T:ITIC device has the lowest krec over a wide range of T, strongly indicating the suppressed recombination among these BHJ films, which explicitly explains the improved Jsc in the corresponding device. To our surprise, the krec of PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) on average is lower than that obtained using PC71BM, which is opposite to the trend of γ. This result seems counterintuitive concerning the low Jsc and IPCE. Due to the extended absorption onset in P(NDI2OD-T2), the density of photons and resultant photo-carriers in the PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) film are probably higher than those in the PC71BM blend film, and thus the recombination may be accelerated according to the relationship B = krecnp. On the other hand, the losses via geminate recombination paths are also likely to contribute to the reduced IPCE and Jsc, which however cannot be identified through our steady-state analysis on recombination. We further performed photoluminescence (PL) quenching measurements to unravel the possible reasons for the reduced Jsc in the all-polymer solar cells. As shown in Fig. S5, ESI,† a nearly complete quenching of the donor's emission in PBDB-T:ITIC is observed while we still see the weak donor peaks in P(NDI2OD-T2) and PB71BM blends. On the other hand, the quenching of the acceptors' emission in the two non-fullerene BHJ films is of the same degree. The spectroscopic evidence suggests that charge transfer in the all-polymer BHJ may not be a main problem for the low Jsc. Given that the recombination coefficient in the P(NDI2OD-T2) cell resembles that in the ITIC device, the reduced IPCE (or Jsc) in the all-polymer BHJ system may be attributed to the strong geminate recombination losses. Actually, in a recent study based on the same polymeric acceptor, it was found that almost 50 percent of the charges recombine geminately in all polymer solar cells comprising PTP8:P(NDI2OD-T2).58 This was confirmed as the major factor hindering the performance of the current all-polymer solar cells. Here we emphasize that the determined krec primarily provides qualitative assessments on the carrier losses in operating solar cells while a full description of photovoltaic device characteristics with the recombination parameters is still a challenge. As shown in Fig. 5d, the activation energy of krec was also assessed, leading to Ea = 350 meV (ITIC), 226 meV (P[NDI2OD-T2]), and 289 meV (PC71BM). When compared to the attenuated Ea for the transport in BHJ films, these values are noticeably larger, indicating that on top of the transport thermal activation related to recombination can be influenced by other co-existing processes. A plausible attribution may be the morphological variation at lower T which calls for further investigations. To enable a more meaningful assessment of the determined recombination parameters in these BHJs, finally we compared the results of krec with benchmarked P3HT:PCBM. It is noticeable that even though much greater performance is achieved, the rate constant in PBDB-T:ITIC cells, the lowest among our compared systems, is still larger than that of P3HT:PCBM by ∼1 order of magnitude.22 This implies that the recombination losses in this non-fullerene device to some degree may not be minimized, pointing to the need for further improvements to achieve enlarged PCEs.
To summarize, we comparatively investigate T-dependent charge carrier transport and non-geminate recombination losses in three representative organic BHJ solar cells based on the PBDB-T donor blended with widely spread small molecule ITIC and polymeric P(NDI2OD-T2) acceptors alongside PC71BM. We observe evidently imbalanced transport with a reduced electron mobility in the PBDB-T:ITIC solar cell which surprisingly produces the champion performance with PCE approaching 10%. In contrast, the device with the P(NDI2OD-T2) acceptor yields the least photocurrent, which cannot be interpreted simply by its absorbance profile and balanced mobility. Of importance, we find that the photoconductivity in these BHJs correlates with the respective recombination rate constant krec and reduction factor γ determined by steady-state charge carrier mobility measurements. The gain in Jsc for the PBDB-T:ITIC cell is reconciled by the decreased krec and γ, leading to mitigated carrier losses through non-geminate recombination. The supreme device characteristic with ITIC is also consistent to the observed preferential π–π stacking along the out-of-plane orientation, revealed by GIWAXS characterization. Our results point to an indication that the mobility balance to some degree may not be a severe limitation for the photovoltaic behaviour of ITIC based solar cells. Meanwhile, it appears obvious that to afford further improvements in desired photon-harvesting and ultimate PCEs with non-fullerene acceptors, control of recombination processes to minimize carrier losses is critical. This work demonstrates a combined analytical tool to enrich fundamental insight into key opto-electrical properties that govern the photovoltaic characteristics based on emerging solution-processable molecular semiconductors.
Acknowledgements
This work was finally supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21674006), the Chinese Academy of Science (100 Top Young Scientists Program and QYZDB-SSW-SLH033), and the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0206600). Y. J. thanks the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (BK20170337), Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD). This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by the Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. S. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Li and X. W. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Lin, A. Armin, E. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, S. Q. Zhang, L. J. Huo, M. J. Zhang and J. H. Hou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1595–1603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohkita, S. Cook, Y. Astuti, W. Duffy, S. Tierney, W. Zhang, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3030–3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, K. Vandewal, J. A. Bartelt, W. R. Mateker, J. D. Douglas, R. Noriega, K. R. Graham, J. M. J. Frechet, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 220–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuik, G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, H. T. Nicolai, N. I. Craciun, D. M. De Leeuw and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 512–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Shuttle, N. D. Treat, J. D. Douglas, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 111–119 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, X.-D. Dang, C. Kim and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 610–617 CrossRef CAS .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939–1948 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Etherington, J. Wang, P. C. Y. Chow and N. C. Greenham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063304 CrossRef .
A. Pivrikas, G. Juska, A. j. Mozer, M. Scharber, K. Arlauskas, N. S. Sariciftci, H. Stubb and R. Osterbacka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 176806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef .
T. Heumueller, T. M. Burke, W. R. Mateker, I. T. Sachs-Quintana, K. Vandewal, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500111 CrossRef .
P. Zalar, M. Kuik, N. A. Ran, J. A. Love and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400438 CrossRef .
A. Armin, J. Subbiah, M. Stolterfoht, S. Shoaee, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, D. J. Jones and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600939 CrossRef .
A. Maurano, R. Hamilton, C. G. Shuttle, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, B. O'Regan, W. M. Zhang, I. McCulloch, H. Azimi, M. Morana, C. J. Brabec and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4987–4992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sonar, J. P. F. Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558–1574 CAS .
Y. Z. Lin and X. W. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 470–488 RSC .
K. Cnops, B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, B. Verreet, M. A. Empl and P. Heremans, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3406 Search PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, Y. K. Li, H. R. Lin, Y. H. Liu, K. Jiang, C. Mu, T. X. Ma, J. Y. L. Lai, H. W. Hu, D. M. Yu and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 520–525 CAS .
J. Liu, S. S. Chen, D. P. Qian, B. Gautam, G. F. Yang, J. B. Zhao, J. Bergqvist, F. L. Zhang, W. Ma, H. Ade, O. Inganas, K. Gundogdu, F. Gao and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16089 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, F. Zhao, Y. Wu, K. Chen, Y. Xia, G. Li, S. K. K. Prasad, J. Zhu, L. Huo, H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, X. Guo, M. Zhang, Y. Sun, F. Gao, Z. Wei, W. Ma, C. Wang, J. Hodgkiss, Z. Bo, O. Inganäs, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604155 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhong, M. T. Trinh, R. S. Chen, G. E. Purdum, P. P. Khlyabich, M. Sezen, S. Oh, H. M. Zhu, B. Fowler, B. Y. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Y. Nam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. T. Black, M. L. Steigerwald, Y.-L. Loo, F. Ng, X.-Y. Zhu and C. Nuckolls, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C. H. Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. R. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Meng, H. T. Fu, X. Y. Xiao, X. Y. T. Winands, W. Ma, W. Wei, B. B. Fan, L. J. Huo, N. L. Doltsinis, Y. Li, Y. M. Sun and Z. H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10184–10190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Dai, F. W. Zhao, Q. Q. Zhang, T. K. Lau, T. F. Li, K. Liu, Q. D. Ling, C. R. Wang, X.
H. Lu, W. You and X. W. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1336–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, L. Qiu, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Zou, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 312–320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, K. Gao, X. Wan, Q. Zhang, B. Kan, R. Xia, F. Liu, X. Yang, H. Feng, W. Ni, Y. Wang, J. Peng, H. Zhang, Z. Liang, H.-L. Yip, X. Peng, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 85–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, S. Zhang, X. Liu and J. H. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604059 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Baran, T. Kirchartz, S. Wheeler, S. Dimitrov, M. Abdelsamie, J. Gorman, R. S. Ashraf, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, N. Gasparini, P. Kaienburg, H. Yan, A. Amassian, C. J. Brabec, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3783–3793 CAS .
D. L. Liu, B. Yang, B. M. Jang, B. W. Xu, S. Q. Zhang, C. He, H. Y. Woo and J. H. Hou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 546–551 CAS .
Y. Z. Lin, J. Y. Wang, Z. G. Zhang, H. T. Bai, Y. F. Li, D. B. Zhu and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sonar, J. P. F. Lim and K. L. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1558–1574 CAS .
Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Wang, J. Y. Wang, J. H. Hou, Y. F. Li, D. B. Zhu and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5137–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, Y. K. Li, H. R. Lin, Y. H. Liu, K. Jiang, C. Mu, T. X. Ma, J. Y. L. Lai, H. W. Hu, D. M. Yu and Y. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 520, 520–525 Search PubMed .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. H. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. H. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Qian, L. Zhong, J.-D. Lin, Z.-Q. Jiang, Z.-G. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, L.-S. Liao and F. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 430–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Z. H. Chen, Y. Zheng, C. Newman, J. R. Quinn, F. Dotz, M. Kastler and A. Facchetti, Nature, 2009, 457, 679–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Marsh, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Hoffmann, F. Jaiser, A. Hayer, H. Bässler, T. Unger, S. Athanasopoulos, D. Neher and A. Köhler, How Do Disorder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1772–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Phan, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, J. Zhou, K. Moudgil, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, A. Facchetti and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600546 CrossRef .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
F. Laquai, D. Andrienko, R. Mauer and P. W. M. Blom, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1001–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakanoue and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 736–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Mihailetchi, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 126602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Craciun, J. Wildeman and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 056601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Proctor, A. S. Kher, J. A. Love, Y. Huang, A. Sharenko, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502285 CrossRef .
M. Caironi, M. Bird, D. Fazzi, Z. H. Chen, R. Di Pietro, C. Newman, A. Facchetti and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3371–3381 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rivnay, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, C. E. Miller, A. Salleo and M. F. Toney, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5488–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Xia, M. J. Ford, F. Jin, D. Liu, H. Zhao, O. Inganäs, G. C. Bazan and W. Ma, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 251–262 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. H. Wetzelaer, N. J. Van der Kaap, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1130–1134 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .
L. J. A. Koster, E. C. P. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085205 CrossRef .
D. J. Wehenkel, L. J. A. Koster, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 125203 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05865aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structure of the compounds used in this study. (b) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells measured under standard AM 1.5 G irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Inset: device architecture of the solar cells. (c) Energy diagram for the three BHJ systems based on different electron acceptors. (d) Normalized UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy of BHJ films. (e) Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of the corresponding devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Dark J–V characteristics of single-carrier devices at RT based on PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM BHJ films. Lines are fittings using the Mott–Gurney law in the space-charge-limited current (SCLC) regime. Inset figures in (a) and (b) are illustrated device architectures for hole-only and electron-only diodes. (c and d) Temperature (T)-dependent dark J–V characteristics of hole-only (a) and electron-only (d) devices based on PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM BHJ films.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Arrhenius plot of SCLC hole and electron mobilities as a function of T along with linear fittings for PBDB-T:ITIC (a), PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2) (b), and PBDB-T:PC71BM (c) blends. Inset in (b): illustration of the activation energy (Ea) of transport within the Gaussian density of states (DOS) where E0 is the Gaussian center for the HOMO (or LUMO) in the BHJ, Et is the transport level, and Eq is the equilibrium level. The energetic distance depicted by the red arrow refers to the activation energy. (d) Ratio of the mobility of slow carriers to that of fast carriers in BHJ films with various electron acceptors.	 

Hole	150	110	130
Electron	130	57	110

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) 2D patterns of grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) measured on BHJ films comprising PBDB-T:ITIC, PBDB-T:P(NDI2OD-T2), and PBDB-T:PC71BM. (d–f) Out-of-plane and in-plane line cuts from the respective GIWAXS patterns in (a–c). Crystal correlation lengths (CCLs) calculated from the FWHM of the π–π stacking diffraction peaks were also labeled. The black horizontal lines in the GIWAXS patterns arose from dead detector pixels.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Short-circuit current (Jsc) and (b) open-circuit voltage (Voc) as a function of irradiation intensity of BHJ solar cells with different acceptors, and lines are linear fits. (c) Reduction factor of the Langevin recombination rate and (d) recombination coefficient (krec) of the same set of BHJ solar cells measured at different T (dashed lines are guide for the eye).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05865a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
