Harnessing the properties of colloidal quantum dots in luminescent solar concentrators  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00701A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00701A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5866-5890Harnessing the properties of colloidal quantum dots in luminescent solar concentrators

        
          
            Yufeng 
            Zhou†
a, 
      
        
          
            Haiguang 
            Zhao†
*b, 
      
        
          
            Dongling 
            Ma
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Federico 
            Rosei
          
          
        
      *ac
aÉnergie Matériaux Télécommunications Research Centre, Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1650 Boulevard Lionel-Boulet, Varennes, Québec J3X 1S2, Canada. E-mail: rosei@emt.inrs.ca
bCollege of Physics & The Cultivation Base for State Key Laboratory, Qingdao University, No. 308 Ningxia Road, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China. E-mail: hgzhao@qdu.edu.cn
cInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R. China
Received 
      17th February 2018
    First published on 19th June 2018AbstractLuminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) can serve as large-area sunlight collectors, are suitable for applications in high-efficiency and cost-effective photovoltaics (PVs), and provide adaptability to the needs of architects for building-integrated PVs, which makes them an attractive option for transforming buildings into transparent or non-transparent electricity generators. Compared with traditional organic dyes, colloidal semiconducting quantum dots (QDs) are excellent candidates as emitters for LSCs because they exhibit wide size/shape/composition-tunable absorption spectra ranging from ultraviolet to near infrared, significantly overlapping with the solar spectrum. They also feature narrow emission spectra, high photoluminescence quantum yields, high absorption coefficients, solution processability and good photostability. Most importantly, QDs can be engineered to provide a minimal overlap between absorption and emission spectra, which is key to the realization of large-area LSCs with largely suppressed reabsorption energy losses. In this review article, we will first present and discuss the working principle of LSCs, the synthesis of colloidal QDs using wet-chemistry approaches, the optical properties of QDs, their band alignment and the intrinsic relationship between the band energy structure and optical properties of QDs. We focus on emerging architectures, such as core/shell QDs. We then highlight recent progress in QD-based LSCs and their anticipated applications. We conclude this review article with the major challenges and perspectives of LSCs in future commercial technologies.
Yufeng Zhou
Yufeng Zhou received her Master's Degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (2013). She continued her research work at Chengdu Green Energy and Green Manufacturing Technology R&D Centre in China as a research assistant for one year. She is currently a PhD student at the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS, Canada) with a Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Saving and Storage (MATECSS) excellence scholarship. Her research mainly focuses on the synthesis of semiconducting nanomaterials (such as colloidal quantum dots and nanoplatelets) and their applications in luminescent solar concentrators and solar-driven water splitting.
Haiguang Zhao
Haiguang Zhao is a Professor at Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. He received his MSc degree (2007) from Zhejiang University and PhD degree (2012) from INRS, Quebec University. His research interests focus on the synthesis of semiconductor materials (including metal oxides, quantum dots and perovskites) for solar energy applications, such as solar cells, luminescent solar concentrators and solar-driven water splitting.
Dongling Ma
Dongling Ma is currently a full professor at INRS. Her main research interest includes the development of various nanomaterials (e.g., quantum dots, catalytic nanoparticles, plasmonic nanostructures, and different types of nanohybrids) for applications in energy (e.g., solar cells), catalysis (including photocatalysis) and biomedical sectors. Before joining INRS in July 2006, she was awarded Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Visiting Fellowships and worked at the National Research Council of Canada from 2004–2006. She received her PhD degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (USA) in 2004.
Federico Rosei
Federico Rosei is a Professor and the Director of the INRS Centre Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, Varennes (QC) Canada. He holds the UNESCO Chair in Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Saving and Storage and the Senior Canada Research Chair in Nanostructured Materials. He received MSc and PhD degrees from the University of Rome “La Sapienza” in 1996 and 2001, respectively. He has received several awards and is a Fellow/Member of many prestigious societies and academies, including the Royal Society of Canada, the European Academy of Sciences, the American Physical Society, the World Academy of Arts and Science, the Chinese Chemical Society (Honorary), the American Association for the Advancement of Science, SPIE, the Canadian Academy of Engineering, ASM International and the Engineering Institute of Canada.
1. Introduction
Generating electricity directly from solar radiation represents an attractive approach towards addressing the increasing demand for clean and renewable energy, eventually reducing the environmental impact caused by excessive carbon dioxide emissions that are associated with the use of fossil fuels.1–9 The quest for solar cells with high power conversion efficiency (PCE), long-term stability and low cost has prompted major research efforts, with a primary aim being the design and realization of new materials with optimal spectral overlap with solar radiation.1–8 Single-crystalline silicon solar cells have been widely commercialized over the last two decades due to their broad light absorption spectrum (300–1100 nm) which overlaps significantly with the solar spectrum and relatively high PCE of ∼25%.10–14 Commercial single-junction, crystalline silicon solar cells exhibit a typical PCE of ∼20–25% along with excellent stability, with only 15% reduction in PCE within 30-year outdoor operation.15 Nonetheless, the price of silicon photovoltaic (PV) modules (fully installed) is still relatively high (up to $1 per watt). Low-cost, solution-processable excitonic solar cells (ESCs), e.g. dye and polymer PVs,1,2,16–20 quantum dot (QD) PVs,6,21,22 and perovskite PVs,23 have emerged as promising alternatives in recent years. In general, up to now the PCE of all the ESCs, except for hybrid perovskite PVs, has remained rather low compared with that of commercial silicon solar cells. Although hybrid perovskite solar cells recently achieved PCE values in excess of 20%,23 lack of stability is still a major challenge. A quick drop in PCE over several days during operation is typically observed because of both the inherent instability of the crystalline structure and the sensitivity to moisture of the photoabsorbing materials.24,25
A promising complementary approach to conventional PV systems consists in using luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs).3,26–39 Solar concentration technology represents an effective approach to reduce the cost of traditional silicon PV devices by decreasing their active area used for generating the same amount of electrical power.3,26–39 LSCs can further provide adaptability to the needs of architects for semi-transparent building-integrated PVs (BIPVs), such as a variety of colors, shapes, transparencies, lightweight and flexibility, which makes them an attractive option for transforming buildings or turning common objects into transparent or semi-transparent electricity generators.3,29,30 A typical LSC consists of an optical waveguide coated or embedded with emissive fluorophores.26,29,34,40 Upon absorption of sunlight, fluorophores re-emit photons which are guided by total internal reflection to the PV devices positioned at their edges (Fig. 1).26,27,29,34,40–43 The surface area of the slab exposed to sunlight is much larger than the area of its edges coupled with solar cells. The ratio of the top area (Atop) and the edge area (Aedge) is defined as the geometric (G) factor,  
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of an LSC based on QDs. An LSC coupled with two PV cells is obtained by embedding QDs in a transparent polymer matrix. The numbers indicate the typical processes of energy loss in an LSC. [1] Unabsorbed light; [2] Light reflects from the top surface; [3] Photon loss due to the non-unity of fluorescence QY; [4] Escaped, re-emitted light from the surface due to the escape cone (the angle smaller than the critical angle), and [5] Light reabsorption by another QD. 
So the LSCs can efficiently enhance the photon intensity at the edges where PV cells are installed, resulting in an increase of their photocurrents.35,44 Moreover, the colour and degree of transparency of a LSC can be effectively controlled by tuning the type and concentration of fluorophores, which can meet the specific requirements of BIPVs.3,26
The optical performance of LSCs is evaluated and quantified on the basis of the optical conversion efficiency (ηopt), defined as the ratio of the output power (Pout) coming from the edges of LSCs and the input power (Pin) through the top surface of the LSC.33  
When calibrated PV cells are used to investigate the optical performance of LSCs, ηopt is defined as follows:33  where ILSC is the short circuit current generated by the PV cell coupled to the LSC, and ISC is the short circuit current of the same PV cell under direct solar illumination.
The internal quantum efficiency (ηint, defined as the ratio of number of photons emitted from the edges of the LSC and the number of photons absorbed by the LSC) can be estimated as follows,45  where the external quantum efficiency (ηext) is defined as the ratio of number of photons collected from the edges of the LSC and the number of incident photons, ηabs is the absorption efficiency, corresponding to the ratio of the number of photons absorbed by the LSC and number of incident photons.
Another commonly used parameter to determine the optical performance of an LSC is the PCE, the ratio of the output electric power of the PV cell coupled with the LSC and the input optical power:46  where Isc is the short circuit current, Voc is the open circuit voltage, FF is the fill factor of the PV cell, P is the irradiation intensity, and Atop is the top surface area of the LSC.
As shown in Fig. 1, the incident light is lost in different pathways. The optical performance of LSCs is determined by several factors associated with the optical properties of the fluorophores and polymer matrix. The requirements of efficient photoluminescence (PL) emitters for LSCs are a large absorption coefficient and broad absorption which overlaps significantly with solar irradiation; high PL quantum yield (QY); small or zero overlap of absorption and emission spectra (large Stokes shift, defined as the difference between positions of the band maxima of absorption and emission); sufficient solubility in the polymer matrix, high photo/chemical-stability etc. In general, sizes of at least 1 m2 of LSCs with an overall optical conversion efficiency over 10% are required for commercialization.
To date, various types of fluorophores have been used as light converters for LSCs, including organic dyes, quantum dots and lanthanide based hybrid materials involving inorganic or organic hosts, summarized in Table 1.26,27,43,47 Upon illumination, down-shifting fluorophores, e.g. dyes and QDs, re-emit photons at a lower energy (i.e., at a longer wavelength).4,26,41,46–50 Typically, organic dyes with a small absorption coefficient exhibit high QY up to unity, as well as narrow absorption and limited coverage of the solar spectrum (usually in the UV-visible range).30,49–52 In addition, in LSCs based on organic dyes, the optical losses due to the reabsorption of guided emission are significant. For instance, the Stokes shifts for Lumogen Red 305 and Rhodamine (Rh) B are ∼140 and 65 meV, respectively (Table 1). In addition, their poor stability, due to the photo-induced structural degradation of dyes, with respect to the stable PCE during long-term device operation is still a major challenge. In lanthanide (Ln3+) based organic–inorganic hybrid materials (Table 1), under UV illumination, the coordinating organic ligand on Ln3+ absorbs light and enhances the intrinsic f–f absorption cross-section, which has very limited overlap with the solar spectrum.53,54 The emission with lower energy originates from the spin-forbidden or parity-forbidden transitions in Ln3+ (for example, Eu3+, Tb3+). One of the advantages in LSCs fabricated using Ln3+-based organic–inorganic hybrids is that there is nearly no overlap between the absorption and emission spectra. However, it is very challenging to tailor the absorption and emission, and achieve high QY. In addition, rare earths are expensive, which also hinders the commercialization of LSCs based on such materials.53,54 Together with their low absorption coefficient (several orders of magnitude lower than that of QDs), these drawbacks largely reduce the light-harvesting efficiency of LSCs based on lanthanide based organic–inorganic hybrid materials, thus limiting their commercial applications.
Table 1 Optical properties of PL emitters for LSC fabrication




Fluorophores
Absorption range (nm)
PL emission range (nm)
Stokes shift (meV)
Solvent
QY (%)
Ref.





a Thin film Ln3+-based hybrid matrix as LSC;.
b PL peak position. F6 = bipyridine-based bridged silsesquioxanes; tU5 = tri-ureasil hybrid matrix.





Organic dyes
Perylene dye 4
400–580
500–650
—
Chloroform
96

49



Coumarin-540
420–555
450–620
∼264
Ethanol
78

50



Lumogen Red 305
400–620
580–740
∼140
Ethanol
∼100

51



Rh B
450–620
520–650
∼65
Ethanol
∼70–97

52



Quantum dots
CdSe/CdS
400–650
590–700
∼400
Hexane/PMMA
45

26



PbS/CdS
300–800
800–1100
∼250
Toluene
∼40–50

31



Si
300–660
640–1000
∼400
Toluene
50

62



Lanthanide complex hybridsa
F6-Eu
240–440
612b
—
—
34

53



FtU5Eu-II
240–450
613b
—
—
48 ± 5

54





Colloidal QDs can overcome these limitations.55 QDs are fluorescent semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) with nanometer (nm) dimensions, normally smaller than 20 nm in diameter.55 Generally, plain QDs are composed of an inorganic core, covered with an organic outer layer of surfactant ligands, e.g. oleylamine (OLA).8,55–59 QDs are promising candidates as fluorophores for LSCs because they offer several advantages, including (i) easy synthesis through wet chemistry approaches, (ii) high QY (up to 100%), (iii) broad absorption spectrum (300–2000 nm), (iv) large absorption cross-sections, (v) size-tunable absorption/emission spectra, and (vi) better chemical/photo-stability compared with organic dyes/polymers.8,55–59 As for LSCs, how to avoid the energy loss because of the reabsorption is a key to obtain high optical efficiency. Ideally, if the QY of QDs reaches 100%, there would be nearly no energy loss through processes [3] and [5], and the energy loss would mainly depend on the critical angle θC as the re-emitted photons can still escape from the LSC [process [4] in Fig. 1]. In reality, the QY of colloidal QDs is typically lower than 100% and there is also a spectral overlap between their absorption and emission. Energy losses from reabsorption of the QDs occur repetitively because photons traveling within the waveguide may be absorbed and re-emitted by other QDs with similar energy band edges many times before reaching an edge.30 In practical LSC implementations, optical path lengths may reach one meter or more, and even a very small overlap between absorption and emission spectra can result in strong energy losses.29,46,60 Thus, the synthesis of QDs with both high QY and large Stokes shift becomes one of the most critical factors in fabricating large-area high-efficiency LSCs.29,46,60 QDs can be engineered to provide a large Stokes shift, which is key to the realization of large-area LSCs with dramatically suppressed reabsorption losses. Therefore, QDs represent promising candidates for the fabrication of low-cost, highly efficient and long-term stable LSCs.26,28,29,31,33,46,47,60–62
In this review, we first present and discuss the synthesis of colloidal QDs, their optical properties and band alignment. We then delve into the relationship between the core/shell structure and the corresponding optical properties, which are required for the application of QDs in LSCs. We review recent progress in the structure, materials, and performance of LSCs based on colloidal QDs, and their possible applications. Finally, we provide perspectives on the remaining key challenges and open opportunities in the field.
2. Synthesis and optical properties of colloidal quantum dots
A promising feature of QDs is the size/shape/chemical-composition dependent quantum confinement, which allows us to precisely tune their optical properties by designing and synthesizing QDs of different size, shape and chemical composition.55,63,64 Over the past two decades, various types of high-quality colloidal QDs including plain QDs and core/shell QDs have been realized, exhibiting size-tunable emission and absorption, high QY and good stability.4,55,63–80 Plain QDs are typically capped with organic surface ligands and exhibit surface-related trap states acting as fast non-radiative de-excitation channels for photogenerated charge carriers, thereby reducing both the QY and photo-/thermal stability.55,63,64,68,79 An important strategy to improve the surface passivation of QDs is their overgrowth with a shell of a second inorganic semiconductor.63,66,68,70,80,81 Compared with plain QDs, core/shell QDs exhibit a significantly enhanced QY, prolonged PL lifetime and improved chemical-, thermal-, and photo-chemical stability due to the reduced density of surface trap states/defects.63,66,68,70,80,81 In addition, by appropriately choosing the core and shell materials, it is possible to tune the absorption/emission spectra in a larger spectral window with a larger Stokes shift than that of the sole core or shell materials.80 Considering the beneficial features of core/shell QDs, in this review, we mainly focus on the synthesis of core/shell QDs and their optical properties (as opposed to plain QDs).
2.1 Synthesis of quantum dots
In recent decades, a series of wet chemical approaches have been developed to synthesize inorganic QDs with uniform size on a large scale, to compete with complicated and high-cost physical methods. In 1993, Bawendi's group reported the synthesis of high quality binary II–VI semiconductor QDs with precisely controllable size and optical properties, called hot-injection. Monodispersed QDs with high QYs, including II–VI, III–V, IV–VI semiconductors, are almost exclusively synthesized by a high temperature organometallic route using the hot-injection method or co-precipitation approach.7,8,82–86 Basically, the size and optical properties of QDs can be tuned via chemical reaction parameters, such as temperature, time, and the choice of precursors and surfactants in the reaction system. To achieve core/shell semiconductor QDs, overcoating and cation exchange methods for shell growth on core QDs have emerged. By using appropriately selected materials and reaction conditions, core/shell QDs with a high QY and suitably engineered band structure can be obtained. In addition, simple and facile preparation routes, such as the solvothermal and microwave-assisted approaches, for QD synthesis [e.g. green carbon QDs, also called carbon dots (C-dots)] have also been introduced.87–90

2.1.1 Hot-injection approach. 
Hot injection is a well-established and most commonly used approach to synthesize high quality inorganic binary QDs. Typically, one of the precursors is heated up to a relatively high temperature. Upon subsequent injection of another precursor at room temperature, the mixed precursors decompose to form nucleation seeds. In the meantime, the reaction temperature drops to allow the growth of seeds into QDs. The obtained QDs usually exhibit monodispersity, narrow size distribution, relatively high QY and colloidal, chemical and photo-stability. As an example of II–VI QD synthesis conducted earlier,64 CdO, trioctylphosphine oxide, hexylphosphonic acid and tetradecylphosphonic acid were firstly mixed in a three-neck flask. When the mixture was heated to 300 °C, the CdO powder was gradually dissolved and generated a colorless homogeneous stock solution. An injection of selenium in tributylphosphine at room temperature into the stock solution at 250–300 °C generated high-quality CdSe NCs with high QY (above 20%) and narrow size distribution [typical standard deviation (σ), <10%]. The sizes of CdSe QDs in the range of 2–8 nm can be tuned by varying the growth temperature, reaction time and molar ratio of Cd/Se. Alternatively, near infrared (NIR)-emitting PbS QDs can be synthesized via the hot-injection method.65 In a typical synthesis, the Pb precursor PbO dissolved in oleic acid (OA) was heated to 150 °C in an inert atmosphere. Stock solutions of the S precursor bis(trimethylsilyl) sulfide and solvent octadecene (ODE) were then added to the above-mentioned solution and mixed under vigorous stirring. The temperature was kept at less than 100 °C for QD growth. Similarly, the size of QDs can be simply tailored by varying the reaction time. The PL emission peak of the PbS QDs obtained via this approach is in the range of 800 to 2000 nm.65
In addition, an emerging type of QD with combined features of colloidal QDs and halide organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, inorganic perovskite QDs with high QY (up to nearly unity), have been reported via the hot-injection route.91,92 For instance, an organo-lead compound trioctylphosphine–PbI2 (TOP–PbI2) as the reactive precursor is introduced and injected into Cs-stock solution at a certain temperature. After a reaction time of 5 seconds, the resulting TOP-capped QDs show a high QY of ∼100% and enhanced chemical stability with respect to OA/OLA co-capped CsPbI3 QDs.91 Alternatively, with appropriate surface treatment or surfactants, the QY and photo-/chemical stability of perovskite QDs can be further improved.93 The use of inorganic perovskite QDs with ∼100% QY for LSCs will diminish the energy loss from the reabsorption issue, which is favorable to fabricate large-area, long-term-stable and high-efficiency LSCs.


2.1.2 Co-precipitation approach. 
Other than the hot-injection approach, the co-precipitation approach has been used to synthesize ternary I–III–VI2 semiconductors.79,84 For example, CuInSeS QDs were synthesized using Cu and In ionic precursors. Typically, two metallic Cu and In precursors were mixed with the S precursor and solvent 1-dodecanethiol (DDT) and OLA in a flask and degassed under vacuum at 90 °C for 30 min. The temperature was then quickly increased to 140 °C and maintained for certain time, until the precursors fully dissolved. Meanwhile, the OLA/DDT-Se solution at room temperature under N2 flow was prepared as the S/Se precursor. Subsequently, when the reaction mixture was heated to 210 °C, the OLA/DDT-Se solution was added dropwise. The reaction was kept at the same temperature for 10 min for the nucleation of QDs, and heated quickly to a higher growth temperature of 235 °C for 15 minutes. The reaction was then quenched with cold water. The sizes of QDs can be effectively controlled through the reaction temperature and time. This approach can also be used to synthesize CuInS2 (CIS), CuInTe2 (CuInTe), and CuInSe2 (CISe) QDs.21,32 In general, compared with the hot injection method, the size distribution of QDs synthesized via the co-precipitation approach is much wider due to the continuous nucleation and growth processes.


2.1.3 Over-coating approach. 
Core/shell QDs have most commonly been achieved either through a successive ionic layer adsorption reaction (SILAR) approach or a cation exchange approach (Fig. 2).8,82,85,86 In the SILAR process, cation and anion precursors are cyclically added into the core mixture in sequence for the layer by layer shell growth. The shell thickness can be precisely controlled by varying the amounts of precursors. For example, as-synthesized CdSe QDs were dispersed in ODE and OLA.33,75,94 Then the mixture was heated to 240 °C in N2 for the shell growth. Equimolar amounts of the Cd/S precursor mixture solution were slowly injected into the core mixture. The advantage of the SILAR approach is that the shell thickness can be well-controlled as thin as one monolayer.33,75,94 For example, in the synthesis of CdSe/CdS75 and CdSe/CdPbS “giant” QDs,33 CdSe QDs with a size of 3.27 nm in diameter and a uniform size distribution (σ < 10%) are used as core QDs (Fig. 3a).33 Increasing the number of SILAR cycles leads to a quasi-linear increase in QD size, as shown in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 3a–h. After the shell growth of thirteen cycles, the final diameter of the obtained samples was 11.9 ± 0.8 nm for the CdSe/13CdS QDs (shell thickness ∼ 4.3 nm) and 12.6 ± 0.4 nm for the CdSe/3CdS/7CdxPb1−xS/3CdS QDs (defined as CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS, shell thickness ∼ 4.7 nm). The crystal lattice can be clearly observed in high resolution TEM (HRTEM) images (Fig. 3f–h). Many types of core/shell QDs, e.g. CdSe/CdS33 and InP/CdS95 have been synthesized via the SILAR approach.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the synthesis of colloidal QDs via various approaches. The core/shell structured QDs can be obtained via the cation exchange approach or the SILAR approach. 
 Fig. 3  (a–e) Representative TEM image of starting CdSe QDs before SILAR (a), CdSe QDs after coating with 3CdS/3CdxPb1−xS (3A) (b), 3CdS/7CdxPb1−xS (7A) (c), 3CdS/7A/3CdS (d) and 13CdS (e) SILAR cycles. (f) HRTEM image of sample (e). (g) HRTEM image of sample (c). (h) HRTEM image of sample (d). Representative TEM images of PbS/CdS QDs with an average diameter of 3.9 nm (i) and 4.8 nm (j). HRTEM images of PbSe/CdSe (k) and PbTe/CdTe (l) core/shell particles in the 〈110〉 directions. (m) A high-resolution high angle annular dark Field (HAADF)-STEM image of a “giant” PbS/CdS QD. TEM images of CISeS QDs (n); CISeS/CdS (o) and CISeS/ZnS QDs (p) showing an analogous pyramidal structure and nearly same sizes. Inset images of (n), (o) and (p) display cartoons of QD structures of CISeS, CISeS/CdS and CISeS/ZnS, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Despite the excellent photo-/chemical stability of “giant” core/shell QDs with a thick shell (thickness > 5 nm), their QY is lower than that of thin-shell QDs. Generally, the lattice mismatch of the core and shell materials induces a strain at the interface.80 When the shell thickness increases, interfacial traps are created which will reduce the QY of QDs and hamper their application in LSCs. Introducing an alloyed layer or a coherently strained heterostructure has been applied to increase the QY of “giant” QDs. For example, CdS/CdSe/CdS seed/spherical quantum well/shell shows suppression of PL blinking at room temperature and nearly 100% QY.96 In this type of QD, the CdSe emissive layer is strained to match with the lattice of the CdS seed, allowing the growth of a trap-free thick CdS outer layer. This approach can be further applied to the synthesis of other types of high quality QDs, which hold great potential for improving LSC performance.


2.1.4 Cation exchange. 
In the above-mentioned over-coating approach, the core size is the same during the process.97 Another approach, called cation exchange, has been applied for the growth of a wider band gap material on lead chalcogenide or CuInSeS QDs.84 Pietryga et al. exploited the cation exchange method to synthesize core/shell PbS/CdS and PbSe/CdSe QDs.97 During the shell formation process, only the precursor of the cationic constituent of a shell material is introduced. The shell growth occurs through the gradual replacement of core cations by newly introduced cations in solution.97 The overall size of the QDs does not change significantly.8,31,58,97,98 For example, the PbX (X = S, Se, Te) QDs were firstly synthesized via the hot injection approach.8,31,58,97,98 PbX-based core/shell QDs were subsequently synthesized via the cation exchange approach.8,31,58,97,98 Briefly, the PbX QDs were dispersed in toluene and heated to 100 °C.77,97 In a separating flask, colorless Cd(oleate)2 stock solution at a temperature of 155 °C under N2 was injected into a PbX (X = S, Se, Te) QD dispersion. The core size of PbS QDs can be varied by different reaction temperatures and times (Fig. 3i and j).99
The as-synthesized PbSe/CdSe and PbTe/CdTe QDs show a typical core/shell structure (Fig. 3k and l).77 By controlling the reaction parameters, such as starting core size of the QDs, reaction temperature, molar ratio of QD/precursor and reaction time, the core size in the core/shell QDs can be controlled. Meanwhile, PbS/CdS QDs exhibit better thermal stability than that of plain PbS QDs.59 The duration of the as-prepared PbS/CdS QDs at 150 °C of 30 min will further narrow the size distribution of QDs with constant initial size, as evidenced by the essentially unaffected PL spectrum, which is known to be very sensitive to the variation of the QD size distribution. In stark contrast, plain PbS QDs at the same concentration and dispersed in the same solvent start to undergo Ostwald ripening (small QDs dissolve into precursors and feed the growth of large QDs) over five minutes after being held at a lower temperature of 100 °C.59 This observation indicates that the CdS shell is more thermally stable than that of PbS, which is consistent with the fact that PbSe/CdSe QDs are more robust than plain PbSe QDs at relatively high temperature.100 The improved thermal stability of core/shell PbS/CdS59 or PbSe/CdSe QDs100 makes them suitable for high-temperature (200–240 °C) growth of CdS shells via the SILAR approach to form “giant” core/thick-shell QDs (Fig. 2 and 3m).7,85,86 A similar cation exchange approach has been used to produce core/shell CuInS/ZnS or CuInSeS/ZnS QDs.32,84,101 For instance, CISeS QDs were firstly synthesized via the co-precipitation approach.84 As shown by the TEM images displayed in Fig. 3n, the CISeS QDs exhibit a triangular shape, suggesting a pyramidal shape with an average size of 5.64 nm (±0.77 nm), where the size is defined as the height of the projected triangles.84 The cation exchange approach was applied to grow a thin inorganic ZnS (CdS) protecting shell on the surface of CISeS QDs. The core/shell CISeS/ZnS (with Zn treatment at 100 °C) and CISeS/CdS QDs showed a similar pyramidal structure, indicating that the Zn and Cd surface treatment does not change the overall size/structure (Fig. 3n–p).84 A thin shell of ZnS can largely improve the colloidal stability of QDs, e.g. core/shell CISeS/ZnS QDs can be stable in toluene for several months without any precipitation. In contrast, the plain QDs precipitate after one-day storage due to the sensitivity of the surface thiol group.


2.1.5 Solvothermal approach. 
Aside from the above mentioned methods, there are other simple and facile routes (solvothermal, hydrothermal, microwave-assisted) to synthesize QDs, such as metal oxide QDs and green, metal-free graphene/carbon QDs.87,102 In the case of the solvothermal or hydrothermal method, all the reactants are kept in an autoclave. The final product of sufficiently high quantity is obtained at high vapor pressure and temperature. This approach is widely used for the synthesis of C-dots,88,90 which are regarded as a class of superior emissive materials for LSC application due to their nontoxicity and high photo-/chemical stability. The optical properties of C-dots are tailored via the selection of the precursor, solvent, surfactant, reaction time and temperature. Lin et al. reported a facile preparation of multicolor PL C-dots, which show red, green, and blue emissions by using three different carbon sources via the solvothermal method.89 The resulting C-dots have bright and stable PL emission in both solution and in a polymer matrix. In addition, sulfur or nitrogen doped C-dots with broad absorption over the UV-visible-NIR spectral window have been investigated using hydrothermal/solvothermal methods.103,104 For instance, the conjugated polymer polythiophene phenylpropionic acid was used as the precursor to prepare C-dots by a hydrothermal route.103 Moreover, the reported QY of C-dots is boosted to 80%, benefiting the practical application of LSCs.105

2.2 Absorption/photoluminescence spectra of quantum dots
The absorption spectrum of the QDs should significantly overlap with the solar spectrum; meanwhile, their emission should fall in the spectrally responsive range of solar cells, which can allow them to absorb re-emitted photons and generate electricity with high absorbed photo-to-electricity conversion efficiency (APCE).30,44 The AM 1.5G spectrum and the bandgap energy of Si and other semiconductors are shown in Fig. 4a. Single-crystal Si and epitaxial III–V compound semiconductor based solar cells are suitable for coupling with LSCs for light harvesting/electricity generation due to their high PCE and APCE. In core/shell QDs, absorption and emission spectra can be well-controlled by tuning both the core size and shell thickness.11,106Fig. 4b illustrates this behavior of UV-visible emitting CdSe/CdS QDs.107 The sharp features of absorption spectra (in the spectral range of 400–600 nm) and narrow PL peak widths (<30 nm) are consistent with their narrow size distribution (σ < 10%). With the increase in CdS shell thickness, the first-excitonic absorption peak and PL peak of CdSe QDs show a clear red-shift due to the electron leakage from the core to the shell region (Fig. 4b). This spectral range of CdSe/CdS QDs is suitable for making transparent (or semi-transparent) LSCs coupled with most of the current commercial solar cells (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  (a) AM 1.5 G solar spectrum from ASTM G173-03 reference spectrum. (b) The evolution of the UV-vis and PL spectra of the CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs upon the growth of the CdS shell in a typical reaction.107 (c) Absorption spectra of the PbS QDs and PbS/CdS QDs.8 (d) PL spectra of the PbS/CdS QDs.58 Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To further absorb more solar light, NIR core/shell QDs, such as CISeS/ZnS core/shell QDs and PbS/CdS core/shell QDs have also been used for LSCs as light emitters.31,32 The optical absorption and PL spectra of PbS/CdS or plain PbS QDs dispersed in toluene are reported in Fig. 4c.8 The absorption spectrum spans over the wide range of UV-visible-NIR wavelengths, which allows for an efficient capture of solar radiation. Typically, the first-excitonic absorption peaks can be tuned from 700–1600 nm for PbS/CdS QDs by varying the size of starting PbS QDs, and the thickness of the shell via manipulating the reaction parameters, such as temperature and time.58 The band-edge emission peak can be tuned from 850 to over 1600 nm (Fig. 4d).58 In fact, a CdS external shell can significantly improve QD stability and enhance their QY.98 There is no significant variation in the optical properties of the QDs in terms of QY, the first excitonic absorption peak position and PL peak position, after their storage at −10 °C in the dark for more than one year.58 The typical QY in core/shell PbS/CdS QDs is in the range of 40–90%.31,58,65,98
2.3 Energy level alignment in core/shell quantum dot systems
Depending on the relative alignment of the conduction band and valence band edges of core and shell semiconductors, the core/shell heterostructure can be denominated as type-I, type-II and reverse type-I (Fig. 5).80 In the type-I structure, the bandgap of the core is smaller than that of the shell, and both the conduction and valence band edges of the core are located in the band gap of the shell.58,63,77,80,98,108 Thus, theoretically, the electrons and holes are both confined in the core region (Fig. 5a).63 The shell can not only improve the surface passivation of the core QD, but also physically separate the surface of the optically active core from its surrounding chemical environment, e.g. oxygen, water and organic molecules, resulting in the improvement of both the QY and photo-stability of QDs.63,75,80 QDs with type-I structure usually have relatively high QY and long-term photo/chemical stability, which is favorable for LSC applications. However, due to the localization of electrons and holes in the core region, the PL emission is dominated by the band structure of the core, such as type-I CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs. Type-I core/shell QDs have small Stokes shift which limits their use in the fabrication of large-area LSCs.63 In the type-II structure, one of the band edges (conduction or valence band edge) of the shell is located in the bandgap of the core (Fig. 5b).22,47,66,67,69,73,76,81,109–111 The electrons and holes are spatially isolated into different regions due to the band alignment (core or shell, Fig. 5b). The emission of type-II core/shell QDs depends on the band offset of core and shell materials, corresponding to the energy gap between the conduction band of the shell and the valence band of the core (or the conduction band of the core and the valence band of the shell) shown in Fig. 5b. For example, in the case of typical type-II CdTe/CdSe QDs,66 the Stokes shift is significantly enhanced with respect to CdTe QDs with identical size of CdTe. Due to the large Stokes shift in type-II QDs, if the QY is high they have excellent potential to be used for LSC applications. Reverse type-I is exactly the opposite of type-I and charge carriers are at least partially delocalized in the shell (Fig. 5d).67 In general, a significantly large Stokes shift is observed in the reverse type-I structure. However, in both type-II and reverse type-I structures, carriers (especially electrons) can leak into the surface of QDs, which can be easily trapped by their surrounding chemical environments, leading to the decrease in QYs and photo-stability.66,69,73 Although the overlap of absorption and emission spectra (large Stokes shift) of both type-II and reverse type-I QDs is very small, the obtained low QY and poor long-term photo/chemical stability are the main issues concerning their use in fabricating high-efficiency LSCs. In the case of quasi-type II, one type of carrier is delocalized over the entire core/shell structure, while the other type is confined in the core (Fig. 5c) such as CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs.31,112 In the case of quasi-type II, most of the electrons or holes are still confined in the shell and do not leak into the surface of QDs, thus the QY is still relatively high compared to type-II QDs.26 Moreover, the Stokes shift can be well controlled by tuning the core size and shell thickness.26,31,33
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the energy level alignment and electron (blue) and hole wave functions (red) in different rectangles correspond to the positions of the valence band and conduction band edge of the core (center) and shell materials, respectively. 
2.4 Stokes shift in quantum dots
One of the dominant factors leading to energy loss is the reabsorption, especially for large-area LSCs. QDs can be engineered to provide a large Stokes shift.26,31–33 Several strategies have been proposed to reduce or possibly eliminate self-absorption by increasing the Stokes-shift, e.g. the use of heterostructured core/shell QDs.26,31–33 As shown in Fig. 6, five types of core/shell QDs have been designed and synthesized with a large Stokes shift. The first approach involves the synthesis of doped core/shell semiconductor NCs, for example, Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs.27,29 Typically, the rate of energy transfer (time scale: ∼ps) from the photoexcited nanocrystal to doped cation (such as Mn2+) greatly exceeds that (∼ns) of exciton recombination, thereby enabling quantitative energy capture by doped cations.27 The excited doped ion then relaxes to its ground state with a high QY (Fig. 6a).27 As the energy level of doped ions is much lower than the lowest energy level of the conduction band of QDs, the Stokes shift in doped core/shell QDs is much larger than that of undoped QDs. Further coating doped core QDs with a thin shell of a larger bandgap semiconductor to form a type-I structure can confine the electron/hole in the core region, which improves both the QY and photostability of QDs.27
 Fig. 6  Band energy structures in core/shell QD with a large Stokes shift: (a) type-I core/thin-shell doped QD. The dotted line indicates the energy level of doped ions; (b) type-I core/thin-shell CISeS/ZnS QD. The dotted line indicates the energy level of native defects of the QD; (c) quasi-type II core/thin-shell QD; (d) “giant” quasi-type II core/shell QD; (e) “giant” type-I core/shell QD. In the “giant” system, the absorption spectrum is dominated by the shell material due to its large volume compared to the core material. 
Second, in the ternary I–III–VI2 semiconducting NCs, such as CIS, CISe and their alloy CISeS QDs, the hole-like defect is responsible for the native intragap emission of these material systems, which leads to a remarkable Stokes shift.32,84 The hole-like defect state is associated with the Cu2+ ion, which is a common substitutional impurity in II–VI semiconductors, where it creates a fairly deep acceptor energy level (Fig. 6b).32 Further coating a thin layer of ZnS on the ternary I–III–VI2 semiconductors leads to a type-I structure, which significantly enhances the QY from typical 10% of plain QDs to ∼60–90% of core/shell QDs due to the improvement of surface passivation.32,101
Third, coating QDs with a wide bandgap semiconductor of suitable energy band alignment allows the formation of a quasi-type II structure. As mentioned above, typically electrons can be delocalized into the shell region, while the holes are confined in the core of the structure, leading to spectral separation between emission and absorption.31,59 To date, various types of core/thin-shell QDs with shell thickness less than 1.5 nm have been synthesized with a large Stokes shift. For example, the PbS/CdS QDs with shell thickness around 0.5–0.7 nm exhibit a larger Stokes shift of up to 300 meV with respect to the bare PbS QDs (which typically exhibit a Stokes shift of several meV to 100 meV depending on their sizes), while also featuring a high QY, up to ∼40%.31
Fourth, a further increase in the shell thickness (>1.5 nm to several tens of nm) in the quasi-type II structure mentioned above can also increase the Stokes shift. Besides the increased delocalization of electrons in the whole shell region, the absorption spectrum of QDs becomes dominated by the thick-shell material as the volume of the shell is significantly larger than that of the core (>90%).26,33 As a result, a much larger Stokes shift than that of core/thin-shell QDs with a similar bandgap alignment can be achieved, where >300 meV Stokes shifts were reported in the case of core/thick-shell CdSe/CdS QDs and CdSe/CdxPb1−xS (CdSe/CdPbS) QDs.26,33 More importantly, core/thick-shell QDs (also called “giant” core/shell QDs, in which the shell is very thick, from several up to twenty nanometers, and the core exhibits quantum confinement behavior) have been widely studied due to their superior chemical- and photo-stability compared with both plain QDs and thin-shell QDs.75,86,94,107 A thicker shell can efficiently protect the core material, isolating it from the QD's surface and the surrounding chemical environment.75,94,107 However, in this quasi-type II structure, the electrons can still be captured by defects at the shell surface, which may reduce the QY.75,94,107 Typically, the QY of the quasi-type II QDs is around 40–50%,75,94,107 which is lower than that (∼60–90%) of type-I core/thin-shell QDs.63,97
Lastly, using type-I “giant” core/thick-shell QDs is another good choice (Fig. 6e).45 Similar to the “giant” quasi-type II QDs, the thick shell dominates the overall absorption spectrum of QDs. Meanwhile the emission can be controlled by the band gap of core QDs (Fig. 6e), which allows for the greater flexibility in controlling the Stokes shift. For example, “giant” type-I CdSe/CdxZn1−xS core/shell QDs exhibit a large Stokes shift of up to 600 meV and the QY is as high as 70%.
In summary, high quality colloidal core/shell QDs with tunable core size and shell thickness and chemical composition, exhibiting narrow size distribution, high QY and good photo-/thermal stability, can be obtained by using well-controlled, environmentally friendly, large-scale solution-phase synthetic approaches. More importantly, by refining the core and shell materials, shell thickness, and the chemical composition of the shell, the band energy alignment between the core and shell can be effectively controlled; all the above-mentioned five types of core/shell QDs represent great candidates as emitters for large-area, high efficiency LSCs.26,31–33,61 However, although type-II core/thin-shell QDs e.g. CdTe/CdSe or “giant” type-II QDs, such as InP/CdS QDs, also exhibit a relatively large Stokes shift, their QY is usually much lower than that of type-I and quasi-type II QDs due to the surface-related trap states,66,95 which should be taken into consideration during the design of QD-based LSCs.
3. Luminescent solar concentrators based on quantum dots
3.1 Core/thin-shell doped quantum dots
As illustrated in Section 2, type-I core/shell QDs with a very thin shell usually exhibit high QY because of the appropriate surface passivation. The corresponding PL emission originates from the band edge emission of the core, resulting in a relatively small Stokes shift. To enlarge the Stokes shift, the incorporation of small amounts (<1 atom%) of metal ion impurities into a semiconductor introduces new localized excited states within the bandgap.27,29 Emission from these states leads to a significant red-shift of the emission compared with undoped semiconductors (Fig. 6a).27,29 Due to their high QY and large Stokes shift, doped QDs have been used for the fabrication of large-scale LSCs. Erickson et al.27 synthesized Mn2+-doped ZnSe QDs capped with a thin layer of ZnS for the realization of visibly transparent LSCs. Mn2+-doped ZnSe core QDs were firstly synthesized by thermal degradation of Zn4(SePh)10(Me4N)2 in the presence of MnCl2. ZnS shells were further grown by SILAR deposition using Zn(oleate)2 and tri-n-octyl phosphine sulfide as Zn and S sources. Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs (Fig. 7c) both in toluene and in a polymer matrix exhibited a large Stokes shift of ∼1 eV, without any overlap between their absorption and PL spectra (Fig. 7a and d).27 The origin of this large Stokes shift is attributed to the Mn2+ doping. As shown in Fig. 7b, doped Mn2+ ions create a 6A1 ground state and exhibit PL corresponding to the 4T1 → 6A1 d–d transition (∼2.1 eV). The 6A1 → 4T1 absorption transition is spin-forbidden, with a very small extinction coefficient with respect to ZnSe host QDs. Therefore the absorption of Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs is dominated by the ZnSe host. The PL from Mn2+ is efficiently sensitized by the host core ZnSe QD (Fig. 7b) because of longer excitonic lifetimes and faster energy transfer. The excited Mn2+ relaxes to its ground state with a high QY, up to 50% in toluene. Together with their large Stokes shift, Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs overcome the key challenge of reducing the reabsorption energy loss in the LSC fluorophore design. Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs (Fig. 7c) were incorporated into poly(lauryl methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) (PLMA-co-EGDM) films by UV polymerization of laurylmethacrylate (LMA) and trioctylphosphine, in the presence of ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDM), containing a photoinitiator.27 The LSC shown in Fig. 7e was semitransparent under visible light, with an optical density of up to 0.30 at the first excitonic absorption maximum. Overall LSC dimensions were 25 × 75 × 4.2 mm3, corresponding to a G factor of 22. The as-fabricated LSCs using doped QDs exhibit a high internal quantum efficiency of 37% under UV excitation. However, the absorption of Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs mainly occurs in the UV range, which significantly limits the corresponding light harvesting in LSC applications. Other types of doped QDs, such as Zn0.87Cd0.11Mn0.02Se/ZnS core/thin-shell QDs (and Cd1−xCuxSe QDs) were synthesized, which can absorb a larger fraction of the solar spectrum compared to Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs. In doped Zn0.87Cd0.11Mn0.02Se/ZnS core/thin-shell QDs, the emission spectrum was centered at 600 nm, while the first absorption peak is around 500 nm with a Stokes shift of 413 mV. These QDs exhibit a QY of 88%. LSCs based on doped Zn0.87Cd0.11Mn0.02Se/ZnS QDs displayed relatively small reabsorption losses,29 therefore proving to be efficient emitters for large-area high-efficiency LSCs.27,29 A proposed approach toward high efficiency LSCs based on core/thin-shell doped QDs is to extend the absorption of QDs over entire the UV-Vis-NIR window by a rational selection of QDs and doped ions.
 Fig. 7  (a) Absorption and PL spectra of Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs in toluene (a) and in an LSC device (d). (b) Schematic description of PL sensitization in Mn2+-doped QDs. Photon absorption by the doped QD in its ground state (|QD,6A1〉) gives the excited QD (|QD*,6A1〉). Energy rapidly localizes to excite Mn2+ within the QD (|QD,4T1〉), which then emits with a high QY. Radiative processes are indicated as straight lines and non-radiative processes as wavy lines. (c) TEM image of representative Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs. (e) A device seen under UV illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Core/thin-shell CuInSxSe1−x/ZnS quantum dots
Meinardi et al.32 used NIR-emitting CISeS/ZnS QDs as high quality fluorophores to fabricate high efficiency large-area LSCs. The CISeS QDs were firstly synthesized via the co-precipitation approach, as introduced before. Furthermore, the ZnS shell was formed on core QDs via the cation exchange approach.32 The as-synthesized core/shell QDs exhibit a broad absorption spectrum, which significantly overlaps with the solar spectrum. A weak shoulder at ∼640 nm (∼1.9 eV) observed in the absorption spectrum indicates the band edge position of the QD. The PL peak is around 1000 nm. Thus, the CuInSeS/ZnS QDs exhibit a large Stokes shift, up to 530 meV. However, the overlap between the absorption and emission spectra is still clear (Fig. 8b), suggesting a partial energy loss due to reabsorption. Typically, the large Stokes shift in I–III–VI2 QDs is due to the hole-like defect responsible for intragap emission (Fig. 6b).32
 Fig. 8  A photograph of the LSC comprising 0.3 wt% QDs under ambient illumination (a) and under illumination from a solar simulator (1.5 AM global) (d). Inset of (d): photograph of the same device taken with an infrared camera. LSC dimensions, 12 × 12 × 0.3 cm3. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of CISeS/ZnS QDs in toluene solution and in a polymer. (c) PL decays measured using pulsed 405 nm excitation of CISeS/ZnS QDs. (e) PL output as a function of optical distance (circles; derived by integrating the PL spectra compared with the probability of a photon reaching the LSC edge computed using Monte Carlo ray tracing (shaded in pink for ΦPL = 40% and in green for ΦPL = 100%)). The PL output obtained by integrating the normalized PL spectra is shown as black triangles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The as-prepared core/shell QDs were further incorporated into a transparent polymer matrix PLMA-co-EGDM with dimensions of 12 × 12 × 0.3 cm3 (Fig. 8a). There is no significant variation in absorption/PL spectra and lifetime during the incorporation process, due to the efficient protection of the core by the ZnS shell (Fig. 8b and c). The QY is around 40 ± 4% in both solution and the polymer matrix. In contrast, pure CISeS QDs exhibit ∼50% PL quenching upon the activation of the radical catalyst during the polymerization. To examine the optical performance of the fabricated LSCs, a characterization set-up for external optical efficiency measurements with illumination from a solar simulator (AM 1.5G) was used, as illustrated in Fig. 8d. A photograph of the same device taken with an infrared camera clearly shows the concentrated light on the edges of LSCs under UV illumination (inset of Fig. 8d).
The PL intensity was recorded at one of the slab edges with the pump spot positioned at different distances d from the sample edge. The drop in PL intensity with increasing d was attributed to the combined effects of light escaped from the waveguide and light reabsorbed by the QDs and by the polymer matrix (Fig. 8e). Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations indicate that, in the case of ΦPL = 40% for QDs, the output probability drops to half of the output value for a 12 × 12 cm2 slab for a 50 cm-wide LSC, while, for LSCs based on QDs with ΦPL = 100%, the lateral slab size for 50% optical loss increases up to one meter. The simulated evolution of the PL intensity with d for the experimental ΦPL = 40% is shown in Fig. 8e. Based on the results from theoretical modelling and the experiment, it is suggested that the scattering losses can be disregarded in LSC devices. To estimate the ultimate PCE achievable with these LSCs, Meinardi et al. estimated the output of LSCs when the used QDs have a high QY of 100% (Fig. 8e). In this case, 61% of photons can be collected at the edge of the LSCs, while the remaining 39% accounts for optical losses due to photon escape from the waveguide. Based on the plot in Fig. 8e, ∼30% loss over a distance of 12 cm was estimated. Finally, by optimizing the concentration of QDs in the polymer matrix, they obtained an optical conversion efficiency of up to 3.27% for large-area LSCs with dimensions of 12 × 12 × 0.3 cm3 (G = 10).32
3.3 Quasi-type II core/thin-shell quantum dots
Zhou et al.31 synthesized PbS/CdS core/shell QDs with tunable size and shell thickness via hot-injection and cation exchange approaches.31,98 The PbS core radius (R) ranges from 1.3 to 3.3 nm, with a CdS shell thickness (H) of 0.1–0.7 nm. The representative absorption and PL spectra of PbS and PbS/CdS QDs with different core sizes and shell thicknesses in solution are shown in Fig. 9a. Both the first excitonic absorption and PL peaks were clearly observed. For core/shell QDs with a larger core radius (2.3 nm), the Stokes shifts exhibit a slight variation, compared to plain PbS QDs. In contrast, in core/shell QDs with R of 1.5 nm, the Stokes shift is significantly enlarged with increasing shell thickness (Fig. 9a). The Stokes shifts in PbS or PbS/CdS QDs shown are core size- and shell thickness-dependent in Fig. 9b. Specifically, the Stokes shift in the plain PbS QDs moderately increases with the decrease in size (blue shift of the PL peak), up to a maximum of 150 meV. In the core/shell QDs, with small core size R below 2 nm (PL peak energy >1.0 eV) and large shell thickness H of 0.5–0.7 nm, the Stokes shifts are significantly larger (up to 200–250 meV) than that of PbS QDs and thin shell core/shell QDs (H: 0.1–0.2 nm).31,98
 Fig. 9  (a) Normalized absorption and PL spectra of QDs with core radius of 1.5 nm and 2.3 nm with tunable CdS shell thickness. (b) Stokes shift of QDs with various shell thicknesses as a function of the PL peak position (related to core size of diameter from 3 to 6 nm). (c) Approximate electronic band structure of a core/shell PbS/CdS QD. (d) PL lifetime of QDs with various shell thicknesses as a function of the PL peak position (related to core size of diameter from 3 to 6 nm). (e) Radial distribution functions for 1S electron of a PbS QD with a core size of 3.0 nm in diameter and tunable shell thickness of 0–0.6 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
To understand the observed differences in Stokes shifts for the investigated samples, according to bulk band alignment of PbS/CdS QDs, electron wave functions of a QD (R: 3 nm; H: 0–0.6 nm) were estimated (Fig. 9c and e). Typically, the effective mass of electrons in bulk PbS and CdS, and the band structure of bulk PbS and CdS were used in these calculations. Fig. 9e shows the radial distribution functions of 1S electrons in the QD as a function of the radial distance from the QD's center. With increasing shell thickness, electrons have more probability to penetrate deeply into the CdS layer and even the surface of QDs. These indications describe the various Stokes shifts depending on the size and shell thickness in core/shell QDs, which is due to the efficient leakage of electrons. In general, compared to plain PbS QDs, the leakage of electrons can result in a red-shift of the PL emission and longer PL lifetime (Fig. 9d). From the experimental data, the PL lifetimes of plain PbS QDs increase from ∼0.4 μs (∼0.8 eV) to ∼2.7 μs (∼1.05 eV) with increasing size of QDs, but retain the same when the PL peak position of QDs is larger than ∼1.05 eV. In the core/shell QDs with PL peak position higher than ∼0.95 eV, the corresponding PL lifetimes are longer than those of the plain PbS QDs. The longer PL lifetime is mainly attributed to the decrease of quantum confinement because of the leakage of electrons.31
In addition, the as-synthesized core/shell QDs with large Stokes shift have a high QY of ∼40–50%, making them promising candidates as fluorophores for high efficiency large-area LSCs. To experimentally investigate the optical efficiency of the LSCs based on QDs with different Stokes shift, Zhou et al.31 fabricated the LSCs (5 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3) by embedding the plain and core/shell QDs in a PLMA-co-EGDM polymer matrix. Large sized PbS QDs and small sized core/shell QDs are labeled as PbS_L and C@S_S, respectively. The normalized PL spectra for the C@S_S sample with large Stokes shift remain unchanged along the optical path as long as 5 cm, suggesting the suppression of reabsorption due to the large Stokes shift (Fig. 10b). Additionally, a weak attenuation (10%) of the PL intensity is observed at an optical path of 4.5 cm due to scattering, confirming the high optical performance of the C@S_S QD-based LSC. Eventually, a semi-transparent C@S_S QD-based LSC was fabricated with size as large as 10 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3 (Fig. 10e). The calculated ηopt exhibits an exponential decrease with increasing length or G factor of the LSC (Fig. 10c and d). The ηopt of the semi-transparent C@S_S QD-based LSC reaches up to 6.1% with a G of 10, which is over 15 times higher than that of the PbS QD-based planar LSC (G = 4.2) with similar concentration of QDs (∼20 μM).31
 Fig. 10  Normalized absorption and PL spectra measured at different optical paths for the samples of (a) the PbS_L QDs and (b) the C@S_S QDs. External optical efficiency of a C@S_S QD-based LSC coupled with Si diode as a function of (c) side length or (d) G factor. (e) Photograph of a QD-polymer-based LSC (dimension: 10 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3) comprising C@S_S QDs in ambient light. Scale bar is 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
3.4 “Giant” quasi-type II core/shell quantum dots
Meinardi et al.26 fabricated an LSC based on quasi-type II “giant” CdSe/CdS QDs embedded in Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) polymer. The external optical efficiency of LSCs using CdSe/CdS QDs is ∼1% for large area LSCs (21.5 × 1.3 × 0.5 cm3, G = 43).26 One of the main limitations in the present “giant” quasi-type II QDs is the composition of the shell: to date, most “giant” QDs have been coated with a thick CdS shell, for example, “giant” CdSe/CdS, InP/CdS, PbS/CdS QDs, etc.7,26,28,85,86,95,113 As a consequence, the absorption spectrum is dominated by the shell, which strongly absorbs radiation below 500 nm (bandgap Eg of 2.49 eV) covering the UV and partially visible range, strongly limiting their applications in LSCs. Recently, Zhao et al.33 demonstrated “giant” CdSe/CdPbS core/shell QD based high efficient LSCs. First, they synthesized “giant” CdSe/CdPbS QDs via the SILAR approach, with a high QY of 40%, narrow size distribution (σ < 10%) and high emission stability in a broad temperature range (100–300 K).33 To experimentally investigate the optical conversion efficiency, they fabricated large-area LSCs (7 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3) by embedding the “giant” QDs in a PLMA-co-EGDM polymer matrix. Compared to pure CdS-shell QDs, the alloyed-shell QDs show an extended absorption in the visible range of 500–600 nm (Fig. 11a), in the presence of Pb dopant ions in the shell. No significant changes in the PL peak position or PL full width at half maximum (FWHM) were observed in the investigated samples in solution or embedded into the polymer matrix. In addition, the PL dynamics of CdSe/13CdS or CdSe/3CdS/7CdxPb1−xS/3CdS (denoted as CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS) QDs in solution and in polymer show almost no variations in PL lifetimes (Fig. 11d and e), indicating that the polymerization process does not lead to the formation of a significant density of surface-defects/traps. Representative photographs of a large-area LSC based on “giant” QDs under ambient (top) and UV (bottom) illumination are shown in Fig. 11b. The LSC exhibits good transparency (almost no absorbance above 650 nm, Fig. 11a) and high concentrated red emission through the edge. The optical conversion efficiency for LSCs with different lengths is reported in Fig. 11c. They observed that LSCs based on alloyed-shell QDs have higher optical efficiencies than the CdSe/13CdS based LSC, with a maximum ηopt of 5.3% at L = 3 cm (G = 10) compared to 4.3% of the CdSe/13CdS structure, with an enhancement of ∼20%.33 Moreover, increasing the G factor reduces the optical efficiency of LSCs, yet the LSC built from the alloyed-shell QDs always maintains a higher efficiency due to the absorption enhancement. Fig. 11f reports the luminescence quantum efficiency (LQE, also called internal quantum efficiency) for the LSC with the alloyed-shell QDs and for the CdSe/13CdS device. The maximum internal quantum efficiency is 40% for the LSC based on CdSe/7CdPbS/13CdS for L = 3 cm (G = 10) and 15.2% for L = 7 cm (G = 23). Compared to the LSC based on pure QDs, the enhancement is in the 7% to 32% range (at L = 4.5 cm/G = 15). These results indicate that Pb doping in the CdSe/CdxPb1−xS core/shell QDs is a promising approach to fabricate high efficiency LSCs.33 The demonstrated metal doping strategy can be potentially applied to other “giant” colloidal QD systems, e.g. InP/CdS QDs.95 In addition, the refined Pb doping concentration can tune the absorption spectrum of QDs to better match the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 11  (a) Absorption and normalized PL spectra of the QD in toluene solution and in a polymer. PL spectra (excitation at 400 nm) were collected at the edge of the LSC when the excitation spot is located at 5 cm from the edge. (b) Camera pictures of a QD-polymer-based LSC (dimensions: 7 × 1.5 × 0.3 cm3) comprising CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS QDs illuminated under ambient illumination (top) and by an ultraviolet lamp emitting at 365 nm (bottom). Scale bar is 1 cm. Dependence of the external optical efficiency (c) and LQE (f) from the length. PL decays of QDs in toluene or in the polymer for (d) CdSe/13CdS QDs and (e) CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS QDs. The excitation wavelength is λex = 444 nm. At L= 3 cm (G = 10) the maximum external optical efficiency reached is 5.3% (for the alloyed QDs based LSC) and 4.3% for the CdSe/13CdS structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
3.5 “Giant” type-I core/shell quantum dots
To enlarge the Stokes shift of core/shell QDs while still maintaining a high QY, “giant” type-I core/shell QDs (Fig. 6e and 12a) have been designed and successfully synthesized. Li et al.45 demonstrated large-area (up to about 90 × 30 cm2) LSCs fabricated from colloidal “giant” core/shell type-I CdSe/Cd0.6Zn0.4S (CdSe/CdZnS) QDs. “Giant” CdSe/CdZnS QDs were synthesized by the SILAR approach.45 With an appropriate fraction of Zn in the CdS thick shell, the conduction-band offset becomes sufficiently large for confining the electron to the CdSe core, forming a type-I structure, other than the quasi-type II structure in “giant” CdSe/CdS QDs (Fig. 12a).26 The absorption is dominated by the thick shell of CdZnS due to its large volume, while the emission depends on the core size of CdSe. The PL peak is at ∼628 nm and the onset of absorption is at ∼460 nm (Fig. 12b), resulting in an estimated Stokes shift of 720 meV. As shown in Fig. 12c, the mean diameter of the “giant” CdSe/CdZnS QDs is 12.0 nm (narrow size distribution, σ < 15%), indicating that the average shell thickness is ∼4.0 nm. Based on the HRTEM image (inset of Fig. 12c), “giant” CdSe/CdZnS QDs do not exhibit any significant defects. To mix the QDs with a hydrophilic polymer of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in polar solvents, hydrophobic “giant” CdSe/CdZnS QDs were encapsulated with a silica shell, which does not lead to any significant variations in QD morphologies, PL spectrum and lifetime (Fig. 12c–f), due to the efficient protection of the CdSe core by the thick shell. The silica-coated “giant” CdSe/CdZnS QDs exhibit a similar QY of ∼70% as uncapped “giant” QDs, which is higher than that of “giant” CdSe/CdS QDs with a typical QY of 40–50% with a similar shell thickness.26
 Fig. 12  (a) An approximate structure of a type-I confinement potential in CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs. CB and VB denote the conduction and valence bands, respectively; Eg = 1.75 eV is the bulk-CdSe bandgap. (b) Absorption (black) and PL (red) spectra of CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs. (c) TEM images of core/shell CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs before (c) and after silica coating (d). Inset: A HRTEM image of the same “giant” QDs. (e) Comparison of PL dynamics of uncoated (red) and silica-coated (blue) “giant” QDs. (f) The PL decay in silica-coated “giant” QDs as a function of shell thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, the “giant” QDs/PVP polymer composites are processed into LSC devices using standard doctor-blade deposition onto glasses (Fig. 13a).26 As the glass is much thicker than the QDs/PVP layer, most of the re-emitted photons travel inside the glass. Usually, the glass has less defects compared with polymers, such as PMMA and PLMA-co-EGDM which could cause the decrease of PL due to the poor compatibility between QDs and polymer materials and relative “harsh” preparation conditions such as UV assisted polymerization. The thickness of the fabricated QD/polymer layer is ∼50 μm. Large-area rectangular pieces of commercial glass (30.5 × 91.4 cm2) have been used as substrates for large-area LSC fabrication (Fig. 13b–e). The LSCs are highly luminescent and exhibit a bright emission from the edges under both sunlight (Fig. 13b) and UV illumination (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  Fabrication of thin-film LSCs by a doctor-blade technique. (a) A schematic representation of thin-film deposition using a doctor-blade method. (b–d) A photograph of a large-area LSC (30.5 × 91.4 cm2) under sunlight (b and d) and UV illumination (c). (e) An absorption spectrum of a fabricated LSC. (f) Spectrally integrated intensity of PL from the LSC edge as a function of separation of the excitation spot and the edge (inset). Error bars represent a standard deviation from three independent measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
An absorption spectrum of the fabricated LSC is shown in Fig. 13e, indicating much weaker light scattering than all polymer LSCs. Consistently, compared with all polymer based devices, the PL loss due to light scattering on a distance of ∼10 cm was only ∼15% in the thin-film LSC, less than ∼50% of polymer based LSCs (Fig. 13f), indicating the expected suppression of light scattering. The authors also proposed that the as-fabricated LSCs using “giant” type-I QDs could be stable for 5.6 years under continuous exposure to direct sunlight.26 Together with their high optical conversion efficiency, “giant” type-I CdSe/CdZnS QD based LSCs identify a new direction towards the commercialization of PV windows.
3.6 Inorganic perovskite quantum dots
As an emerging new class of semiconductor QDs, organic–inorganic CH3NH3PbX3 or inorganic CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite QDs91,92 have various advantages and great potential for LSC applications, including size- and composition-tunable absorption and emission spectra that are similar to traditional inorganic QDs, large absorption coefficient in the UV-visible-NIR range and high QY (up to 100%). Nikolaidou et al. developed opaque organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite QD based thin film LSCs with small dimensions of 1.5 × 1.5 × 0.1 cm3 and a high refractive index of ∼2.5.114 They focused on the optimization of film quality by varying the ratio of precursors and investigated their optical performance when integrated with a silicon solar cell. Nevertheless, the Stokes shift of perovskite QDs is intrinsically small, which hinders the realization of high-efficiency large-area LSCs due to the reabsorption energy loss. Zhao et al. synthesized mixed-halide perovskite QDs via the hot-injection method for large-area LSC application.115 As shown in Fig. 14a, the mixed-halide CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3 QDs exhibit a typical cubic shape with uniform size of ∼13 nm, which is attributed to the cubic phase. The absorption and emission spectra of the as-prepared mixed-halide perovskite QDs with different compositions are shown in Fig. 14b. The absorption spectrum of perovskite QDs can be tailored over the UV-visible region. With the decrease of Br/(Br + I) concentration, the first excitonic absorption peak red-shifted, consistently with the similar trend of PL peak positions. Compared with pure-halide perovskite QDs (CsPbBr3 or CsPbI3) having a FWHM of ∼17–20 nm, the FWHM in mixed-halide perovskite QDs is broader due to their larger size distribution. The QY of the perovskite QDs varied from 20 to 90% based on the different chemical composition (Br/I) of QDs. The QY of QDs can be further tuned by varying the reaction parameters, such as the reaction temperature and time. Moreover, the mixed-halide perovskite CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 QDs (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4) show a two-fold larger Stokes shift with respect to pure-halide perovskite QDs (Fig. 14c), which can reduce the energy loss in large-area LSCs. In colloidal QDs, typically, a Stokes shift arises from a combination of the effects, including band-edge fine-structure splitting, phonon-assisted emission and size polydispersity.80 Herein, the larger Stokes shift in mixed-halide QDs may originate from their larger size distribution compared with single perovskite QDs. The as-synthesized perovskite QDs were used to fabricate semi-transparent large-area LSCs (0.2 × 6 × 6 cm3), as shown in Fig. 14d–f. Under solar or UV illumination, the concentrated red or green light can be observed from the edges of LSCs based on different compositional perovskite QDs. The dynamics of PL decay measured from QDs in solution and in the polymer matrix are almost the same (Fig. 14h), indicating that the QYs of QDs are constant and extra surface traps or defects are not introduced during the LSC fabrication process. The absorption and PL spectra of perovskite QD based LSCs at different optical paths for the mixed-halide CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 and CsPbBr3 QD based LSCs are shown in Fig. 14g. With increasing optical path, spectra of both types of QDs exhibit a red-shift of up to 8 nm with a narrowing of the PL FWHM, which confirms that the energy loss is due to light reabsorption. As shown in Fig. 14i, the integrated PL area of CsPb(Br0.2I1−0.8)3 is 0.5 in a 6_cm LSC, which is higher than 0.3 in a 6_cm LSC based on CsPbBr3 due to photon escape and reabsorption energy loss. Semi-transparent large-area LSCs based on CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QDs exhibit an optical conversion efficiency of 2% with a G factor of 45 (9 × 1.5 cm2) and long-term air stability, which make the LSC based on perovskite QDs great candidates for further commercialization.
 Fig. 14  (a) A large-area TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3 QDs. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPb(BrxI1-x)3 QDs with various chemical compositions (x = 0–1). (c) QY and Stokes shift variations with various Br concentration. Photographs of the LSC comprising CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QDs under ambient (d), one sun (100 mW cm−2) (e), and UV illumination (f). Scale bar is 1 cm (d). LSC dimensions, 6 × 6 × 0.2 cm3. (g) Absorption and PL spectra measured at different optical paths for the CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QD based LSCs. (h) PL decay curves for CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QDs in toluene and polymer matrix (excitation at 440 nm). (i) Integrated PL area of CsPb(BrxI1-x)3 QDs based LSCs at different optical paths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Another approach to enhance the separation of absorption and emission spectra of perovskite QDs is to introduce doping ions into parent perovskite QDs. Recently, Meinardi et al. fabricated large-area LSCs based on manganese-doped CsPbCl3 QDs. There are two emission bands in the doped perovskite QDs. The high-energy peak is related to the bandgap emission and the low-energy peak is due to the interband emission. Except for the strong overlap between the first-excitonic absorption spectrum and high-energy emission, there is no spectral overlap of the absorption spectrum with the low-energy emission spectrum. The QY of doped perovskite QDs is around 5% for band edge emission and 10% for Mn2+ emission. The Mn-related PL spectrum is almost unchanged with increasing optical distance, indicating the suitability of manganese-doped CsPbCl3 NCs as reabsorption-free emitters for large-area LSCs.116 However, it is still very challenging to synthesize doped perovskite QDs with high QY and a broad absorption spectrum. A possible approach towards this objective may consist in the selection of suitable dopant ions and efficient synthetic approaches.
3.7 Si quantum dots and carbon quantum dots
Most of the efficient emitters introduced above are based on inorganic QDs containing toxic heavy metal elements, such as Pb and Cd, or low earth abundant materials such as In. Indirect bandgap Si QDs are promising candidates for large-area LSCs due to their inherent large Stokes shift and enormous global reserves. Meinardi et al. demonstrated the use of Si QDs as emitters for LSCs, which paves the way to industrial scaling of QD-based LSCs.62 The absorption and emission spectra of Si QDs embedded in toluene and a polymer matrix are shown in Fig. 15b. The Si QD-based LSC features a NIR absorption accounting for over 50% of solar radiation. There is a very small overlap between absorption and emission spectra due to its indirect bandgap, indicating the less energy loss due to the absorption in Si based large-area LSCs. To directly examine the reabsorption losses in a device with a lateral area of 12 × 12 cm2, they studied the optical PL emission spectra vs. excitation optical paths (Fig. 15c). As expected, the emissions excited at 0 cm and 12 cm are quite similar, which confirms that the reabsorption loss is strongly suppressed with the optimal optical profile of Si QDs. The as-fabricated planar LSCs based on Si QDs are semi-transparent with appropriate amounts of QDs loaded into the polymer matrix (Fig. 15a). The concentrated light from the edges suggests the high efficiency of LSCs. By further optimizing the polymerization process, the fabricated flexible LSCs can be easily bent into semi-cylindrical configurations for the realization of BIPV applications.62 In addition, the optical performance of large-area LSCs is quantified and shown in Fig. 15d and e. The resulting optical efficiency of LSCs with dimensions of (12 × 12 × 0.26 cm3) reaches ∼2.85% under one sun illumination. Theoretical Monte–Carlo ray-tracing simulations based on experimental data were conducted with increasing LSC lateral size and thickness. The calculated optical efficiency can exceed 6% with dimensions of 12 × 12 × 2.1 cm3 for LSCs, which enhances the capability of solar harvesting in LSCs without large reabsorption losses. In fact, with 6% efficiency, the cost of electricity generated by LSCs is comparable with that of silicon solar cells. With a further enhancement of 10%, the LSCs can replace silicon solar cells for future low-cost electricity generation.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of planar LSCs based on Si QDs under UV illumination (365 nm) taken with a UV-filtered visible camera (red emitting light) and a UV-filtered infrared camera (green emitting light), and photographs of planar LSCs under ambient (bottom left). (b) Absorption (black line) and PL (red line) spectra of Si QDs (4.3 nm diameter) in toluene and polymer matrix. (c) Absorption and normalized PL spectra collected at the edge of the LSC when the excitation spot is located at distances d = 0 cm or d = 12 cm from the edge. (d and e) Theoretical trends of external optical efficiency (open circles) and peak power output (filled red circles) for square LSCs with the experimental thickness (0.26 cm) and increasing lateral size (d) and the experimental area (lateral size 12 × 12 cm2) and increasing slab thickness (e) (in both cases QY of 46%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Nevertheless, the absorption coefficient of indirect Si QDs is relatively small and the synthesis of stable Si QDs is quite challenging, as it involves the use of expensive equipment and extreme experimental conditions (use of hydrogen under high pressure). Demonstrating the easy synthetic route for green materials as efficient emitters for LSCs is still considered complicated. Colloidal C-dots are regarded as emerging and earth-abundant materials (and their other constituents O, H and N are the most abundant elements on the planet), which can act as suitable emitters for LSCs, due to their unique properties including nontoxicity, tunable absorption and emission spectra over the entire UV-visible-NIR window, flexibility of surface modifications, simple synthetic approaches, good photostability and low-cost. Wang et al. developed red-emissive carbon QDs (R-CQDs) with high QY for warm white emitting diodes.117 The R-CQDs were prepared via a facile and simple solvothermal route. The TEM image in Fig. 16a suggests that R-CQDs have a uniform size of ∼5 nm. Based on the HRTEM image, the high crystallinity of R-CQDs and a lattice spacing of 0.21 nm were confirmed, which corresponds to the (100) plane of graphene. The R-CQDs exhibit an absorption onset at ∼600 nm and a PL emission peak at 628 nm, presenting a relatively large Stokes shift of ∼72 meV with respect to traditional inorganic QDs (Fig. 16b). The bright red emissive light can be observed under ambient and UV illumination in Fig. 16c, consistent with the high QY (53%) of R-CQDs. The as-synthesized R-CQDs are suitable emitters for highly efficient light emitting diodes (LEDs) shown in Fig. 16d and large-area LSCs.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM and HRTEM (inset) image of R-CQDs. (b) UV-vis absorption (black), PL excitation (blue), and emission (red) spectra of R-CQDs. (c) Photographs of R-CQDs under sunlight and UV light. (d) Photographs of the warm LED lamp (inset) and the operating warm LED lamp. (e) Schematic illustration of surface modification of C-dots before and after phase transfer. (f and g) Absorption, emission spectra (f) and PL decays (g) of C-dots under different treatments. (h) Absorption and emission spectra of C-dot based LSCs vs. optical distance at an excitation wavelength of 420 nm. (i) Photographs of large-area planar (left) and thin-film (right) C-dot based LSCs under one sun illumination. Two types of C-dots are used. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Very recently, Zhou et al. used high quality C-dots to prepare large-area planar and tandem thin-film LSCs based on two types of C-dots that absorb in different ranges.118 Firstly, visible-active C-dots (QY: 30%) were synthesized via the solvothermal method. After surface treatment, C-dots can be transferred into a hydrophobic monomer for planar LSC fabrication. As shown in Fig. 16e, in the presence of an appropriate catalyst and a crosslinker, the long carbon chain OLA was functionalized on the surface of original C-dots. Due to the presence of this hydrophobic functional group, OLA-modified C-dots with a comparable QY (∼20–30%) can be uniformly dispersed in a nonpolar solvent such as hexane. In addition, the QY of original C-dots can be increased up to 40% by surface capping with Na+ ions, which is beneficial for the realization of thin-film LSCs as it offers the carbon dots with high QY and small PL/absorption overlap. In Fig. 16f, the absorption and emission spectra of C-dots with different surface treatments are shown. It can be observed that the absorption in the longer wavelength range of 550–700 nm is reduced after the surface treatment, which indicates that surface defects are well passivated, thus leading to a reduced spectral overlap between absorption and emission peaks (almost no changes after surface modification). The PL decays in Fig. 16g reveal similar dynamics among as prepared and surface treated C-dots, consistent with the reported values. The OLA-modified C-dots were applied to fabricate large-area polymer based LSCs (Fig. 16i, left). Concentrated yellow orange light is visible when the LSC is partially illuminated under sunlight. The PL spectra of OLA-modified C-dot based LSCs (dimensions: 10 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3) as a function of the optical path were measured and are shown in Fig. 16h. The PL peak position is slightly red-shifted with the increase in optical path. The shapes of PL spectra measured at different optical lengths are almost identical, suggesting the suppression of reabsorption in these LSCs. To further examine the feasibility of C-dots for LSC fabrication, Zhou et al. prepared tandem large-area thin-film LSCs based on Na+ modified C-dots and UV-active C-dots with large Stokes shifts, shown in Fig. 16i (right). The tandem thin-film LSCs achieve an optical conversion efficiency of ∼1.1% under one sun illumination and exhibit excellent photostability with respect to the inorganic QD-based LSCs. These results demonstrate the possibility of developing green, low-cost, highly stable and efficient LSCs based on C-dots. The best optical conversion efficiency obtained so far in LSCs based on C-dots is still rather low. Further research towards achieving high efficiency LSCs should focus on the development of C-dots with a broad absorption range, high QY and large Stokes shift.
The optical performances of the QD based LSCs described above are summarized in Table 2. In general, “giant” QDs including both type-I and quasi-type II structures can maintain their high optical properties during the LSC fabrication process due to their much better stability than bare QDs and core/thin-shell QDs.26 But LSCs fabricated using “giant” QDs suffer from the incomplete coverage of the solar spectrum due to the large energy gap of the absorber materials (CdS or CdZnS). LSCs based on Mn-doped QDs and doped perovskite QDs suffer from the relatively low QY.27 In addition, green C-dots with broad absorption, large Stokes shift and high QY are rarely reported. These problems could be solved by using NIR emitting “giant” QDs, e.g. CISeS/CIS QDs, which may feature a lower absorption onset with a larger Stokes shift, or by fabricating tandem LSCs based on QDs with appropriate spectral profiles.
Table 2 Performance of LSCs based on various types of QDs. PL QYs were measured for colloidal QDs dispersed in solution




QDs
Band structure
Absorption range (nm)
PL peak position (nm)
Stokes shift (meV)
PL QY (%)

A
top (cm2)

G


η
opt (%)

η
int (%)
Ref.





a Under single-wavelength excitation.





Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS
Type-I
300–450
580
∼1000
53
2.5 × 7.5
22
—
37a

27



CISeS/ZnS
Type-I
300–900
960
∼530
40 ± 4
12 × 12
10
∼3.3
∼16.5

32



PbS/CdS
Quasi-type II
300–800
885
∼250
40–50
1.5 × 10
50
1.1
4.5

31



“Giant” CdSe/CdS
Quasi-type II
300–600
640
∼400
45
1.3 × 21.5
43
—
10

26



“Giant” CdSe/CdS
Quasi-type II
300–600
648
∼400
86
2 × 2
3
48a
—

28



“Giant” CdSe/CdPbS
Quasi-Type II
300–600
620
∼300
40
1.5 × 7
23
∼2
15

33



“Giant” silica-coated CdSe/CdZnS
Type-I
300–550
628
∼720
70
6.4 × 6.4
10
—
31

45



CsPb(IxBr1−x)3
—
300–650
620
∼22
60
1.3 × 9
45
2
∼5

115



Si
—
300–700
830
∼400
∼50
12 × 12
12
∼3
∼30

62



C-dots
—
300–650
540a
—
20–30
1.5 × 9
45
∼0.2
∼2.6

118



C-dots (tandem)
—
300–420
450a
—
60
10 × 10
12.5
1.1
—

118



300–550
540a
—
40




4. Potential applications of LSCs
In this section, we briefly introduce several applications of LSCs, such as BIPV systems, solar noise barriers which serve both as solar to electricity generating device and sound/noise barriers, and solar concentrated chemical photoreactors (converting solar light to radiation of a certain wavelength which is active for chemical photoreaction).119–124 As a novel concept, solar PV panels are applied to urban buildings as part of roofs or facades, in which the electrical/thermal energy can be supplied by solar energy, to form so-called net zero-energy buildings. However, on the account of the aesthetics and the difficulties in the adaptation of non-transparent solar cells on rooftops or on the windows of buildings, LSCs represent a promising alternative technology to be used in BIPV systems, with the advantages of low cost, easy fabrication, adjustable semi-transparency and colors, flexibility of shape and high efficiency. As shown in Fig. 17a, Kate et al. developed halide materials doped with divalent thulium (Tm2+) with no reabsorption for highly efficient, colorless LSCs.36 This material has an absorption band up to 900 nm, equal to 63% of the solar spectrum. The PL peak of these emitters is around 1140 nm, which is suitable to be integrated with thin film CuInGaSe solar cells having an internal quantum efficiency of 90%. In the presence of water, however, Tm2+ doped halides are air sensitive. As a result, their luminescence properties quickly decay over a couple of days or weeks. Therefore, they need to be sealed with a protecting layer and used inside a double glass window (Fig. 17a). In general, conventional PV cells are placed at the edges of LSCs. New designs are described in Fig. 17b and c,120,121 with the PV cells on the front-face allowing them to absorb both direct solar irradiation and wave-guided photons emitted from an emitter in a polymer matrix. This geometry will lead to an increased efficiency of the solar cells, and reduce the distance that photons travel in the wave-guide. A similar configuration is feasible in both large and small dimensions and on various substrates for low-bending stiffness and high degrees of flexibility in BIPV systems.120 Aside from the generation of electricity, the incorporation of PV cells into buildings can provide domestic heating, cooling and shading. A smart window prototype based on LSC technology was realized in the presence of thermal sensors (Fig. 17d),122 which ensures the autonomous operation of motorized shading systems on a sunny or cloudy day.
 Fig. 17  (a) Principle of operation of a semi-transparent, colourless LSC in which the coating re-emits absorbed sunlight that is waveguided by total internal reflection in the glass-coating combination to the edges where solar cells convert the light to electric power.36 (b) Photograph of the LSC window with front PV cells.121 (c) Optical image of a representative flexible luminescent solar module on a cylindrical support (scale bar: 1 mm). Each metal grid line interconnects 21 μ-cells, with cell-to-cell spacings of 400 μm.120 (d) Prototype of the LSC smart window.122 Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2017, IEEE. 
Besides the application in BIPV systems, LSCs are also capable of inducing photochemical microreactions. Cambié et al. fabricated a device where the chemicals can react with sunlight in an efficient way, inspired by tree leaves.119 Specifically, a flow reactor is embedded in an LSC, which has selected emission profiles matching the active spectrum range of a photocatalyst or photosensitizer. The concentrated light at a certain wavelength will accelerate the reaction kinetics for corresponding wavelength-dependent photochemical reactions. With the appropriate choice of QDs having a selective optical profile (such as specific light wavelength range), electricity-generating PV windows can also be used in greenhouses for growing plants,125 and in sustainable systems, such as solar to fuel production by converting solar energy using LSCs to induce the photochemical reaction, etc.
To date, challenges related to BIPV applications involving QD-based LSCs have mainly included the cost, durability and optical efficiency of LSCs. In Table 3, the costs of LSCs (1 m2 lateral size) based on various QDs fabricated on an industrial scale are listed.45,115,118,126 It is observed that the average cost of a QD based LSC is less than that of a dye based LSC ($11 per m2).45,127 Compared to polymer based LSCs, the fabrication of PVP/glass based LSCs using a doctor-blade technique is highly economic due to the lower cost of the polymer matrix and glass substrate. For the unit cost of QDs, C-dots show great superiority ($0.07 per g) with respect to other inorganic QDs. The size of LSCs developed using QDs is still quite small, typically less than 100 cm2. Moreover, given that the ratio of the LSC to PV device per m2 costs is 0.08,126 for a 1 m2 LSC coupled with 4 PV cells (G = 125), if the optical conversion efficiency of the LSC is higher than ∼6.3%, the LSC-PV device would allow for cost saving compared to a stand-alone PV. With additional fabrication costs, we state that the optimal LSCs should have high optical conversion efficiency over 10% for large-area LSC realization. The optical conversion efficiency of QD-based LSCs is still low (∼8%, G of ∼18, lateral size of 100 cm2),128 which needs to be enhanced by optimizing the QDs. In addition, storage of LSC-PV generated electricity represents yet another issue to be addressed, as there will be very low or no electricity generation on cloudy days or by night through photovoltaic conversion.
Table 3 Comparison of the cost of LSCs (lateral size: 1 m2) based on QDs




QDs/mass production
QDs ($ per g)
QDs ($)
Polymer ($)
Glass ($)
Other materials ($)
Total ($ per m2)
Ref.




“Giant” silica-coated CdSe/CdZnS (PVP/glass)
1.7
2.72
0.45
6
1
10

45



Perovskite (polymer)


4.62
5.9
—
1
10.5

115



C-dots (PVP/glass)
0.07
0.7
0.5
1
1
3.2

118



CISe/ZnS (PVP/glass, tandem)
0.57
1.15
0.24
1
1



126



Mn2+-doped CdZnS/ZnS
0.34
0.38
0.24
1
—
5.01






It is desirable to develop high efficiency large-area LSCs based on QDs with lower reabsorption loss and long-term stability, which ensure both sufficient generation of electricity and illumination. As mentioned above, the synthesis of QDs with a broad absorption spectrum, high QY and large Stokes shift would be a solution. In addition, to further lower the installation costs of BIPV objects, applying flexible and bendable LSCs as roofs or windows is an alternative to reduce the total cost. Thus, in order to commercialize LSCs in various applications, simplifying the fabrication and installation process of LSCs will also be another research direction. Moreover, the BIPV windows can be designed for integration with thermal sensors for saving the energy consumption of buildings, which provide not only the electricity but also the benefits of space heating or cooling, and indoor illumination.129,130 In addition, the use of green and earth abundant materials for fabrication of LSCs is of high importance, to address environmental sustainability.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, we reviewed recent research progress in LSCs based on colloidal QDs, particularly on core/shell QDs, highlighting the correlation between the structure and optical properties of QDs which may enhance LSC performance. Despite a tremendous effort invested over the last several years in exploring the synthesis, properties and applications of core/shell QDs in LSCs, a number of major questions and challenges still remain unanswered. The overall optical conversion efficiency in large-area LSCs is still low, which is significantly below the target value for commercial products (>10%). It is still very challenging to scale up the size of LSCs, while still retaining a strong optical performance. In addition, it is very difficult to scale-up chemical synthesis towards producing large quantities of core/shell QDs, while still maintaining the desired properties. Future work should focus on (1) developing a general synthetic approach which could meet the requirements of large-scale, reproducible, simple synthesis for core/shell QDs. For example, all the current synthetic approaches rely on a relatively high reaction temperature (typically 100–320 °C), involving toxic organic solvents and surfactants. Thus, identifying new precursors for the low temperature synthesis of core/shell QDs is an emerging direction; (2) using non-toxic semiconducting materials or solvents to synthesize high quality core/shell QDs. Commonly used inorganic QDs for LSCs contain toxic elements, such as Cd which is starting to be limited by the European Union in TVs and lighting technologies.131,132 Even if CuInSe(S) QDs are less toxic, the synthesis procedure involves the use of toxic organic solvents and expensive precursors. It is very promising to produce colloidal QDs in water using less-toxic elements;133 (3) improving the efficiency of LSCs by designing and synthesizing core/shell QDs with high QY, a wide absorption spectrum, large Stokes shift and excellent photo-, colloidal- and thermal stability through a careful selection of core/shell materials, core size, shell thickness and chemical composition. For example, NIR “giant” CISeS/CIS QDs (or CISe/CIS QDs) exhibit a typical quasi-type II structure,134 with a large Stokes shift and wide absorption spectrum up to the NIR region due to the large volume of the CIS shell (the band gap is 1.5 eV, corresponding to 826 nm).
Another method which can be used to improve the performance of LSCs based on core/shell QDs is to couple the QDs with certain metal NCs (Ag, Au), which are able to increase their emission intensity and absorption by increasing the QY and excitation rate due to plasmonic effects;135–137 (4) improving the stability of QDs by coating the QDs with a silica shell which not only avoids possible quenching during the fabrication process of core/shell QDs into the LSC device, but also isolates the QD's surface from surrounding environments, such as water, light and other molecules; (5) developing new types of non-toxic high efficiency QDs, e.g. C-dots and silicon QDs.62 Even if Si QDs or C-dots are promising for LSCs, their absorption range is still narrow in the UV-visible range and the QY is relatively low (less than 50%). Future research directions for these QDs may consist in the optimization of their structure or coating them with a protective layer to tailor their QY and Stokes shifts. To commercially realize large-area LSCs, the challenges should be considered including the efficiency, lifetime and durability of LSCs, and the cost of their installation and fabrication. The average price of a silicon solar cell has come down to ∼$0.6 per watt in recent years, which is predicted to be even lower (∼$0.1 per watt) in the near future. Considering the cost of silicon solar cells and high photostability, the expected requirements of large-area LSC fabrication include an optical conversion efficiency of at least 10%, five year outdoor use with an efficiency decrease of less than 20%, and cost less than $0.1 per watt.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
F. R. acknowledges funding from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) for infrastructure support and its operating funds and the Fonds de recherche du Québec – Nature et technologies (FRQNT). F. R. is grateful to the Canada Research Chairs program for partial salary support. F. R. also acknowledges a Chang Jiang scholar short term award from the government of China and Sichuan province for a 1000 talent short term award. H. Z. acknowledges the start fund from Qingdao University and the funding from the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2018MB001). Y. Z. acknowledges the UNESCO Chair in Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Saving and Storage (MATECSS) for a PhD Excellence Scholarship. D. M. acknowledges the financial support from NSERC.
Notes and references
K. Basu, D. Benetti, H. G. Zhao, L. Jin, F. Vetrone, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23312 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Benetti, K. T. Dembele, J. Benavides, H. G. Zhao, S. Cloutier, I. Concina, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3555–3562 RSC .
D. Chemisana, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 603–611 CrossRef .
M. J. Currie, J. K. Mapel, T. D. Heidel, S. Goffri and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2008, 321, 226–228 CrossRef PubMed .
K. T. Dembele, G. S. Selopal, R. Milan, C. Trudeau, D. Benetti, A. Soudi, M. M. Natile, G. Sberveglieri, S. Cloutier, I. Concina, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2580–2588 RSC .
J. Du, Z. L. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. X. Pan, Q. Shen, J. K. Sung, D. H. Long, H. Dong, L. T. Sun, X. H. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jin, G. Sirigu, X. Tong, A. Camellini, A. Parisini, G. Nicotra, C. Spinella, H. G. Zhao, S. H. Sun, V. Morandi, M. Zavelani-Rossi, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 531–541 CrossRef .
H. G. Zhao, L. Jin, Y. F. Zhou, A. Bandar, Z. Y. Fan, A. O. Govorov, Z. T. Mi, S. H. Sun, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 495405 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Zhou, M. Celikin, A. Camellini, G. Sirigu, X. Tong, L. Jin, K. Basu, X. Tong, D. Barba, D. L. Ma, S. H. Sun, F. Vidal, M. Zavelani-Rossi, Z. M. Wang, H. G. Zhao, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602728 CrossRef .
B. Z. Tian, X. L. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. F. Yu, G. H. Yu, J. L. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pillai, K. R. Catchpole, T. Trupke and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093105 CrossRef .
J. H. Zhao, A. H. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef .
A. V. Shah, R. Platz and H. Keppner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 501–520 CrossRef .
D. C. Jordan and S. R. Kurtz, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 12–29 Search PubMed .
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222–225 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. B. Xia, S. T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. P. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef PubMed .
F. N. Pardo, D. Benetti, H. G. Zhao, V. M. Castano, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, J. Power Sources, 2016, 335, 138–145 CrossRef .
S. Kim, M. Kang, S. Kim, J.-H. Heo, J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, S. I. Seok and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4756–4763 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bang, J. Park, J. H. Lee, N. Won, J. Nam, J. Lim, B. Y. Chang, H. J. Lee, B. Chon, J. Shin, J. B. Park, J. H. Choi, K. Cho, S. M. Park, T. Joo and S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 233–240 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D. Niu, X. D. Guo and L. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
F. Meinardi, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, R. Simonutti, M. Lorenzon, L. Beverina, R. Viswanatha, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 392–399 CrossRef .
C. S. Erickson, L. R. Bradshaw, S. McDowall, J. D. Gilbertson, D. R. Gamelin and D. L. Patrick, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3461–3467 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Coropceanu and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4097–4101 CrossRef PubMed .
L. R. Bradshaw, K. E. Knowles, S. McDowall and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1315–1323 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Debije and P. P. C. Verbunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 12–35 CrossRef .
Y. F. Zhou, D. Benetti, Z. Y. Fan, H. G. Zhao, D. L. Ma, A. O. Govorov, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501913 CrossRef .
F. Meinardi, H. McDaniel, F. Carulli, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, N. S. Makarov, R. Simonutti, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 878–885 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Zhao, D. Benetti, L. Jin, Y. F. Zhou, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, Small, 2016, 12, 5354–5365 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. H. Correia, P. P. Lima, E. Pecoraro, S. J. L. Ribeiro, P. S. Andre, R. A. S. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 1178–1193 Search PubMed .
N. D. Bronstein, Y. Yao, L. Xu, E. O'Brien, A. S. Powers, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos and R. G. Nuzzo, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1576–1583 CrossRef .
O. M. ten Kate, K. W. Krämer and E. van der Kolk, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 115–120 CrossRef .
K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, D. G. Alzate, S. McDowall and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9129–9132 RSC .
G. D. Gutierrez, I. Coropceanu, M. G. Bawendi and T. M. Swager, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 497–501 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meinardi, F. Bruni and S. Brovelli, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17072 CrossRef .
R. Connell and V. E. Ferry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20991–20997 CrossRef .
J. Graffion, A. M. Cojocariu, X. Cattoën, R. A. S. Ferreira, V. R. Fernandes, P. S. André, L. D. Carlos, M. W. C. Man and J. R. Bartlett, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13279–13285 RSC .
Y. El Mouedden, B. F. Ding, Q. L. Song, G. J. Li and K. Alameh, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2016, 22, 4100306 Search PubMed .
S. F. H. Correia, V. D. Bermudez, S. J. L. Ribeiro, P. S. Andre, R. A. S. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5580–5596 RSC .
J. S. Batchelder, A. H. Zewail and T. Cole, Appl. Opt., 1979, 18, 3090–3110 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Li, K. F. Wu, J. Lim, H.-J. Song and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16157 CrossRef .
F. Purcell-Milton and Y. K. Gun'ko, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16687–16697 RSC .
Z. Krumer, S. J. Pera, R. J. A. van Dijk-Moes, Y. Zhao, A. F. P. de Brouwer, E. Groeneveld, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, R. E. I. Schropp and C. d. M. Donega, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 57–65 CrossRef .
R. H. Inman, G. V. Shcherbatyuk, D. Medvedko, A. Gopinathan and S. Ghosh, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 24308–24313 CrossRef PubMed .
W. E. Benjamin, D. R. Veit, M. J. Perkins, E. Bain, K. Scharnhorst, S. McDowall, D. L. Patrick and J. D. Gilbertson, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1291–1293 CrossRef .
J. Batchelder, A. Zewail and T. Cole, Appl. Opt., 1981, 20, 3733–3754 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Daniel, C. Bauer, I. Dolamic and D. Brühwiler, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 1366–1369 CrossRef .
H. Liang, Z. Q. Zheng, Z. C. Li, J. Xu, B. Chen, H. Zhao, Q. J. Zhang and H. Ming, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 93, 681–685 CrossRef .
J. Graffion, X. Cattoën, M. W. C. Man, V. R. Fernandes, P. S. André, R. A. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4773–4782 CrossRef .
M. M. Nolasco, P. M. Vaz, V. T. Freitas, P. P. Lima, P. S. André, R. A. Ferreira, P. D. Vaz, P. Ribeiro-Claro and L. D. Carlos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7339–7350 RSC .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 621–630 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Zhao, M. Chaker and D. L. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6497–6504 CrossRef .
H. G. Zhao, M. Chaker, N. Q. Wu and D. L. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8898–8904 RSC .
H. G. Zhao, H. Y. Liang, F. Vidal, F. Rosei, A. Vomiero and D. L. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20585–20593 CrossRef .
C. Li, W. Chen, D. Wu, D. H. Quan, Z. M. Zhou, J. J. Hao, J. Qin, Y. W. Li, Z. B. He and K. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17777 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, T. A. Baker, J. Lim, K. A. Velizhanin and H. McDaniel, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1138–1148 CrossRef .
F. Meinardi, S. Ehrenberg, L. Dhamo, F. Carulli, M. Mauri, F. Bruni, R. Simonutti, U. Kortshagen and S. Brovelli, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 177–185 CrossRef .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. R. Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H. J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466–11467 CrossRef PubMed .
L. P. Balet, S. A. Ivanov, A. Piryatinski, M. Achermann and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1485–1488 CrossRef .
M. Brumer, A. Kigel, L. Amirav, A. Sashchiuk, O. Solomesch, N. Tessler and E. Lifshitz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1111–1116 CrossRef .
C. Y. Chen, C. T. Cheng, C. W. Lai, Y. H. Hu, P. T. Chou, Y. H. Chou and H. T. Chiu, Small, 2005, 1, 1215–1220 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Lifshitz, M. Brumer, A. Kigel, A. Sashchiuk, M. Bashouti, M. Sirota, E. Galun, Z. Burshtein, A. Q. Le Quang, I. Ledoux-Rak and J. Zyss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25356–25365 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Swafford, L. A. Weigand, M. J. Bowers, J. R. McBride, J. L. Rapaport, T. L. Watt, S. K. Dixit, L. C. Feldman and S. J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12299–12306 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise, A. Kigel and E. Lifshitz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 245424 CrossRef .
S. A. Ivanov, A. Piryatinski, J. Nanda, S. Tretiak, K. R. Zavadil, W. O. Wallace, D. Werder and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11708–11719 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmueller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Dorfs, T. Franzl, R. Osovsky, M. Brumer, E. Lifshitz, T. A. Klar and A. Eychmüller, Small, 2008, 4, 1148–1152 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Lambert, B. De Geyter, I. Moreels and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 778–780 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Protiere and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154–168 CrossRef PubMed .
C. T. Cheng, C. Y. Chen, C. W. Lai, W. H. Liu, S. C. Pu, P. T. Chou, Y. H. Chou and H. T. Chiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3409–3414 RSC .
L. Jin, B. AlOtaibi, D. Benetti, S. Li, H. G. Zhao, Z. T. Mi, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500345 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Adhikari, L. Jin, F. Navarro-Pardo, D. Benetti, B. AlOtaibi, S. Vanka, H. G. Zhao, Z. T. Mi, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 265–274 CrossRef .
X. Tong, Y. F. Zhou, L. Jin, K. Basu, R. Adhikari, G. S. Selopal, X. Tong, H. G. Zhao, S. H. Sun, A. Vomiero, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 441–449 CrossRef .
H. G. Zhao, G. Sirigu, A. Parisini, A. Camellini, G. Nicotra, F. Rosei, V. Morandi, M. Zavelani-Rossi and A. Vomiero, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4217–4226 RSC .
H. G. Zhao, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Small, 2015, 11, 5741–5746 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-E. Nam, W.-S. Song and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18220–18226 RSC .
Z.-C. Yang, M. Wang, A. M. Yong, S. Y. Wong, X.-H. Zhang, H. Tan, A. Y. Chang, X. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11615–11617 RSC .
K. Jiang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, A. G. Wu, C. Z. Cai and H. W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5360–5363 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sahu, B. Behera, T. K. Maiti and S. Mohapatra, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8835–8837 RSC .
F. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, C. Ding, S. Kobayashi, T. Izuishi, N. Nakazawa, T. Toyoda, T. Ohta, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Y. Dai and Q. Shen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10373–10383 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, J. H. Li, X. M. Li, L. M. Xu, Y. H. Dong and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Koscher, J. K. Swabeck, N. D. Bronstein and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6566–6569 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ghosh, B. D. Mangum, J. L. Casson, D. J. Williams, H. Htoon and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9634–9643 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Dennis, B. D. Mangum, A. Piryatinski, Y.-S. Park, D. C. Hannah, J. L. Casson, D. J. Williams, R. D. Schaller, H. Htoon and J. A. Hollingsworth, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5545–5551 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Jeong, Y.-S. Park, J. H. Chang, I. Cho, J. K. Kim, H. Kim, K. Char, J. Cho, V. I. Klimov, P. Park, D. C. Lee and W. K. Bae, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9297–9305 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, D. J. Werder, D. J. Williams, J. L. Casson, R. D. Schaller, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4879–4885 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Zhao, M. Chaker and D. L. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17483–17491 RSC .
H. G. Zhao, Z. Y. Fan, H. Y. Liang, G. S. Selopal, B. A. Gonfa, L. Jin, A. Soudi, D. L. Cui, F. Enrichi, M. M. Natile, I. Concina, D. L. Ma, A. O. Govorov, F. Rosei and A. Vomiero, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7004–7011 RSC .
K. A. Abel, H. J. Qiao, J. F. Young and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2334–2338 CrossRef .
A. C. Berends, F. T. Rabouw, F. C. M. Spoor, E. Bladt, F. C. Grozema, A. J. Houtepen, L. D. A. Siebbeles and C. D. Donega, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3503–3509 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Zhu, D. R. Yang, G. X. Yu, H. Zhang and K. H. Yao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2386–2389 CrossRef .
J. C. Ge, Q. Y. Jia, W. M. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Y. Liu, M. H. Lan, H. Y. Zhang, X. M. Meng and P. F. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4169–4177 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Dong, H. C. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. X. Guo, J. W. Shao, Y. W. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Zhu, Q. N. Meng, L. Wang, J. H. Zhang, Y. B. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. C. Sun, H. Y. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tanabe, Energies, 2009, 2, 504–530 CrossRef .
J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Z. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567–12575 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Huang, R. Demadrille, M. G. Silly, F. Sirotti, P. Reiss and O. Renault, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4799–4805 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Jones, S. Kumar, S. S. Lo and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5423–5431 CrossRef .
C. d. M. Donega, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 165303 CrossRef .
Q. H. Zeng, X. G. Kong, Y. J. Sun, Y. L. Zhang, L. P. Tu, J. L. Zhao and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8587–8593 CrossRef .
M. Cirillo, T. Aubert, R. Gomes, R. Van Deun, P. Emplit, A. Biermann, H. Lange, C. Thomsen, E. Brainis and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1154–1160 CrossRef .
H. G. Zhao, H. Y. Liang, B. A. Gonfa, M. Chaker, T. Ozaki, P. Tijssen, F. Vidal and D. L. Ma, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 215–225 RSC .
K. Nikolaidou, S. Sarang, C. Hoffman, B. Mendewala, H. Ishihara, J. Q. Lu, B. Ilan, V. Tung and S. Ghosh, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 2126–2132 CrossRef .
H. G. Zhao, Y. F. Zhou, D. Benetti, D. L. Ma and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 214–223 CrossRef .
F. Meinardi, Q. A. Akkerman, F. Bruni, S. Park, M. Mauri, Z. Y. Dang, L. Manna and S. Brovelli, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2368–2377 CrossRef .
Z. F. Wang, F. L. Yuan, X. H. Li, Y. C. Li, H. Z. Zhong, L. Z. Fan and S. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702910 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Zhou, D. Benetti, X. Tong, L. Jin, Z. M. Wang, D. L. Ma, H. G. Zhao and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 378–387 CrossRef .
D. Cambié, F. Zhao, V. Hessel, M. G. Debije and T. Noël, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1050–1054 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yoon, L. F. Li, A. V. Semichaevsky, J. H. Ryu, H. T. Johnson, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 343 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Corrado, S. W. Leow, M. Osborn, E. Chan, B. Balaban and S. A. Carter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 111, 74–81 CrossRef .

          N. Aste, C. Del Pero, M. Buzzetti, R. Fusco, D. Testa, F. Leonforte and R. Adhikari, presented in part at 6th International Conference on Clen Electrical Power, Santa Margherita Ligure, August, 2017.
R. Zarcone, M. Brocato, P. Bernardoni and D. Vincenzi, Energy Procedia, 2016, 91, 887–896 CrossRef .
F. Aldegheri, S. Baricordi, P. Bernardoni, M. Brocato, G. Calabrese, V. Guidi, L. Mondardini, L. Pozzetti, M. Tonezzer and D. Vincenzi, Energy. Buildings., 2014, 77, 355–363 CrossRef .
M. E. Loik, S. A. Carter, G. Alers, C. E. Wade, D. Shugar, C. Corrado, D. Jokerst and C. Kitayama, Earths Future, 2017, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef .
K. F. Wu, H. B. Li and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 1, 105–110 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. He, W. Xie, M. M. Yang, J. J. Ding, J. Bao, S. Sun and C. Gao, Sol. Energy, 2015, 117, 260–267 CrossRef .
M. R. Bergren, N. S. Makarov, K. Ramasamy, A. Jackson, R. Guglielmetti and H. McDaniel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 520–525 CrossRef .
A. H. H. Al-Waeli, K. Sopian, H. A. Kazem and M. T. Chaichan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 109–130 CrossRef .
K. Connelly, Y. P. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Lei, Appl. Energy, 2016, 182, 331–339 CrossRef .
Optics.org, http://optics.org/news/7/6/8, accessed June 2016.
LaserFocusWorld https://www.laserfocusworld.com/articles/2017/08/european-commission-to-prohibit-cadmium-from-tvs-and-displays-by-october-2019.html, accessed August 2017.
L. H. Jing, S. V. Kershaw, Y. L. Li, X. Huang, Y. Y. Li, A. L. Rogach and M. Y. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10623–10730 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tong, X. T. Kong, Y. F. Zhou, F. Navarro-Pardo, G. S. Selopal, S. H. Sun, A. O. Govorov, H. G. Zhao, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701432 CrossRef .
H. Y. Liang, H. G. Zhao, D. Rossouw, W. Z. Wang, H. X. Xu, G. A. Botton and D. L. Ma, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2339–2346 CrossRef .
H. Y. Liang, D. Rossouw, H. G. Zhao, S. K. Cushing, H. L. Shi, A. Korinek, H. X. Xu, F. Rosei, W. Z. Wang, N. Q. Wu, G. A. Botton and D. L. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9616–9619 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Liang, H. G. Zhao, Z. P. Li, C. Harnagea and D. L. Ma, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4882–4887 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Yufeng Zhou
	Yufeng Zhou received her Master's Degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (2013). She continued her research work at Chengdu Green Energy and Green Manufacturing Technology R&D Centre in China as a research assistant for one year. She is currently a PhD student at the Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS, Canada) with a Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Saving and Storage (MATECSS) excellence scholarship. Her research mainly focuses on the synthesis of semiconducting nanomaterials (such as colloidal quantum dots and nanoplatelets) and their applications in luminescent solar concentrators and solar-driven water splitting.

Haiguang Zhao
	Haiguang Zhao is a Professor at Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. He received his MSc degree (2007) from Zhejiang University and PhD degree (2012) from INRS, Quebec University. His research interests focus on the synthesis of semiconductor materials (including metal oxides, quantum dots and perovskites) for solar energy applications, such as solar cells, luminescent solar concentrators and solar-driven water splitting.

Dongling Ma
	Dongling Ma is currently a full professor at INRS. Her main research interest includes the development of various nanomaterials (e.g., quantum dots, catalytic nanoparticles, plasmonic nanostructures, and different types of nanohybrids) for applications in energy (e.g., solar cells), catalysis (including photocatalysis) and biomedical sectors. Before joining INRS in July 2006, she was awarded Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Visiting Fellowships and worked at the National Research Council of Canada from 2004–2006. She received her PhD degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (USA) in 2004.

Federico Rosei
	Federico Rosei is a Professor and the Director of the INRS Centre Énergie, Matériaux et Télécommunications, Varennes (QC) Canada. He holds the UNESCO Chair in Materials and Technologies for Energy Conversion, Saving and Storage and the Senior Canada Research Chair in Nanostructured Materials. He received MSc and PhD degrees from the University of Rome “La Sapienza” in 1996 and 2001, respectively. He has received several awards and is a Fellow/Member of many prestigious societies and academies, including the Royal Society of Canada, the European Academy of Sciences, the American Physical Society, the World Academy of Arts and Science, the Chinese Chemical Society (Honorary), the American Association for the Advancement of Science, SPIE, the Canadian Academy of Engineering, ASM International and the Engineering Institute of Canada.

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of an LSC based on QDs. An LSC coupled with two PV cells is obtained by embedding QDs in a transparent polymer matrix. The numbers indicate the typical processes of energy loss in an LSC. [1] Unabsorbed light; [2] Light reflects from the top surface; [3] Photon loss due to the non-unity of fluorescence QY; [4] Escaped, re-emitted light from the surface due to the escape cone (the angle smaller than the critical angle), and [5] Light reabsorption by another QD.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 


Organic dyes	Perylene dye 4	400–580	500–650	—	Chloroform	96	
49

Coumarin-540	420–555	450–620	∼264	Ethanol	78	
50

Lumogen Red 305	400–620	580–740	∼140	Ethanol	∼100	
51

Rh B	450–620	520–650	∼65	Ethanol	∼70–97	
52

Quantum dots	CdSe/CdS	400–650	590–700	∼400	Hexane/PMMA	45	
26

PbS/CdS	300–800	800–1100	∼250	Toluene	∼40–50	
31

Si	300–660	640–1000	∼400	Toluene	50	
62

Lanthanide complex hybridsa	F6-Eu	240–440	612b	—	—	34	
53

FtU5Eu-II	240–450	613b	—	—	48 ± 5	
54


 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the synthesis of colloidal QDs via various approaches. The core/shell structured QDs can be obtained via the cation exchange approach or the SILAR approach.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–e) Representative TEM image of starting CdSe QDs before SILAR (a), CdSe QDs after coating with 3CdS/3CdxPb1−xS (3A) (b), 3CdS/7CdxPb1−xS (7A) (c), 3CdS/7A/3CdS (d) and 13CdS (e) SILAR cycles. (f) HRTEM image of sample (e). (g) HRTEM image of sample (c). (h) HRTEM image of sample (d). Representative TEM images of PbS/CdS QDs with an average diameter of 3.9 nm (i) and 4.8 nm (j). HRTEM images of PbSe/CdSe (k) and PbTe/CdTe (l) core/shell particles in the 〈110〉 directions. (m) A high-resolution high angle annular dark Field (HAADF)-STEM image of a “giant” PbS/CdS QD. TEM images of CISeS QDs (n); CISeS/CdS (o) and CISeS/ZnS QDs (p) showing an analogous pyramidal structure and nearly same sizes. Inset images of (n), (o) and (p) display cartoons of QD structures of CISeS, CISeS/CdS and CISeS/ZnS, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) AM 1.5 G solar spectrum from ASTM G173-03 reference spectrum. (b) The evolution of the UV-vis and PL spectra of the CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs upon the growth of the CdS shell in a typical reaction.107 (c) Absorption spectra of the PbS QDs and PbS/CdS QDs.8 (d) PL spectra of the PbS/CdS QDs.58 Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8 Copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the energy level alignment and electron (blue) and hole wave functions (red) in different rectangles correspond to the positions of the valence band and conduction band edge of the core (center) and shell materials, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Band energy structures in core/shell QD with a large Stokes shift: (a) type-I core/thin-shell doped QD. The dotted line indicates the energy level of doped ions; (b) type-I core/thin-shell CISeS/ZnS QD. The dotted line indicates the energy level of native defects of the QD; (c) quasi-type II core/thin-shell QD; (d) “giant” quasi-type II core/shell QD; (e) “giant” type-I core/shell QD. In the “giant” system, the absorption spectrum is dominated by the shell material due to its large volume compared to the core material.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Absorption and PL spectra of Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs in toluene (a) and in an LSC device (d). (b) Schematic description of PL sensitization in Mn2+-doped QDs. Photon absorption by the doped QD in its ground state (|QD,6A1〉) gives the excited QD (|QD*,6A1〉). Energy rapidly localizes to excite Mn2+ within the QD (|QD,4T1〉), which then emits with a high QY. Radiative processes are indicated as straight lines and non-radiative processes as wavy lines. (c) TEM image of representative Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS QDs. (e) A device seen under UV illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  A photograph of the LSC comprising 0.3 wt% QDs under ambient illumination (a) and under illumination from a solar simulator (1.5 AM global) (d). Inset of (d): photograph of the same device taken with an infrared camera. LSC dimensions, 12 × 12 × 0.3 cm3. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of CISeS/ZnS QDs in toluene solution and in a polymer. (c) PL decays measured using pulsed 405 nm excitation of CISeS/ZnS QDs. (e) PL output as a function of optical distance (circles; derived by integrating the PL spectra compared with the probability of a photon reaching the LSC edge computed using Monte Carlo ray tracing (shaded in pink for ΦPL = 40% and in green for ΦPL = 100%)). The PL output obtained by integrating the normalized PL spectra is shown as black triangles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Normalized absorption and PL spectra of QDs with core radius of 1.5 nm and 2.3 nm with tunable CdS shell thickness. (b) Stokes shift of QDs with various shell thicknesses as a function of the PL peak position (related to core size of diameter from 3 to 6 nm). (c) Approximate electronic band structure of a core/shell PbS/CdS QD. (d) PL lifetime of QDs with various shell thicknesses as a function of the PL peak position (related to core size of diameter from 3 to 6 nm). (e) Radial distribution functions for 1S electron of a PbS QD with a core size of 3.0 nm in diameter and tunable shell thickness of 0–0.6 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Normalized absorption and PL spectra measured at different optical paths for the samples of (a) the PbS_L QDs and (b) the C@S_S QDs. External optical efficiency of a C@S_S QD-based LSC coupled with Si diode as a function of (c) side length or (d) G factor. (e) Photograph of a QD-polymer-based LSC (dimension: 10 × 1.5 × 0.2 cm3) comprising C@S_S QDs in ambient light. Scale bar is 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Absorption and normalized PL spectra of the QD in toluene solution and in a polymer. PL spectra (excitation at 400 nm) were collected at the edge of the LSC when the excitation spot is located at 5 cm from the edge. (b) Camera pictures of a QD-polymer-based LSC (dimensions: 7 × 1.5 × 0.3 cm3) comprising CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS QDs illuminated under ambient illumination (top) and by an ultraviolet lamp emitting at 365 nm (bottom). Scale bar is 1 cm. Dependence of the external optical efficiency (c) and LQE (f) from the length. PL decays of QDs in toluene or in the polymer for (d) CdSe/13CdS QDs and (e) CdSe/3CdS/7A/3CdS QDs. The excitation wavelength is λex = 444 nm. At L= 3 cm (G = 10) the maximum external optical efficiency reached is 5.3% (for the alloyed QDs based LSC) and 4.3% for the CdSe/13CdS structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) An approximate structure of a type-I confinement potential in CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs. CB and VB denote the conduction and valence bands, respectively; Eg = 1.75 eV is the bulk-CdSe bandgap. (b) Absorption (black) and PL (red) spectra of CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs. (c) TEM images of core/shell CdSe/CdZnS “giant” QDs before (c) and after silica coating (d). Inset: A HRTEM image of the same “giant” QDs. (e) Comparison of PL dynamics of uncoated (red) and silica-coated (blue) “giant” QDs. (f) The PL decay in silica-coated “giant” QDs as a function of shell thickness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Fabrication of thin-film LSCs by a doctor-blade technique. (a) A schematic representation of thin-film deposition using a doctor-blade method. (b–d) A photograph of a large-area LSC (30.5 × 91.4 cm2) under sunlight (b and d) and UV illumination (c). (e) An absorption spectrum of a fabricated LSC. (f) Spectrally integrated intensity of PL from the LSC edge as a function of separation of the excitation spot and the edge (inset). Error bars represent a standard deviation from three independent measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A large-area TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3 QDs. (b) Absorption and PL spectra of CsPb(BrxI1-x)3 QDs with various chemical compositions (x = 0–1). (c) QY and Stokes shift variations with various Br concentration. Photographs of the LSC comprising CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QDs under ambient (d), one sun (100 mW cm−2) (e), and UV illumination (f). Scale bar is 1 cm (d). LSC dimensions, 6 × 6 × 0.2 cm3. (g) Absorption and PL spectra measured at different optical paths for the CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QD based LSCs. (h) PL decay curves for CsPb(Br0.2I0.8)3 QDs in toluene and polymer matrix (excitation at 440 nm). (i) Integrated PL area of CsPb(BrxI1-x)3 QDs based LSCs at different optical paths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photographs of planar LSCs based on Si QDs under UV illumination (365 nm) taken with a UV-filtered visible camera (red emitting light) and a UV-filtered infrared camera (green emitting light), and photographs of planar LSCs under ambient (bottom left). (b) Absorption (black line) and PL (red line) spectra of Si QDs (4.3 nm diameter) in toluene and polymer matrix. (c) Absorption and normalized PL spectra collected at the edge of the LSC when the excitation spot is located at distances d = 0 cm or d = 12 cm from the edge. (d and e) Theoretical trends of external optical efficiency (open circles) and peak power output (filled red circles) for square LSCs with the experimental thickness (0.26 cm) and increasing lateral size (d) and the experimental area (lateral size 12 × 12 cm2) and increasing slab thickness (e) (in both cases QY of 46%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM and HRTEM (inset) image of R-CQDs. (b) UV-vis absorption (black), PL excitation (blue), and emission (red) spectra of R-CQDs. (c) Photographs of R-CQDs under sunlight and UV light. (d) Photographs of the warm LED lamp (inset) and the operating warm LED lamp. (e) Schematic illustration of surface modification of C-dots before and after phase transfer. (f and g) Absorption, emission spectra (f) and PL decays (g) of C-dots under different treatments. (h) Absorption and emission spectra of C-dot based LSCs vs. optical distance at an excitation wavelength of 420 nm. (i) Photographs of large-area planar (left) and thin-film (right) C-dot based LSCs under one sun illumination. Two types of C-dots are used. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 


Mn2+-doped ZnSe/ZnS	Type-I	300–450	580	∼1000	53	2.5 × 7.5	22	—	37a	
27

CISeS/ZnS	Type-I	300–900	960	∼530	40 ± 4	12 × 12	10	∼3.3	∼16.5	
32

PbS/CdS	Quasi-type II	300–800	885	∼250	40–50	1.5 × 10	50	1.1	4.5	
31

“Giant” CdSe/CdS	Quasi-type II	300–600	640	∼400	45	1.3 × 21.5	43	—	10	
26

“Giant” CdSe/CdS	Quasi-type II	300–600	648	∼400	86	2 × 2	3	48a	—	
28

“Giant” CdSe/CdPbS	Quasi-Type II	300–600	620	∼300	40	1.5 × 7	23	∼2	15	
33

“Giant” silica-coated CdSe/CdZnS	Type-I	300–550	628	∼720	70	6.4 × 6.4	10	—	31	
45

CsPb(IxBr1−x)3	—	300–650	620	∼22	60	1.3 × 9	45	2	∼5	
115

Si	—	300–700	830	∼400	∼50	12 × 12	12	∼3	∼30	
62

C-dots	—	300–650	540a	—	20–30	1.5 × 9	45	∼0.2	∼2.6	
118

C-dots (tandem)	—	300–420	450a	—	60	10 × 10	12.5	1.1	—	
118

300–550	540a	—	40

 	Fig. 17  (a) Principle of operation of a semi-transparent, colourless LSC in which the coating re-emits absorbed sunlight that is waveguided by total internal reflection in the glass-coating combination to the edges where solar cells convert the light to electric power.36 (b) Photograph of the LSC window with front PV cells.121 (c) Optical image of a representative flexible luminescent solar module on a cylindrical support (scale bar: 1 mm). Each metal grid line interconnects 21 μ-cells, with cell-to-cell spacings of 400 μm.120 (d) Prototype of the LSC smart window.122 Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 Copyright 2017, IEEE.	 

“Giant” silica-coated CdSe/CdZnS (PVP/glass)	1.7	2.72	0.45	6	1	10	
45

Perovskite (polymer)	
	4.62	5.9	—	1	10.5	
115

C-dots (PVP/glass)	0.07	0.7	0.5	1	1	3.2	
118

CISe/ZnS (PVP/glass, tandem)	0.57	1.15	0.24	1	1	
	
126

Mn2+-doped CdZnS/ZnS	0.34	0.38	0.24	1	—	5.01	

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
