The utilization of post-synthetic modification in opto-electronic polymers: an effective complementary approach but not a competitive one to the tradi ...  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5PY01158B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5PY01158B
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6770-6791The utilization of post-synthetic modification in opto-electronic polymers: an effective complementary approach but not a competitive one to the traditional direct polymerization process

        
          
            Qianqian 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. E-mail: lizhen@whu.edu.cn; lichemlab@163.com
Received 
      23rd July 2015
    , Accepted 13th August 2015First published on 14th August 2015AbstractIn addition to the powerful direct polymerization of monomers, the post-synthetic modification route, involving the reaction between the polymer reactive intermediate and small molecule, is another approach for the preparation of functional polymers, which might not be obtained from their corresponding monomers through direct polymerization. This article reviews the recent progress of the utilization of the post functional strategy, for the preparation of new opto-electronic polymers, discusses the design and functionality of these polymers, and gives some outlook for further exploration in this field at the end of this paper.Qianqian LiQianqian Li received her B.Sc. degree from Hubei University, China in 2004, and then obtained her Ph.D. degree at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now an associate professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new electric and optical functional materials.Zhen LiZhen Li received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Wuhan University (WHU), China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. In 2003–2004, he worked in the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology as a Research Associate in Prof. Ben Zhong Tang's group. In 2010, he worked in Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Seth Marder's group. In 2014, he worked in the National University of Singapore as a visiting professor for one month. He is a full professor at WHU from 2006, and his research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structures and new functions for organic electronics and photonics.
1. Introduction
Accompanying the progress of science and technology, opto-electronic materials have attracted great attention in the past few decades, and have already exhibited significant applications in some areas such as lighting, displays, and telecommunications.1–3 In particular, polymers, partially due to their good processability and convenient integration in different devices, are considered as more promising materials, although their present applications are not as wide as other counterparts. So far, a huge library of polymers have been developed, which exhibit interesting, even exciting in some cases, optical or electrical properties, with huge potential applications in the fields of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, sensors, non-linear optics (NLO) and so on.4–7 Generally, different functionalities could be realized by different functional blocks introduced to the polymer systems as side chains or in the main chains. As a result, functional groups were frequently implanted into the predesigned monomers, and then embedded into the yielded functional polymers, during the polymerization process.8–10 However, this synthetic approach does not always work successfully, since the functional group may poison the catalysts hampering the growth of the polymer chain, or the corresponding monomers are inherently unstable or could not be stable under polymerization conditions. Fortunately, an alternative strategy, the post functional strategy, makes up most of the limitations of the traditional direct polymerization approach.11–13 As a typical example in industry, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) could only be obtained through the post functional approach (Chart 1), as its corresponding monomer, vinyl alcohol, is not stable. Similar cases existed in the preparation of many opto-electronic polymers, by utilizing various reactions including the frequently used ones of the azo coupling, esterification, Knoevenagel condensation, Heck and “click” reactions.14–17
 Chart 1  The synthesis of PVA by post synthetic modification. 
In comparison with the direct polymerization approach, as the post functional reactions take place on the polymers, the complete conversion from one reactive group to another is not so easy. However, the post functional strategy could tolerate many functional groups with high polarity, or reactive moieties, or special kinds of atoms, achieving the tasks that are hard to accomplish from the direct polymerization approach. In recent years, more and more functional polymers were obtained from the post functional strategy, vastly enriching the family of functional polymers with new offered functionalities, including some special optical and electrical properties. Herein, in this paper, we would like to review the recent progress of optical and electrical polymers, which were obtained through the post functional strategy, and mainly focus on the post-synthetic modification of linear polymers in the side chains, and the detailed structure–property relationship.
2. Post-synthetic modification of opto-electric polymers
In the traditional direct polymerization approach, the key point is to synthesize the target monomers bearing the required reactive group (i.e. carbon–carbon double bond), in high purity, for the subsequent polymerization reaction. However, the isolation of the monomers is, frequently, not so easy, especially in the presence of some groups with high reactivity. Thus, much effort should be made to obtain pure monomers, to avoid the bad influence of trace impurities in the polymerization process. Totally in contrast, just starting from a polymer intermediate, the preparation and purification of the target functional polymers are very easy and much simple, through the post functional strategy. There is no need to care about the stability of reactive groups in the purification process (normally column chromatography), but only the convenient reprecipitation method. Not only limited to this advantage, many functional polymers, unobtainable from the traditional polymerization of their corresponding monomers, could only be obtained through the post functional strategy.18–21
2.1 Conjugated polymers bearing hydrophilic ions as side chains
Since the first report in 1976, conjugated polymers exhibited some special properties of optics, electronics and magnetics, and have been widely applied to many fields including opto-electronic devices, anticorrosion, military stealth, sensors etc.22–26 Recently, some conjugated polymers containing hydrophilic ions in the side chains, named conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs), have demonstrated very exciting performance. For example, they were utilized to modify the surface of ITO glass to tune the work function in LED devices and solar cells, leading to much enhanced efficiencies.27,28 Also, CPEs could probe some specific chemical and biological analytes based on the conformational changes of CPEs when complexed with other charged species.29–32
However, these CPEs with hydrophilic ions as side chains nearly could not be synthesized through the direct polymerization approach, since the hydrophilic ions were very sensitive to many factors in the polymerization process. Actually, most CPEs were obtained through the post functional strategy. As shown in Fig. 1, P1 and P2 were prepared from the post functional polymer reactions between the polymer precursor of PP1 or PP2 and bromoethane.33,34 Thanks to the polar ammonium groups in their side chains, P1 and P2 were well soluble in solvents such as methanol, dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and other high polar ones, enabling easy integration into LED devices or solar cells to decrease the surface potential and reduce the effective work function, the main reason being the produced dipole moments at the polymer/cathode interface. As a result, in the presence of P1 and P2 as an electron-injection layer (without the Ba layer), the external quantum efficiencies of the LED devices (0.16 and 0.09%) were as high as those with a Ba/Al cathode (0.06 and 0.07%). When applied to solar cells, the utilization of P2 as the interfacial layer could improve the power conversion efficiency to as high as 8.4% under AM 1.5G illumination, while the control device only showed an efficiency of 6.1%.
 Fig. 1  The post-synthetic modification of CPEs with ammonium groups as the side chains. 
However, as mentioned in the Introduction, the complete conversion of polymer intermediates is very difficult. This is the case for P1 and P2: the degree of the quaternization treatment between the dimethylamino unit and bromomethane is about 90% and 80%, respectively, as calculated from the results of elemental analysis. In addition, the purification of the dimethylamino group-containing monomers was a little difficult for the precursor polymers of PP1 and PP2. Thus, an improved synthetic approach was developed, in which the precursor polymer containing bromine atoms in the side chains, PP3, was prepared from its easily purified monomer. Then, the subsequent quaternization reaction with trimethylamine converted PP3 to P3a almost completely in a good yield.35–37 Similar to P1 and P2, once applied to the organic thin-film transistors (OTFTs), P3a could lower the contact resistance, as a result of the formed interfacial dipoles at the metal/organic semiconductor interfaces. Also, P3a could probe the transition from G-quadruplexes to the duplex ones, by monitoring the fluorescence signal from the mixture of P3a and G-Fl (G-quartet DNA is labeled with fluorescein (Fl) at the 5′-terminus), since the electrostatic interactions between G-Fl and P3a placed them in close proximity, resulting in effective fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from P3a to fluorescein accompanying the changes of the fluorescence signal. Interestingly, the electrostatic interactions can also be applied to sense a fluorogenic substrate (fluorescein diacetate) for the esterase activity study with a factor of up to 19-fold achieved, thanks to the π-conjugated system as a signal amplifier to enhance the sensory response. Similarly, P3b could act as a fluorescent probe towards biological species in aqueous media.38 Its brilliant blue fluorescence was quenched once complexing with diol bearing biomolecules like monosaccharides, L-DOPA and L-ascorbic acid, due to static quenching. After the addition of D-glucose only, it produced a greenish yellow emission owing to the formation of an induced aggregated polymer structure.
With the aim to further optimize the performance of LEDs, the ethylene oxide groups, which might possess similar functionality to poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) in light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs), were introduced into the fluorene-based polymer to transport mobile ions in the devices.39,40 The experimental results of the corresponding devices demonstrated that mobile bromide ions could migrate more easily in P4, and form a large space charge field, as a result of the reduced charge injection barrier. Once bound with Na+ or Ca2+ ions on the ethylene oxide side chains, the electron injection ability could be further improved. When these complexes were used as an electron transporting layer (ETL) in PLEDs based on a green-light-emitting polyfluorene derivative, good device performance was obtained with a luminous efficiency (LE) of 11.0 cd A−1 for P4-Na+ and 15.4 cd A−1 for P4-Ca2+. Interestingly, when P4 was used as the electron collection layer (ECL) in PSCs, the Voc and FF values simultaneously improved, thereby increasing the PCE from 2.95 to 3.77%. The overall photovoltaic characteristics were comparable with those of the cells with LiF or Ca as the ECLs.
Besides the commonly used bromine anion, various other counter anions (CAs), such as BF4−, CF3SO3−, PF6−, BPh4−, and B(3,5-(CF3)2C6H3)4−(BArF4)−, have been introduced into the side chains by progressive dilution of the original species. Along with the increased size of the CA, the interchain contacts of the corresponding CPEs decreased, leading to an increase of quantum yield (3–5% for P5aversus 22–41% for P5f).41 The performance of these CPEs as the ETL in PLEDs can also be strongly influenced by the charge compensating ions. For a series of PLEDs with similar device structures, superior device performance (500 mA cm−2) was obtained by P5g with BIm4− as the counter ion.42,43 Furthermore, instead of the generally used fluorene moiety, various other units, such as thiophene, benzene, and so on, were incorporated to realize their application in the opto-electric field. Abnormally, although PP6 and P6b acted as an effective interlayer to improve the opto-electric performance, the PP6-based device showed a typical p-type transistor behavior with the highest hole mobility of 6 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, while that of P6b predominately displayed an n-type transistor behavior with an electron mobility as high as −1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. One possible scenario is that the ionic functionalities in P6b can provide electrostatic dipoles at the electrode to reduce barriers to charge injection.44 Moreover, CPEs can be further modified to polyelectrolyte brushes by using the “grafting onto” approach to achieve better performance in the application of bioimaging.45–50
However, in the above conjugated polyelectrolytes, the counter anions might migrate into the emission layer and induce the possible luminescence quenching, to affect the long-term stability of devices. To overcome this problem, an alternative method is to develop water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymers with the mobile-ions-free nature. Accordingly, some conjugated zwitterionic polyelectrolytes (CZPEs) containing both anionic and cationic groups have been designed by Huang and Bazan.51–55 Taking P7 as an example,51,52 from a well-described, neutral 9,9-bis(N,N-dimethylaminoethyl)-substituted poly(2,7-fluorene) precursor (PP7), a one-step reaction with cyclic 1,4-butane sultone yielded the zwitterionic target polymer directly. When it was used as an electron injection material in PLEDs, the fixed charges could prevent the movement of ions, thus, it was liable to generate strong dipoles near the cathodes, which facilitated charge injection and led to the higher electron currents and improved performance. Accordingly, the device performance was stable at different operating voltages, without significant decrease observed up to 5.8 V. Also, the quaternization degrees of the resultant polymers could be controlled to a large extent by adjusting the feed ratio of 1,3-propanesultone. While using P8 with the quaternization degree of 65% as the ETL, highly efficient PLEDs were achieved (quantum efficiency (QE) of 7.7%). When the quaternization degrees increased to 100%, the device performance further improved (QE of 8.3%). In principle, not only pendant polar groups, but also the nature of the conjugated backbone are critical for the development of new interface modification materials utilized in multilayer organic optoelectronic devices.53 Actually, when a part of the fluorene moiety in P7 and P8 was replaced by the electron-deficient unit of benzothiadiazole, P9 showed a relatively poor interface modification function in PSC, with the poorer performance of its PLED device, possibly caused by a mismatch of the energy barriers.54 However, by oxidizing the amino functionalized precursor polymer (PP10) with hydrogen peroxide, amino N-oxide functionalized polyfluorene copolymer P10 was synthesized, which possessed excellent solubility in polar solvents and good electron injection from high work-function metals. With P10 as the cathode interlayer, the resultant device exhibited a luminance efficiency of 16.9 cd A−1 and a power conversion efficiency of 6.9% for PLEDs and PSCs, respectively, which were more than 90 and 1.7 times higher than those obtained with the corresponding bare Al cathode devices (Fig. 2).55
 Fig. 2  The structures of CZPEs by post-synthetic modification. 
2.2 Conjugated polymers bearing some receptor groups
Not limited to the hydrophilic ions, many other special function groups, for example, some receptors essential for sensors, could only be linked to some conjugated polymers as side chains through the post functional strategy, but not direct polymerization from their corresponding monomers.
As mentioned above, the first example of conductive conjugated polymers, polyacetylene (PA), was reported in 1977, which opened up a new research field.56–60 Generally, disubstituted PAs possess very good thermal stability (no molecular weight change detectable after annealing in air at 120 °C for 20 h), and efficiently strong fluorescence without photo-bleaching. Thus, these advantages, coupled with the “molecular wire effect” in conjugated polymers, make them good candidates as polymer chemosensors.61–65 However, it is a big challenge for the preparation of disubstituted PAs containing some receptors needed for sensors, such as bipyridyl, terpyridyl, and quinoline segments, from the direct polymerization method. Actually, even those alkyne monomers bearing amide, amine, hydroxyl, cyano, thio etc., are very hard to be polymerized into the corresponding disubstituted PAs, because of the deactivation of the transition-metal catalysts for the acetylene polymerization.
Fortunately, as shown in Fig. 3, the designed disubstituted PAs could be prepared from the precursor polymer PP11, through the post functional strategy, with the aim to realize their applications as chemosensors and biosensors.66–72 Among them, 6-benzylaminopurine-functionalized disubstituted PA (P11a) could detect trace Cu2+ and Co2+ ions with the limits as low as 1.0 × 10−8 and 3.3 × 10−8 mol L−1.69 Moreover, it could also be fabricated into test strips, making it a good candidate for potential applications to safeguard humans. With the usage of imidazole to replace 6-benzylaminopurine, P11b demonstrated a similar sensing behavior towards metal ions, and its strong green fluorescence could be quenched completely by trace Cu2+ and Co2+ ions, at the concentrations as low as 1.33 and 1.67 × 10−5 mol L−1 (0.85 and 0.92 ppm), respectively.70 Interestingly, through an indirect displacement strategy, which was based on the high stability of the complex formed by cyanide and Cu2+ ions, P11b acted as a selective and sensitive chemosensor for cyanide anions, since its quenched green fluorescence by Cu2+ ions could be recovered upon the addition of trace cyanide (as low as 2.70 × 10−5 mol L−1, 0.70 ppm). Similarly, by utilizing the coordinating properties of α-amino acids towards the Cu2+ ions, the quenched fluorescence of P11b could be recovered upon the addition of α-amino acids, making P11b also a good chemosensor for α-amino acids with the detection limit of ∼2 ppm (∼1.3 × 10−5 mol L−1).71
 Fig. 3  The introduction of some ligands into the polymers as the side chains by post-synthetic modification. 
Inspired by the displacement strategy, subsequently, Li et al. have designed a new sulfide chemosensor (P11c) with di(2-picolyl)amine moieties as the receptor, by utilizing the post functional strategy.72 Because of the much high stability constant of the complex of S2− and Cu2+, the quenched fluorescence of P11c by Cu2+ ions could be recovered upon the addition of trace S2− anions, with the detection limit of 5.0 × 10−7 mol L−1. Just changing the main chain of polyacetylene to polyfluorene, a famous kind of light emitting polymer with high quantum yield, P12, containing imidazole as the binding site, could probe α-amino acids more sensitively and selectively, with the detection limit of 0.2 ppm.73 Also, it was a sensitive and selective cyanide probe with the detection limit down to 0.31 ppm.74 On combining the usage of gold nanoparticles, the lowest concentration for quantification of cyanide ions decreased to 3.0 × 10−7 M.75 However, interestingly, when di(2-picolyl)amine was linked to the polyfluorenes through the post functional strategy, the resultant polymer of P13 demonstrated a sensitive and selective response towards cyanide according to the displacement method, much different from that of P11c, possibly caused by the influence of different main chains of various conjugated systems.76
Not just limited to the disubstituted PAs, the post functional strategy could also be applied to the convenient preparation of P14 and P15, by using the protection reaction of aldehyde units in the precursor polymers of PP14 and PP15 with mercaptan.77,78 Since the protected aldehyde group could be converted back to the previous aldehyde group only in the presence of Hg2+, P14 and P15 can act as efficient colorimetric and fluorescent probes for Hg2+ ions. As for P15, in the presence of as low as 10 nm Hg2+, it displayed an apparent change in the fluorescence intensity, with a good selectivity over Mg2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Co2+, Al3+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Cr3+, Fe2+, Li+, Na+, and K+, except a slight influence from Fe3+. Also, the acetylene (RH) was introduced to the polymers by post synthetic modification of the precursor polymer using a protection–deprotection two-step protocol, which acted as the side chain to probe some metals, such as Ag+, Hg2+ and Cu+.79–81 Some modified N-heterocycles and hydrophilic moieties can act as the receptors and exhibit unique properties, such as aggregation induced emission (AIE), water solubility, and so on.20,82,83
2.3 Linear polymers bearing D–π-A moieties in the side chains
Due to their synthetic simplicity and good processability, many functional moieties, in addition to the above mentioned receptors and hydrophilic ions, have been incorporated into the linear polymers to realize the corresponding opto-electrical properties. Among them, functional π molecules with the pull–push structures of donor–π-acceptor (D–π-A), have attracted more and more attention, since they could harvest the sunlight and realize the nonlinear optical (NLO) effect.4,84
In the second order NLO polymers, the D–π-A unit, named chromophore, was the key component, which was noncentrosymmetrically aligned through the poling procedure under an electrical field, to give the macroscopic NLO effect. Thus, the introduction of chromophore moieties into the side chains should be a good approach to obtain high NLO efficiency, since the chromophore moieties in this case could relatively rotate freely to achieve the noncentrosymmetric alignment upon poling. However, the strong intermolecular dipole–dipole interactions among the D–π-A units as well as the restriction of polymer chain entanglement on its reorientation along the direction of the electric field typically make the poling-induced noncentrosymmetric alignment of the chromophore moieties a daunting task, which has become the major problem in this NLO research. Fortunately, the interactions could be minimized, and the poling efficiency could be enhanced dramatically, by controlling the shape of the chromophore moieties, according to the site isolation principle.84 Thus, various chromophores with different isolation groups were linked to the polymers as side chains. Since most of the NLO chromophores could not survive the polymerization conditions, the post functional strategy became indispensable, through which, many NLO polymers have been obtained successfully. Mainly, the post functional approaches could be classified into three types (A, B and C) (Fig. 4) for the preparation of NLO polymers.
 Fig. 4  Three strategies to synthesize NLO polymers by post-synthetic modification. 
The most common type (A) is that the D–π-A units bearing different isolation groups are linked to the polymer chain through different chemical reactions. In these polymers, as the main chains were the same, it was beneficial for the comparison of the influence of different D–π-A units on the NLO performance. If the D–π-A unit was fixed, alternatively, various isolation groups could be incorporated conveniently to the chromophore moieties in the precursor polymer through the synthetic approach of Type B. However, in some special cases, both approaches A and B did not work well, yielding insoluble polymers. Thus, the synthetic approach of Type C could be a good choice, in which the D–π-A units and isolation groups were bonded to the polymer chain by three steps, avoiding the formation of some uncontrolled structures derived from the possible competition reactions with poor selectivity. Although there were three synthetic steps, the purification of polymers was still very convenient and simple, just by several precipitations from their THF solutions into methanol, without the need for column chromatography.
With respect to the synthetic approach of Type A, various chemical reactions with mild conditions could be utilized to introduce chromophore moieties with the undestroyed D–π-A structure into polymers as side chains. Jen's group has successfully obtained a series of polymers, P16a–d, bearing FTC or CLD type chromophore moieties in the side chains, from the same precursor polymer PP16 (Fig. 5), through the esterification reaction. Thanks to the mild condition of the esterification reaction with good controllability, the loading density of the chromophore moieties in P16a–d could be easily adjusted according to the design idea, by changing the ratio of the chromophores and PP16 in the post functional reactions.85 Simultaneously, other required groups could be bonded to the remaining unreacted hydroxyl groups in PP16, to assist the noncentrosymmetric alignment of chromophore moieties or strengthen the stability of the NLO performance. If needed, three or more different moieties could be incorporated into the polymers through this approach, to modify the comprehensive properties of the corresponding polymers in addition to their NLO effects. All the synthetic steps could be carried out in one pot, and the formed byproducts, such as N-acylurea and anhydric intermediates, could be easily removed by repetitive precipitations. Actually, in P16a and P16b, the loading densities of the chromophore moieties were maintained at about 20 wt%, and in each chromophore, there was a small dendronized moiety as an isolation group linked to its electron acceptor group, to decrease the strong dipole–dipole interactions of the D–π-A fragments for the realization of high NLO performance, according to the site isolation principle. As a result, P16a and P16b exhibited a large NLO coefficient (r33 = 81 pm V−1), about 2.5 times higher than that of the pristine side-chain NLO polymers (r33 = 33 pm V−1) without an isolation group under the same test conditions, indicating the important role of the isolation group. When this molecular engineering concept was applied to another more efficient NLO chromophore (a CLD-type chromophore), a much larger NLO coefficient could be achieved by polymer P16c (r33 = 97 pm V−1). Also, the site-isolation effect afforded high thermal stability: more than 90% of the NLO coefficient could be maintained at 85 °C for longer than 600 h. More interestingly, with the self-assembly and/or steric congestion of densely loaded flat-tapered dendritic moieties along a linear polymer backbone, P16d possessed a pseudo-cylindrical polymer conformation, which could suppress the chain entanglement encountered in common linear polymers and make the chromophore moieties spatially isolate well in the channels of cylindrical structures, resulting in the excellent NLO coefficient (111 pm V−1) and high thermal stability, even better than that of P16c.
 Fig. 5  The introduction of chromophores into NLO polymers as the side chains through esterification. 
Not only the esterification reaction, but many others have been employed in the post functional strategy for the preparation of NLO polymers. As shown in Fig. 6, through the Kneovenagel condensation reaction, and the reaction between the hydroxyl group and isocyanic acid, different chromophore moieties could be bonded to the polymer backbone of PP17–PP18, to yield P17–P18.86–89 Similar to P16a–d, there was an isolation group linked to the chromophore moieties in each polymer, with the aim to increase their macroscopic NLO performance by decreasing the strong electronic interactions among the highly polar chromophore moieties. However, in comparison with the case of P16a–d, there was a big difference existing between P17 and P18, in which the size of the isolation group was different, changing from very small (the hydrogen atom in P17a) to larger one (the carbazolyl group in P17d). This design idea was according to the concept of “suitable isolation group”, proposed by us in 2006.90 As pointed out by the concept of “suitable isolation group” (for a given chromophore moiety and a given linkage position, there should be a suitable isolation group present to boost its microscopic β value to a possible higher macroscopic NLO property efficiently), there were “suitable isolation groups” present in the three series of P17a–c, P18a–d, and P18e–h, to achieve the relatively higher macroscopic NLO effect, for P17b (r33 = 150 pm V−1), P18c (d33 = 28.6 pm V−1), and P18g (d33 = 39.5 pm V−1), respectively.
 Fig. 6  The introduction of chromophores into NLO polymers as the side chains through different chemical reactions. 
However, regardless of their advantages, there were still some drawbacks needed to be overcome for the Kneovenagel condensation and esterification reactions utilized in the post functional strategy, such as the byproducts or trace amounts of residual ionic impurities generated in the process of chemical reactions, which would significantly attenuate the effective poling electrical field and also cause the dc bias drift during device operation. In search of possible solutions, the “click chemistry” pioneered by Sharpless et al. seems to fit most of the selection criteria for ideal post synthetic modifications,91–93 which include (a) quantitative yields, (b) a high tolerance of functional groups, (c) an insensitivity of the reaction to solvents, irrespective of their protic/aprotic or polar/non-polar character, and (d) reactions at various types of interfaces, such as solid/liquid, liquid/liquid, or even solid/solid interfaces.
The “click”-type reactions, mainly exemplified by Huisgen 1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne or Diels–Alder cycloadditions, have led to reliable and self-directed modular organic reactions, resulting in molecular connections with absolute fidelity. They have also inspired a multitude of applications in biology, chemistry, and materials science.94–96 As a powerful enabling tool, they possess great potential for meeting the aforementioned stringent criteria for the post functional strategy.
The Diels–Alder (D–A) reaction involves a ring-forming coupling between a dienophile and a conjugated diene, which can be described by a symmetry allowed concerted mechanism without forming biradical or zwitterionic intermediates. Through the bulky anthrylmaleimido D–A addition, the FTC-type chromophore has been attached to the poly(methyl methacrylate-co-anthrylmethyl methacrylate) (PMMA-AMA) backbone via its donor side, and a fluorinated dendron was also incorporated into its bridge center to yield P19. Thanks to the mild conditions of the D–A reaction with quantitative conversion and the dendritic moiety bonded on the center site of the chromophore, P19 exhibited high dielectric strength, excellent optical quality, good processability, and reliable poling behavior, and the macroscopic NLO effect was as high as 57 pm V−1.97
Another “click”-type reaction, 1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne reaction, has also received much attention as a highly efficient and stereoselective reaction coupled with excellent functional group compatibility, which has been successfully applied to the macromolecular chemistry, affording polymeric materials varying from block copolymers, dendrimers, to complex macromolecular structures.91
Of course, this reaction has also been successfully utilized in the post functional strategy for the preparation of NLO polymers, especially for some special polymers. As mentioned in section 2.2, it is still a big challenge for many disubstituted acetylene monomers with active protons or polar moieties to be polymerized to their corresponding polyacetylenes (PAs). Thus, the NLO chromophores with high polarity, could only be introduced to PAs as the side chains by the post functional strategy. The first example of NLO active disubstituted polyacetylene was obtained in 2006 through the post functionalization of the nucleophilic substitution reaction, which demonstrated the beneficial effect of the rigid conjugated PA backbone as NLO materials.98 Thus, combined with the advantage of 1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne, various highly polar azo moieties with different isolation groups were attached to PAs through different linkage modes (Fig. 7), to systematically investigate the influence of the bonded position of the isolation group on the chromophore moieties, the linkage mode between the PA backbone and the chromophore moieties, and the size of the isolation groups, on the macroscopic NLO performance of the corresponding PAs.99 The experimental results, on the one hand, confirmed the concept of “suitable isolation group”, and on the other hand, indicated that other parameters could also affect the final NLO properties, providing some useful information for the further development of new NLO polymers with better performance. This powerful 1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne “click” reaction, has also been successfully applied to the syntheses of polyfluorenes containing azo chromophores with changeable isolation groups in the side chains (Fig. 8, P21a–f). Similarly, these polymers demonstrated the enhanced NLO properties, good processability, thermal stability, and improved optical transparency.100
 Fig. 7  The introduction of chromophores into polyacetylene (PA) as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction. 
 Fig. 8  The introduction of chromophores into conjugated polymers as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction. 
Besides the simple chromophore, the bulk dendrons containing many chromophore moieties with a large size could also be introduced into the conjugated polymers as the side chains through the post functional strategy. The designed dendronized polymers with different architecture from normal linear polymers, possess some similar advantages to dendrimers, as reported in the literature.101–103 Generally, the strategies for the preparation of dendronized polymers could be summarized into three categories: the graft-to, the graft-from, and the macromonomer approach;104,105 while the major challenges for these approaches are the difficulty in achieving complete dendron coverage of the backbone in the graft-to and graft-from strategies and sometimes low polymerization degree in the macromonomer strategy. Thus, for the post functional strategy, the chemical reaction with high yield and efficiency was very important to overcome this problem. Thanks to the advantage of the 1,3-dipolar azide–alkyne “Click chemistry” reaction, in our case, when different generations of NLO dendrons were introduced into the conjugated polymers, with the growth of the generation number and the bulk of dendrons, the conversion efficiency still remained about 100% (Fig. 9).106 Interestingly, the increase of the loading density of chromophore moieties, derived from the growth of chromophore dendrons, was beneficial to the enhancement of NLO performance, indicating that the frequently observed asymptotic dependence of electro-optic activity on the chromophore number density may be overcome through rational design of chromophore dendrons.
 Fig. 9  The introduction of chromophore dendrons into the conjugated polymer as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction. 
To further compare the subtle influence of different isolation groups on the same molecular level, the synthetic approach of type B (Fig. 4) has been applied to modify the precursor polymers, PP23 and PP24, with different isolation groups in different sizes.107 As shown in Fig. 10, different isolation groups were conveniently attached to the D–π-A unit, to yield two series of NLO polyurethanes through the click chemistry reaction. The obtained results demonstrated that the suitable isolation group was naphthalene for the fixed D–π-A unit, in the case of PP23 (Fig. 11). However, when the D–π-A unit was changed in precursor polymer PP24, the suitable one varied with the benzyl moiety accordingly. This was reasonable. For different D–π-A units with different pull–push properties and dipole moments, different isolation groups were needed to balance the related multiple effects to optimize their NLO performance. Thus, it was really important to investigate the effects of different isolation groups on the fixed D–π-A unit, for the realization of the NLO activation of the D–π-A unit to the maximum. In this case, the advantage of strategy B was obvious.
 Fig. 10  The post synthetic modification of NLO polymers with an attached isolation group. 
 Fig. 11  The analysis of the obtained NLO data of polymers (a) P23a–d and (b) P24a–d by using PP23 for P23a–d, and PP24 for P24a–d as reference. (A) Comparison of the d33 values of the polymers; (B) comparison of the calculated d33 values, which were obtained by using the tested d33 values dividing the concentration of the active chromophore moieties of the polymers; (C) comparison of the calculated d33(∞) values according to the approximate two-level model. 
In spite of the convenient synthesis using strategies A and B, they were not so suitable for the preparation of some special functional polymers containing chromophore moieties as side chains. For example, polyphosphazene, an important class of inorganic polymers, offers many advantages like NLO polymeric materials, such as high thermo-oxidative and photochemical stability, and good transparency of the backbone in the range from 200 nm to near-IR.108,109 Additionally, the two reactive sites on each repeat unit enable good synthetic flexibility. However, when the NLO chromophores were introduced into polyphosphazenes directly as side chains with a high loading density, nearly no soluble functional polyphosphazenes could be obtained, possibly due to their highly polar structure. Alternatively, through the multiple post functional reactions (including post azo coupling and esterization reactions), the resultant polyphosphazenes, bearing the D–π-A unit with the introduced isolation group in the side chains, were well soluble in common solvents with good comprehensive properties.110 And the loading density of chromophore moieties could be improved to a large extent. The whole synthetic route was very simple, with easy purification. This strategy was also suitable for the synthesis of NLO polyurethanes.111,112 As shown in Fig. 12, six polyurethanes containing a sulfonyl-based or nitro-based D–π-A unit with isolation groups, which were unobtainable from the direct synthetic polymerization approach, were prepared through a two-step polymer reaction conveniently in high yields, confirming the synthetic flexibility of the post functional strategy again. It should be pointed out that the successful syntheses also demonstrated the power of the cooperating usage of different kinds of reactions (including post azo coupling and esterization reactions) in the post functional strategy.
 Fig. 12  The multiple post synthetic modifications of linear polymers through strategy C. 
After the optimization of NLO polymers according to the concept of “suitable isolation group”, the enhancement of NLO performance could be achieved with the utilization of the sulfonyl or nitro-based chromophores. However, limited by the relatively too low β values of these azo chromophores, the above NLO polymers were still not good enough to realize their application in the market due to their relatively low NLO performance. Thus, better pull–push systems with the D–π-A structure were needed to further increase the NLO performance instead of the azo ones. Actually, a large number of D–π-A units with strong dipole moments have been exploited, which possessed much large hyperpolarizabilities (β). However, if these D–π-A units were linked to the polymer backbone from the synthetic route of Type A or directly from the polymerization of the corresponding monomers, the strong electron acceptors of chromophore moieties usually decomposed or escaped, making the structure very complicated without reproducibility. Thus, it was necessary to further modify the synthetic approach. As shown in Fig. 13, the precursor polymer, PP28, bearing a reactive aldehyde group, could be successfully obtained from the Suzuki polymerization reaction, thanks to the relatively mild reaction conditions and the stability of the aldehyde group during the polymerization process. Then, through the post Knoevenagel condensation reactions, different acceptors could be introduced to the polymer backbone, forming the new push–pull structures to conveniently yield highly efficient NLO polymers of P28a, P28b and P28c with 3-phenyl-5-isoxazolone, 1,3-diethylthiobarbituric acid and tricyanovinyldihydrofuran (TCF) as the electron acceptor, respectively.113 The yields were satisfactory: 93% for isoxazolone, 80% for barbituric acid, and 100% for TCF, respectively. This post functional synthetic route widely broadened the selective scope of NLO chromophores from the limited azo moieties to many better ones with excellent much larger β values. Through a similar route, another precursor polymer containing aldehyde groups, PP29, was prepared, in which pyrrole was introduced as the π bridge instead of the frequently used benzene and thiophene rings. In comparison with the most used thiophene ring, pyrrole possessed higher electron density, directly leading to more effective charge transfers as a linker between the donors and the acceptors, to possibly tune the strength of the pull–push conjugated system. Thus, this successful example once again confirms the synthetic flexibility of the post functional strategy, providing a reliable approach for the preparation of functional polymers with some synthetic difficulties.
 Fig. 13  The synthesis of the conjugated polymers with a strong pull–push system through the post Knoevenagel condensation reaction. 
This type of polymer, with the conjugated backbone and the D–π-A type chromophore moieties in the side chains, could not only be utilized as NLO materials, but also applied to solar cells, including the present popular bulk-heterojunction polymer solar cells (BHJ-PSCs) and dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs).4 In BHJ-PSCs, the key component was the conjugated polymer, which, normally, should possess low band gaps and catch more sunlight in the range of the whole solar spectrum, to optimize the opto-electric performance of PSCs. Compared to the traditional linear push–pull conjugated co-polymers with D–A structures, the two-dimensional conjugated polymers with D–π-A units in the side chains can maintain the broad absorption spectra, and also improve their isotropic charge transports, benefiting the performance of the corresponding PSCs. As shown in Fig. 10, this kind of polymer, P30a and P30b, could also be prepared by the post functional strategy (through the post Knoevenagel condensation reactions), as reported by Jen et al. in 2007.114P30a and P30b were prepared from the same mother polymer (PP30), assuring their similar polymerization degrees and molecular weight distributions, to provide an ideal prototype for the investigation of the structure–property relationship. More importantly, this synthetic route offered a useful way to develop fully visible light harvesting polymers by just simply attaching different kinds of acceptors onto the same polymer main chain. With the increase of the electron-withdrawing strength of the pendant acceptor groups from malononitrile to diethylthiobarbituric acid, the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) absorption bands of the corresponding polymers were significantly red-shifted, and the Eg effectively decreased from 1.87 eV (P30a) to 1.76 eV (P30b), while the HOMO levels were maintained at a deep position of approximately −5.30 eV. The solar cells using the two polymers as donors and PC71BM as the acceptor exhibited power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 4.74 and 4.37%, respectively, which were very high efficiencies at that time. Inspired by the exciting results, other conjugated polymers of this type, were developed, with various co-monomers and electron acceptors utilized to tune their photovoltaic properties. For example, in P31a and P31b, the introduction of carbazole moieties could increase the charge-transporting abilities. Also, the increased density of D–π-A units could tune the opto-electronic properties. By blending these polymers as light-harvesting electron donors with PC71BM electron acceptors in bulk heterojunction solar cells, a high PCE of 4.47% was achieved.115 Similarly, the co-monomer could be changed to silafluorene in P32a and P32b, and their PCEs were measured to be 2.50% and 3.15%, respectively.116
With respect to the dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs), the sensitizers played an important role of capturing solar energy and generating electric charges, as a key component.117,118 Among different kinds of sensitizers, the conjugated polymers have attracted much attention, due to their sufficiently large absorption coefficient, tunable energy levels and easy deposition on various surfaces. In 2009, Liu and co-workers reported, for the first time, a conjugated polymer sensitizer (P33) containing an electron donating backbone (triphenylamine) and an electron accepting side chain (cyanoacetic acid) with conjugated thiophene units as the linkers, in which the cyanoacetic acid was introduced into the polymers by the post functional strategy. Since the molecules bearing carboxylic acid moieties were generally very hard to be purified, this post synthetic modification can enable the purification of sensitizers easily. The DSSC based on P33 exhibited an energy conversion efficiency of 3.39%.119 Also, some π-conjugated chromophores and Ru-complexes were attached to the polymers as side chains to realize the light-harvesting and charge separation.120,121
2.4 Polymers containing other functional groups in the side chains
The family of carbon, consisting of graphite, diamond, fullerene, carbon nanotube and graphene, always attracted the attention from the whole world, and demonstrated many unique properties, including special opto-electronic properties.122–125 However, their poor solubility, limited their wide applications severely. As an effective method, the introduction of these conjugated systems into the polymer system could offer them good solubility.
As shown in Fig. 14, C60 could be bonded to the backbone of P34 and P35 by using the post click and esterification reactions, respectively, with the aim to resolve the problem of the phase separation encountered in the physical blends of conjugated polymers and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM, the electron acceptor) in PSCs, since the phase separation dramatically reduced the interfacial area and thus decreased the charge dissociation efficiency, directly lowering the device performance.126,127 Compared to other types of reactions for the attachment of C60 covalently to functional polymers based on the reaction of double bonds, including atom transfer radical addition (ATRA),128 [3 + 2]-cycloaddition with azides,129 Friedel–Crafts reaction,130 tosylhydrazone addition,131 lithiation,132 Bingel reaction,133 and azide–alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition,134 these two kinds of reactions could avoid the possible multiple additions, polymer cross-linking, and diminished solubility of the resultant polymers. When P34 was used as an additive to the blends of P3HT and PCBM, the improved thermal stability in the corresponding PSCs was achieved even upon extended thermal annealing, suggesting that P34 was an effective compatibilizer for P3HT/PCBM physical blends. Moreover, the well-soluble fullerene-grafted polymers also exhibited excellent mobility. By tuning the monomer ratio in the precursor polymer PP35, various PCBM contents in P35 were obtained. And the electron transport characteristics of P35 showed a maximum electron mobility (μe) of 1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 for 37 wt% of the incorporated PCBM.
 Fig. 14  The introduction of some big conjugated systems to the polymers as the side chains through the post-synthetic modification. 
Similar to C60, the solubility and processability of carbon nanotubes and graphene could also be largely improved by linking them to polymers. As reported in the literature,135 carbon nanotubes could be easily functionalized via the amidation and esterification of the nanotube-bound carboxylic acids. So far, ample experimental evidence has confirmed that the nanotube-bound carboxylic acids were the sites to link with a variety of functional groups for the solubilization of both shortened and full-length carbon nanotubes. For example, the dispersion of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)-carbon nanotubes (P36) is as homogeneous as that in solution, and the composite films were of high optical quality, without any observable phase separation. These carbon nanotubes with good solubility offered excellent opportunities not only in the characterization and understanding of carbon nanotubes but also in the utilization of carbon nanotubes for various nanomaterials.136 Other polymers containing carbon nanotubes also exhibited some attractive properties.137,138
Recently, the novel and outstanding electronic properties of graphene, including the ballistic transport at room temperature and high mobility, have attracted increasing attention from different scientific research fields, and offered huge potential applications in many technological areas, such as solar cells, field effect transistors, transparent conductive films, ultrasensitive sensors and so on.139–141 To address its poor solubility, the functionalization and dispersion of graphene sheets were of crucial importance for their applications, in which covalent functionalization was an efficient way. According to the reactions between polymers with functional moieties and C60/carbon nanotubes, P37 and P38 were obtained through the post functional reactions (the click chemistry and nitrogen-centered anion based nucleophilic reaction) of the corresponding conjugated polymers (polyacetylene and poly(9,9′-diheylfluorenecarbazole)), respectively.142,143 The resultant polymer–graphene composites became soluble in different organic solvents. And P38 exhibited excellent optical-limiting behavior, for which both nonlinear absorption and nonlinear scattering contributed.
Similar to the above carbon-based big π system, phthalocyanines (Pcs) and metallophthalocyanines (MtPcs) also possessed some unique properties, such as high thermal and chemical stability, excellent photoconductivity, intense optical absorptions in the visible-near infrared optical region, and well-defined coupling of the electronic π-systems.144,145 However, their wide applications were usually limited by the poor solubility and slippery π–π stacks. Thus, polymeric Pcs/MtPcs have been given much attention recently, which offers a unique combination of good properties of polymers and Pcs/MtPcs, meanwhile, the solubility and aggregation were improved to a large extent. As the synthesis of Pc/MtPc-containing monomers was very difficult with relatively low yields, the polymeric Pcs/MtPcs were almost obtained through the post functional strategy.146,147 As shown in Fig. 14, the dinitrile groups in the main chain reacted with 4-(octyloxy) phthalonitrile in the presence of zinc acetate dihydrate to produce the Zn(II) phthalocyanine-functionalized polymer P39, which had good solubility in THF or chlorobenzene and demonstrated good thermal stability. When acting as the electron donor material in BHJ-PSCs, a power conversion efficiency of 0.014% was obtained.148
2.5 The main chain polymer and hyperbranched polymers
As discussed above, the post functional strategy has been successfully utilized in the synthesis of various opto-electric linear polymers bearing functional groups in the side chains, through convenient and multiple chemical reactions. In contrast, only a few examples have been reported for the polymers with the introduced functional groups in the main chains, possibly due to the limitation of suitable chemical reactions. As shown in Fig. 15, through a high-yield addition reaction between electron-rich alkynes and strong acceptor molecules, such as 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ), polymer P40 could be obtained from the precursor polymer PP40, which demonstrated the narrower band gaps with the elevated HOMO and lower LUMO levels compared to the precursor polymer. Also, the room temperature conductivity of P40 reached 4.5 × 10−5 S cm−1, about 10 times higher than that of PP40.149 Besides the cyano group as the withdrawing moiety, some other groups could also be bonded to the main chains through the post cyclization reaction in the cases of P41a–d, to avoid the decomposition of the strong acceptor groups of benzothiadiazole, benzoselenadiazole, phenazine and quinoxaline, encountered in the direct polymerization process of the corresponding monomers containing these acceptors. The target polymers of P41a–d possessed low band gaps of 1.71–1.29 eV, and demonstrated the absorption and emission in the near infrared (NIR) spectral region, making them potentially useful for electrically switchable day-to-night camouflage applications.150
 Fig. 15  The post-synthetic modification of linear opto-electric polymers in the main chain. 
Meanwhile, the post functionalization of linear polymers at the end of the main chain could also produce some special opto-electric polymers.151,152 For example, as shown in Fig. 16, by the microwave-assisted copper(I)-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction, hydrophobic polymers, P42a and P42b, could be obtained from the same precursor polymer PP42 (the arm-first strategy). Interestingly, P42b could form fluorescent bowl-shaped nanoparticles, which could act as a colorimetric pH sensor.153
 Fig. 16  The post-synthetic modification of linear opto-electric polymers at the end of main chains. 
Hyperbranched polymer (HBP) is a new kind of alternative polymer to dendrimers with a spherical shape and similar properties, which could be prepared by one pot synthesis.6 Compared to linear polymers, HBPs have more abundant end groups for the possible reaction with various functional moieties. Through the post esterification reaction, various D–π-A units bearing hydroxyl moieties could be linked to the polyimide-based HBP with the carboxylic acid terminal groups (PP43) to yield the target polymer P43a–c.154,155 With Disperse Red-1 (DR-1) as the D–π-A unit, P43a and P43b exhibited relatively higher NLO coefficients (d33) of 65 and 42 pm V−1, respectively, as well as good stability (the NLO coefficients remaining stable up to 130 °C). When a strong pull–push system, which consisted of an indoline donor group coupled to a tricyanofuran through a ring-locking polyene, was used instead of DR-1, the NLO coefficient (r33) of P43c was further enhanced to 38.4 pm V−1, more than 5 times that of P43a (6.1 pm V−1) under similar conditions (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  The post-synthetic modification of hyperbranched opto-electric polymers. 
Similarly, the linear PEG arms have also been grafted onto the dendritic core of HBP PP44, to yield a new series of HBPs via the acylhydrazone connection by Zhu and co-workers (Fig. 18),156 which could form unimolecular micelles easily. Interestingly, with different arms of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) segments (Mn = 1000 and 2000), P44a and P44b exhibited different self-assembly behavior and optical performance in cell imaging.
 Fig. 18  The post-synthetic modification of hyperbranched opto-electric polymers. 
3. Concluding remarks
In this paper, recent progress in opto-electronic polymers, yielded through the post functional strategy, has been reviewed. Undoubtedly, as demonstrated by the selected examples in this review, the post-synthetic modification approach is an important alternative method to the traditional direct polymerization route from the corresponding monomer, successfully yielding the opto-electronic polymers unobtainable from their monomers. We classified the selected examples by introducing different functional moieties through the post-modification routes, such as hydrophilic ions, receptor groups, D–π-A moieties, however, due to the length limitation, we could not summarize all the related beautiful work in this review. Alternatively, we elaborately selected those typical ones mainly reported in the past ten years, and focused on the design of opto-electronic polymers at the molecular level, tried to explain the reason for the utilization of the post-synthetic modification route, and attempted to construct a bridge between the synthesis and the required functionality. Actually, for all functional polymers, the post functional strategy is very important, although not everyone is aware of this point deeply. As confirmed by many increasing examples for the successful usage of this strategy, increasing attention should be paid. And for the further development of the post-synthetic modification routes, perhaps, some issues should be addressed, or emphasized especially: the complete group conversion, the purification by removing the possible catalyst and small by-products, the possible degradation of the polymer precursors in the polymer reaction, the repeatable defined structure, and the detailed structure–property relationship.
Essentially, post-synthetic modification is the reaction between a reactive polymeric intermediate and another functional moiety. Although, in principle, the extent of reaction heavily depends on the reactivity of the two reactive groups in the polymeric intermediate and the selected functional moiety, the actual reaction is badly affected by the polymer conformation, making this kind of reaction much different from those among small molecules. In general, the polymer chain is suitable for intertangling, and frequently shields the reactive groups bonded on the polymer from the outside solvents and molecules, directly leading to the decreased collision probability of the reactive groups of the polymer with other small molecules. This caused the incomplete functionalization of the polymeric intermediates. As mentioned above in the case of P3a, from the spectroscopic data, the post quaternization reaction of PP3 with trimethylamine almost completely converted it to P3a in good yield, however, actually, the 100% conversion could hardly be achieved and perhaps impossible, and the current spectroscopic approaches could not differentiate the accurate conversion efficiency, thus, in some sense, the structure of the yielded polymers can not be defined exactly. How to assure 100% conversion and really achieve the designed structure, is one of the most important issues for the rapid development of the post-functionalization strategy in the research field of synthetic polymers. From this point, not only the reactions with high reactivity and efficiency should be utilized, but also the information on the conformation of polymers in different solvents is required to be investigated. Thus, polymer physicists should be involved. Actually, polymer physicists might pay more attention to the physical properties of polymers in dynamic polymer reactions. It would be ideal if some rules could be proposed to control the conformation of the target polymers by modifying the reaction conditions either in the post-synthetic modification or direct polymerization process, with the aim to partially adjust the functionalities of the yielded polymers.
In principle, all the polymers, except dendrimers, are mixtures, consisting of a series of macromolecules with similar molecular weights as characterized by polydispersity. However, the presence of small molecules and oligomers should be avoided. Thus, the purification of polymers is essential for the preparation of synthetic polymers. Unlike the direct polymerization process, in which the monomers are liable to be polymerized and the impurities are mostly the oligomers with low molecular weights, the polymers obtained through the post-synthetic modification might contain many more unreacted small functional molecules. To ensure that the conversion of the reactive polymeric intermediate to the target polymer is as complete as possible, generally, the functional small molecules fed in the reaction are excessive, making the purification procedure difficult. The reactive group in the functional small molecules remained highly reactive, which might cause unpredictable influence on the polymers during storage and in usage, and even possibly in purification. Also, some by-products, produced in the post-synthetic modification should be removed from the polymers. Thus, the purification of the polymers obtained from the post functional strategy might be much more difficult than that for the direct polymerization process, due to the relatively complicated components of the small molecules and the required inert conditions towards the reactive group in the functional small molecule.
As presented in the above selected examples, highly efficient reactions were utilized in the post-synthetic modifications of the polymer intermediates, in which the reaction conditions were relatively mild. However, some degradation still exists in the post functional process, which increases the polydispersity. Meanwhile, the structure of the yielded polymer chains might be changed in some degree. Also, since the extent of reaction can not be controlled exactly, the polymer structure may be a little different in different reaction batches. Furthermore, the conformation of the target polymers might be affected by the above points, as a result, the polymer structure could not be easily defined, and the repeatable preparation of the target polymers could hardly be achieved exactly. Thus, exploring milder reaction conditions and optimizing the repeatable preparation procedure is badly needed, which might be the distinct objective in the next research.
Undoubtedly, the structure–property relationship is an essential topic, which deeply and clearly annotates the observed exciting properties on the molecular level, more importantly, might sagaciously and predictively guide the design of functional materials with the expected properties. However, due to the above discussed existing problems, the relationship between the structure and property of the polymers yielded from the post functional strategy could not be so easily summarized, mainly due to the undefined accurate structure. Thus, to obtain relatively clear rules of the structure–property relationship, the defined structure should be determined. However, since in the design of functional polymers, the primary consideration is to introduce the required functional groups to the polymer system, nearly regardless of the possible influence of the resultant accurate structure, actually, these two parameters should promote each other, and not just considering this problem from the structure to the property.
Excitedly, accompanying the increased successful cases reported recently with the utilization of post-synthetic modification routes, which are not only limited to the polymers but also many kinds of materials, unobtainable from the direct strategy, with different functions, such as the labeling biomolecules (DNA, protein and nucleic acid) for biological study, the modified porous materials (metal organic frameworks (MOFs), porous polymer networks (PPNs)) for gas storage, more interests have been attracted in the research field of the post functional strategy, largely accumulating its development. And by applying the idea of the post-synthetic modification, not limited to the reactive groups with small sizes, some large groups can also be introduced into the linear polymers or HBPs, such as the dendrons, graphene, C60 and so on, to form the target materials. As a typical example, the recently proposed new type of polymers, named “dendronized hyperbranched polymers” by us,6,157–159 could be considered as the application of the post functional strategy in the preparation of hyperbranched polymers. With intense research and the great efforts of scientists from different fields, the post functional strategy would be applied to much more wide areas. And as self-evidence by all the examples illustrated in this review paper, the post-synthetic modification performs the role of an effective complementary approach but not competitive one to the traditional direct polymerization process. Thus, with the tool of direct polymerization on one hand and post-synthetic modification on the other, the synthetic flexibility of functional polymers, including the focused opto-electronic one in this paper, should be dramatically enhanced. Furthermore, as partially demonstrated, the post-synthetic modification could be applied to other materials science, i.e., the hybrid materials.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation of China (no. 21372003 and 21325416), and the National Fundamental Key Research Program (no. 2011CB932702) for financial support.
Notes and references
R. Hu, N. L. C. Leung and B. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4494 RSC .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071 RSC .
K. Li and B. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6570 RSC .
C. Duan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10416 RSC .
L. Feng, C. Zhu, H. Yuan, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6620 RSC .
W. Wu, R. Tang, Q. Li and Z. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3997 RSC .
J. Wu, S. Cheng, Y. Cheng and C. Hsu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1113 RSC .
M. Ullah, A. Armin, K. Tandy, S. D. Yambem, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith and E. B. Namdas, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. C. Veinot and T. J. Marks, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Neindre and R. Nicolaÿ, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4601 RSC .
M. A. Gauthier, M. I. Gibson and H. Klok, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Michinobu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2306 RSC .
Y. Gao, X. Wang, L. Tong, A. Qin, J. Sun and B. Tang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2309 RSC .
A. Brändle and A. Khan, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 3224 RSC .
V. Ladmiral, G. Mantovani, G. J. Clarkson, S. Cauet, J. L. Irwin and D. M. Haddleton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4823 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fukumaru, Y. Saegusa, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2088 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nuhn, M. Barz and R. Zentel, Macromol. Biosci., 2014, 14, 607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Chen, J. W. Y. Lam, W. Qin, R. T. K. Kwok, N. Xie, Q. Hu and B. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schoch, M. Wiessler and A. Jäschke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Lai and J. L. Hong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9546 RSC .
Z. Li, L. Wang, B. Xiong, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Dyes Pigm., 2010, 84, 134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Kulkarni, C. J. Tonzola, A. Babel and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4556 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, J. O'Brien and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1737 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4467 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, P. Aubert, B. C. Thompson, I. Schwendeman, C. L. Gaupp, J. Hwang, N. J. Pinto, D. B. Tanner, A. G. MacDiarmid and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2500 RSC .
H. Yipa and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994 Search PubMed .
S. W. Thomas III, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li and B. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 252 RSC .
X. Feng, L. Liu, S. Wang and D. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2411 RSC .
H. Jiang, P. Taranekar, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, H. Wu, D. Wang, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, F. Huang, Y. Mo, W. Yang, D. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, Y. Tang, M. Yu, F. Feng, L. An, H. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Li, D. Zhu and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Seo, A. Gutacker, B. Walker, S. Cho, A. Garcia, R. Yang, T. Nguyen, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhan, A. J. H. Tan and B. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 417 RSC .
C. Chakraborty, M. K. Bera and S. Malik, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 3522 RSC .
S. Oh, D. Vak, S. Na, T. Lee and D. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Oh, S. Na, J. Jo, B. Lim, D. Vak and D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, A. Garcia, D. Korystov, A. Mikhailovsky, G. C. Bazan and T. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Cao and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hoven, R. Yang, A. Garcia, A. J. Heeger, T. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Henson, Y. Zhang, T. Nguyen, J. H. Seo and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pu, K. Li and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, K. Li, Z. Zhu, K. Pu, Y. Hu, X. Jiang and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1997 RSC .
Z. Zhang, X. Lu, Q. Fan, W. Hu and W. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2369 RSC .
W. Hu, X. Lu, R. Jiang, Q. Fan, H. Zhao, W. Deng, L. Zhang, L. Huang and W. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9012 RSC .
X. Lu, R. Jiang, M. Yang, Q. Fan, W. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Deng, Q. Shen, Y. Huang, X. Liu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 376 RSC .
Y. Yuan, Y. Min, Q. Hu, B. Xing and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11259 RSC .
J. Fang, B. H. Wallikewitz, F. Gao, G. Tu, C. Müller, G. Pace, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Scherf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, L. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Guan and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, X. Guan, C. Zhong, H. Xie, F. Huang, J. Chen, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1298 RSC .
X. Guan, K. Zhang, F. Huang, G. C. Bazan and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. Macdiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578 RSC .
H. N. Kim, Z. Guo, W. Zhu, J. Yoon and H. Tian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 79 RSC .
Y. W. Park, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2428 RSC .
S. Shin, K. Yoon and T. Choi, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, H. Chen, R. Xu, J. W. Y. Lam, K. K. L. Cheuk, H. N. C. Wong and M. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, J. Yao, W. Xu, T. Fan, Q. He, D. Zhu, H. Cao and J. Cheng, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 2179 RSC .
Y. Wang and B. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3553 RSC .
J. H. Wosnick, C. M. Mello and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. An, J. Gierschner and S. Y. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Saeed, H. T. M. Le and O. Š. Miljanić, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lou, Q. Zeng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wan, J. Qin and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5581 RSC .
D. Ou, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polymer, 2012, 53, 5691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, L. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Qin and B. Tang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ou, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Lou, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, J. W. Y. Lam, C. K. W. Jim, A. Qin, J. Qin, Z. Li and B. Tang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 8070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, C. K. W. Jim, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Dong, Z. Li, J. Qin and B. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Lou, Y. Yu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5186 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Lou, Z. Li and J. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 232 CAS .
Z. Li, X. Lou, H. Yu, Z. Li and J. Qin, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7433 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lou, Y. Zhang, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lou, Y. Zhang, S. Li, D. Ou, Z. Wan, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1446 RSC .
X. Cheng, S. Li, A. Zhong, J. Qin and Z. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 157, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, S. Li, H. Jia, A. Zhong, C. Zhong, J. Feng, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, Y. Lei, Y. Hui, H. Mi, F. Ma, Y. Tian and Z. Xie, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4730 RSC .
F. L. Song, S. Watanabe, P. E. Floreancig and K. Koide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Dikusar, V. I. Potkin, E. V. Vashkevich, N. G. Kozlov and R. V. Kaberdin, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2004, 74, 578 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. B. Boase, I. Blakey, B. E. Rolfe, K. Mardonb and K. J. Thurecht, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4450 RSC .
J. Liu, D. Ding, J. Geng and B. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1567 RSC .
J. Luo, M. Haller, H. Ma, S. Liu, T. Kim, Y. Tian, B. Chen, S. Jang, L. R. Dalton and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Liu, M. Haller, L. Liu, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
X. Piao, X. Zhang, Y. Mori, M. Koishi, A. Nakaya, S. Inoue, I. Aoki, A. Otomo and S. Yokoyama, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, G. Yu, S. Dong, W. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Polymer, 2009, 50, 2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. Qin, H. Kang and C. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 927 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Dong, P. Li, Z. Li, Y. Liu, C. Ye and J. Qin, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Li, C. Di, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, Q. Zeng, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Ye and J. Qin, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 6951 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Binder and R. Sachsenhofer, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Ledin, N. Kolishetti and G. Boons, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kade, D. J. Burke and C. J. Hawker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kluger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6611 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Gordon, J. L. Mackey, J. C. Jewett, E. M. Sletten, K. N. Houk and C. R. Bertozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Milles, S. Tyagi, N. Banterle, C. Koehler, V. VanDelinder, T. Plass, A. P. Neal and E. A. Lemke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, J. Luo, Y. Tian, J. Ka, N. M. Tucker, M. Haller, J. Kang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Li, A. Qin, Y. Dong, J. W. Y. Lam, Y. Dong, C. Ye, J. Qin and B. Tang, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 5672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, Z. Li, Z. Li, C. Ye, J. Qin and B. Tang, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Zeng, G. Yu, Z. Li, C. Ye, Y. Liu and J. Qin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. A. Tomalia and P. M. Kirchhoff, U.S. Patent, 4,694,064,  1987 Search PubMed .
S. M. Grayson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Helms and E. W. Meijer, Science, 2006, 313, 929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Frauenrath, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2005, 30, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lau, H. Chow, M. Chan and K. Wong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6463 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Wu, P. Hua, X. Wu, G. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Ye, Z. Li and J. Qin, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 81, 264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Huang, J. Hua, J. Qin, Z. Yang and C. Ye, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Gong, J. Qin, Z. Yang and C. Ye, Polymer, 2005, 46, 4971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, G. Qiu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Dyes Pigm., 2010, 84, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Q. Li, Q. Zeng, Z. Li, Z. Li, J. Qin and C. Ye, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 78, 199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, P. Li, S. Dong, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, Q. Zeng, Z. Li, C. Ye and J. Qin, Polymer, 2007, 48, 3650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, G. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, C. Ye and J. Qin, Polymer, 2008, 49, 901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, K. Chen, H. Yip, S. K. Hau, O. Acton, Y. Zhang, J. Luo and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Chen, F. Huang, H. Yip, S. Liu, J. Zhang, A. K.-Y. Jen and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, W. Cai, F. Huang, J. Zhang, M. Wang, T. Yang, C. Zhong, X. Gong and Y. Cao, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu and W. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2039 RSC .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Fang, M. Su, M. Saeys and B. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Leem, Z. A. Morseth, E. Puodziukynaite, J. Jiang, Z. Fang, A. T. Gilligan, J. R. Reynolds, J. M. Papanikolas and K. S. Schanze, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28535 CAS .
Z. Chen, E. M. Grumstrup, A. T. Gilligan, J. M. Papanikolas and K. S. Schanze, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564 CAS .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790 CAS .
Z. Cao and B. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3183 CAS .
F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485 RSC .
E. F. Palermo, S. B. Darlingbc and A. J. McNeil, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3401 RSC .
M. Hufnagel, M. Muth, J. C. Brendel and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2324 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Van der Veen, B. de Boer, U. Stalmach, K. I. van de Wetering and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3673 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, C. E. Bunker and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1241 RSC .
C. Yang, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5416 RSC .
L. Dai, A. Mau, H. Griesser and T. Spurling, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17302 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heuken, H. Komber and B. Voit, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Miyanishi, Y. Zhang, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6723 RSC .
Y. Sun, K. Fu, Y. Lin and W. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, B. Zhou, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Liu, L. F. Allard and Y. Sun, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niyogi, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, B. Zhao, P. Bhowmik, R. Sen, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tezuka, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, T. Shishido, K. Yoshida, T. Ogawa, S. Isoda, K. Stranius, V. Chukharev, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 741 CAS .
S. J. Lee, J. Kim, H. P. Kim, D. Kim, W. J. da Silva, F. K. Shneider, A. R. bin Mohd Yusoff and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9185 RSC .
C. Chung, Y. Kim, D. Shin, S. Ryoo, B. H. Hong and D. Min, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Q. Luo, W. Lv, Y. Dong, Y. Lin, Q. Yang, A. Shen, D. Pang, J. Hu, J. Qin and Z. Li, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Chen, X. Luo, J. Lu, H. Zhou, W. Wu, H. Zhan, Y. Dong, S. Yan, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mack and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, W. D. Zhang, Z. J. Hu, X. J. Jiang, T. Ngai, P. C. Lo, W. Zhang and G. J. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 782 RSC .
N. K. Boane and M. A. Hillmyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 267 RSC .
M. A. Gauthier, M. I. Gibson and H. A. Klok, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 48, 48 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Li, Y. Li, J. Liu, Y. Tu, W. Zhang, N. Zhou and X. Zhu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2014, 52, 691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, T. Michinobu, M. Ashizawa and T. Mori, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qian, H. Abu and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7678 RSC .
L. R. Hermann High, S. J. Holder and H. V. Penfold, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 7157 CrossRef .
G. Moad, M. Chen, M. Häussler, A. Postma, E. Rizzardo and S. H. Thang, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 492 RSC .
D. A. Roberts, M. J. Crossley and S. Perrier, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4016 RSC .
A. Scarpaci, E. Blart, V. Montembault, L. Fontaine, V. Rodriguez and F. Odobel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1799 CAS .
C. Cabanetosa, W. Bentoumib, E. Blarta, Y. Pellegrina, V. Montembaultc, Y. Bretonnièreb, C. Andraudb, L. Magerd, L. Fontainec and F. Odobela, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2013, 24, 473 CrossRef .
F. Qiu, C. Tu, R. Wang, L. Zhu, Y. Chen, G. Tong, B. Zhu, L. He, D. Yan and X. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9678 RSC .
W. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Fu, C. Ye, J. Qin and Z. Li, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2013, 58, 2753 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Z. Xu and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8122 RSC .
R. Tang, H. Chen, S. Zhou, W. Xiang, X. Tang, B. Liu, Y. Dong, H. Zeng and Z. Li, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5580 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Qianqian Li	Qianqian Li received her B.Sc. degree from Hubei University, China in 2004, and then obtained her Ph.D. degree at Wuhan University in 2009. She is now an associate professor at Wuhan University, and her research interests are in the design and synthesis of new electric and optical functional materials.
Zhen Li	Zhen Li received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Wuhan University (WHU), China in 1997 and 2002, respectively, under the supervision of Prof. Jingui Qin. In 2003–2004, he worked in the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology as a Research Associate in Prof. Ben Zhong Tang's group. In 2010, he worked in Georgia Institute of Technology in Prof. Seth Marder's group. In 2014, he worked in the National University of Singapore as a visiting professor for one month. He is a full professor at WHU from 2006, and his research interests are in the development of organic molecules and polymers with new structures and new functions for organic electronics and photonics.

 	Chart 1  The synthesis of PVA by post synthetic modification.	 

 	Fig. 1  The post-synthetic modification of CPEs with ammonium groups as the side chains.	 

 	Fig. 2  The structures of CZPEs by post-synthetic modification.	 

 	Fig. 3  The introduction of some ligands into the polymers as the side chains by post-synthetic modification.	 

 	Fig. 4  Three strategies to synthesize NLO polymers by post-synthetic modification.	 

 	Fig. 5  The introduction of chromophores into NLO polymers as the side chains through esterification.	 

 	Fig. 6  The introduction of chromophores into NLO polymers as the side chains through different chemical reactions.	 

 	Fig. 7  The introduction of chromophores into polyacetylene (PA) as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction.	 

 	Fig. 8  The introduction of chromophores into conjugated polymers as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction.	 

 	Fig. 9  The introduction of chromophore dendrons into the conjugated polymer as the side chains through the “click” chemistry reaction.	 

 	Fig. 10  The post synthetic modification of NLO polymers with an attached isolation group.	 

 	Fig. 11  The analysis of the obtained NLO data of polymers (a) P23a–d and (b) P24a–d by using PP23 for P23a–d, and PP24 for P24a–d as reference. (A) Comparison of the d33 values of the polymers; (B) comparison of the calculated d33 values, which were obtained by using the tested d33 values dividing the concentration of the active chromophore moieties of the polymers; (C) comparison of the calculated d33(∞) values according to the approximate two-level model.	 

 	Fig. 12  The multiple post synthetic modifications of linear polymers through strategy C.	 

 	Fig. 13  The synthesis of the conjugated polymers with a strong pull–push system through the post Knoevenagel condensation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 14  The introduction of some big conjugated systems to the polymers as the side chains through the post-synthetic modification.	 

 	Fig. 15  The post-synthetic modification of linear opto-electric polymers in the main chain.	 

 	Fig. 16  The post-synthetic modification of linear opto-electric polymers at the end of main chains.	 

 	Fig. 17  The post-synthetic modification of hyperbranched opto-electric polymers.	 

 	Fig. 18  The post-synthetic modification of hyperbranched opto-electric polymers.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
