Highly durable and flexible dye -sensitized solar cells fabricated on plastic substrates: PVDF-nanofiber-reinforced TiO 2 photoelectrodes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21674D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21674D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8950-8957Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHighly durable and flexible dye-sensitized solar cells fabricated on plastic substrates: PVDF-nanofiber-reinforced TiO2 photoelectrodes†

        
          
            Yuelong 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Doh-Kwon 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin Young 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            BongSoo 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nam-Gyu 
            Park
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kyungkon 
            Kim
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Joong-Ho 
            Shin
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            In-Suk 
            Choi
          
        
      *e and 

        
          
            Min Jae 
            Ko
          
        
      *a
aPhoto-Electronic Hybrids Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: mjko@kist.re.kr;  Fax: +82-2-958-6649;   Tel: +82-2-958-5518
bInternational R&D Academy, University of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-333, Republic of Korea
cSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 440-746, Republic of Korea
dDepartment Chemistry and Nano Science, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, 120-750, Republic of Korea
eHigh Temperature Energy Materials Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 136-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: insukchoi@kist.re.kr;  Fax: +82-2-958-5449;   Tel: +82-2-958-6622
Received 
      19th March 2012
    , Accepted 28th June 2012First published on 28th June 2012AbstractIn this study, we developed a novel nanostructured polymer nanofiber/TiO2 nanoparticle composite photoelectrode with high bendability by a spray-assisted electrospinning method. The composite film is used as the photoelectrode in plastic dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). The polymer/TiO2 composite photoelectrode has a structure similar to that of a fiber-reinforced composite; the matrix of the composite photoelectrode contains TiO2 nanoparticles, and PVDF nanofibers are embedded in this matrix. Compared to conventional DSCs, composite-based DSCs show outstanding bending stability because the polymer nanofibers prevent delamination of the electrode by relieving the external stress and effectively retarding crack generation and propagation. Moreover, the efficiency of the cell containing composite electrodes is comparable to that of a cell containing only TiO2, suggesting that the proposed PVDF-nanofiber-reinforced photoelectrode is a promising candidate for a bendable photoelectrode in high-efficiency flexible plastic DSCs.

Broader context
How to construct flexible electrodes with good mechanical stability without sacrificing performance is the critical issue for flexible electronics. Of course, this holds for flexible dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Toward this end, in this study, we have proposed novel polymer-nanofiber-reinforced photoelectrodes with high bendability and a facile low temperature fabrication method for the same, spray-assisted electrospinning. By using this method, we successfully obtained unique nanostructured composite-type photoelectrodes in which polymer nanofibers were embedded in a TiO2-nanoparticle-enriched matrix. The developed photoelectrode shows very good bendability (nearly free of bending damage) despite being fabricated by a low-temperature sintering process; in fact, its bendability is much greater than that of a conventional photoelectrode without much impact on its efficiency because the polymer nanofibers prevent delamination of the electrode by relieving the external stress and effectively retarding crack generation and propagation. The applications of our findings are not limited to DSCs and our hybrid composite electrodes can be applied to other energy conversion and bendable electronic devices.

Introduction
Flexible electronics have been intensively developed over the last decade because they have shown great promise for a variety of applications due to their unique characteristics such as low weight, bendability, portability, and high strength. Flexible electronics have already been applied to solar cells, organic light-emitting diodes, flexible displays, e-paper, thin-film transistors, and so on. Among these applications, flexible solar cells have already attracted considerable attention as a means of generating green energy, thus helping to satisfy the growing energy requirements worldwide with minimal environmental impact. As compared to other types of solar cells, flexible dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) fabricated on a conducting plastic substrate are considered particularly promising because they have low cost and high throughput, and they can be applied to applications such as portable and mobile ubiquitous power sources. As such, considerable efforts have been directed toward fabricating flexible DSCs on a plastic substrate. Here, a critical challenge is how to enhance the connectivity of TiO2 in a photoelectrode fabricated by a low-temperature process (≤150 °C), because the plastic substrate suffers from thermal degradation at the high temperatures (>450 °C) employed in the conventional sintering process. Methods such as chemical sintering have been proposed to fabricate TiO2 photoelectrodes at low temperature for use in plastic DSCs,1–5 and methods such as mechanical pressing6,7 have been proposed to improve the interconnectivity of TiO2 nanoparticles. Nevertheless, for DSCs fabricated at low temperature, the degrees of necking of the TiO2 nanoparticles and adhesion between the photoelectrode film and/or the substrate remain unsatisfactory; as a result, under deformation, the DSCs have poor mechanical stability. For example, inorganic photoelectrodes are so brittle that they easily fracture and delaminate from the substrate under external bending forces. These examples serve to show that in order to guarantee the device performance, it is necessary to consider the mechanical durability of the photoelectrode. Recently, attempts have been made to overcome this problem by changing the structure of the photoelectrode.8,9 For example, Jiang et al.8 suggested the use of ZnO-nanowire-based bendable electrodes because nanowires can effectively release bending stress through space adjustment. However, the power conversion efficiency (<1%) of these nanowire-based DSCs was very low. Our group reported the fabrication of polymer/TiO2-composite-type photoelectrodes by blending TiO2 nanoparticles with the polymer; these photoelectrodes show enhanced toughness.9 It is expected that the use of relatively ductile polymers with TiO2 nanoparticles in the photoelectrode could release the stress concentration in the electrode and minimize the occurrence of mechanical failure; we confirmed this through a bending test in our experiments. However, the compromise between power conversion efficiency and mechanical property is strongly required because of the trade-off relation between them. If an excessive amount of polymer is added for a better mechanical property, it is likely that the electrically insulating polymer might coat the surface of individual TiO2 particles, and the electron transport between TiO2 particles might be hindered. Therefore, a new facile process for fabricating bendable photoelectrodes at low temperature is strongly required to realize enhanced mechanical stability while maintaining good cell efficiency.
In this study, we propose a novel low-temperature fabrication method for photoelectrodes with a unique functional composite structure consisting of electrospun polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) polymer nanofibers and TiO2 nanoparticles. PVDF, a fluoropolymer, was chosen because fluoropolymers are well known to have good electrochemical and mechanical stability.10 Moreover, PVDF polymers containing fluorine atoms, which have the smallest ionic radius and largest electronegativity, are expected to facilitate the ionic transport of electrolytes and reduce the recombination rate at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface.11,12 Finally, the electrospun PVDF nanofiber network has a porous structure with relatively high surface area, which is desirable considering the sufficient loading amount of TiO2 nanoparticles and the mass transport of redox species in the electrolyte. On account of all these characteristics, PVDF polymer nanofibers are considered to be the most suitable reinforcing materials for embedding in the inorganic photoelectrode. Furthermore, it is well known that PVDF nanofibers can be easily prepared by the electrospinning method.13–15 To construct nanostructured organic/inorganic composite films (CFs), a sufficient amount of TiO2 nanoparticles was sprayed simultaneously during the electrospinning of PVDF nanofibers. We call this novel process the spray-assisted electrospinning method [Fig. 1(a)]. The preparations of TiO2–PVDF nanocomposite using electrospinning were reported by other groups.14,15 However, they are not efficient enough to construct TiO2 nanoparticle enriched photoelectrode for DSCs. Consequently, our newly designed flexible DSCs show remarkably improved mechanical durability without a significant decrease in cell performance.
 Fig. 1  (a) Spray-assisted electrospinning system. SEM images of (b) as-spun PVDF nanofibers, (c) as-prepared PVDF/TiO2 composite film (CF), and (d) cross section of a compressed PVDF/TiO2 composite film, that is, of the fiber-reinforced composite structure. 
Results and discussion
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images [Fig. 1(b)] show that the as-spun PVDF nanofibers were arranged randomly with uniform diameters of approximately 400 nm. The nanofibers are expected to act as scaffolds and lend ductility to the TiO2 nanoparticles and the photoelectrode, respectively. In addition, the interpenetrating nanofiber network has a porous structure; the porosity of the nanofiber network was calculated from the density of the nanofibers (ρm, g cm−3) and that of pure PVDF (ρp = 1.78 g cm−3) as follows:16 P(vol%) = (1 − ρm/ρp) × 100%(1)where the density of the nanofibers was determined by measuring their weight and volume. The porosity was calculated to be 80%. Various micropores were observed in the SEM images, and these are expected to allow sufficient infiltration of TiO2 nanoparticles into the pores between nanofibers. Fig. 1(c) shows the surface morphology of as-spun PVDF/TiO2 CFs dried at ambient temperature. TiO2 nanoparticles were uniformly sprayed into the micropores between the nanofibers. Consequently, a unique morphology was obtained: the nanofibers were embedded into and surrounded by TiO2 nanoparticles. A cross-sectional SEM image of the PVDF/TiO2 composite after compression reveals a fiber-reinforced composite-like structure, as shown in Fig. 1(d). The SEM image clearly shows that the compressed PVDF/TiO2 CF was tightly adhered to the substrate. It was also expected that the well-distributed PVDF nanofibers within CF could relieve stress concentration, and hence retard crack propagation into the whole photoelectrode film after crack generation.
First, in order to establish a process for the fabrication of CFs at low temperature, a CF-based photoelectrode was prepared on a FTO/glass substrate with a film thickness of about 6 μm. For comparison, organic binder-free films (BFs), which are conventionally used for low-temperature processed DSCs, with similar film thicknesses were also fabricated on the FTO/glass substrates using an organic binder-free paste. This paste was made by dispersing 15 wt% bead-milled commercial TiO2 (P25) particles in ethanol solution, and then coated using the doctor-blade method. After drying at ambient temperature, the BFs were compressed at 80 MPa to induce tight interconnection of TiO2 nanoparticles, as in the case of the fabrication of CFs. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and Table S1,† the short-circuit current (JSC) of CF-based cells is 8.58 mA cm−2, which is lower than that of BF-based cells, 9.77 mA cm−2. The difference in the JSC values is mainly attributed to the reduced dye absorption due to the existence of PVDF fibers in CFs. An investigation of the dye desorption showed that the amount of dye loading for CF-based cells (12.97 × 10−5 mol cm−3) is 6% lower than that for BF-based cells (13.68 × 10−5 mol cm−3). However, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of CF-based cells was higher than that of BF-based cells by 48 mV. Based on previous reports,11,12,17 it is conjectured that such enhancement of VOC from CF-based cells could be partially attributed to the existence of negatively charged fluoropolymers in CFs, which might repulse the negatively charged I3− away from the interface of TiO2/dye/electrolyte, and the local concentration of I3− near TiO2 films decreased. Further study is required to clarify the effect of fluorine atoms in the polymer network on the performance of DSC, and it will be addressed later. In addition to that, the different pore structures of photoelectrode between CF- and BF-based cells might also affect the VOC. It is reasonable that PVDF-nanofiber networks in CF could induce larger open channels of pores, compared to the case for BF-based cells. It is recently reported that suppressed charge recombination as well as increase in VOC were observed for the DSCs with vertically aligned photoelectrode, which have open channels of pores in photoelectrode.18 This result could also be ascribed to the lower I3− concentration and/or the shorter I3− travel distance due to the open channels of electrolyte. This interpretation can also account for the higher VOC for CF-based cells. A similar observation was reported for the DSC with the highly interconnected porous electrode using virus template.19
 Fig. 2  (a) Photocurrent–voltage curves and (b) Nyquist plot for the EIS analysis of DSCs prepared from binder-free film (BF) and composite film (CF). (c) Comparison of the photocurrent–voltage curves of composite films prepared on FTO/glass and ITO/PET substrates. The inset in (b) is the equivalent circuit of EIS fitting with Z-view software. 
EIS study was performed for the comparison of the charge transfer processes of the BF- and CF-based cells. It is generally known that the semicircles occurring in the range of 1–102 Hz and 102–103 Hz are related to a charge transfer process at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface and injected electrons in the TiO2 films, respectively. The higher frequency semicircles (in the kHz range) are associated with charge transfer at the platinum counter electrode and/or electrical contact between conductive FTO/TiO2 films, and the semicircles at lower frequencies (less than 1 Hz) represent redox diffusion within the electrolyte.20,21Fig. 2(b) displays three distinguishable semicircles for both cells. Relatively larger semicircles were observed in the higher frequency range (kHz range) in CF-based cells. Given the structure of the photoelectrodes, the larger semicircles in CF-based cells arise from the presence of polymer nanofibers, suggesting that higher-impedance elements are present within the cells. It is thought that the nanofibers decrease the electrical contact area between FTO/TiO2 films and also partially block the interconnection of TiO2 nanoparticles within TiO2 films, which produces larger semicircles in the impedance spectrum at higher frequencies. At the same time, the presence of 400 nm sized polymer fibers could also enlarge the porosity of 20 nm sized TiO2 particles based films, and accelerate the ionic diffusion of electrolyte within TiO2 films, which leads to lower Warburg impedance in the lower frequency range (less than 1 Hz). This is consistent with the previous discussion on the effect of pore structure on VOC. As mentioned above, the increased VOC for CF-based cell could be ascribed to the presence of PVDF nanofiber network owing to the suppression of the recombination of photoinjected electrons with I3−. If that is true, the electron life time could be longer for CFs based cells due to less recombination. The electron life time was calculated (and shown in Table S1†) as follows:22 τ = RctCμ(2)where τ, Rct, Cμ represent the electron life time, charge transfer resistance at the interface of TiO2/dye/electrolyte which is related to recombination, and the chemical capacitance at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface. It can be seen that the electron life time of CF based cells is more than three times longer than that of BFs based cells. That is why higher VOC was observed in CFs based cells. Consequently, the final conversion efficiency (4.78%) of CF-based cells does not reduce significantly after the introduction of polymer nanofibers in the photoelectrodes, as compared with the 5.00% efficiency of BF-based cells. Certainly, better bendability will be achieved by introducing more PVDF polymer fibers in CFs. However, the reasonable conversion efficiency should be also considered. This trade-off relation between bendability and efficiency was evaluated by varying the volume content of PVDF in CFs, as shown in Fig. S1.†
The objective of this study is to apply the novel PVDF-nanofiber-reinforced composite electrode fabricated by a low-temperature process to flexible solar cells fabricated on plastic substrates. Hence, CF-based photoelectrodes were also fabricated on ITO/PET substrates. Here, it should be noted that the ITO/PET substrate has intrinsic drawbacks such as higher sheet resistance and less transmittance than the FTO/glass substrate. The slightly lower power conversion efficiency of ITO/PET-based DSCs (4.04%) is unavoidable, compared with the 5.23% efficiency of FTO/glass-based cells, as observed in Fig. 2(c) and Table S1.† However, irrespective of the difference in efficiency, it is expected that higher power conversion efficiency could be achieved by further optimizing the compression process.7 Moreover, as shown in Table S2,† we also investigated the effect of film thickness on photovoltaic properties of CF based cells based on FTO/glass substrate.
To evaluate the mechanical properties of the CF-based films fabricated on the plastic substrate, a bending test was performed with BF- and CF-based films fabricated on a flexible ITO/PET substrate, as shown in Fig. 3. A repeated bending test was performed in the following manner. To apply constant strain on the film, the external force was gradually loaded from two edges of the specimen simultaneously until it was completely bent around a cylindrical rod with a radius of 7 mm. The tensile strain (ε) on the film can be calculated as:23 ε = Δl/l0 = (πr − πr0)/πr0 = h/2r0(3)where l0 is the original length, Δl is the change in length, and h is the total thickness of the sample including the films and ITO/PET substrate, r0 is the radius of curvature to the neutral surface and r is the radius of curvature to a point of interest on the film, as shown in Fig. 3. For BF- and CF-based samples in the present study (TiO2 or TiO2+PVDF on ITO/PET), a ∼4 μm thick electrode film was primarily selected for the bendability test. (The effect of electrode thickness on the cell efficiency depending on bending times is displayed in Fig. S2.†) Therefore, the total thickness of the sample, h, was ∼204 μm. Hence, the maximum tensile strain of 1.4% was applied to the electrode film during repeated bending tests because r0 becomes 7102 μm. The crack formation in the electrodes is completely different in BF- and CF-based flexible solar cells. Before bending, both films had a uniform and crack-free surface [Fig. 4(a) and (d)]. After 500 or even 1000 cycles of bending tests for CF-based cells, only a few cracks were visible at a given magnification, as shown in Fig. 4(c). On the other hand, for BF-based cells, many cracks were visible on the surface after only 200 cycles, and the crack density increased dramatically after 1000 cycles [Fig. 4(e) and (f)]. While the cracks in the BF-based film are long and vertical to the bending axis, those on the surface of the CF-based film are short and deflected due to random PVDF fibers in the composite materials. This result clearly indicates that crack formation in PVDF/TiO2 CFs is dramatically retarded during repeated bending. In turn, the mechanical stability of the CF-based cells improved the performance of flexible DSCs. Fig. 5 shows the changes in JSC, VOC, FF, and the efficiency of both BF- and CF-based DSCs as a function of the number of bending cycles. The results were normalized with respect to the values before bending. No distinct decreases in JSC and VOC were observed for the CF-based DSCs even after 1000 cycles of bending. The cell efficiency decreased slightly, mainly because of the slight decrease in FF that could be attributable to a small degradation in the ITO layer after 1000 bending cycles. On the other hand, for BFs [Fig. 5(d)], the cell efficiency decreased drastically, almost reaching zero, after only 200 bending cycles. The degradation of the BF is mainly associated with the decrease in JSC. As shown in Fig. 5(a) and (d), the degradation of JSC for BF-based cells showed a similar trend to the efficiency of this cell. The degradation in JSC can be attributed to the damage of the electric contact in the cell.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of three-point bending test system. The inset depicts the mechanism of enhanced mechanical stability in fiber-reinforced composite films. 
 Fig. 4  SEM images of a PVDF/TiO2 composite film (a), (b) and (c) after undergoing the bending test for 0, 500, 1000 times; Binder-free films (d), (e) and (f) after doing the bending test for 0, 200, 1000 times. The scale bar indicates a length of 10 μm. 
 Fig. 5  Comparison of photovoltaic properties ((a) normalized short-circuit current; (b) normalized open-circuit voltage; (c) normalized fill factor; (d) normalized efficiency) of BF- and CF-based cells as a function of bending time. Bending of photoanode was performed before constructing the DSCs. Cell performances were normalized compared with the cell without bending. The data were averaged from three cells for each condition. 
The cross-sectional observation of BF and CF films [Fig. 6] clearly shows the different failure behaviors: for example, the BF film is delaminated from the ITO layer, whereas the CF film remains in good contact with the ITO layer. The thru-thickness crack in the BF-based films propagated down to the interface between the TiO2 and ITO layers, then bifurcated into the interface, and consequently delaminated. In contrast, in CF-based films, the cracks are retarded and did not reach the interface. The crack retardation mechanism in CF-based films can be explained by the conventional fracture behavior of composite materials. As seen in Fig. 6(c), the PVDF nanofibers blocked and deflected crack propagation. Furthermore, the lower stiffness of the PVDF composite reduces the driving force of crack propagation; this was also confirmed by nanoindentation analysis. The modulus of the BF-based film by nanoindentation is 7.2 GPa on average, which is much smaller than the TiO2 bulk modules of ∼300 GPa,24–26 because the binding of TiO2 nanoparticles is still really weak and the porosity is quite high. The volume fraction of the PVDF nanofibers in the composite is ∼20%. The modulus of the PVDF is known to be around 2 GPa.27,28 Applying a simple rule of mixture, the modulus (E) of the entire sample will be 0.8 × 7.2 GPa + 0.2 × 2.0 GPa = 6.16 GPa. If strain is assumed in the elastic regime, the strain energy density (U) of the film can be easily calculated as U = ½Eε2. Hence, the strain energy of the BF electrode is higher than that of the CF electrode for a given strain by the modulus difference, 17%. The reduced stiffness was confirmed from the indentation results. For CF-based films, the modulus varies with the position. For instance, in region A in Fig. 7, where the area merely consists of TiO2 as in the BF-based film, the modulus of the composite, 7.7 GPa, is similar to that of BF. In contrast, in region B, where the area consists of composites with PVDF and TiO2, the modulus value is 3.6 GPa, which indicates that the composite materials reduce the stiffness. (Considering the inhomogeneity of the PVDF distribution, the modulus can even be lower than 6.1 GPa in certain local areas.) Thus, as a second mechanism of enhanced mechanical stability, it was considered that the external stress was transferred from the matrix (TiO2 nanoparticles) to the PVDF fibers, and the very long and well-distributed PVDF nanofibers inside CF could absorb elastic strain energy and hence retard the driving force of crack propagation into the CF-based films. Therefore, the composite structure mitigates destructive crack formation and propagation of CFs in DSCs and keeps the cells intact during repeated bending strains. In comparison with previous works, several groups also proposed bendable photoelectrodes such as nanotube,29 metal wires30,31 or fiber based mesh32 for the fabrication of flexible DSCs. The potential bendability of those flexible cells is obvious. However, the practical application of those bendable electrodes seems to be limited due to lower efficiency and poor productivity. In detail, the flexible DSCs with cylinder-shaped photoelectrodes have smaller surface areas, and their fabrication process is complicated, compared to the DSCs with particle-shaped ones. By contrast, we developed polymer nanofiber–TiO2 nanoparticle-based bendable photoelectrodes using a facile fabrication process, which can be applicable for the large-sized flexible DSCs with high efficiency. Recently, Cha et al. demonstrated the good bendability from a glass paper based flexible DSC, but the efficiency was still limited at approximately 2%.33
 Fig. 6  FIB images of (a) surface morphologies and (b) and (c) cross morphologies of bent CFs. FIB images of (d) surface morphologies and (e) and (f) cross morphologies of bent BFs. 
 Fig. 7  Optical microscope images of selected CF positions for nanoindentation analysis (matrix: A region; tangled PVDF:B region). 
To sum up, the better conversion efficiency and improved bendability of CFs based photoanode can be simultaneously achieved.
Experimental
PVDF nanofibers were prepared by the electrospinning method. A viscous PVDF solution was prepared by dissolving 15 wt% PVDF (Kynar®761, Arkema) in a mixture of acetone and N,N-dimethylmethanamide (w:w = 6:4). This solution was immediately loaded into a plastic syringe equipped with a 22 gauge stainless steel needle. The needle was connected to a high-voltage power supply with a voltage of 15 kV. A substrate was placed 15 cm below the tip of the needle to collect the nanofibers. The injection rate of PVDF solution was controlled by N2 flow with constant pressure of 0.01 MPa. To fabricate CFs with PVDF nanofibers, 10 wt% TiO2 (particle size: 21 nm; P25, Degussa) in ethanol solution was sprayed during electrospinning using a stainless steel spray gun. Spraying was conducted at a feeding rate of 0.1 mL s−1 controlled by N2 carrier gas. The CF thickness was controlled by adjusting the spraying time. To enhance the interconnection of the TiO2 particles and the adhesion of the CF with the substrate, the PVDF/TiO2 CF was mechanically compressed (80 MPa) under ambient conditions using a lamination system.
In the preparation of DSCs, the compressed composite photoelectrodes on indium tin oxide/polyethylene terephthalate (ITO/PET, thickness of 200 μm) and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/glass (8 Ω sq−1, Pilkington TEC8) were immersed in 0.5 mM N719 (Peccell Tech. Inc.) anhydrous ethanol solution for dye loading. A Pt counter electrode was prepared by spreading a drop of 7 mM of H2PtCl6·6H2O in 2-propanol on FTO/glass, followed by drying at ambient temperature and annealing at 400 °C for 20 min. The two electrodes were assembled using 60 μm thick Surlyn (DuPont 1702). An electrolyte solution was introduced through a hole drilled in the counter electrode; the liquid-phase electrolyte solution was composed of 0.7 M 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, 0.03 M I2, 0.05 M guanidinium thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile (v/v = 85:15). The active cell area was approximately 0.45 cm2, which was measured by an image analysis program equipped with a digital microscope camera (Moticam 1000). The thickness of TiO2 films after thermal treatment was measured by an Alpha-step IQ surface profiler (KLA Tencor). Photocurrent–voltage measurements were performed under a class-A solar simulator with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. A black mask with proper aperture size was covered onto a cell to exclude the diffused light during measurement. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were measured with a potentiostat (Solartron 1287) equipped with a frequency response analyzer (Solartron 1260), with the frequency ranging from 10−1 to 106 Hz. The magnitude of the alternative signal was 10 mV. Impedance parameters were determined by fitting the impedance spectrum using Z-view software. The impedance measurements were carried out at the open-circuit potential with one sun light illumination.
In order to investigate the bending stability of the electrodes, a repeated uniaxial bending test with a constant strain was performed using a cylindrical rod, as shown in Fig. 3. For the last 10% of the bending cycles, the sample was bent perpendicular to the initial axis in order to mimic practical omni directional bending. The cell performance was measured after 200, 500, and 1000 bending cycles. The mechanical properties of the electrode films were determined by conducting a nanoindentation test using a Triboscope (Hysitron, Minessota, USA) equipped with a Berkovich diamond tip. The machine compliance was considered and the displacement was corrected for thermal drift effects by monitoring the displacement at 10% of the maximum load before loading, as provided in the standard test methods for the nanoindenter. 16 indentations were performed per sample with peak loads of 8.5 mN and depth ranging from 900 to 1200 nm. The load–controlled loading function consists of a loading segment of 5 s, a holding segment of 2 s, and an unloading segment of 5 s; the load–displacement data were recorded during the experiment. The indentation site was first selected using an optical microscope before the indentation. The sample surface was scanned using a scanning probe microscope after the indentations to check the actual indentation marks. Among 16 indentations on the CF, 6 were on the matrix and 4 were on the densely tangled PVDF region, and the others were partially overlapped with PVDF fibers. The modulus and hardness were calculated following the Oliver–Pharr method from the unloading data of the load–displacement curve.34
The cross section of the TiO2 layer was observed using a focused ion beam (FIB; FEI NanoLab™ DualBeam™).
Conclusions
A PVDF/TiO2 composite film with good bendability was prepared by a new low-temperature spray-assisted electrospinning method. The power conversion efficiency of CF-based cells does not reduce significantly after the introduction of polymer nanofibers in the photoelectrodes. This composite film also shows outstanding mechanical stability for flexible DSCs even after 1000 bending cycles because crack formation and propagation was effectively suppressed by PVDF nanofibers; this level of stability was much greater than that of a conventional photoelectrode film consisting of only TiO2, which is degraded by interface delamination within less than 200 cycles. Therefore, the composite-type photoelectrode and spray-assisted electrospinning method developed in this study constitute a promising methodology for the low-temperature fabrication of flexible plastic DSCs. It is also expected that the proposed composite photoelectrode can be combined with a PVDF-based polymer electrolyte to improve the compatibility of the two components. Further scientific investigation of this composite photoelectrode is in progress.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant (2011K000200) from the Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology under the 21st Century Frontier R&D Programs of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea, by the Global Frontier R&D Program on Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (2011-0031576), by the Converging Research Center Program (2010K001435) through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea, and by the Pioneer Research Program funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (2012-0005955).
Notes and references
N.-G. Park, K. M. Kim, M. G. Kang, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang and Y.-J. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2349–2353 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka, M. Ikegami and Y. Kijitori, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A455–A461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Lin, J. Li, N. Wang, C. Lin and L. Zhang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 195, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Weerasinghe, P. M. Sirimanne, G. V. Franks, G. P. Simon and Y. B. Cheng, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 213, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Lee, D.-K. Lee, K. Kim, N.-G. Park and M. J. Ko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 103301 CrossRef .
A. Pasquier, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7469–7474 CrossRef .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4767–4769 RSC .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, K. W. Tan, G. Q. Lo, A. K. K. Kyaw and D. L. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 143101 CrossRef .
Y. Li, K. Yoo, D.-K. Lee, J. H. Kim, N.-G. Park, K. Kim and M. J. Ko, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, e171–e175 CrossRef .
J. Y. Song, Y. Y. Wang and C. C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Han, W. Liu, J. Zhang and X.-Z. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1940–1944 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kang, K. M. Kim, K. S. Ryu, S. H. Chang, N.-G. Park, J. S. Hong and K.-J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, E257–E260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krupa, A. Jaworek, S. Sundarrajan, D. Pliszka and S. Ramakrishna, Fibres Text. East. Eur., 2012, 2, 25–27 Search PubMed .
T. He, Z. Zhou, W. Xu, F. Ren, H. Ma and J. Wang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3031–3036 CrossRef CAS .
J.-U. Kim, S.-H. Park, H.-J. Choi, W.-K. Lee, J.-K. Lee and M.-R. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 803–807 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koelsch, S. Cassaignon, C. Ta Thanh Minh, J.-F. Guillemoles and J.-P. Jolivet, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, J. H. Park, H. S. Han, D. H. Kim, B. S. Han, S. Lee, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung and K. S. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8102–8110 CAS .
Y. M. Lee, Y. H. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, N.-G. Park, W.-S. Choe, M. J. Ko and P. J. Yoo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1160–1167 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hoshikawa, M. Yamada, R. Kikuchi and K. Eguchi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, E68 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-santiago, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Suo, H. Gleskova and S. Wagner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1177–1179 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Wachtman, W. E. Tefft and D. G. Lam, J. Res. Natl. Bureau. Stan. A., 1962, 66, 465–471 Search PubMed .
M. J. Mayo, R. W. Siegel, A. Narayanasamy and W. D. Nix, J. Mater. Res., 1990, 5, 1073–1082 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, B. Zhang and J. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 094126 CrossRef .
A. Linares and J. L. Acosta, Eur. Polym. J., 1997, 33, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Simoes, M. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. A. Saja and C. J. L. Constantino, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2009, 99, 621–629 CrossRef .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Chu, F. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Tang and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592–595 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, R. Liu, X. Xia, D. Yun, L. Zhang, C. Huang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383–3387 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, F. Wang, Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang and D. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 073501 CrossRef .
S. I. Cha, Y. Kim, K. H. Hwang, Y.-J. Shin, S. H. Seo and D. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6071–6075 CAS .
W. C. Oliver and G. M. Pharr, J. Mater. Res., 1992, 7, 1564–1583 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee21674dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
How to construct flexible electrodes with good mechanical stability without sacrificing performance is the critical issue for flexible electronics. Of course, this holds for flexible dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). Toward this end, in this study, we have proposed novel polymer-nanofiber-reinforced photoelectrodes with high bendability and a facile low temperature fabrication method for the same, spray-assisted electrospinning. By using this method, we successfully obtained unique nanostructured composite-type photoelectrodes in which polymer nanofibers were embedded in a TiO2-nanoparticle-enriched matrix. The developed photoelectrode shows very good bendability (nearly free of bending damage) despite being fabricated by a low-temperature sintering process; in fact, its bendability is much greater than that of a conventional photoelectrode without much impact on its efficiency because the polymer nanofibers prevent delamination of the electrode by relieving the external stress and effectively retarding crack generation and propagation. The applications of our findings are not limited to DSCs and our hybrid composite electrodes can be applied to other energy conversion and bendable electronic devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Spray-assisted electrospinning system. SEM images of (b) as-spun PVDF nanofibers, (c) as-prepared PVDF/TiO2 composite film (CF), and (d) cross section of a compressed PVDF/TiO2 composite film, that is, of the fiber-reinforced composite structure.	 
P(vol%) = (1 − ρm/ρp) × 100%	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photocurrent–voltage curves and (b) Nyquist plot for the EIS analysis of DSCs prepared from binder-free film (BF) and composite film (CF). (c) Comparison of the photocurrent–voltage curves of composite films prepared on FTO/glass and ITO/PET substrates. The inset in (b) is the equivalent circuit of EIS fitting with Z-view software.	 
τ = RctCμ	(2)
ε = Δl/l0 = (πr − πr0)/πr0 = h/2r0	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of three-point bending test system. The inset depicts the mechanism of enhanced mechanical stability in fiber-reinforced composite films.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of a PVDF/TiO2 composite film (a), (b) and (c) after undergoing the bending test for 0, 500, 1000 times; Binder-free films (d), (e) and (f) after doing the bending test for 0, 200, 1000 times. The scale bar indicates a length of 10 μm.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of photovoltaic properties ((a) normalized short-circuit current; (b) normalized open-circuit voltage; (c) normalized fill factor; (d) normalized efficiency) of BF- and CF-based cells as a function of bending time. Bending of photoanode was performed before constructing the DSCs. Cell performances were normalized compared with the cell without bending. The data were averaged from three cells for each condition.	 

 	Fig. 6  FIB images of (a) surface morphologies and (b) and (c) cross morphologies of bent CFs. FIB images of (d) surface morphologies and (e) and (f) cross morphologies of bent BFs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Optical microscope images of selected CF positions for nanoindentation analysis (matrix: A region; tangled PVDF:B region).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee21674d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
