Standardization of photoelectrode area of dye -sensitized solar cells   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2RA22047D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2RA22047D
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2683-2689Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsStandardization of photoelectrode area of dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Azhar 
            Fakharuddin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Panikar S. 
            Archana
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zulkeflee 
            Kalidin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mashitah M. 
            Yusoff
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Rajan 
            Jose
          
        
      *a
aNanostructured Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Faculty of Industrial Sciences & Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 26300 Kuantan, Malaysia. E-mail: rjose@ump.edu.my
bFaculty of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 26300 Kuantan, Malaysia
Received 
      4th September 2012
    , Accepted 13th December 2012First published on 14th December 2012AbstractThis study is aimed to provide new insights on the scalability of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). The DSCs of electrode area up to ∼2 cm2 were fabricated using commercially available P25 TiO2 particles, N3 dye, and iodide/triiodide electrolyte. The photovoltaic conversion efficiency follows a biexponential decay, the main contributor to which is the short circuit current density (JSC). Interesting features were observed in the electrochemical impedance spectra and charge transport parameters in the devices as the photoelectrode areas were increased. Results show that electrons from an area above a threshold are not collected due to varied choice of diffusion pathways. Furthermore, this study identifies that the area of the photoelectrode for reporting the efficiency needs to be fixed at ∼0.5 cm2 for 25 nm TiO2 particles because below this value it strongly varies. On the other hand, the study provides opportunities to build high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells using the current choice of materials.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are intensively studied as a renewable energy source due to their easy fabrication process, a large choice of materials, possibility of transparency and flexibility, and light weight.1–4 Intense research in this field for the past two decades brought the DSCs to a level of delivering an efficiency (η) of ∼12% using mesoporous TiO2 particles, inorganic dyes (porphyrin dyes, for example), and cobalt iodide based redox electrolyte.5 One of the major discussions in increasing the η of DSCs was directed to optimize the electrode thickness to enable complete collection of photoelectrons primarily because of the diffusive electron transport in the presence of an electrolyte in this device.6,7 Electron (TiO2)–hole (electrolyte) recombination time in DSCs is several microseconds,8 which together with inferior electron diffusivity (Dn) in nanostructured metal oxide semiconductors (n-MOS),9 typically Dn∼10−5 cm2 s−1 at AM 1.5 conditions, demand that the electrons are to be collected from a small volume of the electrode. Towards this end, the η of DSCs as a function of film thickness is well optimized and an incident-photon-current-conversion efficiency (IPCE) of >98% is routinely achieved in DSCs.5,10,11 Despite the commendable progress made by DSCs, especially in terms of understanding the factors that control photovoltaic efficiency followed by device engineering, its deployability as a clean energy device is still a daunting task.
One of the major drawbacks of the DSC literature is that high η and IPCEs are frequently reported in devices of rather smaller area (≤0.2 cm2). On the other hand, large area modules are developed by combining DSCs to give either added voltages (series connection),12–15 such as W-type14 or Z-type,15 or currents (parallel connection)16,17 with appreciable effective voltage (∼8 V) and current (300 mA), respectively, in devices of active areas in the 20–50 cm2 range. It is interesting to note that the relationship between the device's electrode area and photo-conversion efficiency was not been considered or even ignored in these efforts. Lack of such correlations hindered a knowledge-based engineering of commercial DSCs. For example, although a short circuit current (ISC) of ∼300 mA is reported in a module of parallel connected DSCs of effective area ∼22 cm2, the short circuit current density (JSC) of the resultant module is lower than 10% of that achieved in a reference cell of area ∼0.28 cm2.18 Similar is the case of series connected DSCs that delivered a voltage of ∼8 V from an effective area ∼50 cm2, the JSC of which is ∼1.3 mA cm−2.15 The above JSC is less than 10% of that achieved routinely in the laboratory scale devices. Thus, it turns out that even if higher efficiencies are achieved in the laboratory scale devices, engineering of deployable modules with similar performance is still an elusive issue; and therefore, there is a direct need for finding the correlation between the areas of the device and photovoltaic parameters.
This paper addresses the effect of the device area (0.16–2 cm2) on its photovoltaic parameters. Both η and JSC followed biexponential decay with increase in the device area. A rapid decrease in the above parameters is observed for DSCs of area ≤0.5 cm2; the decay constant at this region was an order of magnitude higher compared to the second region of the biexponential decay curve. These results suggest that the area for reporting the efficiency has to be fixed at ∼0.5 cm2 for laboratory scale devices. The origin of the variations in the photovoltaic parameters and the charge transport characteristics of the devices as a function of the electrode area were studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Lowering of the electron transport resistance and enhancement in electron lifetime were simultaneously observed in devices of electrode area ≥1 cm2, indicating that only a small fraction of the photoelectrons could survive recombination with hole-conducting species in devices beyond this area. Therefore, if high efficiency commercial DSC modules are targeted using the current choice of materials, results from this study would be helpful in designing new device structures.
Experimental
The DSCs were fabricated on fluorine doped tin oxide coated glass substrates (FTO) using standard TiO2 paste (Solaronix), N3 dye, and the iodide/triiodide electrolyte. The FTO substrates were cleaned using ethanol and acetone, masked appropriately to expose the chosen area, and then treated with TiCl4. Eight areas were selected in the range 0.16–1.96 cm2 for the present study. The TiO2 paste was coated on the active areas by doctor-blade technique followed by oven drying at ∼100 °C for ∼10–12 h. The dried films were further homogenized to eliminate edge irregularities by applying a pressure of 1 ton/cm2 at 80 °C. Thus produced compact films were then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. Surface homogeneity of the films were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL, USA) as well as by surface profilometry (Alpha–Step IQ Surface Profiler). Thickness of the devices varied between 10–12 μm. The electrodes are of similar thickness (Fig. S1, ESI†) and any variation in the photovoltaic properties is not arising from surface irregularities. Translucent TiO2 electrodes thus produced were anchored to the N3 dye which was dissolved in a 1:1 volume mixture of acetonitrile and tert-butanol for 24 h at room temperature. The dye-sensitized samples were then washed in ethanol to remove unanchored dye and dried in air. Samples were sealed using a 50 μm spacer (Surilyn). Acetonitrile containing 0.1 M lithium iodide, 0.03 M iodine, 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine and 0.6 M 1-propyl-2,3-dimethyl imidazolium iodide was used as the electrolyte. A platinum coated FTO glass was used as the counter electrode. Photocurrent measurements of the assembled DSCs were performed using a solar simulator (SOLAR LIGHT, Model 16-S 150) employing single port simulator with power supply (XPS 400) at AM1.5G condition. I–V curves were obtained using a potentiostat (Autolab PGSTAT30, Eco Chemie B.V., The Netherlands). The AC responses of the cells were studied using the Autolab PGSTAT30.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 (A) and (B) show current density (J)–voltage (V) characteristics of DSCs and its power output as a function of device area normalized for a thickness of 12 μm, respectively. The cell of area ∼0.16 cm2 showed the highest η∼6.74% with VOC∼0.78 V; JSC∼13 mA cm−2; FF = 65.6%. Requirement of high efficiencies in DSCs are (i) compact but porous electrode, (ii) highly purified dyes, (iii) presence of scattering layers to enhance light sensitivity.19 No scattering layers were used in the present experiments as well as the dyes were as-received and without any further purification; and therefore, the efficiency achieved in these cells are of acceptable quality. Quality of the cells can also be determined from the shunt (RSH) and series (RS) resistances, which could be calculated from the inverse of slops at JSC and VOC of the J–V curves, respectively. The RSH is an estimation of internal currents in the cell and is a measure of back electron transfer and other charge recombination processes in DSCs whereas RS denotes the resistance for charge collection. A high RSH (>1000 Ω) and low RS (<0.01 Ω) are preferred for high fill factor and efficiency of the solar cells. All the cells developed here have high RSH (∼4000–5000 Ω) and low RS indicating that area of the cells does not have any detrimental effects on RS and RSH. Fig. 1(B), which shows the power output from the cell as a function of operating voltage, further confirm the quality of the cells, the relative changes in the maximum power point, VOC, and JSC were such that fill factor remained nearly the same.
 Fig. 1  (A) Current–voltage characteristics of devices measured at AM 1.5 conditions. (B) Representative power output curves showing the relative shifts in VOC and maximum power output. 
On increasing the area of the cell to ∼1.96 cm2, the η decreased by a factor of ∼4 and the JSC by ∼3. Fig. 2 shows the variation in η as a function of device area, which is fitted to biexponential decay. The constants of fitting are in the inset of the Fig. 2. The first decay constant (t1∼0.06) corresponding to smaller areas (≤0.5 cm2) was an order of magnitude lower compared to the second one (t2∼0.5) indicating the crucial dependence of the device area on η. The η achieved in devices of areas ≤0.5 cm2 strongly vary; the η dropped off ∼50% in the 0.16–0.5 cm2 range.
 Fig. 2  Efficiency of cells as a function of electrode area fitted to biexponential decay. 

Fig. 3 shows the variation of JSC, FF, and VOC as a function of device area. The JSC followed similar trend as that of η and contributed to major share to it. Given the JSC of DSCs to be nμ(x)∇Fn,20 where n is the electron density, μ(x) is the electron mobility, and ∇Fn is the gradient in the Fermi levels of the materials interface, a decrease in JSC for devices fabricated using similar materials would imply loss of electrons for constant ∇Fn and μ. In other words, increasing the area would lead to longer path length of the electrons and eventually lost via recombination with the hole-conducting species in the electrolyte as shown schematically in Fig. 4. The VOC remained at similar values in the area range 0.16–0.36 cm2 after which it gradually decreased. Under steady state of operation, , where Jin is the injected electron density, krec[I−3] is the rate constant of iodide reduction and ncb is the conduction band electron density in the dark. The dye-loading measured in the present experiment from desorption test was constant at ∼1.07 × 10−7 moles/cm2; and therefore, a constant Jin implies that decrease in VOC with an increase in area result from the change in the rate constant of iodide reduction. Because the RSH and RS remained at similar values, the FF did not vary appreciably with increase in the area.
 Fig. 3  (A) JSC, (B) Fill Factor, and (C) VOC as a function of device area; (D) is an enlarged view of VOC of region 1, showing that the value remained constant for area up to ∼0.5 cm2. 
 Fig. 4  Cartoon showing the enhanced diffusion paths as a result of larger electrode areas. The area inside red dashed is the active area for the working electrode where the electrons are to be collected, while the red dot shows an electron at the surface of semiconductor to be moved by a distance of x and x′; and “d” is the film thickness. 
The variation in charge transport with respect to the area of the device has been studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) employing the widely accepted transmission line model.21 The electrical equivalent of DSCs comprises of resistors and capacitors representing various interfacial and transport processes in the device (Fig. 5). The EIS spectra is compared with the electrical equivalent to extract the parameters corresponding to the diffusion and recombination processes.22,23 The total impedance of such electrical equivalent is expressed as: (1)where RT (= rtL) is the total resistance offered by the photoelectrode, RCT (= rct/L) is the resistance to the charge transfer from the photoelectrode to the electrolyte, and ωCT is the characteristic frequency at which the charge transfer occurs. The EIS spectrum of DSCs displays three semi circles which are assigned to three processes, viz., (i) resistance to the electron transport (RT) that occurs at high frequency (>0.1 kHz); (ii) resistance to the charge recombination (RCT) occurs at intermediate frequencies (0.1 kHz < f < 1 Hz); and resistance to ion diffusion occurs at lower frequencies (< 1 Hz) (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (A) Cartoon showing the relationship between the materials in DSCs and charge transport parameters in the diffusion–recombination model. (B) EIS spectrum showing the three processes as explained in the text. The “W” stands for resistance to ion diffusion. Refer to the text for details. 

Fig. 6 shows typical EIS spectra of DSCs as a function of device areas for a typical bias voltage ∼0.7 V. Both real (Z′) and imaginary (Z′′) parts of the total impedance marked a surprising decrease in magnitude with increase in area. In addition, the frequencies corresponding to the recombination shifted to higher values with increase in device area (Fig. S2, ESI†) showing its crucial dependence on charge transport. The 45° behavior in the EIS curve, from where the RT is calculated using the transmission line model (Fig. 6),22 shifted to lower Z′ showing that the RT decreased with increase in device area. Fig. 7 (A) and (B) shows the AC resistance calculated directly from the Nyquist plots and the variation of RT determined by employing the transmission line model, respectively. The high frequency region of the AC resistance, that corresponds to the first semicircle in the Nyquist plots, showed a weak dependence on frequency thereby confirming the electron transport process. i.e., as expected the cells showed decreased RT as area of the electrode increased. Jennings et al.6 recently showed that the RT nominally increase with increase in thickness of the electrode. In other words, in general RT increase with increase in the electrode thickness and decrease with increase in its area. Although lower RT is preferred for fabricating high efficiency DSCs, shifting of frequencies corresponding to RCT have adverse effects as discussed below.
 Fig. 6  (Top) Representative EIS spectra as a function of device areas; (bottom) magnified portion showing the EIS curves of the devices of higher areas. 
 Fig. 7  (A) AC impedance of the devices as a function of frequency for representative areas; (B) electrical transport resistance calculated using the diffusion–recombination model. 
The radius of the second semicircle corresponding to the charge transfer process continuously decreased with increasing electrode area thereby shifting the characteristic frequency corresponding to the RCT to higher values. Fig. 8 shows the Bode plots calculated from the EIS curves marking the variation in phase angle of the complex impedance as a function of frequency. The phase angle peak corresponding to the electron diffusion time constant in the TiO2 film usually appears in the 100–1 Hz frequency range, from which the electron lifetime can be calculated using the equation τn = 1/ωCT. Two regions were found in the Bode plots: (i) for areas <0.5 cm2, the peak frequency (fC) shifted systematically from 2.01 Hz to 7.54 Hz; and (ii) for areas >0.5 cm2, the fC ∼ 5.5 Hz with no systematic shift observed. For areas <0.5 cm2, the characteristic charge transfer frequency,ωCT, varied from ∼12.01 Hz to ∼47.35 Hz. The electron lifetime for the areas in the range 0.16–0.49 cm2 were ∼83.3 ms–21.1 ms. i.e., electrons are short lived as a result of enhanced diffusion path as the electrode area increases. For areas >0.5 cm2, the lifetime was ∼27.9 ms. Thus, if we assume that electrons live above ∼21 ms would be collected, devices with areas >0.5 cm2 is expected to show similar η. However, the η continuously decreased with electrode area.
 Fig. 8  Bode plots calculated from the Nyquist plot in Fig. 6 as a function of device area. 
To answer the inconsistency on the electron lifetime time in the above two area ranges, the RCT was extracted from the Nyquist plot using the transmission line model. Fig. 9 shows the variation of RCT against bias voltage for the entire range of areas of electrode developed in this study. The cells showed higher RCT for cells of lower areas and lowered nominally as the area increased, thereby explaining the area-dependent efficiency of the cells. i.e., the η of the devices follows the same trend as that of RCT. A steep fall in RCT was observed for areas >0.5 cm2, which further decreased systematically similar to those of areas <0.5 cm2. Note that VOC also showed a sharp decrease below this area indicating that a large fraction of electrons are not collected in devices of areas >0.5 cm2, above which both JSC and η vary drastically. Therefore, simultaneous lowering of RCT and improved lifetime in devices of area >0.5 cm2 suggest that electrons survived from recombination only are collected. The collected electrons from areas >0.5 cm2 have increased lifetime and the remaining fraction was lost due to enhanced diffusion pathways. The collected minor fraction of electrons, which is only ∼35% in device of ∼2 cm2 area compared to that in the 0.16 cm2 device, most likely result from the first few monolayers in contact with the working electrode. Therefore, the mechanism of area-dependent electron loss is fairly obvious as due to enhanced transit length; thereby lowering the RCT. Although it is known that if the time for transit is greater than that for iodide reduction, the electrons contribute to RCT rather than JSC, a thorough quantification considering the electrode area was not undertaken before.
 Fig. 9  Charge recombination resistance calculated from the diffusion–recombination model. 
To further study the effect of chemical potential as a function of device area and its relationship on the charge recombination of the DSCs, the chemical capacitance (Cμ)24,25 of the electrodes was calculated using the transmission line model and plotted against RCT. The Cμ is a measure of change in electron density on a small variation of chemical potential of the cell and has a Fermi level dependence of the form24,25 (2)
where N is the density of electronic states, e is the elementary charge, E0 is the bottom of the conduction band energy and T0 is the parameter with temperature units that determine the depth of the distribution of electronic states arise from surface states. The normalized Cμ with respect to device area showed no drastic variation as expected; but a nominal decrease was observed with respect to the device area (Fig. S3, ESI†). The observed lowering in Cμ most likely is of statistical origin; i.e., from the redistribution of localized energy states in the band gap25 as a result of increase in the area.
Because E0 and T0 in the eqn (2) are expected to be same for all devices made from same materials and independent of device-area, a plot of RCTvs. Cμ should indicate the electron recombination rate constant for constant N and EF. Fig. 10 shows the variation of RCT as a function of Cμ normalized with respect to the electrode area, which clearly shows that the RCT decrease with increase in device area. i.e., films of higher area are characterized by an increased rate of electron recombination and eventually result in inferior performance. As shown before, the increased rate of recombination results from varied electron paths as the electrode area increases. Therefore, diffusion length, defined as the electron path length in electron lifetime, needs to be redefined taking the area of the electrodes also into account. The thickness of the electrode is the only parameter considered so far for defining diffusion length in DSCs.
 Fig. 10  Plot of charge recombination resistance as a function of chemical capacitance. 
Thus, collection efficiency would be compromised in large area DSCs on account of high rate of electron recombination. Besides, the thickness of the film does not have much role to play in larger DSCs modules and panels. The generalized equation of state for a dye-sensitized solar cell can be written as η = f(α,Φin,ηc)(3)
where α is the absorption efficiency, Φin is the injection efficiency, and ηc is the collection efficiency. For a given dye–photoelectrode materials combination α and Φin taken constant values; therefore, optimizing ηc is the key to develop highly efficient commercial modules. We note that the present study is limited to conventional P25 particles. Although, many materials and morphologies have been developed recently that favors enhanced electron mobility and diffusivity,3,4,26,27 choice of highly efficient DSCs has always been the P25 particles owing to its ready availability and high specific surface area. Within the limitations of the present study, it follows that if P25 particles are used to fabricate DSCs, then the PV parameters should be reported in areas ≥0.5 cm2 in laboratory devices because below this value the η strongly differs. On the other hand, if high efficiency in DSCs is targeted using commercial TiO2 paste on account of its high specific surface area, results from this study would be helpful in designing new device structures. As an example, a peak power of 1 W could be achieved in 12 cm2 by arranging sixty state-of-the-art DSCs (η∼12.3%)5 of area ∼0.2 cm2 and thickness ∼15 μm in series.
Conclusions
A study has been undertaken to determine the dependence of photovoltaic parameters of dye-sensitized solar cells on the area of the photoelectrode fabricated using commercially available TiO2 paste consisting of 25 nm sized particles. The photovoltaic conversion efficiency and short circuit current density followed a biexponential decay with increase in the device area. If larger electrodes are fabricated, then electrons from smaller spatial domains contribute to the short circuit current density because they are short lived in electrodes of area above a threshold value due to varied choice of electron pathways. We identify that, within the limitations of the present study, the threshold area is ∼0.5 cm2, above which the photovoltaic parameters vary strongly; and therefore, this area should be set as a standard for reporting the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells. We showed that electrode thickness has no role in the currently adopted module designs, which are fabricated without knowledge on the dependence of electrode area on the photovoltaic parameters. Results from this study provide opportunities to build high efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells using the current choice of materials.
Acknowledgements
Authors are thankful to Dr Iván Mora-Seró, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló, Spain for helpful discussions. The work is supported by the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) of Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE), Government of Malaysia (RDU 120102).
References
J. Bisquert, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 1633–1636 Search PubMed .
T. W. Hamann and J. W. Ondersma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 370–381 RSC .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289–301 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. Wei-Guang Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu, F. Safari-Alamuti and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1556–1562 Search PubMed .
M. C. Kao, H. Z. Chen, S. L. Young, C. Y. Kung and C. C. Lin, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5096–5099 Search PubMed .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3175–3194 RSC .
M. R. Narayan, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2012, 16, 208–215 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang and G. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, J. Weng, Y. Sui, C. Shi, Y. Huang, S. Chen, X. Pan, X. Fang, L. Hu, F. Kong and K. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 84, 125–133 Search PubMed .
A. Hinsch, W. Veurman, H. Brandt, R. Loayza Aguirre, K. Bialecka and K. Flarup Jensen, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 698–710 Search PubMed .
L. Han, A. Fukui, Y. Chiba, A. Islam, R. Komiya, N. Fuke, N. Koide, R. Yamanaka and M. Shimizu, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 94 .
Y. Jun, J. H. Son, D. Sohn and M. G. Kang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 200, 314–317 Search PubMed .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, N. Kato, K. Higuchi, A. Takeichi, T. Motohiro, S. Fukumoto, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 808–811 Search PubMed .
T. C. Wei, J. L. Lan, C. C. Wan, W. C. Hsu and Y. H. Chang, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2012 DOI:10.1002/pip.2252 .
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Gratzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613–4619 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg and M. C. Hanna, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3605–3614 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Seró, G. Garcia-Belmonte, E. M. Barea and E. Palomares, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 684–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, N. S. Ferriols, P. Bogdanoff and E. C. Pereira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Grätzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17163–17168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5360–5364 RSC .
P. S. Archana, R. Jose, M. M. Yusoff and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 152106 Search PubMed .
E. Naveen Kumar, R. Jose, P. S. Archana, C. Vijila, M. M. Yusoff and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5401–5407 RSC .

Footnote† Supplementary information: FESEM images to analyze thickness of the prepared electrodes, shift in the characteristic frequency corresponding to charge recombination as a function of device area, and chemical capacitance as a function of bias voltage for the entire area ranges considered in this study.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Current–voltage characteristics of devices measured at AM 1.5 conditions. (B) Representative power output curves showing the relative shifts in VOC and maximum power output.	 

 	Fig. 2  Efficiency of cells as a function of electrode area fitted to biexponential decay.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) JSC, (B) Fill Factor, and (C) VOC as a function of device area; (D) is an enlarged view of VOC of region 1, showing that the value remained constant for area up to ∼0.5 cm2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cartoon showing the enhanced diffusion paths as a result of larger electrode areas. The area inside red dashed is the active area for the working electrode where the electrons are to be collected, while the red dot shows an electron at the surface of semiconductor to be moved by a distance of x and x′; and “d” is the film thickness.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (A) Cartoon showing the relationship between the materials in DSCs and charge transport parameters in the diffusion–recombination model. (B) EIS spectrum showing the three processes as explained in the text. The “W” stands for resistance to ion diffusion. Refer to the text for details.	 

 	Fig. 6  (Top) Representative EIS spectra as a function of device areas; (bottom) magnified portion showing the EIS curves of the devices of higher areas.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) AC impedance of the devices as a function of frequency for representative areas; (B) electrical transport resistance calculated using the diffusion–recombination model.	 

 	Fig. 8  Bode plots calculated from the Nyquist plot in Fig. 6 as a function of device area.	 

 	Fig. 9  Charge recombination resistance calculated from the diffusion–recombination model.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 10  Plot of charge recombination resistance as a function of chemical capacitance.	 
η = f(α,Φin,ηc)	(3)
Footnote
† Supplementary information: FESEM images to analyze thickness of the prepared electrodes, shift in the characteristic frequency corresponding to charge recombination as a function of device area, and chemical capacitance as a function of bias voltage for the entire area ranges considered in this study.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
