Ionic migration induced loss analysis of perovskite solar cells: a poling study   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP05450C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP05450C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 7805-7814Ionic migration induced loss analysis of perovskite solar cells: a poling study†

        
          
            Xue 
            Zheng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Wenjie 
            Ming‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Pingping 
            Liu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongfei 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weimin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Boyuan 
            Huang
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Huan 
            Wang
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Chunlei 
            Yang
          
        
      *a
aShenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: cl.yang@siat.ac.cn
bKey Laboratory of Low Dimensional Materials and Application Technology of Ministry of Education, and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, Hunan 411105, China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
dSchool of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, 230009, China
Received 
      30th November 2021
    , Accepted 14th February 2022First published on 15th February 2022AbstractUnderstanding the interplay between ionic migration and defect trapping in photovoltaic perovskites is critical to develop targeted passivation techniques for performance enhancement. In this study, systematic poling experiments on Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) were conducted to resolve the principal effects of bias dependent pretreatment effects due to dynamic ionic migration. We find that under negative polarizations, iodine ion accumulation at perovskite/electron transport layer (ETL) interfaces causes enhanced global non-radiative recombination in PSCs and significant open-circuit voltage (Voc) losses. On the other hand, dramatic short-circuit current (Jsc) reduction occurs in positively polarized devices, which is ascribed to ineffective charge collection due to modified band-bending towards both charge transport materials. Spatiotemporally scanning probe microscopy on the surface of polarized perovskites provides an in situ estimation of iodine diffusion mobility and visualization of reorganizations under an external bias. Moreover, our findings suggest that the precondition effect of PSCs under operation due to defect ions is recoverable, therefore achieving a respectable lifetime of PSCs for commercialization is promising.
1. Introduction
Organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites (OIHPs) possess excellent opto-electronic properties including high defect tolerance, high absorption coefficient and high exciton binding energy, greatly expanding their applications in photovoltaics, light emitting diodes and wearable devices.1–5 In particular, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) achieved certified skyrocketing efficiencies of 25.5% by the end of 2020.6 However, the photocurrent–voltage (J–V) response of PSCs is significantly influenced by the voltage scan direction, rate, precondition and the device architecture.7–10 This anomalous J–V hysteric effects on carrier transport, defect trapping and charge recombination are caused by intrinsic ionic–electronic coupling in OIHPs.9,11–15 The voltage preconditioning effect refers to the dependence of photovoltaic parameters such as open circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) on the electric bias pretreatment in PSCs.16–19 This effect raises serious concerns for long-term stabilities of solar cell operations, thus hindering their future development. Ferroelectric polarizations of perovskites, which are attributed to rotation and reorientation of organic cations, have been proposed to interpret the effects of external bias on the carrier transport of perovskites.20–22
The origin of J–V hysteresis behavior is still under debate and has been proposed to originate from an ion-migration-induced capacitive effect, contact barrier modification, defect assisted trapping and de-trapping processes, and the ferroelectric effect. More related evidence of scan rate-dependent and transient photo-current behavior is that the time scale for ion migration induced barrier modification to reach equilibrium conditions is in the order of several minutes, while the time scale for interface charge recombination is in the order of milliseconds.23 Ionic migration in perovskites not only modifies the bulk band-banding and defect configurations, but also regulates the interface transport barrier and interface recombination. Chen et al. performed step-wise transient photo-current decay measurements to distinguish the effects of capacitive current and interface barrier modifications on steady-state and non-steady-state hysteric J–V responses.24 The former effect is related to previous voltage conditioning. Zhao et al. reported polarity-switchable photovoltaic PSCs preset under a large bias due to modified band bending in the perovskite bulk.25 Grätzel's group pointed out the delayed reduction in built-in potential (Vbi) across the perovskite layer by accumulated ions close to the contacts results in a hysteresis effect.7 Rong et al. found that manipulating the modified band-bending at the interface is also practical to achieve hysteresis tunable solar cells, via adjusting the work function of electron transport materials.26 Similar studies disclosed that elimination of the hysteresis effect can be achieved via fullerene passivation of interface defects.27 Calado et al. concluded that correlations between ionic charge and high interface recombination is essential to device hysteresis.28 A review from Bisquert et al. summarizes that charge recombination in PSCs mediated by mobile ionic defects is linked with surface electrochemical interactions.29 The activated ion migration under an external electric field is speculated to cause additional charge accumulation at contact interfaces, which promote retarded built-in potential changes as voltage sweeps, affecting the charge carrier transport efficiency.
The giant capacitance and dielectric constant effects at low-frequency in PSCs have been observed by Juarez-Perez et al.30 Furthermore, temperature-dependent thermal admittance spectroscopy is an ideal tool to quantitatively analyze the activation energy and density of states (DOS) of dominant defect ions in the perovskite bulk within the low-frequency scheme.9,31,32 Recent publications have dedicated more to developing transient space charge microscopy to elucidate interface and bulk deep-level defect properties in perovskites.33–36 In our previous studies, with quantitative defect profiling, we proposed that iodine migration leads to the formation of deep-level surface defects, enhancing the non-radiative recombination.37 Besides the device-level characterization methods, nanoscale insight into the role of mobile ions in perovskites has been comprehensively demonstrated by scanning probe microscopy (SPM) via atomic force microscopy (AFM). Ginger et al. developed time-resolved Kelvin probe force microscopy to equilibrate surface photo-voltage variations induced by ionic motion in 2-dimensional (2D) perovskites.38 Similar lateral electrode geometry was also used by Birhold et al. to correlate temporal changes in in situ photoluminescence and surface potential on FAPbI3 perovskite films via Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM).39
The above-reviewed electronically and thermally activated complex interactions among ionic reorganization, carrier dynamics and defect states under an external field are of vital importance to solar cell performances since PSCs are typically polarized at the maximum-power-point (MPP) under working conditions. However, the effects of preconditioned voltages on photovoltaic parameters of PSCs and the following relaxation process are yet to be shown conclusively. Although direct phenomena of photocurrent and photovoltage losses linked with ionic drift and accumulation in the nanoscale have been observed, the physical mechanisms of modulated electronic defect profiles and band bending due to ionic migration must be explicitly illustrated with specific characterization tools.
In this study, we aim to find the origin of the voltage preconditioning effect of PSCs which can link the ion dynamics to the device performances under various polarizations. The correlation between slow ion migration and photovoltaic electrical parameters is confirmed by polarized external quantum efficiency spectroscopy and thermal admittance spectroscopy. Next, we proposed spatiotemporally Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) to distinguish negatively charged iodine ions (I−) with respect to bulk band-bending. Different efficiency loss mechanisms related to ion dynamics are distinguished for PSCs under opposite polarization: enhanced charge recombination at contact interfaces and inhibited carrier transport. More importantly, the defect ion migration induced short-circuit current density (Jsc) and open-circuit voltages (Voc) are reversible and can be fully recovered under the dark relaxation conditions.
2. Results and discussion
Triple-cation mixed-halide perovskite films of composition Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 (CsFAMA) were synthesized on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates deposited with nickel oxide (NiO) as the hole transport layer (HTL), as described in our previously published work.40 Using [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) as the electron transport layer (ETL) and bathocuproine (BCP) as the hole blocking layer (HBL), inverted planar perovskite solar cells with the architecture of glass/FTO/NiO/CsFAMA/PC61BM/BCP were fabricated as shown in Fig. 1a, highlighting the polarities of FTO and the top Ag electrode. The surface and cross-sectional morphologies of the perovskite film were examined using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 1b and c, revealing compact polycrystalline films with good coverage. The J–V characteristics of the as-fabricated PSCs are shown in Fig. 1d, exhibiting decent power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of 19.55% and 20.10%, under forward and reverse scans with negligible hysteresis. We first short-circuit the device to relax any accumulated surface charges in the dark, then electrically poled the solar cells under both positive and negative voltages for 4–5 minutes in the dark. The steady state J–V curves during the reverse scan (from open-circuit conditions to short-circuit conditions) immediately after polarization are summarized in Fig. 1e and f. The detailed polarization measurement can be found in the Experimental section. The electrical parameters including Jsc, Voc, fill-factor (FF) and PCE are summarized in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI†). Remarkable Jsc reduction was observed in the positively polarized devices, while dramatic large Voc and FF decreases were observed in negatively polarized devices. The same effects could also be seen in forward scanned J–V curves, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Most importantly, all these electrical parameters of solar cells recover to an initial state within 30 minutes under dark and open-circuit conditions, as shown in Fig. 1g and h and Fig. S2 (ESI†), which suggest an electric field-assisted reversible process related to slow mobile ions. As an initial hypothesis, the current losses under forward bias demonstrate inefficient charge collection, either from increased band-bending or reduced built-in potential. The Voc and FF losses are closely connected to the non-radiative Shockley Read Hall (SRH) recombination in the devices, which may be accelerated by an increased defect density in the perovskite bulk due to ion drift under an external bias.41,42 Next, we performed external quantum efficiency (EQE) and thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS) on the as-fabricated and polarized devices.
 Fig. 1  Microstructure, device performance and poled J–V characteristics. (a) Device architecture prepared in this work, with indicated polarities of front and bottom electrodes and illumination; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of FTO/HTL/CsFAMA; (c) top-view SEM images of the as-fabricated CsFAMA perovskites; (d) representative J–V curves and photovoltaic performances of PSCs. J–V curves during reverse scan for (e) positively polarized devices and (f) negatively polarized devices. The short-circuit current density recovery of positively polarized devices (g) and open-circuit voltage recovery of negatively polarized devices (h). 

Fig. 2a and b show the bias-dependent external quantum efficiency of PSCs as a function of wavelength. The valley-shape efficiency decrease at around 650 nm is due to the un-optimized thickness of the FTO films, resulting in light diffraction and transmission. It is notable that under positive polarization, the collection efficiency in the wavelength range of 450–750 nm is reduced significantly. In contrast, the quantum efficiency for negatively polarized devices only exhibits minor degradations in the long-wavelength region (700–850 nm). We also examine the penetration depth using the Beer–Lambert law via the absorption spectrum of perovskite films fabricated in this work, referred to as the right axis of Fig. 2a. The estimated penetration depth of long-wavelength photons (λ > 700 nm) is larger than the thickness of the perovskite (400 nm). Therefore, following the illumination pathways shown in Fig. 1a, the collection probabilities of photo-generated carriers close to the ETL side are limited in polarized perovskites. In addition, from Fig. 2a, the absorption in the wavelength region of 300–500 nm is higher than the external quantum efficiency. This “blue loss” is interpreted as front surface recombination, an HTL/perovskite interface for instance. Specifically, in the wavelength range of 500–700 nm, the EQE decrement for positively polarized solar cells could be caused by the modification of band bending in the bulk leading to decreased carrier transport or depletion region width (w). Next, we performed capacitance profiling to identify the depletion layer capacitance response of perovskites.
 Fig. 2  External quantum efficiency, capacitance profiling, and defect analysis of polarized devices. Measured EQE as a function of the wavelength of PSCs under positive polarizations (a) and negative polarizations (b). The absorption coefficient of CsFAMA perovskite films is also shown in black open squares in (a). (c) C–V characteristics of PSCs under various polarizations, highlighted with three dominant capacitance features Cg (geometry capacitance), Cdl (depletion layer capacitance) and Cs (surface capacitance) and extracted Vbi; (d) capacitance–frequency characteristics of PSCs under zero bias; (e) the Arrhenius plot of ln(ω/T2) ∼ 1/T and estimated activation energy level of defects; (f) the calculated density of states of defects under negative polarizations (V = −1.0 V). The amplitude of the AC signal is 50 mV (see the Experimental section). 

Fig. 2c shows the capacitance–voltage (C–V) curves and Mott–Schottky (MS) plot for both the as-fabricated and polarized solar cells, and the estimated charge density profile as a function of profiling distance is depicted in Fig. S3 (ESI†). Detailed measurements and the calculation process can be found in the Experimental section. First, three voltage regions can be clearly differentiated: the geometry capacitance (Cgeo), depletion layer capacitance (Cdl) and surface capacitance (Cs). The validity of MS analysis to extract the built-in potential (Vbi) is substantiated by the linear trend of C−2(V) in a limited range of applied bias (0.6–1.0 V), contributed by Cdl as shown in Fig. 2c. The presence of enormous surface capacitance Cs, originating from low-frequency capacitance, has been observed by Juarez-Perez et al.30 The resulting capacitive current provides hysteresis behavior in the dark, which is attributed to ions accumulating at the perovskite/contact layer interface.24 Almora et al. reported exponentially increased Cs and a sudden drop of C−2(V) as the external bias approaches Vbi in MAPbI3−xClx based devices with a mesoporous TiO2 matrix.43 However, due to the different charge transport materials used in this work, the amount of accumulated surface ions is lower, which deviates from the exponential relationships.
From Fig. 1c, it is obvious that the Vbi for the as-fabricated, positively polarized and negatively polarized solar cells is 1.10 V, 1.11 V and 1.20 V, respectively. This indicates that the work function level of the ETL and HTL does not shift with the poling process. Furthermore, both the as-fabricated and polarized devices have achieved full depletion conditions due to the capacitance saturation at reverse bias (Fig. S4, ESI†), suggesting enough diffusion length for photo-generated carriers. Thus, the EQE reduction in the wavelength range of 500–700 nm for positively polarized devices and the resultant photocurrent losses cannot be explained by the decreased depletion region width. Similar experimental results can be found from previous studies.44,45 This provokes us to further explore defect analysis by thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS). TAS enables quantitative distinction between slow mobile ions, and trap/de-trapping of fast electrons and holes in the frequency domain, from a capacitive response.46–49

Fig. 2d shows the original capacitance–frequency (C–f) characteristics of PSCs under thermal equilibrium conditions (V = 0). As pinpointed in Fig. 2c, the excess capacitance at low-frequencies corresponds to Cs which is attributed to ionic accumulation mechanisms located at the electrode interfaces. As frequency increases, the deep-level defects play a vital role in the capacitance response, which correspond to Cdl at an intermediate forward bias in C–V profiles, thus referred to as “dielectric polarization”. The characteristic frequency (ω0), which is extracted from the maximum of the scaled derivative ω/kT dC/dω, exhibits an exponential relationship to the activation energy level (EA) of the dominated defects: (1)where γ0 is the temperature-dependent variable and named the “time-to-escape frequency”, which defines the maximum frequency of de-trapping cycles.50 Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows the scaled derivative of PSCs extracted from original C–f measurements. The Arrhenius plot of characteristic frequency as a function of 1/T for PSCs is displayed in Fig. 2e, also specified with an estimated EA of the defect. The defect locates at 0.199 eV above the valence band (VB) for the as-fabricated solar cells, while it increases to 0.337 eV after negative polarization. However, the EA for positively polarized devices is slightly uplifted to 0.232 eV above the VB level. The increased defect level not only decreases the hole concentration and p-type conductivities of the perovskites, but also increases the electron trapping rate and enhances bulk recombination through SRH mechanisms, leading to degradation in Voc and FF. Furthermore, we estimate the density of states (Nt) profile of these deep-level traps, using the equation below: (2)
The depletion layer width is calculated based on a classic parallel capacitor (see the Experimental section). Fig. 2f depicts the estimated density of states (DOS) against energy depth from the valence band edge for PSCs under a negative bias (V = −1.0 V). Fig. S6 (ESI†) shows the corresponding DOS profiles for PSCs under zero and positive polarizations. A secondary defect band besides the dominated peaks can be observed for polarized devices, corresponding to low-frequency C–f characteristics contributed by ion accumulation at contact interfaces (Cs).37 The total defect density is around 3 × 1016 cm−3 eV−1 for zero biased devices, which increases to 1 × 1017 cm−3 eV−1 for negatively polarized devices. However, the total defect density for positively polarized devices remains nearly unchanged. This quantitative defect analysis confirms the influences of ion migration on the DOS and EA of bulk defects, which promote the charge trapping and recombination process of photo-generated carriers.
The aforementioned device-level characterization features an increased defect density for negatively polarized devices. However, the modified band-bending due to ion migration and diffusion in the CsFAMA perovskite, which leads to EQE decrement in the wavelength range of 500–700 nm, is not substantiated yet. Both assertions should be strongly correlated with field-induced charge motion at the nanoscale. Therefore it is necessary to probe the local surface potential (SP) variations on the perovskite surface induced by ion redistribution under extreme electrical forces using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM).39,51–54 The generation of an electric field is facilitated by an in-plane deposited gold (Au) electrode using electron-beam evaporation (see the Experimental section for details). The distance of the in-plane electrode is 50 μm, generating an electric field of 103 V cm−1, which is large enough to drive ion migration.55Fig. 3a and b show a schematic of the KPFM measurement setup with an AFM tip, as well as the external bias connection. A rectangle of 20 μm × 7 μm (abcd) is scanned from the ab to dc side, following a scan rate of 1 Hz. The left side (ad) of the scanned area is located in the anode position. The anode potential is varied from +6 V to −4 V, and the cathode potential is referenced to 1 V, forming an electrical potential of +5 V and −5 V, respectively. Fig. 3c and d show the potential mapping image while the “ON” state of the anode potential is turned to +6 V and −4 V, named “positive polarization” and “negative polarization”, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Local surface potential mapping on CsFAMA perovskites using KPFM. (a) Schematic of the scan area and scan direction of the AFM tip under an external DC bias; (b) the measurement setup of KPFM on perovskites excited via in-plane electrode; (c and d) the surface potential mapping of perovskites under opposite polarizations; (e and f) distributions of seven cut-off line scans of the surface potential on the perovskites which correspond to the polarization conditions in (c and d), respectively. The color of line 1 to line 7 in (c) is the same as that of legend in (e). 
In Fig. 3c and d, a graded surface potential mapping is obvious both spatially from the ad to bc side, and temporally from the ab to dc side. To quantitatively analyze potential variations, seven homogeneously distributed line scans on the perovskite surface are recorded in Fig. 3e and f, with line 1 and line 7 located approximately 1 μm away from the ad and bc side, respectively. Thus line 1 and line 7 represent the surface potential of the Au anode and the bulk of the perovskite, respectively. Any variations in the potential levels between these lines indicate spatial scales of lateral ionic migration. Meanwhile, for each line scan, the SP dispersions from the bottom (ab) to the top (dc) perovskite surface following the scan direction render temporal variations of ion migration, based on the scan rate.
In the beginning, there are no potential drops across the parallel electrode during the “OFF” state; thus, the surface potential is uniform and the same as that of the referenced cathode (1 V). Under positive polarization, at the “ON” state, a sharp potential increase of line 1 to 5.5 V can be observed (line 1). A minimal potential drop on the electrode can be neglected. Due to lower conductivities of the perovskites, the initial potential of line 7 is lower than line 1.53 Furthermore, in Fig. 3e, in contrast to the uniformly distributed SP of line 7, a hysteric behavior along the ad side is observed for line 1. Particularly, the SP of line 1 gradually reduces from 5.8 V to 4.8 V, as the probe scans from the bottom (ab) to the top (dc) surface of the perovskite.
Next, we reversed the anode potential to “negative polarization” conditions (Fig. 3f). Similarly, during the “OFF” state, the surface potential is uniform and the same as that of the referenced cathode (1 V). During the “ON” state, the anode potential is turned to −4 V, and therefore a sharp potential decrease of line 1 to −3.5 V can be observed. The initial potential of line 7 is higher due to a potential drop on the perovskite. Different from Fig. 3e, similar hysteresis behavior is observed for line 7, which gradually reduces from −1 V to −2 V as the probe scans from the bottom (ab) to the top (dc) surface of the perovskite.
Each scanned KPFM mapping image includes 256 lines from the ab to dc side, taking up several minutes. This minute time scale agrees with ion migration and redistribution under external forces.23,45 In addition, slow changes in surface potential during scanning, compared to a sharp upon “ON” or “OFF” state suggest the origin of dynamic behavior of mobile ions. Therefore, the temporal variations of SP in each line scan are dependent on the potential sign of the anode and dominated mobile ion charges. For the positive polarization condition plot in Fig. 3e, if the positively charged ions are repelled from the anode (+6 V), the SP of line 7 is supposed to be hysteric during the “ON” state and increased from the bottom (ab) to the top surface (dc) of the perovskite as the scan distance increases. Similarly, for the negative polarization conditions shown in Fig. 3f, if the positively charged ions are attracted to the anode (−4 V) during “ON” state scanning, the hysteric SP will occur for line 1 during the “ON” state due to ion accumulation at the ad side of the scanned rectangle. Also, as the scan distance increases to the dc side, the SP of line 1 will be elevated.
Therefore, based on the measured line scan of the surface potential distribution, it is concluded that the negatively charged ions are dominant in the perovskites fabricated in this work, most probably, iodine ions I−. As the anode potential increases to +6 V, large amounts of I− are attracted to the anode. The slow migration behavior leads to reduced SP at line 1, as the scan progresses to the top surface (dc) of perovskites, while the concentration of I− at line 7 remains nearly unchanged. In contrast, as the anode potential reduces to −4 V, I− ions located at the anode region should be repelled towards line 7, lowering the SP of the top surface (dc) of the perovskite. Based on the above discussions, assuming the ion migration occurs over half the distance of the length of the ab side, 10 μm, approximately 220 s ± 20 s are necessary for the AFM tip scans from the bottom (ab) to the top surface (dc) of the perovskites, leading to a potential reduction of line 1. This implies a migration mobility (μ) of 4 × 10−9 ± 0.5 × 10−9 cm2 V−1 s−1, where μ is defined as the ratio between ion drifting velocity and electric field (μ = v/E). In the literature, the ion mobility is reported to be 1.5 × 10−9 ± 0.5 × 10−9 cm2 V−1 s−1 at an electric field of 1.5 V μm−1.55–58 Therefore, the spatiotemporally KPFM methodology provides quantifications of iodine mobility and diffusion coefficient under an external electric field.
The local surface potential assessment by microscopic KPFM provides direct evidence for iodine ion movement in our as-fabricated CsFAMA perovskites. Therefore, the defect and quantum efficiency studies for solar cells and related performance degradation due to external polarizations can be linked with dynamic iodine drift and diffusion. Fig. 4 illustrates the band diagram under thermal equilibrium for the ETL/perovskite/HTL hetero-junction at short-circuit, large positive bias and large negative bias conditions. The electrons and holes, I− and corresponding positive charges due to the law of conservation of charges are highlighted with black solid, black open, green and red solid circles, respectively.
 Fig. 4  The band diagram for perovskites at short-circuit (a), large positive bias (b) and large negative bias (c) conditions under illumination. Generation and recombination in the perovskite layer is denoted as G and R, respectively. Mobile ion accumulation at the perovskite/CTL interfaces are represented by green (iodine interstitials) and red (iodine vacancies) solid circles. Photo-generated-electrons and holes are represented by black solid and open circles, respectively. The dotted lines specify the Fermi level for electrons (EFn) and for holes (EFp), which are split by external bias V. The downward arrow represents the positive polarizations while the upward arrow represents negative polarizations. Under large negative poling conditions, enhanced interface defect recombination is emphasized with a yellow cross due to I− ion accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface. 
In the thermal equilibrium state, the built-in potential of perovskites which is determined by the work function difference of the ETL and HTL is screened, due to ion migration and accumulation at electrode interfaces. Specifically, most I− ions are accumulated at ETL/perovskite interfaces, while induced positive ionic charges are located at HTL/perovskites interfaces. Under these circumstances, the effective collection of photo-generated carriers by the charge transport material is enabled via diffusion, due to a fully depleted perovskite layer. Under a large forward bias, large amounts of mobile I− are attracted towards and pile up at the perovskite/HTL interface, lowering the valence band edge. This is also perceptible in the KPFM line scan for line 1 in Fig. 3e. The modified band-bending introduces an additional transport barrier for photo-generated holes. Similarly, the piling up of positive charges at the ETL/perovskite interfaces lifts up the conduction band edge, which is detrimental to photo-generated electron transport. This interprets the reduced quantum efficiency spectrum in the wavelength range of 500–700 nm. The charge collection is thus diminished resulting in reduced Jsc. Under a large reverse bias, a large amount of I− is driven to the ETL/perovskite interface, which further lowers the conduction band. Though the increased band bending improves the net built-in potential which is beneficial for carrier transport, the enhanced recombination through defect states due to I− accumulation at ETL/perovskite interfaces is preponderated. This mechanism explains the collection losses for the long-wavelength photons in negatively polarized PSCs in Fig. 2b, and also interprets the increased EA and DOS of deep-level defects in Fig. 2e and f. From the above discussions, surface passivation towards iodine ions discharging from perovskite/ETL interfaces will be efficient in preventing performance degradation in negatively charged PSCs. However, neutralizing the positive charges at perovskite/ETL interfaces to restore the downward band bending towards an electron transport material will be useful for positively charged PSCs.
3. Conclusions
In summary, we have performed comprehensive loss analysis on triple-cation mixed-halide perovskite solar cells under polarization, and suggest two main ion migration induced Jsc and Voc degradation mechanisms through macroscopic defect and microscopic SPM characterization. We confirm the dominant I− ion migration under external poling bias, which modifies the charge collection and trap-assisted recombination of the solar cells. The remarkably reduced Jsc under a large positive bias is mainly due to the transport barrier formed at the ETL interface. On the other hand, under large negative polarizations, the piling up of I− presents as deep-level acceptors, and the diffusion of I− ions increases the total defect density, which enhances the trap-assisted SRH recombination and deterioriates the Voc and FF of solar cells. However, both effects can be recovered under dark and open-circuit conditions. Moreover, this work points out the influences of an external bias on the depletion layer properties and charge collection in the PSCs is supposed to be re-evaluated by space charge spectroscopy, TAS, for instance, due to screening effects of ionic migration. We propose that the bias dependent pretreatment effects in PSCs can be relieved through dark relaxation. However, to improve long-term stabilities of PSCs working under various conditions, targeted surface passivation techniques towards either improved photo-voltage or photo-current are necessary.
4. Experimental section
4.1 Material synthesis and precursor preparation
All the chemicals were commercially purchased and used as received. Lead iodide (PbI2) (99.99%), cesium iodide (CsI) (99.98%), lead bromide (PbBr2), anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF) (99.8%), anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (99.9%), and anhydrous chlorobenzene (CB)(99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. NH = CHNH3I (FAI) (99.5%), CH3NH3Br (MABr) (99.5%), [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) (99%), and bathocuproine (BCP) (99%) were purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corp. For the hole transport material, nickel acetylacetonate (95%) and anhydrous acetonitrile (99.8%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
To prepare the hole transport layer, a precursor solution of 5 mg mL−1 nickel(II) acetylacetonate was dissolved in a mixture of acetonitrile and ethanol (v:v = 95:5). The CsFAMA perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing FAI (1 M), PbI2 (1.05 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.22 M) in anhydrous DMF:DMSO (v:v = 4:1). Then, a 7 μL solution of CsI dissolved in pure DMSO with a concentration of 1.5 M was added to 1 mL of the abovementioned mixed solution. The precursor solution was spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and 4000 rpm for 30 s, and then after 5 s, 100 μL of antisolvent chlorobenzene was jetted onto the spinning substrate 5 s prior to the end of the program. The film was then annealed at 100 °C for 40 min in a nitrogen filled glove box.
For solar cell fabrication, the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated glass substrates (15 ohms sq−1) were sequentially cleaned using detergent, deionized water, ethanol and acetone by ultra-sonication for 15 min, and subsequently dried under compressed clean air. Then ∼20 nm thick compact nickel oxide (NiO) was deposited onto the FTO substrate by spray pyrolysis, followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min to crystallize. After cooling down to room temperature, the perovskite absorber was deposited with the method described above. After cooling down to room temperature, ∼40 nm thick PCBM was coated on the FTO/NiO/CsFAMA substrate with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1 at 2000 rpm for 30 s. Then, a saturated BCP solution with a concentration of 0.5 mg mL−1 was deposited on PCBM at 5000 rpm−1 for 30 s. Finally, ∼100 nm of Ag was formed as the top electrode by thermal evaporation to complete the device fabrication.
4.2 Device characterization
The illuminated J–V characteristics of the solar cells were measured using a Keithley 2400, with a built-in solar simulator (Newport, xenon lamp, 450 W) in a glove box (AM 1.5, 100 mW m−2). The bias poling experiment was also conducted in the glove box in the dark with a DC voltage generated using a Keithley 2400. The voltage was applied for 4 minutes each cycle and both forward and reverse scans of the illuminated J–V curves were measured immediately after poling. The reverse scanned J–V curves are shown in the main text. During the J–V measurement, the scan rate is 50 mV s−1 and it increases/decreases 0.01 V per step. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using an EQE-R quantum efficiency analyzer from Enlitech Taiwan Corp. The measuring wavelength range is set from 350 nm to 850 nm. The thermal admittance spectroscopy spectra were obtained using an admittance analyzer from Tonghui electronics (model: TH2838S) together with a home-built close-loop circulatory cryosystem. A four-point probe measurement scheme was used to eliminate the contact resistance. The AC perturbation was of 20–50 mV, adjustable during measurement for a high signal-to-noise ratio. Each frequency spectrum was acquired in the range of 20 Hz to 1 MHz at a given constant temperature, which was changed between 250 K and 330 K at steps of 10 K. Prior to each measurement, the cell was kept for 5 minutes for temperature stabilization. The scan rate of each frequency point was set as medium, allowing for any possible physical contributions from deep traps, ionic movement, etc. to the total capacitance. The capacitance proofing (C–V) characteristics were recorded using the same equipment except for the voltage increment from 0 V to 1.3 V under dark conditions. The excitation frequency of the small perturbation signal is set as 50 kHz to identify the depletion layer capacitance (Cdl). Thus, the built-in potential can be correctly estimated from Mott–Schottky analysis.
4.3 Calculations for Vbi, w, N, EA and defect density of states (Nt)
The equation for depletion layer capacitance (Cdl) as a function of applied bias in an abrupt p–n junction can be approximated as: (3)where ε0 and ε represent the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite and the vacuum permittivity, respectively. N is the total charge density contributed to the junction capacitance; on the other hand, for a lightly doped perovskite, N can be conceived as the defect density. In conventional Mott–Schottky (MS) analysis, the common relationship Cdl−2 = 2(Vbi − V)/qεε0N is presented for V < Vbi. Therefore, Vbi can be extracted by interpolating Cdl−2 towards the voltage axis (eqn (3)). The depletion region width can be calculated assuming a classic parallel plate capacitor with equation: w = εε0/Cg. Cg is perceived as the geometry capacitance at a dielectric polarization regime in the C–f curves, which is estimated to be 85 nF cm−2, 44 nF cm−2 and 45 nF cm−2, for PSCs under zero, +1.0 V and −1.0 V bias, respectively. The dielectric constant for CsFAMA perovskites is assumed to be 30, which is normally accepted in the literature. Thus the calculated depletion layer width is 312.3 nm, 603.4 nm and 590 nm for PSCs under zero, +1.0 V and −1.0 V bias, respectively.
Based on eqn (3), the total charge density N is written as: (4)
The maximum frequency (ω0) that a defect at an energy level Eω within the bandgap can contribute to the junction capacitance is written as:  ω0 is obtained by finding the maxima of the so-called “scaled derivative” (−ω/kTdC/dω) as a function of the frequency axis. The activation energy level (EA) of defects is defined as the distance between contributed defects (Eω) and the edge of the valence band in the energy scale, which is normalized to zero. Practically, EA is estimated by drawing an Arrhenius plot between the inflection frequency divided by T2(ω0/T2) versus 1/T.
4.4 Kelvin-probe force microscopy
For KPFM measurements, we used a commercial AFM system (Asylum Research Cypher ES) in the dark under a nitrogen flow using a conductive probe (AC-240TM, ∼60 kHz and ∼3 N m−1). The dual-amplitude resonance tracking, which employs an AC voltage of 2 V was applied to the conductive probe. A detailed method to track the resonant frequency can be found in our previously published paper.37 All the measurements were carried out in an ambient N2 flow over a 6 μm × 20 μm area with a scan rate of 1 Hz. Before measurements, the cantilever was calibrated by the thermal fluctuation method to covert the voltage to displacement. For polarized-perovskite films, the parallel gold electrode was deposited on CsFAMA films within a distance of 50 μm using e-beam evaporation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is primarily sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52003288, 52002393). We acknowledge financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1500200) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. JZ2021HGQA0191). This work is partially supported by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (Grant No. JCYJ20210324101801004, JCYJ20200109114801744, JCYJ20190807161001747, JCYJ20180507182431967, JCYJ20180507182257563).
References
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. M. Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M. Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Science, 2020, 370, 1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, F. Liu, S. Shrestha, K. Fernando, S. Tretiak, B. Scott, D. T. Vo, J. Strzalka and W. Nie, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay0815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-K. Liu, W. Xu, S. Bai, Y. Jin, J. Wang, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, A. Liu and Y.-Y. Noh, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 662 CrossRef .
B. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang and J. Li, Nat. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwab094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL Best research-cell efficiency chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies-rev210726.pdf.
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995 RSC .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumüller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690 RSC .
O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, D. Meggiolaro, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3180 RSC .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sheng, A. Mei, Q. Wang, D. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383 RSC .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581 RSC .
P. Lopez-Varo, J. A. Jiménez-Tejada, M. García-Rosell, S. Ravishankar, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and O. Almora, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702772 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, X. Zheng, C. Wu, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Z. Razera, D. A. Jacobs, F. Fu, P. Fiala, M. Dussouillez, F. Sahli, T. C. J. Yang, L. Ding, A. Walter, A. F. Feil, H. I. Boudinov, S. Nicolay, C. Ballif and Q. Jeangros, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 242 RSC .
B. Chen, X. Zheng, M. Yang, Y. Yuan, S. Kundu, J. Shi, K. Zhu and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(1), 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Li, C. Li, F. Feng, Y. Yao, X. Cui and J. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22784–22792 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, A. Guerrero, A. Bou, A. M. Al-Mayouf and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2054 RSC .
B. Chen, M. Yang, X. Zheng, C. Wu, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sheng, A. Mei, Q. Wang, D. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383 RSC .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and P. R. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, A. Guerrero, A. Bou, A. M. Al-Mayouf and J. Bisquert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2054 RSC .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, M. García-Batlle and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, C. Aranda, I. Zarazua, A. Guerrero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 209 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Le Corre, E. A. Duijnstee, O. El Tambouli, J. M. Ball, H. J. Snaith, J. Lim and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almora, M. García-Batlle and G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. C, 2019, 10, 3661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reichert, J. Flemming, Q. An, Y. Vaynzof, J.-F. Pietschmann and C. Deibel, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2020, 13, 034018 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, X. Wang, W. Li, Z. Liu, W. Ming, H. Wang, H. Wang, D. Li, B. Liu and C. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 19551 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, J. Pothoof, F. Muckel, R. Giridharagopal, J. Wang and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 100 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Birkhold, J. T. Precht, H. Liu, R. Giridharagopal, G. E. Eperon, L. Schmidt-Mende, X. Li and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1279 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xia, B. Huang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhao, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Zhao, W. Chen and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902870 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rajagopal, R. J. Stoddard, S. B. Jo, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mahesh, J. M. Ball, R. D. J. Oliver, D. P. McMeekin, P. K. Nayak, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 258 RSC .
O. Almora, C. Aranda, E. Mas-Marzá and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 173903 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Y. Li, S. Tan, B. Yu, H. Li, Y. Li, J. Shi, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, N. Sakai, H. J. Snaith, L. M. Peter and P. J. Cameron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5959 RSC .
K. Decock, S. Khelifi, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, A. N. Tiwari and M. Burgelman, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 063722 CrossRef .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Müller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Carr, M. Elshobaki and S. Chaudhary, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 203302 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, E. J. Juarez-Perez, J. Bisquert, I. Mora-Sero and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 133902 CrossRef .
T. Eisenbarth, T. Unold, R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann and H.-W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 034509 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 193 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, B. Huang, E. Nasr Esfahani, L. Wei, J. Yao, J. Zhao and W. Chen, npj Quantum Mater., 2017, 2, 56 CrossRef .
F. Jiang, J. Pothoof, F. Muckel, R. Giridharagopal, J. Wang and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 100 CrossRef CAS .
V. W. Bergmann, S. A. L. Weber, F. Javier Ramos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, D. Li, A. L. Domanski, I. Lieberwirth, S. Ahmad and R. Berger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Futscher, J. M. Lee, L. McGovern, L. A. Muscarella, T. Wang, M. I. Haider, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende and B. Ehrler, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1497 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, S.-G. Kim, J.-M. Yang, Y. Yang and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041111 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp05450c‡ Xue Zheng, Wenjie Ming and Pingping Liu contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Microstructure, device performance and poled J–V characteristics. (a) Device architecture prepared in this work, with indicated polarities of front and bottom electrodes and illumination; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of FTO/HTL/CsFAMA; (c) top-view SEM images of the as-fabricated CsFAMA perovskites; (d) representative J–V curves and photovoltaic performances of PSCs. J–V curves during reverse scan for (e) positively polarized devices and (f) negatively polarized devices. The short-circuit current density recovery of positively polarized devices (g) and open-circuit voltage recovery of negatively polarized devices (h).	 

 	Fig. 2  External quantum efficiency, capacitance profiling, and defect analysis of polarized devices. Measured EQE as a function of the wavelength of PSCs under positive polarizations (a) and negative polarizations (b). The absorption coefficient of CsFAMA perovskite films is also shown in black open squares in (a). (c) C–V characteristics of PSCs under various polarizations, highlighted with three dominant capacitance features Cg (geometry capacitance), Cdl (depletion layer capacitance) and Cs (surface capacitance) and extracted Vbi; (d) capacitance–frequency characteristics of PSCs under zero bias; (e) the Arrhenius plot of ln(ω/T2) ∼ 1/T and estimated activation energy level of defects; (f) the calculated density of states of defects under negative polarizations (V = −1.0 V). The amplitude of the AC signal is 50 mV (see the Experimental section).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Local surface potential mapping on CsFAMA perovskites using KPFM. (a) Schematic of the scan area and scan direction of the AFM tip under an external DC bias; (b) the measurement setup of KPFM on perovskites excited via in-plane electrode; (c and d) the surface potential mapping of perovskites under opposite polarizations; (e and f) distributions of seven cut-off line scans of the surface potential on the perovskites which correspond to the polarization conditions in (c and d), respectively. The color of line 1 to line 7 in (c) is the same as that of legend in (e).	 

 	Fig. 4  The band diagram for perovskites at short-circuit (a), large positive bias (b) and large negative bias (c) conditions under illumination. Generation and recombination in the perovskite layer is denoted as G and R, respectively. Mobile ion accumulation at the perovskite/CTL interfaces are represented by green (iodine interstitials) and red (iodine vacancies) solid circles. Photo-generated-electrons and holes are represented by black solid and open circles, respectively. The dotted lines specify the Fermi level for electrons (EFn) and for holes (EFp), which are split by external bias V. The downward arrow represents the positive polarizations while the upward arrow represents negative polarizations. Under large negative poling conditions, enhanced interface defect recombination is emphasized with a yellow cross due to I− ion accumulation at the ETL/perovskite interface.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 		 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp05450c
‡ Xue Zheng, Wenjie Ming and Pingping Liu contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
