Excited state dynamics and conformations of a Cu( ii )-phthalocyanine-perylenebisimide dyad   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP04026A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP04026A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 22169-22176Excited state dynamics and conformations of a Cu(II)-phthalocyanine-perylenebisimide dyad†

        
          
            K. 
            Wilma‡
a, 
      
        
          
            T. 
            Unger‡
b, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Tuncel Kostakoğlu
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Hollfelder
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Hunger
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Lang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            A. G. 
            Gürek
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Thelakkat
          
        
      cf, 
      
        
          
            J. 
            Köhler
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Köhler
          
        
      bf, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Gekle
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            R. 
            Hildner
          
        
      *a
aExperimentalphysik IV, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth 95440, Germany. E-mail: richard.hildner@uni-bayreuth.de;  Fax: +49 921 554002;   Tel: +49 921 554040
bExperimentalphysik II, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth 95440, Germany
cApplied Functional Polymers, Macromolecular Chemistry I, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth 95440, Germany
dDepartment of Chemistry, Gebze Technical University, Gebze 41400, Turkey
ePhysics Department, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth 95440, Germany
fBayreuth Institute of Macromolecular Research (BIMF), University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth 95440, Germany
Received 
      15th June 2017
    , Accepted 4th August 2017First published on 4th August 2017AbstractWe investigate the excited state dynamics and the conformations of a new molecular donor-bridge-acceptor system, a Cu(II)-phthalocyanine (CuPc) covalently linked via a flexible aliphatic spacer to a perylenebisimide (PBI). We performed time-resolved polarization anisotropy and pump–probe measurements in combination with molecular dynamics simulations. Our data suggest the existence of three conformations of the dyad: two more extended, metastable conformations with centre-of-mass distances >1 nm between the PBI and CuPc units of the dyad, and a highly stable folded structure, in which the PBI and CuPc units are stacked on top of each other with a centre-of-mass distance of 0.4 nm. In the extended conformations the dyad shows emission predominantly from the PBI unit with a very weak contribution from the CuPc unit. In contrast, for the folded conformation the PBI emission of the dyad is strongly quenched due to fast energy transfer from the PBI to the CuPc unit (3 ps) and subsequent intersystem-crossing (300 fs) from the first excited singlet state of CuPc unit into its triplet state. Finally, the CuPc triplet state is deactivated non-radiatively with a time constant of 25 ns.
Introduction
The design of new organic molecular systems for efficient light-energy conversion has become one of the greatest challenges in physical chemistry in recent years. To this end, several multichromophoric architectures, such as dyads, triads and even more complex structures have been synthesised and characterised.1–4 Such structures are usually designed as donor–acceptor systems to allow for efficient energy and/or charge transfer between the building blocks upon photoexcitation.5 Although a huge variety of organic dye molecules exists,6–10 particularly perylene bisimide (PBI) and phthalocyanine (Pc) (and their derivatives) have emerged as promising building blocks for these purposes.6,9 PBIs are known for their outstanding photophysical properties, such as broad and tunable absorption in the visible range and photoluminescence quantum yields close to unity, as well as for their high photochemical stability.10–15 Furthermore, they exhibit high electron affinity16 and are therefore well suited as electron accepting material. Pcs also feature a high thermal and chemical stability, as well as a strong absorption in the red/near infrared spectral region. Moreover, Pcs are known for their ability to act as an electron donor.17,18 Their absorption range and performance in solar cell architectures can be improved using metallo-Pcs with a central metal ion.19 Particularly devices employing CuPc and ZnPc exhibit a high performance which was attributed to a decreasing number of intermediate states (zero for ZnPc, one for CuPc) leading to decreased rates for non-radiative relaxation. In fact, the very first two-layer organic solar cell reported by Tang consisted of CuPc and a perylene tetracarboxylic derivative.6 Later, a hybrid planar-mixed molecular heterojunction solar cell consisting of CuPc as donor and fullerene as acceptor has been fabricated with a power conversion efficiency of 5%.20
Combining the favourable properties of PBI and metallo-Pc is therefore a promising approach for creating efficient donor–acceptor compounds for photovoltaic applications.1,21–29 The absorptions of these molecules are complementary and cover a broad spectral region, which allows to harvest a large fraction of the visible solar spectrum. Moreover, specifically CuPc possesses favourable energy levels for charge transfer towards PBI. A crucial factor for device fabrication is the miscibility and co-crystallisation of Pcs and PBIs. Their substitution patterns allow them to be crystalline or liquid crystalline in nature, and consequently the stacking of these molecules into homocolumns or heterocolumns can be controlled. In this respect, we synthesised differently substituted CuPcs and PBIs with alkyl, alkyloxy or ethylene glycol side chains and studied their miscibility and co-crystallisation.30 These studies demonstrate that a definite degree of immiscibility in bulk is a prerequisite for a phase separated columnar arrangement of each moiety. Accordingly, incompatible substituents should be favoured, i.e. ethylene glycol for CuPc and alkyl substituents for PBI. Since these substitution patterns, however, do not allow to control the domain size of each moiety in the blend, we designed a dyad containing a Cu(II)-Pc (CuPc) and a PBI unit which are covalently linked via a non-conjugated, aliphatic bridge (Scheme 1). This bridge ideally ensures a small distance, and thus effective interactions between PBI and Pc to allow for photoinduced energy transfer and/or charge separation.31 Yet, too short bridges often prevent self-assembly and phase-separation of these units during processing, which is required for efficient device operation.32 Hence, we used a rather long and flexible aliphatic linker. Here, we fully characterise the photophysics of this dyad using picosecond time-resolved as well as femtosecond and nanosecond pump–probe spectroscopy in combination with molecular dynamics simulations. We find that the vast majority of the dyads exists in a highly stable folded conformation, with the CuPc unit stacked on top of the PBI unit. Although this conformation favours highly efficient energy transfer from the PBI to CuPc unit, a photoinduced charge separated state is not formed. The excitation energy is rather deactivated rapidly via intersystem-crossing to the triplet state of CuPc and ultimately back to the ground state.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of the CuPc-PBI-dyad via click chemistry. (i) Anhydrous N,N-dimethylaminoethanol, anhydrous CuCl2; (ii) anhydrous NaH, THF, propargyl bromide; (iii) CH2Cl2 CuBr, N,N,N′,N′′,N′′ pentamethyldiethylenetriamine. 
Results and discussion
Synthesis
To covalently link CuPc and PBI, copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition reaction was used which has emerged as the most prominent example of “click” chemistry, one of the simplest and most efficient methods.33 In Scheme 1 the synthetic route is illustrated (see ESI,† Experimental section). All compounds were characterized by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, time-of-flight mass spectroscopy as well as by elemental analysis. All synthesized CuPc compounds (3, 4 and CuPc-PBI-dyad, Scheme 1) are highly soluble in polar and nonpolar solvents such as chloroform, benzene, carbon tetrachloride, tetrahydrofuran, toluene, acetone, and ethanol.
Steady-state UV/vis and PL spectroscopy

Fig. 1a (solid line) shows the normalized steady-state absorption spectrum of the CuPc-PBI-dyad dissolved in toluene, which features three main bands around 350 nm, 540 nm and 700 nm. Comparing this absorption of the dyad with that of an isolated CuPc moiety (Fig. 1a dashed line, see also ESI,† Fig. S1), the bands around 350 nm and 700 nm can be attributed to the B- and Q-bands of CuPc, respectively.17 The band around 540 nm in the dyad's absorption is characteristic of the PBI absorption (ESI,† Fig. S2). The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of the dyad upon excitation of the PBI unit at 450 nm is displayed in Fig. 1b, which reflects the PL of PBI with its maximum at 540 nm and the characteristic vibronic progression (ESI,† Fig. S2). Nevertheless, a weak signal around 720 nm is present (Fig. 1b, inset), that can be ascribed to the Q-band emission of the CuPc unit of the dyad (ESI,† Fig. S1). Because at a wavelength of 450 nm nearly exclusively PBI is excited (see Fig. 1a) and because the PL of PBI is significantly quenched (see ESI,† Section 4), the appearance of CuPc emission indicates some energy transfer from PBI to CuPc within the dyads. In contrast, emission at 720 nm is not observed from the isolated PBI moiety, see ESI,† Fig. S2.
 Fig. 1  (a) Absorption spectrum of the CuPc-PBI dyads (solid) and of the symmetric CuPc moiety (dashed). (b) Photoluminescence spectrum of the CuPc-PBI dyad using an excitation wavelength of 450 nm. The inset shows an enlarged view of the region with non-vanishing PL of the Q-band of the CuPc unit. (c) Magic angle PL decay curve of the dyad using an excitation wavelength of 450 nm (black dots) together with a biexponential fit (red line; time constants: 0.1 ns and 3.2 ns, amplitudes: 2800 a.u. and 820 a.u.). The grey line represents the instrument response function. For all measurements toluene was used as solvent. 
Picosecond time-resolved spectroscopy
To study the excited state dynamics of the dyads in toluene solution, we performed picosecond time-resolved experiments using pulsed excitation at 450 nm and a Streak-camera as detector. This setup allows us to record simultaneously PL decays with the emission polarisation parallel (I‖) and perpendicular (I⊥) with respect to the polarisation of the excitation light (see ESI,† Experimental section and Fig. S3). Both decays are spectrally integrated from 467 nm to 800 nm, i.e. over the PBI and the CuPc emission. From these data we construct the magic angle decay curve according to (I‖ + 2I⊥)/3, which eliminates contributions of rotational diffusion of the dyads to the decay curve. This magic angle trace is displayed in Fig. 1c, and features two clearly distinct decay components. A bi-exponential fit to the data yields a short time constant of τ1 = 0.1 ns and a longer one with τ2 = 3.2 ns. Note that τ1 is determined by the instrument response function (time resolution) of our setup and thus reflects a much faster decay process (vide infra). The ratio of the corresponding amplitudes of the exponentials is A1/A2 ∼ 3, i.e. the short component dominates the decay.
Because the PL signal of the CuPc unit of the dyad is extremely weak in comparison with the PBI emission (see Fig. 1b), it is reasonable to assume that the PL decay of the dyad is exclusively determined by the PBI unit. Given the lifetime of 3.9 ns of isolated PBI in toluene solution (ESI,† Fig. S2), the bi-exponential decay of the dyad's PBI emission therefore suggests the presence of two quenching mechanisms for the PBI unit: an efficient one gives rise to the short (0.1 ns) component and a weaker quenching process yields the longer (3.2 ns) component. The fast and efficient quenching process may be caused by (i) stacking of two or more PBIs from different dyads on top of each other or by (ii) charge and/or energy transfer from the photoexcited PBI unit to the CuPc unit within the same dyad. Although PBI molecules are highly prone to stacking,10,14 we can rule out option (i). In this situation weakly emissive H-type PBI aggregates would form that feature a substantially red-shifted PL spectrum with a strongly distorted vibronic progression.34 Yet, the PL of the PBI unit does not show this behavior (Fig. 1b). Thus, charge and/or energy transfer (option (ii)) takes place with a transfer efficiency exceeding 99%, as estimated from the measured time constants (ESI,† Section 4). For both transfer processes to be that efficient, a small centre-of-mass distance (sub-nm) between the PBI and the CuPc unit is required. This can be realised owing to the flexible bridge between these units, e.g. in a folded conformation with the CuPc unit stacked on top of the PBI unit.
The long decay time (τ2 = 3.2 ns) of the dyad is slightly smaller than the excited state lifetime of 3.9 ns of isolated PBI moieties (ESI,† Fig. S2). These numbers indicate a weaker quenching of the dyad's PBI emission with an efficiency of about 0.18 (ESI,† Section 4), and thus imply the presence of dyads with a more open conformation. Distances of some nm between PBI and CuPc can easily be achieved (up to ∼4 nm when fully extended, see Scheme 1), which would still allow for energy transfer with a reasonable efficiency.
Hence, our picosecond data suggest that the dyads exist in (at least) two distinct conformations in solution, i.e. a folded and a more open one. In the following we study possible conformations of the dyad, and we further investigate the nature and time scales of the rapid quenching process by femto- and nanosecond pump–probe spectroscopy.
Molecular dynamics simulations
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed with one dyad solvated in 1800 toluene molecules at normal conditions (temperature: T = 300 K; pressure: 1000 mbar). To obtain free energy profiles, we employed the umbrella sampling implemented in Gromacs. The force fields were obtained as detailed in the Experimental section in the ESI.† In Fig. 2a the free energy surface along the center-of-mass (COM) distance between PBI and CuPc is shown. It features three distinct minima at distances of ca. 0.4 nm, 1 nm, and 2.8 nm. Corresponding snapshots of the dyad's conformation at those COM distances are displayed in Fig. 2b. The lowest free energy of −7.14 kBT, and thus the most stable conformation, is found for the closest COM distance of 0.4 nm. Here, the PBI and CuPc units are stacked on top of each other by back-folding of the aliphatic spacer between these units (FOLDED conformation). This conformation appears to be further stabilised by the substituents of CuPc, that are wrapped around the PBI unit. A local minimum with a free energy of 0.78 kBT is found at a larger COM distance, where the PBI and CuPc units are separated by ∼1 nm. This represents a transition (TRANS) conformation between a completely folded and completely unfolded configuration. The spacer is still back-folded to a large extent, but the stabilising wrapping of the CuPc-substituents is not present. Finally, at a COM distance of 2.8 nm a very shallow local minimum is observed, corresponding to a conformation with an extended spacer (OPEN conformation). Beyond 2.8 nm the free energy rises again due to the entropically unfavourable stretching of the aliphatic chain.
 Fig. 2  (a) Free energy profile of the dyad as a function of the center-of-mass distance between the PBI and the CuPc unit of the dyad, determined by molecular dynamics simulations. (b) Snapshots from molecular dynamics simulations of the three different conformations FOLDED, TRANS and OPEN of the dyad taken along the free energy profile. Nitrogen atoms: dark blue, carbon atoms: light blue, oxygen atoms: red, sulfur atom: yellow; aromatic rings are filled with red color, and the copper atom is displayed as sphere. 
The conformational changes TRANS → OPEN and TRANS → FOLDED are separated by an energy barrier of 1.3 kBT and 0.8 kBT, respectively, indicating that the TRANS conformation is metastable and tends to change into the OPEN or FOLDED conformation due to the thermal energy available in the system (the same holds true for the transition OPEN → TRANS). Once the dyad assumes the FOLDED conformation, it is trapped due to the high barrier of ∼8 kBT for the FOLDED → TRANS transition. This free energy profile therefore illustrates that the vast majority of the dyads can be expected in the FOLDED state.
These findings allow us to connect the conformations of the dyads obtained from MD simulations with the picosecond lifetime measurements presented above (Fig. 1c): for the FOLDED conformation the COM distance is very small (0.4 nm). Hence, both charge and energy transfer from the photoexcited PBI to the CuPc unit can be expected to be very fast and efficient (efficiency > 0.99), which results in the short resolution-limited time constant of τ1 = 100 ps. In the OPEN and TRANS conformations the COM distances are too large (1 to 2.8 nm) to allow for efficient charge transfer. However, energy transfer is still possible with reasonable efficiency (here ∼0.18) at such inter-molecular distances, which gives rise to weakly quenched PBI emission with the longer time constant of τ2 = 3.2 ns. From these measured time constants and the corresponding amplitudes of the dyad's PBI emission (Fig. 1c), we estimate that more than 99.9% of the dyads exist in the FOLDED conformation (ESI,† Section 4), as also indicated by the molecular dynamics simulations.
Although the probability to find the dyad in the OPEN & TRANS conformations is accordingly very small, the contribution of weakly quenched PBI emission with the long time constant (3.2 ns) is clearly visible in the lifetime data. This observation can be related to the high PL quantum yield of PBI (0.88 in isolated PBI; 0.70 in OPEN/TRANS dyads), whereas in the FOLDED dyad conformation the measured PL quantum yield of the PBI unit is below 0.005, which is in good agreement with the calculated number of smaller than 0.001 (ESI,† Section 4).
Femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy
Owing to the limited temporal resolution of our picosecond measurements, we performed femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy on the dyads dissolved in toluene to further investigate the nature and time scales of the rapid quenching mechanism for the PBI emission. Note that the response in femtosecond pump–probe spectra is entirely determined by FOLDED dyads, because of the very high probability of > 99.9% to find this conformation in solution. The home-built pump–probe setup comprises an OPA pumped by a regenerative amplifier; the temporal resolution is 210 fs (see Experimental section in the ESI† for details). Fig. 3a shows two examples for pump–probe ΔT/T spectra of the dyad at 1 ps (blue curve) and 15 ps (green curve) after pumping of the PBI unit at 510 nm. Here, T represents the transmission of the sample without preceding pump pulse, and ΔT denotes the difference in transmission with and without preceding pump pulse. The spectra show a positive ΔT/T signal between 640 and 710 nm, which is attributed to the ground state bleach (GSB) of the CuPc unit by comparison with the UV/vis absorption spectrum of the dyad (grey shaded area in Fig. 3a). The negative ΔT/T signal between 520 and 630 nm is assigned to photoinduced triplet absorption of the CuPc unit based on nanosecond pump–probe experiments (see below) and literature data.35–38 The magnitudes of both ΔT/T signatures rise within the first few ps after the pump pulse. As an example we show the transient signal probed at the GSB of CuPc at 680 nm (Fig. 3b), which features an initial rise with a time constant of 3 ps as indicated by the exponential fit to the transient.
 Fig. 3  Femtosecond pump–probe measurements of the CuPc-PBI dyad in toluene solution. (a) Transient absorption spectra of the dyad at 1 ps (blue solid line) and 15 ps (green solid line) after pumping the PBI unit at 510 nm. The grey filled area is the steady-state absorption spectrum of the dyad. (b) Transient of the dyad (black dots) at a probe wavelength of 680 nm (Q-band of the CuPc unit). The red solid curve displays an exponential fit with a time constant of 3 ps. The vertical axes ΔT/T in both panels display the transmission difference ΔT between the transmission of the sample with and without preceding pump pulse divided by the transmission T of the sample without preceding pump pulse. 
The rapid GSB of the CuPc unit demonstrates a fast population of its lowest excited singlet state (Q-band) after photoexcitation of PBI at 510 nm, which indicates energy transfer from the PBI to the CuPc unit in the FOLDED dyads, in agreement with other dyad systems containing PBI derivatives.21 This interpretation is further corroborated by the absence of the stimulated emission (SE) band of PBI (positive ΔT/T signal), which is observed for the isolated PBI moiety in the range between 540 and 600 nm, as well as by the absence of the GSB of PBI (positive ΔT/T signal) around 530 nm (see ESI,† Fig. S5, for the corresponding transient absorption spectrum of the isolated PBI moiety). We note, however, that the complete absence of the SE and GSB bands of PBI is partially due to their spectral overlap with the triplet absorption band of CuPc (see the nanosecond pump–probe spectra below). The magnitude of the photoinduced triplet absorption of CuPc around 580 nm rises with about the same time constant as the GSB signal of the CuPc unit around 680 nm. This observation shows that the energy transfer from PBI to CuPc is immediately followed (on time scales of the temporal resolution of our setup) by fast intersystem crossing (ISC) from the first excited singlet state of CuPc to its lowest energy triplet state. For isolated CuPc moieties it is indeed known that after photoexcitation of the CuPc singlet Q-band rapid ISC into its triplet state takes place within about 300 fs.17 Although this ultrafast ISC may be related to a significant spin–orbit coupling induced by the heavy copper atom, an alternative mechanism has been proposed to promote ISC, which involves a “spin-exchanging” short-lived intermediate charge-transfer state with the copper atom.39 This efficient quenching of the CuPc singlet state by ISC also explains the very small PL signal from its Q-band observed in the steady-state spectra of the dyad (Fig. 1b, inset).
Based on these femtosecond pump–probe data charge transfer within FOLDED dyads can be ruled out, because neither a negative band due to the anion absorption of the PBI nor the cation of the CuPc is observed (see ref. 40 and 41). Moreover, in the case of electron transfer a GSB signal would arise as a positive band at the spectral position of the absorption of PBI between 450 and 560 nm, which is not found. The absence of charge transfer in our dyad, in contrast to similar other dyad-systems, is probably due to the rapid competing processes, i.e., energy transfer from PBI to CuPc and ISC in CuPc.
Nanosecond pump–probe spectroscopy
The maximum temporal window of the femtosecond pump–probe setup is limited to about 1.5 ns. Within this window the decay of e.g. the GSB of the CuPc unit (recovery of its ground state population) around 680 nm could not be observed. To resolve such slower processes we measured transient absorption spectra on nanosecond time scales using a flash-photolysis setup with a time resolution of 5–6 ns. The resulting ΔT/T spectra of the dyad after pumping the PBI unit at 540 nm are shown in Fig. 4a. Generally, these nanosecond ΔT/T spectra are very similar to those measured with femtosecond pump–probe spectroscopy; yet, here both the negative photoinduced triplet absorption (around 500 nm) as well as the GSB (around 680 nm) of the CuPc unit appear immediately within the temporal resolution of the flash-photolysis setup. Fig. 4b shows the magnitudes of two transients at probe wavelengths of 480 nm and 680 nm, which both decay with the same time constant of ∼25 ns. To verify that both the negative and positive ΔT/T signals can indeed be related to processes exclusively in the CuPc unit of the dyad, we also performed measurements on an isolated CuPc moiety dissolved in toluene using a pump wavelength of 610 nm (Fig. 4c). These spectra exhibit the same broad and negative photoinduced triplet absorption band around 500 nm together with the positive GSB signal around 680 nm. The transients retrieved at probe wavelengths of 480 nm and 680 nm (Fig. 4d) reveal a ∼25 ns decay.
 Fig. 4  (a) Nanosecond pump–probe spectra of the dyad dissolved in toluene upon pumping at 540 nm. (b) Transients of the dyad at probe wavelengths of 480 nm (black circles) and 680 nm (green circles) after pumping at 540 nm. (c) Nanosecond pump–probe spectra of the isolated CuPc moiety upon pumping at 610 nm. (d) Transients (magnitudes) of the dyad at probe wavelengths of 680 nm (black circles) after pumping at 650 nm. For all transient spectra in (a) and (c) the laser line was clipped. 
The magnitudes of the ΔT/T transients of the GSB and of the photoinduced triplet absorption from both the dyad and isolated CuPc decay with very similar time constants around 25 ns independent of pump and probe wavelengths. This observation shows that deactivation of the CuPc triplet state repopulates its singlet ground state within 25 ns. This triplet lifetime is very short and be related to enhanced ISC due to the presence of the Cu atom as discussed above and in agreement with literature data.37,38 Finally, we comment on the difference between the femtosecond and nanosecond pump–probe spectra, because in the former the photoinduced triplet absorption band (around 500 nm) is more red shifted and significantly narrower. In femtosecond pump–probe spectra the negative ΔT/T triplet signal of CuPc is partially cancelled and thus narrowed by two positive ΔT/T signals from the PBI unit, its GSB between 500 and 550 nm and its stimulated emission between 540 and 600 nm (see the transient absorption spectrum of the isolated PBI moiety in Fig. S5, ESI†). Because these positive ΔT/T signals contribute only on sub-nanosecond time scales, they do not play a role in the nanosecond pump–probe spectra anymore and thus broaden the nanosecond triplet signal.
Concluding remarks
Our experiments allow us to deduce an energy level scheme for both the OPEN (TRANS) and FOLDED conformations (Fig. 5). For the OPEN conformation (left panel), we excite the PBI unit of the dyad with a wavelength of 450 nm into its lowest excited singlet state, while the CuPc unit is in its ground state, which is denoted by 1PBI*-CuPc. The dominating subsequent relaxation channel is radiative and non-radiative decay of PBI with a time constant of 3.2 ns back to its electronic ground state. There is, however, also energy transfer taking place from PBI to the singlet excited state of CuPc with a transfer time of 17.8 ns (or an efficiency of ∼0.18), i.e. PBI-1CuPc* is formed, which then rapidly decays via two channels to its ground state: (i) direct (non-)radiative decay to the CuPc ground state with a very small probability, and (ii) ISC into the CuPc triplet state (PBI-3CuPc*) within less than 300 fs and then to the ground state within 25 ns. For the FOLDED conformation the PBI unit of the dyad is again excited into its first excited singlet state (1PBI*-CuPc). Within 3 ps the energy is transferred to the CuPc excited singlet state (PBI-1CuPc*) with an efficiency of >0.99, from where again two deactivation channels exist: (i) the dominating process is ISC within 300 fs to the triplet state of CuPc (PBI-3CuPc*), with subsequent non-radiative deactivation into the electronic ground state with a time constant of 25 ns; (ii) radiative decay from PBI-1CuPc* to the ground state PBI-CuPc is also possible with a very small probability, as supported by the very weak fluorescence of the CuPc unit observed at 720 nm in the steady-state data in Fig. 1b. In FOLDED dyads the close distance of 0.4 nm between the PBI and CuPc units should favour charge separation. However, the deactivation of excitation energy due to energy transfer and ISC seems to be too rapid and efficient to allow for the formation of a stable charge-separated state.
 Fig. 5  Energy level schemes of the dyad in the OPEN/TRANS (left) and the FOLDED conformation (right). The CuPc (PBI) units are marked with blue (red). kr, knr, and kISC are radiative (solid arrows), non-radiative, and intersystem crossing rates (dotted arrows) for the indicated transitions between energy levels; the symbols τ denote the corresponding lifetimes as determined in this work. The thickness of the arrows displays the magnitude of the transition rates in each of the conformations. 
It is interesting to note that a superposition of UV/vis spectra of PBI and CuPc is a very good approximation to the dyad's absorption. In other words, the energy levels (singlets and also triplets) of the building blocks of the dyad are not substantially shifted when linked together covalently via a spacer group. This observation appears to be even more surprising given that the dyad exists nearly exclusively in the FOLDED conformation with a very short center-of-mass distance of only 0.4 nm, for which the Coulomb-interactions between the transition dipole moments of PBI and CuPc units are expected to be rather strong. For similarly densely packed molecules we recently determined Coulomb-interactions to be >44 meV (>350 cm−1).42 However, the site energy mismatch between the PBI and the CuPc unit can be estimated to be about 525 meV (4200 cm−1) from the maxima of the corresponding absorptions at 540 nm (2.31 eV or 18500 cm−1) for PBI and 700 nm (1.79 eV or 14300 cm−1) for CuPc. From those numbers we obtain a ratio between Coulomb-coupling and site energy mismatch of <0.1, which clearly places the FOLDED dyad system into the weak coupling regime in Kasha's exciton theory.43 Consequently, exciton states do not form, electronic excitations are localised on the building blocks, and the absorption spectra of the dyad can be constructed by a simple superposition of the PBI and CuPc units.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding from the German Research Foundation DFG within projects HI1508/3 (KW, RH) and GRK1640 (KW, TU, MT, JK, AK, SG, RH), from Elitenetzwerk Bayern (ENB, elite study programme Macromolecular Science, RH), the Bavarian State Ministry of Science, Research, and the Arts for the Collaborative Research Network Solar Technologies go Hybrid (MT, JK, AK), and from TUBITAK-BIDEB (2219-International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Programme, STK). We also thank Inga Elvers for her assistance with the Streak-camera measurements.
References
Y. Chen, Y. Lin, M. E. Ei-khouly, X. Zhuang and Y. Araki, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2007, 111, 16096–16099 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Webber, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 1469–1482 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Jimenez, F. Spänig, M. Salome Rodriguez-Morgade, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2481–2484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Petrella, J. Cremer, L. De Cola, P. Bäuerle and R. M. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 11687–11695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435–461 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cai, S.-J. Moon, L. Cevey-Ha, T. Moehl, R. Hymphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1452–1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hara, Y. Tachibana, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, K. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 89–103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Hofmann, S. M. Lindner, M. Ruppert, A. Hirsch, S. A. Haque, M. Thelakkat and J. Köhler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 9148–9156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lang, R. Hildner, H. Engelke, P. Osswald, F. Würthner and J. Köhler, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1487–1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lang, F. Wüthner and J. Köler, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 935–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1564–1579 RSC .
H. Yoo, J. Yang, A. Yousef, M. R. Wasielewski and D. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3939–3944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wilma, A. Issac, Z. Chen, F. Würthner, R. Hildner and J. Köhler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1478–1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Porphyr. Handb., Academic Press,  1999 Search PubMed .
F. D’Souza and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4913–4928 RSC .
I. Bruder, J. Schöneboom, R. Dinnebier, A. Ojala, S. Schäfer, R. Sens, P. Erk and J. Weis, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 377–387 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 71–73 CrossRef .
F. Javier Céspedes-Guirao, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, Á. Sastre-Santos and F. Fernández-Lázaro, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 5871–5880 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Miller, R. K. Lammi, S. Prathapan, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, J. Org. Chem., 2000, 65, 6634–6649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Blas-Ferrando, J. Ortiz, L. Bouissane, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, F. Fernández-Lázaro and Á. Sastre-Santos, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6241 RSC .
V. M. Blas-Ferrando, J. Ortiz, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, F. Fernández-Lázaro and Á. Sastre-Santos, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4785–4793 RSC .
S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, J. Ortiz, A. M. Gutiérrez, F. Fernández-Lázaro and A. Sastre-Santos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 10744–10752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, T. Da Ros, P. Braiuca and M. Prato, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 1067–1073 CAS .
H. Zhou, X. Li, T. Fan, F. E. Osterloh, J. Ding, E. M. Sabio, D. Zhang and Q. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 951–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Schuster, P. Cheng, P. D. Jarowski, D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, L. Echegoyen, S. Pyo, A. R. Holzwarth, S. E. Braslavsky, R. M. Williams and G. Klihm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7257–7270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mateo-Alonso, C. Sooambar and M. Prato, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 944–951 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Wicklein, Self-Organizing n-type Perylene Derivatives for Organic Photovoltaics – Synthesis, Characterization and Application, Dissertation University of Bayreuth,  2010, retrieved from urn:nbn:de:bvb:703-opus-7208 Search PubMed .
D. Gosztola, B. Wang and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 102, 71–80 CrossRef CAS .

          S.-S. Sun, US Pat., 20040099307 A1,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. E. Hein and V. V. Fokin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1302–1315 RSC .
J. M. Lim, P. Kim, M.-C. Yoon, J. Sung, V. Dehm, Z. Chen, F. Würthner and D. Kim, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 388 RSC .
J. McVie, R. S. Sinclair and T. G. Truscott, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1978, 74, 1870 RSC .
G. J. Dutton, W. Jin, J. E. Reutt-Robey and S. W. Robey, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 073407 CrossRef .
A. V. Nikolaitchik, O. Korth and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 7587–7596 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Caplins, T. K. Mullenbach, R. J. Holmes and D. A. Blank, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11454–11459 RSC .
M. H. Ha-Thi, N. Shafizadeh, L. Poisson and B. Soep, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 8111–8118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schmidt, M. Son, J. M. Lim, M. J. Lin, I. Krummenacher, H. Braunschweig, D. Kim and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13980–13984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Spreitler, M. Sommer, M. Thelakkat and J. Köhler, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7971–7980 RSC .
A. T. Haedler, K. Kreger, A. Issac, B. Wittmann, M. Kivala, N. Hammer, J. Köhler, H.-W. Schmidt and R. Hildner, Nature, 2015, 523, 196–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. Ashraf El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04026a‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of the CuPc-PBI-dyad via click chemistry. (i) Anhydrous N,N-dimethylaminoethanol, anhydrous CuCl2; (ii) anhydrous NaH, THF, propargyl bromide; (iii) CH2Cl2 CuBr, N,N,N′,N′′,N′′ pentamethyldiethylenetriamine.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Absorption spectrum of the CuPc-PBI dyads (solid) and of the symmetric CuPc moiety (dashed). (b) Photoluminescence spectrum of the CuPc-PBI dyad using an excitation wavelength of 450 nm. The inset shows an enlarged view of the region with non-vanishing PL of the Q-band of the CuPc unit. (c) Magic angle PL decay curve of the dyad using an excitation wavelength of 450 nm (black dots) together with a biexponential fit (red line; time constants: 0.1 ns and 3.2 ns, amplitudes: 2800 a.u. and 820 a.u.). The grey line represents the instrument response function. For all measurements toluene was used as solvent.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Free energy profile of the dyad as a function of the center-of-mass distance between the PBI and the CuPc unit of the dyad, determined by molecular dynamics simulations. (b) Snapshots from molecular dynamics simulations of the three different conformations FOLDED, TRANS and OPEN of the dyad taken along the free energy profile. Nitrogen atoms: dark blue, carbon atoms: light blue, oxygen atoms: red, sulfur atom: yellow; aromatic rings are filled with red color, and the copper atom is displayed as sphere.	 

 	Fig. 3  Femtosecond pump–probe measurements of the CuPc-PBI dyad in toluene solution. (a) Transient absorption spectra of the dyad at 1 ps (blue solid line) and 15 ps (green solid line) after pumping the PBI unit at 510 nm. The grey filled area is the steady-state absorption spectrum of the dyad. (b) Transient of the dyad (black dots) at a probe wavelength of 680 nm (Q-band of the CuPc unit). The red solid curve displays an exponential fit with a time constant of 3 ps. The vertical axes ΔT/T in both panels display the transmission difference ΔT between the transmission of the sample with and without preceding pump pulse divided by the transmission T of the sample without preceding pump pulse.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Nanosecond pump–probe spectra of the dyad dissolved in toluene upon pumping at 540 nm. (b) Transients of the dyad at probe wavelengths of 480 nm (black circles) and 680 nm (green circles) after pumping at 540 nm. (c) Nanosecond pump–probe spectra of the isolated CuPc moiety upon pumping at 610 nm. (d) Transients (magnitudes) of the dyad at probe wavelengths of 680 nm (black circles) after pumping at 650 nm. For all transient spectra in (a) and (c) the laser line was clipped.	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy level schemes of the dyad in the OPEN/TRANS (left) and the FOLDED conformation (right). The CuPc (PBI) units are marked with blue (red). kr, knr, and kISC are radiative (solid arrows), non-radiative, and intersystem crossing rates (dotted arrows) for the indicated transitions between energy levels; the symbols τ denote the corresponding lifetimes as determined in this work. The thickness of the arrows displays the magnitude of the transition rates in each of the conformations.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7cp04026a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
