Direct solar-to-hydrogen generation by quasi-artificial leaf approach: possibly scalable and economical device   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA11307F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11307F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3179-3189Direct solar-to-hydrogen generation by quasi-artificial leaf approach: possibly scalable and economical device†

        
          
            Kshirodra Kumar 
            Patra‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Pradnya Arunrao 
            Bharad‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Vanshika 
            Jain
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chinnakonda S. 
            Gopinath
          
        
      *ab
aCatalysis Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Dr Homi Bhabha Road, Pune 411008, India. E-mail: cs.gopinath@ncl.res.in
bCentre of Excellence on Surface Science, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Dr Homi Bhabha Road, Pune 411008, India
Received 
      24th November 2018
    , Accepted 5th January 2019First published on 5th January 2019AbstractOften, a disadvantage in one area of science may become an advantage in another area. In contrast, a successful concept in one area could work for a complementary area of research too. These two philosophies have been successfully used for solar hydrogen generation and they underscore the necessity to connect relevant concepts. We, herein, report a quasi-artificial leaf (QuAL) device in a wireless configuration with a TiO2/Mn–CdS composite and NiCu as a co-catalyst for possibly scalable as well as commercially viable solar hydrogen production under one sun conditions. The device works at no applied potential and generates 10.5 mL h−1 (16 mL h−1) H2 with Ni5Cu2.5 alloy (Pt) as a co-catalyst, which corresponds to a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.8% (7.3%). The significant resemblance of NiCu alloy to Pt in terms of its electrochemical activity and electronic structure makes the device more economical. While the millisecond lifetime of electrons in Mn–CdS is known to help for white light emission, the same factor helps to greatly improve charge utilization for H2 production in the QuAL device. In contrast, the reabsorption of emitted light is a vexing problem in emission applications; however in the present work, reabsorption is successfully utilized to enhance hydrogen yield. Spectroscopy techniques combined with electrocatalytic studies were employed and the results correlated with solar hydrogen generation, demonstrating this as a new pathway to design better solar-light-harvesting architectures.
Introduction
Very likely, the activation of small molecules, such as water, methane, CO2, and N2, will offset some of the future global demands of fossil fuel/energy and the environmental concerns; however, the activation of small molecules by conventional approaches requires very high energy, albeit nature manages to activate them in an effortless manner. Green plants activate water and CO2 and convert them into carbohydrates in direct sunlight. The construction of an artificial photosynthetic device in the right manner would be of great interest to meet part of the global energy/fuel demands and would contribute toward the reduction of global warming.1,2 An artificial photosynthetic system produces hydrogen via water splitting using solar energy, which can be collected directly or combined with CO2 to form synthetic liquid fuels.3 The water splitting reaction includes water oxidation and proton reduction half-reactions to generate O2 and H2, respectively. Water oxidation to O2 is a four-electron process and requires 1.23 V and is a kinetically sluggish reaction; this brings down the overall rate of reaction, thus affecting H2 production too.4 For efficient H2 production, the semiconductor is usually coupled with a co-catalyst and a hole scavenger.5 Pt is known for its low overpotential toward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and as being chemically inert in nature, but it is not cheap;6 therefore, it is important to replace Pt with a comparably active, but cheap and earth-abundant co-catalyst.
The first requirement for any photocatalyst is to tune the electronic structure to absorb light from a broad wavelength regime of sunlight. One way to achieve this requirement is to combine semiconductors with different band gaps, and hence absorption occurs from different wavelength regimes of sunlight.7–11 However, the heterojunction between those semiconductors is generally difficult to control, and generally leads to low efficiency. Further, the valence and conduction band edges should be arranged in such a manner that electrons and holes flow in the opposite directions. It is even more difficult to achieve both these factors in one composite system of light-absorbing semiconductor materials.12 Electronic integration among different materials is the most critical requirement to improve the light absorption to change the utilization factors to generate more hydrogen from water splitting (or power generation through solar cells). Hence, a different strategy may be required to increase the light absorption from a broad wavelength regime.
Quantum dots (QDs) have been generally used as a sensitizer for a wide band gap semiconductor, because of their large light absorption cross-section, and shape- and size-dependent optical properties.13–17 However, the electronic as well as optical properties of QDs can be modified by introducing dopants to increase the lifetime of charge carriers. Nag and co-workers studied the change in optical and photophysical properties, especially emission characteristics, of CdS QDs by Mn2+ doping to show white light emission with millisecond lifetime electrons.18 Although the emission properties of semiconductors, particularly CdS, are well-known, we can make use of the radiative emission for further absorption (including self-absorption) by semiconductors to increase the current or hydrogen yield. In fact self-absorption is a frustrating problem with light-emitting semiconductors. Though QDs are considered as a potential candidate for light-harvesting applications, such as SWS, it is yet to be established with high efficiency. In the present work, an attempt was made to utilize this long-lived charge carrier as well as radiative emission as a secondary light source for improved solar H2 production using Mn-doped CdS QDs in a QuAL wireless device.
In the natural green leaf system, chlorophyll absorbs a part of visible light and employs that photon energy for water splitting and converts it into chemical energy (H2 + O2) through its photosystems I and II. The reduction of protons takes place through an iron-based hydrogenase enzyme and many efforts have contributed to try to mimic the hydrogenase enzyme.19–21 In the present quasi-artificial leaf (QuAL), a combination of titania and CdS (or Mn–CdS) act as light absorber and electrons flow to the co-catalyst for hydrogen generation. Holes are directly injected into the solution to oxidize sacrificial agents, and hence it is termed as QuAL. These metal-ion based complexes are used in homogeneous photocatalytic H2 production by combining them with a photosensitizer. However, heterogeneous catalysts exhibit higher catalytic efficiency than homogeneous catalysts.22 Often large H2 generation is reported when Pt is employed as a co-catalyst, due to its low overpotential. However, the high cost and low abundance of Pt necessitates the search for a suitable alternative with comparable activity at low cost. Some of the earlier studies highlighted the importance of earth-abundant co-catalysts for hydrogen evolution.23–26 In the present study, a non-precious NiCu alloy system was prepared and successfully incorporated into the QuAL device for the H2 evolution reaction. Nocera et al. reported an artificial photosynthetic device composed of a Si solar cell as a light absorbing material; with a NiFe layered double hydroxide as a co-catalyst for H2 evolution with high efficiency.1 Trevisan et al.27 produced 4.30 mL per day of H2 with a 1 cm2 size QuAL device consisting of a TiO2/PbS/CdS heterostructure under 1 sun conditions. Nano Au-integration in the above heterostructure with a porous TiO2 network was demonstrated to enhance H2 production at least by an order of magnitude and it showed 12 mL h−1 H2 production.12 These observations attest to the potential associated with the QuAL concept and could be further exploited with an economical co-catalyst and simpler photoanode system.
Herein, we report a wireless QuAL device consisting of a TiO2/CdS or TiO2/Mn–CdS composite as a photoanode and Pt or NiCu as a co-catalyst for solar H2 evolution from an aqueous electrolyte solution under one sun conditions. To the best of our knowledge, such a wireless photochemical device consisting of an earth-abundant catalyst with high efficiency is yet to be reported.
Experimental section
Fabrication of the photoelectrode
Initially, FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide) plates were cleaned and coated with TiO2 paste by the doctor-blade method and dried at 60 °C for 2 h, followed by calcination at 450 °C for 30 min. Semiconductor QDs of CdS or Mn-doped CdS were deposited by the SILAR (successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction) method.27 Every cycle of SILAR consists of dipping the FTO electrode (precoated with TiO2) in metal ion (0.1 M cadmium nitrate solution in methanol) and sulfide anion (0.1 M sodium sulfide solution) for 1 min each. Five cycles of SILAR deposition were carried out for each electrode. This procedure resulted in a TiO2/CdS photoanode.
For the doping of Mn2+ in CdS, the above procedure was followed but with a metal-ion premixed Cd source. For example, Mn2+ as manganese acetate (0.065 M) was mixed with 0.1 M cadmium nitrate resulting in 0.165 M (Cd + Mn) solution. However, ICP analysis indicated that the final composition of Mn–CdS to be Cd0.98Mn0.02S with 0.44 wt% of Mn–CdS incorporated in titania. Among the various Cd:Mn compositions prepared and evaluated, the above composition demonstrated the maximum activity and thus we restrict our results and discussion to this composition. The photoanode was finally coated with two cycles of ZnS as a protecting layer. For this, the TiO2/Mn–CdS or TiO2/CdS electrode was dipped in 0.1 M solution of Zn(CH3COO)2 for 1 min, followed by dipping the electrode in Na2S solution for 1 min. Pt NPs were deposited, next to the titania layer, by dropcasting 5 mmol of chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) (from Dyesol) over a 0.4 × 1 cm2 area of the FTO plate and this was then evaluated for hydrogen generation and used in other studies. This resulted in the wireless device and was employed for solar hydrogen production.
The NiCu catalyst in alloy and bimetallic forms was synthesized by a solvothermal technique using oleylamine as a reducing as well as capping agent. The schematic representation of the synthesis of the NiCu catalyst is explained in the ESI (TS1†). Instead of Pt, NiCu was coated in the QuAL device for the activity measurements.
Hydrogen production photoelectrochemical measurements
For solar hydrogen generation with the QuAL device in the wireless configuration, 8 mL of 0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3 (50/50 v/v) as a sacrificial hole scavenger was used in a 50 mL round-bottomed flask (RBF) and the photoanode was inserted in this facing the solar light under one sun conditions (100 mW cm−2; 300 W Newport solar simulator). The evolved H2 was measured using the inverted burette method and hydrogen confirmed by GC (Agilent 7890A). A trace amount of water was also present along with hydrogen. The electrolyte was purged with N2 for 30 min before every experiment to remove the dissolved oxygen. H2 evolution was measured at no applied potential.
Material characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a PAN analyticalX'pert Pro dual goniometer diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) with a Ni-filter. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements were performed on a SEM system (Leica, Model Stereoscan-440) equipped with an EDX analyzer (Bruker, D451-10C Quantax 200 with X-flash detector) attachment. HRTEM analysis of the materials was conducted on a FEI TECNAI 3010 electron microscope operating at 300 kV (Cs = 0.6 mm; 1.6 Å resolution). Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis measurements were carried out on a Shimadzu spectrophotometer (model UV-2550) with spectral-grade BaSO4 as the reference material. Raman spectra were recorded on a Horiba JY LabRAM HR 800 Raman spectrometer coupled with a microscope in reflectance mode with a 633 nm excitation laser source, and a spectral resolution of 0.3 cm−1. Chronoamperometry and LSV measurements were recorded using a Gamry potentiostat (model 3000 potentiostat/galvanostat/ZRA) in a conventional three-electrode test cell with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode and platinum foil used as the counter electrode under one sun conditions (Oriel Instruments having a 300 W xenon arc lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 filter). The photoluminescence measurements were performed using a Horiba JobinYvon Fluorolog 3 fluorescence spectrophotometer. The wavelength-dependent IPCE measurements were performed with a Newport solar simulator (UUX 1404565). Details about the efficiency calculations are given in the ESI (TS2†). X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) and the ultra violet photoelectron spectra (UVPES) of the Ni–Cu samples were recorded with a custom-built ambient pressure photoelectron spectrometer (APPES) (Prevac, Poland) equipped with a VG Scienta R3000HP analyzer and MX650 monochromator.28
Results and discussion
UV-visible absorption studies
The UV-Visible absorption spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes are shown in Fig. 1; the inset shows a digital photograph for the color associated with the photoanode films. The absorption onset for the TiO2 photoanode was at 385 nm; with TiO2/CdS the absorption onset was red-shifted to 480 nm, which corresponds to a band gap of ≈2.58 eV. It is to be noted that the band gap of bulk CdS was 2.42 eV, suggesting the nanosize of CdS in the present TiO2/CdS composite. A further red-shift in the absorption spectra to 530 nm was observed with Mn-doped-CdS, corresponding to a band gap of ≈2.34 eV.16 This result demonstrates that Mn-doped CdS can improve the light absorption range from the UV to the green light region. The color change observed from pale yellow (TiO2/CdS) to dark-bright yellow (TiO2/Mn–CdS) supported there was more light absorption in the visible region with the latter composite. It is to be noted that upon Mn-doping in CdS, light absorption was extended into most of the high energy density region (∼1.5 to 1.6 W m−2 nm−1) of the solar spectrum between the UV to green region. Very importantly, the light absorption coefficient was increased dramatically up to 480 nm after Mn-doping, and it was twice that of TiO2/CdS.
 Fig. 1  UV-Visible absorption spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes. Inset shows a digital photograph for the color associated with the photoanode films, (a) TiO2 (white), (b) TiO2/CdS (pale yellow), and (c) TiO2/Mn–CdS (dark yellow). 
These observations fully support the creation of mid-gap state(s), which not only shift the absorption onset to high wavelength, but also increases the absorption co-efficient up to 500 nm. The increase in absorption coefficient between 380 nm and 450 nm is partly attributed to the QDs of Mn–CdS. However, a uniform Mn-doping in CdS with uniform QDs of ∼2 nm size could be expected to increase the band gap to nearly 3.3 eV with a white-light-like emission properties.18 While a white-light-like emission property was observed with the present Mn–CdS–TiO2 composite (discussed later), the light absorption extended up to 530 nm was attributed to the non-adoption of size-selective preparation due to the deployment of the SILAR method.
Hydrogen generation activity
Solar hydrogen generation (SHG) for all the composites was studied systematically with Pt or Ni–Cu as the co-catalyst under one sun conditions and the results are shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1. The 1 cm2 photochemical cell was immersed in aqueous electrolyte solution and illuminated with one sun light from the front side of the FTO plate, and the photocatalytic H2 evolution was studied as a function of time. Pristine TiO2 did not show any measurable activity for hydrogen evolution. It is well known that titania (anatase phase) absorbs in the UV region (<380 nm) and only 4% UV (<400 nm) is present in sunlight. A large recombination of charge carriers also decreases the charge utilization in the case of pristine titania, and hence no measurable activity was observed. Under one sun conditions, however, the TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS composites with Pt(Ni–Cu) as a co-catalyst showed instant hydrogen evolution activity of 3 and 16 mL h−1 (1.8 and 10.5 mL h−1), respectively (Fig. 2). After Mn-doping in CdS, the SHG activity of TiO2/Mn–CdS composite increased at least fivefold, see the video provided in the ESI† for H2 generation with TiO2/Mn–CdS with Ni–Cu as the co-catalyst. This is attributed to the Mn-doping in CdS, which creates mid-gap states in the CdS band gap and alters the electronic and optical properties of the semiconductor. Mn-doped CdS showed emission around 585 nm due to (4T1–6A1) d–d transition.18 However this transition is both optically and spin forbidden and resulted in an increase in the lifetime of charge carriers by the order of milliseconds.29,30 By tuning the particle size of Mn-doped CdS QD around 2 nm, it is also possible to observe white light emission with UV excitation sources.16,29 With a Ni–Cu co-catalyst, the photoanode shows decent activity of 10.5 mL h−1 H2, which is 2/3rd that of Pt. The importance of the present findings lies in generating an electronically similar co-catalyst (to that of Pt) with decent activity from earth-abundant and cheap metals; it is thus expected that there is a good possibility to replace the expensive Pt, although more thorough and systematic evaluations need to be completed.
 Fig. 2  (a) Hydrogen production activities of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes (1 cm2 area) with Pt or NiCu-alloy as the co-catalyst. Inset shows the hydrogen production activity of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode with Ni–Cu alloy and Ni–Cu bimetal NPs as the co-catalyst. (b) Photostability of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode wireless device, described in panel a, with the Ni–Cu alloy co-catalyst is demonstrated by performing the experiment for four cycles of 5 h each. Dashed line indicates the evacuation of hydrogen after every 5 h. 
Table 1 Photocatalytic H2 evolution from the QuAL device made of a TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode and different compositions of NiCu co-catalyst




Entry
Co-catalyst
H2/mL h−1
PCE/%




1
Ni
0.2
0.09


2
Ni5Cu1.25
0.5
0.23


3
Ni5Cu2.5 (alloy)
10.5
4.8


4
Ni5Cu3.75
6.4
2.9


5
Ni5Cu5
2.2
1


6
Ni5Cu2.5 (bimetal)
7
3.1


7
Pt
16
7.3




A H2 production rate of only 0.2 mL h−1 was observed with Ni as the co-catalyst, and the activity increased to 0.5 mL h−1 with a Ni5Cu1.25 composition. Thus there was an enormous improvement in the activity observed with Ni5Cu2.5. Compared to Ni and Ni5Cu1.25, the activity increased 52 and 21 times, respectively, with the Ni5Cu2.5 composition. However, any further increase in Cu-content (Ni5Cu3.75 and Ni5Cu5) led to a significant decrease in the activity. Hence an optimum concentration of Cu in NiCu is required to achieve better H2 evolution. As shown in Fig. 2a in the inset, the wireless photochemical cell exhibited a highly enhanced H2 production rate of 430 ± 20 μmol h−1 (corresponding to 10.5 mL h−1 H2) and a PCE of 4.8% with the Ni5Cu2.5alloy (Table 1). The Ni5Cu2.5 alloy NPs were spherical in morphology with an average particles size of 15 nm (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). The photochemical device produced a large amount of hydrogen gas bubbles with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy, which could be observed with the naked eye. A simple comparison of the HER and PCE of Ni5Cu2.5 with that of Pt underscores the importance of the present alloy co-catalyst. About 2/3rd of the Pt activity is recorded with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy, indicating the possibilities for improving the activity further by fine tuning the composition and electronic structure. It is also worth investigating other alloy or ternary systems for better activity. Moreover the photocatalytic activity of the device with the same Ni5Cu2.5 composition in bimetallic form exhibited 286 μmol h−1 (corresponding to 7 mL H2 h−1) and a PCE of 3.1%.
The stability of the photochemical device for H2 generation with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy was studied and the result is shown in Fig. 2b. The device produced a total of 8.75 mmol (∼210 mL) of H2 after 20 h of continuous irradiation, with no significant change in activity observed, indicating the robustness of the present QuAL device under one sun irradiation as well as the stability of the co-catalyst.
Photoelectrochemical performance
The photoelectrochemical (PEC) performances of the TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes were studied in a three-way electrode system, and the results are shown in Fig. 3a and b. As compared to TiO2/CdS (3.1 mA cm−2), TiO2/Mn–CdS exhibited a high photocurrent density of 4.7 mA cm−2 at zero applied voltage (vs. Ag/AgCl) under one sun illumination (AM 1.5 filter, 100 mW cm−2). A chronoamperometry study was also carried out at zero applied voltage to understand the immediate photoresponse of the photoanode, and the results are shown in Fig. 3b. The photocurrent was stable during the light on–off cycles. The increase in the photocurrent after Mn-doping was attributed to the more visible light absorption as evident from the UV-visible absorption studies (Fig. 1), which in turn increased the charge-carrier generation.
 Fig. 3  Photoelectrochemical performance of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS measured under one sun conditions at 0 V. Results are given for (a) J–V and (b) chronoamperometry measurements; (c) wavelength-dependent IPCE spectra, and (d) IPCE enhancement factor as a function of wavelength. 
The wavelength-dependent incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured and the results are shown in Fig. 3c. Mn–CdS/TiO2 enhanced the IPCE in the wavelength from 350 to 550 nm. The IPCE spectra of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS matched very well with the light absorption features shown in Fig. 1. A careful comparison of the IPCE data of both photoanodes revealed a significantly high IPCE after Mn-doping, even in the UV region, below 400 nm, compared to the one without Mn-doping. Although the Mn-doping effect can be seen in the higher IPCE between 400 nm and 550 nm, as in the UV-Vis absorption spectra, the increase in IPCE in the UV regime is a new and unexpected feature. Similar observations were made with photoanodes fabricated from different batches. This suggests a new factor contributed toward the solar light conversion.

Fig. 3d shows the IPCE enhancement factor, which was obtained by dividing the IPCE value of Mn–CdS/TiO2 to that of CdS/TiO2 at a given wavelength. An overall increase in the enhancement factor was observed in the wavelength from 350 to 540 nm. Two distinct IPCE enhancement regions can be observed in Fig. 3d.12 The IPCE enhancement factor gradually increased from 1 to 2 from 350 to 470 nm, respectively. A significant IPCE enhancement can also be observed from 480 to 540 nm, and this corresponds to the broadened absorption features due to Mn-doping in CdS. The IPCE enhancement factor was observed to be 5.0 up to 530 nm. The enhancement in IPCE for the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode underscores the importance of Mn-doping in CdS for the effective conversion of visible light. Although light absorption and enhanced IPCE is expected between 480 nm and 530 nm due to Mn-doping, the enhanced IPCE in the UV and near visible region underscores an additional contribution. Although an increase in light absorption up to 470 nm is evident for the Mn–CdS system from Fig. 3d, this alone cannot explain the 5 times increase in the rate of hydrogen generation compared to the un-doped CdS–TiO2 system. It is thus expected that some other factors could be contributing to the enhanced hydrogen formation along with the photocurrent generation.
Thorough structural, spectral, and microscopy characterization, including photoluminescence, studies were carried out to explore the factors contributing to the enhancement in photocurrent and hydrogen generation. Details are given in the next section.
Morphology and chemical mapping of the photoanodes

Fig. 4a shows the SEM image and Fig. 4b–d the EDX chemical mapping for S, Cd, and Ti, respectively, for the TiO2/Mn–CdS composite. Fig. 4e and f show the HRTEM images recorded for TiO2/Mn–CdS. The thickness of the photoactive material was about ∼7 μm with a uniform contrast throughout the film (Fig. 4a). In contrast to the expected CdS layers from the SILAR method, a uniform contrast hinted that the QD component is likely to be distributed throughout the bulk of titania. This uniform distribution of CdS is in contrast to the separate layers found for different components in an earlier report.27 We attribute this to the porous network of titania, which allows the diffusion of Cd2+, S2−, and Mn2+ ions and hence the formation of CdS and Mn–CdS in the pores of titania. Chemical mapping of S, Cd, and Ti was measured on a freshly cleaved TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode, and the results are shown in Fig. 4b–d, respectively. Individual elemental mapping for the other three elements (Zn, O, and Mn) are shown in Fig. S2 (in ESI†). Throughout the cleaved photoanode film surface, all of the constituent elements can be seen; this fully supports the diffusion of Cd2+, S2−, and Mn2+ ions (Fig. 4 and S2†) and chalcogenide formation in the pores of TiO2. This is also distributed uniformly throughout the film. In fact, very similar results were obtained by Patra et al. on AuTiO2/PbS/CdS.12 The relatively dense sulfur and cadmium distribution from CdS ensures that it is inevitably on the surface and pores of titania. The uniform distribution fully asserts the physical proximity of chalcogenide and titania in the photoanode. Further, the physical proximity of various components in the confined pores suggests the formation of an abundant bulk heterostructure, which is expected to enhance the solar-light-to-current conversion efficiency.31–33
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image, (b) EDX chemical mapping recorded for the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode and shown for (b) S, (c) Cd, (d) Ti. Zn, O, and Mn element mapping is given in the ESI (Fig. S2†). (e) and (f) TEM analysis of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode. Scale bar is 10 and 2 nm in panels e and f, respectively. 
The interaction between CdS and TiO2 was further explored by TEM and HRTEM studies and the results are shown in Fig. 4e and f. The uniform distribution of CdS and TiO2 nanoparticles can be clearly seen in Fig. 4e. A careful analysis of Fig. 4e, and the enlarged central portion of it shown in Fig. 4f, specifically shows the CdS particles surrounded by TiO2 nanoparticles; this supports the intercalation of CdS into the pores of TiO2. In fact, the thin layer of hexagonal particles seen in Fig. 4e suggests the typical wurtzite structure of CdS. A thin layer of CdS or Mn–CdS coated on titania is expected; however, more careful studies are required. The thin layer of CdS also suggests the quantum confinement along the z-axis. The lattice spacing for TiO2 (CdS) was measured to be 0.35 nm (0.208 nm) for the (101) (110) facet.34,35
Photoluminescence studies
Photoluminescence (PL) studies of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS were carried out to understand the possible reason(s) for the enhanced activity of the photoanode after Mn2+ doping. Fig. 5 shows the PL spectra recorded with 420 nm excitation wavelength and combined with the UV-visible absorption spectra for TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS. The inset in Fig. 5 shows the PL spectra recorded with 370 nm excitation wavelength. A 420 nm excitation wavelength was specifically employed to exclude any emission features from titania, which prevents any band gap excitation of titania, so that features from CdS and Mn–CdS could be evaluated in detail. In the PL spectra (Fig. 5 inset), all the composite materials show the characteristic peaks of TiO2 prominently at 415, and 437 and a shoulder at 463 nm. The emission band at 415 nm is due to the free exciton emission of TiO2.36 The mission feature at 530 nm for titania is attributed to oxygen vacancy sites. Compared to titania, TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS show significantly lower emission intensity, indicating the possibility of enhanced charge utilization (Fig. 5 inset). The emission profile of TiO2/Mn–CdS, with 370 nm excitation wavelength, significantly resembles that of the solar spectrum up to 700 nm. In the case of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS, the feature for CdS emission is merged with the TiO2 feature at wavelengths above 460 nm, which is evident from the comparison of the PL results given in the inset of Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Photoluminescence spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS recorded with a 420 nm excitation source; emission features are normalized. UV-visible absorption spectra recorded for all three materials (given in dashed lines in the same color) are also compared with photoluminescence. Overlapping wavelength regions between the absorption and emission spectra are shown in the figure by a solid triangular area highlighting the secondary light source available for absorption by chalcogenides. About a three times larger triangle area with TiO2/Mn–CdS than without Mn hints at a greater reabsorption of emitted light. Inset shows the photoluminescence spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS recorded with a 370 nm excitation wavelength. 
An emission feature centered around 550 nm was observed with the TiO2/CdS (blue trace, Fig. 5) system with 420 nm excitation wavelength; here, some overlap with the emission feature from titania at 530 nm is unavoidable. However, the emission feature at lower wavelengths is fully distinguishable from titania. In addition to the emission feature at 550 nm, another feature centered around 600 nm was observed for TiO2/Mn–CdS; the latter feature corresponds to the characteristic feature of Mn2+-doping; the broad nature of the peak confirms the Mn2+ d–d transition (4T1 → 6A1) as well as the surface defects of CdS. Nag et al.29 synthesized size-selective and highly crystalline CdS and Mn2+-doped CdS nanocrystals (NCs) with the size ranging from 1.9 nm to 2.6 nm. The PL spectra of the Mn-doped NCs show Mn2+ d–d electron transitions around 620 nm, distinctly separated from the surface-state emissions of CdS with a maximum near 508 nm. In the present work, we were also able to see distinct features of d–d electron transitions around 600 nm and surface-state emissions of CdS NCs around 550 nm. Since the CdS particle size employed in the current system is likely to be bigger than that reported in ref. 29, the emission peak positions were observed at marginally different wavelengths. However, what is particularly important here is the observation of radiative emission wavelength extending up to 420 nm with the TiO2/Mn–CdS system. As seen in Fig. 5, there was no overlap between the absorption and emission features of TiO2. However, when titania combined with CdS, there was some limited overlap observed between the absorption and emission features (blue traces and small triangle) around 460 nm; however, for the TiO2/Mn–CdS system, the absorption–emission overlap increased in intensity and broadened to higher and lower wavelengths significantly, signifying the effect of Mn-doping (Fig. 5). The TiO2/Mn–CdS composite absorbs the light from incident photons, and emits light through radiative recombination, which can then be reabsorbed by CdS or Mn–CdS. In fact, such self-absorption is a frustrating problem in light emitting diodes (LED) and decreases the efficiency of the LEDs. On the contrary, this increases the number of photons available to the chalcogenide particles in photocatalysis. Particularly, the local emission is expected to be intense and in some way it may be comparable to the field effect associated with surface plasmons.37,38 This leads to the generation of a greater number of charge carriers, which can then be used for hydrogen (or current) production, resulting in a highly enhanced activity of composites for hydrogen production.
A careful examination of the results in Fig. 5 (inset) reveals that the emission wavelength range is similar to that of white light and can act as a secondary light source; this would be similar to that of the visible light range of one sun radiation. Although the radiative recombination is decreased substantially with the TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS systems compared to TiO2, the white-light-like emission supports the possibility of reabsorption to produce more charge carriers. Indeed, upon the illumination of one sun radiation under photocatalysis conditions, white light emission is expected. This aspect is worth exploring further with a well-defined system to exploit further for various light-harvesting applications.
The PL spectra in Fig. 5 also appear to be broad and significantly red-shifted compared to the absorption edge together with a significant band-edge emission/overlap with both CdS and Mn–CdS. This is attributed to the presence of non-coordinated surface-related mid-gap states. Possibly, the photoexcited electrons and holes are transferred to these mid-gap states, before recombining radiatively to give rise to the broad emission spectrum red-shifted from the absorption spectrum. As expected, the decrease in particle size increases the surface area, resulting in a greater number of surface-related states. However, the band-gap emission (of CdS) as well as the higher energy emission at wavelengths below 450 nm directly demonstrates the electron transfer to titania. QDs of Mn–CdS lead to the CB of CdS and 6A1 Mn2+-state being higher in energy than the CB of TiO2. This makes the electron transfer feasible from Mn–CdS to the titania and hence leads to more current or hydrogen generation. While the above electronic structure arrangement and the heterojunction between Mn–CdS and TiO2 lead to effective electron transfer, a high lifetime could not be observed in the lifetime measurements for the Mn–CdS/TiO2 composite (which is a characteristic of surface-protected confined Mn–CdS QDs29). As observed in the TEM, due to the bulk heterostructure between CdS and TiO2, effective electron transfer to titania is possible by decreasing the number of surface states. This also could be a reason for the light emission in the lower wavelength region and especially at a band gap value higher than CdS. The increase in the absorption coefficient at λ ≤ 450 nm is partly attributed to the QDs of Mn–CdS (Fig. 1) and suggests the sizes are in the quantum confinement range; however, this was difficult to confirm directly by HRTEM, in spite of our efforts.
XRD and Raman studies of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS were carried out and the results are given in Fig. S3 and S4,† respectively. Largely titania features were observed in both studies. No features due to CdS could be seen in both techniques, indicating the fine distribution of chalcogenide particles on the titania substrate.
NiCu: an affordable and efficient alternative co-catalyst to Pt

XRD of NiCu co-catalyst. 
The XRD patterns with different compositions of NiCu (alloy and bimetal) are shown in Fig. 6. Pure Ni shows characteristic diffraction features of Ni-metal along with a feature around 2θ = 37° corresponding to the (111) plane of NiO. However, pure Cu exhibited typical diffraction features of Cu, without any copper oxide feature. The intensity of the NiO feature decreases in NiCu alloys with the increasing Cu-content and disappears with Ni5Cu2.5 and Ni5Cu3.75 compositions. As shown in inset (i) in Fig. 6, the diffraction peak for the (111) plane of Ni becomes broader and gradually shifts toward a higher 2θ value with the increase in Cu concentration. The typical diffraction features from the (111) and (200) facets of the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy demonstrates its formation; indeed these two features overlap significantly (Fig. 6(ii)).39 However, the same diffraction peak in Ni5Cu3.75 corresponds to the characteristic features of a bimetallic structure; careful examination reveals the (200) feature is shifted to higher 2θ (Fig. 6(ii)) and appears as a separate feature. Particularly to be noted in these results is the absence of diffraction lines corresponding to that of pure Ni and Cu in Ni5Cu2.5 and Ni5Cu3.75. A different XRD pattern was observed with Ni5Cu5 and some of the features were identified to be from individual Ni and Cu NPs. Based on the XRD results, it is evident that an alloy of NiCu can be obtained with a composition around 5:2.5 molar ratios of Ni and Cu. However it does not form an alloy with a higher concentration of Cu. We also synthesized the Ni5Cu2.5 bimetallic NPs by tuning the reaction conditions (see Experimental section and inset (ii) in Fig. 6, which shows the difference in the XRD patterns of Ni5Cu2.5 for the alloy and bimetallic NPs).40
 Fig. 6  XRD pattern of Ni–Cu alloy nanoparticles containing different amounts of Ni and Cu. Inset (i) shows the shift in the (111) plane of Ni to a higher 2θ value after Cu incorporation. Inset (ii) shows the difference in XRD patterns of the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and Ni5Cu2.5 bimetal. 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XPS analysis was performed to further validate the nature of the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and Ni5Cu2.5 bimetallic NPs. The alloy form showed a significantly higher amount of metallic Ni feature at a binding energy (BE) of 852.4 eV (Fig. 7a) than the bimetal (Fig. 7b). Deconvolution supports that the amount of metallic nickel is small on the bimetal. However, the high BE feature at 855.5 eV in Fig. 7a corresponds to the presence of divalent-Ni hydroxide species on the surface of the alloy NPs, and is in good agreement with literature reports.41,42 The significant increase in the Ni2+ feature and corresponding satellite observed in the bimetal suggest the surface phase is hydroxide, and at the expense of Ni-metal. Moreover, the Cu 2p XPS spectra showed the presence of metallic Cu and hydroxide species on the surface of the alloy NPs (refer to Fig. S5†). While the bimetallic Ni5Cu2.5 composition showed a significant amount of NiO and Ni(OH)2 features on the surface of the NPs as evident from the Ni 2p spectra (Fig. 7), no Cu feature was observed on the surface of the bimetal (Fig. S5†). The absence of any Cu on the surface of the bimetallic Ni5Cu2.5 system allows the Ni atoms to oxidize easily, whereas in the alloy form the adjacent Cu atom hinders the formation of the oxide. Cu atoms present on the core of Ni5Cu2.5 bimetal allow the oxidation of Ni to a significant extent. As a result, a much lesser Ni-metallic feature was observed on the surface of the bimetal, as observed in Fig. 7. This is in good agreement with the activity results reported, where we observed significantly lower H2 production with the bimetal as compared to the alloy NPs (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 7  XPS results for the Ni 2p3/2 core level recorded with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and bimetal nanomaterials. While the alloy exhibits a sharp Ni-metal feature, this feature is lower on the bimetal. 
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
To probe the density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level (EF), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UVPES) measurements were carried out for the alloy and bimetal forms of Ni5Cu2.5 and the results are given in Fig. 8. The EF of an electrocatalyst is a characteristic feature directly indicating the catalytic activity.43 The full UVPES spectrum is shown in Fig. S6.† Qualitatively, from the valence band spectra shown in Fig. 8, we observed that the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy system exhibits low, but significant, electron density at the EF compared to no DOS up to 2 eV for the Ni5Cu2.5 bimetallic system. This is a direct indication of the greater metallic character of the alloy (than the bimetal) on the surface, which is in good agreement with the XPS results. It is also to be noted that, in spite of the significant oxide formation on the surface of alloy, the EF observation with a significant DOS underscores its resistance toward oxidation. It is further supported by the work function measurements. The difference between the photon energy (hν = 21.2 eV for He I radiation) and the secondary electron cut-off energy (shown in Fig. 8b with black lines) provides the work function in the UVPES spectra.
 Fig. 8  UVPES results obtained for the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and bimetallic nanomaterials. Comparison of (a) Fermi level, and (b) work function features. 
Interestingly, the work function of the alloy (5.55 eV) appeared to be lower by 0.65 eV than that of the bimetal (6.2 eV) (Fig. 8b). The above observations indicated that the alloy NPs have a higher potential for proton reduction as compared to the bimetallic form. It is to be noted that the Pt, Ni, and Cu elements are reported to exhibit work function in the ranges 5.12–5.93, 5.04–5.35, and 4.5–5.1 eV, respectively.44 The NiCu alloy work function overlaps with that of Pt, while the bimetal exceeds that of Pt. These points underscore a similarity in electronic structure between the NiCu alloy and Pt, and it is expected that the alloy would exhibit a similar activity as that of Pt. It is possible to vary the work function with further fine tuning of the alloy composition. However, the optimum amount of Cu in Ni (Ni5Cu2.5) leads to a similar character as that of Pt and also retains the metallic nature. This is likely to be the main reason for the high catalytic activity.
Electrochemically-measured HER activity
The electrocatalytic activity of different compositions of Ni–Cu materials was studied in N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 using a three electrode system. All the catalysts were coated on a glassy carbon electrode, with the amount of catalyst loading being 5 μg cm−2 in each experiment. As shown in Fig. 9a, Ni exhibits very little HER activity even at 0.5 V applied potential. However Cu incorporation into the Ni (up to Ni5Cu2.5) accelerated the HER activity, but with more Cu concentration, the activity decreases. The polarization curve recorded with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy showed an overpotential of 280 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. In contrast, the Ni5Cu2.5 bimetal showed an overpotential of 400 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The significant improvement in catalytic activity for Ni5Cu2.5 alloy was also evident from the positive shift in the onset potential to −130 mV vs. RHE as compared to the bimetallic form. The higher catalytic activity in the alloy composition is mainly due to synergistic effect of Ni and Cu, which favors the adsorption of a hydrogen-containing intermediate on the surface of the catalyst.45
 Fig. 9  (a) HER polarization curve obtained on different co-catalysts. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data collected in 0.5 M H2SO4 at an HER overpotential of 130 mV vs. RHE for the alloy and bimetal form of Ni5Cu2.5. 
Nevertheless, the lower charge transfer resistance for Ni5Cu2.5 alloy as compared to its bimetallic form (Fig. 9b) indicates the enhanced electrocatalytic performance of the former. Hence, an electronic and/or the chemical coupling between Ni and Cu, which is more prominent in the alloy, can provide a less resistive pathway for electron transfer and consequently enhances the HER activity on its surface. The higher proton reduction current of the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy confirms the critical role of the HER catalyst toward the better performance in the QuAL device.
Possible mechanism
A detailed study of the hydrogen production activity and other relevant characteristic can give an idea about the electronic integration among the constituent components of a photoanode and its light-harvesting mechanism. On the basis of the present study's experimental results and discussions, a possible mechanism of light harvesting by the photoanode and hydrogen production with Pt or NiCu as a co-catalyst is shown in Fig. 10. As CdS exhibits a narrower band gap (2.58 eV) than TiO2 (3.2 eV), it can absorb the visible light photons directly and transfer the photoexcited electrons to the conduction band of TiO2. Such electrons flow through the FTO and reach the Pt/NiCu sites, where they reduce H+ ions to generate H2. The doping of Mn-ions in CdS creates mid-gap states,28,29 which is well-known, in the forbidden band gap of CdS and helps to increase the visible light absorption in the higher wavelength region up to 530 nm, and charge separation in the composite photoanode (Fig. 10). It is to be reiterated that the millisecond lifetime of electrons in Mn–CdS enhances the charge utilization for redox reactions, particularly more hydrogen with long-lived electrons. In addition to the longer wavelength light absorption by the TiO2/Mn–CdS composite, it also emits photons similar to that of visible light. Photon emission due to the radiative recombination of charge carriers becomes a secondary source of photons generated in situ and absorption of this source of photons leads to more charge-carrier generation; or at least, minimizes the charge recombination and hence increases the charge-carrier utilization toward redox reactions. This increases the charge-carrier generation and ultimately the hydrogen production activity and PCE. Thus, with Mn-doping the charge separation and recombination dynamics also changes and results in an extraordinary activity for H2 over the photoanodes.
 Fig. 10  Possible mechanism for hydrogen production over the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode. Mn 3d levels and electron transfer are indicated by yellow dashed lines and dashed arrows. Black portion indicates the co-catalyst coated area. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, a solar-light-driven wireless photochemical cell using TiO2/Mn–CdS as a light-harvesting photoanode material and NiCu as a co-catalyst for photocatalytic H2 evolution at no applied potential was successfully developed. The TiO2/Mn–CdS composite also showed a photocurrent of 4.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V. The high activity and photocurrent generation of the photoanode is mainly attributed to the Mn-doping in CdS. Mn-doping in CdS creates mid-gap states in the band gap of CdS which aids more light absorption at high wavelengths and charge-carrier separation too, which ultimately leads to a high activity of the photoanodes. Optically and spin-forbidden d–d transition in Mn leads to a high lifetime of electrons, which in turn enhances electron utilization for hydrogen generation. Also, in the case of the TiO2/Mn–CdS composite, the reabsorption of emitted white light is possible, which can assist greater charge-carrier generation, resulting in extraordinary activity of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode. We demonstrated that the nature of the co-catalyst surface controls the HER kinetics and finally the photocatalytic activity, as seen by XPS. In addition, the UVPES studies revealed that the Fermi level upshifting in Ni5Cu2.5 alloy makes it an efficient co-catalyst as compared to its bimetallic form. Further fine tuning of the NiCu alloy composition could enhance the activity significantly. We expect that more careful investigations by using spectroscopic methods along with electrochemical studies can provide a rational approach for better solar-light-harvesting architectures.
Though water splitting feasibility with UV light was demonstrated in 1972 by Fujishima and Honda,46 there is no breakthrough yet in solar water splitting. Indeed, it is a complex problem and very important to connect the (unknown) dots that help toward solving the problem. The self-absorption of emitted light is a vexing problem with light emitting materials, while the same could help to increase the efficiency was demonstrated in the present work. Similarly, the in situ formation of quantum dots in the porous network of titania led to the bulk heterostructure and this contributed significantly to charge separation/diffusion. We believe, connecting more such factors might help to improve the efficiency of solar water splitting.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr K. Krishnamoorthy and Mr V. Sudhakar for IPCE measurement. KKP and PAB thank CSIR, New Delhi for research fellowship. We acknowledge for the financial support through MLP034526 project from CSIR, New Delhi.
Notes and references
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
A. A. Melvin, K. Illath, T. Das, T. Raja, S. Bhattacharyya and C. S. Gopinath, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13477–13488 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Leung Dennis, X. Fu, C. Wang, M. Ni, K. H. L. Michael, X. Wang and X. Fu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 681–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, D. J. Martin, W. Wang, J. Tang and W. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14956–14960 RSC .
H. Fujii, M. Ohtaki, K. Eguchi and H. Arai, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1997, 16, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and A. K. Jain, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2001, 165, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, J.-Z. Sun, H.-Y. Li, J. Hong and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1203–1206 RSC .
K. K. Patra, B. D. Bhuskute and C. S. Gopinath, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6515 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu and T. Lian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3781–3810 RSC .
H. Tada, M. Fujishima and H. Kobayashi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4232–4243 RSC .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Patra and C. S. Gopinath, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3294–3311 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nag, S. Sapra, C. Nagamani, A. Sharma, N. Pradhan, S. V. Bhat and D. D. Sarma, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3252–3259 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mersch, C.-Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Andreiadis, P.-A. Jacques, P. D. Tran, A. Leyris, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, B. Jousselme, M. Matheron, J. Pecaut, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, S. Bruller, R. Dong, J. Zhang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Nat. Chem., 2015, 6, 7992 CAS .
S. Rajaambal, K. Sivaranjani and C. S. Gopinath, J. Chem. Sci., 2015, 127, 33–47 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, Y. Shi, C. Huang, Q. Wu, T. Zeng and W. Yao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. Sun, S. Li, C. Huang, W. Yao, W. Chen, T. Zeng, Q. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, L. Duan, Q. Wu and W. Yao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 332, 449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, Q. Wu, C. Huang, W. Yao and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10028 RSC .
R. Trevisan, P. Rodenas, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, C. Sima, R. S. Sanchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Sero, F. F. Santiago and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 141–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, C. P. Vinod and C. S. Gopinath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4717–4726 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nag and D. D. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13641–13644 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Vlaskin, N. Janssen, J. van Rijssel, R. M. Beaulac and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3670–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rajaambal, M. Mapa and C. S. Gopinath, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12546–12554 RSC .
P. Devaraji, M. Mapa, H. M. Abdul Hakkeem, V. Sudhakar, K. Krishnamoorthy and C. S. Gopinath, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 6768–6781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Preethi, R. P. Antony, T. Mathews, L. Walczak and C. S. Gopinath, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivaranjani and C. S. Gopinath, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2639–2647 RSC .
S. Srivastava, A. Santos, K. Critchley, K.-S. Kim, P. Podsiadlo, K. Sun, J. Lee, C. Xu, G. D. Lilly, S. C. Glotzer and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2010, 327, 1355–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Bharad, K. Sivaranjani and C. S. Gopinath, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11206–11215 RSC .
K. K. Patra and C. S. Gopinath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1206–1214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Moon Song, H. Gwag Eun and J. Y. Park, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 459–469 CrossRef .
G. H. Mohamed Saeed, S. Radiman, S. S. Gasaymeh, H. N. Lim and N. M. Huang, J. Nanomater., 2010, 5, 184137 Search PubMed .
D. Li, M. Lu, K. Aragaki, M. Koike, Y. Nakagawa and K. Tomishige, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 171–181 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velu, K. Suzuki, M. Vijayaraj, S. Barman and C. S. Gopinath, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 55, 287–299 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Bharathan, R. Jain, C. S. Gopinath and C. P. Vinod, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4489–4498 RSC .
W. Bi, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, X. Li, T. Jin, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, C. Wu and Y. Xie, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4253–4257 CrossRef CAS .

          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_function
        .
Z. Xing, L. Gan, J. Wang and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7744–7748 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of NiCu co-catalysts, experimental details, hydrogen generation video, TEM of NiCu alloy nanoparticles, SEM-EDX studies of TiO2–Mn–CdS photoanode, X-ray diffraction results, Raman spectral studies, XPS results, and UVPES results. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11307f‡ Equal first authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  UV-Visible absorption spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes. Inset shows a digital photograph for the color associated with the photoanode films, (a) TiO2 (white), (b) TiO2/CdS (pale yellow), and (c) TiO2/Mn–CdS (dark yellow).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Hydrogen production activities of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanodes (1 cm2 area) with Pt or NiCu-alloy as the co-catalyst. Inset shows the hydrogen production activity of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode with Ni–Cu alloy and Ni–Cu bimetal NPs as the co-catalyst. (b) Photostability of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode wireless device, described in panel a, with the Ni–Cu alloy co-catalyst is demonstrated by performing the experiment for four cycles of 5 h each. Dashed line indicates the evacuation of hydrogen after every 5 h.	 

1	Ni	0.2	0.09
2	Ni5Cu1.25	0.5	0.23
3	Ni5Cu2.5 (alloy)	10.5	4.8
4	Ni5Cu3.75	6.4	2.9
5	Ni5Cu5	2.2	1
6	Ni5Cu2.5 (bimetal)	7	3.1
7	Pt	16	7.3

 	Fig. 3  Photoelectrochemical performance of TiO2/CdS and TiO2/Mn–CdS measured under one sun conditions at 0 V. Results are given for (a) J–V and (b) chronoamperometry measurements; (c) wavelength-dependent IPCE spectra, and (d) IPCE enhancement factor as a function of wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image, (b) EDX chemical mapping recorded for the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode and shown for (b) S, (c) Cd, (d) Ti. Zn, O, and Mn element mapping is given in the ESI (Fig. S2†). (e) and (f) TEM analysis of the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode. Scale bar is 10 and 2 nm in panels e and f, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoluminescence spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS recorded with a 420 nm excitation source; emission features are normalized. UV-visible absorption spectra recorded for all three materials (given in dashed lines in the same color) are also compared with photoluminescence. Overlapping wavelength regions between the absorption and emission spectra are shown in the figure by a solid triangular area highlighting the secondary light source available for absorption by chalcogenides. About a three times larger triangle area with TiO2/Mn–CdS than without Mn hints at a greater reabsorption of emitted light. Inset shows the photoluminescence spectra of TiO2, TiO2/CdS, and TiO2/Mn–CdS recorded with a 370 nm excitation wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 6  XRD pattern of Ni–Cu alloy nanoparticles containing different amounts of Ni and Cu. Inset (i) shows the shift in the (111) plane of Ni to a higher 2θ value after Cu incorporation. Inset (ii) shows the difference in XRD patterns of the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and Ni5Cu2.5 bimetal.	 

 	Fig. 7  XPS results for the Ni 2p3/2 core level recorded with the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and bimetal nanomaterials. While the alloy exhibits a sharp Ni-metal feature, this feature is lower on the bimetal.	 

 	Fig. 8  UVPES results obtained for the Ni5Cu2.5 alloy and bimetallic nanomaterials. Comparison of (a) Fermi level, and (b) work function features.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HER polarization curve obtained on different co-catalysts. (b) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data collected in 0.5 M H2SO4 at an HER overpotential of 130 mV vs. RHE for the alloy and bimetal form of Ni5Cu2.5.	 

 	Fig. 10  Possible mechanism for hydrogen production over the TiO2/Mn–CdS photoanode. Mn 3d levels and electron transfer are indicated by yellow dashed lines and dashed arrows. Black portion indicates the co-catalyst coated area.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Synthesis of NiCu co-catalysts, experimental details, hydrogen generation video, TEM of NiCu alloy nanoparticles, SEM-EDX studies of TiO2–Mn–CdS photoanode, X-ray diffraction results, Raman spectral studies, XPS results, and UVPES results. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11307f
‡ Equal first authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
