A review on sustainable synthetic approaches toward photoluminescent quantum dots  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC02964A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC02964A
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 675-700A review on sustainable synthetic approaches toward photoluminescent quantum dots

        
          
            Weiqiang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinghua 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liling 
            Fei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weizhen 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiuling 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Haiyang 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yichun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology of Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China. E-mail: wzliu@nenu.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Changchun University of Science and Technology, Changchun 130022, China. E-mail: liuxiuling@cust.edu.cn
Received 
      17th August 2021
    , Accepted 1st December 2021First published on 1st December 2021AbstractPhotoluminescent quantum dots (QDs) with unique structures and excellent optical attributes have received much interest owing to their extensive applications. In this review, various classes of QDs with different compositions (such as carbon, binary components, and multiple components) have been selected to systematically summarize the green synthesis approaches to obtain QDs. Various liquid-phase chemical strategies based on “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches have been proposed for carbon-based dots (CDs), with emphasis on “bottom-up” approaches using biomass materials as the carbon source. Green synthesis strategies for binary QDs (BQDs) focus on the use of green solvents and design of biological organisms. Among them, the use of various biological organisms as green reactors to synthesize BQDs without chemicals is a better option than other synthetic strategies. The green synthesis of multi-component QDs (MQDs) using partial substitution of green capping ligands, simple operation, and mild reaction conditions is also summarized, especially for perovskite QDs. In particular, the formation mechanisms, advantages, and limitations are discussed for each type of QD in these green synthetic strategies. Finally, the remaining challenges and future prospects of green synthetic strategies to obtain photoluminescent QDs are summarized.Weiqiang YangWeiqiang Yang received his PhD degree from the School of Physics, Northeast Normal University, in 2020. He currently works as a postdoctoral researcher at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of semiconductor quantum dots and hetero-structured composites and their applications in optoelectronic devices.Xinghua LiXinghua Li received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Northeast Normal University in 2010. He is a professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests include low-dimensional functional materials and devices for environmental and energy applications, such as photocatalysts, supercapacitors, and zinc ion batteries.Weizhen LiuWeizhen Liu received his PhD degree from the Northeast Normal University in 2014. From 2013 to 2014, he worked as a project officer at the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Currently, he is an associate professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of fluorescent quantum dots, wide-bandgap semiconductor materials and their optoelectronic devices, and 2D layered materials and relevant devices.Xiuling LiuXiuling Liu received her PhD degree from the Northeast Normal University in 2014. From 2014 to 2016, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently, she is a lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Changchun University of Science and Technology, China. Her research interests include the synthesis and applications of fluorescent quantum dots, lanthanide ion doped upconversion nanoparticle materials and their applications, and white light emitting materials.Haiyang XuHaiyang Xu received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2006. From 2006 to 2008, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He received a fund from the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholars. Currently, he is a professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University. His research interests include wide-bandgap semiconductor materials and their photonic/electronic devices, memristive devices, and artificial synaptics.Yichun LiuYichun Liu received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, China, in 1995. He received a fund from the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholars. He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in November 2021. He is currently the President of Northeast Normal University. His current research interests include semiconductor materials and devices.
1. Introduction
Photoluminescent materials,1,2 which absorb light at a certain energy and immediately emit light, have been widely applied in biochemical analysis probes,3 drug tracers,4 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),5 lasers,6 and other fields. Fluorescent proteins and organic dyes are commonly used luminescent materials owing to their high detection sensitivity and easy operation.7 However, these conventional organic dyes generally suffer from narrow excitation ranges, broad emission spectra, and poor anti-photobleaching.8 Photoluminescent quantum dots (QDs) are new fluorescent material candidates that can overcome the limitations of organic dyes owing to their unique structure and outstanding optical properties. QDs are only a few nanometers in size in all three dimensions. The motion of electrons is obviously bound when the particle size is reduced to the nanometer level. Therefore, electrons in the nanoparticles cannot move freely, leading to clear changes in the electronic structure and properties of nanoparticles. Notably, the increase in band gap with decreasing particle size can be observed from the optical properties of the nanoparticle. Therefore, the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of QDs can easily range from the ultraviolet (UV) region to the visible (VIS) region, even reaching the near-infrared (NIR) region. According to the quantum confinement effect, QDs can generate luminescence after excitation by electromagnetic radiation, and their band gap width and exciton binding energy can be adjusted by changing the QD size, shape, and crystal phase. This conclusion was first confirmed by Brus et al., who obtained CdS particles of different sizes that produced fluorescence of various colors.9 Subsequently, the optical properties and luminescence mechanisms of QDs have become hot research topics internationally.
Over the last two decades, the most researched QDs have generally been binary compounds composed of elements from groups II–VI and IV–VI (such as CdS, CdTe, and PbS). However, the potential toxicity of heavy metals in these QDs is a major problem for their further application.10 QDs of elements from groups III–V (such as InP, InAs, and GaAs) and I–VI (such as Ag2S, Ag2Se, and CuS) without toxic metal elements have also attracted extensive attention. However, the hazardous chemical reagents and complex fabrication conditions required for their synthesis are a concerning issue. Therefore, the development of environmentally friendly QDs is attractive to researchers. Among such QDs, carbon (C), silicon (Si), and sulfur (S) QDs originating from group IV and VI elements have been widely studied owing to their lower cost, readily available raw materials, and good biocompatibility.11,12 Despite these creditable advantages, imperfect optical properties, such as a low quantum yield (QY), broadened full width at half maximum (FWHM), and nonuniform size distribution, have restricted their further application. To address these issues, much effort has been focused on the development of multiple component QDs (such as group I–III–VI, I–IV–VII, and I–II–IV–VI QDs) in recent years. For example, CuInS2 and CuInSe2 QDs have low band gap energies that show greater potential for VIS and NIR emission applications.13,14
Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs have been widely studied in optoelectronic devices owing to their high molar absorption coefficient.15 Emerging perovskite ABX3 QDs (A = Na+, Cs+, CH3NH2+, B = Pb2+, Sn2+, X = Cl−, Br−, I−) have excellent optical properties, such as a high PL QY, narrow FWHM, and tunable emission wavelength, showing good application prospects in the photoelectric field.16 Notably, research related to these emerging ABX3 QDs is still in its infancy.
Owing to the outstanding properties of QDs, various synthetic strategies have been proposed for their preparation, ranging from vapor phase epitaxial growth and the electric field constraint method to liquid-phase synthesis. However, expensive instrumentation, strict experimental conditions, and potentially harmful environmental effects have hindered their commercial progress. The term “green chemistry” was introduced in 1991 as a major direction of chemical advance for the 21st century, with the ultimate goal of achieving zero pollution or emissions.17 The realization of green chemical technology is regulated by twelve principles, such as pollution prevention, atom economy, reduced product toxicity, and so forth (Table 1.).18 In early work, Anastas et al. proposed that the green chemistry concept needs to be studied from a life-cycle perspective.19 Improvements at all stages of the product or process life cycle by green chemistry tends to positively impact human health and the environment. The design of “life cycle innovation” using green methodologies and techniques is among the most active research areas in green chemistry and engineering. Another active area of green chemistry research is the development of analytical methodologies.20 New analytical methodologies and techniques are essential to eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances. Subsequently, Anastas et al. proposed that catalysis is a fundamental pillar of green chemistry.21 The design and application of new catalysts and catalytic systems not only achieves environmental protection, but also improves the economic benefits. Although this technology can, in principle, decrease the negative impacts on human health and the environment, the hazard presented by poisonous materials is not entirely eliminated. In fact, strictly speaking, there is no absolute green synthetic process because any chemical material possesses hazardous properties.22 However, following green techniques, it is possible to improve the resource utilization ratio by using energy-conservation processes to the maximum extent. Environmental pollution and unnecessary waste can be also reduced by using safer solvents, renewable raw materials, and living organisms in green synthetic processes. For example, the substitution of high-toxicity benzene and chlorobenzene with toluene in various synthetic strategies, such as the non-injection method and solvothermal synthesis, can be considered a green synthetic strategy.23,24 Biosynthesis is another type of alternative green synthetic method, where compounds are produced by biological organisms (such as microorganisms, plants, and animals). In general, green synthesis is dedicated to minimizing risks to the environment and human health and is gradually occupying an irreplaceable position. Consequently, the development of novel, facile, and green synthetic approaches for the preparation of photoluminescent QDs is highly desirable.
Table 1 The twelve principles of green chemistry




Prevention
Atom economy




Less hazardous chemical syntheses
Designing safer chemicals


Safer solvents and auxiliaries
Design for energy efficiency


Use of renewable feedstocks
Reduce derivatives


Catalysis
Design for degradation


Real-time analysis for pollution prevention
Inherently safer chemistry for accident prevention




In this review, numerous studies that focused on the development of green synthetic methods for photoluminescent QDs are summarized. These strategies are mainly focused on liquid-phase chemical approaches based on green solvents or raw materials, biosynthesis, and high resource utilization. Among QDs, the green synthesis of new carbon-based dots (CDs) has started quite recently. Synthesizing multi-component QDs (MQDs) using green routes is more difficult. In comparison, a more ideal green synthetic strategy has been developed for traditional binary QDs (BQDs). In combination with the development of these materials, the green synthesis of various QDs is summarized, mainly focusing on the use of green raw materials as carbon sources for CDs, green solvents and biosynthesis for BQDs, and green capping ligands and high resource utilization efficiency for MQDs. The formation mechanisms, advantages, and limitations of green synthesis of each type of QD are discussed in the corresponding sections. Finally, based on the progress made in this field, conclusions and future prospects for the green production of various QDs are provided. The structure of this review is shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of various green synthesis strategies for QDs (CDs, BQDs, and MQDs). 
2. Carbon-based dots
CDs are newly emerged fluorescent nanomaterials possessing monodispersed quasi-spherical or spherical structures of size less than 10 nm. CDs were first reported by Xu et al. from the purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes using an electrophoresis method.25 Fluorescent nanoscale carbon nanoparticles were named “carbon dots” by Sun et al. in 2006.26 However, to date, the term “carbon dot” has been used to broadly refer to nanoscale particles composed of carbon atoms as the main building block, rather than a specific type of QD. A rational and systematic classification of CDs, based on their nature, structure, dimensionality, and quantum confinement, was proposed by Valcarcel et al.27 These CDs can be mainly divided into three categories: (i) quasi-spherical nanodots with an amorphous structure lacking a quantum confinement effect, defined as carbon nanodots (CNDs); (ii) nanodots with a spherical structure possessing a quantum confinement effect and crystalline structure, defined as carbon quantum dots (CQDs); and (iii) nanodots with π-conjugated sheets, defined as graphene quantum dots (GQDs). However, the overall structure and optical performance of each type of CD are very similar.
CDs are generally comprised of bonded sp2-hybridized carbon atoms that form a π-conjugated system and sp3-hybridized carbon atoms in different proportions.28 Meanwhile, a high abundance of oxygen/nitrogen-containing functional groups can be detected on the surface of CDs, such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, carbonyl, and amino groups.29 The versatile functional groups on the surface of CDs allows CDs to have excellent water solubility, and they can be readily modified and functionalized by drug molecules, DNA, antibodies, and carbohydrate molecules.30,31 Furthermore, a major characteristic of CDs is their excellent electron donor and acceptor properties, which can be widely used in photocatalysis and analytical processes.32,33 PL emission is another major characteristic of CDs, and their optical performance can be significantly improved by surface passivation, changes in size, and doping with other elements.34,35 In fact, CDs have many novel properties. For example, photoluminescent behavior dependent on excitation wavelength has been reported in research involving CDs.36 These excellent optical properties make CDs very attractive for applications including bioimaging,37 drug delivery,38 solar cells,39 and laser devices.40 This section of the review summarized the development of different types of green synthetic strategies for CDs.
2.1 Green synthesis of CDs
Various synthetic methods for CDs have been published since 2006, including electrochemical synthesis, microwave irradiation, chemical oxidation, and hydrothermal synthesis.41 Various CDs with excellent optical or electrical performance can be obtained using these strategies. According to the relationship between raw materials and products, the CDs synthesis methods developed over several decades can be divided into “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches.42 The categories of CDs obtained by these two routes can be easily distinguished. A “top-down” approach is generally applied to the synthesis of GQDs, whereas CQDs and CNDs are mainly prepared by “bottom-up” approaches.43–45 The final crude products obtained from these two routes require purification by centrifugation or column chromatography,46 and can be obtained as a powder by further freeze drying or vacuum pumping. The synthetic methods for obtaining CDs are limited by the use of carbonaceous materials that are not freely available, strong acids, and oxidizing solvents. Furthermore, the obtained CDs initially exhibit limited solubility and irregular sizes.47 Therefore, research has focused on exploring simple, cheap, and green methods for preparing high-quality CDs with remarkable optical and electronic properties.

2.1.1 “top-down” approach to obtain CDs. 
“top-down” approaches to obtain CDs, which refer to cutting large carbon materials composed of graphite-like structures into small nanoparticles with predictable sizes using physical or chemical routes, were the main strategies used in early CD research. The mechanism of formation of CDs is dependent on the breakdown of various chemical bonds between carbon atoms.48 Examples of these “top-down” approaches include chemical oxidation, laser etching, arc discharge, and electrochemical oxidation processes.49 Carbon sources used to synthesize CDs include carbon nanotubes, carbon fibers, graphite rods, and activated carbon.50 These carbon materials are generally broken into nanosized CDs by strong oxidants, such as HNO3, H2SO4, or a HNO3/H2SO4 mixture.51 “top-down” approaches are less common in green synthesis owing to the use of environmentally unfriendly chemical reagents. According to the sixth principle of green chemistry, energy requirements of chemical processes should be recognized, owing to their environmental and economic impacts, and minimized.52,53 Therefore, synthetic strategies should be implemented at ambient temperature and pressure.54 In addition to the use of environmentally unfriendly chemicals, green synthesis is less commonly used to obtain CDs owing to energy intensive processes being essential for the comminution of bulk material, which contradicts this sixth principle of green chemistry. However, with the gradual expansion of the available carbon sources, synthetic methods based on waste materials can be regarded as green strategies for the preparation of CDs.55 Notably, these green strategies mainly focus on GQD preparation owing to the raw materials being made up of graphite-like structures.
The waste materials used include various industrial and domestic wastes, such as candle soot,56 hair fibers,57 and coal tar pitch.58These are materials that are composed of numerous carbon ring layer structures that can be broken into fluorescent CDs in a one-step reaction. Furthermore, the upcycling of industrial and domestic waste can reduce adverse effects on human health and the environment. Tan et al. successfully synthesized highly fluorescent CDs with an average size of 3.1 nm from reproducible plant soot, which showed excellent photostability (Fig. 2a–c).59 The obtained CDs were applied as fluorescent bioprobes for organism imaging in small guppy fish. Ko et al. reported a rapid and simple strategy for preparing NIR-emitting CDs by acidic oxidation of tire soot (Fig. 2d).60 The as-prepared CDs showed great potential for NIR fluorescence imaging of C6 cells in vitro and in vivo. Similarly, Jhonsi et al. converted vehicle exhaust soot into water-soluble fluorescent CDs using a simple acid reflux method.61 The as-obtained CDs, which had a spherical structure and an average particle size of ∼4 nm, exhibited excitation-dependent PL and were used as fluorescent probes for tartrazine detection, with a detection limit of 26 nmol L−1. In addition to research based on various types of soot, other industrial wastes have also proven to be suitable. Liu et al. proposed a facile and economical synthetic method using lignite coal as the carbon source, which afforded dispersed CDs (2–4 nm) possessing excellent water-solubility owing to the oxygen-rich functional groups on their surface.62 The as-prepared CDs also showed significant linear responses to Fe3+ concentrations ranging from 10 to 150 μmol L−1 and anti-interference performance for other ions (such as Mg2+, Ba2+, Ni2+, K+, Na+, and Cd2+).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of CDs from plant soot. (b) TEM image of CDs. (c) Photobleaching experiment of CDs59 (reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier). (d) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of CDs from tire soot60 (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


2.1.2 “Bottom-up” approach to CDs. 
Although the use of recyclable and reusable waste materials is somewhat compatible with the green chemistry concept, the use of strong acids or oxidants in “top-down” approaches remains an enormous obstacle to further commercialization. In contrast, the “bottom-up” approach employs renewable and natural green raw materials as carbon sources for the preparation of CDs, providing more research value without the use of strong oxidants or acids. Accordingly, the “bottom-up” approach is the primary strategy for the green synthesis of CDs. In the “bottom-up” approach, small organic molecules or precursors are pyrolyzed or carbonized in water or specific organic solvents to form nanosized CDs under heating, hydrothermal, and microwave irradiation conditions.63 Generally, the whole reaction between small organic molecules or precursors and solvents can be divided into three steps.55 First, the chain intermediate compounds are generated by various condensation reactions (such as amination, aldol condensation, and esterification) from small organic molecules or precursors. Second, the intermediates are further polymerized, aggregated, crosslinked, and carbonized to form carbon cores and clusters through chemical bonding or other interactions. Finally, the surface passivation process is completed by functional groups from the residual small organic molecules or precursors, improving the optical properties and affording more functional surfaces. Compared with traditional carbon sources, biomass comprised of renewable and natural green raw materials is a suitable replacement for small organic molecules or precursors with a certain degree of chemical toxicity, such as organic acids or amines and six-membered hydrocarbon compounds. Furthermore, biomass selected as the carbon source usually exhibits good solubility in water and requires lower temperatures (100–200 °C) for the subsequent reaction.55 Therefore, various synthetic strategies using biomass as the carbon source, including hydrothermal synthesis, microwave irradiation, and pyrolysis carbonization,64 are considered greener alternatives to “top-down” approaches that use waste materials to prepare CDs. Among these methods, hydrothermal synthesis is the most commonly used. Therefore, this section first discusses the use of the hydrothermal method for the green synthesis of CDs from biomass as the carbon source.
Hydrothermal synthesis. 
Hydrothermal synthesis, which involves the thermochemical polymerization of biomass in the presence of water in a sealed pressure vessel,65 is a promising and effective technique for converting biomass into novel CDs.66 The obtained CDs have a uniform particle size and sufficiently high yield, which is beneficial for scale-up production. This method also has other considerable advantages, such as a short reaction time, controllable product morphology, and low energy consumption.
Fruits and their sarcocarps contain many types of carbohydrates and vitamins, and were the earliest carbon source used to prepare CDs. Wang et al. prepared both water-soluble CDs (W-CDs) and ethanol-soluble CDs (E-CDs) using papaya powder as the natural carbon source in deionized water and 90% ethanol, respectively.67 The PL QYs of W-CDs and E-CDs, with smaller size distributions of 2–6 nm and 8–18 nm, were 18.98% and 18.39%, respectively. Furthermore, the W-CDs and E-CDs were applied as promising probes for Fe3+ detection, with detection limits of 0.48 and 0.29 μmol L−1, respectively. Ding et al. proposed a facile and controllable S doping strategy to prepare S-CDs by hydrothermal treatment of durian using platinum as the catalyst (Fig. 3a–d).68 The S-CDs showed a narrow and uniform size distribution, ranging from 2 to 6 nm. Furthermore, abundant oxygen-containing functional groups were located on the surface of the S-CDs. As the S doping concentrations increased, the PL emission wavelength of the S-CDs dramatically shifted from 420 to 620 nm. The highest PL QY of S-CDs with orange light emission was up to 79%. To improve resource utilization, the fruit peels and juices were also used to prepare the CDs. Using orange waste peels as a green carbon source, fluorescent CDs with blue emission were obtained using the hydrothermal method developed by Imae et al.69 Structural studies clearly indicated that the obtained CDs were amorphous in nature and that their surface contained various oxygen functional groups. The as-prepared CDs were perfectly compounded with ZnO-based photocatalytic materials for use as effective photocatalysts for removing environmental dye pollutants. Orange juice is also rich in glucose, fructose, citric acid, and ascorbic acid. Consequently, Mohapatra et al. prepared highly luminescent CDs with a PL QY of 26% using a one-step hydrothermal method.70 In addition to the excellent optical properties, an excitation-dependent PL spectra was observed by optical characterization of the as-synthesized CDs. Furthermore, almost monodisperse CDs with a narrow size distribution of 1.5–4.5 nm were obtained by simple optimization of the centrifugation speed. Similarly, Kailasa et al. developed a facile hydrothermal method to prepare CDs using apple juice as the raw material.71 The as-synthesized CDs showed an obvious red-shift in PL emission from 465 to 565 nm when the excitation wavelength was monotonically increased from 300 to 540 nm. Accordingly, these CDs acted as fluorescent probes for the imaging of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Fig. 3e), and the growth process of these cells was not affected by introducing CDs.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of S-CDs from durian. (b) TEM image of S-CDs. (c) Schematic diagram of the S-CD structure. (d) Photographs of S-CDs with different S doping contents under UV light68 (reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society). (e) (i) Bright field image of Mycobacterium tuberculosis without CDs and (ii–iv) fluorescence images of Mycobacterium tuberculosis with CDs under excitation wavelengths of 405, 488, and 561 nm, respectively71 (reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Elsevier). 
Vegetables are often used as carbon sources for the preparation of CDs owing to their similar composition to fruits. Wang et al. used dehydrated shiitake mushrooms as the carbon source without any additives to prepare N-doped CDs under hydrothermal conditions.72 The as-prepared N-CDs had surfaces that were easier to functionalize owing to the presence of the hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amine groups. Notably, the obtained N-CDs exhibited a distinct pH-sensitive feature in the pH range of 4.0–8.0. These N-CDs easily permeated cells, providing an optical probe for pH sensing in living cells. A facile hydrothermal treatment for the preparation of CDs using coriander leaves as the carbon source was reported by Gopinath et al. using a one-step reaction (Fig. 4a–c).73 The relative PL QY of the obtained CDs was up to 6.48% using quinine sulfate as a reference material. The as-prepared CDs could not only be used as fluorescent probes for the selective detection of Fe3+, but also evaluated on lung normal (L-132) and cancer (A 549) cell lines. In addition to their remarkable photostability, water stability, and low toxicity, the obtained CDs also exhibited inherent antioxidant potency. Wei et al. successfully synthesized CDs with a blue emission from corn flour using a simple hydrothermal method.74 The as-prepared CDs had a uniform size distribution of 2–6 nm and an amorphous structure, and were used as fluorescence sensors for Cu2+ detection owing to their excellent optical properties. In fact, the use of vegetables or fruits as precursor additive agents or raw materials for the synthesis of CDs could be conflicting with their general application in feeding humans and animals. Although these vegetables and fruits are cheaper than expensive chemicals, their use might be unreasonable considering the long-term development of green chemistry. However, waste non-feed vegetables or fruits might be suitable for such a green approach.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CDs from coriander leaves. (b) Fluorescence dependence of CDs in the presence of different metal ions. (c) PL spectra of CDs as a function of Fe3+ concentration73 (reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of N-CDs from willow leaves77 (reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In addition to vegetables and fruits, other green biomass materials have been used as carbon sources to prepare CDs, including soft drinks, traditional Chinese medicines, and plant leaves. Dong et al. demonstrated a simple and green method for the synthesis of bifunctional fluorescent CDs from soy milk.75 Using quinine sulfate as the reference material, the relative PL QY of the obtained CDs was determined to 2.6%. Although the PL QY of the obtained CDs was not satisfactory, good electrocatalytic activity was exhibited for oxygen reduction. Liu et al. successfully used a biomaterial named Phellodendron chinense Schneid as the carbon source and ethanol as the solvent to prepare CDs with double PL emission.76 The absorption range of the obtained CDs completely matched that of chloroplasts and effectively promoted photosynthesis and improved the solar energy capture rate. A facile and green strategy for the hydrothermal synthesis of N-CDs using willow leaves as the carbon source was proposed by Gao et al. (Fig. 4d).77 The as-synthesized N-CDs solution showed a strong blue emission under UV light and can be directly applied as fluorescent inks. The PL intensity of the N-CDs showed no great change under high-ion-concentration conditions. The corresponding solid products showed good electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction. Furthermore, the stability and tolerance of the as-prepared N-CDs for the methanol/CO reaction were better than those of the commercially available Pt/C catalyst.
Microwave irradiation. 
Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths ranging from 1 mm to 1 m. Microwaves are hardly absorbed by glass, plastics, and porcelain, but can be absorbed by water and carbohydrates to produce large amounts of energy. Therefore, this strategy refers to the preparation of CDs by rapidly heating small organic molecules or precursors under microwave irradiation to achieve carbonization, which is a widely used and most rapid method for the green synthesis of CDs.78 Furthermore, the obtained CDs generally have high PL QYs.48
Many studies related to the green synthesis of CDs by microwave irradiation have been reported. Because the roots, stems, and leaves of plants generally contain sugar, protein, and cellulose with various carbon ring structures, they have been the most widely applied carbon sources for the microwave synthesis of CDs. Shang et al. reported a rapid and green microwave irradiation strategy for preparing N-CDs using economical lotus root as the carbon source.79 The N content in the CDs was up to 5.23%. These N-CDs, with an average diameter of 9.41 nm, possessed good water solubility and a PL QY of up to 19% after optimizing the reaction conditions. The as-prepared N-CDs exhibited linear capture selectivity for Hg2+ in the range of 0.1–60 μmol L−1 and potential for multicolor cell imaging (Fig. 5a). A similar microwave-assisted strategy using natural lignocellulose as the carbon source to prepare CDs in 10 min was reported by Shi et al.80 Meanwhile, other stable lignin nanoparticles with spherical structures and a diameter of 100 nm were obtained as byproducts. Notably, the as-prepared CDs, with a narrow size distribution of 2–3 nm, exhibited bright purple PL emission and a prominent up-conversion optical feature, and also showed great potential for bioimaging. Yang et al. developed a simple, economical, and green method to prepare N-CDs using kelp and ethylenediamine as the raw materials under microwave irradiation.81 The PL intensity of the obtained N-CDs showed a good linear relationship in the pH range of 3–8. Another linear relationship was observed between the N-CDs and Co2+ concentration in the range of 1–200 μmol L−1, with a correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.9912. Surprisingly, these N-CDs could be used as fluorescent probes for the visual detection of Co2+ in real river water samples after optimizing the reaction conditions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of N-CDs from economical lotus root79 (reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier). (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CDs from sewage sludge. (c) Absorption, PLE, and PL spectra of CDs. (d) PL spectra of CDs under different excitation wavelengths83 (reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier). 
With the expansion of carbon sources, some research groups have also employed animals or pollutants to prepare CDs under microwave irradiation. A novel and accessible one-pot microwave irradiation strategy for the synthesis of CDs was proposed by Yu et al. using natural silkworm pupa as the carbon source.82 With quinine sulfate as the reference, the relative PL QY of the CDs was measured to be 46%. Owing to their large Stokes shift of 70 nm, the as-prepared CDs can be used as a bioimaging agent for HeLa cell imaging. Furthermore, a viability experiment on HeLa cells showed that the as-obtained CDs showed low cytotoxicity even at a high concentration of 15 mg mL−1. Hu et al. newly synthesized nanosized CDs using a valuable applied microwave irradiation method.83 In this process, sewage sludge containing organics was converted into CDs (Fig. 5b–d). The as-obtained CDs exhibited a broad absorption peak in the UV spectral region, and blue and excitation-dependent PL emission in the optical characterization. The PL QY of the obtained CDs was measured to be 21.7%. Furthermore, these CDs exhibited excellent optical stability after several months of storage in high-ionic-strength media. The as-prepared CDs can be used as sensors for p-nitrophenol with a linear detection range of 0.2–20 μmol−1.
Pyrolysis carbonization. 
Pyrolysis carbonization is a new and effective strategy for the synthesis of CDs, wherein the dehydration and carbonization of small organic molecules or precursors is promoted under high temperatures.84 Although high reaction temperatures are not compatible with the green chemistry concept, the CDs are prepared in a one-step reaction. Furthermore, the whole process has other characteristics, such as less use of complex equipment, convenient operation, and low toxicity.85 CDs with different optical properties can be synthesized by controlling the degree of pyrolysis of the renewable and natural carbon source. Pyrolysis carbonization has become a well-established and common strategy for the green synthesis of CDs.
Biomass from common plants is usually selected as the carbon source for the green synthesis of CDs using pyrolysis carbonization. Li et al. directly prepared fluorescent CDs using gynostemma as the precursor under calcination conditions (Fig. 6a and b).86 The as-prepared CDs, with an average size of ∼2.5 nm in water, emitted intense blue fluorescence under UV light and remained stable under different environmental conditions, including in NaCl and phosphate buffered saline, and under UV irradiation. The hatching and survival rate of zebrafish embryos were used to test the toxicity of these CDs. Even when the CD concentration reached 400 μg mL−1, the nervous and circulatory systems of the organisms were normal, and the deformity rate was less than 10%. Giannelis et al. proposed a novel strategy to synthesize CDs from the soft tissue of grass using pyrolysis carbonization.87 In this strategy, carbonaceous nanoparticles were first prepared by the pyrolysis of shredded fresh grass in air, followed by reflux to generate CDs. The surface of the as-prepared CDs could be readily modified with hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecules, such as ethanolamine (EA), 2-aminoethane sodium sulfonate, and oleylamine (OAm). When exposed to harsh conditions, such as high-temperature and high-salinity environments, these CDs showed remarkable long-term stability. N-CDs with a high N content were fabricated from konjac flour by Bi et al. under mild pyrolysis carbonization conditions.88 N-CDs with an average particle size of 3.37 nm were then obtained by further simple extraction with ethanol and water. The as-synthesized N-CDs exhibited a good pH-dependent PL emission in the pH range of 5–9. Furthermore, the bright blue emission of N-CDs was rapidly quenched by Fe3+ aqueous solution. Notably, this selective PL quenching of N-CDs was recovered by employing L-lysine.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of CD synthesis from Gynostemma. (b) Biological toxicity experiment of CDs against zebrafish embryos86 (reproduced with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of MF-CDs from waste crab shell89 (reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society). 
In addition to plants, animal shells can be used as carbon sources for the green synthesis of CDs. Chang et al. reported a one-pot pyrolysis carbonization method for the synthesis of magnetic fluorescent CDs (MF-CDs) from waste crab shell as the carbon source using three different transition metal ions (Gd3+, Mn2+, and Eu3+) as dopants (Fig. 6c),89 and the as-obtained MF-CDs were denoted as Gd@CDs, Mn@CDs, and Eu@CDs, respectively. The Gd@CDs had a high r1 relaxation rate of 4.78 mM−1 s−1 and a low r2/r1 ratio of 1.33, showing potential as T1 contrast agents. The Mn@CDs and Eu@CDs are also promising T2 contrast agents. Furthermore, no obvious cytotoxicity was observed against zebrafish embryo cells in vivo or in vitro. Therefore, the as-obtained MF-CDs also exhibited great potential for drug delivery.

2.2 Summary
Relevant research on the green synthesis of CDs based on “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches has been discussed in detail. The formation mechanisms of each green synthesis strategy have also been introduced. Furthermore, the advantages and limitations of these green methods, and applications related to the photoelectric performance of the resulting CDs have been discussed. The synthetic strategies and information regarding the as-prepared CDs are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of carbon sources, performance parameters, and applications of CDs obtained by “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches




Methods
Green carbon source
Size (nm)
Emission wavelength (nm)
Application
Ref.




Chemical oxidation
Candle soot
1
415–615
—

56



Plant soot
2.0–4.3
422–457
Bioimaging of guppy fish

59



Tire soot
11
520
Bioimaging of C6 cells

60



Vehicle exhaust soot
∼4
425
Detection of tartrazine

61



Lignite coal
2–4
460
Detection of Fe3+

62



Chemical carbonization
Hair fibers
2–10
383–470
HeLa cellular imaging

57



Base decomposing
Coal tar pitch
1.9–5.8
—
Photocatalytic generation of hydrogen

58



Hydrothermal synthesis
Apple juice
4.5
475
Bioimaging of bacteria and fungi

71



Orange juice
1.5–4.5
455
Bioimaging of MG-63 cells

70



Orange waste peels
2–7
431
Photocatalytic degradation of naphthol blue-black

69



Papaya powder
2–6, 8–18
450
HeLa cellular imaging

67



Durian
2–6
420–620
Bioimaging of fibroblast cells

68



Shiitake mushrooms
2–6
410
HeLa cellular imaging

72



Coriander leaves
∼4
400
Detection of Fe3+/lung normal and cancer cells

73



Cornflour
2–6
441
Detection of Fe3+

74



Soy milk
13–40
475
Oxygen reduction electrocatalysts

75




Phellodendron chinense Schneid
5
546, 673
Promoting the photosynthesis of plants

76



Willow leaves
2–4
∼500
Fluorescent ink/oxygen reduction electrocatalysts

77



Microwave irradiation
Lotus root
5–15
435
Bioimaging of A549 cells

79



Natural lignocellulose
2–3
∼380
Detection of Hg2+

80



Kelp
3.7
450
Detection of Co2+ and pH sensing

81



Silkworm pupa
13–26
420
HeLa cellular imaging

82



Sewage sludge
2–6
412
Detection of p-nitrophenol

83



Pyrolysis carbonization

Gynostemma

∼2.5
400
Bioimaging of zebrafish

86



Grass
2–5, 25–30
∼455
—

87



Konjac flour
3.37
393
HeLa cellular imaging/detection of Fe3+

88



Crab shell
4–4.5
∼425
Bioimaging of zebrafish embryos/contrast agents

89





3. Binary QDs
The “top-down” strategy using large-scale carbon skeletons for the synthesis of CDs has several shortcomings, such as the use of strong oxidants and acids, complex synthetic processes, and low yields. Although the “bottom-up” strategy possesses many merits, including greener carbon sources, convenient operations, and mild synthesis conditions, the particle size distribution of the products is still not uniform. Furthermore, additional separation and purification steps are required for subsequent processing of the CDs. The post-treatment processes of these synthetic methods are tedious and complicated and contrary to the green synthesis concept. Additionally, the obtained CDs have unsatisfactory PL QYs and wide PL emission spectra. Determining the PL emission center of the CDs is also difficult, resulting in their luminescent mechanisms remaining unclear.90 The PL emission wavelength of the CDs depends on the excitation wavelength, with the CDs unable to exhibit particular PL emission over the wide excitation wavelength range. Furthermore, the free radiation transition process from the surface state of CDs cannot be effectively suppressed in the solid state, and the agglomeration of the CDs can induce fluorescence quenching.91 In comparison, BQDs were among the first applied optoelectronic materials owing to their wide band gap, integrated crystal structure, and excellent photoelectric performance.92–94 Currently, the most-studied BQDs comprise compounds of elements from groups II–VI (such as CdS, CdSe, and ZnS),95 I–VI (such as Ag2S, Ag2Se, and CuS),96 IV–VI (such as PbS, PbSe, and SnSe),97 III–V (such as InP, InAs, and GaAs),98 and their core–shell structures.99 Numerous articles have been published on the synthesis, properties, and applications of BQDs in different scientific fields.100–102
BQDs also possess desirable optical properties, including broad absorption ranges, high absorption coefficients, and long photoluminescence lifetimes. Furthermore, the band gap of BQDs is readily tuned to the VIS region owing to the quantum confinement effect. By selecting appropriate elements, the PL emission range of BQDs can even cover the NIR region, such as PbS, PbSe, and Ag2S QDs.103–105 Although surface defect states can lead to the degradation of the fluorescence properties of BQDs, their fluorescence properties can be further improved by forming heterostructures, such as CdTe/CdS, CdTe/ZnS, and InP/ZnS core–shell structures.99 Furthermore, these BQDs and their core–shell structures have generally been obtained in the organic or aqueous phase without excessive post-processing. This review section mainly focuses on different types of green synthetic protocols for BQDs, which is conducive to improving their quality for further practical applications.
3.1 Green synthesis of BQDs
Various synthetic strategies for BQDs have been established over decades of development. Most BQDs can be obtained by selecting suitable raw materials. Although innovative strategies exist for the synthesis of BQDs, the main routes can be generally divided into the two categories, namely, physical and chemical methods. Physical methods include chemical vapor deposition,106 molecular beam epitaxy,107 and ion beam sputtering.108 Although analyzing the photoelectric properties of single BQDs under electric or magnetic fields and pulsed lasers is convenient, it is difficult to peel the obtained BQDs from the surface of a substrate and expensive equipment and the precise control conditions required are prohibitive. Therefore, the main preparation methods for BQDs are colloidal chemical methods. Among them, the green synthesis of BQDs, including organic phase109 and aqueous solution synthesis,110 is the main research direction. Although the as-obtained BQDs have uniform particle sizes and are of high purity, the use of chemical reagents and relatively high energy consumption is a major obstacle. Furthermore, highly toxic raw materials are generally used at the early stage of BQD synthesis. Notably, after solvent improvement, these strategies comply with the green synthesis concept for BQDs. In particularly, the synthesis of BQDs using biological organisms as in vivo bioreactors is a greener choice than the aforementioned strategies.111

3.1.1 Organic phase synthesis of BQDs. 
Organic synthesis is a traditional approach for the preparation of BQDs with high crystallization quality and PL QYs using specific organic solvents and metal precursors. The organic synthesis mechanism of BQDs can be explained using the thermodynamic theory based on the LaMer model of crystal growth or Ostwald ripening.112,113 Primary crystal nucleation is generally agreed to first form by the decomposition of metal precursors into monomers in the presence of organic ligands and specific solvents, such as tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), tri-n-octyl phosphine (TOP), and tributyl phosphate (TBP). The growth process of crystalline grains can then be achieved by monomer diffusion after nucleation, which is effectively controlled by the adsorption of coordination solvent molecules. Therefore, the organic ligands play a key role in determining the size and shape of BQDs.114
An organic synthesis strategy for the preparation of CdSe QDs with excellent optical properties was first pioneered by Murray et al. in 1993.115 In a typical protocol, TOPO, Cd(Me)2, and Se-TOP were used as both coordination solvents and reaction precursors. The mixed solution composed of Cd(Me)2 and Se-TOP was injected into a reaction flask with vigorous stirring. Many crystal nuclei were formed in a very short time owing to the higher reactivity of Cd(Me)2. The injection of the mixed solution quickly produced an orange/yellow solution. Sharp absorption characteristics and strong band edge emissions at 440–460 nm were observed for the obtained CdSe QDs. Furthermore, their optical characteristics could be adjusted by controlling the size of the CdSe QDs. High-quality CdS and CdTe QDs can also be prepared by introducing S and Te stock precursor solutions in a similar synthetic strategy. However, the whole experimental process is complex, and many operations have to be carried out strictly in a glove box in the absence of water and oxygen. Furthermore, Cd(Me)2 is costly, toxic, and explosive. Therefore, Peng et al. proposed a new green strategy based on traditional organic synthesis to prepare CdE QDs (E = S, Se, and Te), wherein Cd(Me)2 was replaced with CdO as the precursor.116 These CdE QDs have sharp first absorption peaks, showing that they are close to monodisperse (Fig. 7a). Strict anhydrous conditions and noxious organic Cd as a raw material are no longer required in this method, which greatly simplifies the preparation process and reduces environmental pollution. Subsequently, greener strategies for the preparation of CdE QDs have been further developed owing to the toxicity of TOPO and TOP. In these improved strategies, frequently used organophosphorus reagents are replaced with cheaper and safer reagents, such as aliphatic acids and amines. For example, Peng et al. innovatively selected oleic acid (OA) as the ligand to stabilize precursors, with octadecene (ODE) considered the noncoordination solvent for the preparation of CdS QDs.117 CdSe and ZnSe QDs were also synthesized using a similar route. To investigate the nucleated growth kinetics of CdSe QDs, Mulvaney et al. successfully prepared CdSe QDs in ODE and analyzed the influence of temperature and OA concentration on the nucleation growth of particles in detail.112 Similarly, Tang et al. proposed a green and low-cost method for the preparation of CdSe QDs using paraffin liquid and OA as the reaction medium.118 A new approach based on the growth mechanism of CdSe QDs, using H2Se gas and Cd compounds as precursors, was proposed (Fig. 7b–d). The obtained CdSe QDs were nearly precipitated as particles, and their compositions consisted only of Cd and Se elements. High-quality CdSe QDs with a controllable size distribution of 2.0–5.0 nm were achieved, with a highest PL QY of 60%.
 Fig. 7  (a) Absorption spectra of the temporal evolution for CdE QDs116 (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CdSe QDs. (c) SEM image of CdSe QDs. (d) corresponding EDX spectrum of CdSe QDs118 (reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society). 
With continuous technological improvement, organic synthesis strategies have been applied to the green synthesis of other BQDs, such as ZnSe, PbS, and Ag2S QDs. Jiang et al. successfully synthesized ZnSe QDs with a zinc blende structure using the environmentally friendly N,N-dimethyloleoyl amide (N,N-DMOA) as the solvent to dissolve Se powder at a mild temperature.119 OA was used as a natural surfactant to dissolve Zn(OAc)2 for the synthesis of Zn-OA. The particle size of the as-prepared ZnSe QDs was readily tuned by changing the concentrations of the precursors and ligands. Flower-shaped QDs were further obtained owing to the aggregation effect between different QDs using this green and nontoxic route. Tachibana et al. reported a new diffusion-controlled synthesis of size-tunable and OA-capped PbS QDs using N,N-diphenyl thiourea (DPTU) and PbCl2 in OAm as the precursors.120 The as-obtained PbS QDs were predominantly spherical (Fig. 8a–c), and their PL QY was ∼64%. Crystal structure measurements indicated that the obtained QDs had a PbS rock salt structure. The obtained PbS QDs had a size distribution of 2.5–5.7 nm, and the corresponding PL emission peak wavelength varied from 990 to 1600 nm. A novel thiol-containing hot-injection method was proposed by Chen et al. for the synthesis of Ag2S QDs.121 OA, OAm, and 1-octanethiol were used as ligands to stabilize the Ag2S QDs. Using 1-octanethiol suppressed the reduction of Ag(I) ions by OAm and prevented the formation of Ag QDs. The absorption and PL emission peaks of the as-obtained Ag2S QDs were located at 803 and 835 nm, respectively (Fig. 8d and e). The MTT assay showed approximate viability of 81% for Vero cells and 65% for MCF-7 cells treated with Ag2S QDs at a concentration of 100 mg mL−1 for 24 h, implying that the obtained Ag2S QDs were environmentally friendly and exhibited low toxicity.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of PbS QDs. (b) XRD pattern of PbS QDs. (c) PL spectra of PbS QDs120 (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) PL and absorption spectra of Ag2S QDs. (e) MTT assay of Ag2S QDs on Vero cells and MCF-7 cells121 (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


3.1.2 Aqueous phase synthesis of BQDs. 
Although organic synthesis strategies using green reagents as reaction media have been developed to prepare high-quality BQDs, the relatively high reaction temperatures and use of chemicals does not strictly conform to the green chemistry concept. The BQDs obtained from the organic phase synthesis have poor solubility in water owing to the hydrophobic ligands on their surface,122 which can lead to the aggregation of the adjacent QDs in water and weaken their optical properties. Furthermore, these BQDs are incompatible with the biological environment.123 The BQDs obtained from organic-phase synthesis must undergo a phase transfer process for medical and biological applications,123 which dramatically increases the operational difficulty and cost of practical applications.
Water is a common low-boiling solvent in the laboratory that is more environmentally friendly than green organic reagents. Aqueous phase synthesis strategies involve the synthesis of BQDs from inorganic reagents in the presence of appropriate stabilizers in water as the reaction medium.110 Currently, water-soluble sulfhydryl and citrate compounds are necessary stabilizers for the aqueous-phase synthesized BQDs.124,125 Furthermore, the selection of protective agents with appropriate functional groups can effectively control the surface charge and other surface characteristics. BQDs can be directly synthesized in the aqueous phase, which greatly improves both their water solubility and biocompatibility. Furthermore, the aqueous-phase synthesis of BQDs has many unique advantages, such as simple operation, low cost, and controllable surface charge. The aqueous phase synthesis of BQDs has become a hot topic, and a mainstream research direction for QDs.
In 1993, Rajh et al. reported the synthesis of CdTe QDs coated with mercaptoglycerol in aqueous solution for the first time.126 In subsequent development processes, inorganic salts containing various cations (such as Zn2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, and Hg2+) and anions (such as S2−, Se2−, and Te2−) were used as precursors to prepare different types of BQDs, such as CdTe, CdSe, ZnS, HgTe, and PbS QDs. Research based on the photoelectric performance of these BQDs has achieved great progress. Water-soluble sulfhydryl compounds are the most common type of surface ligands used for the aqueous-phase synthesis of BQDs. Yang et al. directly synthesized thioglycolic acid (TGA)-capped CdTe QDs using different stoichiometric ratios of the Cd and Te precursors.127 The absorption and PL spectra of the CdTe QDs with different Cd/Te ratios exhibited the same absorbance, PL peak positions, and size (3.1 nm). Furthermore, the crystal structures of CdTe QDs with different Cd/Te ratios were identical, and their PL QYs were increased from 10.3% to 34.0% after the optimization of this ratio. Rabinal et al. reported a simple and viable green route to prepare mercaptopropionic acid (MPA)-capped CdSe QDs at room temperature.128 The as-prepared CdSe QDs exhibited adjustable particle sizes of 1.58–3.42 nm by controlling the annealing time, as also estimated by analyzing the band-edge absorption. The optimized PL QY of the CdSe QDs was determined to be 40%, and a PL emission range from the deep blue to the red region could be achieved (Fig. 9a and b). Furthermore, the optical properties of CdSe QDs were very stable, with no obvious precipitates from their solution observed after a 6-month period. A simple and green aqueous synthesis method was demonstrated by Li et al. for the preparation of ZnS QDs with the different Zn/S ratios using MPA as the capping agent at different pH levels.129 The as-prepared ZnS QDs had a zinc blende crystal structure and size distribution that ranged from 3 to 5 nm. The as-prepared ZnS QDs exhibited blue PL emission with a PL QY of 31% at pH 12. The surface of the ZnS QDs contained plentiful carboxyl groups, which might be selected as the desired biological probes. Rogach et al. successfully synthesized thiol-capped HgTe QDs in aqueous-phase solution using thioglycerol (TG) as the stabilizing agent.130 CdHgTe and HgTe/CdS QDs were also prepared by this route. The as-obtained HgTe QDs had a broad PL emission and a PL QY of up to ∼50%. Furthermore, the PL emission wavelength of the HgTe QDs was changed from 900 to 2000 nm using D2O as a solvent. The obtained HgTe QDs exhibited a wide size distribution, ranging from 3 to 6 nm. These HgTe QDs exhibit high crystallinity with a measured interplanar distance of 3.73 Å, corresponding to the coloradoite phase. Other sulfhydryl compound derivatives containing the amino or carboxyl groups can also be used to prepare BQDs in the aqueous phase. Jin et al. reported an aqueous-phase synthesis method for preparing PbS QDs using glutathione (GSH) as the stabilizer, and Pb(OAc)2 and Na2S as the precursors.131 The PL QY of GSH-coated PbS QDs was determined to be 16% when the PL emission peak was located at 1000 nm. Furthermore, these PbS QDs showed a nanometer-sized cubic-phase structure with a hydrodynamic diameter of 3.5 nm. The obtained GSH-coated PbS QDs can be injected into the lymph system of mouse as a second NIR fluorescence probe (Fig. 9c–e), with the PbS QDs smoothly and quickly entering the popliteal lymph nodes (P) from lymph vessels.
 Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of CdSe QDs with different particle sizes. (b) Corresponding photographs under UV light128 (reproduced with permission from ref. 128 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). (c) Mouse lymph system. (d) Biological imaging of PbS QDs in lymph nodes. (e) Biological imaging of PbS QDs in lymph nodes with different time courses131 (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


3.1.3 Biosynthesis of BQDs. 
The synthesis of BQDs is a promising preparation route owing to its unique advantages, such as simplicity, economy, and environmental protection.110 However, BQDs obtained using aqueous-phase strategies generally possess a lower degree of crystallization, a lower PL QY, and a relatively wide particle size distribution. Therefore, further major improvement of the optical and morphological features of BQDs is required. Owing to the limitations of various chemical synthesis strategies for BQDs, biosynthesis based on biological organisms has received more attention.132,133 Compared with traditional BQDs from aqueous-phase synthesis, BQDs obtained from biosynthesis exhibit inherent biostability and biocompatibility without additional operations. The biosynthesis of QDs is specific, as the QDs prepared by using microorganisms, such as bacteria or fungi, are unique, effectively avoiding the formation of other types of QDs as byproducts. Furthermore, harsh reaction conditions, such as high pressure and temperature, toxic chemicals, and complex purification processes, are not required in the biosynthesis of BQDs. These biosynthesis strategies can also be used to prepare BQDs with size- and component-controlled PL emission in a broad spectral region.134
Various biological organisms (such as fungi, bacteria, viruses, plants, and animals) throughout nature have been successfully applied to synthesize different kinds of BQDs.135 The nanomaterial formation mechanisms of biological organisms as synthesis platforms can be mainly divided into three different types, namely, natural metal-related biodetoxification, biomineralization, and enzymatic reactions.111,134 Among these, the biodetoxification process of organisms is usually an intrinsic resistance behavior toward the most toxic heavy metals. This process alleviates the toxic effect of metal ions on the cells of an organism owing to the internal defense mechanisms of biological systems. Furthermore, the cells of these organisms can reduce or precipitate soluble toxic ions into insoluble metal compounds with low-valence or metal–protein complexes. Unlike the biodetoxification mechanism, biomineralization by microorganisms can immobilize metal ions on solid-phase inorganic materials after a series of physiological actions, which can control the formation and growth of inorganic minerals at the molecular level. Enzymatic reactions mainly depend on reductases, which play a role in the enzymatic process for preparing BQDs. Various intracellular or extracellular reductases can turn metal ions into BQDs.136 The stability of the as-prepared BQDs can be further improved using some small biomolecules, such as polysaccharides and proteins.137 Therefore, biosynthesis is among the green strategies for the preparation of BQDs.
Bacteria. 
Bacteria are easily cultivated prokaryotes with a short growth cycle. Bacteria can produce BQDs with exquisite morphologies intracellularly or extracellularly, depending on the position of the reductive components.134 Various natural bacteria have been shown to synthesize BQDs, and their size and shape are adjustable over a wide range.111 Owing to the short incubation period and simple operation, bacteria can be widely used as excellent biological carriers for the preparation of BQDs.
Iverson et al. reported the first biosynthesis strategy for the preparation of CdS QDs in bacteria.138 In this process, a mixture of CdCl2 and Na2S was selected as the precursor and incubated with Escherichia coli. The size distribution of the obtained CdS QDs ranged from 2 to 5 nm, and the crystal structure belonged to the wurtzite phase with a crystal plane spacing of 3.16 nm. Furthermore, this result showed that the genetic and physiological parameters might strongly affect nanocrystal growth. Similarly, Banfield et al. reported a biosynthesis strategy to prepare ZnS QDs using the strong reducing ability of aerotolerant sulfate-reducing bacteria from the family Desulfobacteriaceae.139 The as-obtained ZnS QDs were formed in the natural biofilms of sulfate-reducing bacteria and exhibited obvious spherical agglomeration, with a sphalerite structure and narrow particle diameter distribution range of 2–5 nm. Pang et al. skillfully used Staphylococcus aureus as synthesis machines to produce fluorescent CdS0.5Se0.5 QDs using a space–time coupling strategy.140 Selenocysteine can first be obtained by the coincubation of Na2SeO3 and S. aureus cells. Subsequently, the intracellular detoxification of Cd2+ can form the Cd precursor, which reacts precisely with Se reduced intracellularly (Fig. 10a). The formation mechanism of cellular beacons based on CdS0.5Se0.5 QDs was also discussed, allowing applications as a bioprobe for pathogen detection. Pearce et al. reported a low-cost and simple procedure for preparing chalcogenide-based QDs (such as CdSe and ZnSe QDs) in Veillonella atypica.133 These bacteria can effectively reduce Se(IV) to Se(II) and react with Zn2+ or Cd2+ to create ZnSe QDs or CdSe QDs with size distributions of 3–6 nm or 2–4 nm, respectively. The as-obtained CdSe QDs with a PL QY of 10.33% showed an intense PL emission peak at 512 nm, whereas the as-prepared ZnSe QDs exhibited a strong PL emission at 368 nm and another weak trap emission at ∼450 nm.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the generation and application of CdS0.5Se0.5 QDs140 (reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (b) Bioimages of yeast cells incorporated with CdTe QDs. (c) Schematic diagram of the possible growth pathways of CdTe QDs146 (reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2010 Springer). 
Fungi. 
Fungi are common eukaryotic microorganisms in nature and they are more easily available and renewable compared with other types of microorganisms. More extracellular reducing proteins can be produced by fungi, indicating that the BQDs obtained were mainly located on the outside of microorganism cells.141 Therefore, relatively easy separation and purification processes can be used for the as-synthesized BQDs, which can be directly applied in various fields. Furthermore, monodisperse BQDs can be readily prepared from fungi by reducing particle aggregation.142
Paknikar et al. prepared PbS QDs intracellularly using Torulopsis species as a bioreactor in a Pb2+-containing solution.143 A sharp absorption peak was observed at ∼330 nm for the as-prepared PbS QDs at different pH values, which matched well with the energy gap of 3.75 eV. Furthermore, the as-prepared PbS QDs exhibited a size distribution range of 2–5 nm. Pang et al. proposed a new biological strategy to achieve the controlled synthesis of CdSe QDs intracellularly using eukaryotic Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells as the biosynthesis platform.144 In this reaction, Na2SeO3 was reduced to organoselenium compounds, which reacted directly with cadmium compounds from the addition of CdCl2. This biosynthetic route required a lower reaction temperature of 30 °C. These CdSe QDs were monodisperse, and their uniform size was identified to be 2.69 nm. Furthermore, the PL emission wavelengths of the as-obtained CdSe QDs could be tuned simply by adjusting the incubation time. A novel method for the extracellular biosynthesis of CdS QDs was reported by Chen et al. in the white rot fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium.145 The mean diameter of these CdS QDs was measured to be ∼2.56 nm. The PL spectra of the purified CdS QDs at different pH values showed a similar pure blue emission. Furthermore, the as-obtained CdS QDs with a face centered cubic structure exhibited uniform morphology and good crystallinity. Zhao et al. developed an efficient and reproducible strategy for producing stable luminescent CdTe QDs using yeast cells.146 The CdTe QD formation process was also speculated based on the observed bioimages (Fig. 10b and c). The as-prepared CdTe QDs were single-crystalline particles with a cubic zinc blende structure, and their uniform diameters ranged from 2 to 3.6 nm. Furthermore, with increasing incubation time, the PL emission peaks of the as-prepared CdTe QDs could be tuned from 490 to 560 nm.
Viruses. 
Viruses are noncellular organisms with simple structures that are generally composed of long nucleic acid chains and protein shells. These viruses can be rapidly reproduced in host cells by replication. Small molecules in viruses, such as fatty and amino acids, can be used as templates for the growth of BQDs.134,147 Owing to the simple structure of viruses, the shape and size of BQDs is relatively convenient to control. Furthermore, viruses also have other advantages, including a tiny volume and mass reproduction. Although viruses have not been widely studied for the preparation of BQDs, their use as a biosynthesis platform is still worthy of attention and exploration.
For example, Mann et al. used the tobacco mosaic virus as a suitable template to prepare CdS and PbS QDs based on a cocrystallization route.148 Single-domain CdS QDs were obtained on the surface of the tobacco mosaic virus by close contact of virions in CdCl2 solution with H2S gas. The as-prepared CdS QDs exhibited a fringe spacing of 0.33 nm for the (111) lattice planes, corresponding to the zinc blende crystal structure. Similarly, the as-obtained PbS QDs had a fringe spacing of 0.344 nm for the (111) lattice plane, which matched well with the rock salt structure. Mao et al. proposed a new biosynthesis strategy for the preparation of ZnS and CdS QDs using the M13 bacteriophage as the biological template.149 The as-prepared ZnS QDs with hexagonal wurtzite or cubic zinc blende structures were well crystallized on the viral capsid. The size distribution of the ZnS QDs ranged from 3 to 5 nm. Notably, the obtained ZnS and CdS QDs had the same size distribution. Furthermore, these BQDs could be assembled into the corresponding nanowires (NWs).
Plants and animals. 
Environmentally friendly and economical strategies using various microorganisms as bioreactors have been widely applied to prepare BQDs. However, the use of microorganisms for the green synthesis of BQDs is hindered because the limitations of cell culture media remain undetermined. In the biosynthesis of BQDs, the use of various plants as renewable and sustainable resources is a more suitable choice than microbial synthesis.132,136
Doran et al. successfully produced CdS QDs in the hairy roots of Solanum lycopersicum.150 The cellular detoxification properties of S. lycopersicum toward heavy metal ions can promote the formation of CdS QDs after incubation with the Cd solution. The as-obtained CdS QDs can be well passivated by phytochelatin peptides, which also exhibit a blue-purple PL emission and excellent photostability. Furthermore, animals, such as rats and earthworms can be employed to produce BQDs. Trabelsi et al. demonstrated that CdS and CdSe QDs can be obtained from the liver and kidneys of rats.151 Interestingly, the obtained CdS QDs exhibited a cubic zinc blende structure with a size of 6.52 nm in liver powder. However, the size of CdS QDs with a hexagonal structure in the kidney was 54.14 nm according to the structural characterization calculations. Green et al. reported a synthesis strategy for preparing luminescent and water-soluble CdTe QDs using earthworms as the biological synthesizers (Fig. 11).152 CdCl2 and Na2TeO3 salts were selected as the Cd and Te precursors, respectively. The as-obtained CdTe QDs with a diameter of 2.3 nm were isolated from chloragogenous tissues of earthworms. Furthermore, the as-obtained CdTe QDs showed an excitonic absorption feature measured at 360 nm. The PL emission maximum was determined to be 520 nm, which exhibited an intensive green emission with a high PL QY of 8.3% using rhodamine 6G as reference. Therefore, these CdTe QDs can be successfully applied to imaging living cells owing to their excellent optical properties.
 Fig. 11  (a) Practical photograph of an earthworm. (b) Cross-section of the posterior section of an earthworm. (c) Region for the generation of metallothionein, as indicated by arrows. (d) Absorption and PL spectra of the obtained CdTe QDs. (e) Fluorescence lifetime of the obtained CdTe QDs152 (reprinted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited). 

3.2 Summary
This section discussed the various green synthetic methods employed to prepare BQDs in laboratories. In contrast to the green synthetic strategies employed for CDs, the green synthesis of BQDs mainly focuses on green solvents and biological organisms, rather than green raw materials. To meet the development of green chemistry, the strategies for the biological preparation of BQDs are discussed in detail. Various green strategies for the synthesis of BQDs and their performance are shown in Tables 3 and 4.
Table 3 Summary of strategies, precursors, sizes, and optical properties of BQDs prepared by organic- and aqueous-phase synthesis




Methods
Materials
Precursors, ligands
Size (nm)
Emission wavelength (nm)
Ref.




Organic synthesis
CdSe
Cd(Me)2, Se shot, TOP, TOPO
8
∼560

115



CdTe
CdO, Te powder, TOPO, tetradecylphosphonic acid
2–8
∼600

116



CdS
CdO, elemental S, OA
2–5.3
∼390-∼450

117



CdSe
Cd-OA, Se-TOP, OA
0.8–1
∼500-∼600

112



CdSe
Cd-OA, H2Se, OA, paraffin liquid
2.0–5.0
486–618

118



ZnSe
Zn(OAc)2, Se powder, OA, N,N-DMOA
∼4
∼440

119



PbS
PbCl2, DPTU, OAm
2.5–5.7
990–1600

120



Ag2S
AgOAc, 1-octanethiol, OAm, OA
2.4, 3.5
665–845

121



Aqueous synthesis
CdTe
CdSO4, NaHTe, mercaptoglycerol
2–4
450–650

126



CdTe
Cd(OAc)2, Te powder, NaBH4, TGA
—
∼570

127



CdSe
CdCl2, Se powder, MPA
1.58–3.42
384–600

128



ZnS
Zn(NO3)2, Na2S, MPA
3–5
420–446

129



HgTe
Hg2+, H2Te, TG
3–6
900–2000

130



PbS
Pb(OAC)2, Na2S, GSH
3.5
1000–1400

131





Table 4 Summary of organisms, sizes, and optical properties of BQDs prepared by biosynthesis




Biological category
Materials
Organisms
Size (nm)
Emission wavelength (nm)
Ref.




Bacteria
CdS

Escherichia coli

2–5
—

138



ZnS
Desulfobacteriaceae
2–5
—

139



CdS0.5Se0.5

Staphylococcus aureus

1.8
520

140



ZnSe, CdSe

Veillonella atypica

3–6, 2–4
368, 512

133



Fungi
PbS

Torulopsis species
2–5
—

143



CdSe

Saccharomyces cerevisiae

2–3.6
490–560

144



CdS

Phanerochaete chrysosporium

1.5–3
458

145



CdTe
Yeast
2–3.6
490–560

146



Viruses
CdS, PbS
Tobacco mosaic virus
5
—

148



ZnS, CdS
M13 bacteriophage
3–5
425

149



Plants and animals
CdS

Solanum lycopersicum

4–10
420–480

150



CdS, CdSe
Rats
6.52, 51.54
—

151



CdTe
Earthworms
2.33
520

152





4. Multi-component QDs
Correlational research on the synthesis, properties, and applications of BQDs has increasingly developed in recent decades. Although particle size greatly affects the optical properties of BQDs, this degree of adjustment is restricted by the limited changes in diameter. Furthermore, surface defects caused by smaller sizes can greatly reduce the stability of BQDs owing to obvious surface effects. In contrast, it is more difficult for BQDs with a larger size to enter organisms, which adversely affects their biological applications. Accordingly, constructing MQDs by introducing new elements into BQDs is a better option.153 The photoelectric properties of MQDs can be concurrently controlled by changing their size and composition.154,155 Notably, the optical properties of MQDs can be affected by changing their compositions while keeping their sizes unchanged.156 Larger Stokes shifts are observed from these MQDs owing to the introduction of new elements.28 Furthermore, extending the traditional system of BQDs to MQDs makes it possible to control the photoelectric properties of QDs over a wider range. In contrast to BQDs, the PL emission range of MQDs can readily range from the VIS to NIR regions. Furthermore, this is not dependent on heavy metal elements (such as Cd, Pb, and Hg).157,158 Therefore, green, safe, and environmentally friendly strategies for the preparation of MQDs will be a future research trend.
Recently, various MQDs, such as group I–III–VI QDs (such as AgInS2, CuInS2, and CuInSe2), group I–V–VI QDs (such as Cu2SbS4, CuSbSe4, and AgBiS2), group I–IV–VII QDs (such as CsSnBr3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3), and group I–II–IV–VI QDs (such as Cu2ZnSnS4, Cu2ZnSnSe4, and Cu2ZnGeSe4) have received great attention owing to their excellent photoelectric performance brought about by the introduction of multiple elements.159–161 Ternary I–III–VI QDs mainly contain three crystal structures, namely, zinc blende, wurtzite, and chalcopyrite.162 Most I–III–VI QDs are direct band gap materials. For example, the band gap of CuInS2 QDs is ∼1.53 eV, and their absorption coefficient can reach 105 cm−1.14 AgInS2 QDs with an exciton Bohr radius of 5.5 nm have two types of crystal structures, namely, a tetragonal chalcopyrite structure with a band gap of 1.87 eV at low temperature and an orthorhombic structure with a band gap of 1.98 eV at high temperature.163 In fact, ternary and quaternary QDs are derived from BQDs. The controlled synthesis and crystal structure of quaternary QDs is extremely complicated owing to the various possible elemental combinations. Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs are mainly composed of kesterite, orthorhombic, and zinc blende structures.162 Furthermore, Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs with a large absorption coefficient (>104 cm−1) have a near-optimum direct band and a band gap energy of ∼1.6 eV.164–166 However, the more stable crystal structure for Cu2ZnSnSe4 and Cu2ZnGeSe4 QDs is stannite.162,167 Perovskite materials have various crystalline structures, including orthorhombic, quadratic, and cubic phases.168 With increasing synthesis temperature, the cubic crystal phase becomes the stable structure in these ternary perovskite QDs. The bandgap of CsSnX3 QDs (X = Cl, Br, I) can be by adjusted from 2.8 to 1.3 eV through compositional tuning and spatial confinement.169 CsPbX3 QDs exhibit the size-adjustable PL emission over the entire visible spectral region of 410–700 nm and a high PL QY of ∼90%.170 Clearly, the increasingly complex composition provides an opportunity to create MQDs with specific properties and performances. This review section discusses the green synthetic strategies associated with MQDs.
4.1 Green synthesis of MQDs
Fabrication strategies for MQDs are adapted from strategies used for traditional BQDs owing to their similar basic synthetic and growth mechanisms.155 However, the synthesis processes for MQDs are more complicated than those for traditional BQDs, owing to the complexity of the nucleation process involving more elements. Furthermore, the obtained MQDs are particularly vulnerable regarding the crystalline phases and compositions owing to significant differences in the chemical properties of different cation and anion precursors. For example, Cu+ and Ag+ are soft acids, In3+ is a hard acid, Sn2+ and Pb2+ are borderline acids, Br− is a borderline base, and I− and S2− are soft bases.157 Two or more different types of capping ligands (such as mercaptans, carboxylic acids, and amines) can be introduced in the synthesis process to regulate the chemical reactivity between cations.155,171,172 Therefore, the green synthesis of MQDs is usually performed in green organic solvents or water-based systems.28,158 To date, various studies based on the green synthesis of MQDs, such as hot-/non-injection methods, microwave irradiation, and hydro/solvothermal synthesis, have been widely reported. Among them, the hot-injection method remains the main green synthesis strategy for the preparation of MQDs.

4.1.1 Hot-injection method. 
The development of organic synthesis has made the low-cost and simple preparation of high-quality MQDs possible using liquid-phase chemistry technology.123 In line with this strategy, primitive coordinating and high-boiling-point solvents (such as TOP and TOPO) can be replaced with greener chemical reagents (such as OA and OAm). Notably, the complete substitution of such phosphorus-containing coordination solvents with green capping ligands has yet to be fully realized in the organic synthesis of MQDs owing to the complexity introduced by multiple elements. The hot-injection method, as a typical representative organic synthesis procedure, can be widely applied for the preparation of MQDs.156 In this method, a mixture of precursors, coordinating solvents, and stabilizers is repeatedly heated in an inert atmosphere, and the other precursors are then rapidly injected into the mixture.16 Supersaturation of the precursors can induce rapid nucleation and growth, leading to MQDs with a kinetically controlled size distribution. Monodisperse MQDs with high crystal quality can be produced by controlling the injection rate or the initial supersaturation of precursors.
Additional types of high-quality MQDs can be successfully obtained by continuing this green strategy.162 Bawendi et al. demonstrated the synthesis of Cu–In–Se QDs with various stoichiometries (CuIn5Se8, CuIn2.3Se4, and CuIn1.5Se3) using this method.173 The PL emission range of Cu–In–Se QDs could be tuned from the red to the NIR regions by adjusting the size and composition. Furthermore, this strategy can be extended to the synthesis of AgInSe2 QDs with a PL emission range from the orange to red regions. Wood et al. first reported a simple silylamide-promoted synthesis of CuInSe2 QDs.174 The morphology of the as-obtained CuInSe2 QDs could be regulated by introducing specific silylamide anion concentrations (Fig. 12a–c). The diameter of the obtained CuInSe2 QDs could be precisely controlled in the range of 2.7–7.9 nm by systematically changing the reaction time and temperature. The PL QY was increased from the initial value of 15% to 60%, a record value at the time, by capping with ZnS shells. Xue et al. successfully implemented the synthesis of high-quality Zn–AgInS2 QDs using 1-dodecanethiol (DDT) as a capping ligand through the hot-injection method.175 The obtained Zn–AgInS2 QDs had a narrow size distribution of 5–7.4 nm and a PL QY of up to 41% after optimizing the conditions. The absorption peak of the obtained Zn–AgInS2 QDs was blue-shifted, and the PL emission wavelength could be adjusted from 520 to 680 nm by varying the reaction temperature.
 Fig. 12  (a) Morphological changes of CuInSe2 QDs with silylamide anion concentration. (b) Corresponding relationship between band gap and size distribution of CuInSe2 QDs. (c) PL spectra and PL QYs of CuInSe2 QDs before and after coating with a ZnS shell174 (reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society). (d) Photographs of CsPbX3 QDs under UV light. (e) PL spectra of CsPbX3 QDs170 (reproduced with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
In particular, the synthesis of perovskite QDs with excellent luminescent properties has been widely studied recently. Kovalenko et al. first synthesized CsPbX3 QDs using ODE as the organic solvent, and OA and OAm as the capping ligands.170 The PL emission spectra of CsPbX3 QDs could be changed over the entire VIS region by adjusting the ratio of the halogen components, and exhibited a FWHM of 12–42 nm (Fig. 12d and e). Different emission colors were observed for all samples under UV light. Furthermore, the as-obtained CsPbX3 QDs showed a wide color gamut, covering up to 140% of the NTSC color standard. Owing to the toxicity of lead ions in CsPbX3 QDs, other types of perovskite QDs require further development. A similar and facile hot-injection approach to prepare CsSnX3 QDs was developed by Bohm et al.169 The PL emission wavelength of the as-obtained Sn-based perovskite QDs could be changed from 630 to 680 nm by adjusting the reaction temperature in the range of 125–170 °C, and the corresponding optical bandgap could be tuned from 2.8 to 1.3 eV. Deng et al. also successfully synthesized stable Cs2SnI6 QDs using this method.176 The as-obtained Cs2SnI6 QDs exhibited bright red fluorescence under UV light. The shapes of the obtained Cs2SnI6 QDs could be changed into various morphologies (such as nanorods, nanowires, nanobelts, and nanoplatelets) by prolonging the reaction time.
The stoichiometry of the I–II–IV–VI group QDs is difficult to control during synthesis, and requires a strong understanding of the precursor activity and accurate handling of the reaction process. In contrast to other types of semiconductor QDs mentioned in this review, Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs are generally not photoluminescent. However, Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs, which are composed of Earth-abundant elements, are among the most attractive and innovative nontoxic green materials. Therefore, these Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs show broad application prospects in various technical fields, such as solar cells and thermoelectric applications.177,178 Pal et al. reported a novel and rapid hot-injection strategy to produce Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs with a diameter distribution of 7–9 nm.179 A kesterite-type tetragonal phase was observed by structural characterization (Fig. 13a and b). A type-II photovoltaic device based on Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs was also constructed. Significantly, the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of this device indicated an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.39 V and short-circuit current (ISC) of 5.3 mA cm−2. An additional phosphine-free green route for the synthesis of Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs based on the hot-injection method was demonstrated by Zhang et al.180 The as-obtained Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs had a tetragonal structure. Furthermore, the band gap of the as-obtained Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs was 1.7 eV (Fig. 13c and d). The as-synthesized Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs were used to fabricate a photoresponse device. Schottky contact (Au/Cu2ZnSnSe4) was observed on the nonlinear I–V curves, and the device current increased three-fold under light illumination compared with that in the dark. In fact, the quality of these materials is usually assessed by constructing the corresponding device. For example, Mitzi et al. successfully prepared the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells with a world record efficiency.181 However, Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 absorbers with phase purity were produced using a hydrazine solution-based process. Hydrazine is both highly toxic and reactive; therefore, appropriate protective equipment must be selected to prevent physical contact with either vapor or liquid. Therefore, the isolation, purification and formulation of QDs is essential for the green synthetic approach.
 Fig. 13  (a) XRD pattern of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs. (b) I–V characteristics of a photovoltaic device based on Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs179 (reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Absorbance as a function of photon energy for Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs. (d) I–V characteristics of a photoresponse device based on Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs under light and dark conditions180 (reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 


4.1.2 Non-injection method. 
From a green synthesis perspective, the use of relatively green organic solvents under high-temperature conditions does not exactly comply with the green chemistry concept. Furthermore, the size, morphology, and elemental compositions of MQDs are difficult to precisely control in the hot-injection method.182 This is mainly due to uncontrollable reaction parameters, such as reaction temperature, growth time, and precursor injection rate.157 In comparison, the non-injection method, also known as the heat-up method, is a more effective and greener synthetic method at low growth temperatures. In this method, various precursors are prepared in two or more steps and then mixed immediately. The reaction system is rapidly heated to the temperature required to induce nucleation. Notably, this reaction can proceed at low temperature.161 Therefore, this strategy is an effective green synthesis method for preparing MQDs.
Scholes et al. demonstrated an optimized non-injection method to prepare monodisperse pyramidal CuInS2 QDs.183 The size of the as-obtained CuInS2 QDs could be changed from 3 to 8 nm by increasing the reaction time from 20 to 120 min (Fig. 14a–f). Furthermore, satisfactory monodispersity was observed in the STEM images, with pyramidal CuInS2 QDs in the chalcopyrite phase. Interestingly, this synthetic method can yield large amounts of high-quality QDs, in accordance with the green chemistry concept. Torimoto et al. reported a low-temperature approach to preparing AgInS2 QDs using a non-injection method.184 Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate (SDDBT) was selected as the S source. The average size of these AgInS2 QDs was slightly decreased from 4.3 to 3.8 nm by changing the capping ligands from OAm to octylamine. Furthermore, the average diameter of the AgInS2 QDs showed almost no change, even when the Ag-containing precursor was widely varied. However, the energy gap was increased by adjusting the Ag content in the AgInS2 QDs. With increasing Ag content, the PL emission peaks of AgInS2 QDs were gradually red-shifted to the NIR region.
 Fig. 14  STEM images of CuInS2 QDs with reaction times of (a) 20, (b) 30, (c) 45, (d) 60, (e) 90, and (f) 120 min183 (reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). Photographs of the large-scale synthesis of (g) CsPbCl1.5Br1.5, (h) CsPbBr3, and (i) CsPbBrI2 QDs. (j) Schematic diagram of white LEDs based on CsPbBr3 and the CsPbBrI2 QDs/PDMS layer. (k) EL spectra of white LEDs under different working times186 (reprinted with permission from ref. 186 Copyright 2019 Springer). 
For the preparation of perovskite QDs, Xie et al. developed a direct heating non-injection synthetic method to prepare CsPbX3 QDs using OAm and OA as the capping ligands.185 The PL emission wavelength of the as-prepared CsPbX3 QDs could be conveniently tuned from 360 to 700 nm. Furthermore, the PL QY was up to 87% for the perovskite QDs with green and red emissions. The results of the structural studies showed that the as-prepared CsPbX3 QDs were spherical in shape with a cubic zinc blende structure. A simple and low-cost strategy for the synthesis of CsPbX3 QDs was developed by Zhao et al. using a non-injection method without inert gas protection.186 The as-obtained CsPbX3 QDs maintained excellent optical properties after more than 6 months of exposure to air. Notably, this method can be used to realize the large-scale synthesis of CsPbX3 QDs (Fig. 14g–k). The as-prepared CsPbX3 QDs could be dispersed in PDMS to create a light emission layer, which was used to fabricate high-quality white LEDs. The electroluminescence (EL) spectra of devices still exhibited reasonable stability after 8 h of operation.
In fact, other green synthetic strategies are not common owing to the complexity of the constituent elements in quaternary QDs. In addition to the hot-injection method, the heat-up method is a main green strategy. Norris et al. reported a simple and green synthetic method for preparing Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs.187 The as-prepared Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs had a size distribution ranging from 2 to 7 nm, and all samples had the same kesterite structure (Fig. 15a and b). The corresponding optical absorption edge of the as-prepared Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs was blue-shifted, and the energy gap changed from 1.5 to 1.8 eV, as the diameter decreased from 7 to 2 nm. Shavel et al. reported a scalable heat-up synthesis strategy for preparing monodisperse Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs with a yield above 90%.188 The Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs showed isotropic spherical shapes with a wurtzite phase structure (Fig. 15c–f). The growth process and mechanisms of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs were explored in detail. Different ramp rate constants from 100–250 °C produced essentially the same final Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs, indicating that the heating rate had no significant effect on their size and composition. However, the heating rate markedly influenced the size distribution of the final Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs. Similarly, a facile and rapid non-injection route was reported by Zhang et al. for the synthesis of Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs at a low-temperature in triethanolamine (TEA) solution.189 The crystal phase of the as-synthesized Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs was stannite, with an average size of ∼23.5 nm, and the optical energy gap was estimated to be 1.04 eV.
 Fig. 15  (a) XRD pattern of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs with different particle sizes. (b) Corresponding absorption spectra of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs187 (reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). TEM images of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs using different heating rates: (c) floating rate and (d) steady rate. Corresponding standard size dispersion: (e) floating rate and (f) steady rate188 (reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society). 


4.1.3 Microwave irradiation. 
Microwave irradiation has not only been used to synthesize CDs, but also other semiconductor QDs.190 The microwave irradiation process can be performed at the boiling point of the solvent under normal pressure. In addition to reaction temperature, the reaction time is also important for the green synthesis of MQDs in terms of resource utilization. In the synthesis of MQDs under general heating, blackbody radiation is used to drive energy transfer to the reaction vessel. However, this energy transfer leads to the formation of a temperature gradient, which has an adverse effect on the uniform nucleation and particle growth of MQDs.157 In the microwave irradiation process, MQDs can usually be prepared in a short reaction time owing to rapid heat release. Furthermore, the as-obtained MQDs have small sizes, good purity, and high yields.191 For the design of faster, cleaner, and greener synthesis methods, the use of microwave irradiation to prepare MQDs has received widespread attention.
For example, Wang et al. described a facile and green route to synthesize Cu–In–S/ZnS core–shell QDs in the aqueous phase using microwave irradiation.192 The absorption and PL emission spectra of Cu–In–S/ZnS core–shell QDs were also red-shifted by adjusting the Cu/In ratio. The PL QY of Cu–In–S/ZnS core–shell QDs was up to 43%, and they could be embedded in polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to prepare the nano-power. The Cu–In–S/ZnS/PVP solid power can generate intensive green and red emissions at 540 and 655 nm, respectively. Therefore, this material can be used as a color conversion layer to realize white emission at color coordinates of (0.30, 0.33). Chang et al. reported a rapid microwave-assisted strategy for the synthesis of magnetic Gd3+-doped CuInS2/ZnS QDs in a short reaction time of 10 min.193 GSH and citric acid trisodium salt (SC) were selected as dual stabilizing agents (Fig. 16a–c). The PL QY of the Gd3+-CuInS2/ZnS QDs was significantly enhanced from 6% to 26% after coating with a ZnS shell. Furthermore, the as-obtained Gd3+-CuInS2/ZnS QDs exhibited strong electron paramagnetic resonance signals, a remarkably low r2/r1 ratio (1.42), and a high r1 value (55.90 mM−1 s−1). Highly water-soluble AgInS2/ZnS QDs were synthesized by Wu et al. under microwave irradiation.194 The as-prepared AgInS2 and AgInS2/ZnS QDs exhibited the same tetragonal structure. Furthermore, their energy gaps were determined to be 2.66 and 2.91 eV, with the corresponding PL emission peaks measured at 570 and 553 nm, respectively. The longest PL lifetime was up to 424.5 ns for the AgInS2/ZnS QDs, which can be applied to detect intracellular Cu2+ and for biological imaging.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of Gd3+-CuInS2/ZnS QDs. (b) T1- and T2-weighted images of phantoms as a function of Gd concentration. (c) Inverse relaxation times (1/T1 and 1/T2) as functions of Gd concentration193 (reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). Photographs of LEDs based on CsPbX3 QDs as the light emission layer: (d) CsPbCl2Br1, (e) CsPbBr3, (f) CsPbBr1.5I1.5, (g) CsPbBr1I2. (h–k) Corresponding emission spectra195 (reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society). 
Perovskite QDs can also be successfully prepared using this green strategy. Yao et al. reported a one-step microwave-assisted approach to the synthesis of CsPbX3 QDs within a few minutes.195 Furthermore, Mn-CsPbCl3 QDs with different Pb/Mn ratios were prepared using this method. The as-obtained CsPbX3 QDs showed a FWHM of 14 nm and PL QY of over 90%, and were used as color conversion materials for the fabrication of various LEDs with different luminous colors (Fig. 16d–k). The constructed LEDs exhibited bright light emission with color coordinates of (0.15, 0.26), (0.37, 0.61), (0.47, 0.42), and (0.68, 0.30). Xiao et al. directly synthesized CsPbBr3 and Cs4PbBr6 QDs in several minutes using a microwave-assisted method.196 In this method, the transition from CsPbBr3 (3D) to Cs4PbBr6 (0 D) QDs was precisely tuned by adjusting the amounts of OAm and OA added. The band structure of Cs4PbBr6 QDs was calculated using the density functional theory (3.90 eV) and it was shown that pure Cs4PbBr6 QDs were a direct band gap material. The PL emission mechanism based on absorption and PL spectra showed that green emission was not related to the Cs4PbBr6 QDs.


4.1.4 Hydro/solvothermal synthesis. 
According to the synthesis principles of green chemistry, the use of nontoxic reagents and solvents is necessary for the preparation of MQDs. Among the various solvents used for MQDs synthesis, water is the greenest. As mentioned for the preparation of BQDs in the aqueous phase, employing water as an environmentally friendly solvent is a general green synthetic approach to the preparation of MQDs.28 The hydrothermal synthesis of MQDs possesses distinct advantages, such as good biocompatibility and direct water-solubility without any modification.161 Furthermore, replacing organic solvents not only reduces the cost of synthesis, but also greatly decreases the adverse impact on humans and the environment.158 The solvothermal method is a new strategy based on the hydrothermal method, with the difference being that organic or nonaqueous solvents are used in the solvothermal method. In contrast to hydrothermal synthesis, the product morphologies can be readily controlled in solvothermal synthesis using different solvents. Other advantages include low energy consumption, less agglomeration, and adjustable particle sizes.
As the earliest obtained BQDs were synthesized in the aqueous phase, the hydrothermal synthesis of MQDs has great potential among green strategies. Su et al. first reported a facile and green hydrothermal method for the preparation of water-soluble CuInS2 QDs using MPA as a capping ligand.197 The PL intensity of the as-obtained CuInS2 QDs was enhanced by a certain amount of ascorbic acid (AA) and quenched by folic acid (FA) in the concentration range of 0.2–100 mmol L−1. Furthermore, the as-obtained CuInS2 QDs were applied as a fluorescence probe for FA determination in a real sample. Zhang et al. first successfully synthesized water-soluble AgInS2 QDs using GSH as a capping ligand or stabilizing agent at a low temperature of 95 °C.198 The as-obtained AgInS2 QDs showed a higher PL QY of 15% after modification with a ZnS shell. Meanwhile, the absorption and PL emission spectra were blue-shifted by extending the growth time owing to the formation of Zn–AgInS2 QDs. Both the AgInS2 and AgInS2/ZnS QDs showed good degradation performance for rhodamine B.
The perovskite QDs can be rapidly decomposed in water or under a humid atmosphere owing to their ionic crystal nature. Therefore, green research on perovskite QDs at certain pressures and temperatures has mainly focused on solvothermal synthesis. A simple solvothermal approach to synthesizing high-quality CsPbX3 QDs with controllable composition and morphology was developed by Xu et al.199 Highly stable CsPbBr3 QDs and NWs were prepared using this process. The as-obtained CsPbBr3 NWs with a diameter of ∼2.6 nm exhibited a very high PL QY of ∼100%. Furthermore, a white LED with a high luminous efficiency of 60 lm W−1 was fabricated using green CsPbBr3- and red CdSe-PMMA composite films as color conversion layers. Chen et al. reported a green and effective solvothermal strategy for preparing Mn-doped CsPbCl3 QDs for the first time.200 The Mn2+ dopant in CsPbCl3 QDs remained stable after exposure to air for 30 days. The as-obtained CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, CsPbBr3, and Mn-CsPbCl3 QDs were embedded into a PMMA matrix to construct LEDs with blue, green, and orange light emissions. Furthermore, these luminescent layers could be hierarchically assembled to construct white LEDs, which exhibited good performance, with color coordinates of (0.332, 0.334) and a color rendering index of 80 (Fig. 17). Notably, the PL intensity of Mn–CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs returned to the original state in the heating/cooling cycle experiment. Importantly, the PL intensity ratio of the exciton/Mn peak and temperature showed a good linear relationship.
 Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the as-prepared CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, CsPbBr3, and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs/PMMA films under UV light. EL spectra of various LEDs: (b) UV chip, (c) CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, (d) CsPbBr3, (e) Mn–CsPbCl3, (f) CsPbBr3 and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs, (g) CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, CsPbBr3, and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs. (h) Varying temperature PL spectra of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs. (i) Heating/cooling cycle experiment of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs. (j) PL intensity ratio of exciton/Mn peak of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs as a function of temperature200 (reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 

4.2. Summary
In general, green synthetic methods for MQDs have many similarities to those for BQDs owing to their similar crystal growth mechanisms. The difference in the green syntheses of BQDs and MQDs is that a capping ligand is essential to balance the equilibrium reaction activity of MQDs. Therefore, synthetic research using green organic solvents or water-based systems remains at the primary stage, especially regarding perovskite QDs. The methods and parameters for the obtained MQDs are shown in Table 5.
Table 5 Summary of methods, sizes, and optical performance of MQDs obtained by organic- and aqueous-phase synthesis




Methods
Materials
Precursors, ligands
Size (nm)
Emission wavelength (nm)
Ref.





Hot-injection method
Cu–In–Se
CuCl, InCl3, CuI, AgI, InI3, (Me3Si)2Se, TOP, OA
2.0–3.5
650–975

173



CuInSe2
CuCl, InCl3, Se powder, TOP, OA, OAm
2.7–7.9
750–1100

174



Zn–AgInS2
AgNO3, In(OAc)3, TOP, DDT, OA, OAm
5–7.4
520–680

175



CsPbX3
Cs2CO3, PbX2, TOP, OA, OAm
4–15
410–700

170



CsSnX3
Cs2CO3, SnX2, TOP, OA, OAm
7.6–10.7
630–680

169



Cs2SnX6
Cs2CO3, SnI4, OA, OAm,
2.5
620

176



CuZnSnS4
CuCl2, ZnCl2, sulfur, SnCl4, OAm
7–9
—

179



CuZnSnSe4
CuCl2, SnCl4, ZnCl2, Se powder, OAm, DDT
3.4
—

180




Non-injection method
CuInS2
CuI, CuOAc, In(OAc)3, DDT, OA
3–8
—

183



AgInS2
AgNO3, In(NO3)3, SDDBT, OAm, octylamine
3.8–4.3
650–830

184



CsPbX3
Cs2CO3, PbX2, Dodecanal, TOP, OA, OAm
1–10.4
360–700

185



CsPbX3
Cs2CO3, PbX2, TOP, OA, OAm
4–30
416–671

186



Cu2ZnSnS4
CuCl2, SnCl2, ZnCl2, SDDBT, OAm, OA
2–7
—

187



Cu2ZnSnS4
CuCl2, ZnO, SnCl4, DDBT, OAm
13
—

188



Cu2ZnSnSe4
CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl4, Se powder, TEA
23.5
—

189




Microwave irradiation
Cu–In–S/ZnS
CuCl2, Zn (OAc)2, InCl3, Na2S, thiourea, PVP
4.8
543–700

192



Gd–CuInS2/ZnS
GdCl3, CuCl2, InCl3, Zn(OAc)2, thiourea, GSH, SC
3.5
560

193



AgInS2/ZnS
AgNO3, Zn(OAc)2, In(NO3)3, GSH, Na2S, OA, OAm
3
540–570

194



CsPbX3
CsOAc, PbX2, MnCl2, OA, OAm
15.1–23.7
410–691

195



CsPbBr3, Cs4PbBr6
Cs2CO3, PbX2, OA, OAm
7.8–22.2
515

196




Hydro/solvothermal synthesis
CuInS2
CuCl2, InCl3, thiourea, Na2HPO4, MPA
—
660

197



AgInS2/ZnS
AgOAc, In(OAc)3, Na2S, Zn(OAc)2, GSH
4
606

198



CsPbX3
CsOAc, PbX2, OA, OAm, TOP, TOPO
8.2–12.5
410–700

199



Mn2+–CsPbCl3
Cs2CO3, PbX2, OA, MnCl2
—
600

200





5. Conclusions and perspectives
This review shows that various QDs have great potential in various fields, such as display lighting, medical imaging, and chemical analysis. Although various synthesis methods for these QDs have been widely explored, QD preparation processes remain expensive, time-consuming, and harmful to human health and the environment. The industrialization and commercial application of various QDs is unrealistic without simple, fast, and environmentally friendly green strategies for their production. This review mainly discussed research progress regarding various QDs. The green routes toward various QDs have been emphasized, and their formation mechanisms, advantages, and limitations discussed in detail. Although extensive synthetic research on various QDs has been reported, the corresponding green synthetic research remains at the primary stage. Significant progress in the green synthesis of these QDs is required to understand their properties and accelerate their practical application. The following challenges should be carefully considered to achieve green synthetic progress:
(i) For the green synthesis of CDs, the use of waste materials in the “top-down” route not only reduces production costs, but also decreases environmental pollution. However, strong acids or oxidants are essential to form CDs by breaking down carbon ring structures of waste materials. Furthermore, additional separation and purification processes are usually required owing to the heterogeneous fragmentation of the carbonaceous structure. Employing renewable and natural green raw materials as carbon sources is a novel green synthetic strategy, but the size distribution of CDs obtained using this “bottom-up” route is not uniform, and their photoelectric performance is also not ideal. Furthermore, complex and tedious post-processing steps still cannot be omitted from the “bottom-up” route.
(ii) For the green synthesis of BQDs, organic synthesis was one of the first and most widely studied strategies. Although organic reagents with high toxicity and boiling points have been effectively replaced, the temperature required for the new organic reagents as solvents and capping ligands is generally higher than 100 °C. Aqueous-phase synthesis using water as the solvent can reduce the reaction temperature, but the quality of the obtained BQDs is significantly decreased. Furthermore, sulfide and citrate compounds as ligands readily fall off the surface of BQDs, resulting in the aggregation of BQDs. The biosynthesis of BQDs is a cheap, safe, and environmentally friendly green strategy. However, only specific types of BQDs can be obtained by biosynthesis owing to the limitations of the synthesis mechanism. Furthermore, the productivity of BQDs obtained by biosynthesis is low, and controlling the size and shape is difficult.
(iii) In the green synthesis of MQDs, achieving controllable and high-quality fabrication is difficult because of the great activity difference between the cation and anion precursors. Various ligands are required to maintain the balance between different precursors, such that the preparation of MQDs can only be implemented in the liquid phase. In green organic solvent-based systems, some toxic organic ligands containing phosphorus are still required for insoluble precursors such as PbCl2 for CsPbCl3 QDs and Se powder for CuInSe2 QDs. Research progress on the green synthesis of MQDs has also been slow. Nontoxic ligands and solvents have been applied in water-based synthesis systems, and the energy consumption and reaction time was also decreased. However, water cannot be universally applied to MQDs because some materials, such as perovskite QDs, readily decompose.
Overall, the green synthesis of QDs remains in its infancy, with much effort and meaningful exploration required, particularly for MQDs. The preparation of high-efficiency and environmentally friendly QDs is a development trend for future research, with several specific approaches that can be considered to address current problems. First, improving the toxicity and reducing the boiling point of solvents, while also ensuring compatibility between the solvents and precursors, remains challenging. A suitable alternative solvent could result in QDs with high-efficiency and environmentally friendly properties. Furthermore, surface modification strategies based on solvents are promising for the development of various functional QDs. Second, using green raw materials as reaction precursors is another promising strategy to obtain high-efficiency and environmentally friendly QDs. In the future, more attention should be paid to reusing waste as green raw materials, which can also resolve the adverse effects caused by pollution. Finally, among various strategies, increased energy consumption might be achieved using convenient and high-efficiency experimental equipment. Researchers could propose more effective methods to simplify the cumbersome experimental steps, as well as facilitate the economical use of resources. Furthermore, novel bioreactors that convert waste materials into environmentally friendly QDs could be developed and are expected to be used for the green synthesis of various QDs. Such progress will improve understanding regarding QDs and provide new practical applications for QDs in nanoscience.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSFC for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 52025022), the Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 12074060, 11874104, 51732003 and 51872043), the “111” Project (no. B13013), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (grant no. 2019YFB2205100, 2021YFA0716400), the Fund from Jilin Province (no. YDZJ202101ZYTS133 and JJKH20211273KJ) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (no. 2412019BJ006 and 2412021ZD012).
References
R. Gao, X. Fang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3399–3412 RSC .
R. Gao, M. S. Kodaimati and D. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 5564–5589 RSC .
F. A. Esteve-Turrillas and A. Abad-Fuentes, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 41, 12–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Manabe, A. Hoshino, Y. Q. Liang, T. Goto, N. Kato and K. Yamamoto, IEEE T. Nanobiosci., 2006, 5, 263–267 Search PubMed .
W.-S. Song, J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 111, 104–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Nie, S. Ma, G. Yao, F. Zeng, X. Wang, C. Sun, G. Hu and Z. Su, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 40, 3270–3278 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Analyst, 2004, 129, 672–677 RSC .
Z. H. Li, J. Peng and H. L. Chen, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 7521–7536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002454 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morozova, M. Alikina, A. Vinogradov and M. Pagliaro, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Bao, B. Gao and M. Li, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 8288–8296 RSC .
W. Lian, D. Tu, P. Hu, X. Song, Z. Gong, T. Chen, J. Song, Z. Chen and X. Chen, Nano Today, 2020, 35, 100943 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rockett and R. W. Birkmire, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, R81–R97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Chandra Mahakul and P. Mahanandia, Superlattices Microstruct., 2020, 148, 106719 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ananthakumar, J. R. Kumar and S. M. Babu, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 6, 042001 CrossRef .
K. Sanderson, Nature, 2011, 469, 18–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ivanković, Int. J. Sustainable Green Energy, 2017, 6, 39–48 CrossRef .
P. T. Anastas and R. L. Lankey, Green Chem., 2000, 2, 289–295 RSC .
P. T. Anastas, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 1999, 29, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Anastas, M. M. Kirchhoff and T. C. Williamson, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 221, 3–13 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. de Marco, B. S. Rechelo, E. G. Totoli, A. C. Kogawa and H. R. N. Salgado, Saudi Pharm. J., 2019, 27, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
O. V. Kharissova, B. I. Kharisov, C. M. Oliva Gonzalez, Y. P. Mendez and I. Lopez, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2019, 6, 191378 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Choi, H. C. Woo, X. Huang, W. G. Jung, B. J. Kim, S. W. Jeon, S. Y. Yim, J. S. Lee and C. L. Lee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13356–13367 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S. Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano, C. Carrillo-Carrion and M. Valcarcel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1311–1326 RSC .
A. Das and P. T. Snee, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 598–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, W. Li, P. Han, X. Zhou, J. Cheng, H. Wen and W. Xue, Anal. Methods, 2019, 11, 2240–2258 RSC .
F. Yan, Y. Jiang, X. Sun, Z. Bai, Y. Zhang and X. Zhou, Mikrochim. Acta, 2018, 185, 424 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zhao, Z. Chen, C. Zhao, N. Gao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Carbon, 2015, 85, 309–327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, X. Xie, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zeng, D. Y. H. Pui and J. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Ye, J.-J. Huang, L. Luo, H.-J. Fu, Y.-M. Sun, Y.-D. Shen, H.-T. Lei and Z.-L. Xu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2017, 45, 1571–1581 CAS .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei, N. Zhong, Q. Y. Gao and H. M. Xiong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12635–12642 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hola, M. Sudolska, S. Kalytchuk, D. Nachtigallova, A. L. Rogach, M. Otyepka and R. Zboril, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12402–12410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Zhao, F. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Guo, J. Mei, C. Tian, X. Yang and D. Zhao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 399 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qu, L. Liu, T. Sun, J. Hou, Y. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Diao, S. Lu, W. Zhao and L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 175102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Duan, L. Ma, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Sang, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 188, 110768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Briscoe, A. Marinovic, M. Sevilla, S. Dunn and M. Titirici, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4463–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, Y. Ni, J. Ren, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Xie, S. Zhou and S. F. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 11577–11583 RSC .
D. Xu, Q. Lin and H. T. Chang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iravani and R. S. Varma, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2020, 18, 703–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Montes, M. L. Soriano, M. J. Villaseñor and Á. Ríos, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 878, 114573 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Zhu, T. Lu, G. Zhang, J. Xu, Y. Song, Y. Li, L. Wang, B. Yang and F. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4913–4921 RSC .
L. Wang, S. J. Zhu, H. Y. Wang, S. N. Qu, Y. L. Zhang, J. H. Zhang, Q. D. Chen, H. L. Xu, W. Han, B. Yang and H. B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu and Z. Xu, Anal. Methods, 2019, 11, 760–766 RSC .
J. Luo, H. Kong, M. Zhang, J. Cheng, Z. Sun, W. Xiong, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhao and H. Qu, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2019, 15, 151–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tejwan, S. K. Saha and J. Das, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 275, 102046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Perumal, R. Atchudan, T. N. J. I. Edison and Y. R. Lee, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105802 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, R. Bandyopadhyay and P. Pramanik, Mater. Today Chem., 2018, 8, 96–109 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, H. Zhao, H. Cao, Y. Wu, Z. Sun, X. Meng, T. Wang, G. Yu, J. Lin and R. Hou, ACS Appl. Nano. Mater., 2019, 2, 3404–3413 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .
P. T. Anastas and M. M. Kirchhoff, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 686–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Erythropel, J. B. Zimmerman, T. M. de Winter, L. Petitjean, F. Melnikov, C. H. Lam, A. W. Lounsbury, K. E. Mellor, N. Z. Janković, Q. Tu, L. N. Pincus, M. M. Falinski, W. Shi, P. Coish, D. L. Plata and P. T. Anastas, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1929–1961 RSC .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, C. M. Li and C. Z. Huang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 449–471 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, R. Ban, P.-H. Zhang, G.-H. Wu, J.-R. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Carbon, 2013, 64, 424–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, N. Xiao, Y. Wang, H. Li, C. Liu, J. Xiao, Y. Wei, Z. Guo and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2021, 174, 750–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tan, L. Zhang, R. Tang, X. Song, Y. Li, H. Wu, Y. Wang, G. Lv, W. Liu and X. Ma, Talanta, 2013, 115, 950–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Ko, Y. W. Chang, G. Paramasivam, M. S. Jeong, S. Cho and S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10290–10292 RSC .
S. Thulasi, A. Kathiravan and M. Asha Jhonsi, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 7025–7031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Hao, J. Liu and H. Tao, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2018, 113, 012063 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
W. Meng, X. Bai, B. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Lu and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 172–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, Biomass Bioenergy, 2020, 134, 105479 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Jiang, N. Niu, Z. Chen, S. Li, S. Liu and J. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 11–24 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Guo, T. Yang, M. Chen and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Q. Guo, D. Chen, Z. Liu, X. Zheng, A. Xu, S. Yang and G. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5750–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Prasannan and T. Imae, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 15673–15678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahu, B. Behera, T. K. Maiti and S. Mohapatra, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8835–8837 RSC .
V. N. Mehta, S. Jha, H. Basu, R. K. Singhal and S. K. Kailasa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 213, 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, J. M. Xia, J. Feng, M. Q. He, M. L. Chen and J. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7130–7137 RSC .
A. Sachdev and P. Gopinath, Analyst, 2015, 140, 4260–4269 RSC .
J. Wei, X. Zhang, Y. Sheng, J. Shen, P. Huang, S. Guo, J. Pan and B. Feng, Mater. Lett., 2014, 123, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, J. Zhai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9367–9369 RSC .
W. Li, S. Wu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Zhuang, C. Hu, Y. Liu, B. Lei, L. Ma and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804004 CrossRef .
S. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Fan, X. Wei, C. Hu, L. Wang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6320–6325 RSC .
J. Vinoth Kumar, G. Kavitha, R. Arulmozhi, V. Arul, S. Singaravadivel and N. Abirami, J. Fluoresc., 2021, 31, 915–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gu, S. Shang, Q. Yu and J. Shen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 38–42 CrossRef CAS .
M. Si, J. Zhang, Y. He, Z. Yang, X. Yan, M. Liu, S. Zhuo, S. Wang, X. Min, C. Gao, L. Chai and Y. Shi, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3414–3419 RSC .
C. Zhao, X. Li, C. Cheng and Y. Yang, Microchem. J., 2019, 147, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, W. J. Wang, X. Hai, Y. L. Yu and J. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 387–393 RSC .
Y. Hu and Z. Gao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 382, 121048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zuo, X. Lu, Z. Sun, Y. Guo and H. He, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 183, 519–542 CrossRef .
X. Lin, M. Xiong, J. Zhang, C. He, X. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Kuang, M. Yang and Q. Huang, Microchem. J., 2021, 160, 105604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, L. Li, J. Liu, L. Yu, H. Li, F. Cheng, X. Yi, J. He and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9832–9840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis and E. P. Giannelis, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 3141–3145 RSC .
X. Teng, C. Ma, C. Ge, M. Yan, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, P. C. Morais and H. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 4631–4639 RSC .
Y. Y. Yao, G. Gedda, W. M. Girma, C. L. Yen, Y. C. Ling and J. Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13887–13899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, S. B. Yu, J. S. Wei and H. M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cohn, L. Oakes, R. Carter, S. Chatterjee, A. S. Westover, K. Share and C. L. Pint, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4669–4675 RSC .
Y. Tang, R. Wang, Y. Yang, D. Yan and X. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19446–19455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. Yan and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10099–10106 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Zhou, D. Yan and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3473–3479 RSC .
H. Qi, S. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Fang, A. Wang, H. Shen and Z. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 10160–10173 RSC .
K. J. McHugh, L. Jing, A. M. Behrens, S. Jayawardena, W. Tang, M. Gao, R. Langer and A. Jaklenec, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706356 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kisslinger, W. Hua and K. Shankar, Polymers, 2017, 9, 35 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhao, N. Oh, D. Jishkariani, M. Zhang, H. Wang, N. Li, J. D. Lee, C. Zeng, M. Muduli, H. J. Choi, D. Su, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15145–15152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jang, A. Shapiro, M. Isarov, A. Rubin-Brusilovski, A. Safran, A. K. Budniak, F. Horani, J. Dehnel, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1002–1024 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Jiang, F. Fu, W. Guo, W. Huang and L. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 1723–1729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi and S. Jeong, Int. J. Pr. Eng. Man-G. T., 2018, 5, 349–358 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen and H. Liang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2014, 135, 23–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Aeberhard, R. Vaxenburg, E. Lifshitz and S. Tomic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16223–16228 RSC .
C. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, L. Li, D. Wu and Q. Wang, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 393–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, J. Yin, J. Zhao and W. W. Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54109–54114 RSC .
J. Y. Huang, Z. Z. Ye and L. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2002, 21, 129–131 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Saucer, J. E. Lee, A. J. Martin, D. Tien, J. M. Millunchick and V. Sih, Solid State Commun., 2011, 151, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Chao, W.-R. Chen, J.-W. Chen, S.-M. Lai and G. Keiser, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2011, 29, 051805 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, C. Zhang, G. Zeng, G. Chen, J. Wan, Z. Guo, H. Wu, Z. Yu, Y. Zhou and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 78595–78610 RSC .
V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmuller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2905–2929 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Y. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11669–11717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Bullen and P. Mulvaney, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2303–2307 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Sowers, B. Swartz and T. D. Krauss, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Yu and X. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 2611–2611 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, L. Cao, F. Tang and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16671–16675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Chen and J. Jie, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2010, 5, 106–117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chan, M. Liu, K. Latham, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, T. Teranishi and Y. Tachibana, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2182–2187 RSC .
P. Jiang and Z. Chen, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5707–5712 RSC .
D. Janczewski, N. Tomczak, M. Y. Han and G. J. Vancso, Nat. Protoc., 2011, 6, 1546–1553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pu, F. Cai, D. Wang, J.-X. Wang and J.-F. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 1790–1802 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Hashem, M. A. Ahmed and M. F. Abdel Messih, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 4816–4822 RSC .
J. Weng, X. Song, L. Li, H. Qian, K. Chen, X. Xu, C. Cao and J. Ren, Talanta, 2006, 70, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rajh, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11999–12003 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, J. Li, H. Z. Wang, J. Q. Zhuang and W. S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5618–5621 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Kalasad, M. K. Rabinal and B. G. Mulimani, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12729–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Y. Shih and W.-H. Shih, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 205604 CrossRef .
A. L. Rogach, M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, A. Kornowski, M. G. Burt, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2001, 224, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakane, Y. Tsukasaki, T. Sakata, H. Yasuda and T. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7584–7586 RSC .
M. Akbari, M. Rahimi-Nasrabadi, S. Pourmasud, M. Eghbali-Arani, H. R. Banafshe, F. Ahmadi, M. R. Ganjali and A. Sobhani nasab, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 9979–9989 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Pearce, V. S. Coker, J. M. Charnock, R. A. Pattrick, J. F. Mosselmans, N. Law, T. J. Beveridge and J. R. Lloyd, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 155603 CrossRef PubMed .
K. B. Narayanan and N. Sakthivel, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 156, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Dhillon, S. K. Brar, S. Kaur and M. Verma, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2012, 32, 49–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Narayanan and N. Sakthivel, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 59–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Khan, K. M. Fromm, T. F. Rizvi, B. Giese, F. Ahamad, R. J. Turner, M. Füeg and E. Marsili, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2020, 37, 1900419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Sweeney, C. Mao, X. Gao, J. L. Burt, A. M. Belcher, G. Georgiou and B. L. Iverson, Chem. Biol., 2004, 11, 1553–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Labrenz, G. K. Druschel, T. Thomsen-Ebert, B. Gilbert, S. A. Welch, K. M. Kemner, G. A. Logan, R. E. Summons, G. De Stasio, P. L. Bond, B. Lai, S. D. Kelly and J. F. Banfield, Science, 2000, 290, 1744–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Xiong, R. Cui, Z. L. Zhang, X. Yu, Z. Xie, Y. B. Shi and D. W. Pang, ACS
Nano, 2014, 8, 5116–5124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kumar, A. A. Ansary, A. Ahmad and M. I. Khan, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borovaya, Y. Pirko, T. Krupodorova, A. Naumenko, Y. Blume and A. Yemets, Biotechnol. Biotechnol. Equip., 2015, 29, 1156–1163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kowshik, W. Vogel, J. Urban, S. K. Kulkarni and K. M. Paknikar, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 815–818 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cui, H.-H. Liu, H.-Y. Xie, Z.-L. Zhang, Y.-R. Yang, D.-W. Pang, Z.-X. Xie, B.-B. Chen, B. Hu and P. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2359–2364 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, B. Yi, G. Zeng, Q. Niu, M. Yan, A. Chen, J. Du, J. Huang and Q. Zhang, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 117, 199–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bao, N. Hao, Y. Yang and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 481–489 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, K. P. Johnsson, X. Peng, T. E. Wilson, C. J. Loweth, M. P. Bruchez, Jr. and P. G. Schultz, Nature, 1996, 382, 609–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shenton, T. Douglas, M. Young, G. Stubbs and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 253–256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mao, C. E. Flynn, A. Hayhurst, R. Sweeney, J. Qi, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 6946–6951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Al-Shalabi, M. A. Stevens-Kalceff and P. M. Doran, Biochem. Eng. J., 2014, 84, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Trabelsi, I. Azzouz, M. Sakly and H. Abdelmelek, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 1121–1128 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Sturzenbaum, M. Hockner, A. Panneerselvam, J. Levitt, J. S. Bouillard, S. Taniguchi, L. A. Dailey, R. Ahmad Khanbeigi, E. V. Rosca, M. Thanou, K. Suhling, A. V. Zayats and M. Green, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 57–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yao, D. Wei, Y. Ni, D. Yan and C. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, Z. Chen, S. Gao, B. L. Goh, I. B. Samsudin, K. W. Lwe, Y. Wu, C. Wu and X. Su, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2019, 29, 628–640 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Li, H. Huang, B. Mao, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Semicond., 2020, 41, 091701 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang and W. W. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13662–13679 RSC .
W. M. Girma, M. Z. Fahmi, A. Permadi, M. A. Abate and J. Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 6193–6216 RSC .
N. Tsolekile, S. Parani, M. C. Matoetoe, S. P. Songca and O. S. Oluwafemi, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2017, 12, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Regulacio and M. Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 511–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yarema, M. Yarema and V. Wood, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1446–1461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Tang, Z. Zang, Y. Yao, Z. Yao, H. Zhong and B. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 590–605 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrançois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756–3776 RSC .
J. Feng and X. Yang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1044 CrossRef .
A. G. Kannan, T. E. Manjulavalli and J. Chandrasekaran, Procedia Eng., 2016, 141, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Liu, B. L. Guo, X. S. Wu, F. M. Zhang, C. L. Mak and K. H. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3182–3186 RSC .
M. Yuan, X. Zhang, J. Kong, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, Y. Meng, S. Wu and D. Kou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 374–379 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakamura, T. Maeda and T. Wada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 121203 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. F. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, D. Credgington, N. C. Greenham and M. L. Bohm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lefrancois, S. Pouget, L. Vaure, M. Lopez-Haro and P. Reiss, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 654–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yarema, D. Bozyigit, I. Rousseau, L. Nowack, M. Yarema, W. Heiss and V. Wood, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3753–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, W. B. A. Ho and J. M. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9769–9773 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, X. Yan, M. Zhang, S. Sun, M. Yang, W. Shen, X. Pan, P. Wang and Z. Deng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8132–8140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, L. A. Jauregui, G. Zhang, Y. P. Chen and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 540–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Zhou, Y. Q. Deng, P. P. Zhang, D. X. Kou, W. H. Zhou, Y. N. Meng, S. J. Yuan and S. X. Wu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800354 CrossRef .
S. K. Saha, A. Guchhait and A. J. Pal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8090–8096 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Yao, L. Shen, H. Zhang, X. Zhang and B. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7207–7210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Hu and T. Zhu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 469 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Z. Zhong, S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, Y. C. Li, Y. Q. Ding, Y. F. Li and G. D. Scholes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5253–5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, S. Ogawa, T. Kameyama, K.-i. Okazaki, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata, Y. Tsuboi and T. Torimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12851–12858 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Peng, K. Huang, Z. Shi, R. Xie and W. Yang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1994–2006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, J. Wei, Y. Sun, J. Wu, Y. Hou, P. Wang, N. Wang and Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 6917–6929 CrossRef .
A. Khare, A. W. Wills, L. M. Ammerman, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11721–11723 RSC .
A. Shavel, M. Ibáñez, Z. Luo, J. De Roo, A. Carrete, M. Dimitrievska, A. Genç, M. Meyns, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 720–726 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. Wu, L. Yan, R. Zhou, S. Si, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 2554–2557 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Singh, R. Kumar, D. P. Singh, R. Savu and S. A. Moshkalev, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 282–314 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Schütz, L. Xiao, T. Lehnen, T. Fischer and S. Mathur, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 63, 341–374 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Ji, Q.-H. Zhang, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 11700–11705 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Chang, G. R. Chen and J. D. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7132–7140 RSC .
W. W. Xiong, G. H. Yang, X. C. Wu and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4160–4165 RSC .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, H. Gao, J. Shao, H. Zou, D. Yao, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42919–42927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, X. Li, X. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Chen, H. Zhang, A. Huang and Z. Xiao, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 13663–13669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Hu and X. Su, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4598–4604 RSC .
Z. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Huang and X. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 27–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Zou, L. Wu, Q. Pan, D. Yang, H. Hu, Y. Tan, Q. Zhong, Y. Xu, H. Liu, B. Sun and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701121 CrossRef .
D. Chen, G. Fang, X. Chen, L. Lei, J. Zhong, Q. Mao, S. Zhou and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8990–8998 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Weiqiang Yang	Weiqiang Yang received his PhD degree from the School of Physics, Northeast Normal University, in 2020. He currently works as a postdoctoral researcher at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of semiconductor quantum dots and hetero-structured composites and their applications in optoelectronic devices.
Xinghua Li	Xinghua Li received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Northeast Normal University in 2010. He is a professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests include low-dimensional functional materials and devices for environmental and energy applications, such as photocatalysts, supercapacitors, and zinc ion batteries.
Weizhen Liu	Weizhen Liu received his PhD degree from the Northeast Normal University in 2014. From 2013 to 2014, he worked as a project officer at the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Currently, he is an associate professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, China. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of fluorescent quantum dots, wide-bandgap semiconductor materials and their optoelectronic devices, and 2D layered materials and relevant devices.
Xiuling Liu	Xiuling Liu received her PhD degree from the Northeast Normal University in 2014. From 2014 to 2016, she worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Currently, she is a lecturer at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Changchun University of Science and Technology, China. Her research interests include the synthesis and applications of fluorescent quantum dots, lanthanide ion doped upconversion nanoparticle materials and their applications, and white light emitting materials.
Haiyang Xu	Haiyang Xu received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2006. From 2006 to 2008, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He received a fund from the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholars. Currently, he is a professor at the Key Laboratory of UV-Emitting Materials and Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University. His research interests include wide-bandgap semiconductor materials and their photonic/electronic devices, memristive devices, and artificial synaptics.
Yichun Liu	Yichun Liu received his PhD degree in condensed matter physics from the Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, China, in 1995. He received a fund from the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholars. He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in November 2021. He is currently the President of Northeast Normal University. His current research interests include semiconductor materials and devices.

Less hazardous chemical syntheses	Designing safer chemicals
Safer solvents and auxiliaries	Design for energy efficiency
Use of renewable feedstocks	Reduce derivatives
Catalysis	Design for degradation
Real-time analysis for pollution prevention	Inherently safer chemistry for accident prevention

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of various green synthesis strategies for QDs (CDs, BQDs, and MQDs).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of CDs from plant soot. (b) TEM image of CDs. (c) Photobleaching experiment of CDs59 (reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier). (d) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of CDs from tire soot60 (reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of S-CDs from durian. (b) TEM image of S-CDs. (c) Schematic diagram of the S-CD structure. (d) Photographs of S-CDs with different S doping contents under UV light68 (reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society). (e) (i) Bright field image of Mycobacterium tuberculosis without CDs and (ii–iv) fluorescence images of Mycobacterium tuberculosis with CDs under excitation wavelengths of 405, 488, and 561 nm, respectively71 (reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CDs from coriander leaves. (b) Fluorescence dependence of CDs in the presence of different metal ions. (c) PL spectra of CDs as a function of Fe3+ concentration73 (reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of N-CDs from willow leaves77 (reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of N-CDs from economical lotus root79 (reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier). (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CDs from sewage sludge. (c) Absorption, PLE, and PL spectra of CDs. (d) PL spectra of CDs under different excitation wavelengths83 (reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of CD synthesis from Gynostemma. (b) Biological toxicity experiment of CDs against zebrafish embryos86 (reproduced with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of MF-CDs from waste crab shell89 (reproduced with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

Chemical oxidation	Candle soot	1	415–615	—	
56

Plant soot	2.0–4.3	422–457	Bioimaging of guppy fish	
59

Tire soot	11	520	Bioimaging of C6 cells	
60

Vehicle exhaust soot	∼4	425	Detection of tartrazine	
61

Lignite coal	2–4	460	Detection of Fe3+	
62

Chemical carbonization	Hair fibers	2–10	383–470	HeLa cellular imaging	
57

Base decomposing	Coal tar pitch	1.9–5.8	—	Photocatalytic generation of hydrogen	
58

Hydrothermal synthesis	Apple juice	4.5	475	Bioimaging of bacteria and fungi	
71

Orange juice	1.5–4.5	455	Bioimaging of MG-63 cells	
70

Orange waste peels	2–7	431	Photocatalytic degradation of naphthol blue-black	
69

Papaya powder	2–6, 8–18	450	HeLa cellular imaging	
67

Durian	2–6	420–620	Bioimaging of fibroblast cells	
68

Shiitake mushrooms	2–6	410	HeLa cellular imaging	
72

Coriander leaves	∼4	400	Detection of Fe3+/lung normal and cancer cells	
73

Cornflour	2–6	441	Detection of Fe3+	
74

Soy milk	13–40	475	Oxygen reduction electrocatalysts	
75


Phellodendron chinense Schneid	5	546, 673	Promoting the photosynthesis of plants	
76

Willow leaves	2–4	∼500	Fluorescent ink/oxygen reduction electrocatalysts	
77

Microwave irradiation	Lotus root	5–15	435	Bioimaging of A549 cells	
79

Natural lignocellulose	2–3	∼380	Detection of Hg2+	
80

Kelp	3.7	450	Detection of Co2+ and pH sensing	
81

Silkworm pupa	13–26	420	HeLa cellular imaging	
82

Sewage sludge	2–6	412	Detection of p-nitrophenol	
83

Pyrolysis carbonization	
Gynostemma
	∼2.5	400	Bioimaging of zebrafish	
86

Grass	2–5, 25–30	∼455	—	
87

Konjac flour	3.37	393	HeLa cellular imaging/detection of Fe3+	
88

Crab shell	4–4.5	∼425	Bioimaging of zebrafish embryos/contrast agents	
89


 	Fig. 7  (a) Absorption spectra of the temporal evolution for CdE QDs116 (reproduced with permission from ref. 116 Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society). (b) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CdSe QDs. (c) SEM image of CdSe QDs. (d) corresponding EDX spectrum of CdSe QDs118 (reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of PbS QDs. (b) XRD pattern of PbS QDs. (c) PL spectra of PbS QDs120 (reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) PL and absorption spectra of Ag2S QDs. (e) MTT assay of Ag2S QDs on Vero cells and MCF-7 cells121 (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of CdSe QDs with different particle sizes. (b) Corresponding photographs under UV light128 (reproduced with permission from ref. 128 Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). (c) Mouse lymph system. (d) Biological imaging of PbS QDs in lymph nodes. (e) Biological imaging of PbS QDs in lymph nodes with different time courses131 (reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the generation and application of CdS0.5Se0.5 QDs140 (reproduced with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society). (b) Bioimages of yeast cells incorporated with CdTe QDs. (c) Schematic diagram of the possible growth pathways of CdTe QDs146 (reprinted with permission from ref. 146 Copyright 2010 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Practical photograph of an earthworm. (b) Cross-section of the posterior section of an earthworm. (c) Region for the generation of metallothionein, as indicated by arrows. (d) Absorption and PL spectra of the obtained CdTe QDs. (e) Fluorescence lifetime of the obtained CdTe QDs152 (reprinted with permission from ref. 152 Copyright 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited).	 

Organic synthesis	CdSe	Cd(Me)2, Se shot, TOP, TOPO	8	∼560	
115

CdTe	CdO, Te powder, TOPO, tetradecylphosphonic acid	2–8	∼600	
116

CdS	CdO, elemental S, OA	2–5.3	∼390-∼450	
117

CdSe	Cd-OA, Se-TOP, OA	0.8–1	∼500-∼600	
112

CdSe	Cd-OA, H2Se, OA, paraffin liquid	2.0–5.0	486–618	
118

ZnSe	Zn(OAc)2, Se powder, OA, N,N-DMOA	∼4	∼440	
119

PbS	PbCl2, DPTU, OAm	2.5–5.7	990–1600	
120

Ag2S	AgOAc, 1-octanethiol, OAm, OA	2.4, 3.5	665–845	
121

Aqueous synthesis	CdTe	CdSO4, NaHTe, mercaptoglycerol	2–4	450–650	
126

CdTe	Cd(OAc)2, Te powder, NaBH4, TGA	—	∼570	
127

CdSe	CdCl2, Se powder, MPA	1.58–3.42	384–600	
128

ZnS	Zn(NO3)2, Na2S, MPA	3–5	420–446	
129

HgTe	Hg2+, H2Te, TG	3–6	900–2000	
130

PbS	Pb(OAC)2, Na2S, GSH	3.5	1000–1400	
131


Bacteria	CdS	
Escherichia coli
	2–5	—	
138

ZnS	Desulfobacteriaceae	2–5	—	
139

CdS0.5Se0.5	
Staphylococcus aureus
	1.8	520	
140

ZnSe, CdSe	
Veillonella atypica
	3–6, 2–4	368, 512	
133

Fungi	PbS	
Torulopsis species	2–5	—	
143

CdSe	
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
	2–3.6	490–560	
144

CdS	
Phanerochaete chrysosporium
	1.5–3	458	
145

CdTe	Yeast	2–3.6	490–560	
146

Viruses	CdS, PbS	Tobacco mosaic virus	5	—	
148

ZnS, CdS	M13 bacteriophage	3–5	425	
149

Plants and animals	CdS	
Solanum lycopersicum
	4–10	420–480	
150

CdS, CdSe	Rats	6.52, 51.54	—	
151

CdTe	Earthworms	2.33	520	
152


 	Fig. 12  (a) Morphological changes of CuInSe2 QDs with silylamide anion concentration. (b) Corresponding relationship between band gap and size distribution of CuInSe2 QDs. (c) PL spectra and PL QYs of CuInSe2 QDs before and after coating with a ZnS shell174 (reproduced with permission from ref. 174 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society). (d) Photographs of CsPbX3 QDs under UV light. (e) PL spectra of CsPbX3 QDs170 (reproduced with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) XRD pattern of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs. (b) I–V characteristics of a photovoltaic device based on Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs179 (reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Absorbance as a function of photon energy for Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs. (d) I–V characteristics of a photoresponse device based on Cu2ZnSnSe4 QDs under light and dark conditions180 (reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  STEM images of CuInS2 QDs with reaction times of (a) 20, (b) 30, (c) 45, (d) 60, (e) 90, and (f) 120 min183 (reproduced with permission from ref. 183 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). Photographs of the large-scale synthesis of (g) CsPbCl1.5Br1.5, (h) CsPbBr3, and (i) CsPbBrI2 QDs. (j) Schematic diagram of white LEDs based on CsPbBr3 and the CsPbBrI2 QDs/PDMS layer. (k) EL spectra of white LEDs under different working times186 (reprinted with permission from ref. 186 Copyright 2019 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) XRD pattern of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs with different particle sizes. (b) Corresponding absorption spectra of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs187 (reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). TEM images of Cu2ZnSnS4 QDs using different heating rates: (c) floating rate and (d) steady rate. Corresponding standard size dispersion: (e) floating rate and (f) steady rate188 (reproduced with permission from ref. 188 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram for the synthesis of Gd3+-CuInS2/ZnS QDs. (b) T1- and T2-weighted images of phantoms as a function of Gd concentration. (c) Inverse relaxation times (1/T1 and 1/T2) as functions of Gd concentration193 (reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). Photographs of LEDs based on CsPbX3 QDs as the light emission layer: (d) CsPbCl2Br1, (e) CsPbBr3, (f) CsPbBr1.5I1.5, (g) CsPbBr1I2. (h–k) Corresponding emission spectra195 (reproduced with permission from ref. 195 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the as-prepared CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, CsPbBr3, and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs/PMMA films under UV light. EL spectra of various LEDs: (b) UV chip, (c) CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, (d) CsPbBr3, (e) Mn–CsPbCl3, (f) CsPbBr3 and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs, (g) CsPbCl0.5Br0.5, CsPbBr3, and Mn–CsPbCl3 QDs. (h) Varying temperature PL spectra of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs. (i) Heating/cooling cycle experiment of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs. (j) PL intensity ratio of exciton/Mn peak of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 QDs as a function of temperature200 (reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 


Hot-injection method	Cu–In–Se	CuCl, InCl3, CuI, AgI, InI3, (Me3Si)2Se, TOP, OA	2.0–3.5	650–975	
173

CuInSe2	CuCl, InCl3, Se powder, TOP, OA, OAm	2.7–7.9	750–1100	
174

Zn–AgInS2	AgNO3, In(OAc)3, TOP, DDT, OA, OAm	5–7.4	520–680	
175

CsPbX3	Cs2CO3, PbX2, TOP, OA, OAm	4–15	410–700	
170

CsSnX3	Cs2CO3, SnX2, TOP, OA, OAm	7.6–10.7	630–680	
169

Cs2SnX6	Cs2CO3, SnI4, OA, OAm,	2.5	620	
176

CuZnSnS4	CuCl2, ZnCl2, sulfur, SnCl4, OAm	7–9	—	
179

CuZnSnSe4	CuCl2, SnCl4, ZnCl2, Se powder, OAm, DDT	3.4	—	
180


Non-injection method	CuInS2	CuI, CuOAc, In(OAc)3, DDT, OA	3–8	—	
183

AgInS2	AgNO3, In(NO3)3, SDDBT, OAm, octylamine	3.8–4.3	650–830	
184

CsPbX3	Cs2CO3, PbX2, Dodecanal, TOP, OA, OAm	1–10.4	360–700	
185

CsPbX3	Cs2CO3, PbX2, TOP, OA, OAm	4–30	416–671	
186

Cu2ZnSnS4	CuCl2, SnCl2, ZnCl2, SDDBT, OAm, OA	2–7	—	
187

Cu2ZnSnS4	CuCl2, ZnO, SnCl4, DDBT, OAm	13	—	
188

Cu2ZnSnSe4	CuCl2, ZnCl2, SnCl4, Se powder, TEA	23.5	—	
189


Microwave irradiation	Cu–In–S/ZnS	CuCl2, Zn (OAc)2, InCl3, Na2S, thiourea, PVP	4.8	543–700	
192

Gd–CuInS2/ZnS	GdCl3, CuCl2, InCl3, Zn(OAc)2, thiourea, GSH, SC	3.5	560	
193

AgInS2/ZnS	AgNO3, Zn(OAc)2, In(NO3)3, GSH, Na2S, OA, OAm	3	540–570	
194

CsPbX3	CsOAc, PbX2, MnCl2, OA, OAm	15.1–23.7	410–691	
195

CsPbBr3, Cs4PbBr6	Cs2CO3, PbX2, OA, OAm	7.8–22.2	515	
196


Hydro/solvothermal synthesis	CuInS2	CuCl2, InCl3, thiourea, Na2HPO4, MPA	—	660	
197

AgInS2/ZnS	AgOAc, In(OAc)3, Na2S, Zn(OAc)2, GSH	4	606	
198

CsPbX3	CsOAc, PbX2, OA, OAm, TOP, TOPO	8.2–12.5	410–700	
199

Mn2+–CsPbCl3	Cs2CO3, PbX2, OA, MnCl2	—	600	
200


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
