Recent advances in hierarchical three-dimensional titanium dioxide nanotree arrays for high-performance solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA03521G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA03521G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12699-12717Recent advances in hierarchical three-dimensional titanium dioxide nanotree arrays for high-performance solar cells

        
          
            Wu-Qiang 
            Wu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hao-Lin 
            Feng
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong-Yan 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dai-Bin 
            Kuang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Cheng-Yong 
            Su
          
          
        
      
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-20-8411-3015;   Tel: +86-20-8411-3015
Received 
      24th April 2017
    , Accepted 28th May 2017First published on 30th May 2017AbstractHierarchical metal oxide nanotree array architectures with tunable three-dimensional (3D) morphologies and homo-/heterogeneous junctions, consisting of 1D/2D nanobranches grown epitaxially on the sidewalls of vertical 1D nanostructured trunks (resembling a tree), have been widely explored to demonstrate their huge potential in the development of high-performance photovoltaic devices. In this review, the growth of a wide variety of TiO2 nanotree array architectures will be discussed, with an emphasis on solution-phase and vapor-phase syntheses. The evolution of electrode materials and recent progress in 3D TiO2 nanotree array architectures for solar cells are reviewed. Furthermore, to highlight the obvious benefits of 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays, the limitations and challenges of these hierarchical array architectures when used in solar cells are addressed. Finally, insight into future directions and opportunities for these fascinating electrode materials in creating a new energy conversion epoch is also provided.Wu-Qiang WuWu-Qiang Wu received his Ph.D. from the University of Melbourne in March 2017. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is presently a research fellow at the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska–Lincoln. His current research interests lie in the fabrication of functional inorganic and organic hybrid materials and their applications in thin-film optoelectronic devices.Hao-Lin FengHao-Lin Feng received his Bachelor's degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2014. He is presently a postgraduate at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of hierarchical nanomaterials and their applications in quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells.Hong-Yan ChenHong-Yan Chen is an associate professor at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her Bachelor's degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University, and her Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010. Her current research interests lie in functional micro/nanostructured materials for dye-sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, and photoelectrochemical cells.Dai-Bin KuangDai-Bin Kuang is a professor at the School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Dr Kuang received his Ph.D. from Sun Yat-sen University in 2003. He worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) from 2003–2004 and at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (Switzerland) from 2004–2008 as a postdoctoral researcher, before becoming a professor at SYSU in 2008. He is the author of over 100 peer-reviewed publications. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photocatalysis, and photoelectrochemical cells.Cheng-Yong SuCheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-Sen University (SYSU). He obtained his Ph.D. from Lanzhou University in 1996, joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University in 2001 as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow, continued postdoctoral work with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye at the University of South Carolina in 2002, and was then promoted to a full professor at SYSU in 2004. He is the author of over 200 peer-reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on metal–organic materials, catalysis, and nanoscience relevant to a clean environment and clean energy.
1. Introduction
Rapid energy consumption and aggravated environmental pollution in the 21st century have resulted in the search for clean and renewable alternative energy solutions worldwide. Solar energy, a clean and inexhaustible energy source, holds great potential for meeting the stringent energy demands of modern life. Fundamentally, utilizing and converting abundant solar energy efficiently remains a significant and urgent challenge for researchers to resolve, and is also crucial for decreasing energy demand.1–4 In this regard, photovoltaics are regarded as among the most promising methods for providing a sustainable source of electric power to the planet. Among various energy-harvesting devices, solar cells are regarded as a suitable choice for harnessing and utilizing sunlight to drive chemical reactions and produce electricity.5 Specifically, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), and perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are of great interest as next-generation solar cells due to their low-cost materials, simple fabrication processes, and relatively high efficiencies.6–11
In the last two decades, there has been tremendous effort focused on the smart design of nanostructured materials and devices.12–20 In particular, 1D nanostructured arrays, including nanorods (NRs), nanowires (NWs), and nanotubes (NTs), which elongate or extend in the vertical direction against the horizontal plane of the front substrates, have been demonstrated as promising structures capable of providing direct electron transfer pathways and effectively suppressing photogenerated charge recombination, distinguishing them from the more frequently used 0D nanoparticles.21–28 However, 1D nanoarrays have performance limitations due to their low internal surface areas and low light-harvesting efficiencies.29–36 As a result, researchers aiming to improve the performance of solar cells have been forced to design novel 3D array architectures that typically integrate intrinsic 1D nanostructured backbones with the additional growth of epitaxial 1D nanorods/wires or 2D nanosheets branches along omnidirectional dimension, affording ultimate 3D hierarchical nanotree array architectures.37–43 To date, 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures have been successfully incorporated into a variety of photovoltaic devices as efficient photoanodes, consistently demonstrating markedly improved performance.44–48 These 3D nanotree array architectures offer a number of synergistic advantages, such as a high surface area for sufficient sensitizer anchoring, fast electron transfer (direct charge transfer pathway in both trunks and branches), and long electron lifetime (perfect crystallinity, minimal surface defects, and fewer grain boundaries) for efficient charge collection, improved light absorption (prolonged optical path, increased light trapping, and superior multi-scattering capability) for enhanced light harvesting, and a porous network between interlaced and intertwined nanobranches for efficient electrolyte infiltration.40,49,50 All aforementioned fascinating advantages suggest the vast potential of 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures for achieving high-performance optoelectronic devices.
Many strategies have been developed for the fabrication of various 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures on various conducting substrates, which exhibit diverse functions.21,29,39,40,51 In particular, full solution-processed synthetic routes, such as hydrothermal or solvothermal protocols, have shown great promise and been used successfully to prepare 3D branched array architectures, simultaneously accessing various precursors, solvents, and organic additives, such as surfactants, to control crystal growth.52,53
In this review, we summarize recent advances in the synthesis of 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures and their applications as high-performance photoanode materials in DSSCs, QDSSCs, and PSCs. The current status of solar cells is outlined to clarify the pivotal role of 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures in revolutionizing the scrupulous design and performance of photoelectric conversion. Optimized 3D nanotree arrays with branched or hyperbranched architectures have been introduced as next-generation electrode materials in the semiconducting metal oxide nanoarray family, showing promise as better candidates for solar cells. Finally, general remarks are provided to summarize the benefits of 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures and, more importantly, the existing obstacles and challenges, as well as providing insight into future directions and opportunities in the development and application of 3D hierarchical metal oxide nanotree array architectures.
2. Synthesis of 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures
Recently, significant progress has been made toward controlling the growth and properties of hierarchical metal oxide array architectures. This has fueled optimism toward the use of semiconducting metal oxide nanoarrays in solar cells. The morphology of nanomaterials dramatically affects their optical and photoelectric properties. Advances in manipulating nanotree morphologies include branch diameter oscillation, designed branch placement, and hyperbranching control.54–56 Several bottom-up approaches have been reported for producing well-engineered 3D hierarchical metal oxide nanotree array architectures. In general, solution-based chemical synthesis and vapor phase methods are well-developed routes for fabricating nanotree array architectures. Typically, solution-processed methods, such as hydrothermal (if water is used as the dominant solvent) and solvothermal (using a non-aqueous solvent) synthesis, chemical bath deposition, and electrodeposition, have been widely employed to fabricate metal oxide nanotree arrays on various substrates. Furthermore, 3D hierarchical metal oxide nanotree arrays can be synthesized using vapor methods, such as vapor oxidization of metal substrates, laser ablation (pulsed laser deposition, PLD), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and plasma techniques. Various intriguing TiO2 nanotree arrays have been fabricated using the abovementioned methodologies. In this section, we will mainly focus on hydrothermal (HT) synthesis and give a basic introduction to vapor phase-based synthesis, including vapor oxidation (VO) and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) techniques, which are commonly used to grow 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays. These synthetic routes are illustrated in Fig. 1. Each method has its merits and drawbacks, which will be discussed. Accordingly, we compare these various methods and provide useful guidelines for preparing novel hierarchical array architectures.
 Fig. 1  Schematic view of typical fabrication process for 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays. (a) One-step self-assembled or self-catalyzed growth. (b) Sequential surface branched modification of pre-formed 1D nanostructured array. (c) Template-assisted growth (NR, nanorod; NS, nanosheet; NW, nanowire; NT, nanotubes). 
2.1 Hydrothermal growth of 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays
Hydrothermal synthesis is among the most effective and popular strategies for large-scale production of nanotree arrays. Using hydrothermal chemistry, various types of nanotree arrays with homojunctions or heterojunctions can be realized in a controlled manner by altering synthetic parameters, such as the metal precursor, reaction time, temperature, pH, additives, surfactants, stirring rate, and atmosphere. Different protocols have been proposed to successfully construct 3D hierarchical branched arrays, including (a) one-step self-assembly growth, (b) sequential (step-by-step) surface branched modification of pre-formed 1D morphology, and (c) template-assisted growth, as shown in Fig. 1. In general, metal oxide array architectures prepared using these routes are semi-crystalline in nature, requiring an additional post-annealing process to convert to crystalline products.

2.1.1 One-step self-assembly hydrothermal growth. 
Various 1D semiconducting metal oxide nanostructured arrays, such as TiO2 nanowires and ZnO nanorods, which grow in only the c-direction, have been prepared via a simple one-step hydrothermal synthesis.21,57,58 However, few reports have focused on the one-step hydrothermal growth of 3D metal oxide nanotree array architectures. Herein, the successful application of a one-step hydrothermal growth protocol to the fabrication TiO2 nanotree array is demonstrated (Fig. 1a). TiO2 is an n-type wide band gap semiconductor that is nontoxic and highly stable, and has been widely used in various applications, such as solar cells, photocatalysis, and Li-ion batteries. TiO2 crystallizes in three common crystal structures, namely anatase, rutile, and brookite. Most solution-processed TiO2 nanowire arrays grown on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates are rutile phase because of the small lattice mismatch (<2%) between FTO and rutile TiO2.59 Due to the larger amount of adsorbed dye and faster electron transport rate, superior photovoltaic performance is normally obtained by anatase TiO2 compared with its rutile counterpart.60–62 However, growing anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass is challenging because of the large lattice mismatch of ∼19% between FTO and anatase TiO2.63 Recently, our group demonstrated the first simple and facile one-step hydrothermal route to grow hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays, consisting of long TiO2 nanowire trunks and short nanorod branches, on FTO glass without any surfactant or template. Typically, hydrothermal growth occurs in a mixed precursor solution containing potassium titanium oxide oxalate (PTO), diethylene glycol (DEG), and H2O.40 Subsequently, this PTO/DEG/H2O system, which is capable of one-step hydrothermal growth of TiO2 nanotree arrays, has undergone a series of systematic investigations by adjusting its synthetic parameters, including PTO concentration, DEG/H2O volume ratio, reaction time, and hydrothermal temperature. As a result, the controllable synthesis of various nanotree array architectures has been achieved, which simultaneously provides precise control over the trunk diameter (200–600 nm)64 and length (120 nm–55 μm),40,43,65,66 crystal structure (anatase, rutile, or mixed anatase/rutile),64,66 trunks morphologies (1D nanowires/nanotubes or 2D nanosheets),65 and the geometry (diameter and length) and density of nanobranches.67–69 Intriguing TiO2 nanotree arrays with distinct morphologies have been prepared, as shown in Fig. 2a–e.40,65,68,69 The growth process of TiO2 nanotree arrays with anisotropic crystal structures prepared in the PTO/DEG/H2O system can be understood as the most plausible self-assembly mechanism, involving successive dissolution–nucleation-oriented attachment-induced growth–splitting–ripening procedures without pre-seeding treatment of conducting substrates.70 DEG has been employed as a capping reagent to hinder PTO hydrolysis and aid the directional growth of TiO2 nanocrystals, leading to the formation of intriguing nanotree array structures with trunks and branches, and allowing control of the intrinsic array morphologies.
 Fig. 2  Branched TiO2 nanotree arrays with different morphologies prepared by hydrothermal growth: (a) hierarchical TiO2 nanowires consisting of a long nanowire trunk and numerous nanorod branches.65 (b) Cactus-like TiO2 nanowires consisting of a nanosheet backbone and numerous nanorod branches.65 (c) Hyperbranched TiO2 nanoarrays consisting of long nanowire trunks, short nanorod branches, and tiny nanorod leaves (known as a tree with luxuriant foliage).69 (d) TiO2 nanowire–nanosheet hierarchical arrays.68 (e) TiO2 nanowire–nanosheet–nanorod hyperbranched arrays consisting of nanowire trunks and nanosheet leaves linked by nanorod branches.68 Adapted with permission from ref. 65, 68 and 69. Copyright 2014 Elsevier, 2014 Nature Publishing Group, and 2014 Elsevier. 


2.1.2 Sequential surface-branched modification of pre-formed 1D morphology. 
An ordered array of pre-formed 1D morphology can serve as the backbone for subsequent branched modification, which allows the transformation from simple 1D nanostructures to complex 3D hierarchical branched array architectures (Fig. 1b). This ensures a high surface area, reinforces light scattering and trapping, and suppresses the back reaction.
Such approaches were also adopted to fabricate various homojunction TiO2 nanotrees grown vertically on conducting substrates. These branched structures have been achieved by consecutive incorporation of well-defined 1D nanorods/nanowires or 2D nanosheet branches onto the surface of a pre-formed 1D morphology. This protocol allows better control of the length and density of the branches by adjusting the subsequent hydrothermal conditions, such as precursor concentration and reaction time. Successful demonstrations include rutile TiO2 nanorod branches on pre-formed rutile TiO2 nanorod trunks,38,71 and anatase TiO2 nanorod/nanosheet branches on pre-performed anatase TiO2 nanowire trunks.68,72 Using step-by-step hydrothermal treatment protocols, two novel types of 3D TiO2 hyperbranched array architecture have been realized in our group. One type of hyperbranched array consists of long TiO2 nanowires trunks, short TiO2 nanorod branches, and tiny TiO2 nanorod leaves (known as a tree with luxuriant foliage) (Fig. 2c).69 Another type is composed of nanowire trunks and nanosheet leaves (Fig. 2d) linked by nanorod branches (Fig. 2e).68
This method also potentially enables bandgap engineering and design by introducing various heterobranched array architectures, which is crucial for improving the performance of metal oxide array-based solar cells. Typically, heterogeneous composite-like nanotrees comprise trunks and branches with different crystal phases (i.e., anatase TiO2 and rutile TiO2) or with diverse material combinations (such as TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2). Compared with the aforementioned homobranched metal oxide array architectures, heterobranched growth is more challenging due to the crystal phase difference and the lattice mismatch at the heterogeneous material interface. For example, Lin et al. reported hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotube arrays composed of highly ordered anatase TiO2 nanotubes with small rutile nanobranches emerging on the tube walls.73 The subsequent branched modification is not limited to the pre-formed 1D nanostructured array scaffolds, and could, in principle, be applied to any type of 1D, 2D, or even 3D nanostructured backbone, as long as the backbone contains holes and is accessible by liquid precursor. A host of successful metal oxide stem/branch structures have been reported by others, including SnO2 nanowire/TiO2 nanorod,74 SnO2 nanowire/Fe2O3 nanorod,75 Co3O4 nanowire/MnO2 nanosheet,76 SnO2 nanowire/ZnO nanorod,77 and TiO2 nanowire/ZnO nanosheet78 branched nanostructures. Zhang et al. reported a hybrid ZnO nanorod/TiO2 nanosheet/CuO nanoneedle branched array architecture.79 Fan et al. fabricated Co3O4/NiO core–shell arrays on stainless steel substrate.80 This versatile surface modification method has also been extended to hollow spheres and hierarchical microspheres by our group to obtain branched nanowire-coated macroporous metal oxide electrodes with homogeneous or heterogeneous compositions (TiO2–TiO2, SnO2–TiO2, and Zn2SnO4–TiO2)70,81 and hyperbranched hierarchical microspheres with 3D interconnected networks.67


2.1.3 Template-assisted growth. 
In template-assisted growth methods, an ordered array of 1D nanowire can act as a template for the growth of other 1D nanostructured arrays. This has been demonstrated using a ZnO nanowire array to obtain a free-standing TiO2 nanotube array.25,82 After growth of TiO2 on the surface of the ZnO arrays, the ZnO nanowires were etched away in acidic medium to obtain TiO2 nanotubes. Using this method, 3D branched TiO2 nanotube networks have also been prepared (Fig. 1c). For example, a branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotube network was grown on transparent conducting oxide substrates83 and TiO2 nanotube-branched hollow nanofibers84 have been fabricated using ZnO nanorods as a sacrificial template and combining solution-processing routes with chemical etch treatments.

2.2 Vapor phase-based synthesis of 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays
Vapor phase-based synthesis also allows the fabrication of 3D branched, or even hyperbranched, nanotree arrays. In particular, vapor transport and deposition, vapor oxidation, and laser ablation, which usually involve a “self-catalyzed” growth mechanism, are common strategies for growing TiO2 nanotree arrays. For example, a highly oriented and hierarchically structured rutile TiO2 nanotree has been reported by Wu and coworkers using acid vapor oxidation (Fig. 3), where the titanium substrate acts directly as the titanium source and oxygen is provided by vapor with the assistance of HCl. The authors showed that HCl not only served as a catalyst to guide growth of rutile phase, but also as a corrosive agent to introduce defects that provided nucleation for both the trunk and successive growth of branches on the trunk surface.85 Recently, branched, and even hyperbranched, anatase TiO2 nanotrees with microscopic features have been fabricated using laser ablation (pulsed laser deposition) or pulsed chemical vapor deposition.29,86,87
 Fig. 3  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the growth process for rutile TiO2 nanoforests formed via HCl acid vapor oxidation. (e) SEM image of a typical individual nanotree.85 Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Solution-phase and vapor-phase syntheses are the two competing methods for fabricating 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays, but both have their advantages and drawbacks. In general, solution-based approaches have the advantages of high yield, low cost, and simplicity, enabling the facile production of 3D nanotree array architectures with a wide variety of morphologies (homogeneous or heterogeneous junction) by adjusting the precursor solution and preparation conditions at low temperatures. However, the products are semi-crystalline and/or defect-riddled in nature, and post-treatment (calcination or a hydrothermal process) is usually needed for conversion into final crystalline nanomaterials. In contrast, vapor-phase methods are capable of producing 3D nanotree arrays with high crystallinity and well-defined interfaces, and could provide subtle control of branches with designed placement and interconnectivity. However, this method is not widely used because of its elaborate procedures, sophisticated operating facilities, unsatisfactory yields, and high temperature. Long-term, the key challenge is to develop a synthetic method capable of large-scale production of high quality hierarchical metal oxide arrays with branched structures over broader dimensions and larger areas that will possess synergistic advantages for achieving high-performance photovoltaic devices.
3. 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays for solar cell applications
Solar cells, which harvest sunlight and directly convert it into electricity, are regarded as among the most effective methods for clean and sustainable energy production. The key challenge is to develop highly efficient solar cells in a cost-effective and environmentally friendly manner. The basic principle in solar cell research is to increase the optical adsorption of the active layer and/or reduce electron loss during the transport. This requires the scrupulous design of photoanodes and smart hybridization of specific active materials into purposely designed structures. 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays vertically grown on TCO substrate have been extensively studied and incorporated into solar cells as photoanodes (Fig. 4). In solar cells using the sensitization concept, including DSSCs, QDSSCs, and PSCs, the photoanode materials serve as scaffolds for anchoring sensitizers (such as dyes, quantum dots, and organometallic halide perovskites) and providing transport pathways for photogenerated electrons.44,88 This section highlights recent advances in 3D TiO2 nanotree array-based solar cells, including DSSCs (liquid and solid-state devices), QDSSCs, and PSCs.
 Fig. 4  Schematic structure of solar cells using 3D metal oxide nanotree arrays as a photoanode material. 
3.1 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays for DSSCs

3.1.1 Liquid-state DSSCs. 
In the last two decades, DSSCs have attracted considerable attention, emerging as a promising alternative to conventional silicon solar cells due to their high efficiency, low cost, and ease of fabrication. The three main components of DSSCs are the dye, redox shuttle, and photoanode, which play pivotal roles in device performance. Anode materials, such as nanostructured TiO2 semiconductor, provides an accessible surface area to anchor dye molecules for light harvesting. State-of-the-art DSSCs, with highest efficiencies exceeding 14%, comprise a TiO2 nanoporous electrode co-sensitized with alkoxysilyl-anchor dye and carboxy-anchor organic dye.89 However, electron transport in the nanoparticles is restricted by a random electrical pathway and percolation network, which are induced by excessive trapping and detrapping events occurring within enormous defects, surface states, and grain boundaries of the nanoparticulate films.90,91 Therefore, efforts have focused toward various types of one-dimensional (1D) semiconducting metal oxide nanostructures, including nanowires (NWs), nanorods (NRs), nanotubes (NTs), and nanofibers (NFs), which offer a direct transport pathway for photogenerated electrons that could efficiently enhance charge transport, hamper charge recombination, and markedly improve charge collection efficiency.21–28 Despite their undisputed advantages regarding efficient charge transport, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs employing normal 1D nanostructured photoanodes still lag behind standard mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystalline photoanodes, mainly because of severe limitations in dye-loading capacity, which result from insufficient surface area.29–31 To improve the PCE of DSSCs, it is crucial to maximize dye loading, the interfacial contact area of metal oxide/dye/electrolyte, and optical confinement, as well as improving the mobility of electrons in the semiconductor active layer to compete with charge recombination. In this regard, 3D metal oxide nanotree array architectures with synergistic advantages have attracted increasing attention. Recently, much progress has been made in TiO2 nanotree array-based DSSCs with enhanced photovoltaic performance due to increased light harvesting efficiency, which originates from a large dye-loading capacity and multiple light scattering of the branched structures. In this section, we describe the evolution of TiO2 nanotree array materials and their promising application in DSSCs.
3.1.1.1 Rutile TiO2 nanotree arrays. 
Generally, rutile TiO2 nanowires are easily grown on FTO glass substrates due to the small lattice mismatch (<2%) between FTO and rutile TiO2. Both the rutile TiO2 nanowire trunks and branches have been formed by hydrolysis of the Ti precursor (such as butyl titanate or titanium tetrachloride) in a corrosive HCl medium.38,71,92 For example, Lin et al. fabricated rutile TiO2 nanobranched arrays on FTO (Fig. 5a) via a two-step wet-chemistry synthetic route for DSSC application.38 The short-circuit density (Jsc) and PCE of the 3 μm branched rutile TiO2 nanorod array DSSCs were 10.05 mA cm−2 and 3.75%, respectively, which were three-fold higher than those of bare TiO2 nanorod array DSSCs. The authors proposed the most likely electron transport mechanism within such nanobranched arrays, in which photogenerated electrons from dye molecules quickly transfer from the TiO2 nanobranches to the collecting FTO substrates through the single-crystalline TiO2 nanorod trunk (Fig. 5b). Later, Feng et al. reported single crystal-like 3D rutile TiO2 branched nanowire arrays consisting of 1D branches epitaxially grown from the primary trunk (Fig. 5c). An atomic model was used to schematically illustrate the twinned structural relationship between the trunk and branch, which indicated that the nanobranches were epitaxially grown on the trunk along the (100) and (010) crystalline planes in four symmetrical directions with a typical angle of 65° between the c-axes of the trunk and branch. Such oriented assembled 3D branched nanowire arrays with a twin-structured coherent interface and four-fold symmetry should have few grain boundaries and lattice defects, which would facilitate charge transport along the 3D hierarchical nanowire arrays (Fig. 5d–g). The fast charge transport property of 3D branched nanowire arrays is best illustrated by the diffusion coefficient being two-fold higher in such arrays compared with randomly packed NP films (Fig. 5h).71
 Fig. 5  3D rutile TiO2 nanotree array structures in DSSCs. (a) SEM image and (b) a schematic sketch of the electron transfer mechanism of rutile TiO2 nanobranched arrays.38 (c–g) TEM images and atomic models, and (h) diffusion coefficients to show the twinned structural relationship between the trunk and branch, and the fast electron transport properties of 3D branched nanowires, respectively.71 Adapted with permission from ref. 38 and 71. Copyright 2011 The PCCP Owner Societies and 2014 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.1.2 Anatase TiO2 nanotree arrays. 
Owing to its superior dye adsorbing capability, better optical transparency, faster electron transport, and a lower charge carrier recombination rate, anatase TiO2 normally achieves better photovoltaic performance compared with rutile TiO2.60–62 However, direct growth of 1D anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on the FTO glass remains challenging due to the large lattice mismatch of ∼19% between them, not to mention the challenges regarding 3D nanotree arrays.63
Our first attempt to prepare a anatase TiO2 nanowire array on FTO glass was performed in the presence of sulfate, which led to a quasi-1D nanowire composed of oriented assembled anatase TiO2 nanoparticles.61 Another method for achieving 1D anatase TiO2 nanostructured arrays involves taking advantage of intermediate rod-shaped titanium compounds, such as Na-titanate (such as Na2Ti5O11) or K-titanate (such as K2Ti6O13) with highly anisotropic structures prepared using the hydrothermal reaction of titanium foil with alkaline NaOH or KOH solution. These compounds can be transformed into target anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays by ion exchange, to replace Na+ or K+ with H+, and subsequent calcination treatment.93,94 Based on this technique, our group developed hierarchical single-crystalline anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays consisting of 15 μm long nanowire trunks and a large number of short nanorod branches on Ti foil substrate and assembled fully flexible DSSCs with a PEDOT/ITO-PET plastic counter electrode, which yielded an impressive PCE of 4.32% (Fig. 6a).39
 Fig. 6  Construction of branched anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on metal substrate or transparent conducting oxide (TCO) glass. (a) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on Ti foil for fully flexible DSSC application.39 (b) SEM image of PLD TiO2 forest films and (c) J–V curves recorded under different light illumination condition for PLD TiO2 forest films with a thickness of 7 μm.29 Adapted with permission from ref. 29 and 39. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, the back-side illumination geometry of the opaque Ti substrate-based DSSC configuration leads to a high energy loss and increased travel distance for photogenerated electrons to reach the collecting electrode when incident light is illuminated through the transparent counter electrode.95,96 Luo et al. developed a lift-off transfer technique, involving growing forest-like TiO2 array architectures (∼7 μm) on Ti foil via a two-step hydrothermal process and then transferring the film onto FTO glass for DSSC application, achieving a PCE of 5.45%.51 The TiO2 nanotree-based DSSCs exhibited higher Jsc values than the nanorod-based DSSCs, which can be attributed to enhanced light absorption in the nanotree sample due to increased dye adsorption and light scattering. Sauvage and coworkers demonstrated a PLD method for fabricating vertically aligned anatase TiO2 forest arrays directly on FTO glass (Fig. 6b),29 which achieved a PCE of 5% for 7 μm thick films (Fig. 6c). By carefully controlling the PLD growth parameters, it is possible to mimic the natural growth of tree morphologies with different lengths as seen in nature for photosynthesis. However, its application in photovoltaic devices is still limited by complex technical requirements and difficulties in increasing the length of the array nanostructures.
Evidently, it is highly desirable yet challenging to form 3D hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanotree arrays with controlled lengths and distinct morphologies directly on FTO glass substrate via a facile one-step solution process. Recently, our group demonstrated a facile surfactant-free one-step hydrothermal route for fabricating 18 μm-long hierarchical branched anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays consisting of long TiO2 nanowire trunks and short nanorod branches on FTO glass by immersing the FTO glass into the mixed PTO, DEG and H2O precursor solution (Fig. 7a and b).40 Interestingly, the self-assembly growth of such hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass did not require a seeding agent on the substrate surface, and the growth mechanism was elucidated by the time-dependent (1–12 h) hydrothermal process, showing the transformation from sparse and smooth nanowire arrays to tree-like hierarchical branched nanowire arrays (Fig. 7c). DSSCs based on this hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanotree array film obtained an impressive PCE of 7.34% (Fig. 7d). Notably, configuring the branched TiO2 nanowires framework with a large amount of dendritic nanorod branches was beneficial for further increasing the surface area to promote dye uptake, while preserving the superior electron transport property. Furthermore, the proposed facile hydrothermal synthesis protocol using the mixed PTO/DEG/H2O solution is versatile and feasible for depositing hierarchical TiO2 nanotree arrays on arbitrary substrates, such as glass, metal foils, and metal wires.39,40,97 Furthermore, the hydrothermal synthesis route provides the greatest potential for controlling the crystallography and geometry of the branched nanowire arrays. For example, the crystal phase (rutile or anatase), stem control (nanowire, nanotube, or nanosheet), branch placement, hyperbranching control, branch length, diameter oscillations, and degree of hierarchy order, can be adjusted by selecting appropriate hydrothermal parameters.50,65,69,98
 Fig. 7  Pioneer fabrication of hierarchical branched anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass substrate via one-step hydrothermal growth. (a) XRD patterns and (b) SEM images of hierarchical branched TiO2 nanowire arrays. (c) Schematic illustration of formation of hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass. (d) J–V curves of DSSCs based on hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays prepared after 9 h with an additional TiO2 blocking layer; inset: corresponding IPCE spectrum.40 Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the follow-up work, various hierarchical anatase cactus-like branched TiO2 (CBT) nanowire arrays (Fig. 8c–e) with controllable morphologies directly grown on a TCO substrate were demonstrated in DSSC applications. The PTO/DEG/H2O system was carefully adjusted by altering the PTO concentration in the range 0.05–0.15 M with the optimized DEG/H2O volume ratio (Fig. 8a).65 This follow-up work allowed the controllable synthesis of hierarchical TiO2 nanowires with various trunk morphologies (1D nanowires or 2D nanosheets) and branch distributions (high-density nanowire branches with high aspect ratios or selectively germinated nanorods on the wing sides of nanosheet backbones), which exhibited distinct photovoltaic characteristics. DSSCs based on 7 μm-long CBT arrays (CBT-0.05 M) assembled with high-density and high-aspect-ratio nanorod branches exhibited a promising PCE of 6.43%, which was attributed to improved light harvesting efficiency resulting from a larger surface area and superior light scattering effect (Fig. 8b). Similarly, Lei et al. fabricated an all-nanosheet assembled branched TiO2 array architecture consisting of long TiO2 nanosheet trunks grafted with a large number of TiO2 nanosheet branches using the PTO/DEG/H2O system and refreshing the hydrothermal cycles. DSSCs based on ∼21 μm-thick TiO2 nanosheet-branched TiO2 nanosheet arrays achieved an outstanding PCE of 6.66%, which was attributed to the higher specific surface area for adsorbing more dye molecules, the superior light scattering capacity for boosted light-harvesting efficiency, and faster charge transport for more efficient charge collection.99
 Fig. 8  Morphology-controlled cactus-like branched TiO2 (CBT) arrays on TCO substrate for DSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of one-step synthesis of various CBT arrays on FTO glass prepared with different PTO precursor concentrations (0.05 M, 0.1 M, and 0.15 M). (b) J–V curves of DSSCs based on various CBT arrays. (c–e) SEM images of CBT-0.05 M, CBT-0.1 M, and CBT-0.15 M, respectively.65 Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
High specific surface area, fast electron transport, and pronounced light-scattering effect were indispensable for achieving a high performance photoanode, but were often mutually incompatible.100 To tackle the problem of low internal surface area of typical metal oxide array architectures, which results in insufficient dye uptake, a strategy of decorating the 1D backbone with a large number of anisotropic and dendritic nanorod branches to anchor more dye molecules is commonly used. Furthermore, another solution involves extending the length of the array architectures. Using this method, an ultra-long hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire array on FTO glass with multilayered configuration (MTNW) and lengths of up to ∼47 μm (Fig. 9a and b) was reported.66 Interestingly, the distinct morphologies of multilayer stacking, namely, dense TiO2 nanowires (DTNW), hierarchical TiO2 nanowires (HTNW), and loose TiO2 nanowires (LTNW), can be ascribed to the variation in concentration gradient during each constant hydrothermal cycle. When compared with a reference P25 nanoparticle film (thickness, ∼20 μm; PCE, 7.23%) with similar dye loading amounts, the enhanced efficiency of the MTNW arrays (PCE, 8.82%) could be ascribed to the superior light scattering ability for enhanced light-harvesting efficiency, efficient charge collection, electrolyte penetration, and suppressed charge recombination due to the unique 1D direct electric transfer pathway with less grain boundaries and defects.66 Furthermore, the effect of different sintered temperatures on MTNW array photoanodes was found to control the crystal phase of the samples (anatase, rutile, or mixed anatase/rutile TiO2), eventually leading to a high degree of crystallinity in anatase TiO2 samples when annealed at 550 °C. As a result, a milestone efficiency of 9.40% was successfully achieved for DSSCs based on a MTNW array photoanode (Fig. 9c), representing the highest efficiency reported for oriented TiO2 nanowire array-based DSSCs so far.
 Fig. 9  Ultra-long hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass for DSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of multistep hydrothermal fabrication of a three-layer TiO2 nanowire arrays on seeded FTO glass. (b) SEM image of MTNWs on FTO glass prepared after three hydrothermal cycles (3 × 9 h). (c) J–V curves of DSSCs based on ∼47 μm thick TiO2 hierarchical nanowire arrays, followed by annealing at 550 °C.66 Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.1.1.3 Hyperbranched TiO2 nanotree arrays. 
Although typical nanotree arrays composed of stems and branches can combine superior light-trapping, scattering, and prominent electron transport, their roughness factor is inferior to that of stereotyped nanoparticle photoanodes with a similar film thickness. Therefore, there is still plenty of space for further decoration of nanowire arrays with an increased branch packing density and even luxuriant foliage to construct the hyperbranched TiO2 nanotree arrays. In our follow-up work, we reported a hyperbranched anatase TiO2 nanowire (HBTNW) on an FTO glass substrate. Such hyperbranched arrays are formed by multiscale combination of elongated 1D features, imitating a wide-spreading tree with a trunk, branches, and leaves simultaneously, comprising a 1D long vertical TiO2 nanowire trunk coated with numerous 1D slender TiO2 nanorod branches, on which tiny 1D TiO2 nanorod leaves are anchored (Fig. 10a–c). These hyperbranched arrays overcome typical shortages of insufficient dye adsorption for conventional 1D smooth nanowire arrays or prototype hierarchical nanowire arrays when applied to DSSCs, and exhibit similar dye uptakes (90.10 nmol cm−2vs. 88.62 nmol cm−2) to nanoparticle counterparts of the same thickness.69 Moreover, this report achieved the first controllable synthesis of a family of vertically aligned array architectures, including smooth TiO2 nanowires (STNW, Fig. 10a), hierarchical TiO2 nanowires (HTNW, Fig. 10b), and hyperbranched TiO2 nanowires (HBTNW, Fig. 10c) in the same PTO/DEG/H2O hydrothermal system by carefully adjusting the hydrothermal conditions, such as temperature, reaction time, and hydrothermal cycle. DSSCs fabricated with an ∼8 μm-long hyperbranched nanowire array photoelectrode yielded an impressive PCE of 8.11%, which was much higher than that of the reference nanoparticles (diameter, ∼20 nm) counterpart (6.32%) due to the synergistic effects of high dye uptake and superior broadband light scattering for improved light harvesting, and faster charge transport for efficient charge collection (Fig. 10d and e). Furthermore, the electron transfer behavior within STNW, HTNW, HBTNW, and TNP was proposed, indicating the faster electron transport property of the oriented array architectures compared with the random network of TNP counterparts (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  Family of vertically aligned TiO2 nanowire array structures for DSSC applications. (a–c) TEM images of STNW, HTNW, and HBTNW, respectively. (d) Schematic device configuration using various nanowire arrays: grass (STNW), tree stem and branch without foliage (HTNW), and trees with luxuriant branches and foliage (HBTNW). (e) J–V curves of DSSCs based on STNW, HTNW, HBTNW, and TNP. (f) Schematic illustration of electron transfer pathways (ETPs) within STNW, HTNW, HBTNW, and TNP.69 Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Based on previous observations, enlargement of the surface area for array architectures was still restricted along either the axial or ambient direction. A strategy to maximize the surface area of 1D nanostructures in the omnidirectional dimension by providing ample germination sites to anchor more building units is still required. In this regard, the development of branched and hyperbranched TiO2 array architectures has witnessed significant progress. For example, a full solution-processed strategy has been demonstrated to fabricate anatase TNW–NS branched nanowire arrays (Fig. 11a) with epitaxial growth of lamellar NSs onto the surface of the TNW via an effective acid-thermal reaction, which provides ample “active sites” for the germination of more luxuriant NR branches onto the interstice of the well-aligned TNS and free space in the TNW scaffolds. Subsequently, novel hyperbranched titania array architectures, composed of nanowire trunks and nanosheet leaves linked by nanorod branches (TNW–NS–NR, Fig. 11a) have been developed, and their solar energy conversion efficiency has been assessed.68 Time-dependent hydrothermal experiments were conducted to systematically tailor the TiO2 branched structures and scrutinize the growth process of the TNW–NS hierarchical arrays and TNW–NS–NR hyperbranched arrays. Consequently, a significantly enhanced absolute full-sun efficiency of 9.09% was attained for the TNW–NS–NR-based cell, which was 77% higher than that of the pure TNW-based device (5.15%) (Fig. 11b). This enhancement could primarily arise from the synergistic effect of increased dye loading (two-fold increase), and improved light scattering and trapping to maximize light harvesting in the array architectures (Fig. 11c). Intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectra (IMPS/IMVS), electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), and schematic illustrations of electron transfer pathways (ETPs) within TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR have been used to illustrate the fast electron transport characteristics within the array architectures (Fig. 11d–f). Most importantly, this work fully realizes the potential of nanowire-based electrodes, inspired by taking full advantage of omnidirectional exploitation of geometric space in the oriented materials, and maximizing omnidirectional light harvesting in the array architectures for broad wavelengths of incident light.
 Fig. 11  Branched TNW–NS or hyperbranched TNW–NS–NR with optimized light harvesting for DSSC application. (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication process for various TiO2 array structures. (b) J–V curves of DSSCs based on TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (c) Plausible schematic model of light scattering and reflecting within simplified networks of TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (d) Electron transport time/lifetime as a function of light intensity and (e) EIS spectra of DSSCs based on TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (f) Schematic illustrations of electron transfer pathways (ETPs) within TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR.68 Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014 The Nature Publishing Group. 
Di Fonzo and coworkers reported a self-assembled hyperbranched tree-like TiO2 nanostructure composed of oriented nanocrystalline grains prepared via a PLD method. By varying the annealing temperature, a compromise between crystalline domain size and roughness factor was found at 450 °C. DSSCs based on such hyperbranched nanostructured TiO2 photoanode yielded a PCE of over 9% owing to the high specific surface area and broadband light scattering for maximized light harvesting and elongated structures, together with the anisotropic and directional crystal growth for facilitated electron transport.101
3.1.1.4 Other TiO2 nanotree array derivatives. 
Another type of 1D nanostructured arrays, TiO2 nanotubes, which possess large specific surface areas for dye adsorption and interior hollow tube-like channels to multiply the optical pathway, and provide easy electrolyte infiltration and beneficial electric properties for facilitated charge transport, have also attracted much research attention.102–104 Accordingly, 3D branched nanotube networks have been proposed as derived structures of 3D nanotree arrays. Hwang and coworkers reported a facile synthetic route to fabricate branched double-shelled (tube-in-tube) TiO2 nanotube arrays on TCO substrates using a ZnO nanorod template-directed method (Fig. 12a–f), which provided precise structural control over the tube–tube void, branch length, and population density.83 The complex 3D branched nanotubular network, which uses the inner channels of the double-shelled nanotubular stems for surface-modification with hollow branches, further increases the surface area for enhanced dye loading, resulting in an enhanced light-harvesting ability (Fig. 12g). DSSCs fabricated with such 3D branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotube networks exhibited an enhanced PCE of 5.74%, which is higher than those assembled using 1D nanotube arrays (4.42%) (Fig. 12h).
 Fig. 12  3D branched TiO2 nanotube network with double-shelled structures for DSSC applications. (a–f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis for 3D branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays. (g) SEM images of 3D double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays. (h) J–V curves of DSSCs based on 1D nanotubes and 3D branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays.83 Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Moreover, heterogeneous branched arrays comprising nanostructures of different crystal phases can facilitate charge transport if the energy level between different phases is matched.73 Lin and coworkers reported a facile and robust route to synthesize hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotube arrays composed of rutile nanorod branches on the walls of anatase TiO2 nanotube stems, while simultaneously allowing for the formation of a top layer of flower-shaped rutile TiO2 structures as an efficient light scattering layer (Fig. 13a and b). Time-dependent hydrothermal treatment was performed to scrutinize the growth process of these heterogeneous yet hierarchical structures. DSSCs based on such branched nanotube samples yielded a high PCE of 7.24%, representing a 68% increase in PCE compared with the device prepared using pure anatase TiO2 nanotubes (4.34%) (Fig. 13c). This was a direct consequence of the synergistic effects of greatly enhanced surface area for higher dye loading, improved light harvesting from efficient light scattering, and fast electron transport facilitated by heterojunctions between the anatase and rutile phases (Fig. 13d).73
 Fig. 13  3D hierarchically heterostructured TiO2 nanotube-nanorod branched networks for DSSC applications. (a) SEM images and (b) XRD pattern of hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotubes with heterogeneous anatase and rutile junctions. (c) J–V curves of DSSCs based on pure TiO2 nanotubes and hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotubes hydrothermally treated for different times. (d) Sketch of anatase/rutile heterostructured TiO2 nanotree arrays.73 Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 


3.1.2 Solid-state DSSCs. 
More recently, solid-state DSSCs (ssDSSCs), employing a solid hole-transporting material (HTM), have emerged as promising alternatives to standard liquid-electrolyte-based devices due to their long-term stability, flexible design, and lightweight cells.105,106 Many studies have focused on enhancing PCE by addressing the different physical phenomena and technical features of these devices. For example, the development of novel HTMs, such as spiro-MEOTAD and P3HT, and novel dyes with high extinction coefficients and durability have been studied.107–110 In general, the cell performance of ssDSSCs could be further improved if the solid-state system was combined with more effective semiconductor metal oxide photoanodes with prominent light scattering and trapping architectures. This would ensure a higher photon–sensitizer interaction, orient structures to improve electron transport via direct conduction pathways, and favor HTM infiltration and pore-filling, leading to higher generated currents and efficient charge collection. 3D TiO2 nanotree array architectures able to combine enhanced light trapping and scattering, facile HTM infiltration, and facilitate electron transport, are regarded as promising candidates for ssDSSC applications.
Vertically aligned thornbush-like TiO2 nanowires (TBWs, ∼9 μm long) on FTO glass, which consist of many nanoplate or nanorod branches on nanowire trunks, have been fabricated via a mild one-step hydrothermal reaction in the PTO/DEG/H2O system by Kim and coworkers.64 These TBWs were utilized as photoanodes for ssDSSCs. By adjusting the DEG/H2O volume ratios, different morphologies of TBWs with distinct diameters (200, 400, and 600 nm), crystal phases (anatase, rutile, and mixed anatase/rutile), and branch compositions (nanoplates or nanorods) were synthesized in a controlled manner. To assemble the ssDSSCs, a quasi-solid-state polymer electrolyte solution containing PEGDME, SiO2, MPII, and I2 dissolved in acetonitrile,111 or an all-solid-state polymer electrolyte of PEBII (Mw = 15000 g mol−1)112 was dropped on the N719-sensitized TBW photoanodes. A PCE of 5.2% was obtained for ssDSSCs fabricated with 200 nm TBW arrays (TBW200), which was higher than that of the TBW400 and TBW600 arrays. This result was due to the higher surface area, pure anatase phase, better scattering properties, and superior charge transport of the TBW200 array. To further increase the surface area and interconnectivity of the TBWs, surface modification with a graft-copolymer-directed organized mesoporous TiO2 and utilization of a PEBII solid-state electrolyte were employed, which led to an enhanced PCE of 6.7%. In their follow-up work, Kim and coworkers again optimized the DEG/H2O ratio in the PTO/DEG/H2O hydrothermal system to obtain long hierarchical pine tree-like anatase TiO2 nanotube (PTT) arrays consisting of vertically oriented long nanotube stems (diameter, 100–300 nm) for facilitating charge transport and many short nanorod branches (length, 230–430 nm) for high dye loading (Fig. 14a and b).50 Furthermore, the solid-state polymer electrolyte of PEBII was used to fabricate ssDSSCs. These ssDSSCs assembled with 19 μm-long PTT arrays exhibited an outstanding PCE of 8.0%, which was two-fold higher than that of commercially available dyesol nanorod paste (4.0%) and is among the highest values obtained for N719 dye-based ssDSSCs (Fig. 14c). This superior performance can be attributed to the large surface area, improved electron transport, and interconnected and porous network for easy electrolyte infiltration and reduced TiO2/electrolyte interfacial resistance.
 Fig. 14  Pine tree-like TiO2 hierarchical array architectures for ssDSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of fabrication technique and (b) TEM image of pine tree-like hierarchical TiO2 nanotubes (PTT) arrays. (c) J–V curves of ssDSSCs fabricated with different PTT arrays (PTT1, PTT2, and PTT3 are pine-tree like TiO2 nanotubes with film thicknesses of 13.5, 16, and 19 μm, respectively).50 Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 
Di Fonzo and coworkers reported applying the first generation of forest-like TiO2 arrays to liquid-type DSSCs.29 Although interesting results were obtained, efficiency remained lower than for the standard mesoporous nanocrystalline photoanode, mainly due to severe limitations in roughness factor and dye-loading capacity, which led to lower generated photocurrents. Subsequently, the authors demonstrated improved optical density and PCE in ssDSSCs with a photoanode architecture comprising an array of hierarchical tree-like hyperbranched nanostructures (trees with branches and leaves) self-assembled from the PLD methods in the gas phase (Fig. 15a and b). ssDSSCs based on arrays of hyperbranched TiO2 nanostructures on FTO glass sensitized with D102 dye and infiltrated with spiro-OMeTAD as electrolyte showed a maximum PCE of 3.96%. This was a significant efficiency enhancement (66%) with respect to the reference mesoporous photoanode, which was mainly due to the peculiar hyperbranched structure with high roughness factor for optimal dye uptake, broadband light scattering, and efficient electron transport (Fig. 15c and d).86
 Fig. 15  Hyperbranched TiO2 nanotrees for ssDSSC applications. (a and b) Sketch and SEM image of TiO2 hyperbranched arrays architectures fabricated using PLD technique. (c) Light harvesting efficiency and (d) J–V curves of ssDSSCs based on TiO2 hyperbranched arrays and TiO2 nanoparticles sensitized with D102 dye.86 Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3D hierarchical metal oxide nanotree arrays overcome the typical limitations of 1D nanostructures and 0D reference nanocrystalline films. When applied to ssDSSCs, they show high surface areas for sensitizer loading, microscopic feature sizes for broadband light scattering and trapping, well-aligned structures for short carrier diffusion distance, and fast electron transport, resulting in efficient charge collection. Furthermore, they have an interconnected structure with large gaps and high porosity for effective pore-filling of solid electrolytes with large molecular volumes. These advantages are a promising foundation, showing great potential for next-generation high-performance solid-state devices composed of highly conductive solid-state electrolytes, and optimized photoanode structures and sensitizers (dyes, polymers, or quantum dots).

3.2 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays for QDSSCs
Derived from DSSCs, QDSSCs are devices in which QDs act as sensitizers that are adsorbed on a porous metal oxide film to harvest light and inject electrons into the metal oxide. QDSSCs could play a leading role in providing scalable and inexpensive solar energy, owing to their unique optical and electrical properties, such as size tunable optical response, high extinction coefficient, quantum confinement, solution processability, and multiple-exciton generation with single-photon absorption.113–115 The theoretical maximum efficiency of QDSSCs has been predicted as up to 44% due to the multiple exciton generation of QDs, which is much higher than the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit (∼31%) for any type of bulk semiconductor-based single-junction solar cell.116,117 Much effort has been focused on developing a wide range of QDs sensitizers. For example, CdX, PbX, CuInX (X = S, Se, Te), Zn–Cu–In–Se, and Cu–In–Ga–Se, have been employed in QDSSCs, resulting in good photovoltaic performance with PCEs approaching 12%.118–126 These sensitizers are decorated on a wide band gap metal oxide framework (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, Zn2SnO4) that acts as a photoanode. Among various QDs, CdS and CdSe are attractive and have been extensively studied owing to their high light harvesting potential in the visible-light region.127,128 CdS/CdSe cosensitization has been shown to broaden the optical absorption and enable ultrafast electron transport and high charge collection efficiency in solar cells.118,129
However, improved PCE efficiency can be achieved by optimizing the porous structure of the metal oxide film.130 Although the structure of QDSSCs is somewhat different to that of DSSCs, the strategy for assembling 3D hierarchical nanotree array photoanodes is effective for improving the performance of QDSSCs. Recently, improved performance in devices based on QD-sensitized 3D branched metal oxide nanotree arrays has been demonstrated owing to the high and uniform loading of QDs on the nanotree film for efficient light harvesting and favorable energy band alignment at metal oxide/QD interfaces for easy electron–hole separation and efficient electron injection.
An example of using hierarchical branched anatase TiO2 nanowires as host materials for QDSSCs has recently been reported, as shown in Fig. 16a. When sensitized with CdS/CdSe QDs, the devices yielded an impressive PCE of 4.2%, which was 30% higher than that of smooth nanowire devices (3.23%) due to the superior light-scattering ability of the 3D geometry for enhanced light-harvesting efficiency and the prominent charge-collection efficiency, which benefited from the additional growth of branches for efficient electron injection (Fig. 16b). The thickness of the CdS and CdSe shell layer was confirmed by high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The results indicated that the QD loading was thinner on the hierarchical TiO2 nanowires due to the larger surface area compared with smooth nanowires using an equal amount of QD deposition on both smooth and hierarchical nanowires. The most plausible model for electron injection and transport within two such photoanodes has been simplified and proposed (Fig. 16a). Detailed electrochemical analysis indicated that QDSSCs based on hierarchical TiO2 nanowires exhibited a longer electron lifetime and higher charge collection efficiency (Fig. 16c).72
 Fig. 16  Hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures for QDSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process, and electron injection and transport within smooth TiO2 nanowires and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires. (b) J–V curves and (c) charge-collection efficiencies of QDSSCs based on smooth TiO2 nanowires and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires.72 Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
In addition to 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array photoanodes with single components, hybrid heterostructured array architectures consisting of trunks and branches with different types of metal oxide show great potential for producing efficient QDSSCs by combining the advantages of each component. Our group developed two hybrid TiO2 nanowire/ZnO nanorod (TNW/ZNR) branched arrays and TiO2 nanowire/ZnO nanosheet (TNW/ZNS) branched arrays.131 The vertically aligned TNW was applied as the backbone, and ZNS and ZNR branches were subsequently grown on the TNW using a seed-assisted hydrothermal technique with the same Zn precursors, but in the presence or absence of sodium citrate (Fig. 17a). For TNW/ZNS, lamellar nanosheets uniformly covered the surface of the TNW backbone, interconnecting to form a porous network (Fig. 17b). For TNW/ZNR, numerous ZNR branches were grown on the TiO2 backbone (Fig. 17c). The QDSSC based on the 3D hybrid hierarchical TNW/ZNS photoanode exhibited the best PCE of 4.57%, which was higher than that using pristine TNW (PCE, 2.75%). The EIS, IMPS, and IMVS measurements indicated that the TiO2/ZnO hybrid arrays-based device had lower recombination resistance, resulting in an increased charge recombination rate compared with the pristine 1D TNW counterpart, which hindered electron transport (longer electron transport time) and shortened the electron lifetime. The interfacial engineering or surface passivation was anticipated to be helpful in relieving these issues. However, the enhanced PCE for the 3D hybrid array-based devices can be attributed to the superior light scattering of branched architectures for enhanced light harvesting, and good contact with front electrode, which generated higher Jsc and FF values.131 Inspired by the hyperbranched TNW–TNS–TNR array architectures, hyperbranched TNW–TNS–ZNR hybrid arrays have also been developed (Fig. 17d and e). Combining the utilization of the Cu2S counter electrode, QDSSCs based on hyperbranched TNW–TNS–ZNR hybrid arrays achieved an optimized PCE of up to 5.38%, which is higher than their TNW–TNS array (3.75%) and pristine TNW array (2.85%) counterparts. This superior PCE can be attributed to the maximized light harvesting efficiency and charge collection efficiency of the TNW–TNS–ZNR heterostructured arrays.132
 Fig. 17  Branched TiO2/ZnO hybrid array architectures for QDSSCs application. (a) Schematic diagram of step-by-step synthesis of TNW/ZNS and TNW/ZNR hybrid arrays. SEM images of (b) TNW/ZNS and (c) TNW/ZNR hybrid arrays.131 (d) Schematic illustration and (e) SEM image of TNW–TNS–ZNR hyperbranched hybrid arrays.132 Adapted with permission from ref. 131 and 132. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3D hierarchical metal oxide nanotree arrays with homogeneous or heterogeneous structures have been identified as promising morphologies in QDSSC applications due to their enhanced light scattering, reduced charge recombination, and efficient charge collection within such photoanodes. However, in this case the quantum effect is not fully involved. Competing with typical DSSCs requires optimization of the adsorption status of the QDs and QD-sensitized electrode structure, including the integration of a suitable wide band gap matrix, high coverage, and band alignment of the QDs. This would benefit both electron transfer and collection, leading to a better PCE of the corresponding QDSSCs. We expect that a much more efficient QDSSC could be obtained if 3D branched or hyperbranched metal oxide arrays were combined with other types of QD (ZnTe/CdSe, CdTe/CdSe, and CdSeTe).133,134 The lower efficiency compared with their DSSC counterparts, and the successful progress made in DSSCs, means that great opportunities remain for further research work on QDSSCs.
3.3 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays for PSCs
Originating from the DSC concept, PSCs, which use organometallic halide perovskite compounds, CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br or I), as light harvesters, have received much research attention due to their low cost, ease of fabrication, and high solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency.9,10,107,135,136 Solution-processed PSCs are beginning to revolutionize photovoltaic technologies by providing cost-effective and highly efficient alternatives to traditional DSSCs, silicon solar cells, and other thin film (such as CdTe and CuInGaSe) solar cells. These perovskite materials possess fascinating properties, such as a tunable bandgap,137 high absorption coefficients,138 long charge carrier (electron–hole) diffusion lengths,139 and low-temperature solution processability.109 Since Miyasaka and co-workers first reported sensitized-concept PSCs comprising CH3NH3PbI3, mesoporous TiO2, and liquid electrolytes in 2009,140 much effort has been focused on morphology control for each function layer,141,142 device architecture optimization,107,135,143 perovskite film crystallization modulation,144–148 and interfacial engineering.149–151 In a short period, the PCE of PSC devices has been boosted from 3.8% to 22.1%.140,152 The hybrid perovskite material exhibits ambipolar characteristics, and is capable of transporting electrons and holes. This makes PSCs feasible and versatile in diverse architectures, such as mesoscopic135 and planar structures.153 In mesoscopic PSCs, a mesoporous semiconducting metal oxide, such as TiO2, serves as not only the nanostructured scaffold for perovskite loading, but also the electron transporting layer (ETL) to selectively extract photogenerated electrons from the perovskite light absorber and efficiently transport them to the front electrode. The morphology, thickness, and crystallinity of ETL and the properties of the ETL/perovskite interface play a crucial role in determining cell performance.154
Similar to their applications in DSSCs, the utilization of 1D TiO2 nanostructured thin films has led to improvements in PSCs and is, therefore, regarded as a promising alternative ETL in PSCs owing to their unique advantages, such as facilitating electron transport with straight pathways and enhancing light harvesting by light scattering.155–160 Having evolved from 1D array structures, 3D hierarchical TiO2 nanotree arrays consisting of a 1D trunk and branch building blocks, can also be used to build high-performance PSCs. The distinct difference in PSCs is the significant reduction in film thickness of the TiO2 nanotree films (normally less than 1 μm) due to the high absorption coefficient and long charge carrier diffusion length of the perovskite materials.161 Using a ZnO nanowire template-assisted surface-reaction-limited pulsed chemical vapor deposition technique, Wang and coworkers prepared a 3D branched TiO2 nanowire architecture with a mixed anatase/rutile phase. PSC based on ∼600 nm-long 3D branched TiO2 nanowire arrays achieved a PCE of 9.0% and largely suppressed the J–V hysteresis effect (Fig. 18a and b).162 Mahmood et al. demonstrated a 3D anatase TiO2 nanorod-nanofiber hyperbranched array (Fig. 18c) prepared via a multi-step electrospinning and hydrothermal route. Mesostructured PSCs based on these hyperbranched TiO2 arrays obtained a maximum PCE of 15.50% owing to superior light harvesting, suppressed recombination losses, and enhanced charge collection efficiency.163 Using the PTO/DEG/H2O hydrothermal system, Rachel and coworkers fabricated a thin film of dendritic anatase TiO2 nanowires (Fig. 18d) on FTO glass substrates with a controllable film thickness (∼120 nm to 4 μm) by adjusting the precursor concentration, solvent composition, and reaction time. The dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin film showed adequate density and good surface coverage on the FTO substrate, which ensured the reduction of film thickness to ∼200 nm while simultaneously maintaining good hole-blocking properties. In particular, the multifunctionality of this dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin film can be embodied in: (a) the thin film characteristics, unique 1D building blocks, and 3D interconnected networks for efficient electron transport; (b) the porous nanowire network for good perovskite infiltration, forming an intimate TiO2/perovskite interface; (c) the 3D branched configuration for efficient light confinement, which improves light harvesting efficiency; and (d) the tree-like geometry with wires of various orientations that could effectively block direct contact between the hole-transporting layer and FTO, or between the back electrode and FTO, even in the absence of a TiO2 blocking layer. As a result, PSCs constructed using optimized dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin films yield PCEs of up to 14.2% with a Jsc of 20.32 mA cm−2, Voc of 993 mV, and FF of 0.70 (Fig. 18d and e).43
 Fig. 18  3D branched or hyperbranched TiO2 nanotree arrays for PSC applications. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a PSC prepared using a 3D branched TiO2 nanowire ETL (scale bar is 500 nm); (b) J–V curves of PSC based on 3D branched TiO2 nanowire ETL, showing largely suppressed hysteresis; inset: top view SEM image of tree-like branched TiO2 morphology.162 (c) 3D hyperbranched TiO2 nanofiber-nanorod array.163 (d) J–V curve of PSC based on 3D dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin film; inset: SEM images of pure FTO and FTO/ATNW substrates. (e) Schematic of completed PSC device constructed with dendritic TiO2 nanowire showing efficient light harvesting and charge-carrier separation.43 Adapted with permission from ref. 43, 162, and 163. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 Wiley, and 2015 Wiley. 
The 3D branched TiO2 nanotree array architectures exhibited several advantages, namely a higher surface area and porosity for efficient perovskite infiltration, superior light scattering for enhanced light harvesting, and a 3D interconnected network for improved electron transport, suppressed charge recombination, and efficient charge collection. In particular, the stem of the 3D nanotree served as a rapid charge-conducting channel to facilitate electron transport to the front electrode, while the large number of branches provided a much higher volume density of nucleation sites for perovskite deposition, allowing more efficient charge separation and extraction. These advantages make 3D branched TiO2 nanotree arrays superior ETL candidates for PSCs. We believe that constructing 3D branched metal oxide nanotree array architectures with heterogeneous structures by combining different semiconductor components according to the matched band-alignment principle would allow the fabrication of high-performance PSCs with enhanced PCE and improved stability.
4. Conclusion and perspective
3D branched metal oxide nanotree arrays have sparked tremendous research interest in recent years. Herein, we have provided a systematic review of the synthesis of 3D branched TiO2 nanotree arrays, and provided a snapshot of the latest progress in photovoltaic applications.
In the synthesis section, we provide a concise overview of common routes toward the fabrication of branched nanotree arrays based on solution-phase or vapor-phase routes, including one-step self-assembly hydrothermal growth, sequential surface branched modification of pre-formed 1D morphology, template-assisted growth, and one-step self-catalyzed growth. Solution-processed synthesis enables the facile production of 3D branched metal oxide nanotree arrays with high yields and a rich variety of morphologies by adjusting reaction parameters such as temperature, precursor concentration, additives, and solvent compositions. Although the vapor-phase method allows subtle control of branch placement with a high crystalline quality and a well-defined interface, its exploitation has been limited by harsh experimental requirements, such as high temperatures, high costs, sophisticated growth facilities, and toxic source materials. New and improved synthetic technologies and novel fabrication processes to provide better control over structural complexity, composition uniformity, desired morphology and structure, facets, surface chemistry, interface electronics, and the yield of branched array architectures are needed to help solve the variety of synthetic challenges currently faced by researchers. The feasibility of scalable production and environmentally friendly growth (using earth-abundant and nontoxic materials) in a simple and cost-effective manner for the fabrication of high-quality 3D semiconductor metal oxide branched nanotree array structures is of great concern, and will become a future trend.
The application of 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays in emerging solar energy conversion technology, namely solar cells (DSSCs, QDSSCs, and PSCs), is highlighted. Throughout this review, 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays are shown to be the most promising materials currently, for example, as replacements for randomly-packed 0D nanoparticulate films and oriented 1D array nanostructures. These arrays enhance the efficiency of solar cells due to their unique geometrical characteristics (3D branched tree-like structure with interconnected porous network) and excellent optical and electronic properties. The 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays enhance the efficiency of solar cells in four main ways. Firstly, the 3D branched array architectures provide an enlarged surface area compared with the parent 1D scaffold or even possess higher surface areas than their nanocrystalline counterparts, which can lead to abundant sensitizer loading (such as dyes, QDs, and perovskite). Secondly, the strong light trapping and scattering efficiency of the 3D nanotree arrays can contribute to improved optical absorption and enhanced light harvesting efficiency in solar cells due to the microscopic feature size in their 3D geometry. Thirdly, relatively fast electron transport and inhibited charge recombination within 3D nanotree array-based photoanodes can benefit charge collection from active semiconductor materials to the external circuit. Finally, the multiscale inner porous structure resulting from the interconnected and interweaved network of 3D hierarchically branched array architectures also improves the permeation and diffusion of light harvesters/electrolytes/hole-transporting materials in the photoanodes, forming good interfacial contact at the relevant interfaces.
Although the advantages of 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays on TCO substrates have been well documented, and many representative examples have demonstrated their outstanding performance in photovoltaic technologies, significant challenges remain, as summarized below:
(1) The 3D TiO2 nanotree array structure in solar cell applications has drawbacks for charge recombination due to the augmented recombination sites compared with the pristine 1D nanostructured arrays, resulting in lower charge collection efficiency. This turns quantifying the charge transport and recombination loss into a delicate gain-loss balance to obtain an optimized PCE. Overcoming this challenge will require more insightful understanding of the relationship between device performance and material structure, and of the theoretical dynamics of charge separation and transport in specific device architectures. This would lead to rationally designed metal oxide-based heterogeneous composites with optimized interfacial engineering that allows the surface chemistry and band gap to be tailored, which is a necessary step on the path to further exploring the merits of branched arrays materials for enhanced device performance, such as optical absorption, electron or ion transport, and reduced charge recombination with oxidized species in the electrolyte or at the interfaces. For example, regarding using the branched array architectures with different material combinations (such as SnO2/TiO2, SnO2/ZnO, ZnO/TiO2) in photoelectric conversion devices, such as solar cells, further work should achieve more ideal structures that can satisfy the incompatible requirements of large internal surface area to ensure sufficient sensitizer loading, superior light scattering to guarantee efficient light utilization, fast electron transport to enable efficient charge collection, and high porosity for ease of sensitizer infiltration and electrolyte diffusion.
(2) As the 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays are grown vertically on the TCO substrates, their growth could theoretically be planted onto arbitrary substrates, especially flexible substrates, to make 3D nanotree arrays promising materials for the construction of fully flexible photovoltaic devices.
(3) Potential applications of 3D branched metal oxide array architectures on TCO substrates are not limited to solar cells. Instead, these architectures also showcase great potential in other energy-related applications, such as supercapacitors, photocatalysis, water splitting, gas sensors, photodetectors, fuel cells, and Li-ion batteries.
In short, significant effort should be dedicated to optimizing branched array nanostructures to develop optoelectronic devices with high efficiency, low cost, and long lifespans. Although considerable progress has been made, studies into 3D metal oxide nanotree arrays in photoelectric conversion and other energy-related fields are still in their infancy, which leaves plenty of scope for follow-up research topics in this field.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the NSFC (51472274), GDUPS (2016), the Program of Guangzhou Science and Technology (201504010031), the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities, and the NSF of Guangdong Province (S2013030013474).
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weintraub, Y. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8981–8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. Duan, H. Zhang, Q. Tang, B. He and L. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17497–17510 CAS .
D. H. Chen, F. Z. Huang, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2206–2210 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, W. S. Chi, J. T. Park, J. K. Koh, D. K. Roh and J. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Dong, X. Y. Lai, J. E. Halpert, N. L. Yang, L. X. Yi, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Z. Y. Tang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1046–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, J. Qi, D. Wang and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6914–6918 CAS .
X. Y. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604–5618 CAS .
H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15475–15489 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10092–10109 CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuang, J. Brillet, P. Chen, M. Takata, S. Uchida, H. Miura, K. Sumioka, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Zhuge, J. J. Qiu, X. M. Li, X. D. Gao, X. Y. Gan and W. D. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1330–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1892 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Ye, X. K. Xin, C. J. Lin and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sauvage, F. Di Fonzo, A. L. Bassi, C. S. Casari, V. Russo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, C. E. Bottani, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2562–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, B. J. Li, H. Wang, W. X. Zhao, H. Huang, C. L. Liang, X. Yu, Z. Liu and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17531–17538 RSC .
M. Lv, D. Zheng, M. Ye, J. Xiao, W. Guo, Y. Lai, L. Sun, C. Lin and J. Zuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1615–1622 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19100–19108 CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Ren, Y. Guo and P.-X. Gao, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 2980–2993 RSC .
S. Hoang and P.-X. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600683 CrossRef .
J.-H. Yun, L. Wang, R. Amal and Y. Ng, Energies, 2016, 9, 1030 CrossRef .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, Z. Chen, K.-Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772–6801 CAS .
J. Qu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2003–2009 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Bai, Q. Wu, W. Zhou, H. Zhang, J. Li and L. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6977–6982 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5750–5757 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, B. X. Lei, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim and K. Yong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2109–2116 RSC .
M. McCune, W. Zhang and Y. Deng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3656–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, F. Z. Huang, D. H. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3264–3272 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Sun, Y. Jiang, X. Zhong, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 130–156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Fang and H. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1139–1159 CAS .
K. Fan, J. Yu and W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 319–344 RSC .
H. Chen and S. Yang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 96–108 RSC .
J. Tian and G. Cao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320–321, 193–215 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Cheng and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 327–343 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Roh, W. S. Chi, H. Jeon, S. J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 379–386 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shao, J. Sun, L. Gao, S. Yang and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6824–6830 RSC .
R. I. Walton, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 230–238 RSC .
W. D. Shi, S. Y. Song and H. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5714–5743 RSC .
D. Wang, F. Qian, C. Yang, Z. H. Zhong and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 871–874 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bierman, Y. K. A. Lau, A. V. Kvit, A. L. Schmitt and S. Jin, Science, 2008, 320, 1060–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, M. J. Bierman and S. A. Morin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1472–1480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. G. Ndifor-Angwafor, D. J. Riley and M. N. R. Ashfold, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 431, 352–357 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Kuang, Q. P. Luo, B. X. Lei, X. Y. Yu and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8709–8714 RSC .
C. Howard, T. Sabine and F. Dickson, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 1991, 47, 462–468 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, Y. F. Wang, J. M. Liu, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1352–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Sedach, T. J. Gordon, S. Y. Sayed, T. Furstenhaupt, R. H. Sui, T. Baumgartner and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5063–5069 RSC .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8095–8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Roh, W. S. Chi, S. H. Ahn, H. Jeon and J. H. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1384–1391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, X. D. Guo, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3968 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4816–4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sheng, D. Q. He, J. Yang, K. Zhu and X. J. Feng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1848–1852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Rao, W. Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, D. Zheng, M. Lv, C. Chen, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3039–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Cheng, Y. Y. Tay, H. H. Hng and H. J. Fan, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 26, 2254–2260 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, C. Cheng, J. P. Liu, Y. Y. Tay, J. Jiang, X. T. Jia, J. X. Zhang, H. Gong, H. H. Hng, T. Yu and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2439–2445 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Liu, J. Jiang, C. W. Cheng, H. X. Li, J. X. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Cheng, B. Liu, H. Y. Yang, W. W. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Chen, S. F. Yu, J. X. Zhang, H. Gong, H. D. Sun and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3069–3076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. X. Wang, C. H. Sun, Y. Zhao, S. Y. Zhou, P. Chen and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3909–3911 RSC .
Z. Y. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. P. Du, X. Y. Qi, Y. Z. Huang, C. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5374–5378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, Y. Q. Zhang, X. L. Wang, C. D. Gu, X. B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3887–3901 CAS .
C. K. Xu, P. H. Shin, L. L. Cao, J. M. Wu and D. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, X. Li, X. Gao, X. Gan, B. Weng, L. Li, Z. Yuan, Z. Shi and Y.-H. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23411–23417 RSC .
H. Han, P. Sudhagar, T. Song, Y. Jeon, I. Mora-Sero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang and U. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2810–2812 RSC .
X. F. Yang, J. L. Zhuang, X. Y. Li, D. H. Chen, G. F. Ouyang, Z. Q. Mao, Y. X. Han, Z. H. He, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and J. C. Yu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Passoni, F. Ghods, P. Docampo, A. Abrusci, J. Marti-Rujas, M. Ghidelli, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, M. Binda, S. Guarnera, A. L. Bassi, C. S. Casari, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. Di Fonzo, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10023–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, Y. Hara, C. Sun, M. A. Anderson and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3413–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J.-i. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
M. J. Bierman and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1050–1059 CAS .
T. Berger, T. Lana-Villarreal, D. Monllor-Satoca and R. Gomez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9936–9942 CAS .
H. Li, Q. Yu, Y. Huang, C. Yu, R. Li, J. Wang, F. Guo, S. Jiao, S. Gao, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Wang and L. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13384–13391 CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2807–2824 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, J. Y. Liao, H. Y. Chen, X. Y. Yu, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18057–18062 RSC .
B. X. Lei, J. Y. Liao, R. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15228–15233 CAS .
L. Chu, L. Li, J. Su, F. Tu, N. Liu and Y. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4420 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, J. Khan, Z. Chai, Y. Yuan, X. Yu, P. Liu, M. Wu and W. Mai, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
B.-X. Lei, X.-F. Zheng, H.-k. Qiao, Y. Li, S.-N. Wang, G.-L. Huang and Z.-F. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4362–4369 RSC .
L. Passoni, F. Giordano, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. Di Fonzo, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 93180–93186 RSC .
S. So, I. Hwang and P. Schmuki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 849–854 CAS .
H. Wang, H. Li, J. Wang, J. Wu, D. Li, M. Liu and P. Su, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 744–750 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Su, H. Y. Li, J. S. Wang, J. S. Wu, B. X. Zhao and F. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 347, 636–642 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. Q. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486–U494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
J. T. W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mor, S. Kim, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar, J. Basham and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4250–4257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Roh, J. A. Seo, W. S. Chi, J. K. Koh and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11079–11085 RSC .
J. K. Koh, J. Kim, B. Kim, J. H. Kim and E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1641–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. B. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Tian, R. Gao, Q. F. Zhang, S. G. Zhang, Y. W. Li, J. L. Lan, X. H. Qu and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18655–18662 CAS .
T. L. Li, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315–5324 CAS .
X. Y. Yu, J. Y. Liao, K. Q. Qiu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9494–9500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, I. Mora-Sero, Z. X. Pan, K. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Y. Feng, G. Yang, X. H. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15913–15922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Zhu, J. H. Qiu, K. Y. Yan and S. H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4000–4005 CAS .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Wang, H. J. Zhu, Y. M. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Tao, S. Hark, X. D. Xiao and Q. A. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3302–3308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Myung, D. M. Jang, T. K. Sung, Y. J. Sohn, G. B. Jung, Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim and J. Park, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3789–3800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Peng, C. Yang and X. Zhong, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Z. Du, J.-S. Hu, Z. Pan, Q. Shen, J. Sun, D. Long, H. Dong, L. Sun, X. Zhong and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4201–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Peng, J. Du, Z. Pan, N. Nakazawa, J. Sun, Z. Du, G. Shen, J. Yu, J.-S. Hu, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5328–5336 CAS .
G. Zhu, L. K. Pan, T. Xu and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3146–3151 CAS .
X. Y. Yu, B. X. Lei, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1396–1400 RSC .
J. J. Tian, E. Uchaker, Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4466–4472 CAS .
A. Kolay, P. N. Kumar, S. K. Kumar and M. Deepa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4607–4617 RSC .
H.-L. Feng, W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. Rao, Q. Wan, L.-B. Li, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5199–5205 CAS .
H.-L. Feng, W.-Q. Wu, H.-S. Rao, L.-B. Li, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14826–14832 CAS .
S. Jiao, Q. Shen, I. Mora-Seró, J. Wang, Z. Pan, K. Zhao, Y. Kuga, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 908–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Kim and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 85–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Y. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, H. Tao, P. Qin, W. Ke and G. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3970–3990 CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Huang, S. Wei, L. Zheng, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6209–6221 RSC .
H. S. Kim, S. H. Im and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seol, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12463–12470 CAS .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, F. Li, A. R. Pascoe, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
        .
M. Z. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, A. R. Pascoe, W.-Q. Wu, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, J. Zhong, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601715 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Wu, F. Huang, D. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502027 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Wu, D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, M. Paulose, M. I. Dar, T. Moehl, N. Arora, P. Gao, O. K. Varghese, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Small, 2015, 11, 5533–5539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S.-M. Dai, P. Zhu, L.-L. Deng, S.-Y. Xie, Q. Cui, H. Chen, N. Wang and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21358–21365 CAS .
X. Gao, J. Li, S. Gollon, M. Qiu, D. Guan, X. Guo, J. Chen and C. Yuan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4956–4961 RSC .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, J. Li, D. Geng, J. Wang, L. Zhang, T. L. Andrew, M. S. Arnold and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 564–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2859–2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Wu-Qiang Wu	Wu-Qiang Wu received his Ph.D. from the University of Melbourne in March 2017. He received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is presently a research fellow at the Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska–Lincoln. His current research interests lie in the fabrication of functional inorganic and organic hybrid materials and their applications in thin-film optoelectronic devices.
Hao-Lin Feng	Hao-Lin Feng received his Bachelor's degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2014. He is presently a postgraduate at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of hierarchical nanomaterials and their applications in quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells.
Hong-Yan Chen	Hong-Yan Chen is an associate professor at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her Bachelor's degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University, and her Ph.D. in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010. Her current research interests lie in functional micro/nanostructured materials for dye-sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, and photoelectrochemical cells.
Dai-Bin Kuang	Dai-Bin Kuang is a professor at the School of Chemistry, Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Dr Kuang received his Ph.D. from Sun Yat-sen University in 2003. He worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) from 2003–2004 and at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (Switzerland) from 2004–2008 as a postdoctoral researcher, before becoming a professor at SYSU in 2008. He is the author of over 100 peer-reviewed publications. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photocatalysis, and photoelectrochemical cells.
Cheng-Yong Su	Cheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-Sen University (SYSU). He obtained his Ph.D. from Lanzhou University in 1996, joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University in 2001 as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow, continued postdoctoral work with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye at the University of South Carolina in 2002, and was then promoted to a full professor at SYSU in 2004. He is the author of over 200 peer-reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on metal–organic materials, catalysis, and nanoscience relevant to a clean environment and clean energy.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic view of typical fabrication process for 3D TiO2 nanotree arrays. (a) One-step self-assembled or self-catalyzed growth. (b) Sequential surface branched modification of pre-formed 1D nanostructured array. (c) Template-assisted growth (NR, nanorod; NS, nanosheet; NW, nanowire; NT, nanotubes).	 

 	Fig. 2  Branched TiO2 nanotree arrays with different morphologies prepared by hydrothermal growth: (a) hierarchical TiO2 nanowires consisting of a long nanowire trunk and numerous nanorod branches.65 (b) Cactus-like TiO2 nanowires consisting of a nanosheet backbone and numerous nanorod branches.65 (c) Hyperbranched TiO2 nanoarrays consisting of long nanowire trunks, short nanorod branches, and tiny nanorod leaves (known as a tree with luxuriant foliage).69 (d) TiO2 nanowire–nanosheet hierarchical arrays.68 (e) TiO2 nanowire–nanosheet–nanorod hyperbranched arrays consisting of nanowire trunks and nanosheet leaves linked by nanorod branches.68 Adapted with permission from ref. 65, 68 and 69. Copyright 2014 Elsevier, 2014 Nature Publishing Group, and 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–d) Schematic illustration of the growth process for rutile TiO2 nanoforests formed via HCl acid vapor oxidation. (e) SEM image of a typical individual nanotree.85 Adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic structure of solar cells using 3D metal oxide nanotree arrays as a photoanode material.	 

 	Fig. 5  3D rutile TiO2 nanotree array structures in DSSCs. (a) SEM image and (b) a schematic sketch of the electron transfer mechanism of rutile TiO2 nanobranched arrays.38 (c–g) TEM images and atomic models, and (h) diffusion coefficients to show the twinned structural relationship between the trunk and branch, and the fast electron transport properties of 3D branched nanowires, respectively.71 Adapted with permission from ref. 38 and 71. Copyright 2011 The PCCP Owner Societies and 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Construction of branched anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on metal substrate or transparent conducting oxide (TCO) glass. (a) Schematic illustrations of the fabrication of hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on Ti foil for fully flexible DSSC application.39 (b) SEM image of PLD TiO2 forest films and (c) J–V curves recorded under different light illumination condition for PLD TiO2 forest films with a thickness of 7 μm.29 Adapted with permission from ref. 29 and 39. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Pioneer fabrication of hierarchical branched anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass substrate via one-step hydrothermal growth. (a) XRD patterns and (b) SEM images of hierarchical branched TiO2 nanowire arrays. (c) Schematic illustration of formation of hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass. (d) J–V curves of DSSCs based on hierarchical TiO2 nanowire arrays prepared after 9 h with an additional TiO2 blocking layer; inset: corresponding IPCE spectrum.40 Adapted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Morphology-controlled cactus-like branched TiO2 (CBT) arrays on TCO substrate for DSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of one-step synthesis of various CBT arrays on FTO glass prepared with different PTO precursor concentrations (0.05 M, 0.1 M, and 0.15 M). (b) J–V curves of DSSCs based on various CBT arrays. (c–e) SEM images of CBT-0.05 M, CBT-0.1 M, and CBT-0.15 M, respectively.65 Adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Ultra-long hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays on FTO glass for DSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of multistep hydrothermal fabrication of a three-layer TiO2 nanowire arrays on seeded FTO glass. (b) SEM image of MTNWs on FTO glass prepared after three hydrothermal cycles (3 × 9 h). (c) J–V curves of DSSCs based on ∼47 μm thick TiO2 hierarchical nanowire arrays, followed by annealing at 550 °C.66 Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Family of vertically aligned TiO2 nanowire array structures for DSSC applications. (a–c) TEM images of STNW, HTNW, and HBTNW, respectively. (d) Schematic device configuration using various nanowire arrays: grass (STNW), tree stem and branch without foliage (HTNW), and trees with luxuriant branches and foliage (HBTNW). (e) J–V curves of DSSCs based on STNW, HTNW, HBTNW, and TNP. (f) Schematic illustration of electron transfer pathways (ETPs) within STNW, HTNW, HBTNW, and TNP.69 Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Branched TNW–NS or hyperbranched TNW–NS–NR with optimized light harvesting for DSSC application. (a) Schematic illustrations of fabrication process for various TiO2 array structures. (b) J–V curves of DSSCs based on TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (c) Plausible schematic model of light scattering and reflecting within simplified networks of TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (d) Electron transport time/lifetime as a function of light intensity and (e) EIS spectra of DSSCs based on TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR. (f) Schematic illustrations of electron transfer pathways (ETPs) within TNW, TNW–NS, and TNW–NS–NR.68 Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014 The Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  3D branched TiO2 nanotube network with double-shelled structures for DSSC applications. (a–f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis for 3D branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays. (g) SEM images of 3D double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays. (h) J–V curves of DSSCs based on 1D nanotubes and 3D branched double-shelled TiO2 nanotubular arrays.83 Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  3D hierarchically heterostructured TiO2 nanotube-nanorod branched networks for DSSC applications. (a) SEM images and (b) XRD pattern of hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotubes with heterogeneous anatase and rutile junctions. (c) J–V curves of DSSCs based on pure TiO2 nanotubes and hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotubes hydrothermally treated for different times. (d) Sketch of anatase/rutile heterostructured TiO2 nanotree arrays.73 Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  Pine tree-like TiO2 hierarchical array architectures for ssDSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram of fabrication technique and (b) TEM image of pine tree-like hierarchical TiO2 nanotubes (PTT) arrays. (c) J–V curves of ssDSSCs fabricated with different PTT arrays (PTT1, PTT2, and PTT3 are pine-tree like TiO2 nanotubes with film thicknesses of 13.5, 16, and 19 μm, respectively).50 Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  Hyperbranched TiO2 nanotrees for ssDSSC applications. (a and b) Sketch and SEM image of TiO2 hyperbranched arrays architectures fabricated using PLD technique. (c) Light harvesting efficiency and (d) J–V curves of ssDSSCs based on TiO2 hyperbranched arrays and TiO2 nanoparticles sensitized with D102 dye.86 Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Hierarchical TiO2 nanotree array architectures for QDSSC applications. (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process, and electron injection and transport within smooth TiO2 nanowires and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires. (b) J–V curves and (c) charge-collection efficiencies of QDSSCs based on smooth TiO2 nanowires and hierarchical TiO2 nanowires.72 Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Branched TiO2/ZnO hybrid array architectures for QDSSCs application. (a) Schematic diagram of step-by-step synthesis of TNW/ZNS and TNW/ZNR hybrid arrays. SEM images of (b) TNW/ZNS and (c) TNW/ZNR hybrid arrays.131 (d) Schematic illustration and (e) SEM image of TNW–TNS–ZNR hyperbranched hybrid arrays.132 Adapted with permission from ref. 131 and 132. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  3D branched or hyperbranched TiO2 nanotree arrays for PSC applications. (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a PSC prepared using a 3D branched TiO2 nanowire ETL (scale bar is 500 nm); (b) J–V curves of PSC based on 3D branched TiO2 nanowire ETL, showing largely suppressed hysteresis; inset: top view SEM image of tree-like branched TiO2 morphology.162 (c) 3D hyperbranched TiO2 nanofiber-nanorod array.163 (d) J–V curve of PSC based on 3D dendritic TiO2 nanowire thin film; inset: SEM images of pure FTO and FTO/ATNW substrates. (e) Schematic of completed PSC device constructed with dendritic TiO2 nanowire showing efficient light harvesting and charge-carrier separation.43 Adapted with permission from ref. 43, 162, and 163. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, 2015 Wiley, and 2015 Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
