Doped graphene for metal-free catalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60401B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60401B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2841-2857Doped graphene for metal-free catalysis

        
          
            Xiang-Kai 
            Kong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Le 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Qian-Wang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ac
aHefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. E-mail: cqw@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 551 63603005;   Tel: +86 551 63603005
bCAS Key Laboratory of Soft Matter Chemistry and Department of Polymer Science & Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. E-mail: changle@ustc.edu.cn
cCAS High Magnetic Field Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, China & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, China
Received 
      6th November 2013
    First published on 6th February 2014AbstractGraphene has attracted increasing attention in different scientific fields including catalysis. Via modification with foreign metal-free elements such as nitrogen, its unique electronic and spin structure can be changed and these doped graphene sheets have been successfully employed in some catalytic reactions recently, showing them to be promising catalysts for a wide range of reactions. In this review, we summarize the recent advancements of these new and interesting catalysts, with an emphasis on the universal origin of their catalytic mechanisms. We are full of hope for future developments, such as more precisely controlled doping methods, atom-scale surface characterization technology, generating more active catalysts via doping, and finding wide applications in many different fields.
Xiang-Kai Kong
Xiang-Kai Kong completed his BS degree in Materials Physics from Huaibei Normal University in 2009. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Professor Qian-Wang Chen at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests include catalysis, carbon materials, surface enhanced Raman scattering and theoretical simulations.
Chang-Le Chen
Chang-Le Chen is currently a Professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei, China. Chang-Le obtained his BS degree from USTC, and his MS and PhD degrees from University of Chicago under the supervision of Prof. Richard Jordan. Before taking his faculty position, he did a postdoc study at Northwestern University with Prof. Tobin Marks, and worked as a Scientist II at Celanese Corporation. His notable awards include Albert J. Cross Prize, American Chemical Society DIC Young Investigator Award, IUPAC Prizes-Honorable Mention and the Recruitment Program of Global Experts.
Qian-Wang Chen
Professor Qian-Wang Chen received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1995 and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. Later, he worked as a post doctoral researcher in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan, Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, Germany and visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a professor in 2000 at the USTC and was awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2002 by the Ministry of Education of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of nanoscale materials.
1. Introduction
Catalysis is an important phenomenon ubiquitous in nature as well as in artificial chemical transformations. It is not only one of the hottest topics in academic research, but also affects the chemical industry and changes our lives much more profoundly than we realize. Without molecular sieve catalysts for the conversion of methanol to gasoline, mankind would be confronted with a serious shortage of energy. The synthesis of ammonia via heterogeneous catalysis using a K-promoted iron oxide system has helped to resolve the food production problem. Supereminent activity and high selectivity are the prerequisite of catalysts, which can accelerate the chemical reactions and save the undesired consumption of reactants. In addition, good stability, convenience for recycling and low toxicity are also desirable properties for various catalysts.
Metallic nanoparticles are undoubtedly the most vibrant catalysts due to their good performance in a series of paramount chemical reactions in modern chemistry. However, their use on an industrial scale is restricted by limited reserves, high cost and low stability. In the drive towards green and sustainable chemistry, carbon nanomaterials without metal elements have been explored and studied extensively in catalysis.1 Labeled as metal-free catalysts, carbon nanomaterials have attracted more and more attention due to their fine performance in some chemical reactions, such as oxygen reduction reaction in fuel cells,2–6 oxidative dehydrogenation,7–11 oxidation of various alcohols and hydration of different alkynes,12 reduction of nitrobenzene13 and oxidant of thiols and sulfides.14 It is generally accepted that carbon nanostructures are mainly classified into three categories: (1) 2D graphene, with completely flat sp2 hybridizations, being of good conductivity and seminal catalytic function; (2) 1D carbon nanotubes and nanofibers with high strength; and (3) 0D fullerene with good semiconductor properties. The latter two allotropes are constructed by curved sp2 hybridizations, whose π orbitals contain a certain amount of s electrons in addition to p electrons. Here, this review will focus on graphene, which is assembled by planar sp2 hybrid carbon atoms with the s, px and py atomic orbitals on each carbon atom forming three strong σ bonds with the three surrounding atoms.15
Graphene, which is composed of one monolayer of carbon atoms with a honeycomb structure, has attracted considerable interest among the public because of its unique electronic, optical, thermal, and mechanical properties. It is a zero band gap semiconductor with the valence and conduction bands touching at the Brillouin zone corners.16 High-quality graphene can be prepared by various methods including micro mechanical exfoliation, epitaxial growth and chemical vapor deposition (CVD). However, the zero band gap property weakens its catalytic activity and limits its broader applications.17,18 Fortunately, the introduction of heteroatoms into graphene presents the potential to tweak its electronic and electrochemical properties by changing the electronic density within the graphene sheet.19 Accordingly, doping with foreign non-metallic atoms has been demonstrated both experimentally and theoretically as a successful method to tune graphene's electronic structure, increasing active sites and enhancing catalytic activity significantly. However, much of the research in this field is still in its infancy. Some groups have reviewed the applications of graphene-based materials in catalysis, however the authors only lay emphasis on the graphene–metal/metal oxide nanocomposite catalysts1,18,20,21 and oxygen reduction reactions.3,20–23
In this review, we will discuss the latest advances in the catalytic chemistry of doped graphene, which has been considered as one of the most promising metal-free catalysts, with the hope of increasing the awareness of this novel catalyst and stimulating further exploration of its applications in more reactions. The reports of different doped graphenes are introduced according to the type of the doping element. Foreign O element is usually attached to the respective materials in the hydroxyl and carboxyl forms, not a doping format in a strict sense. However, it is still a metal-free modification, similar to the doping structure. Moreover, it is the origin of graphene-related materials employed as metal-free catalysts in synthetic applications12 and is often used as the precursor for other heteroatom doping. Additionally, the oxygenated groups are inevitable in graphene-based materials and cannot be completely removed during the reduction process, making its catalytic properties very important in this discussion. In each element doping section, the existing synthetic method will be introduced briefly and readers can refer to previous reviews if required to get more detailed preparation information.15,18,24 Then, the progress of both experimental and theoretical investigations will be discussed. Finally, a brief summary and an outlook on the future development of doped graphene in catalysis will be presented.
2. Graphene-functionalized with foreign elements
2.1. O-attached graphene (χ = 3.44)
Oxygen heteroatoms are often unavoidable in graphene, especially when it is obtained from the classic Hummers method owing to the employment of strong oxidizing agent. Even after sufficient reduction, these attached oxygen functional groups are inevitable and cannot be completely removed. Graphene oxide (GO) is usually synthesized by exfoliation of graphite oxide obtained by the oxidation of natural graphite powder with various oxidants in acidic media18 (Hummers method). It is frequently used as the precursor to prepare graphene and could be regarded as a typical O-attached graphene. Although the precise atomic and electronic structures of GO remain largely unknown, as a simplified model, it can be depicted as individual graphene sheets decorated with abundant oxygen functional groups on both the basal planes and edges.25 Based on a series of detailed characterizations, Dekany's group have unraveled the chemical structure of GO and proposed a credible model, which has a corrugated carbon network including a ribbonlike arrangement of flat carbon hexagons connected by CC double bonds (as seen in Fig. 1) and functional groups such as tertiary hydroxyl, 1,3-ether, ketone, quinine and phenol.26,27 In addition, it has now been confirmed that epoxy and hydroxyl groups will reside on the GO basal surface, while carboxyl groups tend to attach to the edges of the GO plane.28,29
 Fig. 1  A new structure model of GO: (a) surface species and (b) folded carbon skeleton. With permission from ref. 26, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 

2.1.1. Catalytic oxidation reaction. 
Catalysis presents an important role in facilitating synthetically useful transformations. Very recently, Bielawski and Dreyer reported that GO could catalyze both the oxidation of alcohols and cis-stilbene, and the hydration of various alkynes under relatively mild conditions with excellent yields and desired selectivities.12 This is the first example of graphene-based materials as metal-free catalysts in synthetic applications, opening up a new research field. To confirm the catalytic role of GO in the oxidation process, a series of control experiments were designed by the authors, and it was indicated that GO would undergo partial reduction during the catalytic conversion. The authors studied the recyclability of the GO catalyst, and no influence was observed on the activity of oxidation benzyl alcohol into benzaldehyde under high initial loadings (≥50 wt%). However, the recovered GO catalyst exhibited only approximately 5% conversion at low catalyst loadings (≤20 wt%). It was proposed that the reduced GO was converted to GO during the catalytic process under high catalyst loadings.
Bielawski and co-workers have made significant contributions to GO's catalytic applications30 by using GO in a series of other catalytic reactions, including the oxidation of sulfides and thiols,14 C–H oxidation,31 Claisen–Schmidt condensation,32 polymerization of various olefin monomers,33 ring opening polymerization of various cyclic lactones and lactams,34 and dehydration polymerization in the synthesis of carbon reinforced poly(phenylene methylene) composites.35 Their contributions inspired a great deal of interest among the public, inspiring many groups to explore GO's catalytic performance in more catalytic reactions.
Qu and co-workers have developed a colorimetric method for glucose detection as illustrated in Fig. 2.36 GO–COOH was prepared by adding NaOH and chloroacetic acid into GO solution to convert the –OH groups to –COOH via conjugation of acetic acid moieties.37 Based on the catalytic performance of GO–COOH samples in the reaction of 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine oxidation in the presence of H2O2, GO–COOH has been demonstrated to possess intrinsic peroxidase-like activity to produce a blue color reaction following a ping-pong mechanism, with a maximum reaction rate of (3.85 ± 0.22) × 10−8 M s−1. This method was simple, cheap and highly selective, and was successfully employed for glucose detection in buffer solution, diluted blood and fruit juice. These findings facilitate GO's utilization in medical diagnostics and biotechnology.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of colorimetric detection of glucose by using glucose oxidase and GO–COOH catalyzed reactions. Reprinted from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley. 
Liu et al. have obtained GO foam via freeze drying, which was found to serve both as a reactant affording reduced GO and as a catalyst to convert SO2 to SO3.38 Tan et al. reported the first example of using GO to facilitate the synthesis of organic compounds under visible light irradiation. GO was employed as a cooperative catalyst to rose Bengal, contributing to the photocatalytic oxidative C–H functionalization of tertiary amines to generate imines,39 which have great value in the synthesis of many industrially important materials and biologically active compounds. Cao et al. reported the first convenient metal-free catalytic process for an efficient imine synthesis from various amines under mild and neat conditions with molecular oxygen as the terminal oxidant.40 Based on the oxidative coupling of amines to imines, Su and co-workers have probed the activity of GO and studied its catalytic mechanism. Through the base and acid treatment of GO, it was found that the carboxylic groups as well as the localized unpaired electrons facilitated synergistic intermolecular arrangements, contributing to the enhanced catalytic activity of oxidative coupling of various primary amines.29
In order to understand the experimental results, theoretical simulations have also been employed to study the catalytic transition states and the oxidation process of GO catalysts. Boukhvalov and co-workers have investigated the catalytic properties of GO based on the oxidation model of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde.41 Based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations, it was revealed that the reaction proceeded via the transfer of hydrogen atoms from the organic molecule to the GO surface. The GO model with 12.5% of the carbon atoms covered by hydroxyl and epoxy groups has been established initially (as seen in Fig. 3). As the benzyl alcohol molecule moved close to the GO surface, one hydrogen atom would transfer from PhCH2OH to an epoxy group of GO, forming a diol on the GO sheet. The formation of dangling bonds on PhCH2OH or on GO was found to be energetically unfavorable, making this step endothermic. Then another hydrogen atom of benzyl alcohol molecule would migrate to one of the hydroxyl group on the GO surface, which resulted in the formation of one equivalent of water, and this step was exothermic. These simulated results have depicted detailed images of GO's catalytic process and were in agreement with the above-mentioned experimental results of Bielawski and Dreyer, where the radical groups were found to disappear after catalytic courses.12
 Fig. 3  Optimized atomic structures for the (a) initial, (b) intermediate and (c) final steps of benzyl alcohol oxidation over GO with the initial coverage of epoxy and hydroxyl groups, in which 12.5% of the carbon atoms are on the material's basal plane. The total energy costs of the reactions are reported in eV. From ref. 41 with permission from Wiley. 


2.1.2. Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalysis is one of the most important catalytic areas and GO possesses excellent activity toward many pivotal transformations. The electro-oxidation of ascorbic acid, uric acid, dopamine and acetaminophen using GO have been reported by Su's group.42 They prepared the GO modified electrode by employing in situ electrochemical oxidation of graphite, as seen in Fig. 4. During the positive scans, the van der Waals force between graphitic sheets could be weakened owing to the oxidation process, and might be broken with the aid of gas evolution, forming few-layer GO sheets. Taking oxidation of ascorbic acid as an example here, the obtained low oxidation potential and high oxidation current demonstrated very good potential for electrochemical applications, which was explained by the increased surface area and oxygen functional groups of GO compared to graphite. Based on the high sensitivity and apparent peak separations for different analytes, it was proposed that GO-modified electrodes might find wide applications for biosensors and bioanalysis. Apart from this, reduced GO sheet films were also prepared by Li et al. as advanced electrode materials, and they have exhibited fast electron-transfer kinetics and possessed excellent electrocatalytic activity toward oxygen reduction.25,43
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the exfoliation process (gray, red, white and blue stand for carbon, oxygen, hydrogen and gas, respectively). (b) CV curves obtained from 3.0 mM ascorbic acid in 0.1 M PBS (pH = 6.9) with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; the dotted and solid lines stand for graphite and GO electrodes, respectively. (c) Amperometric response of GO-modified electrode held at 0.0 V for successive injection of ascorbic acid under constant magnetic stirring. Inset: calibration plot of current vs. ascorbic acid concentration. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley. 


2.1.3. Photocatalysis. 
TiO2 has been widely recognized as a good photocatalyst due to its suitable energy gap. GO is proved to be a semiconductor or an insulator while pristine graphene has a zero band gap. Oxygenated components attached to the pristine graphene surface are tightly related to its band structure and the induced band gap opens up possibilities for photocatalytic applications. A GO semiconductor with an apparent band gap of 3.3–4.3 eV for direct transition and 2.4–3.0 eV for indirect transition was synthesized by Teng's group.44 This band gap energy was sufficient to overcome the endothermic energy required for the water splitting reaction (1.23 eV). With the irradiation of both UV and visible light, abundant and continuous hydrogen evolution was obtained for reactions conducted in a 20 vol% aqueous methanol solution. The schematic corresponding energy-levels are displayed in Fig. 5. No noticeable degradation of GO was observed, demonstrating its high catalytic performance. Methanol was considered as a sacrificial hole scavenger, which could catch the photo-generated holes in the valence band of GO, avoiding electron–hole recombination.
 Fig. 5  Schematic energy-level diagram of GO relative to the levels for H2 and O2 generation from water. During photocatalytic reaction the conduction band of GO with a high overpotential relative to the level for H2 generation exhibits fast electron injection from the excited GO into the solution phase, whereas the holes in the valence band of GO do not interact with the water molecules for O2 generation, but are removed by the hole scavenger (methanol) instead. The possible mechanism for this methanol assisted water splitting is shown in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley. 
In addition, Chen et al. reported an efficient photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to methanol using GO as a catalyst,45 and its schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 6. H3PO4 was used to react with hydroxyl groups forming esters, which could prevent the GO basal plane from further oxidation. GO with band gap in the range of 3.2–4.4 eV was obtained, which was sufficient to overcome the endothermic characteristics of the CO2 reduction under solar energy excitation. The O containing chemical groups would stretch the band gap energy and help the electrons excite from the valence band to the conduction band, leading to photo-generated electrons and holes, which served as oxidizing and reducing radicals, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction mechanism on GO, reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry. 


2.1.4. Other catalytic applications. 
Further efforts were devoted to the catalytic application of GO, since it was predicted that GO can be applied in other catalytic transformations due to its great chemical activity induced by the presence of plentiful oxygen-containing functional groups. For example, it has been shown to be an recyclable acid catalyst for ring opening reaction of epoxides with methanol or other primary alcohols as nucleophiles and solvents.46 It has also been proved to be an efficient and reusable catalyst for the acetalization of aldehydes at room temperature,47 aza-Michael addition of amines to activated alkenes,48 Friedel–Crafts addition of indoles to α,β-unsaturated ketones,49 synthesis of dipyrromethane and calyx[4]pyrrole50 and oxidative dehydrogenation of propane.51 All of the above results demonstrated the crucial role of the hetero oxygen element for the generation of active reactions sites on graphene sheets, which proves to be highly beneficial to its catalytic applications. Although GO is active in so many different transformations, its exact role in these catalytic processes needs more detailed investigations. Considering the complexity of the surface oxygen-containing groups, detailed characterizations are required to understand their distributions. Careful investigations on the differences of the mechanism in different reactions are much needed, which would also help to expand the applications of GO in other catalytic reactions.

2.2. N-doped graphene (χ = 3.04)
N-doped graphene (N-graphene) has been the most intensively studied doping model. N is next to C in the periodic table of chemical elements, and its electronegativity is larger than that of C (χ = 2.55). As such, the introduction of N into graphene sheets could modify its local electronic structures. The N heteroatom could be introduced directly during the graphene growth, by a CVD method using NH3 and CH4 as the N and C sources52 or via a solvothermal process using lithium nitride and tetrachloromethane.53 Alternatively, N can be doped through post treatment of graphene or GO, such as hydrazine reduction,54 thermal annealing in ammonia,55,56 and the arc-discharge method.57 It has been well established that the incorporation of N atoms into the graphene matrix can lead to three main types of N formats, including graphitic N with direct substitution structure, and pyridinic N and pyrrolic N structures.58 Graphitic N means the doping N atom is combined into a hexagonal ring. Pyridinic and pyrrolic N donate one and two p electrons to the π system, forming sp2 and sp3 hybridized bonds, respectively.59 More interestingly, it was confirmed that N-doped carbon materials can improve their biocompatibility significantly.60 It is expected that N-doped graphene will find more and more applications in the field of catalysis.

2.2.1. Oxygen reduction reaction. 
The fuel cell is an important electrochemical energy conversion device, which generates electricity from chemical energy directly through the reaction between a fuel and an oxidant in its electrodes.61 The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode plays a key role in determining cell performance, cost and durability.62 Currently, Pt based material is regarded as an active and efficient catalyst for ORR. However, many issues including the high cost, CO poisoning and agglomeration trend have hindered its commercialization.
N-graphene was reported for the first time to be a valuable catalyst for ORR by Dai's group in 2010.63 Ni was employed as the catalyst and they developed a facile CVD approach with a N containing reaction gas mixture of NH3:CH4:H2:Ar at 10:50:65:200 standard cubic centimeters per minute for the synthesis of N-graphene films on a large scale. The N/C atomic ratio was ca. 4% for the obtained N-graphene and it was demonstrated to act as a superb metal-free electrode for ORR associated with alkaline fuel cells. As shown in Fig. 7, the pristine graphene electrode exhibited a two electron process for oxygen reduction with the onset potential of about −0.45 and −0.7 V. In contrast, the N-graphene electrode displayed a one step, four electron pathway, which is more efficient for ORR. Meanwhile, the steady catalytic current density of N-graphene is nearly 3 times higher than that of the commercial Pt/C electrode over a large potential range. In addition, N-graphene was insensitive to CO, resolving the severe drawback of Pt nanoparticles. This new metal-free catalyst showed high selectivity, long-term operation stability and fine tolerance to crossover effect, suggesting its great potential for other catalytic applications beyond fuel cells.
 Fig. 7  The rotating ring disk electrode voltammograms for the ORR in air saturated 0.1 M KOH at the pristine graphene electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-graphene electrode (blue line). Adapted from ref. 63 with permission, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Sun and co-workers prepared N-graphene by heat treatment of graphene using ammonia, leading to 2.8 at% N doping at the optimized temperature of 900 °C.64 The resultant N-graphene exhibited a very high ORR activity through a four electron transfer process in oxygen saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, comparable or even better than commercial Pt/C (Pt loading: 4.85 μg cm−2) electrodes. Based on the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, they attributed the enhanced ORR activity to the graphitic N atoms (substitutional doping) owing to the matching relationship between activity and graphitic N contents. Soon after, Ruoff et al. attributed this enhanced activity to pyridinic and pyrrolic N atoms, which was in conflict with Sun's result above. They obtained N-graphene with different N doping formats via annealing GO with different N sources,65 and the schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 8. Through annealing of GO with ammonia, polyaniline or polypyrrole, the content of graphitic N species, pyridinic N centers and pyrrolic N moieties could be tuned, making this process more suitable for practical applications. Interestingly, the total atomic content of N in the metal-free N-graphene catalyst does not influence the ORR process under alkaline conditions. Instead, the activity of this novel catalyst was found to be dependent on the graphitic N content, which was related to the limiting current density. Moreover, the onset potential for ORR could be improved by the increasing pyridinic N content, which gradually converted the two electron pathway to a four electron process.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram for the preparation of N-graphene with different N states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2012, Royal Society Chemistry. 
It is still very controversial as to whether the pyridinic N format or the graphitic N configuration determines the ORR activity. Moreover, whether the two-electron or four-electron pathway dominates is also under debate. Xia's group used high purity argon as a protective gas to anneal GO and melamine, and obtained highly doped N-graphene with up to 10.1 at% N.66 Through the electrocatalytic measurement with 0.1 M KOH aqueous solution electrolyte, it was found that the activity of N-graphene toward ORR was higher than graphene and not considerably affected by the alteration of N content. As a result, it was concluded that the pyridine-like N component determined the electrocatalytic activity of N-graphene for ORR. Similar results were also given by Woo et al.67 Hydrazine was used to deoxidize GO and their ORR activity in acid media was attributed to pyridinic N centers, higher than the commercial vulcan carbon.
In contrast, Lin and co-workers obtained pure pyridinic N atom doped single layer graphene with N percentage of up to 16 at% by the CVD method using hydrogen, ethylene and ammonia.68 In the KOH electrolyte solution with pH = 13, the resultant two electron mechanism of ORR suggested pyridinic N might not be an effective promoter for ORR. On the other hand, a 3D porous structure of N-graphene with a high graphitic N doping level (∼44 at%) has been obtained from polypyrrole, and it exhibited good activity for both ORR and oxygen evolution reactions (OER).69
Interestingly, Dong et al. synthesized N-graphene by a solvothermal method, and showed that N-graphene could act as a catalyst to facilitate four electron oxygen reductions in alkaline solution and two electron reduction in acidic solution.59 The doped N atoms introduced electronic states around the Fermi level of graphene, helpful for the electron transfer from the band of graphene to anti-bonding orbitals of oxygen molecules, weakening the O–O bond and contributing to the reduction of oxygen molecules.70
To understand the catalytic mechanism for catalyst design and resolve these controversies, a series of simulation works have been carried out.71,72 Boukhvalov and Son calculated the energetics of N-graphene catalyzed ORR with different amounts of N doping. It was found that a small amount of graphitic N doping decreased the energy costs at the intermediate steps of oxygen reduction significantly and the energy barriers were even lower than that on a Pt surface for the same process.73 In contrast, Xia's group have simulated the ORR process on N-graphene with pyridinic doping in acidic fuel cells using B3LYP hybrid density functional theory.74,75 The N doping could introduce high positive spin density and asymmetry atomic charge density, leading to a high catalytic activity. This electrocatalytic process could occur spontaneously on N-graphene as seen in Fig. 9, and the calculated average reversible potential was 1.15 V per SHE, which was consistent with the experimental results.
 Fig. 9  Optimized structure of each electron transformation in ORR: (a) initial position of OOH from N-graphene, (b) OOH adsorbs on the doped graphene, (c) O–O bond is broken, (d) one water molecule is generated, and (e) C–O bond is broken, the second water molecule is generated. Gray, blue, red and small white balls represent C, N, O and H atoms, respectively. With permission from ref. 75, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Based on the above results, it is still difficult to reach a unified conclusion because the graphitic and pyridinic N doping formats are only considered separately in the ORR process. This problem was partially addressed by Oshima et al.76 They showed that catalysts with a relatively larger amount of graphitic N exhibit higher ORR activity than those with a relatively larger amount of pyridinic N atoms. Meanwhile, Ikeda's calculations suggested oxygen molecules are preferentially adsorbed associatively at C sits near the doped graphitic N moieties.77 In addition, Anderson and co-workers showed there was no evidence for the direct four electron oxygen reduction to water over N-graphene with pyridinic edge sites,71 suggesting that pyridinic N centers are a bad design for ORR applications. Very recently, Murakoshi et al. selectively doped pyridinic N and graphitic N within the graphene matrix with pyridine and julolidine as the N containing precursor molecules, and they proceeded via four- and two electron reduction pathways, respectively, in alkali-based solutions.78 In addition, Bao et al. studied the surface coverage, electrode potential and solvent effect on the catalytic process based on the graphitic N-graphene model, aiming to understand the basic chemistry of ORR on N-graphene.79 It was concluded from their results that: (1) hydrogen bonds of water would polarize oxygen molecules, facilitating their adsorption on N-graphene significantly; (2) associative mechanism and four electron reduction pathway were dominant in ORR; (3) the removal of adsorbed O from N-graphene surface was the rate determining step. Fig. 10 displays the possible reaction pathways obtained from their discussion. In order to unambiguously resolve this problem, samples with pure graphitic and pyridinic N doped single layer graphene should be prepared and compared in ORR measurements. Moreover, DFT simulations need to be carried out to support the experimental results.
 Fig. 10  Reaction scheme of ORR on N-graphene in alkaline solution, where ① presents an associative mechanism and ② a dissociative mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier. 


2.2.2. C–H bond activation reaction. 
C–H bond activation is an important reaction traditionally catalyzed by transition metals and organometallic complexes.80 Cheap metal-free catalysts have emerged as promising candidates for this transformation. N-graphene was reported to exhibit high activity and selectivity for the oxidation of arylalkanes in aqueous phase, affording high value-added products for biomedical applications.81 The N-doped sp2 hybridized carbon was prepared through a CVD process with acetonitrile vapor as the N source with 8.9% N content. Control experiments on different carbon materials suggested the N doping greatly enhanced catalytic activity as well as selectivity, and the activity was not related to the surface area of the catalysts.
DFT simulation was carried out to study the catalytic mechanism with graphitic N as the doping format according to the XPS result. Interestingly, the catalytic active site was the ortho carbon site, as shown in Fig. 11a, instead of the doped graphitic N. Based on electronic partial density calculations, it was indicated that the density states near the Fermi level for ortho carbon are higher than those of other nearby C atoms, conferring it a metal-like d band electronic structure and a more metal-like catalytic performance.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of different catalytic sites for peroxide adsorption on the N-graphene. The adsorption energy is listed in the top line (in eV) beside the corresponding sites; “XX” indicates that peroxide can not be adsorbed on the site. The charge of different sites before formation of peroxide is shown in the second line (in a). The inset at the bottom of (a) shows the local configuration of peroxide on ortho carbon site of N-graphene. (b) The electronic partial density of states for N and C in different positions of N-graphene. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Wiley. 


2.2.3. Reduction of nitro compounds. 
Nitro compounds are prevalent organic pollutants generated from agricultural and industrial sources.82 Meanwhile, the conversion from nitro to amino groups has great industrial relevance, such as for preparing aniline and paracetamol.83 The reduction of 4-nitrophenol (Nip) to 4-aminophenol (Amp) by sodium borohydride (BH4−) was found by Pal et al. in 200284 and it has become almost the most often used reaction to test the catalytic activity of catalysts in aqueous solution.85 Almost all of the existing investigations on this reaction were based on metallic material under mild conditions. Recently, our group reported the synthesis of N-graphene by hydrothermal treatment of GO and ammonia, and its catalytic behavior in the reduction of Nip to Amp.86 Interestingly, the N-graphene catalytic process was found to follow zero order kinetics (as seen in Fig. 12), which was different from the first order kinetics observed using all of the traditional metallic catalysts.
 Fig. 12  (a) Typical absorption spectra of Nip by BH4− as the catalytic reaction proceeded, where the molar ratio between Nip and NaBH4 was selected as 1:100; (b) photos of the color change during the catalytic reaction for NG. (c) and (d) Time curves of the absorbance measured for the NG catalyst, indicating zero order kinetics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry. 
This result demonstrated the difference between N-graphene and metallic catalysts, and it could be explained by the smaller active sites. DFT calculations have also been employed to simulate the adsorption configuration of Nip ion on this metal-free catalyst according to the XPS and in situ FTIR results (as seen in Fig. 13). Only the carbon atom near the doped N atom could be activated to catch Nip ions owing to its weaker conjugation compared to other carbon atoms, so the number of active sites on the graphene surface was much smaller than those of metallic nanoparticles. Therefore, the adsorption process of Nip ions on the surface of N-graphene was more pivotal than in the cases of metals, changing its reaction kinetics. Furthermore, the active sites of N-graphene were positively charged owing to the large electronegativity of doped N atoms, so Nip ions preferred to combine with graphene sheet via the atom of hydroxyl group, as based on the Mulliken analysis it had a charge of −0.450 electrons, more negatively charged than the −0.246 electrons of the nitro group. This was in agreement with the decrease of O–H vibration of the in situ FTIR results.
 Fig. 13  
In situ FTIR of the mixture composed of Nip and NG (a) in side view and (b) in top view; (c) the absorbance variation of O–H vibration with time. With permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry. 
In addition, Xia and co-workers reported the enhanced electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of nitroaromatic compounds with a decreased overpotential compared with thermally reduced graphene.87 Four nitro compounds – 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene, 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene, 2,4-dinitrotoluene and 1,3-dinitrobenzene – were tested using N-graphene. The onset and peak potentials both shifted positively on N-graphene compared to the thermally reduced graphene, indicating a greatly decreased overpotential and the excellent activity of this new metal-free catalyst.


2.2.4. Oxidation of benzylic alcohols. 
Recently, Wang's group have employed a heat treatment procedure to synthesize N-graphene and reported its efficient catalytic activity toward aerobic selective oxidation of benzylic alcohols.88 It was found that the nitridation temperature greatly influenced the N doping concentrations and formats. Graphitic sp2 N atoms were found to be the active sites with good linear correlation with activities (as seen in Fig. 14(a)). The activation energy and pre-exponential factor were 56.1 ± 3.5 kJ mol−1 and 2.32 × 103, respectively, following a Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetic pathway. The reaction process was proposed based on electron paramagnetic resonance characterization (shown in Fig. 14(b)) and it is suggested that the formation of the intermediate product of sp2 N–O2 had a high chemical reactivity towards alcohols.
 Fig. 14  (a) Relationship between initial reaction rate and graphitic N species; (b) the proposed reaction pathway for the aerobic alcohol oxidation over N-graphene. With permission from ref. 88, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.5. Electrochemical biosensing. 
Glucose oxidation is of great significance in life sciences. As N-graphene has good biocompatibility and has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient catalyst, its application in biosensing was investigated. Lin et al. used N plasma treatment to produce N-graphene, and the N content could be tuned from 0.11 to 1.35% by controlling the exposure time.89 N-graphene had good response and high sensitivity toward glucose oxidation, exhibiting fast electron transfer kinetics. As shown in Fig. 15, the influence of ascorbic acid and uric acid has also been studied, and glucose with concentrations as low as 0.01 mM could be detected by N-graphene, indicating its potential applications in biosensing.
 Fig. 15  Chronoamperometric responses to successive addition of 5 mM uric acid (UA), 5 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 0.5 mM glucose, 0.1 mM glucose, 0.05 mM glucose, 0.02 mM glucose, and 0.01 mM glucose on N-graphene electrode immobilized with glucose oxidase at −0.15 V in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.0). From ref. 89, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Reduction of hydrogen peroxide by N-graphene has also been investigated,90,91 and the obtained excellent electrocatalytic activity suggested its potential applications in measuring H2O2 release in living cells.91 In addition, calculations indicated that the reactivity had the following order: pyridinic N-graphene > pyrrolic N-graphene > graphitic N-graphene > pristine graphene, which could be explained by the calculated electrostatic potential distributions.92
Due to the great performance of N-graphene in electrocatalytic reactions, it has been applied as a sensor for simultaneously determining small biomolecules including ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid.93 Moreover, it was found that this metal-free catalyst could reduce triiodide by replacing the Pt cathode in dye sensitized solar cells, resulting in a power conversion efficiency of up to 7.07%.94 In general, N-graphene has shown many superior features in metal-free catalysis including high efficiency, high stability, recyclability, biocompatibility, making it highly attractive for further investigations.

2.3. B-, S-, P-, Se-, I- and Si-doped graphene and H-decorated graphene

2.3.1. B-doped graphene (χ = 2.04). 
B element has unique and basically incomparable properties. Investigations on B-doped graphene (B-graphene) have also been carried out,95,96 since B and N both are next to C in the periodic table of chemical elements. B-graphene could be synthesized via thermal annealing of graphite oxide in the presence of boron oxide as the B source.97 Although the electronegativity of B is smaller than that of N, B-graphene also showed excellent activity toward ORR in alkaline electrolytes. Furthermore, it exhibited long-term stability and fine CO tolerance, which was superior to Pt-based catalysts. Recently, our group carried out DFT calculations, which suggest B doping could induce local high spin density on the basal plane owing to its strong electron withdrawing capability, which plays a key role in facilitating the adsorption of oxygen and OOH molecules and enhances the ORR compared with pristine graphene.98 As shown in Fig. 16, as the doped B atom had only three valence electrons, its pz orbital should be vacant, leaving an unpaired single pz electron on the neighboring C atom, which induced an interesting local spin density. Meanwhile, since the electronegativity of B was smaller than that of C, the paired covalent electrons will be slightly polarized towards the C atoms, forming local positive charge density on the B atoms as depicted in Fig. 16b, which could be taken as new active sites for catalysis. Furthermore, the simulated ORR process demonstrated that the OOH cluster could adsorb on B-graphene tightly and this whole catalytic reaction was an exothermal process with no energy barrier, eventually forming two water molecules.
 Fig. 16  (a) The source of the high spin density for B-graphene, (b) the calculated NBO charge density distribution in unit of a.u. for B-graphene, (c) relative energies of the reaction pathways of ORR on B-graphene. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Wiley. 


2.3.2. S-doped graphene (χ = 2.58). 
The electronic structure of S-doped graphene (S-graphene) was investigated by simulations, which revealed that it could be either a semiconductor with a small band gap or a metallic form, depending on the content of doped sulfur.99 Experimentally, both hydrogen sulfide100 and benzyl disulfide101 have been used as S sources, leading to S-graphene formation from GO. Mullen et al. indicated that S could be introduced into graphene sheets in a major form of thiophene-like S.100 In both cases, good catalytic activities in ORR were observed, demonstrating S-graphene as an excellent metal-free catalyst with high stability and selectivity. Furthermore, edge-selectively sulfurized graphene nanoplatelets have been produced by simple dry ball-milling graphite in the presence of sulfur (S8) in 2013.102 The schematic presentation is displayed in Fig. 17 and the obtained material shows good performance in ORR and its catalytic efficiency could be improved with further oxidation. Combined with theoretical analysis, the electronic spin density was found to be critical in the catalysis, with S atoms and OSO doped at the edges of graphene strongly promoting the electrocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 17  A schematic representation of the ball-milling process. From ref. 102 with permission from Wiley. 
In another report, sulfated graphene, through acid treatment of graphene, has been prepared as an efficient solid catalyst. Quantitative energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping showed element S was distributed on the whole surface of graphene homogeneously (Fig. 18).103 Catalytic tests demonstrated the sulfated graphene was a good water tolerant catalyst with high activity for the hydrolysis of ethyl acetate,103 dehydration of xylose104 and acid catalyzed liquid reactions such as the esterification of acetic acid.105
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of the prepared sulfonated graphene, and corresponding quantitative EDS element mapping of (b) C, (c) O and (d) S. (e) Illustration for the preparation of sulfonated graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2011, Royal Society Chemistry. 


2.3.3. P-doped graphene (χ = 2.19). 
P element is in the nitrogen group, and it has the same number of valence electrons as nitrogen and similar chemical properties. A thermal annealing approach has been used to fabricate P-doped graphene (P-graphene) with triphenylphosphine as the P source, and the obtained sample exhibited outstanding ORR activity (higher than graphene) as well as excellent selectivity and stability.106 Very recently, Primo and García have prepared P-graphene by simple pyrolysis of alginate and H2PO4− in the absence of oxygen, and the obtained sample was shown to be a good photocatalyst for hydrogen generation from water–methanol mixtures. Moreover, it was found that an increase in the amount of HPO42− increased its catalytic activity.107 In addition, the existing calculations showed that P substitutional defect on graphene had low formation energy and would introduce a larger band gap energy.108 Experimentally, triphenylphosphine has been used as P source to obtain P-doped graphite, which has showed high electrocatalytic activity, long-term stability, and excellent tolerance to crossover effects of methanol in ORR in an alkaline medium.109


2.3.4. Se-doped graphene (χ = 2.55). 
Diphenyl diselenide protected by argon was selected as the Se source to introduce Se doping.101,110 Se-graphene exhibited better catalytic activity for ORR than the commercial Pt/C in alkaline electrolyte, revealing good potential as a substitute for Pt-based catalysts in fuel cells.101 It was shown that the ORR activity of an only 1 wt% Se-doped carbon material was comparable to N-doped carbon materials with 4–8 wt% of N, indicating the good performance of Se-graphene.110 As the electronegativity of Se is the same as C atom, the induced charge redistribution should be smaller than for other foreign atom doping. Therefore, its good catalytic properties were explained by the large atomic size of Se, which would induce high strain at the edges of carbon materials, facilitating charge localization and contributing to oxygen adsorption. Moreover, the polarizability of Se was high and it was noted that lone Se pairs could easily interact with the surrounding molecules.


2.3.5. I-doped graphene (χ = 2.66). 
Iodine was deemed to be a p-type doping of graphene. Huang et al. prepared I-doped graphene (I-graphene) via annealing GO and I2 at high temperature in argon.111 The I-doping content could be controlled through adjusting the ratio of GO to I. The obtained I-graphene displayed excellent catalytic activity, good reusability and high resistance to crossover effects for ORR. Based on XPS characterization and detailed analysis, it was confirmed that the formed I3− could induce a relatively higher positive charge density on the graphene surface, facilitating the reduction of oxygen to OH−.


2.3.6. Si-doped graphene (χ = 1.90). 
Si doping in graphene is still rare and represents an emerging field, especially in catalytic research. To the best of our knowledge, there is no experimental report on catalysis using Si-doped graphene (Si-graphene). Zhao et al. investigated the adsorption of NO, NO2 and N2O on Si-graphene using DFT calculations, and found it could be an ideal sensor for NO and NO2 detection.112 Interestingly, when the greenhouse gas N2O was adsorbed on Si-graphene in the [2+2]-cycloaddition configuration, a N2 molecule was able to escape and leave an O atom attached to the basal plane with the O–Si bond of 1.581 Å, indicating that Si-graphene could be used as metal-free catalyst for N2O reduction.


2.3.7. H-decorated graphene (χ = 2.20). 
H decoration is another important functional method to modify graphene. The fully hydrogenated graphene has been named graphane, and has every C atom combined with one H atom and all of the attached H atoms distributed on both sides of the basal plane, alternately. As it has not yet been fabricated, partial H-decorated graphene (H-graphene) may be more relevant in practice application. The hydrogenated methods include CVD fabrication and solution based reduction of graphite, as well as hydrogenation of sp2 carbon materials in a hydrogen gas/plasma atmosphere.19 Yan's group prepared H-graphene with the H/C ratio of 0.54 and reported its catalytic activity to be higher than the reduced graphene for the Fenton-like reaction to degrade organic dyes.113 In addition, our group have found that H decoration could enhance the ORR performance of graphene based on DFT investigations.98 The π covalent bond was broken due to H adsorption, forming single electrons and high local spin density, which was beneficial for oxygenated component adsorption, contributing to the ORR process.
Based on the above discussions, it can be concluded that two alterations in the surface structure contribute to the catalytic origins of the doped graphene: one is from the local high electron/spin density induced by the electronegativity difference of the doped element or the broken π covalent bonds caused by H decoration, the other is modifications at the edge of the graphene sheets, such as the induced high strain of Se and OSO groups doped by S. Both alterations in the surface structure facilitate the adsorption of reactants and improve the chemical activity. As such, it can be expected that new metal-free catalysts could be prepared by doping with other elements.

2.4. Graphene doped with two elements
With the development of doping technology, the growth of graphene co-doped with two elements has been explored by scientists. Co-doping using elements with different electronegativity could create a unique electronic structure and might bring in special synergistic effects. The electronegativities of B and N are 2.04 and 3.4, which are lower and higher than that of C element (χ = 2.55), respectively. B and N co-doped graphene (BN-graphene) has been used as a high performance solid state supercapacitor114 and was predicted to be a good catalyst for the cathode ORR via first principles calculations.115,116 Recently, it was fabricated through thermal annealing of GO in the presence of boric acid and ammonia by Dai et al., showing superior electrocatalytic activities toward ORR in alkaline media, better than the Pt/C electrode.117 The doping level could be adjusted, which directly influences the energy band gap, local spin density and charge distribution. Co-doping with two appropriate elements could create a new and smaller band gap that will increase the conductivity; calculations suggested B12C77N11H26 structure had the lowest energy gap, resulting in the highest chemical reactivity or the best catalytic performance.
In addition, Qiao and co-workers have investigated the catalytic performance of BN-graphene both experimentally and theoretically.118 They prepared BN-graphene using a two step doping method, incorporating heteroatoms at desired sites on the graphene surface and preventing the formation of inactive by-products. For comparison, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and B-graphene and N-graphene were selected to study the synergistic effect of the double doping. Fig. 19(a) shows a higher cathode current and a higher potential for BN-graphene, indicating a more efficient and more facile ORR process on the co-doped graphene. The transferred electron number in an ORR process was 3.97 for BN-graphene, higher than that of single doped graphene and h-BN, indicating excellent activity and perfect selectivity (four electron dominating pathway) for BN-graphene (as seen in Fig. 19(b)). The DFT investigations revealed this co-doped sample had the largest combined energy for the adsorption of surrounding oxygen containing molecules. An alternative enhanced mechanism has been pointed out, as displayed in Fig. 19(d): a B atom meta to the doped N atom exhibited the highest adsorption energy, whereas an ortho B bonded directly to the N atom showed the lowest activity.
 Fig. 19  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of ORR on BN-graphene and the h-BN–graphene hybrid in an oxygen saturated 0.1 M solution of KOH with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) Summary of the kinetic limiting current density and the transferred electron number on the basis of the RDE data and the RRDE data (values in parentheses) on various catalysts. (c) Calculated adsorption energies of HO2 for all of the selected catalysts. N(p) and N(g) indicate pyridinic and graphitic N bonding, respectively. (d) Adsorption energies on various BN-graphene with B active sites as a function of the distance to a pyridinic N atom. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Wiley. 
Another simulated investigation about the catalytic activity of BN-graphene has been completed by Fan et al.119 They have systematically studied the ORR performance of BN-graphene, B-graphene and N-graphene. It was found that the charge redistribution happens mostly in the region of BN cluster with its nearest carbon atoms as shown in Fig. 20, and the formation of the epoxide group should be important for the four-electron process of BN-graphene.
 Fig. 20  The 2D charge redistribution in the graphene planar region calculated by the charge difference between the doped graphene and pristine graphene (blue for charge depletion and red for charge accumulation) of B-graphene, N-graphene and BN-graphene. With permission from ref. 119, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry. 
In addition to BN-graphene, the authors have also fabricated S and N dual-doped graphene (SN-graphene).120 Commercial silicon dioxide was used to create mesopores as seen in Fig. 21(a). The obtained SN-graphene exhibited good long term stability and high catalytic activity including very high kinetic limiting current and positive onset potential for ORR, indicating it would be a very suitable catalyst for the next generation of fuel cells. The great synergistic effect could be attributed to the redistribution of spin and charge densities induced by the co-doped S and N atoms, which was calculated as shown in Fig. 21(b).
 Fig. 21  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous graphene from GO. (b) Spin and charge density of graphene network (gray) dual-doped by N (black) and S (white). Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission from Wiley. 
The S and N dual-doped graphene has also shown increased ORR activity in NaOH electrolyte with thiophene and pyrimidine as the precursors.121 However, all of these mentioned promising co-doped catalysts were studied in alkaline media. Recently, Woo et al. have tried to use boric acid and phosphoric acid to introduce B and P to N-graphene, obtaining BN-graphene and P and N dual-doped graphene (PN-graphene), respectively.122 Their ORR activities were studied in acidic media and both of them showed good performance, especially the PN-graphene. Its onset potential and mass activity were 0.87 V and 0.80 mA mg−1, better than 0.75 V and 0.45 mA mg−1 of the original N-graphene, indicating a synergetic increased catalytic property due to the co-doping. The enhanced performance was attributed to the asymmetry enhancement of spin density caused by the dual-doped heteroatoms, as well as the induced facile electron transfer on the graphene basal plane and decrement of energy gap. The synergetic effect induced from double doping has further enhanced the catalytic performance of graphene, which also opens up more possibilities for the fine tuning of the properties of graphene-based materials. Currently, the studies of the co-doping effect are very preliminary. For example, extensive investigations are need to understand the exact formats and concentrations of the co-doped elements on the surface of the graphene, as well as their influence for the catalytic properties.
3. Conclusion and perspectives

Table 1 summarizes different reactions catalyzed by doped graphene. With the selection of appropriate precursors, different metal-free heteroatoms can be doped into graphene sheets, modifying its geometrical and electronic structures and inducing interesting active sites, which contribute to their different catalytic performance. The most common preparation method for GO is the Hummers method, which uses a strong oxidizing agent. GO has been widely studied and applied in many important catalytic reactions, especially for a series of oxidation reactions, in which the attached oxygenated groups on the graphene surface are pivotal as the active sites. For other heteroatom-doped graphene, such as N and B doping, there are two preparation methods in general: the first is the synchronous doping method, which depends on CVD technology, with the addition of an appropriate carbon source and heteroatom precursor, and the foreign element can be introduced into the graphene sheets during its growing process. The other method is the post treatment process, in which GO or reduced GO was prepared at first as graphene substrates, which are plasma treated or annealed at high temperatures with the introduction of heteroatom containing molecules, affording different doped graphene catalysts. In light of all these methods, it is still very difficult to control the doping concentration, doping and bonding formats, distributional uniformity as well as some other features. This is especially true for the co-doping cases. All of these features directly or indirectly determine the properties of the doped graphene in catalytic reactions. Therefore, the development of better synthetic strategies is still much needed. As can be seen from the catalytic efficiency shown in Table 1, all doped samples exhibit higher efficiency compared to un-doped graphene, demonstrating a great beneficial effect of doping on performance. Interestingly, all co-doped graphenes have shown better performance during the catalytic process than single element doped samples under the same conditions. This provides not only new insights on the underlying synergistic effect, but also a general strategy for the development of low cost and high performance metal-free doped graphene for catalysis.
Table 1 Summary of the doped graphene as metal-free catalysts. [T]: conversion rate; [Y]: yield; [B]: reaction barrier; [V]: maximum reaction rate




Doped graphene
Catalyst preparation
Doped level (atomic ratio)
Catalytic application
Catalytic efficiency
Ref.




GO
Hummers method
33.9%
Oxidation of benzyl alcohol
1.6 × 10−2 mol g−1 [T]

12



GO
Hummers method
35.5%
Oxidation of sulfides and thiols
Sulfides: 51–96% [Y]

14



Thiols: 75–100% [Y]


GO
Hummers method
—
Oxidation of C–H
4–85% [Y]

31



GO
Hummers method
23.6%
Oxidation of glucose
(3.85 ± 0.22) × 10−8 M s−1 [V]

36



GO
Hummers method
25.5%
Oxidation of SO2
6.12 g g−1 [T]

38



GO
Hummers method
—
Oxidative C–H functionalisation of tertiary amines
90–97% [Y]

39



GO
Hummers method
—
Oxidative coupling of amines to imines
75–98% [Y]

29, 40



GO
Simulations
75% and 12.5%
Oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde
1.64 eV for 75% [B]

41



1.10 eV for 12.5% [B]


GO

In situ electrochemical oxidation of graphite
22.5%
Oxidation of ascorbic acid
—

42



GO
Hummers method
—
ORR
>Bare GC electrode

43



GO
Hummers method
30%
Generation hydrogen from water
>Pt/GO

44



GO
Hummers method
—
Conversion of CO2 to methanol
0.172 μmol g cat−1 h−1

45



GO
Hummers method
—
Ring opening of epoxides
7–99% [T]

46



GO
Hummers method
43.6%
Acetalization of aldehydes
2–95% [Y]

47



GO
Hummers method
—
Aza–Michael addition of amines to activated alkenes
65–97% [Y]

48



GO
Hummers method


Friedel–Crafts addition of indoles to α,β-unsaturated ketones
40–92% [Y]

49



GO
Hummers method
—
Synthesis of dipyrromethane and calyx[4]pyrrole
86–100% [T]

50



GO
Simulations
—
Oxidative dehydrogenation of propane
9.2–25.3 eV [B]

51



GO
Hummers method
—
Claisen–Schmidt coupling of methyl ketones and aldehydes
10–85% [Y]

32



GO
Hummers method
38.5%
Polymerization of various olefin monomers
100% [T]

33



GO
Hummers method
36.1%
Ring opening polymerization of various cyclic lactones and lactams
39–100% [Y]

34



GO
Hummers method
32.9%
Dehydrative polymerization
—

35



N-graphene
CVD method with CH4 and NH3 as C and N sources
4%
ORR
>Pt/C

63



N-graphene
Annealing graphene or GO with different N precursors
2.8%,64 5.5%,65 6.6%,65 7.36%,65 10.1%66
ORR
>Pt/C64

64–66



>Pt & GC electrode65


>Graphene66


N-graphene
Reducing GO by hydrazine
The ratio of C to N at the surface is 0.047
ORR
>Vulcan carbon

67



N-graphene
CVD method with ethylene and ammonia as C and N sources
16%
ORR
<Pt

68



N-graphene
Pyrolyzing the GO-polypyrrole composite
44%
ORR and OER
>Pt/C & graphene

69



N-graphene
Solvothermal method
10.5%
ORR
—

59



N-graphene
Simulations
4%,73 2.2%74
ORR
>Graphene

71, 73–75, 79



N-graphene
CVD method with pyridine and julolidine as N sources
2.7% pyridine
ORR
>Graphene

78



N-graphene
CVD method with acetonitrile vapor as the N source
2.0% julolidine
Activating C–H bonds
91.3% [Y]

81



8.9%


N-graphene
Hydrothermal treating GO with ammonia
11.1%
Reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol
100% [Y]

86



N-graphene
Annealing GO with melamine
10.1%
Reduction of nitro explosives
>Thermally reduced graphene

87



N-graphene
Heating GO with NH3
4.2%
Oxidation of benzylic alcohols
Activation energy: (56.1 ± 3.5) kJ mol−1, close to 51.4 kJ mol−1 of Ru/Al2O3

88



N-graphene
N plasma treatment method
From 0.11% to 1.35%
Oxidation of glucose
>Graphene & GC electrode

89



N-graphene
N plasma treatment method
8.5%
Reduction of H2O2
>Pt

90



N-graphene
Simulations
2.2%
Reduction of H2O2
>Graphene

92



N-graphene
Annealing GO with melamine
8.4%
Electrochemical determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid
>Bare GC electrode

93



N-graphene
Annealing GO in ammonia
7.6%
Reducing triiodide
>Pt

94



B-graphene
Annealing GO in B2O3 vapor
3.2%
ORR
≈Pt

97



B-graphene
Simulations
2.2%
ORR
>Graphene

98



S-graphene
Thermal treating of GO with H2S
From 1.2% to 1.7%
ORR
>Pt/C

100



S-graphene
Annealing GO with benzyl disulfide
From 1.3% to 1.5%
ORR
>Pt/C

101



S-graphene
Ball-milling graphite in S8
4.94%
ORR
>Pt/C

102



S-graphene
Sulfonated treatment of graphene
6.4%,103 1.8%104
Hydrolysis of ethyl acetate,103 dehydration of xylose,104 esterification of acetic acid105
>Nafion NR50103

103–105



61% [Y]104


>Mesoporous carbon & GO & SBA-15105


P-graphene
Annealing GO with triphenylphosphine
1.3%
ORR
>Graphene

106



P-graphene
Pyrolysis of alginate and H2PO4− annealing GO with diphenyl diselenide
7.3%
Hydrogen generation
>GO

107



Se-graphene
1.1 wt%110
ORR
>Pt/C101 & graphene110

101, 110



I-graphene
Annealing GO with I2
1.2%
ORR
>Pt/C & graphene

111



Si-graphene
Simulations
—
N2O reduction
—

112



H-graphene
Gamma ray irradiation of GO
54%
Fenton like reaction to degrade organic dye
>Reduced graphene

113



H-graphene
Simulations
2.2%
ORR
>Graphene

98



BN-graphene
Simulations
—
ORR



115, 116, 119



BN-graphene
Annealing GO with boric acid and ammonia
—
ORR
>Pt/C

117



BN-graphene
Annealing GO with NH3 for N doping, and then pyrolysing the intermediate with H3BO3
—
ORR
>B-graphene & N-graphene & h-BN/graphene

118



BN-graphene
Pyrolysis of graphene-dicyandiamide for N doping, and then pyrolysing it with boric acid
—
ORR
>N-graphene

122



SN-graphene
Heating GO with melamine and benzyl disulfide
—
ORR
>N-graphene & S-graphene

120



SN-graphene
CVD method with benzene, pyrimidine and thiophene as the C, N and S precursors.
—
ORR
>N-graphene & S-graphene

121



PN-graphene
Pyrolysis of graphene-dicyandiamide for N doping, and then pyrolysing it with phosphoric acid
—
ORR
>N-graphene

122





Many characterization techniques including TEM, FTIR and XPS have been employed to study doped graphene. However, it is still difficult to obtain the precise image of the doped graphene. To the best of our knowledge, no work has been able to give the complete doped structures, and most of them only showed the concentration and bonding formats of these doped atoms. As we have discussed above, the doped structures are crucial for the catalytic properties. Therefore, more precise characterizations are required to completely understand the structure of doped graphene and its catalytic mechanism. For example, detailed surface characterizations with the help of modern techniques such as scanning probing microscopy may help to display the detailed distribution of these doped atoms, even down to the single atom level.
Pristine graphene has a low chemical activity due to its uniform and symmetrical electronic structure. The doped elements can break the perfect π covalent bonds and induce local high electron/spin densities owing to the electronegativity differences, which contribute to its catalytic activity. In addition, the modifications at the edge of graphene sheets, such as the induced high strain of Se and OSO groups doped by S, can also facilitate the reactant’s adsorption and enhance its chemical activity. Also, these doped groups may also be considered as active sites. For example, the oxygenated moieties on GO possess highly active chemical properties. Therefore, it is expected new metal-free catalysts could be prepared by doping with other elements. However, some problems remain to be resolved, and the catalytic investigations on these doped graphenes are still in the early stages and most of them are limited to ORR. For example, detailed comparisons among different doping elements should be performed, which will help to direct future studies. However, there is still little work involving side-by-side comparisons among doping of different elements in intrinsic graphene. Moreover, as different laboratories have reported different results, it is very difficult to draw any meaningful conclusions at the current stage. For example, N-graphene was found to show either higher65 or lower68 activity in ORR compared to commercial Pt catalyst. Also, the catalytic thermodynamics and kinetics are unclear and more detailed studies should be carried out. Single molecule technology may help to address this problem. Taking the N-doped graphene catalyzed reduction of Nip as an example, single layer graphene with high quality can be prepared by the CVD method and single foreign atom doping might be realized via STM or other technologies. One Nip molecule would be transferred to the doped site through precise manipulations. The processes of Nip adsorption, reduction of the nitro group and Amp desorption may be observed directly, demonstrating a precise catalytic process.
To fully resolve these problems, systematic theoretical simulations are also needed in addition to experiments, which may establish a clear relationship between doping and catalytic properties in the future. As for the co-doped models, much more research should be carried out to clearly understand the synergistic effects from the two doped elements.
Above all these, the practical applications of the doped graphene in more extreme conditions and under other influencing factors should be explored. For example, recovery is an inevitable issue for any catalyst. These doped graphenes can be prepared into 3D macroscopic structures by a gel method, which will make the recovery more convenient. However, this may affect their catalytic activities. As such, a more suitable and general recycling strategy is highly desired for practical catalytic applications. This field has enjoyed an explosive expansion in a rather short period of time. These new metal-free catalysts have already exhibited excellent properties in many catalytic reactions, and will certainly find more applications in other important and interesting catalytic reactions in the near future. Or even more creatively, these doped graphenes may enable new transformations that cannot be realized by metallic catalysts or cannot be realized at all before now. For example, some studies have demonstrated good CO2 adsorption properties of N-doped graphene123 and oxygen modified graphene.124 We believe the metal-free catalytic transformations of CO2 will be soon realized by doped graphene. In the meantime, mechanistic studies are crucial to help with the understanding of the current systems as well as the design of better catalysts. On September 19, 2012, the world's first graphene production line started construction in Ningbo City, Zhejiang Province in Southern China, with an anticipated annual production capacity of 300 tonnes. This project was formally put into production in 2013 to produce high quality material, on a large scale, at low cost and in a reproducible manner, meaning the commercialization of graphene. This will ultimately open a way for graphene's exploitation in a wide spectrum of applications around the world.125 With the improvement for large scale preparation and easy recovery, we expect that the doped graphene will be soon extended to industrial and commercial catalytic employment.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, 21271163, U1232211 and 21374108), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2060200012), Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20133402120019) and the Recruitment Program of Global Experts.
Notes and references
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. Xue, D. Yu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CAS .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CAS .
C. V. Rao and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4340–4346 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, R. Blume, A. Zhang, R. Schloegl and D. S. Su, Science, 2008, 322, 73–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Frank, M. Morassutto, R. Schomaecker, R. Schloegl and D. S. Su, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 644–648 CrossRef CAS .
J. McGregor, Z. Huang, E. P. J. Parrott, J. A. Zeitler, K. L. Nguyen, J. M. Rawson, A. Carley, T. W. Hansen, J. P. Tessonnier, D. S. Su, D. Teschner, E. M. Vass, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schloegl and L. F. Gladden, J. Catal., 2010, 269, 329–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rinaldi, J. Zhang, B. Frank, D. S. Su, S. B. A. Hamid and R. Schloegl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 254–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Su, L. Zhi, A. Thomas, X. Feng, D. S. Su, R. Schloegl and K. Muellen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11296–11297 CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, H. P. Jia and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6813–6816 CAS .
B. Li and Z. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16380–16382 CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, H. P. Jia, A. D. Todd, J. Geng and C. W. Bielawski, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2011, 9, 7292–7295 CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 CAS .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2006, 312, 1191–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Biswas and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3806–3826 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
M. Pumera and C. H. A. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5987–5995 RSC .
C. Zhu and S. Dong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1753–1767 RSC .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 52–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, X. Li, J. W. Lee and B. N. Popov, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 207–217 CAS .
S. H. Hur and J. N. Park, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 8, 218–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Szabo, O. Berkesi, P. Forgo, K. Josepovits, Y. Sanakis, D. Petridis and I. Dekany, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2740–2749 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kong and Q. Chen, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lerf, H. Y. He, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, M. Acik, K. Takai, J. Lu, S.-J. Hao, Y. Zheng, P. Wu, Q. Bao, T. Enoki, Y. J. Chabal and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1298–1306 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1233–1240 RSC .
H. P. Jia, D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 4431–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Jia, D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 528–532 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3247–3253 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, K. A. Jarvis, P. J. Ferreira and C. W. Bielawski, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 757–766 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, K. A. Jarvis, P. J. Ferreira and C. W. Bielawski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7659–7667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, K. Qu, C. Zhao, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2206–2210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Liu, K. Welsher, J. T. Robinson, A. Goodwin, S. Zaric and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 203–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Long, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Gao, W. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13934–13941 RSC .
Y. Pan, S. Wang, C. W. Kee, E. Dubuisson, Y. Yang, K. P. Loh and C. H. Tan, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 3341–3344 RSC .
H. Huang, J. Huang, Y. M. Liu, H. Y. He, Y. Cao and K. N. Fan, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 930–934 RSC .
D. W. Boukhvalov, D. R. Dreyer, C. W. Bielawski and Y. W. Son, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeng, Z. Sun, X. Sang, D. Diamond, K. T. Lau, X. Liu and D. S. Su, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, H. Feng, J. Lu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Yeh, J. M. Syu, C. Cheng, T. H. Chang and H. Teng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Hsu, I. Shown, H. Y. Wei, Y. C. Chang, H. Y. Du, Y. G. Lin, C. A. Tseng, C. H. Wang, L. C. Chen, Y. C. Lin and K. H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 262–268 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro, P. Concepcion, V. Fornes and H. Garcia, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5443–5445 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro, M. Puche, V. Fornes and H. Garcia, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 2026–2030 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, H. P. Mungse, N. Kumar, S. Choudhary, S. L. Jain, B. Sain and O. P. Khatri, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12673–12675 RSC .
A. V. Kumar and K. R. Rao, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 5188–5191 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. S. Chauhan and S. Mishra, Molecules, 2011, 16, 7256–7266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang and Z. Cao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16558–16565 RSC .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Pan, L. Yu, Y. Cui, Y. Jiang, J. Qi, W. X. Li, Q. Fu, X. Ma, Q. Xue, G. Sun and X. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1194–1200 RSC .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. Wang, J. Guo and H. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Wang, K. Zhao, Z. Shi, Z. Gu and S. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 255–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Usachov, O. Vilkov, A. Grueneis, D. Haberer, A. Fedorov, V. K. Adamchuk, A. B. Preobrajenski, P. Dudin, A. Barinov, M. Oehzelt, C. Laubschat and D. V. Vyalikh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5401–5407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bai, Q. Zhu, Z. Lv, H. Dong, J. Yu and L. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1413–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Carrero-Sanchez, A. L. Elias, R. Mancilla, G. Arrellin, H. Terrones, J. P. Laclette and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1609–1616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Q. Minh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 563–588 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Li, M. Yao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10911–10917 RSC .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 CAS .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
Z.-H. Sheng, L. Shao, J.-J. Chen, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Lee, K. U. Lee, J. W. Lee, B. T. Ahn and S. I. Woo, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1052–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, S. Lim, Z. Tian, J. Shang, L. Lai, B. MacDonald, C. Fu, Z. Shen, T. Yu and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8038–8044 RSC .
Z. Lin, G. H. Waller, Y. Liu, M. Liu and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 241–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Jia and Z. Xiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2730–2740 RSC .
K. A. Kurak and A. B. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6730–6734 CAS .
Y. Okamoto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 335–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Boukhvalov and Y. W. Son, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 417–420 RSC .
L. Zhang and Z. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11170–11176 CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Niu, L. Dai and Z. Xia, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7542–7550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niwa, K. Horiba, Y. Harada, M. Oshima, T. Ikeda, K. Terakura, J. I. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ikeda, M. Boero, S.-F. Huang, K. Terakura, M. Oshima and J. I. Ozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14706–14709 CAS .
S. Yasuda, L. Yu, J. Kim and K. Murakoshi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9627–9629 RSC .
L. Yu, X. Pan, X. Cao, P. Hu and X. Bao, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 183–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Labinger and J. E. Bercaw, Nature, 2002, 417, 507–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, G. Hu, J. Zhong, Z. Shi, Y. Zhu, D. S. Su, J. Wang, X. Bao and D. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2109–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nemanashi and R. Meijboom, J. Colloid Interface
Sci., 2013, 389, 260–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fenger, E. Fertitta, H. Kirmse, A. F. Thunemann and K. Rademann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9343–9349 RSC .
N. Pradhan, A. Pal and T. Pal, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 196, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
P. Herves, M. Perez-Lorenzo, L. M. Liz-Marzan, J. Dzubiella, Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5577–5587 RSC .
X. Kong, Z. Sun, M. Chen, C. Chen and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3260–3266 CAS .
T. W. Chen, J. Y. Xu, Z. H. Sheng, K. Wang, F. B. Wang, T. M. Liang and X. H. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 30–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Long, X. Xie, J. Xu, Q. Gu, L. Chen and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 622–631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7496 RSC .
P. Wu, Y. Qian, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6402–6412 RSC .
P. Wu, P. Du, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6920–6928 RSC .
Z. H. Sheng, X. Q. Zheng, J. Y. Xu, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 34, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, D. Li, J. Qu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lherbier, X. Blase, Y. M. Niquet, F. Triozon and S. Roche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 036808 CrossRef .
L. S. Panchokarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, H. L. Gao, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
X. Kong, Q. Chen and Z. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 514–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Denis, R. Faccio and A. W. Mombru, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 715–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mullen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138–6145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, G. Zhang, H. Chen, S. Wang, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 484–487 RSC .
E. Lam, J. H. Chong, E. Majid, Y. Liu, S. Hrapovic, A. C. W. Leung and J. H. T. Luong, Carbon, 2012, 50, 1033–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, J. Sun, L. Zhu, X. Meng, C. Qi and F. S. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5495–5502 RSC .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11813–11816 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Denis, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 492, 251–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H.-J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3257–3261 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, H. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Xu and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6455–6460 RSC .
Z. Yao, H. Nie, Z. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Liu and S. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1027–1029 RSC .
Y. Chen, B. Gao, J.-X. Zhao, Q.-H. Cai and H.-G. Fu, J. Mol. Model., 2012, 18, 2043–2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. F. Chen, C. F. Yuan, Z. Y. Zhu and L. F. Yan, Chin. J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 25, 335–338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Muellen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, F. Li, Z. Hu, X. Luo, L. Zhang, X. F. Zhou, H. T. Wang, J. J. Xu and E. G. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155454 CrossRef .
S. F. Huang, K. Terakura, T. Ozaki, T. Ikeda, M. Boero, M. Oshima, J. I. Ozaki and S. Miyata, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235410 CrossRef .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3110–3116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, W. T. Zheng and J. L. Kuo, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5498–5505 RSC .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, G. Dong, C. Jin, M. Huang and L. Guan, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, M. W. Chung, H. C. Kwon, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3694–3699 CAS .
V. Chandra, S. U. Yu, S. H. Kim, Y. S. Yoon, D. Y. Kim, A. H. Kwon, M. Meyyappan and K. S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 735–737 RSC .
Y. Liu and J. Wilcox, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1940–1947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://investorintel.com/graphite-graphene-intel/the-revolutionary-era-of-industrial-scale-graphene-is-coming/
        .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Xiang-Kai Kong
	Xiang-Kai Kong completed his BS degree in Materials Physics from Huaibei Normal University in 2009. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Professor Qian-Wang Chen at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests include catalysis, carbon materials, surface enhanced Raman scattering and theoretical simulations.

Chang-Le Chen
	Chang-Le Chen is currently a Professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Science and Technology of China in Hefei, China. Chang-Le obtained his BS degree from USTC, and his MS and PhD degrees from University of Chicago under the supervision of Prof. Richard Jordan. Before taking his faculty position, he did a postdoc study at Northwestern University with Prof. Tobin Marks, and worked as a Scientist II at Celanese Corporation. His notable awards include Albert J. Cross Prize, American Chemical Society DIC Young Investigator Award, IUPAC Prizes-Honorable Mention and the Recruitment Program of Global Experts.

Qian-Wang Chen
	Professor Qian-Wang Chen received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1995 and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. Later, he worked as a post doctoral researcher in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan, Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, Germany and visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a professor in 2000 at the USTC and was awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2002 by the Ministry of Education of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of nanoscale materials.

 	Fig. 1  A new structure model of GO: (a) surface species and (b) folded carbon skeleton. With permission from ref. 26, copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of colorimetric detection of glucose by using glucose oxidase and GO–COOH catalyzed reactions. Reprinted from ref. 36 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optimized atomic structures for the (a) initial, (b) intermediate and (c) final steps of benzyl alcohol oxidation over GO with the initial coverage of epoxy and hydroxyl groups, in which 12.5% of the carbon atoms are on the material's basal plane. The total energy costs of the reactions are reported in eV. From ref. 41 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the exfoliation process (gray, red, white and blue stand for carbon, oxygen, hydrogen and gas, respectively). (b) CV curves obtained from 3.0 mM ascorbic acid in 0.1 M PBS (pH = 6.9) with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; the dotted and solid lines stand for graphite and GO electrodes, respectively. (c) Amperometric response of GO-modified electrode held at 0.0 V for successive injection of ascorbic acid under constant magnetic stirring. Inset: calibration plot of current vs. ascorbic acid concentration. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic energy-level diagram of GO relative to the levels for H2 and O2 generation from water. During photocatalytic reaction the conduction band of GO with a high overpotential relative to the level for H2 generation exhibits fast electron injection from the excited GO into the solution phase, whereas the holes in the valence band of GO do not interact with the water molecules for O2 generation, but are removed by the hole scavenger (methanol) instead. The possible mechanism for this methanol assisted water splitting is shown in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction mechanism on GO, reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  The rotating ring disk electrode voltammograms for the ORR in air saturated 0.1 M KOH at the pristine graphene electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-graphene electrode (blue line). Adapted from ref. 63 with permission, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram for the preparation of N-graphene with different N states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2012, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Optimized structure of each electron transformation in ORR: (a) initial position of OOH from N-graphene, (b) OOH adsorbs on the doped graphene, (c) O–O bond is broken, (d) one water molecule is generated, and (e) C–O bond is broken, the second water molecule is generated. Gray, blue, red and small white balls represent C, N, O and H atoms, respectively. With permission from ref. 75, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Reaction scheme of ORR on N-graphene in alkaline solution, where ① presents an associative mechanism and ② a dissociative mechanism. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representation of different catalytic sites for peroxide adsorption on the N-graphene. The adsorption energy is listed in the top line (in eV) beside the corresponding sites; “XX” indicates that peroxide can not be adsorbed on the site. The charge of different sites before formation of peroxide is shown in the second line (in a). The inset at the bottom of (a) shows the local configuration of peroxide on ortho carbon site of N-graphene. (b) The electronic partial density of states for N and C in different positions of N-graphene. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Typical absorption spectra of Nip by BH4− as the catalytic reaction proceeded, where the molar ratio between Nip and NaBH4 was selected as 1:100; (b) photos of the color change during the catalytic reaction for NG. (c) and (d) Time curves of the absorbance measured for the NG catalyst, indicating zero order kinetics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  
In situ FTIR of the mixture composed of Nip and NG (a) in side view and (b) in top view; (c) the absorbance variation of O–H vibration with time. With permission from ref. 86, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Relationship between initial reaction rate and graphitic N species; (b) the proposed reaction pathway for the aerobic alcohol oxidation over N-graphene. With permission from ref. 88, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Chronoamperometric responses to successive addition of 5 mM uric acid (UA), 5 mM ascorbic acid (AA), 0.5 mM glucose, 0.1 mM glucose, 0.05 mM glucose, 0.02 mM glucose, and 0.01 mM glucose on N-graphene electrode immobilized with glucose oxidase at −0.15 V in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.0). From ref. 89, copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The source of the high spin density for B-graphene, (b) the calculated NBO charge density distribution in unit of a.u. for B-graphene, (c) relative energies of the reaction pathways of ORR on B-graphene. Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  A schematic representation of the ball-milling process. From ref. 102 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of the prepared sulfonated graphene, and corresponding quantitative EDS element mapping of (b) C, (c) O and (d) S. (e) Illustration for the preparation of sulfonated graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2011, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of ORR on BN-graphene and the h-BN–graphene hybrid in an oxygen saturated 0.1 M solution of KOH with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) Summary of the kinetic limiting current density and the transferred electron number on the basis of the RDE data and the RRDE data (values in parentheses) on various catalysts. (c) Calculated adsorption energies of HO2 for all of the selected catalysts. N(p) and N(g) indicate pyridinic and graphitic N bonding, respectively. (d) Adsorption energies on various BN-graphene with B active sites as a function of the distance to a pyridinic N atom. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  The 2D charge redistribution in the graphene planar region calculated by the charge difference between the doped graphene and pristine graphene (blue for charge depletion and red for charge accumulation) of B-graphene, N-graphene and BN-graphene. With permission from ref. 119, copyright 2013, Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A schematic illustration of the fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous graphene from GO. (b) Spin and charge density of graphene network (gray) dual-doped by N (black) and S (white). Reprinted from ref. 120 with permission from Wiley.	 

GO	Hummers method	33.9%	Oxidation of benzyl alcohol	1.6 × 10−2 mol g−1 [T]	
12

GO	Hummers method	35.5%	Oxidation of sulfides and thiols	Sulfides: 51–96% [Y]	
14

Thiols: 75–100% [Y]
GO	Hummers method	—	Oxidation of C–H	4–85% [Y]	
31

GO	Hummers method	23.6%	Oxidation of glucose	(3.85 ± 0.22) × 10−8 M s−1 [V]	
36

GO	Hummers method	25.5%	Oxidation of SO2	6.12 g g−1 [T]	
38

GO	Hummers method	—	Oxidative C–H functionalisation of tertiary amines	90–97% [Y]	
39

GO	Hummers method	—	Oxidative coupling of amines to imines	75–98% [Y]	
29, 40

GO	Simulations	75% and 12.5%	Oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde	1.64 eV for 75% [B]	
41

1.10 eV for 12.5% [B]
GO	
In situ electrochemical oxidation of graphite	22.5%	Oxidation of ascorbic acid	—	
42

GO	Hummers method	—	ORR	>Bare GC electrode	
43

GO	Hummers method	30%	Generation hydrogen from water	>Pt/GO	
44

GO	Hummers method	—	Conversion of CO2 to methanol	0.172 μmol g cat−1 h−1	
45

GO	Hummers method	—	Ring opening of epoxides	7–99% [T]	
46

GO	Hummers method	43.6%	Acetalization of aldehydes	2–95% [Y]	
47

GO	Hummers method	—	Aza–Michael addition of amines to activated alkenes	65–97% [Y]	
48

GO	Hummers method	
	Friedel–Crafts addition of indoles to α,β-unsaturated ketones	40–92% [Y]	
49

GO	Hummers method	—	Synthesis of dipyrromethane and calyx[4]pyrrole	86–100% [T]	
50

GO	Simulations	—	Oxidative dehydrogenation of propane	9.2–25.3 eV [B]	
51

GO	Hummers method	—	Claisen–Schmidt coupling of methyl ketones and aldehydes	10–85% [Y]	
32

GO	Hummers method	38.5%	Polymerization of various olefin monomers	100% [T]	
33

GO	Hummers method	36.1%	Ring opening polymerization of various cyclic lactones and lactams	39–100% [Y]	
34

GO	Hummers method	32.9%	Dehydrative polymerization	—	
35

N-graphene	CVD method with CH4 and NH3 as C and N sources	4%	ORR	>Pt/C	
63

N-graphene	Annealing graphene or GO with different N precursors	2.8%,64 5.5%,65 6.6%,65 7.36%,65 10.1%66	ORR	>Pt/C64	
64–66

>Pt & GC electrode65
>Graphene66
N-graphene	Reducing GO by hydrazine	The ratio of C to N at the surface is 0.047	ORR	>Vulcan carbon	
67

N-graphene	CVD method with ethylene and ammonia as C and N sources	16%	ORR	<Pt	
68

N-graphene	Pyrolyzing the GO-polypyrrole composite	44%	ORR and OER	>Pt/C & graphene	
69

N-graphene	Solvothermal method	10.5%	ORR	—	
59

N-graphene	Simulations	4%,73 2.2%74	ORR	>Graphene	
71, 73–75, 79

N-graphene	CVD method with pyridine and julolidine as N sources	2.7% pyridine	ORR	>Graphene	
78

N-graphene	CVD method with acetonitrile vapor as the N source	2.0% julolidine	Activating C–H bonds	91.3% [Y]	
81

8.9%
N-graphene	Hydrothermal treating GO with ammonia	11.1%	Reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol	100% [Y]	
86

N-graphene	Annealing GO with melamine	10.1%	Reduction of nitro explosives	>Thermally reduced graphene	
87

N-graphene	Heating GO with NH3	4.2%	Oxidation of benzylic alcohols	Activation energy: (56.1 ± 3.5) kJ mol−1, close to 51.4 kJ mol−1 of Ru/Al2O3	
88

N-graphene	N plasma treatment method	From 0.11% to 1.35%	Oxidation of glucose	>Graphene & GC electrode	
89

N-graphene	N plasma treatment method	8.5%	Reduction of H2O2	>Pt	
90

N-graphene	Simulations	2.2%	Reduction of H2O2	>Graphene	
92

N-graphene	Annealing GO with melamine	8.4%	Electrochemical determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid	>Bare GC electrode	
93

N-graphene	Annealing GO in ammonia	7.6%	Reducing triiodide	>Pt	
94

B-graphene	Annealing GO in B2O3 vapor	3.2%	ORR	≈Pt	
97

B-graphene	Simulations	2.2%	ORR	>Graphene	
98

S-graphene	Thermal treating of GO with H2S	From 1.2% to 1.7%	ORR	>Pt/C	
100

S-graphene	Annealing GO with benzyl disulfide	From 1.3% to 1.5%	ORR	>Pt/C	
101

S-graphene	Ball-milling graphite in S8	4.94%	ORR	>Pt/C	
102

S-graphene	Sulfonated treatment of graphene	6.4%,103 1.8%104	Hydrolysis of ethyl acetate,103 dehydration of xylose,104 esterification of acetic acid105	>Nafion NR50103	
103–105

61% [Y]104
>Mesoporous carbon & GO & SBA-15105
P-graphene	Annealing GO with triphenylphosphine	1.3%	ORR	>Graphene	
106

P-graphene	Pyrolysis of alginate and H2PO4− annealing GO with diphenyl diselenide	7.3%	Hydrogen generation	>GO	
107

Se-graphene	1.1 wt%110	ORR	>Pt/C101 & graphene110	
101, 110

I-graphene	Annealing GO with I2	1.2%	ORR	>Pt/C & graphene	
111

Si-graphene	Simulations	—	N2O reduction	—	
112

H-graphene	Gamma ray irradiation of GO	54%	Fenton like reaction to degrade organic dye	>Reduced graphene	
113

H-graphene	Simulations	2.2%	ORR	>Graphene	
98

BN-graphene	Simulations	—	ORR	
	
115, 116, 119

BN-graphene	Annealing GO with boric acid and ammonia	—	ORR	>Pt/C	
117

BN-graphene	Annealing GO with NH3 for N doping, and then pyrolysing the intermediate with H3BO3	—	ORR	>B-graphene & N-graphene & h-BN/graphene	
118

BN-graphene	Pyrolysis of graphene-dicyandiamide for N doping, and then pyrolysing it with boric acid	—	ORR	>N-graphene	
122

SN-graphene	Heating GO with melamine and benzyl disulfide	—	ORR	>N-graphene & S-graphene	
120

SN-graphene	CVD method with benzene, pyrimidine and thiophene as the C, N and S precursors.	—	ORR	>N-graphene & S-graphene	
121

PN-graphene	Pyrolysis of graphene-dicyandiamide for N doping, and then pyrolysing it with phosphoric acid	—	ORR	>N-graphene	
122


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
