Research progress of two-dimensional antimonene in energy storage and conversion  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP00126A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP00126A
(Review Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 12587-12601Research progress of two-dimensional antimonene in energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Zhe 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanjie 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yunhui 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *abcd
aSchool of Electronic Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 300130, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yhshi@hebut.edu.cn
bTianjin Key Laboratory of Electronic Materials and Devices, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, 300130, People's Republic of China
cHebei Collaborative Innovation Center of Microelectronic Materials and Technology on Ultra Precision Processing (CIC), Tianjin, 300130, China
dHebei Engineering Research Center of Microelectronic Materials and Devices (ERC), Tianjin, 300130, China
Received 
      10th January 2023
    , Accepted 20th April 2023First published on 21st April 2023AbstractSince the first proposal of antimonene in 2015, extensive research attention has been drawn to its application in energy storage and conversion because of its excellent layered structure and fast ion diffusion properties. However, in contrast to the revolutionary expansion of antimonene-based energy devices, reviews on this topic that summarize and further guide the design of 2D antimonene for energy storage and conversion are rare. In this review, the structure, physicochemical properties, and popular synthesis approaches of antimonene are first summarised. Specifically, the rational design and application of antimonene in energy storage and conversion such as electrochemical batteries and supercapacitors, electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction, electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction, photocatalytic reduction of organic pollution, photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2), solar cells and photovoltaic devices are outlined. Finally, opportunities and challenges are presented to further advance the development and application of antimonene in energy conversion and storage.
Zhe Li
Zhe Li is a student at the Institute of Electronic Information Engineering, HeBei University of Technology. At present, his research direction is two-dimensional energy storage materials. He mainly studies MoB-based zinc ion batteries in water systems.
Yanjie Cheng
Yanjie Cheng received his bachelor degree from Shanxi University in 2020. Now, he studies at the School of Electronic Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, China. His research interests are focused on filter capacitors, and Nanomaterials.
Ye Liu
Ye Liu, born in Shandong Province in 1997, studied at the School of Electronic Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology. Her research direction is two-dimensional material energy storage devices, mainly studying the energy storage behavior of antimonene-based materials in aqueous electrolyte.
Yunhui Shi
Yunhui Shi is a lecturer for College of Electronic Information Engineering, HeBei University of Technology. Her research focuses on the fields of nanotechnology for energy storage materials with multifunctional hybrid nanocomposite structures. In recent years, she has expanded her fields of interest toward characterization, chemical functionalization, and application of new 2D nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical storage devices, such as lithium/sodium ion batteries, have the advantages of high energy density, high power density, long cycle life, low self-discharge rate and high working voltage, and are widely used in the fields of energy storage, electronics, communications and aerospace. In addition, environmentally-friendly supercapacitors with large capacity, high power density, and long cycle life have a wide range of applications in wind power generation systems, smart grid systems, and so on. As key components, Electrodes are crucial to electrochemical storage performance. Thus, great efforts have been made to develop superior electrode materials, including amorphous carbon materials,1,2 metal and metal oxides,3–6 transition-metal carbides7 and chalcogenides,8etc.
Among various electrode materials, two-dimensional (2D) materials show great potential in energy storage applications owing to their large interlayer spacing, high specific surface area, and sufficient reactive basal planes and edges. Since the successful fabrication and application of graphene in various energy storage devices,9,10 new mono elemental 2D Xenes materials have attracted intensive interest. Antimonene, defined as a mono- or few-layer of antimony atoms, is a rising star because of its layer-dependent optical, electronic, catalytic, and electrochemical properties. Pandey et al.11 demonstrated that there are four antimonene allotropes (α-antimonene, β-antimonene, γ-antimonene, and δ-antimonene) through first-principle theoretical calculation. Among them, the β-type phase with a puckered honeycomb structure is the most stable allotrope in the air atmosphere and possesses a large interlayer distance of 3.65 Å,11 which can facilitate rapid ion diffusion and intercalation, making it a promising energy storage material for electrochemical batteries and supercapacitors. For instance, graphene derived composite materials rGO@Co3O4/CoO, which is used as supercapacitor material, has a specific capacity of 276.1 F g−1 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at 5 mV s−1 sweep speed.12 In contrast, antimonene shows a high specific capacity of 597 F g−1 in 0.2 M KOH electrolyte at a sweep speed of 10 mV s−1,13 indicating the potential different energy storage mechanisms.
Given its extremely large surface-to-volume ratio and layer-dependent bandgap (an indirect bandgap of ∼0.76 eV for a single layer β-antimonene which decreases significantly with increased thickness), antimonene is also expected to be used as an excellent catalyst for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting, CO2 photoreduction, and organic pollutants photodegradation. In addition, the puckered honeycomb morphology makes the structure and performance of pristine antimonene feasible to be optimized via heteroatom doping, interface engineering, constructing heterostructures, etc. Therefore, band engineering of antimonene through surface and interlayer modification can enhance the activity of reaction centres as well as introduce more active sites. Current available theoretical and experimental investigations have described the application of antimonene in energy storage and conversion. For example, 2D antimonene electrodes can store lithium ions,14 and antimonene quantum dots (AMQDs) can improve the performance and stability of solar cells.15–17 However, recent reviews based on antimonene nanosheets or quantum dots most focused on the fabrication methods and applications in the electronic area; there is no thorough description and summary of their reaction mechanism and application in energy storage and conversion. Thus, a comprehensive review is expected to offer insight into the development of 2D antimonene-based materials and devices, especially energy-related. Herein, we concentrate on the design and engineering strategies of antimonene-based materials for energy storage and conversion, including pure and elemental doped antimonene, and relevant composites. First, we briefly review the physicochemical properties and fabrication methods of antimonene nanosheets. Then, the recent advances in batteries, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis are presented systematically. Last, we highlight the current challenges and future opportunities of antimonene-based materials for high performance energy storage and conversion systems.
2. Physicochemical properties and synthetic strategies of 2D antimonene
2.1. Physicochemical properties
Zeng and co-workers18 first reported the two-dimensional material antimonene in 2015. As the most commonly studied antimonene structure, β-phase antimonene has a stable configuration and a large specific surface area due to the corrugated honeycomb structure. It is well accepted that the measured bond length of adjacent Sb–Sb bonds is 2.84 Å while the bond angle is 89.9°.19 Theoretical calculations also predicted that β-type phase features modulated semiconducting electronic properties, which gradually transform from topological semimetal to indirect-band gap semiconductor with decreased thickness/layer. Specifically, according to Fig. 1, both the trilayers and bilayers feature metallic states as the top of the conduction band and the bottom of the valence band cross the Fermi level, while the single-layer antimonene shows a wide bandgap of 2.28 eV.18 The broadened bandgap enables antimonene a larger reduction potential while it can result in a greater thermodynamic driving force during the photocatalytic reaction. And the more negative conduction band can inhibit the recombination of holes and electrons effectively. On the other hand, the diameter of antimonene element is 0.32 nm, which is larger than non-metal elemental doping and point defects. As expected, the chemical properties have also changed along with the changes in layer and size. For instance, Raman activation modes of the β-antimonene monolayer show a blue shift to 150 cm−1 (Eg) and 195 cm−1 (A1g),19 respectively, compared with that of bulk antimony as Eg is the in-plane mode and A1g is the out-of-plane vibration mode. Therefore, chemical properties can be optimized via different atoms’ intercalation or fabricating heterostructures with other nanomaterials.
 Fig. 1  Layer-dependent electronic structures of Sb. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Angewandte Chemie, copyright 2015. 
In summary, the distinctive physical and chemical properties of antimonene make it an important candidate for energy storage and conversion. First, the extremely large surface-to-volume ratio can promote mass transfer and light harvesting, and the abundant active sites are in favour of ion adsorption and redox reaction. Second, the reduced thickness and enlarged interlayer spacing can facilitate the ions’ migration and thus accelerate the electrons’ transportation in the plane.
2.2. Synthetic strategies
Efforts have been made to fabricate 2D antimonene and the main preparation methods, including molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), liquid phase exfoliation (LPE), electrochemical exfoliation, and so on, can be divided as top-down and bottom-up methods.
MBE in brief is a conventional bottom-up method that can be depicted as heating the proper precursors in a furnace under a vacuum environment to produce a molecular beam or atomic beam through a small hole and thus spray it directly onto a substrate at an appropriate temperature. A thin antimonene film can be consequently formed on the substrate by controlling the molecular beam. On the other hand, MBE grows slowly, so accurate thickness control can be achieved. Moreover, growth is performed in ultra-vacuum, and the substrate surface is cleaned completely after treatment. In such circumstances, the epitaxy process avoids contamination, so that the quality of growth is excellent and free from any defects. For example, in 2017, Gao and co-workers20 used MBE to prepare monolayer antimonene on a PdTe2 substrate (Fig. 2a). The lattice mismatch between the modified substrate and antimonene is only 2.3%, which is suitable for the growth of antimonene. The obtained antimonene was tested by XPS, and the results showed that the physical structures and chemical properties were stable. In 2018, Wang et al.21 used MBE to grow a monolayer of antimonene on an Ag(111) hexagonal symmetric substrate (Fig. 2b), and the antimonene obtained using this substrate was flatter than that with other methods.
 Fig. 2  (a) Molecular beam epitaxy on Ag(111) substrates. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Advanced Materials, copyright 2017. (b) Molecular beam epitaxy on PdTe2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Nano letters, Copyright 2018. (c) Liquid phase stripping method. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Angewandte Chemie, Copyright 2018. (d) Schematic diagram of double electrode system for electrochemical stripping of antimony. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Advanced Optical Materials, Copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the electrochemical exfoliation and synchronous halogenation of antimonene in an ionic liquid-based electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Advanced Functional Materials, Copyright 2019. 
The top-down LPE method can be depicted as exfoliating bulk antimony in solution to obtain 2D antimonene (Fig. 2c).22 The methods can be divided into the direct exfoliation method and the intercalation exfoliation method. The former has a simple preparation procedure but low yield, and the latter is more complicated but can obtain a better quality of 2D antimonene with high yield. Antimonene prepared by LPE is also stable, but the quality of antimonene obtained by liquid stripping method is lower than that by MBE. One of the most important advantages of LPE is the large-scale preparation of single, few or multiple antimonene layers, which makes it widely used in energy, catalysis and biological fields due to its enormous active sites resulting from defects. In 2016, Carlos et al.23 prepared a few-layer antimonene (FLA) for the first time using the LPE method. Specifically, they produced FLA suspensions by sonicating antimony crystals in a solution of 4:1 isopropanol and water for several weeks. The prepared antimonene can remain stable in air for several weeks. In 2019 Carlos et al.24 studied various factors affecting the preparation of antimonene by LPE. Accordingly, the pretreatments such as grinding can deeply affect the concentration and morphology of antimonene suspension. In addition, the solvent plays a very important role in LPE, and the highest concentration of antimonene suspension can be obtained using NMP/H2O at a ratio of 4:1. Finally, ultrasonic probe treatment is better than water bath sonication in terms of both quality and quantity for resulting antimonene.
Electrochemical exfoliation can prepare larger-scale nanomaterials and no complicated chemical reactions are required but electrochemical activation. Moreover, electrochemical exfoliation can change the surface group of antimonene. In 2017, Lu et al.25 successfully prepared α-phase FLA and AMQDs for the first time by electrochemical exfoliation (Fig. 2d). In 2019, Su et al.26 prepared low-layer antimonene by a one-step electrochemical stripping process through synchronous halogenation (Fig. 2e). This method can form halogen radicals from halogen anions in electrolyte and insert them into antimonene crystal layer. Thus, the energy band structure of antimonene can be adjusted. This method also provides a new direction for the demonstration of functionalization and energy band engineering of 2D materials.
3. 2D antimonene for energy storage
Rechargeable/secondary lithium/sodium ion batteries and supercapacitors with high energy capacity and efficiency are urgently needed to meet the demand for sustainable energy technology. Therefore, new electrode materials have attracted enormous research interest for they are the host of alkali-metal ions and thus important determinants of energy density and charging rate. Recent experiments exhibit that 2D antimonene has large specific area and interlayer spacing, tunable bandgap, and electrochemical properties, suggesting great potential in energy storage. The larger the specific surface area of materials, the more active sites they have, and thus the higher the specific capacitance. Yan,28 Tian,29 Wang,30 and Guo31 used antimonene as the cathode of ion batteries, indicating that the large interlayer spacing can enable the fast Li/Na ions diffusion kinetics. Thus, in this section, the energy storage mechanisms and properties of antimonene-based energy storage devices are demonstrated and discussed in detail.
3.1. Reaction mechanism
Liu et al.27 analyzed the storage mechanism of antimonene in acidic, basic and neutral conditions, respectively. Peaks at 0.15 and 0.4 V in H2SO4 electrolyte indicate the Faraday process of antimonene while the quasi-rectangular shape of CV curves in KCl and LiOH electrolytes indicates that there is a pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanism of antimonene in neutral and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 3a–c). By further employing the power law (i = avb) to analyze the relationship between peak current and sweep speed, a mixture of pseudo-capacitance and battery-like behavior of antimonene in acidic environment is further confirmed (Fig. 3d–f).
 Fig. 3  (a–c) CV curves of antimonene in H2SO4, KCl, LiOH electrolytes at different scan rates, respectively. (d) Calculation of b for antimonene electrode at different scan rates in H2SO4 electrolyte. The capacitance area ratio of antimonene in H2SO4 electrolyte with a scan rate of (e) 3 mV s−1 and (f) 10 mV s−1, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Electrochimica Acta, Copyright 2023. 
3.2. Rechargeable battery

3.2.1. Alkali-metal ion batteries. 
Sodium-ion batteries have attracted research attention because of the abundant sodium reserves and relatively low manufacturing costs. Yingchang Yang et al.28 synthesized porous antimonene(p-antimonene) as the negative electrode for sodium-ion battery. Specifically, in 1 M tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide (TMAOH) aqueous solution, porous antimonene was electrochemically stripped using a two-electrode system, and the as-prepared p-antimonene is shown in Fig. 4a with a thin film morphology. The CV values of p-antimonene and Sb NPs electrodes at 0.2 mV s−1 are further compared in Fig. 4b. Accordingly, the mass normalized current density of p-antimonene electrodes is much higher than that of the Sb NPs. Fig. 4c further depicts the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of p-antimonene electrodes at a scan of 0.1 mV s−1, in which Na+ ions are inserted into antimonene to form Na3Sb as shown by the reduction peaks at 0.68 V and 0.34 V, while the anodic peak at 0.87 V corresponds to the desolvation of Na3Sb into Sb. Fig. 4d shows the cycling performance of p-antimonene and Sb NPs electrodes in fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) electrolyte at 100 mA g−1. It can be seen that the reversible specific capacity of antimonene electrodes and Sb NPs electrodes are 615 and 608.3 mA h g−1 in the organic system, respectively. The Nyquist diagram (Fig. 4e) indicates that the contact resistance and charge transfer resistance (RCT) of p-antimonene electrodes are 3.7 and 62.7 Ω, respectively, which are much lower than that of Sb NPs (6.1 and 113.6 Ω). In conclusion, due to the large surface-to-volume ratio and porous sheet structure, the porous antimonene electrodes can adapt to large volume changes and promote the diffusion of Na+ ions, thus resulting in good cycle performance and rate performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Prepared antimonene, (b) CV Curve of antimonene and antimony nano sheet electrode at 0.2 mV s−1, (c) CV diagram of porous antimonene at 100 mA g−1, (d) cyclicity of antimonene and antimony nano sheet electrode at 100 mA g−1, (e) Nyquist diagram. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Electrochemistry Communications, Copyright 2021. (f) Ex situ SAED patterns during sodiation at 1.5, 0.68, and 0.01 V and desodiation states at 0.96 and 1.5 V under a 0.5 C rate during the 3rd discharging/charging cycle and (g) Schematic diagram showing the five states of the FLA anode during sodiation/desodiation processes corresponding to the different crystalline phases/crystal structures of Sb, NaSb and Na3Sb at the specific charging discharging voltage. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from ACS nano, Copyright 2018. 
The anisotropic volume expansion of 2D FLA is further expected to facilitate the sodium-ion insertion and thus improve the cycle life of sodium-ion batteries. It is found that FLA electrode can show a stable capacity of 620 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.5 C and maintain 99.7% capacity after 10–150 test cycles, along with a high coulomb efficiency of close to 100%.29 When the current density increases to 5 C, the anode capacity is 429 mA h g−1 and can maintain 67% of its initial capacity. After 35 charge–discharge cycles, the specific capacity can recover to 645 mA h g−1 at the current density of 0.1 C, indicating good reversibility and high rate performance. In addition, further investigation of the sodium ion storage mechanism of FLA indicates that the inserted Na+ ion can react with Sb atom to form NaSb and Na3Sb, resulting in the in-plane lattice expansion of the a/b axis. On the other hand, the interlayer distance of FLA is about 3.8 Å, which could accommodate large Na+ ions. Therefore, the insertion of Na+ between FLA layers would not significantly change the lattice parameters of the c-axis. The electrochemical reaction mechanism can be further illustrated as shown in Fig. 4f and g. Specifically, sodium reacts with antimonene at 0.68 V to form crystal NaSb and gradually forms Na3Sb at 0.39 V. Since the in-plane expansion along the a/b axis is not constrained; thus, it could accommodate large anisotropic volume changing along the a/b axis and so as to realize stable Na+ ion storage.


3.2.2. Lithium-metal batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries have the characteristics of large storage capacity, high energy density and good cycle stability, and are widely used in various electronic products, aerospace and electric vehicles. However, up to now, scientists are still imperative to explore efficient anode materials due to the limited performance of normal lithium-ion batteries with the graphite anode. In such circumstances, 2D antimonene with large interlayer spacing and sufficient reactive basal planes and edges have attracted numerous research interests. For example, bilayer β-antimonene was used as anode material for lithium-ion batteries.30 Generally, there are two stacking modes of bilayer antimonene: AA-stacking and AB-stacking (Fig. 5a and b). The energy band gaps of these two structures are 0.35 and 0.04 eV (Fig. 5c and d), respectively, which shows quite good stability and potential as anode materials. In addition, the ionization potentials of AA and AB stacked bilayers are 4.40 and 3.94 eV, respectively. As a result, AA-stacking antimonene with higher ionization potential is better suited to work as anode material. On the other hand, the energy barrier of Li migration in AA-stacking mode is smaller than that in AB-stacking mode, indicating that different configurations of β-antimonene have a different effect on the adsorption and diffusion of Li ions. The open circuit voltage of the antimonene anode is 0–2 V. As a result, the volume expansion rate of the AB-stacking structure at the maximum lithium capacity is 25%, which is much higher than that of the AA-stacking structure (4%). Therefore, AA-stacking β-antimonene bilayers have good structural integrity and potential as a negative electrode for lithium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 5  (a) The structure and calculated (c) energy band of AA-stacking bilayer β-Sb, and (b) the structure and calculated (d) energy band of AB-stacking bilayer β-Sb. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Applied Surface Science, Copyright 2019. (e) Cycling performances of bulk β-phase antimony, antimonene nanosheets and Sb NPs; (f) rate performance of antimonene nanosheets and Sb NPs. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Copyright 2019. 
Another example of antimonene-based lithium electrode comes from Gao et al.31 In this work, bulk antimony, antimonene and antimonene nanoparticles (NPs) are studied systematically at different current densities to compare the electrochemical properties (Fig. 5e). The results show that the capacity of bulk Sb decays rapidly after dozens of cycles, and the decay rates of antimonene and Sb NPs after 100 cycles are 3.8% and 21.9%, respectively, indicating the stable cyclic performance of antimonene and Sb NPs. On the other hand, although the capacity of Sb NPs is higher than that of antmonene at 0.1 C, it decreases faster with the increment of current density, showing the better rate performance of antimonene than that of Sb NPs (Fig. 5f). Based on the first principle calculation, antimonene is conducive to Li+ ion diffusion along the plane channel and thus resulting in a small diffusion barrier of 0.25 eV, while the cross-layer diffusion barrier of Li-ion is 1.14 eV. That can explain the differences in electrochemical performance of antimonene and Sb NPs, since there is a diffusion competition along the in-plane and interlayer orientations in Sb NPs, while Li+ ions can only diffuse along the plane channel direction in 2D antimonene.

3.3. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors have attracted research attention due to their high-power density, fast charging and discharging speed, and long cycle life. 2D antimonene with a large specific surface area and sufficient active planes and edges has become an ideal candidate for supercapacitor electrodes. Antimonene has a large specific surface area due to its layered structure, which also makes antimonene have great potential for energy storage and catalysis. In those papers, Perin,33 Ismail13 and Yan Li46 and other research have demonstrated through experiments that specific surface area is closely related to specific capacitance. In this section, we summarize reports on antimonene and antimonene-based hybrid electrodes and their application in supercapacitor devices. The characteristic nanosheet physical structure of antimonene not only enables abundant electrochemical reaction sites at the electrode/electrolyte interface but also boots the ions and electrons transportation, facilitating fast and stable charging/discharging.

3.3.1. Antimonene nanosheets and quantum dots. 
In 2017, Periñán et al.32 firstly proposed to use antimonene as electrode materials in supercapacitors. They deposited antimonone on the screen-printed electrode (SPE) by drop-casting. When the mass load of antimonene on the SPE increased from 1.8 to 36 ng, the specific capacitances decrease gradually in 0.5 M H2SO4. This may be the result of agglomeration or stacking of nano antimonene materials, which reduces the electroactive surface area. When the charging current density is 14 A g−1, the specific capacitance of antimonene electrode is 1573 F g−1, suggesting that the energy storage capacity is significantly improved. On the other hand, the energy and power density of the system are 20 mW h kg−1 and 4.8 kW kg−1, respectively, which possesses a good circulation capacity of more than 1000 cycle times.
Ismail and co-workers13 further analyzed the electrochemical properties of ball-milled antimony and antimonene. The specific capacitance of antimonene (597 F g−1) is higher than that of ball-milled antimony (101 F g−1), owing to the increased specific surface area of antimonene and thus the increased interaction between electrode active sites and electrolyte. On the other hand, the RCT of antimonene is 1.8 Ω, which is lower than ball-milled antimony (6 Ω). The results indicate that antimonene shows better electrochemical properties than antimony due to its layered structure and low RCT. When the current density is 5 A g−1, the antimonene can show excellent stability up to 3000 cycles.


3.3.2. Antimonene-based hybrid materials. 
Compositing antimonene with other materials can further enhance the charge storage capacity owing to the synergistic effect. Studies have shown that antimonene exhibits excellent properties after being compounded with different materials. For example, hybrid antimonene/2D MXene materials can significantly improve their energy storage capacity in proton electrolytes. When composited with three-dimensional (3D) materials such as 3D Ni, the material exhibits excellent mechano-electrical conversion efficiency and excellent capacitive performance.
Specifically, a composite electrode consisting of antimonene and MXene was prepared.33 The storage properties of the composite electrodes and original MXene electrodes were studied by a three-electrode system with 1 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte. In addition, given that the potential range of antimonene/MXene electrode in the acidic electrolyte is narrow (−0.5 to 0.4 V), 1 M LiCl was also used as a neutral electrolyte for its relatively wide operating voltage (−1 to 0.4 V). The results show that the antimonene/MXene composite electrode can achieve an ultra-high volume capacitance of 4255 F cm−3 at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 in 1 M H2SO4 (Fig. 6a), while the specific capacitance reaches 2192 F cm−3 at 0.2 mA cm−2 in LiCl electrolyte (Fig. 6b), which is better than most previously reported MXene-based electrodes.34–36 In addition, the total amount of stored charges(qT) and the straightforwardly ion-accessible outer surface charges (qo) were studied by the Trasstti analysis method (Fig. 6c and d). The results show that the qT reaches 3571.42 C cm−3 in H2SO4, which is three times that in LiCl (1492.54 C cm−3), indicating that the stored charge in H2SO4 is much higher than that in LiCl. Moreover, the flexible supercapacitor composed of the composite electrode has a wide potential window of 2 V in the neutral electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) Specific volumetric capacitance of antimonene/MXene electrodes with different antimonene loading densities tested in H2SO4 and LiCl electrolytes, (c and d) calculation of qo and qT for antimonene/MXene electrode (antimonene loading density: 0.1 mg cm−2) at different scan rates in H2SO4 and LiCl electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Advanced Energy Materials, Copyright 2019. 
A flexible supercapacitor composed of antimonene/carbon nanotubes (CNT)/polyaniline (PANI) electrodes can achieve a specific capacitance of 416 F g−1 and stable cycle performance of over 120000 cycles.37 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy shows that the resistance of antimonene/CNT/PANI is much smaller than that of CNT/PANI. After adding antimonene nanosheet, the resistance and RCT of CNT/PANI decrease from 2.96 and 0.12 Ω to 2.54 and 0.064 Ω, respectively (Fig. 7a). On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 7b, the CV diagrams of Sb, CNT film, CNT/PANI film and Sb film are compared. It shows that Sb nanosheets significantly improve the diffusion and transport capacity of ions and electrons in the Sb/CNT/PANI film electrode, thereby improving the electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 7  Electrochemical properties of Sb/PANI/CNT film electrodes: Comparison of (a) EIS, (b) CVs at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Small, Copyright 2022. (c) CV curves of VS-2, Sb, VS-2/Sb, (d) capacitance vs. current density graph, (e) contribution of diffusive and capacitive current for VS-2/Sb at 0.2 V. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Journal of Power Sources, Copyright 2020. 
Vimal et al.38 studied a core–shell structure electrode composed of 3D Ni core and antimonene nanodendrite shell to achieve excellent electrochemical energy storage. They prepared and named the core–shell structure as antimonene/3DNi-3, antimonene/3DNi-10 and antimonene/3DNi-15 according to deposition time intervals (5, 10, 15 s) during the electrochemical deposition technique. The electrochemical tests of antimonene/3DNi electrode in different electrolytes (LiOH, NaOH, KOH) indicate that it can achieve better charge storage performance in 1 M LiOH electrolyte, which may be due to the small radius of Li+ compared with other ions. And the specific capacity of antimonene/3DNi-15 electrode (1618.41 mA h g−1) is significantly higher than that of antimonene/3DNi-10 electrode (1116.08 mA h g−1) and antimonene/3DNi-5 electrode (1055.29 mA h g−1). On the other hand, the capacitance retentions of the three antimonene/3DNi electrodes are about 20.32%, 39.36% and 44.15%, respectively, when the current density increases from 7.5 to 50 mA. Moreover, the antimonene/3DNi-15 electrode shows good cyclic stability after 1500 charge and discharge cycles with high capacitance retention of 97.7%.
In another example, Shobhita et al.39 demonstrated a VS4/antimonene hybrid electrode and further evaluated the optimum concentration of antimonene and VS-2 to expose more active sites and improve charge storage performance. They first prepared VS4 and named as VS-2, VS-3 and VS-4, according to the molar ratios between NH4VO3 and KIT-6 of 2:1, 3:1 and 4:1, respectively. It is experimentally determined that VS-2 can achieve the highest charge capacity and promote the diffusion of ions. On this basis, VS-2 was then hybridized with antimonene and the optimum concentration of antimonene and VS-2 was further determined. The CV diagram shows that both the anode and cathode that based on VS-2/antimonene (Fig. 7c), show fast current responses. And the relaxation time of VS-2/antimonene is 2.2 s, which is much less than that of pure VS-2 (28.5 s). On the other hand, the specific capacitances of VS-2/antimonene are 1447, 1275, 1197, 1035 and 782 F g−1 at the current densities of 6, 8, 10, 15 and 30 A g−1, while the specific capacitances of VS-2 is 826, 748, 625, 520 and 330 F g−1 (Fig. 7d). Obviously, VS-2/antimonene show higher specific capacitance and good capacitance retention. Moreover, the diffusion(interpolation/de-interpolation) and capacitive reaction kinetics were further clarified and quantitative by i/v1/2vs. v1/2. The results show that at 100 mV s−1, the contribution of capacitive storage for VS-2 is about 57.9% and can rise to 84.1% for VS-2/antimonene (Fig. 7e), indicating that VS-2/antimonene has more surface-active sites and can thus rise benefit to the diffusion of ions. The VS-2/antimonene composite also shows good stability after 2000 charge/discharge cycles without significant expansion and collapse during ion insertion or de-intercalation.
The application of the above-mentioned 2D antimonene in energy conversion is summarized as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 A comparison of 2D antimonene-based materials for device in two-electrode system




Electrode materials
Electrolyte
Device
Current density (A g−1)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Ref.




Porous antimonene
FEC
Battery
0.1
569.1

28



Few-layer antimonene
1 M NaClO4
Battery
0.66
642

29



2D β-antimonene
FEC
Battery
3.3
488

31



2D antimonene
2 M KOH
Supercapacitor
1
270 F g−1

13



2D antimonene
0.5 M H2SO4
Supercapacitor
14
876.7

32



Antimonene/CNT/PANI
1 M H2SO4
Supercapacitor
0.5
416 F g−1

37



Antimonene/MXene
1 M H2SO4
Supercapacitor
0.5 mA cm−2
4255 F cm−3

33



Antimonene/3D Ni
1 M LiOH
Supercapacitor
5 mA cm−2
1308

38



Antimonene/VS4
3 M KOH
Supercapacitor
6
482

39






4. 2D antimonene for energy conversion
4.1. Electrocatalysis
Electrocatalysis is a chemical action in which electrocatalysts on the electrode surface or in the liquid phase can promote or inhibit the electron transfer reaction in an electric field without altering their chemical properties. Wu et al.40 proposed the “capture-backdonation-recapture” mechanism, and calculated the theoretical study of ammonia synthesis by first principles, which widened the development of heteronuclear metal-free double-atom catalysts. Zhang et al.41 proposed a new type II van der Waals Gase/CN and Ga2SSe2CN heterostructures by first-principles calculations. The heterostructured photocatalyst has 15.11% solar-hydrogen conversion efficiency due to its unique band arrangement. Generally, there are two half reactions including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at cathodes and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at anodes during water splitting. Thus, the conductivity and sufficient exposed catalytic site are deciding factors for electrocatalytic activity. Although antimonene is a semiconductor, it possesses high electrical conductivity (1.6 × 104 S m−1)42 and a large specific surface area, making it an ideal candidate for HER, OER, and electrocatalytic CO2 reduction (ECR).

4.1.1. Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction. 
Recently, Xiaohui Ren et al.43 found that FLA could be used as a catalyst for water splitting to accelerate HER and OER. Before that, they firstly verified the stability of antimonene and then applied it in Na2SO4, KOH and pure water electrolytes, respectively. The results show that there is no oxidation reaction in alkaline KOH, indicating that antimonene is very stable in alkaline electrolyte. They further analyzed the HER and OER in different concentrations of KOH, and calculated the corresponding Tafel slope. In HER, the Tafel slopes of Sb nanosheets in KOH at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1 M are 260.4, 272.3, 217.2 and 286.4 mV dec−1, respectively. In 0.5 M KOH, the Tafel slope is the lowest, indicating that HER activity and reaction rate are increased at this time. On the other hand, in OER, the Tafel slope of Sb nanosheets in KOH of the same concentration are 429.3, 275, 267.4 and 261.3 mV dec−1. Among them, the Tafel slope in 1 M KOH is the lowest. The results show that the FLA can exist stably under alkaline KOH and promotes water splitting, which may be related to the inherent semimetallic properties of antimonene and additional active sites in the interface.
Tingting Bo et al.44 studied the HER of transition metal (TM) doped β-antimonene (TM@β-Sb) through DFT calculation. They calculated the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) of the TM@β-Sb monolayer (Fig. 8a). The results imply that the binding energies of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, V, and Zn doped β-antimonene, which can evaluate the thermodynamic stability with element doping, are −3.71, −4.03, −3.30, −5.47, −5.16, −4.32 and −1.75 eV, respectively. In addition, a comparable ΔGH* value of 0.06 eV for V-doped β-antimonene can be achieved in contrast to Pt metal (ΔGH* = −0.09 eV), indicating the excellent HER performance of the V@Sb monolayer. And there is no structural collapse in the whole simulation process, suggesting that the V@β-Sb monolayer is dynamically stable. On the other hand, taking Ni@β-Sb as an example, the ΔGH* values under compressive strain and tensile stress are also studied. Specifically, ΔGH* of Ni@β-Sb raises from 0% to −4% compressive strain firstly and then reduces from −4% to −8% compressive strain. Therefore, compression strains that are less than 4% cannot improve the HER catalytic performance of the Ni@β-Sb monolayer effectively. On the other hand, ΔGH* values decrease from 0.24 eV to −0.10 eV under tensile stress, and an optimal ΔGH* of 0.02 eV can be obtained at ε = 6% tensile strain, which is even better than V@β-Sb (Fig. 8b). These findings provide new insight for the future design and improvement of β-antimonene in HER catalysis.
 Fig. 8  (a) Calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy for TM-doped B-Sb monolayer; (b) the calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy of Ni@ β-Sb monolayer with different biaxial strain. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Computational Materials Science, Copyright 2020. (c) The obtained Gibbs free energy of adsorption of hydrogen (ΔG*H) for Ir@, Pt@, Ni@ and Cu@Sb monolayers; (d) the HER volcano curve relationship between ΔG*H and theoretical exchange current i. Gibbs free energy diagrams for OER elementary steps of the Pt@Sb monolayer. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2021. (e) Corresponding jgeovs. scan rates plots. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Chemical Communications, Copyright 2019. (f) The Gibbs free energy changes for the first protonation steps in ECR and HER on TM@Sb monolayers. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Journal of CO2 Utilization, Copyright 2021. 
TMs doped single-layer antimonene can not only promote hydrogen evolution but can also act as a catalyst in oxygen evolution and redox reaction. For instance, in the study of different TMs doped single-layer antimonene by Lu et al.,45 the ΔGH* between the reaction products H* and +H2* were systematically calculated. And the closer the ΔGH* value gets to zero, the better the HER catalytic efficiency can be achieved. The ΔGH* plots resulting from different TM dopants are shown in Fig. 8c and d. It can be seen that the ΔGH* of Ir@Sb, Pt@Sb, Ni@Sb and Cu@Sb (−0.009, −0.010, −0.059 and −0.193, respectively) are all close to zero, indicating the excellent catalytic activity. In such circumstances, in the experiment, they further studied the HER mechanism of Ir@Sb in acid-base and neutral media. The experimental results indicate that Ir@Sb has good HER in acidic media since additional energy is required to break H2O molecules in neutral and alkaline to produce H+.
The electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency of doped antimonene is further proved experimentally by Yan Li et al.46 They found that the Ru–S–Sb bonds in doped antimonene together could promote the activity of HER. According to the cyclic voltammetry, the double-layer capacitances (Cdl) of Ru–S–Sb/antimonene, RuS2 and antimonene are 14.6, 6.8 and 6.5 mF cm−2 (Fig. 8e), respectively, showing that Ru–S–Sb/antimonene had a higher specific surface area and thus could provide more catalytic active sites. Furthermore, the low RCT of Ru–S–Sb/antimonene (148.7 Ω) suggests the effective HER kinetics between the Ru–S–Sb/antimonene and electrolyte interface. Thus Ru–S–Sb/antimonene could be used as a HER catalyst owing to the binding strength of the Ru–H bond, and enhanced HER activity.


4.1.2. Electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction. 
ECR, which is a complex process related to various intermedia, is the focus of electrocatalysis and energy conversion since it is a promising method to alleviate the potential energy crisis and global warming. Song Lu et al.47 firstly proposed to embed TM atoms into antimonene as catalysts to produce CH4 through ECR. Generally, in the catalytic reaction, if protons could combine with carbon or oxygen atoms, intermediate C*OOH and O*CHO would thus be formed. However, if the protons directly adsorb on the catalyst surface, intermediate *H would thus be generated in HER. These two are competition reactions, in another word, ECR can be inhibited by HER. Accordingly, there are eight TM atoms (Sc/V/Cr/Mn/Fe/Co/Zn/Mo) that can promote ECR reaction (Fig. 8f). On the other hand, the overpotential is a critical parameter to evaluate the conversion performance of catalysts. Generally, the smaller the overpotential is, the lower the driving voltage is needed to satisfy the current density, thus achieving high catalytic efficiency. Among these TMs, the overpotential of Co@Sb is only 0.50 V, and a wide variety of organics are applied. Surprisingly, Co@Sb is lower than previously reported electrocatalysts and even better than the current state-of-the-art catalyst Cu(211).

4.2. Photocatalysis
Photocatalysts can promote the decomposition of organic and inorganic compounds, bacteria and viruses, and accelerate water splitting and CO2 conversion to produce new clean energy. Generally speaking, photocatalysts can effectively degrade toxic and harmful gases and purify the air effectively. At the same time, it can also be used to decompose and harmless treat toxins released by bacteria or fungi. The general photocatalytic process involves the generation and transfer of photoexcited electrons and holes, and the follow-up surface redox reactions. There are many kinds of photocatalysts, such as titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), tin oxide (SnO2) and graphene like 2D materials. Major semiconductor photocatalysts undergo low photocatalytic efficiency owing to weak photoabsorption and insufficient photocatalytic sites. Luckily, 2D antimonene with visible light absorption, large surface-to-volume ratio, abundant active site, and short carrier diffusion distance is an advanced photocatalyst.

4.2.1. Photocatalytic degradation of organic matter. 
A novel graphite carbon nitride/antimonene (CNSbx, x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) was fabricated and used as a photocatalysis by Jesús et al.48 to degrade and remove organic pollutants such as rhodamine B(RhB) and nitrophenol (p-NP). The results show that RhB dye can completely be degraded in only 20 minutes with CNSb0.25 as the photocatalyst (Fig. 9a). On the other hand, for more stable p-NPs, taking CNSb0.1 as photocatalyst is more effective, but fully degrading it takes 120 minutes (Fig. 9b). Since the heterostructure can enhance the optical absorption and charge separation properties, it thus results in better photoactivity and degradation efficiency.
 Fig. 9  (a) RhB degradation curves for CNSbx heterostructures; (b) p-NP degradation curves of CNSbx. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Advanced Sustainable Systems, Copyright 2019. (c) Time profiles of the photocatalytic regeneration of NADH from NAD+; (d) time profiles of the CO2 conversion to formic acid. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Copyright 2020. 


4.2.2. Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction (PCR). 
Antimonene/Cp*Rh(phen)Cl/black phosphorus hybrid nanosheets were fabricated and used as the photocatalysts/biocatalysts for PCR. In this experiment, AM and BP nanosheets(NSs) were connected by electronic medium (M, [Cp*Rh(phen)Cl]Cl(Cp* = C5Me5, phen = 1, 10-phenanthroline)).49 The results show that the regeneration efficiency of Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) with AM/M/BP HNSs is 89 ± 1.4% (Fig. 9c), which is significantly higher than that of pure AM NSs (20 ± 0.8%), BP NSs (26 ± 0.7%) and physically mixed AM/BP NSs (33 ± 1.2%). And AM/M/BP HNSs show a wide light absorption range and high density, indicating the enhanced light absorption capacity. Furthermore, the synergy efficiency of an artificial photosynthetic system (APS) composed of AM/M/BP HNSs is directly detected, and a single enzyme or multi-enzyme biocatalysis is introduced to reduce CO2. Accordingly, using TEOA as electronic donor, the AM/M/BP HNS-based APS generates 365 ± 23 μmol formic acid after four hours of visible light exposure (Fig. 9d). Even with water as electron donor, an NADH regeneration rate of 35 ± 4% can be reached with AM/M/BP HNS-based APS. On the other hand, the operation stability was further considered. The results show that the activity of AM/M/BP HNS remained above 80% after 5 times of reuse, indicating the high operation stability.
The application of the above-mentioned 2D antimonene in photo- and electrocatalysts is summarized as shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of different 2D antimonene-based materials for photo- and electrocatalysts




Catalytic type
Catalytic materials
Catalytic application
Catalytic activity
Ref.




Electrocatalyst
Few-layer antimonene nanosheets
H2 evolution
Tafel slope HER: 217.2 mV dec−1

43



O2 evolution
Tafel slope OER: 267.4 mV dec−1


Electrocatalyst
TM@β-Sb
H2 evolution
V@β-Sb, ΔGH* = 0.06 eV

44



Electrocatalyst
TM@Sb
H2 evolution
Ir@Pt@Sb, ΔGH* = 0.01 eV

45



O2 evolution
Pt@Sb, ηOER = 0.48 mV


Oxidation–reduction
Ag@Sb, ηORR = 0.50 V


Electrocatalyst
Ru–S–Sb/antimonene
H2 evolution
Tafel slope HER: 118 mV dec−1

46




C
dl = 14.6 mF cm−2


Electrocatalyst
TM@Sb
CO2 reduction
Co@Sb, η = 0.05 V

47



Photocatalyst
CNSbx
Organic pollutants reduction
RhB: C/C0 (1 to 0), 20 min

48



p-NP: C/C0 (1 to 0), 120 min


Photocatalyst
Antimonene/Cp*Rh(phen)Cl/BP
CO2 reduction
NADH: 89 ± 1.4%

49



HCOOH: 365 ± 23 μmol





4.3. Solar cells and photovoltaic devices
Solar cells, or photovoltaic cells, are a kind of power equipments that can directly convert light energy into electric energy through the photovoltaic effect. According to the crystalline state, solar cells can be divided into crystalline thin film type and amorphous thin film type, and the former can be divided into monocrystalline and polycrystalline forms; According to the hole transport layer materials, they can also be divided into silicon solar cells, multi-compound thin film solar cells, polymer multi-layer modified electrode solar cells, nanocrystalline solar cells, and organic solar cells. Among them, silicon solar cells are the most mature electronics and play a leading role in the application. However, there is still room for the enhancement of solar cells, such as hole transport layer (HTL), photocurrent and stability. Taking semiconductor antimonene nanosheets as HTL can effectively improve hole transport and photocurrent transmission, which also show significantly improved stability.

4.3.1. Antimonene-based photoelectric solar cells. 
For instance, semiconductor antimonene nanosheets (SAN) are indirect band gap materials that can potentially act as HTL for perovskite solar cells (PVSCs).50 The energy conversion efficiency of the corresponding PVSCs can increase from 17.58% to 20.05% with SANs. However, free-standing SANs are unsuitable for optoelectronic applications owing to their indirect bandgap. Coating SANs film with poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) can regulate the average bandgap to −5.28 eV according to the ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy. On the other hand, the combination of PTAA/SANs has better compatibility with CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film (−5.4 eV) than that with a single PTAA. In addition, due to the high conductivity of antimonene, it is in favor of the hole transfer from the perovskite to the HTL (Fig. 10a). Furthermore, with CH3NH3Pbl3 film deposited on the surface of PTAA/SANs, the larger grain size of composites can effectively reduce the trap density and inhibit the charge recombination of PVSCs, leading to improved energy conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of hole extraction from the perovskite to PTAA/SANs. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Advanced Materials, Copyright 2018. (b) Static PL spectra of AMQDs coated on TiO2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, Copyright 2019. (c) The values of Gmax (Black Squares) and P(E,T) (Red Circles) obtained for a reference OSCs with a pure CuSCN HEL and the PSCs using a bilayer CuSCN/AMQSs HEL with the AMQSs films prepared at different rotation speeds from 1000 to 6000 rpm. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from 2D Materials, Copyright 2019. (d) J–V curves for Device 1 (control), 2 (included AntQ), and 3 (included AntQ and AntS), parameters are also listed in the table. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Journal of Power Sources, Copyright 2019. (e) Side views of three stacked (AA, AB, and AC) vdW bilayer grey antimony. d1 represents the interlayer distances; (f) electronic band structures of AA-, AB-, and AC-stacking vdW bilayer antimonene, which are calculated at the HSE level with spin–orbital coupling (SOC). The horizontal dashed lines indicate the Fermi level. (Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE)). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Nano Energy, Copyright 2017. 
In another experiment, Chenle Zhang et al.15 made a preliminary study on AMQDs sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). In this work, they first applied the experimentally prepared AMQDs as photosensitive materials for QDSSCs. Results indicate that the band gap of AMQDs is about 1.5 eV, which is close to the ideal band gap of a solar absorber. They further studied the optical band gaps of different AMQDs coated films, which are 1.85 eV (AMQDs-1), 1.70 eV (AMQDs-2), 1.56 eV (AMQDs-3), and 1.39 eV (AMQDs-4), respectively. The static photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of AMQDs films is thus obtained, as shown in Fig. 10b. It can be seen that the luminescence intensity of AMQDs-3 films is greater than that of other films, and AMQDs-3 has the highest external quantum efficiency. As a result, the efficiency of photovoltaic cells can reach 3.09% with AMQDs-3, indicating that AMQDs are promising photoactive materials.
AMQDs can also play a stable role in organic solar cells. By combining AMQSs with CuSCN to form a bilayer hole extraction layer (HEL), efficient and stable organic solar cells can be obtained as reported by Wang et al.16 In the experiment, the optimum thickness of CuSCN for preparing organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) was set to 40 nm, and the optimum thickness of AMQS was optimized by spin-coating at a controlled rotation speed of 3000 rpm. The short circuit current density (Jsc) of pure CuSCN cell is 15.21 mA cm−2 and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is 7.86%. After the combination, the Jsc of CuSCN/AMQSs HEL battery is 17.10 mA cm−2, which is 12% higher than that of pure CuSCN battery, and the PCE of the corresponding battery is 8.80%, which is also more than 12% higher than that of pure CuSCN battery. On the other hand, the root means square (RMS) roughness of pure CuSCN is 1.6 nm and further decreases to 1.5 nm with AMQSs intermediate layer, indicating that the introduction of AMQSs intermediate layer can smooth CuSCN and is conducive to the charge extraction process of OPVs. Moreover, the maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax) of bilayer CuSCN/AMQSs HEL is 9.95 × 1027 m−3 S−1, which is much larger than that of pure CuSCN (8.79 × 1027 m−3 S−1), and the exciton dissociation probability also increases from 80.4% to 97.1% on 3000 rpm (Fig. 10c). On the other hand, the PL of the bilayer CuSCN/AMQSs HEL has stronger intensity. This shows that the bilayer CuSCN/AMQSs is conducive to the charge transport and extraction of OPVs.
OPVs can be further improved by doping AMQS in PEDOT:PSS emulsions.17 Specifically, different HELs were prepared as original PEDOT:PSS (Device A), PEDOT:PSS:AMQSs (0.1 mg ml−1) (Device B), PEDOT:PSS:AMQSs (0.25 mg ml−1) (Device C) and PEDOT:PSS:AMQSs (0.5 mg ml−1) (Device D), respectively. By studying the morphology of different HELs, it is found that the RMS roughness of PEDOT:PSS:AMQSs is 0.66 nm with 0.25 mg mL−1 AMQS and it further increases to 1.23 nm when the concentration of AMQS is 0.5 mg ml−1. The relatively small RMS is conducive to the contact between HEL and bulk heterojunction. When the open circuit voltage is 0.89 V, the PCE of Devices A, B and C is 9.15%, 9.43% and 9.89%, respectively. As the concentration increases, the PCE of Device D begins to decrease to 9.03%. On the other hand, Device C has the highest Gmax, which can extract and collect charges more effectively. The highest exciton dissociation probabilities P(E,T) of Device C is 0.90. In conclusion, the enhancement of PCE can be attributed to inhibiting the recombination loss of deep defects and improving the charge extraction efficiency. It provides a simple and effective HEL transformation strategy for realizing high-efficiency photovoltaic.
Junjie He et al.51 studied the photovoltaic performance of low dimensional antionmene oxide in Cu:NiOx based planar p–i–n PVSCs in 2019. In the experiment, they employed both 0D antimonene oxides (antimonene oxide quantum dots, AntQ) and few-layer 2D antimonene oxide nanosheets (AntS) and fabricated three devices as follows:Device 1: ITO/Cu:NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/Bphen/AlDevice 2: ITO/Cu:NiOx/AntQ/perovskite/PCBM/Bphen/AlDevice 3: ITO/Cu:NiOx/AntQ/perovskite/AntS/PCBM/Bphen/Al
As a result, the photovoltaic performance of Device 2 and Device 3 is improved compared with Device 1, mainly because of the improved photocurrent intensity, as the photocurrent intensity of Device 1 is 20.6 mA cm−2 while that of Device 2 and 3 is 22.4 and 23.3 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 10d). At the same time, they found a reaction hysteresis in Device 3, while the hysteresis in Device 2 is reduced compared with Device 1. Accordingly, they speculated that the hysteresis is caused by AntS which can break the equilibrium charge extraction, and thus verified that AntS cannot improve the photovoltaic cell efficiency of the device. However, AntQ can improve the device's performance by increasing the photocurrent. This study shows the potential value of AntQ in PVSCs.


4.3.2. Antimonene-based thermal photovoltaic (TPV) and photothermal cells. 
Meiqiu Xie et al.52 firstly proposed a TPV cell based on AC-stacking bilayer antimonene using the van der Waals (vdW) stacking strategy. In the experiment, they studied the band gaps of three stacking modes of vdW antimonene via DFT firstly (Fig. 10e), since it is a critical factor that can directly affect the conversion efficiency of TPV devices. The results demonstrate that the band gaps of AA- and AB-stacking vdW structure are 0.29 and 0.09 eV, respectively. And the band gap of AC-stacking vdW bilayer antimonene is 0.62 eV (Fig. 10f), which fully meets the optimal range required by TPV cells (ca. 0.35–0.75 eV). And thus the AC-stacking vdW bilayer antimonene-based TPV cells can achieve 31% radiation-to-electricity conversion efficiency.
In addition to the above-mentioned applications in solar cells, the optical absorption and photothermal conversion can also be improved by AMQDs through a spontaneous oxidation reaction.53 According to the theoretical calculation, the original AMQDs only have a weak absorption peak at 2.2 eV and the absorption range is narrow (2.05–2.35 eV). However, the light absorption range of oxidized AMQDs is red-shifted and the absorption of near-infrared light has strengthened and increased with the increase of oxidation degree. At the same time, oxidation can further enhance the electron transition in AMQDs and greatly improve its light absorption performance. On the other hand, the non-radiative transition process and the nonadiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) of both original and oxidized AMQDs are further calculated. The results show that after 4 picoseconds, 2% and 6% of the original and oxidized AMQDs have recombined and resulted in photogenerated electron–hole pairs, respectively, indicating that the composite time scale is significantly longer than the picosecond order. The theoretical research shows that the photothermal conversion performance of oxidized AMQDs can reach 45.5%.

5. Summary and outlook
This review provided a brief introduction of 2D layered antimonene from its experimental synthesis to its potential applications in energy storage and conversion. Specifically, the physical properties of antimonene sheets are initially discussed, followed by the synthesis approaches including MBE, LPE, and electrochemical exfoliation. Ultimately, the practical applications of antimonene sheets in energy storage and conversions, such as batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis are outlined.
However, the exploration of antimonene sheets is still in the infancy stage which requires continued innovative investigation and improvement. Here, major challenges and opportunities are provided as follows to bring further consideration:
First of all, the premise to truly advance the practical applications of antimonene is to control the structure of antimonene precisely, owing to its layer-dependent electrical and optical properties. However, the structural morphology including lateral dimensions, layers, and point defects of 2D antimonene resulting from diverse synthesis routines is generally different, leading to distinct energy storage and conversion properties accordingly. So that it is impossible to make objective comparisons on different research. Thus, the intrinsic link between the synthesis approaches, corresponding structures and performance of antimonene needs further exploration.
The potential properties of functionalized antimonene make it an excellent candidate for catalytic and energy systems. Thus, the defect chemistry of antimonene, such as vacancies, doping, lattice disorders and voids, and edge modification, is urgently expected to realize band engineering. However, to date, most of the related research remains in the theoretical stage. It is of great importance to put this theory into practice.
The restacking of antimonene sheets can result in serious performance degradation due to the reduced specific surface area, active sites, and possible large volume expansion as electrode materials. Thus, the electrode design and assembly principle are expected to couple with the fabricating process, morphology and physicochemical properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province [grant number E2021202018]; the Science and Technology Research Project from the Hebei Province Education Department [grant number QN2021041].
References
Z. Jian, W. Luo and X. Ji, Carbon electrodes for K-ion batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11566–11569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jian, S. Hwang and Z. Li, 
            et al., Hard–soft composite carbon as a long-cycling and high-rate anode for potassium-ion batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700324 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, W. K. Pang and V. Sencadas, 
            et al., Understanding high-energy-density Sn4P3 anodes for potassium-ion batteries, Joule, 2018, 2, 1534–1547 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zhao and C. Ni, 
            et al., Reaction and capacity-fading mechanisms of tin nanoparticles in potassium-ion batteries, The, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12652–12657 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, L. Dong and B. Sun, 
            et al., K2Ti2O5@C Microspheres with Enhanced K+ Intercalation Pseudocapacitance Ensuring Fast Potassium Storage and Long-Term Cycling Stability, Small, 2020, 16, 1906131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, X. Xie and S. Choi, 
            et al., Sb2O3/MXene (Ti3C2Tx) hybrid anode materials with enhanced performance for sodium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12445–12452 RSC .
X. Ren, Q. Zhao and W. D. McCulloch, 
            et al., MoS2 as a long-life host material for potassium ion intercalation, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1313–1321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, T. Zhou and Y. Zheng, 
            et al., CoS quantum dot nanoclusters for high-energy potassium-ion batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702634 CrossRef .
T. Kar, R. Devivaraprasad and R. K. Singh, 
            et al., Reduction of graphene oxidea comprehensive electrochemical investigation in alkaline and acidic electrolytes, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57781–57790 RSC .
T. Kar, R. Devivaraprasad and B. Bera, 
            et al., Investigation on the reduction of the oxides of Pd and graphite in alkaline medium and the simultaneous evolution of oxygen reduction reaction and peroxide generation features, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Atomically thin group V elemental films: theoretical investigations of antimonene allotropes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, S. Sahoo and W. K. Tan, 
            et al., Microwave-assisted thin reduced graphene oxide-cobalt oxide nanoparticles as hybrids for electrode materials in supercapacitor, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 40, 102724 CrossRef .
M. M. Ismail, J. Vigneshwaran and S. Arunbalaji, 
            et al., Antimonene nanosheets with enhanced electrochemical performance for energy storage applications, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 13717–13725 RSC .
J. Su, T. Duan and W. K. Li, 
            et al., A first-principles study of 2D antimonene electrodes for Li ion storage, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 462, 270–275 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Li and P. Zhang, 
            et al., Antimonene quantum dot-based solid-state solar cells with enhanced performance and high stability, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 189, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, M. Zhao and Y. Zhou, 
            et al., Novel 2D material from AMQSs based defects engineering for efficient and stable organic solar cells, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 045017 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, W. Lan and J. Gu, 
            et al., High-efficiency organic photovoltaic cells with an antimony quantum sheet modified hole extraction layer, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2020, 11, 111–117 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan and Y. Li, 
            et al., Atomically thin arsenene and antimonene: semimetal–semiconductor and indirect–direct band-gap transitions, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 3155–3158 CrossRef .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Atomically thin group V elemental films: theoretical investigations of antimonene allotropes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Shao and H. Liu, 
            et al., Epitaxial growth and air-stability of monolayer antimonene on PdTe2, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Z. L. Liu and C. Cheng, 
            et al., Epitaxial growth of flat antimonene monolayer: A new honeycomb analogue of graphene, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2133–2139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. He and B. Zhou, 
            et al., Bandgap-tunable preparation of smooth and large two-dimensional antimonene, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 8804–8809 CrossRef .
C. Gibaja, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel and P. Ares, 
            et al., Few-layer antimonene by liquid-phase exfoliation, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 14557–14561 CrossRef .
C. Gibaja, M. Assebban and I. Torres, 
            et al., Liquid phase exfoliation of antimonene: systematic optimization, characterization and electrocatalytic properties, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22475–22486 RSC .
L. Lu, X. Tang and R. Cao, 
            et al., Broadband nonlinear optical response in few-layer antimonene and antimonene quantum dots: a promising optical kerr media with enhanced stability, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
L. Su, X. Tang and X. Fan, 
            et al., Halogenated antimonene: one-step synthesis, structural simulation, tunable electronic and photoresponse property, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Li and Y. Cheng, 
            et al., Insights into the regulation of energy storage behaviors of antimonene in aqueous electrolytes, Electrochim. Acta, 2023, 439, 141585 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Leng and W. Shi, Electrochemical exfoliation of porous antimonene as anode materials for sodium-ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2021, 126, 107025 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, S. Zhang and C. Huo, 
            et al., Few-layer antimonene: anisotropic expansion and reversible crystalline-phase evolution enable large-capacity and long-life Na-ion batteries, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1887–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Tang and X. Zhou, 
            et al., The good performance of bilayer β-antimoneneas an anode material for the Li-ion battery study, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 495, 143549 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, W. Tian and C. Huo, 
            et al., Tailoring natural layered β-phase antimony into few layer antimonene for Li storage with high rate capabilities, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3238–3243 RSC .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down and C. Gibaja, 
            et al., Antimonene: a novel 2D nanomaterial for supercapacitor applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
J. Yu, J. Zhou and P. Yao, 
            et al., Antimonene engineered highly deformable freestanding electrode with extraordinarily improved energy storage performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902462 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu and S. Dong, 
            et al., Self-assembled three-dimensional Ti3C2Tx nanosheets network on carbon cloth as flexible electrode for supercapacitors, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 485, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and X. Li, 
            et al., Engineering 3D ion transport channels for flexible MXene films with superior capacitive performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900326 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin and S. Qin, 
            et al., Highly conductive Ti3C2Tx MXene hybrid fibers for flexible and elastic fiber-shaped supercapacitors, Small, 2019, 15, 1804732 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. Ou and Z. Luo, 
            et al., High Capacitive Antimonene/CNT/PANI Free-Standing Electrodes for Flexible Supercapacitor Engaged with Self-Healing Function, Small, 2022, 2201377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Mariappan, K. Krishnamoorthy and P. Pazhamalai, 
            et al., Antimonene dendritic nanostructures: Dual-functional material for high-performance energy storage and harvesting devices, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105248 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singal, A. Joshi and G. Singh, 
            et al., Dual approach of antimonene hybridization and hierarchical structuration to expose more active sites for improved charge storage characteristics of VS4, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 228669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, C. He and W. Zhang, “Capture-backdonation-recapture” mechanism for promoting N2 reduction by heteronuclear metal-free double-atom catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 9344–9353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Zhang, Y. Yin and C. He, Spontaneous enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic water splitting on novel type-II GaSe/CN and Ga2SSe/CN vdW heterostructures, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 5064–5075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, X. Song and J. Liu, 
            et al., Two-dimensional antimonene single crystals grown by van der Waals epitaxy, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Ren, Z. Li and H. Qiao, 
            et al., Few-layer antimonene nanosheet: a metal-free bifunctional electrocatalyst for effective water splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4774–4781 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bo, Y. Liu and J. Yuan, 
            et al., Tunable HER activity from doping and strain strategies for β-Sb monolayer: DFT calculations, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 185, 109966 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, H. L. Huynh and F. Lou, 
            et al., Single transition metal atom embedded antimonene monolayers as efficient trifunctional electrocatalysts for the HER, OER and ORR: a density functional theory study, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 12885–12895 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Chen and J. Huang, 
            et al., Interfacial engineering of Ru–S–Sb/antimonene electrocatalysts for highly efficient electrolytic hydrogen generation in neutral electrolyte, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10884–10887 RSC .
S. Lu, H. L. Huynh and F. Lou, 
            et al., Electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 over transition metal atom embedded antimonene: First-principles study, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 51, 101645 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barrio, C. Gibaja and J. Tzadikov, 
            et al., 2D/2D graphitic carbon nitride/antimonene heterostructure: structural characterization and application in photocatalysis, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800138 CrossRef .
X. Ji, Y. Kang and T. Fan, 
            et al., An antimonene/Cp*Rh(phen)Cl/black phosphorus hybrid nanosheet-based Z-scheme artificial photosynthesis for enhanced photo/bio-catalytic CO2 reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 323–333 RSC .
F. Zhang, J. He and Y. Xiang, 
            et al., Semimetal–semiconductor transitions for monolayer antimonene nanosheets and their application in perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803244 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, F. Zhang and Y. Xiang, 
            et al., Preparation of low dimensional antimonene oxides and their application in Cu: NiOx based planar pin perovskite solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2019, 435, 226819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, S. Zhang and B. Cai, 
            et al., van der Waals bilayer antimonene: a promising thermophotovoltaic cell material with 31% energy conversion efficiency, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 561–568 CrossRef CAS .
X. Niu, Y. Li and Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Greatly enhanced photoabsorption and photothermal conversion of antimonene quantum dots through spontaneously partial oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17987–17993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

Zhe Li
	Zhe Li is a student at the Institute of Electronic Information Engineering, HeBei University of Technology. At present, his research direction is two-dimensional energy storage materials. He mainly studies MoB-based zinc ion batteries in water systems.

Yanjie Cheng
	Yanjie Cheng received his bachelor degree from Shanxi University in 2020. Now, he studies at the School of Electronic Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, China. His research interests are focused on filter capacitors, and Nanomaterials.

Ye Liu
	Ye Liu, born in Shandong Province in 1997, studied at the School of Electronic Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology. Her research direction is two-dimensional material energy storage devices, mainly studying the energy storage behavior of antimonene-based materials in aqueous electrolyte.

Yunhui Shi
	Yunhui Shi is a lecturer for College of Electronic Information Engineering, HeBei University of Technology. Her research focuses on the fields of nanotechnology for energy storage materials with multifunctional hybrid nanocomposite structures. In recent years, she has expanded her fields of interest toward characterization, chemical functionalization, and application of new 2D nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Layer-dependent electronic structures of Sb. Reproduced from ref. 14 with permission from Angewandte Chemie, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Molecular beam epitaxy on Ag(111) substrates. Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from Advanced Materials, copyright 2017. (b) Molecular beam epitaxy on PdTe2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Nano letters, Copyright 2018. (c) Liquid phase stripping method. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Angewandte Chemie, Copyright 2018. (d) Schematic diagram of double electrode system for electrochemical stripping of antimony. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Advanced Optical Materials, Copyright 2017. (e) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the electrochemical exfoliation and synchronous halogenation of antimonene in an ionic liquid-based electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Advanced Functional Materials, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) CV curves of antimonene in H2SO4, KCl, LiOH electrolytes at different scan rates, respectively. (d) Calculation of b for antimonene electrode at different scan rates in H2SO4 electrolyte. The capacitance area ratio of antimonene in H2SO4 electrolyte with a scan rate of (e) 3 mV s−1 and (f) 10 mV s−1, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from Electrochimica Acta, Copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Prepared antimonene, (b) CV Curve of antimonene and antimony nano sheet electrode at 0.2 mV s−1, (c) CV diagram of porous antimonene at 100 mA g−1, (d) cyclicity of antimonene and antimony nano sheet electrode at 100 mA g−1, (e) Nyquist diagram. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from Electrochemistry Communications, Copyright 2021. (f) Ex situ SAED patterns during sodiation at 1.5, 0.68, and 0.01 V and desodiation states at 0.96 and 1.5 V under a 0.5 C rate during the 3rd discharging/charging cycle and (g) Schematic diagram showing the five states of the FLA anode during sodiation/desodiation processes corresponding to the different crystalline phases/crystal structures of Sb, NaSb and Na3Sb at the specific charging discharging voltage. Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from ACS nano, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The structure and calculated (c) energy band of AA-stacking bilayer β-Sb, and (b) the structure and calculated (d) energy band of AB-stacking bilayer β-Sb. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Applied Surface Science, Copyright 2019. (e) Cycling performances of bulk β-phase antimony, antimonene nanosheets and Sb NPs; (f) rate performance of antimonene nanosheets and Sb NPs. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) Specific volumetric capacitance of antimonene/MXene electrodes with different antimonene loading densities tested in H2SO4 and LiCl electrolytes, (c and d) calculation of qo and qT for antimonene/MXene electrode (antimonene loading density: 0.1 mg cm−2) at different scan rates in H2SO4 and LiCl electrolytes. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Advanced Energy Materials, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electrochemical properties of Sb/PANI/CNT film electrodes: Comparison of (a) EIS, (b) CVs at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Small, Copyright 2022. (c) CV curves of VS-2, Sb, VS-2/Sb, (d) capacitance vs. current density graph, (e) contribution of diffusive and capacitive current for VS-2/Sb at 0.2 V. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Journal of Power Sources, Copyright 2020.	 

Porous antimonene	FEC	Battery	0.1	569.1	
28

Few-layer antimonene	1 M NaClO4	Battery	0.66	642	
29

2D β-antimonene	FEC	Battery	3.3	488	
31

2D antimonene	2 M KOH	Supercapacitor	1	270 F g−1	
13

2D antimonene	0.5 M H2SO4	Supercapacitor	14	876.7	
32

Antimonene/CNT/PANI	1 M H2SO4	Supercapacitor	0.5	416 F g−1	
37

Antimonene/MXene	1 M H2SO4	Supercapacitor	0.5 mA cm−2	4255 F cm−3	
33

Antimonene/3D Ni	1 M LiOH	Supercapacitor	5 mA cm−2	1308	
38

Antimonene/VS4	3 M KOH	Supercapacitor	6	482	
39


 	Fig. 8  (a) Calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy for TM-doped B-Sb monolayer; (b) the calculated hydrogen adsorption free energy of Ni@ β-Sb monolayer with different biaxial strain. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Computational Materials Science, Copyright 2020. (c) The obtained Gibbs free energy of adsorption of hydrogen (ΔG*H) for Ir@, Pt@, Ni@ and Cu@Sb monolayers; (d) the HER volcano curve relationship between ΔG*H and theoretical exchange current i. Gibbs free energy diagrams for OER elementary steps of the Pt@Sb monolayer. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Nanoscale, Copyright 2021. (e) Corresponding jgeovs. scan rates plots. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Chemical Communications, Copyright 2019. (f) The Gibbs free energy changes for the first protonation steps in ECR and HER on TM@Sb monolayers. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Journal of CO2 Utilization, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) RhB degradation curves for CNSbx heterostructures; (b) p-NP degradation curves of CNSbx. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Advanced Sustainable Systems, Copyright 2019. (c) Time profiles of the photocatalytic regeneration of NADH from NAD+; (d) time profiles of the CO2 conversion to formic acid. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Copyright 2020.	 

Electrocatalyst	Few-layer antimonene nanosheets	H2 evolution	Tafel slope HER: 217.2 mV dec−1	
43

O2 evolution	Tafel slope OER: 267.4 mV dec−1
Electrocatalyst	TM@β-Sb	H2 evolution	V@β-Sb, ΔGH* = 0.06 eV	
44

Electrocatalyst	TM@Sb	H2 evolution	Ir@Pt@Sb, ΔGH* = 0.01 eV	
45

O2 evolution	Pt@Sb, ηOER = 0.48 mV
Oxidation–reduction	Ag@Sb, ηORR = 0.50 V
Electrocatalyst	Ru–S–Sb/antimonene	H2 evolution	Tafel slope HER: 118 mV dec−1	
46


C
dl = 14.6 mF cm−2
Electrocatalyst	TM@Sb	CO2 reduction	Co@Sb, η = 0.05 V	
47

Photocatalyst	CNSbx	Organic pollutants reduction	RhB: C/C0 (1 to 0), 20 min	
48

p-NP: C/C0 (1 to 0), 120 min
Photocatalyst	Antimonene/Cp*Rh(phen)Cl/BP	CO2 reduction	NADH: 89 ± 1.4%	
49

HCOOH: 365 ± 23 μmol

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of hole extraction from the perovskite to PTAA/SANs. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Advanced Materials, Copyright 2018. (b) Static PL spectra of AMQDs coated on TiO2 substrates. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, Copyright 2019. (c) The values of Gmax (Black Squares) and P(E,T) (Red Circles) obtained for a reference OSCs with a pure CuSCN HEL and the PSCs using a bilayer CuSCN/AMQSs HEL with the AMQSs films prepared at different rotation speeds from 1000 to 6000 rpm. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from 2D Materials, Copyright 2019. (d) J–V curves for Device 1 (control), 2 (included AntQ), and 3 (included AntQ and AntS), parameters are also listed in the table. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Journal of Power Sources, Copyright 2019. (e) Side views of three stacked (AA, AB, and AC) vdW bilayer grey antimony. d1 represents the interlayer distances; (f) electronic band structures of AA-, AB-, and AC-stacking vdW bilayer antimonene, which are calculated at the HSE level with spin–orbital coupling (SOC). The horizontal dashed lines indicate the Fermi level. (Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE)). Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Nano Energy, Copyright 2017.	 
Device 1: ITO/Cu:NiOx/perovskite/PCBM/Bphen/Al
Device 2: ITO/Cu:NiOx/AntQ/perovskite/PCBM/Bphen/Al
Device 3: ITO/Cu:NiOx/AntQ/perovskite/AntS/PCBM/Bphen/Al

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
