Growth, patterning and alignment of organolead iodide perovskite nanowires for optoelectronic devices   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR06982J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06982J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4163-4170Growth, patterning and alignment of organolead iodide perovskite nanowires for optoelectronic devices†

        
          
            Hui 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongdong 
            Dong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keke 
            Qiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lingling 
            Bu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dun 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong-En 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yibing 
            Cheng
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Zhixin 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Tang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Haisheng 
            Song
          
        
      *a
aWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO) and School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Sciences and Technology, 1037 Luoyu Road, 430074, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China. E-mail: zhixin-zhao@163.com; songhs-wnlo@mail.hust.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, Luoshi Road, 430070, Wuhan, Hubei, China
cDepartment of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia
Received 
      26th November 2014
    , Accepted 23rd January 2015First published on 26th January 2015AbstractOrganolead halide perovskites are becoming intriguing materials applied in optoelectronics. In the present work, organolead iodide perovskite (OIP) nanowires (NWs) have been fabricated by a one step self-assembly method. The controllable NW distributions were implemented by a series of facile techniques: monolayer and small diameter NWs were prepared by precursor concentration tuning; NW patterning was achieved via selected area treatment assisted by a mask; NW alignment was implemented by modified evaporation-induced self-assembly (EISA). The synthesized multifunctional NWs were further applied in photodetectors (PDs) and solar cells as application demos. The PD performances have reached 1.32 AW−1 for responsivity, 2.5 × 1012 Jones for detectivity and 0.3 ms for response speed, superior to OIP films and other typical inorganic NW based PD performances. An energy conversion efficiency of ∼2.5% has been obtained for NW film based solar cells. The facile fabrication process, controllable distribution and optoelectronic applications make the OIP NWs promising building blocks for future optoelectronics, especially for low dimensional devices.
Introduction
Organolead halide perovskite based optoelectronic devices have attracted intense research interest due to their low cost, mild fabrication process, high energy conversion efficiency and tunable optoelectronic properties.1–4 The reported organolead halide perovskite thin films for optoelectronic devices are mostly cast from nanoparticle or micron size grains by various novel techniques.4 To date, two solution methods have been developed to control the crystallization of perovskite, either a two-step sequential deposition or one-step crystallization with fast deposition induced by an anti-solvent additive.5–7 The products of the one-step solution method contain a large amount of dendrite-like whiskers during spin coating. The dendrite crystal growth implies that organolead iodide perovskite (OIP) contains preferential growth. Inspired by this, the synthesis of OIP NWs was investigated and implemented in the present work. For OIP material properties, first-principles calculations demonstrate the unusual defect physics in which the dominant defects are shallow levels.8 The benign defect physics was further confirmed by solar cell performances where there was no apparent offset between nanoparticle and large micron size based devices.5,7 The benign defects of OIP materials and expected superior charge transport properties of single crystal NWs promise the OIP NWs wide applications in not only thin film solar cells but also low dimensional optoelectronic devices. However, other morphologies and applications of OIP NWs have been less investigated than its thin film analogues.
Single crystalline semiconductor NWs have been extensively studied in the last few decades due to their unique electronic and optical properties and potential applications in special electronic and photonic devices.9 The unique properties of NWs that arise are attributed to their anisotropic geometry, large surface-to-volume ratio, and carrier and photon confinement in two dimensions (1D system).10–12 In most cases, self-assembled NWs in the solution method tend to distribute in a macroscopically random manner on substrates. The disordered NWs may lead to poor device performance and low NW utilization due to the mismatch in distribution between the random NWs and the traditional ordered electrodes.13 Therefore, uniform distribution, patterning and alignment for OIP NWs are highly desired for optoelectronics.
Several strategies for NW alignment have been reported, for example, the Langmuir–Blodgett technique,14,15 electric or magnetic field assisted alignment,16,17 dip coating,18,19 electrostatic alignment20 and so on. However, those techniques usually become invalid in large-area ordered patterns. In contrast, the evaporation-induced self-assembly method (EISA) has been widely utilized for large scale aligned NW patterns. In the present OIP NW alignment, tilted substrate growth combined with the EISA method (modified EISA method) was applied to guide the alignment of NW growth. For NW patterning, the NW distribution area highly depends on the solution distribution. Once the substrate surface is selectively treated to make it hydrophilic, the solution can uniformly spread out only on the treated area. In the present work, UV-ozone treatment combined with a shadow mask was utilized for NW patterning.
Herein, OIP NWs were fabricated by a one-step self-assembly solution method. Uniform NW distribution, patterning deposition and NW alignment were carried out on common substrates (glass, SiO2/Si, and FTO). Two kinds of optoelectronic devices were fabricated based on OIP NWs. One was photodetectors (PDs) utilizing monolayer NWs as a low dimensional device demo, and the other was NW film solar cells as a thin film device demonstration. The performances of PDs were superior to the reported thin film based PDs,21 and the photovoltaic devices could work with ∼2.5% conversion efficiency. The investigation of the OIP NW-based PDs and solar cells is expected to open the door for the applications of OIP NWs in the optoelectronic field.
Methods
Perovskite NW growth
Unless otherwise indicated, all the starting materials were obtained from commercial suppliers and were used without any further purification. CH3NH3I was synthesized according to a previous study.22 The precursor solution was prepared by mixing equimolar PbI2 and CH3NH3I DMF solutions. The starting concentration was 45 wt% and the other different concentrations were obtained by diluting a 45 wt% solution. Substrates were ultrasonically cleaned by acetone, ethanol, DI water and a boiled H2SO4–H2O2 (5 : 2) solution, respectively. For NW growth experiments, four pieces of a clean glass substrate were preheated using four hot plates and the setting temperature was 120 °C, 90 °C, 60 °C and RT, respectively. Ten microliters of a 45 wt% perovskite solution were dropped onto the above four preheated substrates. Solution coated substrates were kept on hot plates for 3 hours and the substrates gradually became light black. Finally, the light black products were annealed at 80 °C for 10 min to obtain the NWs. Besides this, the following NWs were all grown at RT and annealed at 80 °C for 10 min.
Controllable distribution of OIP NWs
A UV-ozone treatment was utilized to make the substrate surface hydrophilic for a uniform distribution and the power was set at 500 W and the duration was 30 min. The contact angle was tested using a contact angle meter (USA Kino Industry, SL200B). A fixed volume ∼1 μL solution was dropped onto the treated substrate for NW growth. Four concentrations of 45 wt%, 10 wt%, 1 wt%, and 0.1 wt% were dropped onto SiO2/Si substrates to investigate the concentration effects on NW growth. A three-step method as shown in Fig. 4b was utilized for NW patterning growth. SiO2/Si substrates coated with a 1 μL 2 wt% solution were tilted by a small angle (∼10°) for aligned NW experiments. The prepared OIP NWs were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 450), HRTEM (Tecnai G2 20 U-Twin), XRD (XRD-7000S/L) and UV-Vis absorption spectra (Cary, Lambda 950).
Photodetector fabrication and measurements
The aligned perovskite NWs uniformly distributed on SiO2/Si or glass substrates were patterned with interdigitated Au electrodes by thermal evaporation assisted by a shadow mask. The active channels were 350 μm in width and 1.5 cm in length. Photodetector performances were measured using a probe station connected to an Agilent B1500A semiconductor characterization system. The device was further covered with an aluminum cap to provide optical and electromagnetic shielding. Illumination was generated by monochromatic light-emitting diodes controlled by a functional generator (Agilent 33210A). Light intensity was calibrated using a silicon photodetector (Newport 818-UV).
Solar cell fabrication and measurements
The NW thin film solar cells were fabricated in the same way as the typical device fabrications except for the absorbed materials.23 The device configuration was FTO/dense TiO2 layer/mesoporous TiO2 layer/OIP NW film/hole transport layer (HTM)/Au. The OIP NW layer was deposited in the same way as in the aforementioned NW growth part, and the only difference was spraying a solution onto the substrates for fast deposition instead of dropping. A sun simulator (Oriel) coupled with a filtered 1000 W xenon lamp was used to provide simulated solar irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Current–voltage characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 meter.
Results and discussion
Preferential growth of NWs
The precursor concentrations firstly referred to the thin film solar cell fabrication technique of the one step method.24 A droplet of 45 wt% precursor solution (constant volume, 10 μL) of equimolar CH3NH3I and PbI2 in dimethyl formamide (DMF) was dropped onto FTO substrates by a pipette. Fig. 1a–d show the product morphologies affected by the different substrate temperatures (120 °C, 90 °C, 60 °C and RT (room temperature)). The corresponding morphologies were nanoparticles, mixtures of nanowhiskers and nanoparticles, and nanowires, respectively. A high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of single NWs is shown in Fig. 1e and the space of the lattice fringe was ∼0.31 nm. As shown in the HRTEM image, the whole crystals grew along the same axis direction, which was further confirmed by fast Fourier transform (FFT) images of two different selected areas (denoted as f and g). Fig. 1f and g show almost the same perovskite diffraction spots. Consequently, the NWs were single crystals and the growth direction was [100]. The obtained NWs were further characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the XRD spectra (Fig. 1h) agreed well with the tetragonal perovskite spectra25 no matter whether the NWs were deposited on glass (1#), FTO substrates (2#) or SiO2/Si substrates (3#).
 Fig. 1  NW growth. (a–d) SEM morphologies prepared at different substrate temperatures: (a) 120 °C, (b) 90 °C, (c) 60 °C and (d) RT. (e–g) HRTEM image of single NWs (e) and its selected area FFT patterns (f and g). The FFT patterns were extracted from different circled areas denoted as f and g in (e). (h) The XRD spectra of the obtained NWs on different substrates. The spectra denoted as 1#, 2# and 3# were recorded from NWs grown on glass, FTO and SiO2/Si substrates. Star symbols indicate the standard perovskite XRD peaks. Solid circles indicate the XRD peaks from FTO. 
The growth procedure of the present NW growth method could be described as evaporation-induced self-assembly. When the precursor solution was cast on substrates, the evaporation of the solvent resulted in the supersaturated crystal growth with the c-axis parallel to the surface at RT.26 The low symmetry (tetragonal I4/mcm) of OIP and strong intermolecular interactions may allow for a preferred growth into NW morphology.27,28 For a high substrate temperature of 120 °C (Fig. 1a), it tended to grow homogeneously into nanoparticles29 and suppress the preferential growth. While growing at RT (Fig. 1d), the natural evaporation preferentially grew into NWs due to the low symmetry structure similar to the reported spin coating process.26,30
Uniform NW distribution
In addition to the right crystal phase of perovskite NWs, the NW distribution on the substrate should match the traditional techniques of micro- and nano-fabrications. The uniform distribution was implemented by UV-ozone treatment due to the improvement of surface DMF infiltration. The contact angles of SiO2/Si substrates before (Fig. 2a) and after (Fig. 2b) the UV-ozone treatments were 71° and 3°, respectively. The surface treatment significantly decreased the contact angle and improved the substrate infiltration. Once a 1 μL solution was dropped onto the treated substrate, it quickly spread out to the whole substrate (∼1.5 cm2). The uniform distribution of the solution and the low evaporation speed (natural evaporation at RT) ensured the uniform distribution of following NW growth in the whole substrate. The treatment was also applied to other common substrates, and it was found that such a treatment was not sensitive to substrate material. Fig. 2c and d show the NW distribution on non-treated and UV-ozone-treated SiO2/Si substrates, respectively. Nanowires on the treated substrate were uniformly distributed on the whole substrate without any NW aggregation (Fig. 2d). In contrast, NWs on non-treated substrates aggregated into bundle-like morphologies and some places were blank (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  Surface treatment effects. (a, b) Optical images of contact angle measurements taken from the non-treated substrates and UV-ozone treated substrates. Their contact angles were 71° and 3°, respectively. (c, d) Optical images of growth products from non-treated substrates and treated substrates, respectively. 
The effect of precursor concentration
As in the aforementioned part, utilizing a 45 wt% starting precursor concentration, multilayer NW products were obtained. The varied number of NW layers greatly affects their application in low dimensional devices.9 Precursor concentrations were investigated to tune the number of layers and NW diameters. Fig. 3a–d show the NW products grown from precursor concentrations of 45 wt%, 10 wt%, 1 wt% and 0.1 wt%, respectively. The following statistical numbers of NW layers and diameters were roughly estimated. The decreasing concentrations resulted in the decreased number of layers and diameters. The number of layers and diameters for Fig. 3a and b (45 wt% and 10 wt% concentrations) were 4–8 layers and 0.5–1 μm, and 2–5 layers and 0.3–0.8 μm, respectively. Monolayer NWs were obtained when the precursor concentrations were not higher than 1 wt% (Fig. 3c and d). The corresponding NWs also showed smaller diameters, and less than 100 nm could be obtained when the concentrations did not exceed 0.1 wt%. The evolved trends of layers and diameters are mainly attributed to natural evaporation-induced self-assembly growth. Nanowire growth mainly contained two processes: nucleation and crystal growth. Following the solvent evaporation, the solute concentration gradually increased. When the concentration reached supersaturation, nucleation occurred and crystal growth would also happen in an inseparable process. Because of the natural evaporation of the present growth, the nucleation and growth were coupled to each other as the solvent evaporation.29,31 For high concentration precursors, the nucleation and growth repeated many times led to multilayer NWs and wider diameter distribution, while for low concentration precursors, the supersaturated concentration was difficult to reach and the nucleus only occurred over a short time. Thus, the corresponding products contained monolayer NWs with smaller diameters.
 Fig. 3  Growth products synthesized from different concentrations: (a) 45 wt%, (b) 10 wt%, (c) 1 wt%, and (d) 0.1 wt%. 
Nanowire patterning
Nanowires only growing on selected areas not only increase the NW utilization efficiency but also avoid contamination on non-desired areas. The present NW patterning was implemented by UV-ozone treatment assisted by a shadow mask. Fig. 4a shows a schematic image of the selected area NW growth. Substrates covered by a mask were firstly treated by UV-ozone to ensure that the selected area is hydrophilic (Step 1). After dropping the solution onto a non-masked substrate, the solution only dispersed on the treated area (Step 2). Finally, NWs only grew on the treated area and the selected area growth was achieved (Step 3). Fig. 4b and c show the selected area growth results and NWs only grown on rectangular treated areas with sharp edges. These demonstrated that the present treatment assisted by the mask method could efficiently work for NW patterning. The patterning work avoiding the use of traditional photolithography and photoresist is expected to greatly broaden the OIP NW application fields and simplify the device fabrication process.
 Fig. 4  NW patterning growth. (a) Schematic description of the selected area growth. (b, c) SEM images from three neighboring selected areas (b) and one integrated area (c). 
Nanowire alignment
The growth products of OIP NWs on a UV-ozone treated surface are distributed uniformly and randomly as shown in Fig. 5a. The disordered distribution mismatched the traditional ordered electrodes for device applications. The evaporation-induced self-assembly method has been successfully utilized in the synthesis of ordered organic NWs.32–34 The EISA method was firstly applied for the present NW aligned growth, and the aligned NW area was small, especially in the central area where NWs were randomly distributed (not shown here). In order to obtain a large area aligned NW distribution such as the whole substrate, the substrates were tilted for a small angle of less than 15° to guide the NW alignment. The growth mechanism is schematically described in Fig. 5b. Utilizing the present modified EISA method (EISA combined with tilted substrate growth), NWs in the whole substrate aligned very well quasi-vertically to the substrate edge. Fig. 5c and d describe the NW distribution in two different positions; one was the starting growth area, the substrate edge (Fig. 5c), and the other was the area far from the edge (Fig. 5d). Both of them aligned to the same direction along the evaporation direction (arrowed in Fig. 5b), which demonstrated the well aligned growth in the whole substrate. For the growth mechanism described in Fig. 5b, nanowires started growth from the substrate edge due to the heterogeneous nucleation growth.30 As the evaporation continued, the contact line (liquid/substrate interface) driven by evaporation and gravity moved along the evaporation direction. In other words, the evaporation direction can help to guide the NW growth in the whole substrate. As a result, the modified EISA method could be utilized for large scale ordered NW growth. The reasons of NW alignment can also be explained by energetically favorable and surface energy minimization growth.35
 Fig. 5  NW alignment growth. (a) SEM image of randomly distributed NWs. (b) Schematic description of the aligned NW growth. The evaporation direction is indicated by arrows. (c, d) Optical images of NWs grown by a modified EISA method. The patterns were captured from substrate edge (c) and the remote area from edge (d). 
Photodetectors (PDs) of monolayer NWs
Monolayer aligned NWs were firstly applied in PDs as a low dimensional optoelectronic device demo. Absorption of NW films was measured by UV-vis spectra as shown in Fig. 6a. Such NW films (∼300 nm thickness) can absorb more than 90% of the light from UV to whole visible light consistent with their bandgap and high molar extinction coefficient.4 The broadband absorption and high absorption coefficient suggest that the present NWs are superior materials for high performance PDs. The inset of Fig. 6b shows the optical micrograph of the fabricated conductive PD. The average diameter and length of the NWs were 500 nm and 800 μm, respectively. The lighted current (Ilight) versus applied bias curves are shown in Fig. 6b under light irradiance of different wavelengths. At a constant light intensity (∼80 μW cm−2), PDs excited by 650 nm light obtained larger Ilight. Concerning this, the left work utilizes 650 nm light for illumination unless otherwise specified. Fig. 6c shows the I–t curve under the repetitive switching of 650 nm light at a bias of 2 V. The Ilight and Id (dark current) were stable as the reversible and rapid switch between the illuminated state and the dark state. The obtained Ilight and Id were 115 nA and 5 nA, respectively, and the Ilight/Id ratio can reach 23. From a high resolution scan of one cycle of I–t curves as shown in Fig. 6d, the extracted rise and decay times were 0.2 ms and 0.3 ms, respectively, which were superior to a reported thin film based PD's speed (∼100 ms).21
 Fig. 6  (a) UV-Vis spectra of OIP NW films. (b) Photocurrent response under different wavelength light illumination from UV to infrared. The inset is the optical image of a typical PD with a scale bar of 200 μm. (c) I–t curve illuminated by 650 nm light at a bias of 2 V. (d) High resolution scan to one cycle of I–t curves. The time interval was 0.1 ms. 
For a conductive photodetector, the detectivity (D*) and responsivity (R) are the figures of merit to compare the performances of different geometry devices. Detectivity is defined using responsivity, device area (A), electrical bandwidth (B) and noise current (In) by the equation: . Responsivity is defined by photocurrent (Ip = Ilight − Id) divided by the incident power (P) to the active area. The shot noise, associated with current fluctuations flowing across a PD, often dominates the total noise of the detector.36 So, In could be approximately correlated with Id described by  where q is elementary charge. Therefore, D* can be simplified as . In Fig. 7a, Ip increased as the applied voltage and irradiation increased, which roughly reflected the dependent relationship between Ip, applied bias and P. Fig. 7b and c further show the detailed responsivity evolution as we changed the bias and irradiation, respectively. The estimated R can reach 1.3 A W−1 with the increase of applied bias under a fixed illumination of 80 μW cm−2. In contrast, R increased to 0.85 A W−1 at a fixed bias of 1 V when the illumination decreased to 4 μW cm−2. Considering the evolution of Fig. 7b and c, it can be concluded that higher bias and lower irradiance can obtain higher R than the present 1.3 A W−1. A similar trend was also observed for the D*–P curve (Fig. 7d) and the estimated detectivity can reach 2.5 × 1012 Jones at a bias of 1 V. The present PDs have also been measured using higher bias voltage to confirm the PD stability. From Fig. S2 in ESI,† the PDs can withstand 50 V testing. Compared with recent OIP films21 and low dimensional inorganic NW based PDs,37,38 the performances of the present PDs demonstrated superior response time, responsivity and detectivity, which suggests that they have high potential in light sensor applications. The single crystal structure, high light absorption coefficient and good ohmic contact ensured superior performances of the present PDs.
 Fig. 7  (a) I–V curves under different illumination power densities at a bias of 1 V. (b) PD responsivity depending on the applied bias under 650 nm light illumination at a power density of 80 μW cm−2. (c) Dependence relationship between responsivity and irradiance at a fixed bias of 1 V. (d) The normalized detectivity evolved as the irradiance, and the applied bias was 1 V. 
Solar cells of NW films
Another demo based on OIP NW thin film solar cells has also been fabricated. There are double layers of perovskite material contained in solar cells. One layer is perovskite nanoparticles infiltrated into the mesoporous TiO2 layer and the other is left NWs capping the whole TiO2 surface (ESI Fig. S3†). As shown in Fig. 8, the measured key parameters of open circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), filled factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE) were 0.75 V, 5.4 mA cm−2, 61% and 2.5%, respectively. Compared with the reported high efficiency (∼19.3%) of OIP thin film solar cells,4–6 the obtained Jsc were much lower because of the thicker film required to avoid shorting of the inter-NW void. While for specific fields, the non-full fill of NWs may find suitable applications such as semi-transparent solar cells. The prototype devices manifested the implementation of OIP NW solar cells and need further optimization.
 Fig. 8  Photocurrent density of solar cells as a function of the forward bias voltage. The inset is the detailed performance parameters. 
It was noted that another paper has also reported the OIP NW growth39 during the manuscript preparation process of the present work. The random NWs were synthesized by the slip-coating method. The size distributions and PDs of NWs were investigated. Superior charge carrier extraction in NW based devices was also expected.
Conclusions
A new morphology of OIP materials, OIP NWs, has been successfully implemented. The self-assembly growth of NWs is mainly attributed to the low symmetry of OIP and the strong intermolecular interactions. As a kind of low dimensional material for optoelectronic devices, the controllable distribution of NWs was crucial for its application. The NW patterning and alignment were implemented by selected area treatment and modified EISA, respectively. The synthesized NWs were successfully applied in low dimensional PDs and thin film solar cells as demos. Monolayer NW based PDs obtained a response time of ∼0.3 ms, a responsivity of 1.3 A W−1 and a detectivity of 2.5 × 1012 Jones, which are superior to recently reported PD performances based on OIP thin films and inorganic NWs. Thin film solar cells based on OIP NWs also worked and obtained an energy conversion efficiency of 2.5%. The one dimensional single crystals, mild growth conditions, controllable distribution and superior light absorption and conversion properties suggest that the present NWs have wide application in optoelectronics.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61306137), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (HUST: 2014QN014) and 973 Program of China (2011CBA00703). The authors thank the Testing Center of HUST and the Center for Nanoscale Characterization and Devices, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO) for access to facilities.
References
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. A: Mater., 2006, 85, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2003, 421, 241–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Barrelet, A. B. Greytak and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1981–1985 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hayden, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 352–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Mannsfeld, A. Sharei, S. Liu, M. E. Roberts, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4044–4048 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, Nature, 2003, 425, 243–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Piao, F. Kimura and T. Kimura, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4853–4855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, R. B. Bhiladvala, T. J. Morrow, J. A. Sioss, K.-K. Lew, J. M. Redwing, C. D. Keating and T. S. Mayer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 88–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Peng, J. Wang, J. Pei and Y. Cao, Langmuir, 2008, 25, 665–671 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Fan, J. Jie, J. C. Chang, C.-S. Lee, W. Zhang and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1716–1720 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kalsin, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, S. K. Smoukov, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2006, 312, 420–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591–597 Search PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Gratzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tidhar, E. Edri, H. Weissman, D. Zohar, G. Hodes, D. Cahen, B. Rybtchinski and S. Kirmayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13249–13256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Dirksen and T. A. Ring, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1991, 46, 2389–2427 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cacciuto, S. Auer and D. Frenkel, Nature, 2004, 428, 404–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 2000, 62, 756 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. F. Dupont, G. Huber, S. R. Nagel and T. A. Witten, Nature, 1997, 389, 827–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
E. Heves, C. Ozturk, V. Ozguz and Y. Gurbuz, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2013, 34, 662–664 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Wang, J. Lin, W.-B. Gu, Y.-Q. Liu, H.-D. Wu and G.-B. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2433–2435 RSC .
G. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Liang, G. Yu, Z. Xie, H. T. Huang, B. Liu, X. F. Wang, D. Chen, M. Q. Zhu and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2681–2690 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horváth, M. Spina, Z. Szekrényes, K. Kamarás, R. Gaal, D. Gachet and L. Forró, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6761–6766 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The leakage current level of PDs, I–t curves of PDs at high bias voltage and the surface morphologies of NW absorption layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06982jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  NW growth. (a–d) SEM morphologies prepared at different substrate temperatures: (a) 120 °C, (b) 90 °C, (c) 60 °C and (d) RT. (e–g) HRTEM image of single NWs (e) and its selected area FFT patterns (f and g). The FFT patterns were extracted from different circled areas denoted as f and g in (e). (h) The XRD spectra of the obtained NWs on different substrates. The spectra denoted as 1#, 2# and 3# were recorded from NWs grown on glass, FTO and SiO2/Si substrates. Star symbols indicate the standard perovskite XRD peaks. Solid circles indicate the XRD peaks from FTO.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface treatment effects. (a, b) Optical images of contact angle measurements taken from the non-treated substrates and UV-ozone treated substrates. Their contact angles were 71° and 3°, respectively. (c, d) Optical images of growth products from non-treated substrates and treated substrates, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Growth products synthesized from different concentrations: (a) 45 wt%, (b) 10 wt%, (c) 1 wt%, and (d) 0.1 wt%.	 

 	Fig. 4  NW patterning growth. (a) Schematic description of the selected area growth. (b, c) SEM images from three neighboring selected areas (b) and one integrated area (c).	 

 	Fig. 5  NW alignment growth. (a) SEM image of randomly distributed NWs. (b) Schematic description of the aligned NW growth. The evaporation direction is indicated by arrows. (c, d) Optical images of NWs grown by a modified EISA method. The patterns were captured from substrate edge (c) and the remote area from edge (d).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV-Vis spectra of OIP NW films. (b) Photocurrent response under different wavelength light illumination from UV to infrared. The inset is the optical image of a typical PD with a scale bar of 200 μm. (c) I–t curve illuminated by 650 nm light at a bias of 2 V. (d) High resolution scan to one cycle of I–t curves. The time interval was 0.1 ms.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) I–V curves under different illumination power densities at a bias of 1 V. (b) PD responsivity depending on the applied bias under 650 nm light illumination at a power density of 80 μW cm−2. (c) Dependence relationship between responsivity and irradiance at a fixed bias of 1 V. (d) The normalized detectivity evolved as the irradiance, and the applied bias was 1 V.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocurrent density of solar cells as a function of the forward bias voltage. The inset is the detailed performance parameters.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The leakage current level of PDs, I–t curves of PDs at high bias voltage and the surface morphologies of NW absorption layers. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06982j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
