Advancements in PV-thermal systems with and without phase change materials as a sustainable energy solution: energy, exergy and exergoeconomic (3E) an ...  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00681E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00681E
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4956-4987Advancements in PV-thermal systems with and without phase change materials as a sustainable energy solution: energy, exergy and exergoeconomic (3E) analytic approach

        
          
            Imtiaz Ali 
            Laghari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Samykano
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            A. K. 
            Pandey
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            K. 
            Kadirgama
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            V. V. 
            Tyagi
          
        
      d
aCollege of Engineering, University Malaysia Pahang, Lebuhraya Tun Razak, 26300 Gambang, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. E-mail: mahendran@ump.edu.my
bResearch Centre for Nano-Materials and Energy Technology (RCNMET), School of Science and Technology, Sunway University, No. 5, Jalan Universiti, Bandar Sunway, Petaling Jaya, 47500 Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. E-mail: adarsh.889@gmail.com
cFaculty of Mechanical & Automotive Engineering Technology, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, 26600 Pekan, Pahang, Malaysia
dSchool of Energy Management, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Katra, J&K 182320, India
Received 
      3rd May 2020
    , Accepted 15th July 2020First published on 25th July 2020AbstractPhotovoltaic thermal (PVT) systems are increasingly becoming an essential part of the solar application systems integrating the photovoltaic (PV) and solar thermal collectors into a single unit to produce heat and electrical energy from the intermittent solar irradiation. Energy systems are usually analyzed by energy and exergy analyses. Most of these systems are designed considering their energy performances based on the 1st law of thermodynamics. Generally, the energy reduction occurring in systems can be detected using exergy analysis and is a valuable tool for investigating the energy efficiency of energy systems, thereby helping the complicated thermodynamic systems more efficient. The exergoeconomic analysis is a form of economics focused on exergy analysis and is a hybrid of exergy and cost analysis to enhance the output of PVT systems. This allows designers to determine strategies to enhance the system efficiency from its cost perspective. Herein, a detailed literature review on energy, exergy and exergoeconomics (3E) analysis and their applications in air-based, water-based and bi-fluid PVT systems with and without integrated phase change materials (PCMs) is executed. It was found that water-based PVT systems with PCMs (PVT-PCM) are more feasible as the energy and exergy efficiencies are enhanced and their energy payback time reduced as compared to other conventional systems. The energy and exergy efficiencies of the water-, air- and bi-fluid-based PVT systems integrated with PCMs were found to be higher than the systems without PCM integration. PCM integration with a water-based PVT system can lead to the storage of thermal energy and also enhance the overall exergetic efficiency of the system up to 25%. The exergy efficiencies of PVT systems were found to be between 3–14%, and generally less than their energy efficiencies. Thus, 3E analysis is found to be a more technical approach to assess the performance of PVT systems and gives a complete overview of the performance of the system.
1. Introduction
Owing to the rapid growth in global population, industrialization and advancement in the living standards of people worldwide, the per capita energy consumption is increasing at a rate higher than ever before.1 The overuse of fossil fuels in real life applications has produced significant environmental degradation and such incremental changes due to global warming, make the development of environment friendly energy resources indispensable in fulfilling the continued growth in energy demand for clean energy.2 Focusing on solar energy, it has been demonstrated to be an alternate and clean energy source for sustainable development globally. Solar energy is an abundant, sustainable and limitless source of clean energy, and therefore can be incorporated into several energy consumption schemes to eliminate the addiction of today's society on fossil fuel.3 Solar power is not a new idea that has only been established by scientists, but rather a free energy source, which has been accessible since the beginning of time.4,5 Solar energy can be utilized in two ways: (1) direct conversion of electricity using PV and (2) indirect conversion into thermal energy using solar thermal collectors. Photovoltaic solar cells consist of two highly doped PN junctions. The PV panel absorbs 80% of solar irradiance, from which only 6–19% of the energy from the sun is transformed into an useable power output with the remaining energy being wasted.6 PV cells that work under sunlight and high temperature tend to suffer from low energy efficiencies, which shows that the decrement in efficiency is mainly due to the increase in the temperature of the solar cell. According to research, if the photovoltaic device temperature is above 25.0 °C then there will be decrement in its electrical efficiency.7
Thus, to overcome this problem, researchers suggest the use of some techniques to reduce the temperature of the PV panel by installing some cooling means.8 For example, photovoltaic thermal (PVT) systems are used to overcome this problem. PVT systems are mainly comprised of a PV device and solar thermal components, which use the power output and heat energy as the end product.9 In hybrid PVT systems, some fluid is required such as water, air and a mixture of both, which is located at the back of the PV panel. The flow of the fluid using a thermal absorber decreases the PV temperature significantly, which ultimately improves the power output, and the hot water or air can be utilized for different applications.10 Thermal and electrical co-generation coupled in hybrid PVT systems is an efficient tool to minimize solar irradiance loss through heat dissipation and control the PV device temperature, thus effectively increasing the useful energy output of the PV device. PVT interfaces collect heat energy in a similar manner as thermal collectors, where the absorber plate operates as an energy conversion platform.11
The performances of PVT systems are dependent on the energy analysis (EA), which is generally restricted to adjusting the energy inputs and outputs.12 However, considering their energy, the first law of thermodynamics was observed to be incomplete, and thus the thermodynamic study of the various thermal process and structures the application of PVT systems is becoming significant. It is well understood that the full transfer of heat to work is not possible. Therefore, the portion that is available for conversion is referred to as exergy.13 Exergy Analysis (ExA) is a modern tool that provides adequate details on the efficiency of energy conversion systems. Furthermore, exergy analysis examines if a more efficient thermal system can be designed by decreasing the source of thermodynamic imperfections existing in systems. Therefore, both EA and ExA can be applied to different applications to design and optimize energy systems. Exergoeconomic analysis (EXENEC) is a tool that associates the exergy analysis and cost perspective ideologies to construct and implement cost-effective systems on a larger scale than that of the conventional exergy and economic analysis.14 EXENEC is defined as the integration of exergy analysis and conventional cost analysis for improvement of the performances of energy systems.15 Many researchers16,17 have investigated the 3E analysis of PVT systems, and a few17,18 investigated the energy and exergy analysis of two-side serpentine flow hybrid PVT water-based PCM integrated systems. The combination of thermal modules on the rear side of the PV cell eliminates the lower energy transformation issue to a certain degree and enhances the overall efficiency of the system.
An attempt was made by Sarhaddi et al.19 to evaluate the exergy efficiency of air-based PVT systems. The detailed EA and ExA analyses were directed to measure the power output and thermal components of the exergy efficiency of PVT systems. Kazemian et al.20 designed, developed and conducted a comparative study on three different types of systems: (i) conventional PV system; (ii) PV system integrated with phase change materials (PCM); and (iii) PVT system integrated with PCM. Their findings suggest that the PV-PCM configuration increased the electrical and exergy efficiency by 4.22%, and the PVT-PCM configuration increased the exergy electrical efficiency by 8.81% compared to the PV system; therefore, the results suggest that PVT-PCM is the best system compared to the conventional PV and PV-PCM systems.
Previously, several researchers16,21–25 around the world reviewed the works on 3E analysis of solar energy systems in order to optimize their energy efficiency. Kumar et al.26 discussed the EA and ExA of various solar energy applications. The exergy efficiency of PVT systems was observed to increase with an increase in mass flowrate, which were superior to PV and solar thermal collectors alone in performance and cost. The cost of generating electricity in PVT systems is significant, and thus needs to be lowered by inventing highly developed and inexpensive materials. Accordingly, automatic tracking mechanism and simulation tools can help to enhance the line focus or point focus. The techno-economic and cost analysis of different elements is also important. Yazdanifard et al.22 discussed the ExA of the various types of PVT systems. The comparison of the exergy output of the various PVT systems revealed that the use of nanofluids, concentrators and optical filters had a beneficial impact on the exertional capacity of the PVT systems. Moreover, the following conclusions were drawn from their study.
With an increase in solar radiation, the energy efficiency increases with a decrease in ambient temperature. By increasing the packing factor, the energy efficiency of the PVT system increases. The efficiency of the PVT system increases by increasing the length of the collector, number of pipes and optimum diameter of the pipe, which maximize the exergy efficiency. A review on the latest advancements of solar thermal collector EA was presented by Evangelisti et al.,27 who analyzed the standard and performance tests related to solar thermal collectors. A complicated design was found to be necessary to achieve improved results. Thus, the key aspects of thermal behavior need to be the focus with a detailed heat transfer analysis in order for the maximum outlet fluid temperature and high efficiency to be achieved. However, we suggest that polymeric materials be considered as a realistic alternative, which need to be studied more in-depth by the scientific community in order to improve the heat transfer and the structure of the absorber, and the study of the convective phenomenon is crucial for improving the air collectors. Caliskan et al.28 reviewed the 3E analysis of solar thermal collectors and found that most of the energy and exergy lost were by radiation. Radiation destroys most of the energy and exergy. The main reason for this is the huge difference in temperature between the sky of the collector and the glass surface. If the collector glass materials are selected more effectively, the loss of radiation can be reduced. The solar exergy of systems is the maximum input rate of exergy, and the most of it is destroyed by irreversibility in the system. This reveals the big limitation of solar collector systems. However, the functional performances of these systems can be enhanced by energy and exergy strategies. A review on exergy-based performance evaluation of thermal energy storage was presented by Jegadheeswaran et al.29 Exergy-based performance assessment of latent heat energy storage systems can be described as a more insightful measure than energy-based measures because it reflects the true potential of systems and the economic value of the storage/recovery operation. However, the design and maintenance of latent heat storage systems can be justified only if their exergetic cost is low, and thermoeconomic optimization dependent on exergy is more beneficial in reducing the exergetic cost of these systems. As discussed in the abovementioned review papers, there is no prerequisite for energy, exergy and exergoeconomics analysis with and without PCM integration in the field of PVT systems. The new contribution of this study is to present a comprehensive review on the 3E (energy, exergy and exergoeconomic) analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) systems with and without phase change materials (PCM) as a sustainable approach to enhance their efficiency and economic value. To the best of our knowledge and based on above literature review, it can be stated that there are no comprehensive reviews in the literature on the 3E analysis of PVT systems with and without PCMs. Thus, the aim of the present review is to introduce the wide range of works on the 3E analysis of PVT systems in recent years and discuss the technical challenges associated with PVT systems. Also, we introduce the impact of 3E analysis for PVT systems and the impact of PCMs on them.
The sections are organized as follows. Section 2 presents the detailed knowledge about the PVT system and different types of PVT systems. Section 3 presents the detailed energy, exergy and exergoeconomic (3E) analysis, energy and exergy balance equations of PV, PVT and PVT-PCM integrated systems. Section 4 provides the 3E analysis of air-assisted PVT systems (PVTair) with and without the integration of PCMs. Section 5 details the studies on water-based PVT systems (PVTwater) with and without PCMs. Section 6 covers the studies on the 3E analysis of bi-fluid PVT systems with and without PCMs. The technical challenges associated with this technology are explained in Section 7. Finally, the conclusions obtained from this study and recommendations are presented in Section 8.
2. PVT systems: understanding and their classification
This section details the basic understanding of PVT systems and their classification.
2.1 Concept of PVT systems
The photovoltaic thermal (PVT) system is a hybrid solar energy system that converts solar radiation into the useful electrical energy and thermal energy simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Concept of the PVT system. 
The PVT system is an integration of a PV module and thermal collector. The PVT system produces electrical and thermal energy simultaneously, where the PV module converts the solar radiation falling on the surface directly to electricity and the thermal collector converts the heat into useful heat.7,30 Hot fluid can be used for different medium and low temperature range applications such as the domestic applications of space heating and water heating. The collector used in this hybrid system in the medium temperature range is a flat-plate collector (FPC). The FPC is composed of an insulated metal box glass cover (glazed or unglazed), solar cells, dark brown colored absorber collector plate and sealed materials. It is simple and robust with a low maintenance cost. Researchers consider that the FPC is one of the simplest made collector with the widest application such as space heating and numerous commercial and industrial applications.31 Flat-plate collectors are applied in devices requiring energy delivery at moderate temperatures. Solar radiation is extracted by the absorber plate and transferred to the fluid that circulates through the FPC in tubes.
The main features of solar PVT systems are as follows:
(a) The PVT system delivers electrical energy and thermal energy from the same system.
(b) The effectiveness of the PVT system is greater than the performances of two individual systems.
(c) They require less space compared to two individual systems.
(d) Thermal reliability is improved since the efficiency and lifetime cycle are improved by using cooling techniques.
2.2 Classifications of PVT systems
As can be seen from Fig. 2, photovoltaic thermal (PVT) systems can be classified as air-based PVT systems, water-based PVT systems and bi-fluid (water + air) PVT systems. These three PVT systems are further classified as active and passive PVT systems with and without the integration of PCMs. In air-based PVT systems, air is used as a medium for extracting heat from the PV module using the thermal collector attached at the back of the PV panel. This type of system describes the end use of the heated air from air-based PVT systems. The end use of harvested air from the PVT module primarily involves the application of space heating and crop drying. Furthermore, the other types of air-based PVT systems include active (forced air circulation using a fan) and passive (natural flow air) with and without PCMs. Phase change materials (PCMs) are used as a storage medium to store the heat and utilize it when solar energy is not available.32 In water-based PVT systems33 water is used as an intermediate for extracting heat from the PV panel using a thermal absorber. Hot water is the output and it is used for many applications such as household purposes or in industry as preheated water. Water-based PVT systems can also be classified as active (force circulation of water) and passive (natural flow of water) with and without PCMs. The integration of PCMs further enhances the efficiency and work as thermal energy storage. The bi-fluid-based PVT34 architecture is proposed to receive and transform solar energy into electrical energy and thermal (hot air and water) simultaneously. Bi-fluid based PVT systems can also be further classified as active and passive with and without PCMs. Bi-fluid PVT systems have an extra advantage of producing two different fluids, which can be utilized for two different applications simultaneously.
 Fig. 2  Classification of PVT systems. 

2.2.1 Air-based PVT systems with and without PCMs. 
An increase in the temperature of the PV cell results in a reduction in its electrical and overall performance.7 Thus, to enhance the efficiency, some techniques need to be employed to cool the PV panel. In air-based systems, air is used as the medium to cool the temperature of the PV panel. There are two types of cooling techniques, one is active and the other is passive. In the passive technique, the natural flow of air is used to cool temperature of the PV cell, whereas in the active technique, fans are used for circulating the air at the back of the PV panel.
Air is the circulating fluid in the air-based PVT collector, as shown in Fig. 3, which is more advantageous for drying applications where the hot air demand is high. The main reason for using air instead of water has a lower cost, lower risk of freezing or boiling, and furthermore lower risk of damage in case leakage occurs. Teo et al.36 designed an active cooling technique to cool the PV panel temperature. They analyzed the efficiency and temperature of the PV device with and without the use of active cooling. Their results showed that without the use of the active cooling technique, the temperature of the solar cell was as high as 68 °C and the efficiency of the solar PV module was between 8% to 9%. When an active cooling system was employed, the PV panel temperature decreased to 38 °C, which consequently enhanced the efficiency of the solar PV cell to between 12% and 14%. Ooshaksaraei et al.37 performed observational investigations on four different air-based PVT systems modules as follows: (i) single path, (ii) double-path parallel flow, (iii) double-path counter flow, and (iv) single-path returning flow using bifacial solar PV cells. The results demonstrated that the enhancement in the electrical efficiency was in the range of (ii) 51–67%, (iii) 47–62%, (iv) 42–56%, and (i) 28–49% for each model.
 Fig. 3  Air-based PVT system without PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.) 
Agrawal et al.38 conducted the experiments in which they made a comparative analysis between single-channel and micro-channel air-based PVT systems. It was observed that the highest thermal performance improvement in the micro-channel photovoltaic thermal module (MCPVT) was around 74% and that of the single-channel photovoltaic thermal module (SCPVT) was around 62%. Giovanni et al.39 designed a low-cost air-based PVT prototype system to investigate the economic and energy performances of various operating conditions. An air-to-air heat pump attached to the PVT air-based system was used for the application of space heating in buildings. The results indicated that there was improvement in the electrical energy in the range of 11–19.7 MW h per year, i.e. 50–80% annual energy savings compared to conventional PVT systems. Fig. 4 shows the air-based PVT system with PCM, where the PCM TES package consisted of a variety of parallel layers of PCM and each layer of PCM was composed of PCM panels. This proposed system can be used for both day-time and night-time cooling depending on the application.
 Fig. 4  Air-based PVT systems with PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.) 
The statistical observation accomplished by Sohel et al.41 describes an air-based hybrid PVT system coupled with a phase change material (PCM). The air can be utilized for applications such as space heating and water heating. Further, the PCM integrated with this hybrid PVT system module was thoroughly examined for the overall impact of key constraints on the performance of the system. It was observed that solar irradiation initially improved the thermal efficiency, and the electrical efficiency was enhanced with respect to solar irradiance. The results revealed that the channel depth had a limited effect on the PVT system, while the wind speed exhibited a substantial affect. When the wind speed was higher, the thermal efficiency decreased. This is because of the higher wind speed, much of the unglazed PVT surface was lost to the atmosphere. This lowered the photovoltaic panel temperature, and therefore increased its electrical power performances. The preliminary findings also indicated that the air-based PVT system can provide a significant share of the space heating energy required for a distinctive domestic application. The integration of PCM with the PVT system allows heating, air conditioning and ventilation energy requirements to be offset when sunlight is not available.


2.2.2. Water-based PVT system with and without PCMs. 
The PVTwater system functions the same as PVTair except the working fluid is water instead of air. The thermo-physical properties of the water-based system are much higher than that of the air-based system, and thus the water-based system can enhance the system performance more efficiently compared to the air-based PVT system. Researchers33,42 prefer the water-based PVT device because it can withstand the limitations of air-based PVT systems and decrease the PV device temperature. The water-based PVT system is also comprised of an active and passive system similar to the air-based PVT system, but very few worked on the passive technique (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Water-based PVT systems without PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.) 
Ahmad et al.44 investigated a PV system integrated with an absorber collector, in which three absorber collector performances were determined. The results indicated that 800 W m−2 solar radiation and a spiral flow absorber mass flow rate of 0.041 kg s−1 resulted in an overall efficiency of 65%, including 13% PV panel efficiency and 52% thermal efficiency, which also resulted in 79–91% energy savings at a mass flow rate ranging from 0.11–0.041 kg s−1. Kazem et al.45 performed an experimental comparative analysis of conventional PV and PVT water-based rectangular absorber systems. The results showed that the electrical energy obtained by the rectangular water-based PVT system was higher compared to that of the conventional PV system. In the arrangement, the rectangular-shaped PVT absorber can cover more area, resulting in greater heat transfer. Hue et al.46 studied the innovative building-integrated heat pipe PVT systems. Through the novel heat pipe PVT system, there was a reduction in the temperature of the HPPVT wall to 23.2%. The result showed that the efficiencies (electrical and thermal) achieved was 9.8% and 34.7%, respectively, further resulting in electricity savings of 2647 kW h per year. It was also analyzed that the overall efficiency of the HPPVT system was higher than that of the building water-based PVT systems. Fraisse et al.47 simulated a water-based PVT system without PCM to reduce the thermal degradation of the PV panel by reducing the exterior temperature. Cooling achieved by dropping water formations on the on the higher surface of the photovoltaic panel. The results indicated that more than 15% electrical efficiency can be achieved by employing this technique. Dubey et al.48 investigated two different types of PVT water-based systems in tropical climate conditions. Model-1 was mono-crystalline silicon PV cell coupled with a tube and sheet-type thermal collector, model-2 was a multi-crystalline silicon solar cell coupled with a parallel plate thermal collector, which were both tested at different flow rates of 0.03 kg s−1 and 0.06 kg s−1. The efficiencies (thermal and electrical) of module-1 were 40.7% and 11.8%, while that of module-2 were 39.4% and 11.5%, respectively.
Many researchers49–54 have suggested that water-based PVT-PCM is a solution to reduce the heat from the PV panel and to store heat energy. Recently, to utilize the heat of the PV panel, many researchers suggested the use of phase change materials (PCM) to store thermal energy. Fig. 6 shows that water-based PVT systems with PCM are an acceptable choice for counteracting the exhausted and environmentally hazardous fossil fuel. Nevertheless, an elevated PV module cell temperature decreases the electrical efficiency. Hence, a hybrid PVT thermal array is ideal technology for improving the electrical efficiency and storing the useful heat. Furthermore, the addition of phase change materials (PCM) into PVT systems provides dual benefits in terms of PV cell cooling and heat recovery.
 Fig. 6  Water-based PVT system with PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.) 
PCMs are considered to be latent heat storage devices, which are used to extract the heat from the PV panel and to reduce the PV panel temperature by storing energy in the form of internal energy and release the stored energy for other applications.56,57 Phase change materials (PCMs) can be classified as organic, inorganic and eutectic30).
Organic PCMs consist of paraffin wax, alkanes, esters, fatty acids, alcohols compound ketones and amide. Inorganic PCMs consist of salt hydrates, metallics, carbonate, chloride, sulfate, fluoride, and manganese chloride. A material with desired thermophysical properties can be made using mixtures of organic eutectic, inorganic eutectic or organic–inorganic eutectics, which work at different temperature ranges. The temperature range of organic PCMs is 4–150 °C, inorganic PCMs 8–900 °C and eutectic PCMs 12–600 °C.58 Taher et al.59 reported the analysis of PV and PCM water-based PVT systems. The PCM water-based PVT system tested under various outdoor conditions exhibited an improvement in efficiencies (thermal and overall) of 26% and 40%, respectively, compared to that of the conventional PV panel. The energy payback time (EPBT) of PVT-PCM is 6 years based on the exergy analysis, which is 12.26% lower than that of the PV panel.
Zhou et al.60 proposed hybrid active cooling with forced ventilation using a PCM storage system. Mathematical modelling and systematical evaluation indicated that the use of both active cooling and PCM cooling results in an improvement in the electrical and overall efficiency. More generalized results showed that a decrease in solar cell temperature from 70.9 °C to 32.8 °C resulted in an increase in PV power from 10 W to 11.3 W, which in turn enhanced the electrical output performance from 11.5% to 14.9%. Preet et al.61 discussed the use of cooling techniques with PCMs in PVT systems. They analyzed the cause and effect of an increase in PV panel temperature, which directly affects the efficiency and thermal reliability of the PV panel. It was found that the use of PCMs in PVT based on different thermal supervision systems allowed the heat extracted from the PCMs to be utilized for an extended time and further used for water heating or space heating applications. Fayaz et al.62 investigated a PCM-integrated PVT system and systems without PCM integrated both experimentally and mathematically. The resulting cell temperature was 82.9 °C, 71 °C and 67 °C for the PV, PVT and PVT PCM-based systems, respectively. The electrical efficiency improved by 12.4% and 12.8% in the case of the PVT system both numerically and experimentally, while 12.7% and 12.5% mathematically and observationally, respectively, in the case of PVT-PCM. It was also concluded that the PVT-PCM system is the best option since its electrical performance was enhanced by 10.13% and 9.2% mathematically and experimentally, respectively.


2.2.3. Bi-fluid based PVT system with and without PCM. 
Bi-fluid PVT systems are one of the methods suggested by many researchers, which involves the use of two fluids in the PVT system. Accordingly, the restrictions of water-based and air-based systems can be compensated. Bi-fluid PVT systems have an extra advantage of producing two different fluids, which can be utilized for two different applications simultaneously. Most researchers working on bi-fluid PVT systems achieved higher efficiencies compared to that of conventional PVT air-based and PVT water-based systems. Senthilraja et al.63 performed an efficiency assessment of water/air-assisted PVT systems for hydrogen manufacture applications, as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of PVT system. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) (b) Thermal efficiency of the different PVT systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
The fabricated solar-based water air collector was studied at three different flow rates, i.e. 0.08 kg s−1, 0.01 kg s−1 and 0.011 kg s−1. The thermal and electrical efficiencies were found to be 33.8% and 8.5%, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7(b).
Othman et al.64 developed the air/water PVT system to improve the efficiency of the collector via heat reduction. The developed system was studied under irradiance in the range of 350 W m−2 to 800 W m−2 and fluid flow rate ranging from 0.01 kg s−1 to 0.10 kg s−1. The electrical output performance calculated for this hybrid system was 17.0%, which is 4 times lower than the thermal efficiency. The high values were similar to that of the conventional PVT systems. Experimental validation of a 2D theoretical model was reported by Jarimi et al.34 In their research, theoretical and experimental analysis of a PVT bi-fluid solar collector was performed, which integrates the use of dual heat exchanger systems using air and water. The results revealed that the primary energy saved by utilizing bi-fluid based PVT systems was between 58.10% and 62.31%. Abu Bakar et al.65 implemented a basic unglazed bi-fluid PVT system without PCM, which incorporates PV laminates, a serpentine-shaped copper tube as the water heating component and a single pass air pipe as the air heating component. The efficiency of the bi-fluid PVT systems was predicted when the fluids worked independently and simultaneously. At the optimum mass flow rate for specific parameters, the overall thermal equivalent efficiency is expected to be as high as 76% when the fluids work simultaneously. The increase in temperature of both fluids either in independent or simultaneous mode showed that thermal energy produced by this type of collector contributes to various types of potential applications such as pre-heating air and water for agriculture drying, aquaculture and domestic applications. The use of different thermal fluids, cooling channel arrangements and various passive heat transfer enhancement techniques was investigated to extract heat from the rear surface of the PV modules. Water-based PVT systems have been widely used to remove heat from the rear surface of the PV module, and thus can be added to traditional FPC domestic water heating systems, and water preheating systems for industrial processes. However, water freezing in cold regions can limit their use.

3. 3E (energy, exergy, exergoeconomic) analysis
Energy and exergy analysis are prevalent methodologies used to determine the performance of energy storage systems. The phenomenon of exergoeconomics involves the integration of exergy analysis and conventional cost analysis for enhancing the performances of energy systems.
3.1 Energy analysis
EA is the study and observation of a proposed system in the context of the first law of thermodynamics. EA is the traditional method for evaluating whether or not energy is being used in processes including natural resource production and energy conversion. The energy efficiency of PVT systems can be defined as the ratio of thermal and electrical energy to the incident solar energy falling on the PV panel. The energy balance equation for the photovoltaic PV system without thermal energy storage can be given as follows.66,67
The actual solar photovoltaic output Q0 = VOC × ISC × FF(1)where VOC is the open circuit voltage, ISC is the short circuit current and FF is the fill factor.
Therefore, FF can be further stated as (2)
Based on the above definition, eqn (2) can be transformed into Q0 = Vm × Im(3)
The energy efficiency can also be defined as theoretically as (4)
The energy balance equations related to air-based photovoltaic thermal (PVT) systems without thermal energy storage can be expressed as68,69 ∑mai = ∑ma0(5) (6)
The incident solar energy for the collector surface is given as68,69 Qc = A × IS(7)where A = area of the collector exposed to sunlight and IS = solar irradiance intensity.
The solar energy obtained from the collector surface can be written as:68,69 Qu = ατIS × A(8)where α = absorptance of the glass, τ = transmittance exterior surface of absorber by circulating fluid/air.
Useful energy directed to the collector is captured by the circulating fluid/air, which can be further expressed as:68,69 Qu = Qf = mfCp,fΔT(9)where Cp,f = specific heat, Qf = heat absorber, m = rotating fluid/air mass flow rate, and ΔT = temperature change.
Th energy efficiency can be formerly written as:68,69 (10)
The steady-state energy balance equation for water-based PVT systems without thermal energy storage according to Hakan et al. is:28 Enw,in + Ensolar,in = Enw,out + Enloss(11)where, Enw,in = energy intake in water, Ensolar,in = solar power input rate, Enw,out = water output rate solar power, Enloss = energy loss rate
The net water energy rate is ΔEnw = Enw,out − Enw,in = mwCp(Tw,out − Tw,in)(12)where mw = flow rate of substance, Cp = specific heat, Tw,out = solar collector output temperature, and Tw,in = water input temperature.
The input rate of solar energy Ensolar,in is found by Ensolar,in = αqA(13)where α is the permeability of the system, q is the rate of solar radiation and A is the area of the solar collector.
The loss rate of energy (Eloss) is comprised of the convection heat loss (Qloss,conv) and heat radiation loss (Qloss,rad) as follows: Eloss,rad = Qloss,conv + Qloss,rad(14)
The amount of heat loss of radiation can be calculated as Qloss,rad = Aεσ(Tsurf4 − Tair4)(15)where A, ε, σ, Tsurf, and Tair are area, emissivity of the system, Boltzmann constant, temperature of the air and temperature of the glass surface.
The rate of convection heat loss can be calculated as Qloss,conv = hA(Tsurf − Tair)(16)where h is the convection heat transfer coefficient. (17)where K is the thermal conductivity, Nu is the Nusselt number and L is the characteristic length. (18) Nu = (0.15)Ra1/3(19)where A and P are the area and perimeter of the photovoltaic cell, respectively, and Ra is the Rayleigh number as follows (20)where θ is the solar collector angle, Pr is the Prandtl number and v is the kinematic viscosity.
The energy efficiency (η) of the systems can be expressed by (21)
The steady-state condition and energy balance equation for PVT systems with integrated PCM can be derived from ref. 13 as ∑Ein = ∑Eout + ∑Eloss(22) ⇒ Esun + Emass,in = Eel + Emass,out + Eloss(23)where Ein is the input energy, Eout is the output energy and Eloss is the energy loss. According to the above equation, Esun is the effective solar irradiance, which can be further expressed as Esun = GAcτgacell(24)where G = the rate of solar radiation, Ac = the collector area, τg = the glass cover transmittivity and αcell = PV cell absorptivity. In eqn (9), the thermal power output of the systems can be calculated as Emass,out − Emass,in = Eth = mnfCp,nf,out(Tnf,out − Tnf,in)(25)where Tnf,out and mnf are the collector outlet temperature and nanofluid mass flow rate, respectively. The specific heat capacity of water and density can be calculated using the following equation derived for two-phase physical principle mixtures70 ρnf = ϕρn + (1 − ϕ)ρbf(26) (27)where, ρ = the coolant density. The subscripts n, bf and nf = particles. ϕ = volumetric ratio, which can be determined as follows (28)where Eel is the power system electrical output, which can be calculated using the following equation Eel = VOC × ISC × FF(29)where VOC is the open circuit voltage and ISC is the short circuit current, and FF is the fill factor of the PV device, which can be stated as the following expression as the ratio between the maximum power obtained by the photovoltaic panel to the product between the open circuit voltage and short circuit current as the standard test condition (STC)71 (30)where VOC = open circuit voltage and ISC = short circuit current, which are fixed value givens by the manufacturer.
The electrical power needed for coolant pumping can be calculated as72 (31)where ΔP = the drop of pressure in collector and ηp = pump efficiency.
The overall power consumption required during the chosen time period is the overall energy performance of the systems. Hence, the overall efficiency of the system can be considered a function of thermal and electrical efficiency.73 (32)where Apv = area of PV cell and r = packing factor, which is defined as Apv/Ac in eqn (17), and the thermal and electrical efficiency can be calculated as (33) (34)
3.2. Exergy analysis
ExA is based on the 2nd law of thermodynamics, which is a thermodynamic investigation methodology that offers an alternate and informative method for analyzing and evaluating processes and structures in a rational and meaningful way. Typically, ExA is used to determine the performance and define and report the exergy destruction and losses so that configuration for increasing efficiencies will be distinct. In thermodynamic systems, exergy is the part of energy that is the most useful work that can be derived from the system at a given state in a given environment, and thus has economic value and can allow careful managing. One of the main objectives of exergy analysis is to identify and classify the causes of exergy destruction and exergy losses and to measure the associated rates.
The exergy balance equation for a photovoltaic (PV) system without thermal energy storage can be written as (35)where TS is the temperature of the sun, which is assumed to be 5777.0 K. The exergy output of solar PV devices can be expressed as Exout = Exelec + Extherm + Exd = Exelect + I/(36)where I/ = ∑Ex = Exd,elect + Exd,therm, which comprises external and internal losses, respectively. Exergy destruction can be termed as internal loss, i.e. Exd,elect, including heat loss, Exd,thermal, which is mathematically equal to PV systems. Exelect = Eelect − I/ = VOC × ISC − (VOC × ISC − Vm × Im)(37)where VOC × ISC represents the electrical energy and (VOC × ISC − Vm × Im) represents the destruction electrical exergy. Thus, we can determine the exergy equation from the above equations as follows. Exelect = Vm × Im(38)where Extherm = thermal exergy of the system, which can be expressed in terms of heat loss from the PV surface to the environment as follows (39)where Q = hcaA(Tcell − Ta) and hca = 5.7 + 3.8v are the coefficient of heat transfer and the velocity of wind, respectively.
By using eqn (39), the output equation for exergy can be further written as follows:  40
The power conversion efficiency, ηPCE, of the solar PV = input/output electrical energy on the PV surface is as follows: (41)
By using the form factor, the power conversion efficiency can be written using the above equation as74 (42)
The effect of temperature on the output of the PV system can be acquired from the fundamental equations. ηC = ηTref[βTref(Tc − Tref) + γlog10 × IS](43)where the ηTref = electrical output at the reference temperature and 1000 W m−2 solar irradiance, βref and γ are the coefficient of temperature and solar radiation coefficient, respectively, which can be calculated as (44)
The exergy balance equation for photovoltaic thermal PVT air-based systems can be written as75–77 (45)where is (U − U∞) is the internal energy, T(S − S∞) is the entropy, (P∞/J)(V − V∞) represents the work done by the system and on the system, (V2/2 g J−1), (Z − Z∞), (g/gc J−1) denotes the momentum,  is the gravity, EiAiFi (3T4 − T∞4 − 4T∞T3) is the emission radiation and ∞ = present and reference condition.
Neglecting the pressure, the momentum and change in the gravitational force can be written as75,77 (46)
In the PV collector, the exergy is given by77 (47)where Ta and TS are the ambient and source temperature, respectively.
Received exergy from the fluid can be written as77 Exf = m(E0 − Ei) = m[(h0 − hi) − Ta(s0 − si)](48)where m, h and s are the mass flow rate, entropy and specific enthalpy, respectively.
The specific heat output can be written as77,78 h0 = CPoTo(49)where, To = outlet temperature and CPo = outlet specific heat of air.
The specific enthalpy can be written as77,78 hi = CPiTi(50)where Ti = inlet temperature and CPi = input specific heat of the air at inlet.
The entropy difference can be calculated using the following equation79 CPo = a + kTi(51) CPi = a + kTo(52) (53)
In eqn (7) and (8), the values of the constants such a and k can be calculated by replacing them in the above equations to get the entropy difference.
The exergy efficiency of air-based PVT systems can be written as77–79 (54)where Exc = exergy received by the collector and Exf = exergy received by the fluid.
In the steady-state condition, for PVT air-based systems without PCM integration as thermal energy storage, the rate of thermal exergy gain can be written as35,80 (55)where Qf is the thermal energy output rate, Ta is the fluid output temperature, Epv is the photovoltaic output and Efan is the fan power.
The thermal exergy for low-temperature PVT systems can be written as80 (56)
The exergetic efficiency of the PVT air-based collector can be written as80 (57)
The electrical and thermal exergy efficiencies can be written as (58) (59)
In the steady-state condition, for PVT water-based systems with PCM integration as thermal energy storage, the exergy balance equation can be written based on ref. 13 as ∑Exin = ∑Exout + ∑Exloss(60) ⇒ Exsun + Exmass,in = Exel + Exmass,out + Exloss(61)where Exin = exergy input rate, Exout = exergy output rate and Exloss = exergy loss rate.
In the above equation, Exsun is the actual solar irradiance, which can be expressed as73 (62)where Tamb refers to the ambient temperature and Tsun is equivalent to sun ≈ 5800 K.
The mass flow rate associated with exergy can be calculated as66 Exmass,out − Exmass,in = Exth = mnf[(hnf,out − hnf,in) − Tamb[(snf,out − snf,in)](63)where hnf = enthalpy and Snf = entropy of the PVT system. The enthalpy and entropy changes may be defined in the above equations as66 hnf,out − hnf,in = Cp,nf(Tnf,out − Tnf,in)(64) (65)
Thus, the output thermal exergy of the systems can be expressed as (66)
The electrical energy is equivalent to the electrical exergy of the system since electrical energy is for doing useful work73 Exel = Eel(67)
The exergy loss of the system can be calculated by substituting the above equations in the following equations (68)
Hence the generation rate of entropy can be calculated as81 (69)where Sgen refers to generation rate of system entropy.
Similarly, the overall system exergy can be represented a as function of the electrical and thermal efficiencies as81 (70)
The electrical and thermal efficiencies can be determined as (71) (72)
3.3 Exergoeconomic analysis
EXENEC is a tool that combines the exergy analysis and economic ideologies to construct and implement cost-effective systems on a larger scale than that of the conventional exergy and economics analysis. EXENEC is defined as the integration of exergy analysis and conventional cost analysis for enhancing the performances of energy systems. It can also be considered as exergy-based cost reduction for thermal systems. Some reports82,83 also termed thermoeconomics as EXENEC. Based on exergoeconomics, the in efficiencies related with the 1st and 2nd laws of thermodynamics, i.e. exergy destruction, exergy losses and cost related with these inefficiencies, are assessed.
Several studies15,21,84,85 on energy systems, thermal power plants, and cogeneration systems using the exergoeconomic and thermoeconomic analysis techniques have been published in the literature.86 They have been shown to be very effective in improving the overall system or different variables in a single part. After energy analysis and exergy analysis, exergoeconomic analysis can be conducted. EXENEC analysis involves an exergy cost that is affiliated with the exergy stream. Thus, it is essential to understand the exergy flow rate of the crossing pointing flows of materials. To identify the level of exergy flow at various pints, the mass, energy and exergy balance should be applied to each element of the system. Economic analysis then follows as the second step.
In EXENEC analysis with respect to the exergy losses using the exergy balance equations of PV systems, the energy loss rate Lex can be written as87 Lex = ∑inputs exergy flow rates − ∑products exergy flow rates(73) (74)
After evaluating the EE losses in the above two equations, the EXENEC analysis of solar PV cell R can be used to show the ratio of the thermodynamic loss rate L and capital cost K. Thus, R can be further defined from the above statement as (75)

Eqn (73) is a specific form of R, which is dependent on the EE loss rate (Ren)(Rex) (76) (77)
The energy process output involves energy loss, Enloss, and exergy loss, Exloss, together with exergy destruction, Exdest. A previous study indicated that energy loss rate = Lex,loss, exergy loss = Lex,loss and destruction rate = Ldest, where the total sum of all the exergy destruction rate = Lex,total Len,loss = Enloss(78) Lex,loss = Exloss(79) Lex,dest = Exdest(80) (81) Lex,total = Exloss + Exdest(82) (83) (84) (85) (86)
The study of NPV involves the economic value and viability of an investment or plan. It is important for the capital budget and even the current and future value of the project or plan considering depreciation and the return on investment or rate of return88
NPV for PV systems can be expressed as (87)where N = no of years and C0 = capital cost and running and maintenance cost of PV.
For PVT systems without PCM with respect to the exergy balance equation, the mass, exergy and energy balance of any control volume under a constant state may be expressed as ∑minlet = ∑mexit(88) Q − W = ∑mexithexit − ∑minlethinlet(89) Xheat − W = ∑mexitΨexit − ∑minletΨinlet + i(90)where the heat transfer Xheat and net exergy at temperature T can be given as (91)
Also, the specific physical exergy is given by Ψph = (h − T0) − (h0 − T0S0)(92)
4. 3E (energy, exergy and exergoeconomic) analysis of PVT-air systems
The performance of PVT systems can be assessed from EA and ExA analysis. It was noted above, that the EA does not consider the efficiency of the electrical output and thermal power of the PVT systems. Thus, for the actual analysis of PVT systems, exergy analysis is mandatory to determine the exergy efficiencies. In this section, all the recent studies related to PVT air-based systems with and without PCMs are discussed.
4.1 PVT-air systems without PCM
The theoretical and experimental evaluation of the hybrid PVT air collector explored by Sykirah et al.89 comprises the exergy analysis of PVT systems, solar dying systems and solar collectors. A steady state (PVT) air collector thermal analysis was established to predict the air outlet and PV panel temperature. The error of the outlet air and photovoltaic temperature between the theoretical and practical value is 1.10% and 2.60%, respectively. The hybrid PVT air collector used a mass flow rate ranging between 0.001 kg s−1 and 0.15 kg s−1 and solar irradiance of 600 W m−2, and the impact of mass flow rate on the exergy analysis was determined. The optimum PVT air collector exergy performance achieved was approximately 0.38. A greenhouse solar dryer integrated with a number of solar air collectors was examined by Tiwari et al.,90 and for the NPVT collector, an analysis with respect to EA and ExA was performed. Thermal modeling of the PVT system and analytical expression of different parameters including the outlet and inlet air collector temperature, and PV cell temperature were performed and solved using MATLAB Simulink. Additionally the effect of the mass flow rate and number of solar collectors on the heat energy, electrical output, overall thermal energy, thermal exergy efficiency and overall thermal efficiency was calculated. It was observed that with a different number of air collectors ranging from 1 to 5, the equivalent heat energy was between 3.24 and 10.57 kW h, the equivalent thermal efficiency was 61.56% and the equivalent energy efficiency changed from 28.96% to 19.11%. An attempt was made by Sarhaddi et al.19 to determine the exergetic efficiency of a solar photovoltaic thermal air-based system. Energy and exergy analysis were carried out in detail to measure the thermal, electrical constraints, exergy components and exergy efficiency of the air-based PVT collector. Accordingly, the thermal efficiency, electrical efficiency, overall efficiency and exergy efficiency were found to be 17.18%, 10.01%, 45% and 10.75%, respectively.
Jha et al.91 examined the EA and ExA of photovoltaic thermal-based systems and the performance analysis of PVT systems in various environments. The experimental analysis was based on different flow rates of 0.007 kg s−1, 0.0097 kg s−1 and 0.0128 kg s−1 for different days in December and March. It was found that the maximum irradiance occurs at 12 noon daily for both months. Furthermore, it was found that among the mass flow rates, 0.0128 kg s−1 is the best, and also the thermal energy and exergy gain achieved were 152 W h and 7.88 W h, respectively. The maximum outlet temperatures of 45 °C and 53 °C were reported in the summer and winter seasons, respectively. The exergy gain was found to be enhanced by 100% in summer compared to winter. Jha et al.91 discussed the exergetic analysis of two different module designs and flow rates of a novel PVT air-based system. In case I, the PVT array consisted of 18 PVT modules and each module was comprised of 36 PVT tiles and in case II, the PVT array is consisted of 36 PVT modules and each one was comprised of 36 PVT tiles. Based on the annual, overall thermal energy and exergy gain for various climate conditions, the output of both cases was compared. According to the results of the comparative analysis, compared with case I, case II had a lower PV cell temperature (19%), higher electrical efficiency (6.5%) and higher average outlet air temperature (18.1%). Agarwal et al.92 investigated the exergoeconomic analysis of a glazed hybrid air-based PVT collector, as shown in Fig. 8. The cost analysis was studied at different interest rates of 8% 10% and 12%. The result concluded that the EPBT energy payback time is 1.8 and 7.8 years, respectively, considering the thermal energy and exergy efficiency of the glazed hybrid PVT air collector.
 Fig. 8  PVT air collector connected in series. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.) 
It was also investigated that the overall exergy cost was about $8.55 per annum and overall thermal energy about $36.97 per annum. According to a study reported in the literature,93 an indoor test method was established for EA of simulated PVT air-based systems. For this purpose, a PVT air-based solar heater was developed, manufactured and its efficiencies over several functional specifications were tested. Depending on the energy balance equation, a thermal model was established in a stable state. There was also a distinction between the experimental and theoretical findings. The results from the EA indicated that the electrical and thermal efficiencies of the solar PVT system were 8.4% and 42%, respectively, and thus this technique may be used by designers to test various types of PVT systems to enhance the performance of their layout or models. Agarwal et al.94 reported the optimization of the energy and exergy related to a BIPVT air-based system. To deliver the thermal energy for space heat applications, the rooftop of a building was used to produce a higher electrical performance per unit area and thermal energy, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Design of rooftop BIPVT. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.) 
By using the elementary heat transfer equation, a traditional one-dimensional model was developed. The performance of the PV, net energy benefits and exergy of the BIPVT were determined. The findings showed that the constant air flow rate connected in series gave a high output, whereas the constant mass air flow rate system connected in parallel provided higher efficiencies. The combined thermal and electrical exergies were 1531 kW h and 16209 kW h, respectively, with the typical average thermal efficiency of 53.7%.
Saloux et al.95 investigated the exergetic analysis of photovoltaic thermal and conventional photovoltaic systems, as shown in Fig. 10. Specific electrical and thermal models were developed and used to characterize each system. Actually, exergy and energy balances equations were used to determine the various sources of energy loss found in the electrical and thermal energy flow. The electrical voltage and current reduction factors were described and used to convey the exergy and its degradation in PVT systems, and consequently two thermodynamic diagrams were suggested to represent the losses. The result indicated that electrical efficiency was reduced, while the thermal and total output improved with an increase in the ambient temperature (i.e. PV cell temperature increased). The electrical energy efficiency was in the range of 8–11%, while the thermal efficiency was in the range of 20–33% due to the variation in the heat loss. Both the electrical and exergy efficiency had the same value, and consequently, the thermal exergy efficiency did not follow linear behavior.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of PVT systems and energy flow diagram. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.) 
A comparative analysis was reported for several types of PVT air-based collectors including unglazed, glazed and conventional air collectors for various conditions with respect to climate, as shown in Fig. 10.96 The descriptive research was carried out in terms of overall energy and exergy gain, exergy and energy efficiency. It was reported that the average thermal exergy and energy of the glazed air PVT collector increased by 27.01% and 29.3%, and particularly for the unglazed air PVT collector by 61.01% and 59.8%, respectively, compared to that of the PV system. The overall exergy efficiency of the glazed, unglazed and conventional PVT system was 18%, 16.5% and 12.4% respectively.
Srimanickam et al.97 performed an exergy analysis on hybrid flat plate air-based PVT systems. Different parameters including solar isolation, outlet and inlet temperature, voltage and current were used to investigate the exergy and energy performances of the PVT air-based systems.
In addition, an enhanced equation for the exergy analysis of the hybrid air-based PVT systems was used. Subsequently, parametric experiments were conducted. A comprehensive analysis with respect to exergy and energy was executed to measure the electrical and thermal specifications. The results revealed that the electrical efficiency, thermal efficiency, overall energy efficiency and overall exergy efficiency were 9.78%, 24.22%, 44.84% and 11.23%, respectively.
Agarwal et al.98 explored the EXENEC analysis of a hybrid glazed PVT air collector in terms of energy savings, where the PVT air-based system offers more potential than the conventional PV system. The experiment was performed on a glazed PVT air collector, and it was observed that statistical and practical value of the correlation co-efficient was in the range of 0.966–0.99. The overall thermal energy and exergy gain were reported to be 1252.0 kW h and 289.50 kW h, respectively. The results validated that the yearly energy saving using the hybrid glazed PVT system is 234.70 kW h. EA and ExA of a PVT air-based system was studied by Fudholi et al.99 The achieved analytical and inversion method gave the energy balance equations. The theoretical findings were compatible with the experimental results. The practical and theoretical studies were performed with the solar irradiance of 385 W m−2 and 820 W m−2 and mass flow rate of around 0.007 kg s−1 and 0.07 kg s−1. For the effects of different solar irradiation in the range of 300–1200 W m−2, exergy analysis assessment was used. Furthermore, an exergy analysis was carried out to obtain the exergy loss, PVT exergy efficiency and improvement potential under solar irradiance of 385 W m−2 and 820 W m−2. The EA and ExA of a PVT air-based system were also investigated by Numan et al.100 In contrast, the air velocity distributions of cooling and temperature distribution of the surface were examined via simulation using ANSYS Fluent, which matched the experimental data, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Experimental setup of PVT air-based system. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
The experiments were conducted on open, regular and scattered fins. The results suggested that with the use of small and regular fins compared with empty fins, the exergy performance of the mono- and poly-crystalline PV panel was improved by 30% and 70%, respectively. The thermal efficiency was improved by about 70% and 55% respectively. It was found that the surface temperature of the PV device decreased roughly in the range of 10 °C to 15 °C. To investigate the hybrid micro-channel air-based PVT systems,38 the energy exergy was studied based on the proposed air channel cell at a constant air flow in terms of geometry and temperature parameters. The performance in terms of overall thermal efficiency, exergy gain, and exergy efficiency was analyzed in different climate conditions. Based on the mathematical calculations, it can be stated that the yearly thermal efficiency and exergy gain were enhanced by 70% and 61%, respectively, for the micro-channel air-based PVT systems.
4.2 PVT-air systems with PCM
An improvement in passive cooling for PVT air-based integrated PCM systems was proposed by Wongwuttanasatian et al.101 In their analysis, palm wax was selected as the PCM, which is much more economical compared to the commercial PCMs. Also, three different PCM containers were used and examined in various weather environments, as shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  PCM heat sinks: (a) grooved container, (b) tubed container and (c) finned container. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
It was observed that the finned container had the strongest cooling effect on the PV system, which resulted in a reduction in the PV module temperature, and thus the maximum electrical output. The passive cooling with this container was further investigated and compared with PV systems without cooling. The temperature of the finned box was reduced from 57.9 °C to 51.8 °C. The performance of the air-based module was improved from 9.33% to 9.82%, leading to a 5.3% boost. Saliently, the passive cooling of PCM-integrated air-based PVT systems has not always been advantageous, but relies on irradiance. Fayaz et al.62 investigated a PCM-integrated PVT system and without PCM systems both experimentally and mathematically. The resulting cell temperature was 82.9 °C, 71 °C and 67 °C for the PV, PVT and PVT PCM-based systems, respectively. The electrical efficiency improved by 12.4% and 12.8% in the case of the PVT system both numerically and experimentally, while 12.7% and 12.5%, respectively, in the case of the PVT-PCM system. It was also concluded that PVT-PCM is the best option since the electrical performance was enhanced by 10.13% and 9.2% mathematically and experimentally, respectively. Several studies on the 3E analysis of PVT air-based systems are available, but scarce details are available on the exergoeconomic analysis of air-based PVT systems. In addition, the literature limits techno-economic analysis and thermo-economic analysis. Therefore, further research should be carried out on this topic, and the results of these analyses can be applied to improve the performance of air-based PVT systems. Additional performance analyses for computational machine models and numerical approaches should be performed to examine the process characteristics of systems prior to their implementation.
5. 3E analysis of PVT-water systems
The energy, exergy and exergoeconomics (3E) analysis of water-based PVT systems with and without PCM are discussed in this section. All the recent findings related with this topic are discussed below.
5.1 PVT-water system without PCM
The work reported in ref. 102 examined the EA and ExA of a hybrid water-based (PVT) system. This study was focused on the thermal energy, electrical energy and energy gain for two different arrangements, including case I, where the collector was partially covered by the PV module, and case II, where the collector was fully covered by the PV module. The impact of the collector area covered by the hybrid water collector was examined. The results demonstrated that case I is more appropriate for the thermal energy approach and case II is more appropriate for the electrical power generation approach. The thermal energy gain obtained annually was 4167.3 and 10.23 kW h and electrical gain obtained annually was 320.65 and 1377.63 kW h for case I and II, respectively. Furthermore, the thermal overall energy gain annually decreased by 9.48% and overall exergy gain was enhanced by 39.1% for case I and II, respectively. Sobhnamayan et al.103 investigated the optimization of water-based PVT systems with respect to exergy analysis. A simulation-based computer program was established to analyze the thermal and electrical constraints of the water-based PVT systems. The findings of the simulations were in strong contrast with the experimental data. It was analyzed that with an increase in the inlet velocity from 0.01 m s−1 to 2 m s−1 exergy of the PVT system increased from 9% to 11.36%, respectively.
An investigation on the exergy efficiency of PVT water-based systems related to exergy losses was reported by Yazdanpanhai et al.104 The experimental configuration of the installed photovoltaic thermal water collector and its operational constraints were determined. The observed parameters included solar irradiance intensity, wind speed inlet and outlet temperature of water, open and short circuit voltage. Different exergy components of the PVT system were added, and the revised exergy balance equation was obtained with respect to the exergy loss. The obtained exergy efficiency was 13.95% when the optimum mass flow rate was 0.002 kg s−1. Fudholi et al.105 examined the EA and ExA of PVT water-based systems with a spiral flow absorber. It was reported that the overall performances of both the photovoltaic device and PVT systems increased with an increase in the mass flow rate. The results revealed that the PVT water-based system with the abovementioned absorber exhibited 58% to 68% PVT efficiency, 13–13.8% PV efficiency, thermal efficiency of 45–55% and the primary energy savings from 79% to 91% at the mass flow rate 0.011–0.041 kg s−1 under the solar irradiance of 80 W m−2. The exergy efficiency of the PVT system was 25–42% with the thermal exergy of 57–138 W and electrical exergy of 63–69 W. Shyam et al.106 conducted research to appraise the efficiency of a series of interconnected water-based PVT collectors based on the overall thermal energy and exergy gain. The experiments were conducted under a clear sky in different months of the year. It was analyzed that there was a good balance between the experimental and calculated values. The total thermal energy produced during the year was 3561.9 kW h, whereas the exergy generated was 376.1 kW h. The annual rate expenses based on total thermal energy and exergy were expected to be 153 Rs per kW h and 1445 Rs per kW h, respectively.
Valizadeh et al.107 investigated the exergy efficiency of a linear PV device. An electrical study on PVT systems was conducted using four parameters of current voltage design. The exergy efficiency was achieved by integrating the various elements of the energy systems. The modeling findings of this study were in strong agreement with the data from previous research. The results demonstrated the change in exergy efficiency as a function of fluid velocity and negligible channel diameter. With an increase in the fluid velocity from 0.08 to 0.43 m s−1, the electrical output and thermal performances increased by 1.05% and 2.2%, respectively. An increase in the receiver diameter from 0.06 to 0.2 m increased the exergy efficiency and thermal output by 1.47% and 9.47%, respectively. An increase in the channel diameter from 0.07 to 0.6 m increased the thermal efficiency and electrical performance by 2.75% and 3.9%, respectively. An increase in the fluid temperature from 20 °C to 90 °C increased the exergy efficiency by 8.2%. However, the thermal and electrical energy decreased by 6.5% and 3.5%, respectively. The reason for the improvement in the thermal efficiency is due to increase in the absorber plate temperature (APT) and temperature of the water source with an increase in the ambient temperature. With an increase in the incident beam radiation from 50 to 100 W m−2, the thermal efficiency initially increased and then reached 60%. Meanwhile, the electrical and thermal efficiency improved by 15.7% and 6.6%, respectively.
An energy, exergy and exergoeconomic (3E) analysis of PVT water-assisted systems was performed by Adedeji et al.108 Three different systems classified as single effect, double effect and triple effect absorption systems were simulated by software and operated by the heat from the PVT systems, and a portion of the electrical output power was pumped from the absorption systems, while the remaining was used for domestic purposes, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of proposed PVT systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.) 
The recommended (PVT) system is capable of producing 150 kW of thermal energy for absorption on systems and 2589 kW of electricity. The results revealed that the overall energetic and exergetic efficiencies of the integrated system were 53% and 24%, respectively, when the solar irradiance was 800 W m−2. An increase in the amount of solar irradiance of the PVT systems caused a reduction in the overall efficiency of the three systems, and thus it can be concluded that an improvement in solar irradiance is not required for the efficiency of the systems for a set cooling load.
5.2. PVT water-based system with PCM
A PVT-PCM water-based system was investigated59 under several weather conditions. Experiments were implemented to investigate the actual performance of the PV system and PVT-PCM water-based panel. It was reported that by the integration of the PVT PCM system, there was an improvement in the thermal and overall efficiencies by 26% and 40%, respectively, Moreover, there was an increase in the electrical performance by 17.33% compared with the PV device. It was also observed that the energy payback time (EPBT) of the water-based PVT PCM system was reduced to 6.0 years compared to that of the conventional system. Hossain et al.18 designed and developed PVT-PCM systems and examined their performances with respect to 3E analysis. The PCM used was lauric acid for the reliable storage of thermal energy and cooling the PV panel temperature. The PVT-PCM systems were examined at several mass flow rates to determine the optimum value for higher efficiencies. The results indicated that the maximum energy efficiency at a flow rate of 4 LPM was 87.72%. Moreover the higher electrical efficiencies were in the range of 9.88–11.88% at a mass flow rate of 4 LPM. The PV device and PVT-PCM integrated systems exhibited maximum performances of 7.09% and 12.19% at s mass flow rate 0.5 LPM, respectively. Salem et al.109 examined the overall performance of the PVT-PCM water-assisted system, as shown in Fig. 14. Water and PCM Al2O3 additives with various nanoparticle mass concentrations of around 0–1% and cooling water mass fluctuations ranging from 0–5.31 kg s−1 in a straight aluminum channel under the PV plate were used.
 Fig. 14  Schematic experimental setup. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
The result indicated that 4.25% Al2O3 nanoparticles make the composite technique (Al2O3/PCM) mixture better than the 100% water cooling process. It was highlighted that the energy and exergy performance were 70.5% and 8.2%, respectively.
Kandilli et al.110 studied the 3E analysis of PVT integrated PCM systems. Integrated PVT system with phase change materials and nanoparticles were developed, the systems components were described, and a thermodynamic analysis including the first law and second law of thermodynamics, and the performances related to the energy exergy and economic analysis were calculated. The results of the experiments were compared for both the PVT and PVT-PCM integrated systems. The total energy efficiency of the PVT system was 33%, the paraffin PCM-based system was 37%, for steric acid 40% and 30% for the PVT system. The average exergy efficiency of the PVT system was 22%, paraffin PCM-based system 24%, steric acid 22% and 20% for the PVT system. The energy payback time (EPBT) of the PVT integrated PCM systems with paraffin and steric acid and the traditional PVT system were determined to be 10.8 and 7, years respectively. Gaur et al.111 analyzed the energy and exergy analysis of PVT-PCM integrated water-based systems. Their investigation was based on the theoretical studies of the thermal and electrical performances of water-based PVT-PCM integrated systems under varying weather conditions. The integration of PVT-PCM water-based systems improves the efficiency of the systems based on their electrical and thermal specifications. The improvement in electrical and thermal efficiency is attributed to the degradation of the surplus heat of the PV module by the latent heat absorption method.
Mousavi et al.112 investigated the EA and ExA of copper foam-filled PCM-integrated water-based PVT systems. Accordingly, five different PCMs were employed to examine the different parameters. The results of the simulations were compared with the practical PCM-integrated system. The highest thermal efficiency of 83% was reported at a mass flow rate of 0.003 kg s−1 using paraffin C22 as the PCM storage system. Moreover, the results were compared and validated with the practical system and reported to be satisfactory. The exergy of the PVT-PCM integrated system was 16.7%. It was also reported that the exergy of the PVT system was less than that of the PCM system. Furthermore, the exergy of the foam-filled PCM system was the highest. The electrical efficiency was improved by 2.3% using this integrated water-based PVT-PCM system. A comprehensive model was simulated to assess the energy analysis of the water-based PVT-PCM integrated system conveyed in the literature.113 A PVT water-based PCM-integrated system was investigated in this study, including the thermal conductivity, melting temperature, solar irradiation, and mass flow rate. A model was designed and compared with the PVT-PCM integrated system using TRANSYS. The result revealed that an increase in the melting temperature of the PCM caused an increase in the PV panel surface temperature from 51.53 °C to 58.78 °C. By enhancing the thermal conductivity, the electrical and thermal efficiency increased by 1.34% and 6.59%, respectively. Zhou et al.60 proposed the EA of hybrid PVT systems with active cooling using forced ventilation and a PCM integrated storage system, as shown in Fig. 15. The mathematical modelling and systematic evaluation demonstrated that with the use of both active cooling and PCM cooling, there was improvement in the electrical and overall efficiency. A more generalized result presented that a decrease in the PV device temperature from 70.9 °C to 32.8 °C resulted in an increase in the PV power from 10 W to 11.3 W, which further resulted in the enhancement of the electrical performance from 11.5% to 14.9%.
 Fig. 15  Detail construction of PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
An experimental analysis of PCMs as a coolant with PVT water-based systems presented by Kazemian et al.20 highlighted different systems including the conventional PVT system, PV system integrated with PCM and PVT system integrated with PCM, as shown in (Fig. 16 and 17).
 Fig. 16  Experimental setup and schematic diagram. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.) 
 Fig. 17  Cross-sectional view of the PV-PCM and PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.) 
Pure water, a combination of water and ethylene glycol and ethylene glycol with a weight fraction of 50%, and pure ethylene were the operating fluids used in the PVT-PCM integrated systems. The findings suggest that the water-based PVT/PCM configuration increases the electrical output of the system, and the PV-PCM configuration increases the electrical exergy performance by 4.2% relative to that of the PV device. In addition, for the PVT-PCM integrated systems, the inclusion of ethylene glycol with water lowered the heat energy of the system, thereby increasing the thermal exergy efficiency of the system. Rezvanpour et al.114 demonstrated that calcium carbonate hexahydrate as a PCM can normalize the heat of PV cells and enhance the output electrical performance of the PV panel. In addition, the TRANSYS simulation software was used to authenticate the experimental findings. A special, simple and cost-efficient system layout and data acquisition was initiated. A comparison was produced between the experimental data and simulation outcomes. In their study, the findings revealed the higher temperature drop of 38% for the PCM PV systems compared to that of the traditional PV device. Additionally, the PV-PCM device benefitted from this rise in energy output of 1.16 W with an efficiency of 24.68% throughout the months of November and December. The lowest and highest change between the practical and TRANSYS simulation findings were 0.96% and 8.25%, which showed the tremendous agreement between these data. EA and ExA revealed that the energy efficiency of the PV-PCM is 15% greater than that of the traditional PV module. The energy performance of the PV-PCM and PV devices were also determined to be 12.5% and 4%, respectively. The 3-D design of a PVT-PCM nanofluid-based system was implemented in ANSYS Fluent 18.2 by Salari et al.115 The hybrid configuration and fluid flow assisted the systems to be laminar, which were consistent and fully established to be an incompressible collector model, as shown in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Boundary conditions of the PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
In addition, the influence of different parameters such as inlet temperature, nanofluid mass fraction, mass flow rate, solar irradiance and PCM coating thickness on the performance of the systems was studied, and the temperature distribution was evaluated to assess the output of the nanofluid-based PVT-PCM systems. The surface temperature and the volume of the molten PCM decreased with an increase in the mass flow rate of the nanofluid. The overall energy performances of the systems operating with water fluids, manganese oxide nanofluid, multiwall carbon nanofluid and composite nanofluid were 55.24%, 60.08% and 61.07%, respectively. In, addition it was reported that by increasing the thickness of the PCM sheet, both the outflow and system surface temperature decreased. EA and ExA were practically examined by Sardarabadi et al.116 using PCM and nanofluid in PVT water-based systems. The experiment was performed with two different systems, where one was an integrated PVT PCM system and other was a PVT without PCM system. The results were compared including surface temperature, electrical and thermal performance with that of the conventional systems, which revealed that the with the use of the water-based PVT-PCM integrated systems, an increase of 42% in thermal efficiency cab be achieved. It was also reported that with the use of both PCM and nanofluid, the exergy efficiency can be increased by up to 23%. Taher et al.59 reported the EXENEC analysis of PV and PCM water-based PVT systems. The PVT water-based integrated PCM system was tested under various outdoor conditions, as shown in Fig. 19. An improvement in the overall and thermal efficiencies of 26.87% and 40.59%, respectively, was achieved compared to that of the conventional PV panel. The payback time of the PVT-PCM system is 6 years based on the exergy analysis, which is 12.26% lower than that of the PV panel.
 Fig. 19  Standard PV system and PVT-PCM water system experimental setup. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) 
A theoretical and outdoor model-based PVT water-based integrated PCM system was investigated by Fayaz et al.55 An excessive PV device temperature decreased the electrical output, and thus the integration of PVT is suitable for the improvement in electrical efficiency and development of useful thermal energy. In the thermal collector, aluminum was used as the material via the implementation of a new concept to improve the heat transfer efficiency and was integrated in PVT and PVT PCM systems. The effective agreement between the theoretical and practical findings was demonstrated by experiments. A reduction in cell temperature by 12.6 °C and 10.3 °C was achieved by the PV module for the PVT systems. The highest electrical performance attained was 13.7% and 13.5% for PV and 13.85% and 13.74% for PVT theoretically and experimentally, respectively. ExA and EXENEC analysis of a PVT water-based collector for different climate conditions was studied by Jahromi et al.117 Energy analysis of a commercial PVT system was examined using its technical specifications for different climate conditions. MATLAB Simulink was introduced for this system and further justified by TRANSYS, and appropriate results were found. The results indicated that the exergy efficiency was between 9.6–9.7% under different climate conditions. EXENEC analysis was performed using the NPV method and it was concluded that the system was marginally stable with respect to its economics. According to the above literature review, it was found that several studies on PVT thermodynamic analysis focusing on energy conservation were published. However, exergy and exergoeconomic-based evaluation of PVT systems has been less explored. Phase change material-integrated PVT water-based systems guarantee thermal energy use even in the absence of solar energy.
6. 3E analysis of Bi-fluid-based PVT system
In this section, EA analysis of bi-fluid air- and water-based PVT systems will be discussed in detail. All the related findings on EA are discussed below since no work has been done on ExA and EXENEC on bi-fluid-based PVT systems.
6.1. EA of bi-fluid-based PVT systems with and without PCM
Abu Bakar et al.65 implemented basic unglazed bi-fluid PVT systems without PCM that incorporates PV laminates, a serpentine-shaped copper tube as the water heating component and a single-pass air pipe as the air heating component. The efficiency of the bi-fluid PVT systems was predicted when the fluids worked independently and simultaneously. At the optimum mass flow rate for specific parameters, the overall thermal equivalent efficiency was expected to be as high as 76% when the fluids worked simultaneously. The increase in the temperature of both fluids in either independent or simultaneous mode showed that the thermal energy produced by this type of collector can contribute to various types of potential applications such as pre-heating air and water for agriculture drying, aquaculture and domestic applications. The performance of the hybrid bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM was investigated by Di Su et al.118 They developed a multi-channel network incorporating four separate bi-fluid channels including water–air, water–water, air–water and air–air. It was verified that the flow also improves the overall efficiency. The results revealed that the water–water bi-fluid channel has high electrical, thermal and overall performance of 7.8%, 64.4% and 84.2%, respectively, at a mass flow rate of 0.15 kg s−1.
Tiwari et al.119 examined the EA of bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM. They developed an integrated model for the analysis of the overall thermal efficiency in the different climatic conditions. The results revealed that the highest overall thermal efficiency obtained at the mass flow rate of 0.02 kg s−1 was 77.25%. The electrical efficiency for the studied PVT systems was determined to be 11.83%. Jarimi et al.34 performed an energy analysis of bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM. Theoretical and experimental studies were carried and a 2D model was developed for the validation of the experimental results. The results showed that the primary energy savings performance of the air- and water-based bi-fluid systems was 58.10% and 61.31%, respectively, at the maximum flow rates. Othman et al.64 developed bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM to improve the efficiency of the collector by heat reduction. The developed system was studied under irradiance in the range of 350 W m−2 to 800 W m−2 and fluid flow rate in the range of 0.01 kg s−1 to 0.10 kg s−1. The results revealed that the thermal and electrical efficiencies were 17% and 76%, respectively. These values are very high and comparable to that of the conventional PVT systems.
7. Technical discussion and challenges
This section presents a detailed technical discussion on PVT air-, PVT water- and PVT bi-fluid-based systems with and without PCM.
7.1. Technical discussion
Conventional PVT systems often focused on air and water as the transfer fluid. Table 1 presents a summary of some of the standard work performed by researchers over the last few years on air-, water- and bi-fluid PVT systems with and without PCM. Various system performances, key points, important system definitions and systems specifications are listed in this table. Accordingly, it can be seen that in all cases (PVT air, PVT water and PVT bi-fluid), the efficiency is greater when the PVT system is integrated with PCMs. This is due to the fact that PCM integration reduces the temperature of the PVT modules, which ultimately enhances the electrical efficiency of the system since it is a well-known fact that when the temperature increases above 25 °C, the electrical efficiency decreases. Also, PCMs do not only work as a temperature regulator but they store the thermal energy, which is then used to heat the working fluid to get useful heat in absence of solar energy. Another finding from Table 1 is that the electrical and thermal efficiency in the case of water-based PVT-PCM systems are higher compared with that of air-based and bi-fluid-based PVT systems. This is due to the fact that specific heat of water is much higher than that of air. However, the application of both systems, i.e. PVT water and PVT air, is different, which makes it necessary to study both systems for their practical application.
Table 1 Comparative features of different PVT systems with and without PCMs




Type of PVT system
Efficiency (%)
Advantages
Limitations
Applications
Reference


Electrical
Thermal
Overall




Air-based PVT systems without PCM
17.18
10.01
45
Overall thermal and electrical performance improved, overall annual thermal and electrical gain increased
Both efficiencies decrease with a climate change
To run the domestic load, space heating

120



EA techniques are efficient for estimation of design parameters
Low temperature of air during winter


Air-based PVT systems with PCM
11.50
NA
NA
Using PCM reducing the panel temperature in the range 3.7 °C to 4.3 °C
Heat transfer rate is weaker compared with forced convection



32



Water-based PVT systems without PCM
9.8
40
50–60
Enhancement in the electrical and thermal efficiency
Time required more for the initial recover cost
To meet the demand of residential building

121



Economically feasible 82% reduction in the energy cost


Water-based PVT systems with PCM
11.65
52–57
69.2
No electricity needed for pump, highest thermal performance is obtained


Crop drying, water heating

104



Bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM
8.5
33.8
NA
Power output and thermal efficiency increased, panel surface temperature and environmental impact reduced


Space heating

63



Hydrogen production


Bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM
8–9
60.19
70.62
Reduction in the cell temperature
Consumption of pump power, net electrical efficiency reduced in winter
Electrical energy, floor heating

60



Increase in the power output




Next, what has been covered in the literature is PVT air-based systems. In this section, the 3E analysis of PVT air-based systems with and without PCMs is discussed thoroughly. All the standard work done by the many researchers on the related air-based with and without PCM systems considering energy analysis is summarized in Table 2. The various system performances, key points, related important system definitions and systems specifications are listed in Table 1. The performance of the air-based PVT systems is also summarized, including their energy and exergy performances with key features and relevant findings. It was observed that the energy and exergy efficiency are improved by using air-based PVT systems with the integration of PCM. Hazami et al.122 examined the energetic and exergetic efficiencies of (PVT) air-based systems. Their results indicated the maximum instantaneous electrical and thermal energies efficiencies were 50.10% and 15%, and the enhancement in the active mode electrical efficiency and exergy performance of the PVT systems were 3% and 2.5%, respectively. A contrast was also made between the energetic and exergetic performances based on the PVT solar collector, FPC and PV device. It was identified that the electrical exergy efficiency varied from 8.5% to 10.6% in the passive mode to 12% to 14.8% in the active mode. Compared to the exergy thermal efficiencies of the FPC and PV module, the PVT air energy and exergy efficiencies are much better. They also noticed that the electrical output of the PVT air-based system also predominantly increased compared with that of the conventional photovoltaic systems. Thus, it can be concluded that the glazing of the PVT collector leads to an improvement in the thermal performance, while a decrease the electrical performance of the systems. Finally, according to Table 2, it can be concluded that the integration of PCMs in PVT air-based systems improves their energy and exergy efficiencies and payback time from an exergoeconomic point of view.
Table 2 Findings on air-based PVT systems with and without PCMs




System type
Overall energy (η) efficiency
Overall exergy (Ψ) efficiency
Exergoeconomics
Reference




Air-based without PCM
NA
NA
Payback time is 1.8 years and 7.7 years
Agarwal et al.92


Air-based without PCM
59–92
11.1–13.5


Salem et al.123


Air-based without PCM
65–70
NA


Mojumder et al.124


Air-based without PCM
65–70
14.8


Hazami et al.122


Air-based without PCM
68.5
NA
EPBT for system is 1.23 and 10 years
Tiwari et al.125


Air-based without PCM
90
11–13
NA
Silmani et al.126


Air-based without PCM
69.6
8.6


Gholampour et al.127


Air-based without PCM
NA
9.6–9.7


Jahromi et al.128


Air-based without PCM
72
NA
NA
Shahsavar et al.129


Air-based without PCM
45
10.75
NA
Sarhaddi et al.19


Air-based with PCM


9.3–9.8%
NA
Wongwuttanasatian et al.101


Air-base with PCM
17% increase


NA
Fiorentini et al.130


Air-based with PCM
13.5% increase


NA
Nouira et al.131


Air-based with PCM
12.51% increase


NA
Wenyl et al.132


Air-based with PCM
30


EPBT 5 years
Sohel et al.41




Next, the 3E analysis of PVT water-based systems with and without PCM is discussed thoroughly. All the standard work done by the many researchers on the related water-based systems with and without PCM considering 3E analysis is summarized in Table 3. It can be observed from Table 3 that PVT water-based PCM-integrated systems are more feasible compared to without PCM systems. The total energy performance of PVT-PCM water-based systems improved up to 28.86% compared with the conventional PV system, as indicated by Maatallah et al.59 The temperature of the PVT-PCM system was much lower than that of the conventional PV systems without PCM. EXENEC analysis also indicated that the EPBT of the PVT-PCM water-based systems is 5.92 years, which is lower than that of 6.68 years in the case of the without PCM conventional system, where the EPBT is almost 11.26% shorter than the conventional without PCM systems. The reason for this is that the embodied energy for the PVT-PCM water-based system was 5.56% higher than that of the conventional without PCM systems and the exergy output was 18.97% higher than that of conventional systems. The life cycle conversion efficiency of the PVT-PCM water-based systems is approx. 27% higher compared to that of the conventional without PCM systems. The available data of the energy and exergy efficiencies suggests that PVT water-based PCM-integrated systems are the most suitable from an EA, ExA and EXENEC analysis point of view. The energy and exergy efficiencies are enhanced more compared to the conventional systems without PCM integration and the energy payback time is reduced.
Table 3 Findings on water-based PVT system with and without PCM




System type
Energy (η) efficiency
Exergy (Ψ) efficiency
Exergoeconomics
Reference




Water-based without PCM
NA
9–11.36%


Sobhnamayan et al.103


Water-based without PCM
13–13.8%
NA


Fudholi et al.105


Water-based without PCM
53%
24%


Adedeji et al.108


Water-based PVT with PCM
17.33% improved
26.87–40.59% increase
11.26% shorter than conventional PV
Maatallah et al.59


Water-based with PCM
87.72%
7.09–12.19%
EPBT 6 years
Maatallah et al.59


Water-based with PCM
70.5%
8.2%


Salem et al.109


Water-based with PCM
NA
4.22% increase


Kazemian et al.20


Water-based with PCM
42% rise
22% increase


By Sardarabadi et al.116


Water-based with PCM
67.90%
12.26%


Taher et al.59


Water-based with PCM
NA
9.6–9.7%
2589 € per m2
Jahromi et al.117


Water-based with PCM
87
12.19


Hossain et al.18


Water-based without PCM


9.7
Marginally stable
Jahromi et al.117


Water-based without PCM


2.3
5 years
Mousavi et al.112


Water-based with PCM
45% increased
22% increase
7 years
Kandilli et al.110




The research on PVT systems started in the mid-1970s, with the focus on the PVT collector efficiency. Domestic application was regarded as the main market. Initially the focus was on glazed collectors for both air- and water-based systems. However, the cost for a complete system is incredibly high and unaffordable for industrial and residential owners. Thus, 3E analysis of PVT systems with the integration of PCMs is promising to generate the energies due to high reliability with lower environmental impacts. Generally, the energy reduction occurring in the system can be detected using exergy analysis, and thus it is valuable tool to determine the energy efficiency of a system, hence helping to make complicated thermodynamic systems more efficient. The exergoeconomic analysis is a form of economics focused on exergy analysis. It is hybrid of exergy and cost analysis to enhance the output of PVT systems. This allow designers to determine ways or strategies to enhance the efficiency of systems based on cost. PVT system modules are architecturally adaptable and have potential to develop into a range of standardized and aesthetically appealing commercial products. Their market potential is expected to be higher compared to individual PV and solar thermal systems due to their obvious benefits over the independent systems. Considering the most recent attempts to improve PVT systems, more focus has been paid to the thermal efficiency rather than the electrical efficiency. Water-based PVT systems are also very popular technology and have gained growing applications in practical projects. Air-based PVT systems are commonly used PVT technology and have been developed into commercial units and used in engineering practices. Although significant works have been completed on the study of PVT systems, there are still some opportunities existing for the further development of this technology, and advanced economic and environmental analyses considering the effect of climatic conditions on the performance of the system through long-term measurements.
7.2. Challenges
Herein, the energy, exergy and exergoeconomic (3E) analysis of PVT systems was discussed in detail. All the work done by authors on PVT systems including water-based and air-based systems with and without the integration of PCMs and their 3E analysis were studied and the performances of all the PVT applications of related systems were reported herein. The energy efficiency is always higher than the exergy efficiency because exergy signifies the quality of energy, and therefore always increases with an increase in temperature, in contrast to the quantity of energy. However, each PVT application has its own significance and importance based on its end use with respect to environmental and exergoeconomic viability. PVT systems need significant improvements to allow their commercialization and to be real contenders as existing established solar thermal and photovoltaics systems. According to the above study, various issues are correlated with traditional working fluids. Air-based PVT systems have the lower efficiency and are known to be the least effective because of their relatively low heat transfer. Higher efficiencies can be achieved in water-based PVT systems. Nevertheless, when they are applied in extremely cold climates, issues related to leakage damage the system. Also, there is the risk of freezing. Water- and air-based systems exhibit and cause higher PV module cooling; however, in terms of design, they are becoming more complicated, and in passive mode are difficult to design. Phase change materials effectively work as a thermal management system, but it was noted that the heat must be utilized effectively. Some phase change materials are toxic, undergo corrosive reactions with the container, and are not environmentally friendly, and thus these factors have to be considered when selecting PCMs. The gap between hypothetical research and industrial progress in these systems definitely has a great significance. This work offers principles and essential information, and thus the promotion of these systems can be adopted by industries. In conclusion, the deficiency of a global standard, tracking and performance analysis of PVT systems are the foremost problems owing to the field reliance on different views, which may adversely affect the development of this technology. Therefore, it is important to focus on implementing an international standard.
8. Conclusions and future recommendations
The conclusions obtained from the detailed literature review on the 3E analysis of PVTair, PVTwater and PVTbifluid systems with and without PCMs are presented in this section. Further, this section covers the recommendations for future work.
8.1. Conclusions
Herein, we thoroughly focused on the performance of air, water and bi-fluid-based PVT systems with and without PCMs. The 3E analysis of air-, water- and bi-fluid-based PVT systems was presented. Furthermore, the energy and exergy equations of PV, PVT and PVT-PCM integrated systems were studied. The substantial research conclusions are as follows:
• A huge amount of work has been performed on PVT-PCM integrated systems, but limited work has been done to date on energy, exergy and exergoeconomic analysis in the literature. Most of the systems were designed with respect to energetic performances, which is based on the 1st law of thermodynamics, and often the energy reduction occurring in the systems can be detected using exergy analysis. Maximum energy loss occurs because of irreversibility. It was analyzed that the rate of exergy destruction is greater than that of the other parts.
• Exergoeconomic analysis assesses the cost of utilized resources and system irreversibility. This analysis solves the problem relating to dynamic energy systems such as PVT systems that cannot be analyzed by conventional energy-based economic analysis.
• In general, the energy efficiencies of PVT systems were found to be more than that of their exergy efficiencies. The exergy efficiency of PVT systems was found to be in the range of 3–14%.
• The overall electrical energy performance of water-, air- and bi-fluid-based PVT systems integrated with PCMs was found to be better compared to that without PCMs.
• The energy payback time of water-, air- and bi-fluid-based PVT systems integrated with PCMs was reduced compared to that of the conventional systems. The EPBT was almost 11.26% shorter than that the conventional without PCM systems.
• The life cycle conversion efficiency of PVT-PCM water-based systems is approx. 27% higher compared to conventional without PCM systems. It was found to be always beneficial to use PCM-integrated PVT systems for better performance and economic efficiency.
• It was found from the energy and exergy efficiencies that water-, air- and bi-fluid-based PVT systems integrated with PCMs are more suitable from an EA, ExA and EXENEC analysis point of view.
8.2. Future recommendations
This research paper contains a thorough review of the advancement of PVT technologies with and without PCMs using the 3E approach within the last decade. Based on this through review, the recommendations for future work are as follows:
➢ Product life assessments, payback time system costs, climate change and exergy efficiencies are some key issues that need to be tackled by PVT systems, which have been introduced and are to be established in the near future to gain a position in the international market.
➢ To carry out long-term tests on PVT collectors to study factors such as PV module lifetime, PV module weakening due to thermal stress and PVT help in minimizing the stress, it is recommended that the PV module power output and energy efficiency be measured and studied over long period.
➢ The lack of clarity in experiment time, testing methods and flow rate calls for the need for developing a global standard for designing, evaluating, installing and testing PVT collectors.
➢ To determine the high-level exergy and environmental impact of advanced PVT systems, exergetic life cycle analysis is recommended. For comparison purposes this review should also be applied to model PV and PVT systems. This will help to asses accumulated exergetics and emissions of contaminates through different stages of the PVT lifespan, such as reducing CO2.
➢ Technoeconomic and thermoeconomic research on PVT systems should be carried out. There is lack in the literature of calculations on their levelized energy cost (LCOE) and levelized heat cost (LCOH).
➢ There is lack of energy, exergy and exergoeconomic analysis of air- and water-based PVT-PCM systems, and thus further analysis is required on these systems. Also, the 3E analysis of bi-fluid-based PVT systems with integrated PCM is necessary.
➢ Some cooling techniques can be employed to achieve greater electrical energy from PVT systems such as the jet impingement method, which can be a useful to extract a high amount of thermal energy and electrical energy. Replication studies are quite importance for a more solid understanding of the performances of PVT systems. Furthermore, analysis on nanofluid-based jet impingement systems can be useful to extract more heat energy from the PV device as well as electrical energy.
➢ Also, elaborate 3E analysis of nanofluid and nano-PCM-based PVT systems is significant. Further, work on nanofluid- and nano-PCM-integrated PVT systems based on the 3E approach is recommended.
Abbreviations


A
Cross-sectional area (m2)
PCMPhase change materials

A
sc
Area of solar collector in m2
PVPhotovoltaics

C
p
Specific heat capacity (kJ kg−1 K−1)
PVTPhotovoltaic thermal systems
EAEnergy analysis

Q
Heat transfer rate
ExAExergy analysis

S
gen
Rate of entropy generation
EXENECExergoeconomics

S
Solar radiation in W m−2

E
Electrical power output in W

T
Temperature
EPBTEnergy payback time

T
c
Cell temperature in °C
FFFill factor

T
f
Temperature of fluid air/water in °C
FPCFlat plate collector

T
gi
Temperature of inner surface of glass
HPPVTHeat pipe-based PVT systems

T
go
Temperature of outer surface of glass

H
Height in m
WWatts

I
S
Solar irradiance intensity

U
Flow velocity (m s−1)

I
SC
Short circuit current

V
Wind velocity

I(t)Solar intensity

L
Loss factor

Greek


L
Length in m

η
Energy efficiency

K
Capital cost

Ψ
Exergy efficiency
kW hKilowatt hour

ρ
Density (kg m−3)

M
Mass (kg)

τ
Transmittance

M
a
Mass of ambient air (kg)

α
Absorbance

N
u
Nusselt number

μ
Boltzmann constant

ε
Emissivity of system

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Universiti Malaysia Pahang (UMP) for the financial support under grant RDU192209, RDU192216 and RDU192217 and Sunway University for the research facilities provided.
References
B. Kalidasan, A. K. Pandey, S. Shahabuddin, M. Samykano, M. Thirugnanasambandam and R. Saidur, Phase change materials integrated solar thermal energy systems: global trends and current practices in experimental approaches, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101118 CrossRef .
A. Sharma, V. V. Tyagi, C. R. Chen and D. Buddhi, Review on thermal energy storage with phase change materials and applications, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13(2), 318–345 CrossRef CAS .
M. George, A. K. Pandey, N. Abd Rahim, V. V. Tyagi, S. Shahabuddin and R. Saidur, Concentrated photovoltaic thermal systems: a component-by-component view on the developments in the design, heat transfer medium and applications, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 186, 15–41 CrossRef .
X. Bo, X. Jiaxin and Z. Chen, Heat transfer study in solar collector with energy storage, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 156, 119778 CrossRef .
I. K. Karathanassis, E. Papanicolaou, V. Belessiotis and G. C. Bergeles, Design and experimental evaluation of a parabolic-trough concentrating photovoltaic/thermal (CPVT) system with high-efficiency cooling, Renewable Energy, 2017, 101, 467–483 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. J. Van Helden, R. J. C. Van Zolingen and H. A. Zondag, PV Thermal systems: PV panels supplying renewable electricity and heat, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12(6), 415–426 CAS .
M. M. Islam, A. K. Pandey, M. Hasanuzzaman and N. A. Rahim, Recent progresses and achievements in photovoltaic-phase change material technology: a review with special treatment on photovoltaic thermal-phase change material systems, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 126, 177–204 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Sathe and A. S. Dhoble, A review on recent advancements in photovoltaic thermal techniques, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 645–672 CrossRef .
N. Dimri, A. Tiwari and G. N. Tiwari, Thermal modelling of semitransparent photovoltaic thermal (PVT) with thermoelectric cooler (TEC) collector, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 146, 68–77 CrossRef .

          A. K. Pathak, et al., Role of Solar Energy Applications for Environmental Sustainability,  2019 Search PubMed .
A. H. Al-walei, M. T. Chaichan, K. Sopian and H. A. Kazem, Research Article Energy Storage: CFD Modeling of Thermal Energy Storage for a Phase Change Materials (PCM) added to a PV/T using nanofluid as a coolant, J. Sci. Eng. Res., 2017, 4(12), 193–202 CAS  , http://www.jsaer.com.
O. Ozgener and A. Hepbasli, A review on the energy and exergy analysis of solar assisted heat pump systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11(3), 482–496 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hosseinzadeh, M. Sardarabadi and M. Passandideh-Fard, Energy and exergy analysis of nanofluid based photovoltaic thermal system integrated with phase change material, Energy, 2018, 147, 636–647 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tsatsaronis, Definitions and nomenclature in exergy analysis and exergoeconomics, Energy, 2007, 32(4), 249–253 CrossRef .
A. Abusoglu and M. Kanoglu, Exergoeconomic analysis and optimization of combined heat and power production: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13(9), 2295–2308 CrossRef .

          M. Bayat and M. Ozalp, Energy, Exergy and Exergoeconomic Analysis of a Solar Photovoltaic Module, Elsevier,  2018 Search PubMed .
A. R. A. Elbar, M. S. Yousef and H. Hassan, Energy, exergy, exergoeconomic and enviroeconomic (4E) evaluation of a new integration of solar still with photovoltaic panel, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 233, 665–680 CrossRef .
M. S. Hossain, A. K. Pandey, J. Selvaraj, N. A. Rahim, M. M. Islam and V. V. Tyagi, Two side serpentine flow based photovoltaic-thermal-phase change materials (PVT-PCM) system: energy, exergy and economic analysis, Renewable Energy, 2019, 136, 1320–1336 CrossRef .
F. Sarhaddi, S. Farahat, H. Ajam and A. Behzadmehr, Exergetic performance assessment of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) air collector, Energy Build., 2010, 42(11), 2184–2199 CrossRef .
A. Kazemian, M. Hosseinzadeh, M. Sardarabadi and M. Passandideh-Fard, Experimental study of using both ethylene glycol and phase change material as coolant in photovoltaic thermal systems (PVT) from energy, exergy and entropy generation viewpoints, Energy, 2018, 162, 210–223 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, A critical review on energy, exergy, exergoeconomic and economic (4-E) analysis of thermal power plants, Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal, 2017, 20(1), 283–292 CrossRef .
F. Yazdanifard and M. Ameri, Exergetic advancement of photovoltaic/thermal systems (PV/T): a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 97, 529–553 CrossRef .
K. R. Ranjan and S. C. Kaushik, Energy, exergy and thermo-economic analysis of solar distillation systems: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 27, 709–723 CrossRef .
R. Rawat, R. Lamba and S. C. Kaushik, Thermodynamic study of solar photovoltaic energy conversion: an overview, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 71, 630–638 CrossRef .
N. S. Nazri, 
            et al., Energy economic analysis of photovoltaic-thermal-thermoelectric (PVT-TE) air collectors, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 92, 187–197 CrossRef .
S. K. Sansaniwal, V. Sharma and J. Mathur, Energy and exergy analyses of various typical solar energy applications: a comprehensive review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 1576–1601 CrossRef .
L. Evangelisti, R. De Lieto Vollaro and F. Asdrubali, Latest advances on solar thermal collectors: a comprehensive review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109318 CrossRef .
H. Caliskan, Energy, exergy, environmental, enviroeconomic, exergoenvironmental (EXEN) and exergoenviroeconomic (EXENEC) analyses of solar collectors, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 488–492 CrossRef .
S. Jegadheeswaran, S. D. Pohekar and T. Kousksou, Exergy based performance evaluation of latent heat thermal storage system: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14(9), 2580–2595 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiu, Y. Ouyang, Y. Feng and X. Zhang, Review on micro/nano phase change materials for solar thermal applications, Renewable Energy, 2019, 140, 513–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pandey, M. S. Hossain, V. V. Tyagi, N. Abd Rahim, J. A. L. Selvaraj and A. Sari, Novel approaches and recent developments on potential applications of phase change materials in solar energy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 281–323 CrossRef .
N. Choubineh, H. Jannesari and A. Kasaeian, Experimental study of the effect of using phase change materials on the performance of an air-cooled photovoltaic system, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 103–111 CrossRef .
N. Aste, C. Del Pero and F. Leonforte, Water PVT Collectors Performance Comparison, Energy Procedia, 2017, 105, 961–966 CrossRef .
H. Jarimi, M. N. Abu Bakar, M. Othman and M. H. Din, Bi-fluid photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) solar collector: experimental validation of a 2-D theoretical model, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1052–1067 CrossRef .
T. T. Chow, A review on photovoltaic/thermal hybrid solar technology, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87(2), 365–379 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Teo, P. S. Lee and M. N. A. Hawlader, An active cooling system for photovoltaic modules, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90(1), 309–315 CrossRef .
P. Ooshaksaraei, K. Sopian, S. H. Zaidi and R. Zulkifli, Performance of four air-based photovoltaic thermal collectors configurations with bifacial solar cells, Renewable Energy, 2017, 102, 279–293 CrossRef CAS .
S. Agrawal and G. N. Tiwari, Energy and exergy analysis of hybrid micro-channel photovoltaic thermal module, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85(2), 356–370 CrossRef .
G. Barone, A. Buonomano, C. Forzano, A. Palombo and O. Panagopoulos, Experimentation, modelling and applications of a novel low-cost air-based photovoltaic thermal collector prototype, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 195, 1079–1097 CrossRef .
H. Ren, Z. Ma, W. Lin, W. Fan and W. Li, Integrating photovoltaic thermal collectors and thermal energy storage systems using phase change materials with rotary desiccant cooling systems, Sustainable Cities and Society, 2018, 36, 131–143 CrossRef .

          M. I. Sohel, M. Zhenjun, C. Paul, A. Jamie and S. Robert, A theoretical investigation of a solar photovoltaic thermal system integrated with phase change materials, Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences – Papers: Part A,  2013, p. 1623 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, 
            et al., Solar radiation transfer and performance analysis of an optimum photovoltaic/thermal system, Energy Convers. Manage., 2011, 52(2), 1343–1353 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aste, C. Del Pero, F. Leonforte and M. Manfren, Performance monitoring and modeling of an uncovered photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) water collector, Sol. Energy, 2016, 135, 551–568 CrossRef .
A. Fudholi, K. Sopian, M. H. Yazdi, M. H. Ruslan, A. Ibrahim and H. A. Kazem, Performance analysis of photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 78, 641–651 CrossRef .
H. A. Kazem, Evaluation and analysis of water-based photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) system, Case Studies in Thermal Engineering, 2019, 13, 100401 CrossRef .
H. Long, T. T. Chow and J. Ji, Building-integrated heat pipe photovoltaic/thermal system for use in Hong Kong, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 1084–1091 CrossRef .
G. Fraisse, C. Ménézo and K. Johannes, Energy performance of water hybrid PV/T collectors applied to combisystems of Direct Solar Floor type, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81(11), 1426–1438 CrossRef .
S. Dubey and A. A. O. Tay, Testing of two different types of photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) modules with heat flow pattern under tropical climatic conditions, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2013, 17(1), 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abhat, Low temperature latent heat thermal energy storage: heat storage materials, Sol. Energy, 1983, 30(4), 313–332 CrossRef CAS .
N. Abbas, 
            et al., Applications of nanofluids in photovoltaic thermal systems: a review of recent advances, Phys. A, 2019, 536, 122513 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, 
            et al., Power improvement of finned solar photovoltaic phase change material system, Energy, 2020, 193, 116735 CrossRef .
S. Harish, D. Orejon, Y. Takata and M. Kohno, Thermal conductivity enhancement of lauric acid phase change nanocomposite with graphene nanoplatelets, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2015, 80, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mishra, B. B. Lahiri and J. Philip, Carbon black nano particle loaded lauric acid-based form-stable phase change material with enhanced thermal conductivity and photo-thermal conversion for thermal energy storage, Energy, 2019, 116572 Search PubMed .
M. J. Zaidan and M. H. Alhamdo, Improvement in heat transfer inside a phase change energy system, Int. J. Mech. Mechatron. Eng., 2018, 18(5), 33–46 Search PubMed .
H. Fayaz, N. A. Rahim, M. Hasanuzzaman, A. Rivai and R. Nasrin, Numerical and outdoor real time experimental investigation of performance of PCM based PVT system, Sol. Energy, 2019, 179, 135–150 CrossRef .

          S. Raoux and M. Wuttig, Phase change materials – Science and Applications, Springer, US,  2009 .
M. A. Rosen, A review of energy storage types, applications and recent developments, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101047 CrossRef .
H. Nazir, 
            et al., Recent developments in phase change materials for energy storage applications: a review, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 129, 491–523 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maatallah, R. Zachariah and F. G. Al-Amri, Exergo-economic analysis of a serpentine flow type water based photovoltaic thermal system with phase change material (PVT-PCM/water), Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 195–204 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, S. Zheng and G. Zhang, Study on the energy performance enhancement of a new PCMs integrated hybrid system with the active cooling and hybrid ventilations, Energy, 2019, 179, 111–128 CrossRef .
S. Preet, Water and phase change material based photovoltaic thermal management systems: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 791–807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fayaz, N. A. Rahim, M. Hasanuzzaman, R. Nasrin and A. Rivai, Numerical and experimental investigation of the effect of operating conditions on performance of PVT and PVT-PCM, Renewable Energy, 2019, 143, 827–841 CrossRef .
S. Senthilraja, R. Gangadevi, R. Marimuthu and M. Baskaran, Performance evaluation of water and air based PVT solar collector for hydrogen production application, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(13), 7498–7507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Othman, S. A. Hamid, M. A. S. Tabook, K. Sopian, M. H. Roslan and Z. Ibarahim, Performance analysis of PV/T Combi with water and air heating system: an experimental study, Renewable Energy, 2016, 86, 716–722 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Abu Bakar, M. Othman, M. Hj Din, N. A. Manaf and H. Jarimi, Design concept and mathematical model of a bi-fluid photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) solar collector, Renewable Energy, 2014, 67, 153–164 CrossRef .
S. R. Park, A. K. Pandey, V. V. Tyagi and S. K. Tyagi, Energy and exergy analysis of typical renewable energy systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 105–123 CrossRef .
A. Duran, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, Thermodynamic analysis of solar photovoltaic cell systems, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 153–159 CrossRef .
D. MacPhee and I. Dincer, Thermal modeling of a packed bed thermal energy storage system during charging, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2009, 29(4), 695–705 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Öztürk and Y. Demirel, Exergy-based performance analysis of packed-bed solar air heaters, Int. J. Energy Res., 2004, 28(5), 423–432 CrossRef .
E. Ebrahimnia-Bajestan, M. Charjouei Moghadam, H. Niazmand, W. Daungthongsuk and S. Wongwises, Experimental and numerical investigation of nanofluids heat transfer characteristics for application in solar heat exchangers, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2016, 92, 1041–1052 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granström, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Laminated fabrication of polymeric photovoltaic diodes, Nature, 1998, 395(6699), 257–260 CrossRef .
J. Yazdanpanahi, F. Sarhaddi and M. Mahdavi Adeli, Experimental investigation of exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collector based on exergy losses, Sol. Energy, 2015, 118, 197–208 CrossRef .
T. T. Chow, G. Pei, K. F. Fong, Z. Lin, A. L. S. Chan and J. Ji, Energy and exergy analysis of photovoltaic – thermal collector with and without glass cover, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86(3), 310–316 CrossRef .
A. K. Pandey, V. V. Tyagi and S. K. Tyagi, Exergetic analysis and parametric study of multi-crystalline solar photovoltaic system at a typical climatic zone, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2013, 15(2), 333–343 CrossRef .
A. Midilli, Determination of pistachio drying behaviour and conditions in a solar drying system, Int. J. Energy Res., 2001, 25(8), 715–725 CrossRef .
A. Durmuş, A. Durmuş and M. Esen, Investigation of heat transfer and pressure drop in a concentric heat exchanger with snail entrance, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2002, 22(3), 321–332 CrossRef .
S. K. Tyagi, S. Wang, M. K. Singhal, S. C. Kaushik and S. R. Park, Exergy analysis and parametric study of concentrating type solar collectors, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2007, 46(12), 1304–1310 CrossRef .
G. C. Bakos, I. Ioannidis, N. F. Tsagas and I. Seftelis, Design, optimisation and conversion-efficiency determination of a line-focus parabolic-trough solar-collector (PTC), Appl. Energy, 2001, 68(1), 43–50 CrossRef .
D. E. Chelghoum and A. Bejan, Second-Law analysis of solar collectors with energy storage capability, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 1985, 107(3), 244–251 CrossRef .
F. Yazdanifard and M. Ameri, Exergetic
advancement of photovoltaic/thermal systems (PV/T): a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 97, 529–553 CrossRef .
Z. Said, R. Saidur, N. A. Rahim and M. A. Alim, Analyses of exergy efficiency and pumping power for a conventional flat plate solar collector using SWCNTs based nanofluid, Energy Build., 2014, 78, 1–9 CrossRef .
O. K. Singh and S. C. Kaushik, Thermoeconomic evaluation and optimization of a Brayton–Rankine–Kalina combined triple power cycle, Energy Convers. Manage., 2013, 71, 32–42 CrossRef .
J. L. Silveira, W. D. Q. Lamas, C. E. Tuna, I. A. D. C. Villela and L. S. Miro, Ecological efficiency and thermoeconomic analysis of a cogeneration system at a hospital, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16(5), 2894–2906 CrossRef .
D. B. Singh and G. N. Tiwari, Exergoeconomic, enviroeconomic and productivity analyses of basin type solar stills by incorporating N identical PVT compound parabolic concentrator collectors: a comparative study, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 135, 129–147 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Lu, M. Li, N. Lior and W. Li, Energy, exergy, exergoeconomic and environmental (4E) analysis of a distributed generation solar-assisted CCHP (combined cooling, heating and power) gas turbine system, Energy, 2019, 175, 1246–1258 CrossRef .
D. Hoffman, The application of solar energy for large-scale seawater desalination, Desalination, 1992, 89(2), 115–183 CrossRef CAS .
E. Izgi and Y. E. Akkaya, Exergoeconomic analysis of a solar photovoltaic system in İstanbul, Turkey, Turk. J. Elec. Eng. & Comp. Sci., 2013, 21(2), 350–359 Search PubMed .
T. S. Ong and C. H. Thum, Net Present Value and Payback Period for Building Integrated Photovoltaic Projects in Malaysia, Int. J. Acad. Res. Bus. Soc. Sci., 2013, 3(2), 2222–6990 Search PubMed .
N. S. Nazri, 
            et al., Exergy and improvement potential of hybrid photovoltaic thermal/thermoelectric (PVT/TE) air collector, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 111, 132–144 CrossRef .
S. Tiwari and G. N. Tiwari, Energy and exergy analysis of a mixed-mode greenhouse-type solar dryer, integrated with partially covered N-PVT air collector, Energy, 2017, 128, 183–195 CrossRef .
P. Jha, B. Das and R. Gupta, Energy and exergy analysis of photovoltaic thermal air collector under climatic condition of North Eastern India, Energy Procedia, 2019, 158, 1161–1167 CrossRef .
S. Agrawal and G. N. Tiwari, Enviroeconomic analysis and energy matrices of glazed hybrid photovoltaic thermal module air collector, Sol. Energy, 2013, 92, 139–146 CrossRef .
S. C. Solanki, S. Dubey and A. Tiwari, Indoor simulation and testing of photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) air collectors, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86(11), 2421–2428 CrossRef CAS .
B. Agrawal and G. N. Tiwari, Optimizing the energy and exergy of building integrated photovoltaic thermal (BIPVT) systems under cold climatic conditions, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87(2), 417–426 CrossRef .
E. Saloux, A. Teyssedou and M. Sorin, Analysis of photovoltaic (PV) and photovoltaic/thermal (PV/T) systems using the exergy method, Energy Build., 2013, 67, 275–285 CrossRef .
S. Agrawal and G. N. Tiwari, Overall energy, exergy and carbon credit analysis by different type of hybrid photovoltaic thermal air collectors, Energy Convers. Manage., 2013, 65, 628–636 CrossRef .
B. Srimanickam, M. M. Vijayalakshmi and E. Natarajan, Experimental Study of Exergy Analysis on Flat Plate Solar Photovoltaic Thermal (PV/T) Hybrid System, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2015, 787, 82–87 Search PubMed .
S. Agrawal and G. N. Tiwari, Exergoeconomic analysis of glazed hybrid photovoltaic thermal module air collector, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86(9), 2826–2838 CrossRef .
A. Fudholi, 
            et al., Energy and exergy analyses of photovoltaic thermal collector with ∇-groove, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 742–750 CrossRef .
A. Numan and F. Kaya, Effect on the exergy of the PVT system of fi ns added to an air-cooled channel: a study on temperature and air velocity with ANSYS Fluent, Sol. Energy, 2019, 184, 561–569 CrossRef .
T. Wongwuttanasatian, T. Sarikarin and A. Suksri, Performance enhancement of a photovoltaic module by passive cooling using phase change material
in a finned container heat sink, Sol. Energy, 2020, 195, 47–53 CrossRef .
R. K. Mishra and G. N. Tiwari, Energy and exergy analysis of hybrid photovoltaic thermal water collector for constant collection temperature mode, Sol. Energy, 2013, 90, 58–67 CrossRef .
F. Sobhnamayan, F. Sarhaddi, M. A. Alavi, S. Farahat and J. Yazdanpanahi, Optimization of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PV/T) water collector based on exergy concept, Renewable Energy, 2014, 68, 356–365 CrossRef .
J. Yazdanpanahi, F. Sarhaddi and M. M. Adeli, Experimental investigation of exergy efficiency of a solar photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collector based on exergy losses, Sol. Energy, 2015, 118, 197–208 CrossRef .

          A. H. M. A. D. Fudholi, A. Ibrahim, M. Y. Othman and M. Hafidz, Energy and exergy analyses on water based photovoltaic thermal (PVT) collector with spiral flow absorber, in 2nd International Conference on Energy Systems, Environment, Antalya, Turkey,  2013, pp. 70–74 Search PubMed .
Shyam, G. N. Tiwari, O. Fischer, R. K. Mishra and I. M. Al-Helal, Performance evaluation of N-photovoltaic thermal (PVT) water collectors partially covered by photovoltaic module connected in series: an experimental study, Sol. Energy, 2016, 134, 302–313 CrossRef .
M. Valizadeh, F. Sarhaddi and M. Adeli, Exergy performance assessment of a linear parabolic trough photovoltaic thermal collector, Renewable Energy, 2019, 138, 1028–1041 CrossRef .
M. J. Adedeji, T. L. Ruwa, M. Abid, T. A. H. Ratlamwala and M. Dagbasi, Energy, Exergy, Economic and Environmental analysis of Photovoltaic Thermal Systems for Absorption Cooling Application, Energy Procedia, 2017, 142, 916–923 CrossRef .
M. R. Salem, M. M. Elsayed, A. A. Abd-Elaziz and K. M. Elshazly, Performance enhancement of the photovoltaic cells using Al2O3/PCM mixture and/or water cooling-techniques, Renewable Energy, 2019, 138, 876–890 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kandilli, Energy, exergy, and economical analyses of a photovoltaic thermal system integrated with the natural zeolites for heat management, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43(9), 4670–4685 CrossRef .
A. Gaur, C. Ménézo and S. Giroux, Numerical studies on thermal and electrical performance of a fully wetted absorber PVT collector with PCM as a storage medium, Renewable Energy, 2017, 109, 168–187 CrossRef .
S. Mousavi, A. Kasaeian, M. B. Shafii and M. H. Jahangir, Numerical investigation of the effects of a copper foam filled with phase change materials in a water-cooled photovoltaic/thermal system, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 163, 187–195 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kazemian, A. Salari, A. Hakkaki-Fard and T. Ma, Numerical investigation and parametric analysis of a photovoltaic thermal system integrated with phase change material, Appl. Energy, 2019, 238, 734–746 CrossRef .
M. Rezvanpour, D. Borooghani, F. Torabi and M. Pazoki, Using CaCl2·6H2O as a phase change material for thermo-regulation and enhancing photovoltaic panels' conversion efficiency: experimental study and TRNSYS validation, Renewable Energy, 2020, 146, 1907–1921 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salari, A. Kazemian, T. Ma, A. Hakkaki-Fard and J. Peng, Nanofluid based photovoltaic thermal systems integrated with phase change materials: numerical simulation and thermodynamic analysis, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sardarabadi, M. Passandideh-Fard, M. J. Maghrebi and M. Ghazikhani, Experimental study of using both ZnO/water nanofluid and phase change material (PCM) in photovoltaic thermal systems, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 161, 62–69 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Jahromi, A. Vadiee and M. Yaghoubi, Exergy and Economic Evaluation of a Commercially Available PV/T Collector for Different Climates in Iran, Energy Procedia, 2015, 75, 444–456 CrossRef .
D. Su, Y. Jia, X. Huang, G. Alva, Y. Tang and G. Fang, Dynamic performance analysis of photovoltaic-thermal solar collector with dual channels for different fluids, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 120, 13–24 CrossRef .
A. Tiwari and M. S. Sodha, Performance evaluation of hybrid PV/thermal water/air heating system: a parametric study, Renewable Energy, 2006, 31(15), 2460–2474 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Singh, S. Agrawal, D. V. Avasthi and A. Saraswat, Electrical energy analysis and optimization of single pass unglazed PVT system using evolutionary algorithm, Proc. 2015 1st Int. Conf. Next Gener. Comput. Technol. NGCT 2015,  2016, pp. 814–819 Search PubMed .
M. O. Lari and A. Z. Sahin, Design, performance and economic analysis of a nanofluid-based photovoltaic/thermal system for residential applications, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 149, 467–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hazami, A. Riahi, F. Mehdaoui, O. Nouicer and A. Farhat, Energetic and exergetic performances analysis of a PV/T (photovoltaic thermal) solar system tested and simulated under to Tunisian (North Africa) climatic conditions, Energy, 2016, 107, 78–94 CrossRef .
M. R. Salem, R. K. Ali and K. M. Elshazly, Experimental investigation of the performance of a hybrid photovoltaic/thermal solar system using aluminium cooling plate with straight and helical channels, Sol. Energy, 2017, 157, 147–156 CrossRef .
J. C. Mojumder, W. T. Chong, H. C. Ong, K. Y. Leong and Abdullah-Al-Mamoon, An experimental investigation on performance analysis of air type photovoltaic thermal collector system integrated with cooling fins design, Energy Build., 2016, 130, 272–285 CrossRef .
S. Tiwari and G. N. Tiwari, Exergoeconomic analysis of photovoltaic-thermal (PVT) mixed mode greenhouse solar dryer, Energy, 2016, 114, 155–164 CrossRef .
M. E. A. Slimani, M. Amirat, S. Bahria, I. Kurucz, M. Aouli and R. Sellami, Study and modeling of energy performance of a hybrid photovoltaic/thermal solar collector: configuration suitable for an indirect solar dryer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 125, 209–221 CrossRef .
M. Gholampour and M. Ameri, Energy and exergy analyses of Photovoltaic/Thermal flat transpired collectors: experimental and theoretical study, Appl. Energy, 2016, 164, 837–856 CrossRef .
S. N. Jahromi, A. Vadiee and M. Yaghoubi, Exergy and economic evaluation of a commercially available PV/T collector for different climates in Iran, Energy Procedia, 2015, 75, 444–456 CrossRef .
A. Shahsavar and M. Ameri, Experimental investigation and modeling of a direct-coupled PV/T air collector, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84(11), 1938–1958 CrossRef .
M. Fiorentini, P. Cooper and Z. Ma, Development and optimization of an innovative HVAC system with integrated PVT and PCM thermal storage for a net-zero energy retrofitted house, Energy Build., 2015, 94, 21–32 CrossRef .
M. Nouira and H. Sammouda, Numerical study of an inclined photovoltaic system coupled with phase change material under various operating conditions, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 141, 958–975 CrossRef .
W. Lin, Z. Ma, M. I. Sohel and P. Cooper, Development and evaluation of a ceiling ventilation system enhanced by solar photovoltaic thermal collectors and phase change materials, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 88, 218–230 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Concept of the PVT system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Classification of PVT systems.	 

 	Fig. 3  Air-based PVT system without PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Air-based PVT systems with PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Water-based PVT systems without PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Water-based PVT system with PCM. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of PVT system. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.) (b) Thermal efficiency of the different PVT systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 
Q0 = VOC × ISC × FF	(1)
	(2)
Q0 = Vm × Im	(3)
	(4)
∑mai = ∑ma0	(5)
	(6)
Qc = A × IS	(7)
Qu = ατIS × A	(8)
Qu = Qf = mfCp,fΔT	(9)
	(10)
Enw,in + Ensolar,in = Enw,out + Enloss	(11)
ΔEnw = Enw,out − Enw,in = mwCp(Tw,out − Tw,in)	(12)
Ensolar,in = αqA	(13)
Eloss,rad = Qloss,conv + Qloss,rad	(14)
Qloss,rad = Aεσ(Tsurf4 − Tair4)	(15)
Qloss,conv = hA(Tsurf − Tair)	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
Nu = (0.15)Ra1/3	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
∑Ein = ∑Eout + ∑Eloss	(22)
⇒ Esun + Emass,in = Eel + Emass,out + Eloss	(23)
Esun = GAcτgacell	(24)
Emass,out − Emass,in = Eth = mnfCp,nf,out(Tnf,out − Tnf,in)	(25)
ρnf = ϕρn + (1 − ϕ)ρbf	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
Eel = VOC × ISC × FF	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
Exout = Exelec + Extherm + Exd = Exelect + I/	(36)
Exelect = Eelect − I/ = VOC × ISC − (VOC × ISC − Vm × Im)	(37)
Exelect = Vm × Im	(38)
	(39)

 		 
	(41)
	(42)
ηC = ηTref[βTref(Tc − Tref) + γlog10 × IS]	(43)
	(44)
	(45)
	(46)
	(47)
Exf = m(E0 − Ei) = m[(h0 − hi) − Ta(s0 − si)]	(48)
h0 = CPoTo	(49)
hi = CPiTi	(50)
CPo = a + kTi	(51)
CPi = a + kTo	(52)
	(53)
	(54)
	(55)
	(56)
	(57)
	(58)
	(59)
∑Exin = ∑Exout + ∑Exloss	(60)
⇒ Exsun + Exmass,in = Exel + Exmass,out + Exloss	(61)
	(62)
Exmass,out − Exmass,in = Exth = mnf[(hnf,out − hnf,in) − Tamb[(snf,out − snf,in)]	(63)
hnf,out − hnf,in = Cp,nf(Tnf,out − Tnf,in)	(64)
	(65)
	(66)
Exel = Eel	(67)
	(68)
	(69)
	(70)
	(71)
	(72)
Lex = ∑inputs exergy flow rates − ∑products exergy flow rates	(73)
	(74)
	(75)
	(76)
	(77)
Len,loss = Enloss	(78)
Lex,loss = Exloss	(79)
Lex,dest = Exdest	(80)
	(81)
Lex,total = Exloss + Exdest	(82)
	(83)
	(84)
	(85)
	(86)
	(87)
∑minlet = ∑mexit	(88)
Q − W = ∑mexithexit − ∑minlethinlet	(89)
Xheat − W = ∑mexitΨexit − ∑minletΨinlet + i	(90)
	(91)
Ψph = (h − T0) − (h0 − T0S0)	(92)

 	Fig. 8  PVT air collector connected in series. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Design of rooftop BIPVT. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2009.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of PVT systems and energy flow diagram. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Experimental setup of PVT air-based system. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 12  PCM heat sinks: (a) grooved container, (b) tubed container and (c) finned container. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 101 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of proposed PVT systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic experimental setup. (This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Detail construction of PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Experimental setup and schematic diagram. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Cross-sectional view of the PV-PCM and PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 20 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Boundary conditions of the PVT-PCM systems. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 115 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Standard PV system and PVT-PCM water system experimental setup. (This figure has been adapted/reproduce from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019.)	 


Air-based PVT systems without PCM	17.18	10.01	45	Overall thermal and electrical performance improved, overall annual thermal and electrical gain increased	Both efficiencies decrease with a climate change	To run the domestic load, space heating	
120

EA techniques are efficient for estimation of design parameters	Low temperature of air during winter
Air-based PVT systems with PCM	11.50	NA	NA	Using PCM reducing the panel temperature in the range 3.7 °C to 4.3 °C	Heat transfer rate is weaker compared with forced convection	
	
32

Water-based PVT systems without PCM	9.8	40	50–60	Enhancement in the electrical and thermal efficiency	Time required more for the initial recover cost	To meet the demand of residential building	
121

Economically feasible 82% reduction in the energy cost
Water-based PVT systems with PCM	11.65	52–57	69.2	No electricity needed for pump, highest thermal performance is obtained	
	Crop drying, water heating	
104

Bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM	8.5	33.8	NA	Power output and thermal efficiency increased, panel surface temperature and environmental impact reduced	
	Space heating	
63

Hydrogen production
Bi-fluid-based PVT systems without PCM	8–9	60.19	70.62	Reduction in the cell temperature	Consumption of pump power, net electrical efficiency reduced in winter	Electrical energy, floor heating	
60

Increase in the power output

Air-based without PCM	NA	NA	Payback time is 1.8 years and 7.7 years	Agarwal et al.92
Air-based without PCM	59–92	11.1–13.5	
	Salem et al.123
Air-based without PCM	65–70	NA	
	Mojumder et al.124
Air-based without PCM	65–70	14.8	
	Hazami et al.122
Air-based without PCM	68.5	NA	EPBT for system is 1.23 and 10 years	Tiwari et al.125
Air-based without PCM	90	11–13	NA	Silmani et al.126
Air-based without PCM	69.6	8.6	
	Gholampour et al.127
Air-based without PCM	NA	9.6–9.7	
	Jahromi et al.128
Air-based without PCM	72	NA	NA	Shahsavar et al.129
Air-based without PCM	45	10.75	NA	Sarhaddi et al.19
Air-based with PCM	
	9.3–9.8%	NA	Wongwuttanasatian et al.101
Air-base with PCM	17% increase	
	NA	Fiorentini et al.130
Air-based with PCM	13.5% increase	
	NA	Nouira et al.131
Air-based with PCM	12.51% increase	
	NA	Wenyl et al.132
Air-based with PCM	30	
	EPBT 5 years	Sohel et al.41

Water-based without PCM	NA	9–11.36%	
	Sobhnamayan et al.103
Water-based without PCM	13–13.8%	NA	
	Fudholi et al.105
Water-based without PCM	53%	24%	
	Adedeji et al.108
Water-based PVT with PCM	17.33% improved	26.87–40.59% increase	11.26% shorter than conventional PV	Maatallah et al.59
Water-based with PCM	87.72%	7.09–12.19%	EPBT 6 years	Maatallah et al.59
Water-based with PCM	70.5%	8.2%	
	Salem et al.109
Water-based with PCM	NA	4.22% increase	
	Kazemian et al.20
Water-based with PCM	42% rise	22% increase	
	By Sardarabadi et al.116
Water-based with PCM	67.90%	12.26%	
	Taher et al.59
Water-based with PCM	NA	9.6–9.7%	2589 € per m2	Jahromi et al.117
Water-based with PCM	87	12.19	
	Hossain et al.18
Water-based without PCM	
	9.7	Marginally stable	Jahromi et al.117
Water-based without PCM	
	2.3	5 years	Mousavi et al.112
Water-based with PCM	45% increased	22% increase	7 years	Kandilli et al.110

A
	Cross-sectional area (m2)
PCM	Phase change materials

A
sc
	Area of solar collector in m2
PV	Photovoltaics

C
p
	Specific heat capacity (kJ kg−1 K−1)
PVT	Photovoltaic thermal systems
EA	Energy analysis

Q
	Heat transfer rate
ExA	Exergy analysis

S
gen
	Rate of entropy generation
EXENEC	Exergoeconomics

S
	Solar radiation in W m−2

E
	Electrical power output in W

T
	Temperature
EPBT	Energy payback time

T
c
	Cell temperature in °C
FF	Fill factor

T
f
	Temperature of fluid air/water in °C
FPC	Flat plate collector

T
gi
	Temperature of inner surface of glass
HPPVT	Heat pipe-based PVT systems

T
go
	Temperature of outer surface of glass

H
	Height in m
W	Watts

I
S
	Solar irradiance intensity

U
	Flow velocity (m s−1)

I
SC
	Short circuit current

V
	Wind velocity

I(t)	Solar intensity

L
	Loss factor

L
	Length in m

η
	Energy efficiency

K
	Capital cost

Ψ
	Exergy efficiency
kW h	Kilowatt hour

ρ
	Density (kg m−3)

M
	Mass (kg)

τ
	Transmittance

M
a
	Mass of ambient air (kg)

α
	Absorbance

N
u
	Nusselt number

μ
	Boltzmann constant

ε
	Emissivity of system

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
