Self-assembling porphyrins and phthalocyanines for photoinduced charge separation and charge transport  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CC30621B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CC30621B
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4032-4045Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSelf-assembling porphyrins and phthalocyanines for photoinduced charge separation and charge transport

        
          
            Hiroshi 
            Imahori
          
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Tomokazu 
            Umeyama
          
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Kei 
            Kurotobi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yuta 
            Takano
          
          
        
      a
aInstitute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan. E-mail: imahori@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp;  Fax: +81-75-383-2571;   Tel: +81-75-383-2566
bDepartment of Molecular Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan
cFukui Institute for Fundamental Chemistry, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8103, Japan
dPRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      28th January 2012
    , Accepted 29th February 2012First published on 29th February 2012AbstractLarge π-conjugated compounds are promising building blocks for organic thin-film electronics such as organic light-emitting diodes, organic field-effect transistors, and organic photovoltaics. Utilization of porphyrins and phthalocyanines for this purpose is highly fascinating because of their excellent electric, photophysical, and electrochemical properties as well as intense self-assembling abilities arising from π–π stacking interactions. This paper focuses on fundamental aspects of self-assembled structures that have been obtained from porphyrin and phthalocyanine building blocks and more complex composites for photoinduced charge separation and charge transport toward the potential applications to organic thin-film electronics.
Hiroshi Imahori
Hiroshi Imahori is Full Professor of the Graduate School of Engineering and Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University. He received JSPS Prize (2006), CSJ Award for Creative Work (2006), Osaka Science Prize (2007), and NISTEP Researcher Award (2007). His current interests involve artificial photosynthesis, molecular photovoltaics, organic functional materials, and drug delivery systems. To date, Hiroshi Imahori has written more than 250 papers and reviews.
Tomokazu Umeyama
Tomokazu Umeyama was born in 1976 and studied chemistry at Kyoto University. He received his BS (1999), MS (2001), and PhD (2004) in polymer chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Y. Chujo. In 2004 he joined the group of Prof. H. Imahori as an Assistant Professor at Kyoto University. Since 2010 he has also been the researcher of JST-PRESTO. He received Osawa Award for Young Scientists (2010). His current interests involve functionalization of nanocarbon materials and their application to photoelectrochemical devices.
Kei Kurotobi
Kei Kurotobi is Assistant Professor of Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, and obtained his PhD degree (2003) in Science from Yamaguchi University, with Professor Y. Sugihara on the subject of nonalternant hydrocarbon. He was postdoctoral fellow at the Graduate School of Science in Kyoto University with Professor A. Osuka (Porphyrin Chemistry), and at Institute for Chemical Research in Kyoto University with Y. Murata (Fullerene Chemistry).
Yuta Takano
Yuta Takano is Assistant Professor of the Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University. He received a PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Takeshi Akasaka from Tsukuba University, Japan in 2010. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Life Science Center of Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance (TARA Center), University of Tsukuba until 2011. His current research interests are structural and physical organic chemistry of carbon nanostructures, mainly fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, and photofunctional molecules for cell biological hybrid materials.
1. Introduction
The construction of functional structures and materials from molecular building blocks has drawn much attention over the last few decades. In this regard, supramolecular chemistry has developed simultaneously, as the rational construction is closely related to the self-assembling capabilities of building blocks.1 On the basis of the principles of molecular recognition well-defined, discrete oligomolecular species that result from the intermolecular association of several components are available. However, it is still a challenge to form polymolecular entities that result from the spontaneous association of a large undefined number of components into a specific phase having well-defined meso- and microscopic organization and macroscopic characteristics depending on its nature such as layers, films, membranes, vesicles, micelles, and gel. Currently, many research groups have been exploring the basic principles and concepts to self-assemble building blocks into organized states exhibiting specific unique functions including optical, electrical, and magnetic properties.2
Large π-conjugated compounds are promising building blocks for organic thin-film electronics such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), and organic photovoltaics (OPVs).3–9 In particular, porphyrins and phthalocyanines are representative examples.10–16 These molecular units are highly versatile in having special optical, electronic, and photophysical properties. Namely, they have a high light-collecting property in the visible and near-infrared regions and a potential ability to accept or release an electron because of the delocalized π systems in the macrocycles. In addition, it is possible to modulate the redox properties of the macrocycles dramatically by altering the inserted metals in the core, modifying substituents in the periphery of the macrocyclic ring, coordinating axial ligands onto the metals, and even exciting the chromophore with light. Porphyrins and phthalocyanines also possess their self-assembling abilities mainly due to the strong attractive forces between aromatic rings—so called π–π stacking interactions. The overlap between the π-orbitals within a well-organized stack of porphyrin and phthalocyanine molecules may result in intriguing one-dimensional (1D) materials with excellent conducting properties. In this context, once well-preprogramed porphyrins or phthalocyanines are self-assembled with suitable counterparts in a rational manner, the supramolecular assemblies would exhibit unique excellent functions.
This paper reviews fundamental aspects of self-assembled structures that have been obtained from porphyrin and phthalocyanine building blocks for photoinduced charge separation (CS) and charge transport toward the potential applications to OFETs and OPVs. The emphasis lies on our state-of-the-art work as well as related representative examples. Specifically, functionalized porphyrins and phthalocyanines are self-assembled directly on a semiconducting electrode (i.e. TiO2) for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) or the corresponding polymers are self-assembled with fullerenes for bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells. Meanwhile, they are combined with electron-accepting materials (i.e. nanocarbons and semiconducting nanoparticles) to be assembled into highly hierarchical architectures for hybrid DSSCs.
2. Self-assembly of binary composites
2.1 Self-assembling porphyrin– and phthalocyanine–fullerene linked dyads
Supramolecular donor–acceptor (D–A) heterojunctions have received considerable attention because of their potential utility for OFETs and OPVs.17–19 Tashiro and Aida et al. reported an amphiphilic porphyrin–C60 linked dyad 1 (Fig. 1), which is self-assembled to form a photoconductive 1D supramolecular D–A heterojunction structure.20 Initially, they found that dyad 1 self-organizes to form a spherical nanostructure due to the unfavorable charge-transfer (CT) interaction between the donor and acceptor. However, when enantiopure (+)-1 possessing a stereogenic center in the C60 unit is allowed to self-assemble in a dichloromethane–methanol mixture, bundles of very long nanofibers are formed. The nanofiber sample exhibits significant photocurrent generation under visible light illumination. The hole (μh) and electron (μe) mobilities obtained by a time-of-flight (TOF) method were determined as 0.10 and 0.14 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, which are among the highest values ever reported for organic ambipolar materials with a D–A heterojunction.21–23
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of 1 and 2 exhibiting top class ambipolar charge-transporting properties. 
Although the high ambipolar mobilities are fascinating toward the application to organic thin-film electronics, the close relationship between the charge-transporting properties and molecular D–A arrangement in the nanofiber remains veiled. Recently much attention has been paid to liquid crystals (LCs) as a promising methodology of controlling molecular arrangement and orientation because of their crystal-like characteristics.24,25 Disc-like porphyrin and phthalocyanine molecules functionalized with alkyl groups self-assemble into supramolecular 1D columns that further self-organize into hexagonal, rectangular, and nematic phases as discotic liquid crystals (DLCs).26,27 Hierarchical self-assembly from disc-like porphyrin and phthalocyanine molecules to DLCs through the formation of 1D columns is a highly appealing strategy to organize D–A molecules,28–31i.e., forming D–A heterojunction structures exhibiting ambipolar charge-transporting properties and efficient photocurrent generation. As an acceptor fullerenes have also been successfully incorporated into LC systems to give various LC phases.32,33 Therefore, a simultaneous application of phthalocyanines and fullerenes to LCs is extremely attractive to form supramolecular D–A heterojunction structures.34 Phthalocyanine–C60 linked dyads were incorporated into LC phthalocyanine,35 whereas [60]PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) was introduced into LC porphyrin.36 The formation of LC mesophases was also suggested for mesogenic phthalocyanine–C60 linked dyads.37
We designed zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc)–C60 dyad 2 (Fig. 1).38 Six 4-dodecyloxyphenoxy groups are introduced into the periphery of the central core to form discotic columnar structure of the ZnPc.39 C60 is also tethered to the ZnPc core via a short semiflexible bridge. We expected that, due to the strong π–π interaction between the C60 molecules and the suitable covalent linkage, the C60 molecules would be also arranged successively along the ZnPc 1D column, leading to D–A bicontinuous structure in the LCs. The LC properties of 2 were examined by a combination of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), polarized optical microscopy (POM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD).38 Once 2 is heated above the transition temperature, 2 forms discotic rectangular columnar mesophase and retains this ordered structure even after cooling to 25 °C. It is noteworthy that due to the π–π interaction the C60 molecules are also arranged linearly, showing the helical alignment along the ZnPc columnar structures. This helical C60 arrangement along the ZnPc column is formed even before heating treatment due to the plausible self-assembling process in the reprecipitation procedure by a toluene–methanol mixture.
The LC structure of 2 was correlated with the charge-transporting properties determined by the TOF method.38 LC 2 displays remarkably high μh of 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 and μe of 0.11 cm2 V−1 s−1, which are comparable to 1.20 It should be noted here that the respective μh and μe values were increased strikingly after the heating and cooling treatment. This exemplifies that the heating allows 2 to adopt more regular arrangement, especially intra-column arrangement of the ZnPc moiety as well as the inter-column arrangement, leading to improvement of the ambipolar charge-transporting properties. With these long-range charge-transporting properties in mind, flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) of 2 was determined to estimate the short-range charge mobility.38 The total charge mobilities of 2 were obtained as 0.10 cm2 V−1 s−1 before heating and 0.52 cm2 V−1 s−1 after heating and cooling treatment. These short-range trends are consistent with long-range trends observed by the TOF method. TRMC values depend on the degree of alignment for ZnPc–C60 molecules in the intra-column, whereas TOF values correlate with that between the inter-columns as well as in the intra-column. It should be emphasized that the μh and μe values measured by TOF after the heating are 26 times and 7 times higher than those before the heating. On the other hand, the total charge mobility measured by TRMC after the heating and cooling treatment is 5 times higher than that before the heating. It is evident that the enhancement in the total charge mobility obtained by TOF is larger than that obtained by TRMC. More well-ordered alignment of the respective columns in the LC by the heating may facilitate inter-charge transport between the columns more remarkably than intra-charge transport in the columns, leading to the improvement of the macroscopic charge mobilities.
Martínez-Díaz, Barberá, Torres and coworkers prepared two phthalocyanine–C60 linked dyads 3 and 4 (Fig. 2) with a rigid and a flexible spacer between the phthalocyanine and C60 units, respectively.40 Phthalocyanine–C60 dyad 3 does not reveal mesomorphic properties on its own, but forms columnar hexagonal mesophases when blended with equimolar amounts of an intrinsically mesomorphic phthalocyanine. In contrast, 4 self-organizes in columnar stacks within a rectangular arrangement. Both 3 and 4 do not exhibit regular C60 arrangement. These results suggest that fine-tuning of the spacer in phthalocyanine–C60 linked dyads is essential to form bicontinuous D–A arrays and results in high ambipolar charge mobilities.
 Fig. 2  Molecular structures of 3 and 4. 
D–A bicontinuous heterojunction structures self-assembled from D–A linked dyads seem to be promising as a charge-transporting material in BHJ solar cells. Gong, Cheng, and coworkers applied their LC porphyrin–fullerene linked dyad 5 (Fig. 3) to BHJ solar cells.41 From two-dimensional (2D) wide angle XRD and electron diffraction (ED) experiments together with computer simulation they proposed the formation of porphyrin columnar structure with C60 channels along the porphyrin columns. BHJ solar cells were fabricated with SiPCPDTBT:5 in a device configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/SiPCPDTBT:5/Al, where ITO is indium tin oxide, PEDOT is poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene), and PSS is poly(styrenesulfonate). The SiPCPDTBT:5 device yielded a power conversion efficiency (η) of 3.35%, which is slightly lower than that (4.03%) of the SiPCPDTBT:[60]PCBM reference device. The ED pattern obtained in the blend film is identical to that of pure 5, indicating that the ordered structure of 5 is still retained in the thin-film blend. The transient absorption measurement suggests the occurrence of photoinduced electron transfer (ET) from both excited states of the polymer and porphyrin to C60, followed by electron transport through the C60 channels, leading to photocurrent generation in the device.41
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of 5 and related compounds for BHJ solar cells. 
Some of the porphyrin– or phthalocyanine–C60 linked dyads self-assembled to form unique morphological nanostructures,42–44 but accurate arrangement of the molecules inside the nanostructures remains unresolved. Meanwhile, Guldi and coworkers utilized electrostatic and van der Waals interactions for layer-by-layer deposition of individual porphyrin–C60 linked dyads on an ITO electrode.45,46 The photoactive electrodes exhibit rather poor photocurrent generation (incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of <1%) due to cancellation of the charge-separated states in the multilayer films. Ariga and coworkers presented electrochemical-coupling layer-by-layer assembly as a novel fabrication methodology for preparing layered thin films on an ITO electrode.47N-Alkylcarbazole dimerization is selected as coupling reaction. They demonstrated controlled layering of porphyrin, C60, and fluorene monomers possessing the carbazole units in both homo- and hetero-electrochemical-coupling layer-by-layer assembly. A prototype D–A heterojunction device with ITO/porphyrin/C60/Al configuration reveals poor photocurrent generation.
2.2 Self-assembling porphyrins or phthalocyanines with fullerenes or carbon nanotubes by noncovalent interactions
An alternative approach is self-assembly of porphyrins or phthalocyanines with fullerenes, which are not covalently linked to each other, on an electrode by modulating interactions between the donors, acceptors, and D–A molecules as well as the molecules and surrounding environment (i.e. solvent). In this regard, D–A composites in the form of aggregates have been assembled as a three-dimensional (3D) D–A network on a semiconducting surface for attaining efficient photocurrent generation in supramolecular solar cells.48–56
We deposited the composite aggregates of porphyrins/fullerenes as thin films on a nanostructured SnO2 electrode under the influence of an electric field.57 As we have already found, porphyrins and fullerenes reveal unique interactions in the ground and excited states.58–61 We expected that the π–π interaction between them would facilitate the complexation and aggregation, which is of benefit for fast CS. The deposition procedure is as follows. Porphyrin 6 (Fig. 4) and C60 are dissolved in a good solvent (i.e. toluene) and then the resulting toluene solution is rapidly injected into a poor solvent (i.e. acetonitrile) to form composite aggregates derived from the lyophobic nature in the mixed solvent (acetonitrile/toluene = 3/1, v/v). Under application of a dc electric field (100–500 V), the aggregates in the mixed solvent become negatively charged and are deposited on a nanostructured SnO2 electrode (SnO2/(6 + C60)m), as they are driven towards the positively charged electrode surface. The broad absorption of the deposited film in the visible and in the near-IR region as well as the high molar absorptivity makes the film suitable for harvesting solar energy.57
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of 6 and 7 for supramolecular solar cells. 
Photocurrent measurements were performed in acetonitrile containing NaI (0.5 M) and I2 (0.01 M) as a redox electrolyte and a Pt gauge counter electrode.57 A short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 0.18 mA cm−2, an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.21 V, a fill factor (ff) of 0.35, and a η of 0.012% (input power (WIN) = 110 mW cm−2) were obtained for the SnO2/(6 + C60)m device. A maximum IPCE of 4.5% at 430 nm for the SnO2/(6 + C60)m device is larger than the sum (∼2%) of the single component devices, respectively, under the same two-electrode conditions. A maximum IPCE value of 17% is also attained at 460 nm at an applied potential of 0.2 V vs. SCE. Such enhancement verifies that CS between the porphyrin and C60 in the supramolecular complex is a dominating factor for efficient photocurrent generation. Namely, ultrafast photoinduced ET occurs from the free base porphyrin singlet excited state (1H2P*/H2P˙+ = −0.7 V vs. NHE) to C60 (C60/C60˙− = −0.2 V vs. NHE).57 The reduced C60 transfers electrons to the conduction band (CB) of SnO2 nanocrystallites (ECB = 0 V vs. NHE) by electron hopping through the large excess of C60 molecules, to produce the current in the circuit. The regeneration of H2P (H2P/H2P˙+ = 1.2 V vs. NHE) is achieved by the iodide/triiodide couple (I−/I3− = 0.5 V vs. NHE) present in the electrolyte system.57
We further systematically examined the substituent effects of 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrins 7a–e on the film structures and their photoelectrochemical properties of the composite clusters of 7a–e and C60 that are electrophoretically deposited on nanostructured SnO2 electrodes (Fig. 4).62–64 The photocurrent generation efficiency was found to correlate with the complexation ability of the porphyrin for C60. Basically, the IPCE value is increased upon increasing the ratio of the porphyrin vs. C60 in the resulting films, although the incorporated amount of C60 is much larger than that of the porphyrin ([7]:C60 = 1:>9). The unique molecular arrangement of the porphyrin 7a and C60 on SnO2 electrodes results in the largest IPCE value (ca. 60%) among this type of photoelectrochemical devices.62–65 Molecular packing of the cocrystal (i.e.7a·2C60 toluene) shows that 7a and C60 form a periodic nanostructure in which monolayer sheets of 7a and C60 are alternatively stacked, which is an ideal electron- and hole-transporting pathway for high device performance.62,63 The rapid formation of the composite aggregates (100 nm) and the micro-cocrystal (2 μm) from the combination of 7a and C60 in the mixed solvent is notable in that the association is accelerated by the intermolecular interaction (i.e. hydrogen bonding and CH–π interactions) between the methoxy groups of the porphyrins and of the porphyrin–C60, in addition to the π–π interactions between the porphyrin–C60 and C60 molecules. Therefore, the SnO2 electrode modified with the composite aggregates and the micro-cocrystal yields remarkably efficient photocurrent generation compared with the analogous systems. TRMC measurements of the aggregate and cocrystal consisting of 7a and C60 also exhibit notably high electron mobilities (0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1).63 These values are higher than that (0.008 cm2 V–1 s–1) for highly efficient BHJ solar cells composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [60]PCBM.66 Our experimental results exemplify the importance of electron- and hole-transporting highways at the molecular level in BHJ solar cells (i.e. bicontinuous percolating 3D D–A network).67,68 Such fundamental information will be useful for the rational design of OPVs at the nano- and mesoscopic levels. On the other hand, we could not obtain a complex of phthalocyanine and C60 under the analogous conditions due to the weak complexation between the phthalocyanine and C60.50,69 Although a supramolecular complex is formed between C60 and bowl-shaped subphthalocyanine cage70 or pyrene-fused subphthalocyanine,71 such unique complexation has not been applied to BHJ solar cells.
Porphyrins were also self-assembled with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) on electrodes by various techniques.72–76 For instance, Guldi, Prato and coworkers organized covalently and noncovalently functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) with ionic porphyrins on an ITO electrode by a layer-by-layer technique.75 Photoelectrochemical measurements gave an IPCE of 3.8% for the covalent device and 9.9% for the noncovalent device.
2.3 Vertically self-assembling porphyrins with fullerenes on electrodes
Provided ideally vertical arrangement of the bicontinuous D–A arrays on the electrodes, such D–A arrays would yield efficient CS and transportation of separated charges to respective electrodes leading to enhanced photocurrent generation. Although nanostructures with bicontinuous D–A arrays have been obtained by self-assembly of D–A molecules on an electrode,19,62,63,77 it is still difficult to achieve desirable vertical arrangement of bicontinuous D–A arrays on an electrode.78,79 We developed a novel approach to construct vertical alignment of bicontinuous D–A arrays on a flat SnO2 electrode for efficient photocurrent generation (Fig. 5).80 A palladium-mediated stepwise self-assembly of 5,15-bispyridyl zinc porphyrins (Py-ZnP-Py) as a donor ensures the vertical growth of porphyrin chains on the SnO2 electrode that is initially modified with pyridyl zinc porphyrin carboxylic acid (Py-ZnP-acid). Pyridyl C60 (Py-C60) molecules as an acceptor are infiltrated into the porphyrin brush by using the coordination bonding of the pyridyl moiety to the zinc atom of the porphyrin together with π–π interaction between the Py-C60 molecules after adsorption of C60 biscarboxylic acid (C60-acid) on the SnO2 surface. Therefore, the relationship between the film structure and photoelectrochemical properties as a function of the number of porphyrin layer (n) can be evaluated systematically.
 Fig. 5  Schematic view of vertically arranged D–A arrays on a flat SnO2 electrode and its photocurrent generation mechanism. 
The average thickness of the porphyrin brush was determined by using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements for the SnO2 nanoparticles modified with the porphyrin arrays.80 Close inspection of the TEM images shows that the thickness increases linearly with increasing n, indicating the linear elongation of porphyrin chains. The tilt angle (θ) of the porphyrin chains on the SnO2 surface with respect to surface normal was estimated to be 62°, showing that the porphyrin chain is heavily tilted to the SnO2 surface on which the porphyrin chains are well-packed. The tilt angle is comparable to those observed for self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of porphyrins on both metals and semiconductor surfaces.2,81
The photoelectrochemical properties were also assessed as a function of n. With increasing n, the IPCE value is increased to reach maxima (n = 5) and then decreases gradually (n = 6–8). As established previously,48–57 CS from the zinc porphyrin excited singlet state (1ZnP*) to C60 takes place in addition to direct electron injection from 1ZnP* to the CB of the SnO2. In the former case, the generated C60˙− injects electrons into the CB of the SnO2via electron hopping through the C60 molecules infiltrated from top to bottom of the porphyrin brushes. For all the layer numbers the IPCE values are much higher than those of reference systems without Py-C60 or with the C60 reference, demonstrating that the vertical bicontinuous D–A arrays on the electrodes are responsible for the enhancement of photocurrent generation. The trend of the IPCE value as a function of n is parallel to those of the infiltrated amount of Py-C60 as well as the surface morphology as a function of n. The decreasing trend of the IPCE value (n = 6–8) correlates with the decreasing amount of the incorporated C60 molecules between the porphyrin brushes, which arise from the porphyrin aggregation, as seen in the trend of surface morphology. The maximum IPCE value (21%) is comparable to the highest value (20%) among vertically grown donor or acceptor chains from electrode surfaces.78 These results would be valuable for the rational molecular design of high-performance OPVs.
Desirable, vertically ordered BHJ structures were partially achieved by Matsuo, Sato, Nakamura and coworkers.82 They thermally converted tetrabenzoporphyrin precursor 8 to benzoporphyrin 9 at 180 °C to form a columnar structure (ca. 60%) of 9 and bis(dimethylphenylsilylmethyl)C60 (SIMEF) on an ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode (Fig. 6). SEM observation reveals that tetrabenzoporphyrin molecules 9 self-assemble to yield the nanorod structure with a height of 65 nm and a diameter of 26 nm on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode. Each nanorod was estimated to contain 30000–100000 molecules of 9. The formation of vertically aligned columnar nanocrystals of 9 at 180 °C on the ITO/PEDOT:PSS electrode may be enhanced in the matrix of SIMEF that crystallizes at lower temperature (crystallization temperature of 149 °C), assisting the self-assembly process. The three-layered structured photovoltaic device (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/9/9:SIMEF/SIMEF/BCP (bathocuproine)/Al) afforded η = 5.2% with Voc = 0.75 V, Jsc = 10.5 mA cm−2, ff = 0.65 and maximum IPCE = 50%. There is still large room for the improvement with regard to the diameter and regularity of the columnar nanostructure.82
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of 8, 9 and SIMEF for BHJ solar cells. 
2.4 Self-assembling porphyrin conjugated polymers with fullerenes for BHJ solar cells
As described earlier, porphyrins and fullerenes are known to form supramolecular CT complexes involving closest contacts between one of the electron-rich 6:6 bonds of the fullerene and the geometric center of the porphyrin.58–64 Pre-organized porphyrin arrays using various nanoscaffolds including dendrimers,83 oligopeptides,84 and nanoparticles85 have been used for the bottom-up organization of the porphyrins and fullerenes on nanostructured semiconducting electrodes. The modified electrodes exhibited remarkable photocurrent generation in the cases that interdigitating D–A film structures are formed owing to the π–π interaction between the porphyrin and fullerene as well as the pre-organized porphyrin arrays. With these results in mind, we focused on conjugated porphyrin polymers.86 We expected that a combination of novel 1D conjugated porphyrin polymers with fullerenes would also yield analogous supramolecular D–A structures exhibiting efficient photocurrent generation.
Conjugated polymers with alternating main chain structures of zinc porphyrin–furan 10 and zinc porphyrin–thiophene 11 were synthesized by palladium(0)-catalyzed Stille coupling reaction (Fig. 7).87 The optical, electrochemical, photophysical, and photovoltaic properties of 10 and 11 were investigated to elucidate the effects of the heterole bridges (i.e. furan vs. thiophene) in the porphyrin polymers. The optical bandgap of 10 (1.75 eV) is smaller than that of 11 (1.90 eV), implying the high delocalization of the π-electrons along the polymer main chain of 10 relative to 11. The more extended π-conjugation in 10 stems from the smaller steric repulsion of the meso-furan moiety with the porphyrin rings than that of the meso-thiophene. The time-resolved fluorescence spectrum of 10 shows a gradual Stokes shift to the longer wavelength in the subnanosecond time domain due to the relaxation from a twisted conformation with the large dihedral angles between the porphyrins and the furan rings to a coplanar conformation with the small dihedral angles, whereas the fluorescence spectrum of 11 does not exhibit the dynamic Stokes shift. Both 10 and 11 are electrochemically active in the oxidation and reduction regions and have suitable HOMO/LUMO levels that enable photoinduced ET from the excited polymer to [60]PCBM in the blend films. Indeed, the blend films display strong fluorescence quenching from the porphyrin moieties together with appearance of CT emission arising from the interaction between the porphyrin and the C60 moieties. This is the first observation on CT emission between conjugated porphyrin polymers and fullerenes.87 BHJ solar cells were fabricated using the blend films of 10:[60]PCBM and 11:[60]PCBM as a photoactive layer. The 10:[60]PCBM and 11:[60]PCBM-based devices reveal low η values of 0.048% and 0.027% under standard AM1.5 sunlight (100 mW cm−2). Unfortunately, formation of the supramolecular CT complexes arising from the conjugated porphyrin polymer and fullerene does not enhance the device performance of the BHJ solar cells probably due to the lack of bicontinuous D–A network in the photoactive layer.87 Nevertheless, these results obtained here will provide fundamental information on the rational design of large chromophore-embedded conjugated polymers for solar energy conversion.
 Fig. 7  Molecular structures of 10 and 11 for BHJ solar cells. 
3. Self-assembly of ternary composites
3.1 Self-assembling porphyrin– and phthalocyanine–fullerene—single-walled carbon nanotube ternary composites
Charge-transporting properties of organic thin films have found to be crucial in the device performances. In this regard charge transport has been frequently limited by grain boundaries in the films as well as molecular arrangements within the grains.7 Therefore, a new method enhancing electrical communication between the grains as well as modulating the arrangements within the grains is necessary to improve device performances. We exploited a novel self-assembly strategy to build up well-ordered D–A nanograins and their efficient molecular wiring that can be detected as photocurrent (Fig. 8).88 A semi-flexible, short covalent linkage between porphyrin as a donor and C60 as an acceptor is chosen to yield dyad 12 because this combination is known to yield a long-lived charge-separated state efficiently.48–56 We expected that the intermolecular porphyrin–porphyrin and C60–C60 interactions rather than the intermolecular porphyrin–C60 interaction would prevail to form nanograins, where D and A moieties are arranged separately for efficient photocurrent generation. Utilization of a semiflexible, short methylene spacer between the porphyrin and C60 would be suitable to strengthen the desirable interactions.
 Fig. 8  Schematic self-assembly of porphyrin–C60 linked dyad 12 and f-SWNT to yield the corresponding ternary composites that are deposited on a SnO2 electrode. 
Rapid injection of a poor solvent into a good solvent containing 12 is used to accelerate the formation of D–A nanograins in the mixed solvent ((12)m) (step 1 in Fig. 8).88 More importantly, an addition of soluble functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (f-SWNT) as a molecular wire is anticipated to cross-link the D–A nanograins in the mixed solvent simultaneously ((12 + f-SWNT)m), enhancing the electric communication between the grains. Electrophoretic deposition of the ternary component aggregates onto a nanostructured SnO2 electrode allows us to fabricate a desirable 12–f-SWNT film on the electrode (step 2 in Fig. 8). So far the “wiring effect” of SWNTs between photoactive nanograins has yet to be investigated. As such, the ternary component system consisting of porphyrins, fullerenes, and SWNTs has not been constructed, although the binary systems have been widely utilized for photo- and electronic devices.89–98
At first, self-assembling behavior of 12 in an o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB)–acetonitrile mixture was investigated for the better understanding of the more complex 12–f-SWNT composite.88 Addition of poor solvent (acetonitrile) to the ODCB solution containing 12 leads to the red-shift and broadening of the absorption, suggesting the nanograin formation of 12. In accord with the absorption change, the field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) measurement of (12)m discloses unique ellipsoid-shaped nanograins, corroborating well-organized arrangement of 12 in the nanograins. Consistently, the XRD measurement of (12)m reveals a diffraction peak at low angle, corresponding to an inter-plane distance of ∼7 Å. This value can be assigned to the inter-plane distance between the porphyrins in which one of eight tert-butyl groups of one porphyrin is fit into a one-sided hollow center of another porphyrin surrounded by the four tert-butyl groups. This results in a slipped stacked J-aggregate of the porphyrin moieties, consistent with the red shift of the Soret band. A plausible molecular structure of (12)m optimized by the MM3 force field shows the formation of slipped stacked porphyrin arrays with an inter-plane distance of ∼7 Å, where the C60 moieties are also arranged continuously along the 1D porphyrin array.
To enhance the electric communication between the ellipsoid-shaped nanograins of (12)m, f-SWNT was self-organized with 12 in a similar manner.88 The FE-SEM image of (12 + f-SWNT)m reveals the expected morphology in which the ellipsoid-shaped nanoaggregates of (12)m are connected with f-SWNT. It is noteworthy that the self-assembly processes allow f-SWNT to just bridge between the ellipsoid-shaped nanograins without affecting the intrinsic morphology of (12)m. In accordance with the surface observation, the TRMC measurement on (12 + f-SWNT)m exhibits one order of magnitude higher transient conductivity than that of (12)m to yield a total mobility of 3.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is comparable to the value (3.2 cm2 V–1 s–1) of (f-SWNT)m. The improved mobility of (12 + f-SWNT)m can be interpreted by the occurrence of charge shift from the resulting C60˙− to f-SWNT, followed by bulk recombination of charge carriers during efficient electron transportation through f-SWNT. In consonance with the f-SWNT wiring, the maximum IPCE value (22%) of the photoelectrochemical device with (12 + f-SWNT)m is two times larger than that with the (12)m device.88 These results unambiguously corroborate that electric communication between the D–A nanoaggregates is enhanced remarkably by the SWNT wiring. The photocurrent generation mechanism was proposed as follows.88 At first, photoinduced ET occurs from the 1H2P* (1H2P*/H2P˙+ = −0.7 V vs. NHE) to the C60 moiety (C60/C60˙− = −0.4 V vs. NHE). Then, the C60 arrays mediate electrons to the CB of f-SWNT (c1 = −0.1 V vs. NHE). The superb electron mobility of f-SWNT facilitates the electron flow toward the SnO2 electrode (ECB = 0 V vs. NHE) by electrically wiring the ellipsoid-shaped nanograins of 12. On the other hand, the porphyrin arrays (H2P/H2P˙+ = 1.2 V vs. NHE) shift holes until the H2P˙+ accepts electrons from the I−/I3− redox couple (I−/I3− = 0.5 V vs. NHE) to regenerate the initial state. Finally, the electrons injected into the CB of the SnO2 nanocrystallines are driven to the counter electrode via external circuit to regenerate the I3–/I– redox couple.
Zamora, Gómez-Herrero, Torres and coworkers conducted self-assembly of covalently-linked phthalocyanine–C60 dyad 13 with SWNT (Fig. 9).99 When drop-cast on a silicon oxide surface on which SWNT is grown by catalyst-assisted chemical vapor deposition (SiO2/SWNT), dyad 13 is able to self-organize on SiO2/SWNT. On the basis of the atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies they proposed monolayer formation of 13 around SWNT where 13 adopts a radial, upright position with the C60 moiety interacting with SWNT as well as the other C60 moieties. Analogous π–π interactions between fullerenes and SWNTs have been described previously.92–94 It is intriguing to note that 13 on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) forms supramolecular films and micrometre-long fibers which possess outstanding nanoscale electrical conductivity values as high as 30 μA for bias voltages ranging from 0.30 to 0.55 V as revealed by conductive-AFM studies.100 The different organization behavior of 13 on SWNT and HOPG can be rationalized by the different carbon atoms' network in the two “substrates”, rolled in the case of SWNT and planar, 2D in the case of HOPG.
 Fig. 9  Molecular structure of 13. 
We also self-assembled C60 molecules into the inside of SWNT, the outside of which was further functionalized with zinc porphyrin (C60@SWNT–ZnP) (Fig. 10).101 Encapsulation of C60 into open-ended SWNT (p-SWNT) with diameters of 1.3–1.6 nm is conducted by a sublimation method (C60@SWNT). Then, surfactant-wrapped C60@SWNT is reacted with p-iodophenyl diazonium salt in aqueous solution, followed by treatment with the in situ generated diazonium salt in ODCB to yield pre-functionalized peapod with p-iodophenyl groups (C60@SWNT–PhI). Finally, Suzuki coupling reaction of C60@SWNT–PhI with zinc porphyrin boronic ester gives C60@SWNT–ZnP. TEM measurements verified that the inner space of SWNT is still well-packed by the encapsulated C60 molecules after the modification of outer skeleton under the intensive conditions. The AFM image of C60@SWNT–ZnP spin-coated on mica from DMF dispersion reveals fibrous structures with an average diameter of 4.5 nm, implying efficient debundling of C60@SWNT by the bulky ZnP units.
 Fig. 10  Preparation of C60@SWNT–ZnP ternary composite: (i) 4-iodobenzene diazonium tetrafluoroborate, then p-iodoaniline; (ii) 5-(pinacolboryl)-10,15,20-tris(3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)-porphyrinatozinc(II). 
The transient absorption component spectrum of p-SWNT–ZnP shows a negative signal in the full range of the measurement (500–1100 nm) with a lifetime (τ) of 0.3 ps.101 This signal can be assigned to the ground state photobleaching due to the SWNT absorptions of M11 (the lowest transitions between van Hove singularities in the valence band (VB) and CB of metallic SWNT) and S22 (the second lowest transitions in semiconducting SWNT). The spectrum of p-SWNT–PhI also exhibits a similar negative signal. Additionally, a broad and featureless positive absorption band in the visible region emerges in the spectra of p-SWNT–ZnP with τ of >1 ns. We have already shown that the photoelectrochemical device based on similar porphyrin–SWNT composites linked by the same phenylene spacer displays no photocurrent response by the porphyrin absorption, suggesting the formation of an exciplex from the porphyrin excited singlet state and subsequent rapid decay of the exciplex to the ground state.96 Therefore, this broad and featureless absorption in the visible region can be assigned to the exciplex state comprised of the ZnP and SWNT.102,103 The absorption changes recorded upon the excitation of C60@SWNT–ZnP at 420 nm differ from those of p-SWNT–ZnP.101 In addition to the negative signal of the ground state photobleaching of the C60@SWNT moiety, the exciplex absorption appears, but the lifetime (τ = 24 ps) is much shorter than that of p-SWNT–ZnP (τ = 1073 ps). Furthermore, an additional long-lived component (τ > 2 ns) with two minima at 560 and 600 nm emerges. Importantly, the third component exhibits weak positive absorption in the 650–750 nm region. Considering the similarity between this band and that of ZnP˙+, we can assign it as the charge-separated state. In contrast with p-SWNT–ZnP, where the resultant exciplex decays without forming the charge-separated state, C60@SWNT–ZnP generates the ZnP˙+ and the fullerene peapod radical anion after the exciplex formation. The energy level of the charge-separated state would become lower than that of the exciplex state by the inclusion of the fullerene molecules. It should be noted here that no clear signals for C60˙− at 1080 nm are observable. The lack of C60˙− detection may be rationalized by no occurrence of the consecutive ET from the exterior frame of SWNT to the encapsulated C60 or low molar absorption coefficient of C60˙− at 1080 nm. The differences in the photodynamics of C60@SWNT–ZnP and p-SWNT–ZnP highlight the effect of fullerene encapsulation on the electronic communications between the SWNT and ZnP in the excited state. Our results exemplify that the encapsulation of C60 into SWNT inner space has large impacts on the excited-state interactions between porphyrins and SWNTs. These results obtained here demonstrate that the inner space doping of SWNT will have considerable merit for tuning the electronic properties of SWNT in the hybrid materials with photoactive molecules for the applications in artificial photosynthesis and solar energy conversion.
3.2 Self-assembling porphyrin–nanoparticle–graphene ternary composites
Multistep ET in well-organized organic components is a general methodology to achieve efficient solar energy conversion in natural photosynthesis.48,51,53 However, in artificial photosynthetic systems it is still a challenge to organize suitable organic/inorganic components in a bottom-up manner, forming a hierarchical ET cascade on an electrode without impairing the intrinsic structures and functions.19 We exploited an approach to construct a multistep ET system exhibiting efficient photocurrent generation.104 The ET system on a SnO2 electrode involves quinoxaline-fused zinc porphyrin carboxylic acid 14,105 zinc oxide nanoparticle (ZnONP), and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) as D–A components (Fig. 11). The three components possess suitable redox potentials and excited states, which would facilitate the ET flow starting from 1ZnP* to the SnO2 electrode through ZnONP and RGO. They can be sequentially self-organized on a nanostructured SnO2 electrode, that is, (i) anchoring of the ZnONP on RGO as a 2D scaffold, (ii) adsorption of 14 on the ZnONP attached to RGO, (iii) electrophoretic deposition of the resulting organic/inorganic ternary composites onto sintered SnO2 nanoparticles on a fluorine-doped tin oxide transparent conducting electrode (FTO/SnO2).
 Fig. 11  Self-assembly of 14–ZnONP–RGO ternary composite on a SnO2 electrode and its photocurrent generation mechanism. 
The FE-SEM and TEM measurements reveal that the RGO sheets on the electrode are wrapped with ZnO nanoparticles that are further coated with ZnP molecules.104 These results suggest that the RGO sheets serve as a 2D network, which would be able to facilitate electron flow from the 14–ZnONP composites to the FTO/SnO2 electrode. Although the RGO sheets are randomly distributed in the composite film, this random network can still promote ET to the electrode after collecting electrons in the RGO sheets.
To demonstrate the effects of the ET cascade on the photocurrent generation efficiency, the IPCE values of the photoelectrochemical devices were compared under the same conditions.104 The action spectra closely resemble the corresponding absorption spectra of the electrodes. The IPCE value of the FTO/SnO2/(14)m device is larger considerably than that of the FTO/SnO2/(ZnONP)m and FTO/SnO2/(ZnONP + RGO)m electrodes, implying that direct electron injection from 1ZnP* to the CB of the SnO2 electrode has a significant impact on the photocurrent generation. The IPCE value of the FTO/SnO2/(14 + ZnONP)m electrode is enhanced remarkably compared with the FTO/SnO2/(ZnP)m electrode, demonstrating the large contribution to the photocurrent from an additional pathway that electron injection occurs from the 1ZnP* to the CB of the SnO2via ZnONP. The IPCE value of the FTO/SnO2/(14 + ZnONP + RGO)m electrode is further enhanced relative to the FTO/SnO2/(14 + ZnONP)m electrode, exemplifying that electron injection takes place from the 1ZnP* to the CB of the SnO2via ZnONP and/or RGO, improving the photocurrent generation. It should be emphasized that the maximum IPCE value of the FTO/SnO2/(14 + ZnONP + RGO)m electrode reaches ca. 70% at 440 nm under an applied potential of 0.05 V vs. SCE. Considering that the adsorbed amounts of 14 on RGO are comparable, the improvement results from the difference in the electron injection efficiency and/or electron collection efficiency due to the presence of the RGO and the better configuration for the photocurrent generation. These results imply that the hierarchical ET cascade system is responsible for the occurrence of multistep ET on the electrode, leading to efficient photocurrent generation through the ZnONP and RGO sheets in the device.
4. Self-assembly of porphyrins for dye-sensitized solar cells
Porphyrins and phthalocyanines have attracted much attention as a potential dye in DSSCs due to the crucial role of porphyrinoids in natural photosynthesis.10–16 In particular, porphyrins have exhibited η values of 5–12%,105–121 opening a new era for porphyrin DSSCs. Considering that dye fabrication on a TiO2 surface relies on the self-assembly process of the dye on the surface, it is of utmost importance to elucidate the close relationship between SAM structure, photophysics, and solar cell performance.
We examined the effects of porphyrin substituents and adsorption conditions (i.e. immersion solvent and immersion time) on the photovoltaic properties of porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 cells.122 5,10,15,20-Tetraphenylporphyrinatozinc(II) is chosen as a core structure of a sensitizer, because systematic substituents on the meso-phenyl groups allow us to evaluate the effects. One carboxy group is tethered to the meso-phenyl ring to ensure the single anchorage of the porphyrin molecule on a TiO2 surface where the porphyrin geometry is susceptible to the molecular structure as well as the adsorption conditions. We anticipated that the variations in the molecular structure and the adsorption conditions would have a large impact on molecular packing, geometry, and aggregation of the porphyrin molecules on the TiO2 electrodes, eventually affecting the photovoltaic properties.
To establish the cell performance of a reference system (i.e. ruthenium dye) under the present conditions using P-25 TiO2 nanoparticle, first we investigated immersion time dependence of the η value for the adsorption of N719 (0.2 mM) in a tert-butanol–acetonitrile mixture (1:1, v/v) (Fig. 12).122 The η value is increased gradually upon increasing the immersion time to reach a maximum η value of 6.5% in 12 h. Further increase of the immersion time (>12 h) does not change the η value. The dye packing density (Γ) is also increased upon increasing the immersion time to become saturated in 12 h (2.0 × 10−10 mol cm−2). The Γ value agrees with the corresponding value calculated for the densely-packed monolayer on TiO2. Accordingly, the immersion time profile of the η value correlates well with that of the η value. Moreover, the η value shows little dependency on immersion solvents (tert-butanol–acetonitrile mixture, dichloromethane, and methanol).
 Fig. 12  Molecular structures of ruthenium complex N719 and porphyrins 15 and 16 for DSSCs. 
Next, we assessed photovoltaic properties of the porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 cells using 15 and 16 as representative examples.122 As contrasted with the weak immersion solvent dependence of the η value in N719-sensitized TiO2 cells, the η value of 15-sensitized TiO2 cells displays strong dependency of the immersion solvents. The η value for the immersion time of 12 h is increased in the order of dimethylformamide (0.55%), dichloromethane (1.1%), tert-butanol–acetonitrile mixture (2.1%), ethanol (3.2%), and methanol (3.7%). The low Γ value on TiO2 for the adsorption in the non-protic solvents is responsible for the low η value. On the other hand, the large Γ value on TiO2 for the adsorption in the protic solvents, which corresponds to the densely-packed monolayer, indicates the significant contribution of the protic solvents to the self-assembly process of 15 on TiO2. To gain information on the binding mode of 15 adsorbed on the TiO2, attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra of the porphyrin monolayers were compared with the FTIR spectra of the corresponding porphyrin powder in a KBr pellet. The FTIR spectrum of 15 obtained from a solid sample reveals the characteristic band of ν(CO) of the carboxylic acid group at around 1700 cm−1.122 This diagnostic for the ν(CO) disappears for the ATR-FTIR spectra of TiO2/15. The ATR-FTIR spectrum of TiO2/15 exhibits a marked increase in the symmetric carboxylate band, ν(COOs−), at around 1400 cm−1. The disappearance of ν(CO) and the increased intensities of ν(COOs−) corroborate that a proton is detached from the carboxylic acid group during the adsorption of the porphyrin on the TiO2 surface, leading to the bidentate binding of the carboxylate group to the TiO2 surface. This is consistent with the previous assignment that a carboxylic acid of analogous porphyrins is bound to a TiO2 surface via a bridging bidentate mode106 together with the fact that X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurement for alike tetraphenylporphyrin with a carboxylic acid group provided evidence for the bidentate binding of the carboxylate group to the TiO2 surface.105,117–119
To further improve the solar cell performance of 15-sensitized TiO2 cells, immersion time dependence of the η value for the adsorption of 15 was examined in MeOH, which had yielded the maximum η value among all the immersion solvents under the same conditions.122 The η value is increased rapidly upon increasing the immersion time to reach a maximum η value of 4.6% in 1 h and then is decreased gradually to reach a constant η value of 3.7%. In line with the initial trend, the Γ value is also increased rapidly upon increasing the immersion time, but levels off in 1 h (Γ = 1.2 × 10−10 mol cm−2). The decrease in the η value for the long immersion time is attributed to the accelerated nonradiative decay due to the porphyrin aggregation.122 Intense aggregation tendency of 5-(4-carboxyphenyl)-10,15,20-triphenylporphyrinatoznic(II) on the TiO2 due to the smaller steric hindrance relative to 15 matches the remarkable decrease in the η value for the long immersion time.122
The η value of the present cell using 15 is ∼70% that of the N719-sensitized TiO2 cell (6.5%) under the present optimized conditions using P-25 TiO2 nanoparticle.122 It is noteworthy that integration of the IPCE values for the 15-sensitized TiO2 cell with respect to wavenumber is ∼70% that of the N719-sensitized TiO2 cell, which parallels the ratio of the η values in the two cells. IPCE value depends on light-harvesting efficiency, electron injection efficiency, and charge-collection efficiency. Taking into account the maximum IPCE values of 70–80% in the two cells, which approach to the limitation under the device conditions, both the electron injection efficiency and charge-collection efficiency are nearly optimized and comparable. Accordingly, the light-harvesting efficiency of the 15-sensitized TiO2 cell largely limits the cell performance. Overall, further increase in the performance of porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 cells is possible by improving the device fabrication as well as the light-harvesting property, as Grätzel and coworkers have achieved the high η value of 11–12% using highly light-harvesting push–pull porphyrins 17 and 18 (Fig. 13).110,113 It should be pointed out that the performance of the porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 cells strongly depends on the immersion solvent and immersion time, which is in marked contrast with N719-sensitized TiO2 cells. The high performance in ruthenium complex-sensitized TiO2 cells may originate from the robust geometry of ruthenium dyes on the TiO2 through more than two anchoring groups, while the rather flexible geometry of the porphyrin on the TiO2 through the single anchoring group may cause the susceptible cell performance, which is influenced greatly by the porphyrin substituents as well as the adsorption conditions.
 Fig. 13  Molecular structures of highly light-harvesting push–pull porphyrins 17 and 18 for DSSCs. 
To disclose the close relationship between the porphyrin geometry on TiO2, the photophysics, and the solar cell performance, transient absorption measurements were carried out for the porphyrin monolayer on TiO2 with acetonitrile without the iodide/triiodide couple.123,124 Under the experimental conditions, electron injection from the porphyrin excited singlet state to the CB of the TiO2 and charge recombination from the CB of the TiO2 to the porphyrin radical cation can be observed. At first we evaluated the effect of spacer length between the porphyrin core and the TiO2 surface on the electron injection and charge recombination. The ET kinetics of 15 with the phenylene spacer was compared to that of 16 with the biphenylene spacer. For instance, the transient absorption kinetics of 15 and 16 attached to the TiO2 in tert-butanol–acetonitrile as an immersion solvent for 1 h were measured over a time window of 500 ps. The two kinetic curves at 660 nm monitoring the zinc porphyrin radical cation show that 16 with the longer biphenylene spacer has faster electron injection (<0.1 ps (72%), 0.9 ps (18%) for 16vs. <0.1 ps (52%), 2.4 ps (18%) for 15) and faster charge recombination (43 ps (37%), 256 ps (32%) for 16vs. 59 ps (17%), 391 ps (18%) for 15), as well as a lower amplitude of a long-lived signal (>50 ns (32%) for 16vs. >50 ns (65%) for 15), accounting for long-lived charges, which can be harvested as photocurrent in a solar cell. In the operating cell, the long-lived porphyrin radical cation is quenched by I− in the electrolyte solution, leading to photocurrent generation. Therefore, the ratio of long-lived charges should correlate with solar cell performance. Actually, the η (2.4%) value of 16-sensitized TiO2 cells is lower than that (3.4%) of 15-sensitized TiO2 cells. Diau and coworkers as well as Mozer, Officer and coworkers also reported analogous fast charge recombination in porphyrin-modified TiO2 surfaces.125,126
How can one interpret the experimental result that both electron injection and recombination are overall faster for the sensitizer with the longer connecting spacer? If the porphyrins adopted perpendicular orientation to the TiO2 surface under the densely-packed conditions, the electron injection and charge recombination in TiO2/16 would be slower than those in TiO2/15 due to the weaker through-bond electronic coupling in TiO2/16 than TiO2/15. This assumption cannot explain the trend. Thus, we proposed tilted geometry of the porphyrins on TiO2.123,124 More tilted geometry of 16 to TiO2 relative to 15 rationalizes the faster electron injection and charge recombination of TiO2/16 than TiO2/15 as well as the smaller ratio of long-lived charges in TiO2/16 than TiO2/15 due to the stronger through-space electronic coupling of 16 than 15. TEM measurements on TiO2 nanoparticles sensitized with 15 and 16 provided support for the tilted binding geometry.123 The samples for the TEM measurements were prepared in the same way as for time resolved measurements, yielding complete monolayers of the porphyrins. The TEM images reveal ∼20 nm sized TiO2 nanoparticles, covered with a thin porphyrin layer with an average thickness of 1.0 ± 0.2 nm. Given that the molecular lengths of 15 and 16 along the long molecular axis are 2.0 nm and 2.4 nm, the tilted angles were estimated to be 53° for 15 and 60° for 16. This is consistent with our proposal as well as previous studies on porphyrin monolayers on metals and semiconducting surfaces.80,81 Officer and coworkers determined the orientation and molecular density for porphyrins adsorbed on planar TiO2 surfaces using X-ray reflectometry.127 Adsorbed porphyrin orientation, determined from computations constrained by the measured porphyrin layer thickness, was calculated to have a binding tilt angle of 50−55°, which is in good agreement with our tilt angles.
Remarkably, when TiO2/15 is prepared in methanol as an immersion solvent for 1 h, the time profile of absorbance at 660 nm discloses two slow rise components (5 ps (18%), 60 ps (43%)) in addition to a fast rise component (<0.1 ps (31%)) due to the formation of ZnP˙+.123 Moreover, the decay is very slow (547 ps (5%), >50 ns (95%)). Although the reason is not clear at present, the porphyrin molecule may adopt more upright geometry on the TiO2 surface with the aid of MeOH, resulting in the slow electron injection and charge recombination as well as large ratio of the long-lived charges, stemming from the weaker electronic coupling between the porphyrin core and the TiO2. As MeOH molecules can directly bind to the TiO2 surfaces,128,129 coadsorption of MeOH molecules in binding of the porphyrin carboxylate to the TiO2 surface may make the porphyrin geometry on the TiO2 more upright, weakening the electronic coupling between the porphyrin core and the TiO2. This also explains why the η (4.6%) value of 15-sensitized TiO2 cells prepared in methanol as an immersion solvent for 1 h is higher than that (3.4%) of 15-sensitized TiO2 cells prepared in tert-butanol–acetonitrile as an immersion solvent for 1 h.
Although the photophysics of phthalocyanine DSSCs has been studied,130,131 the close relationship between phthalocyanine SAM, photophysics, and solar cell performance remains unexplored.
5. Conclusions
The review has focused on recent advancement in self-assembly of porphyrins and phthalocyanines on electrodes toward the potential applications to OFETs and OPVs. A variety of approaches and concepts for self-assembling porphyrins and phthalocyanines have been described. To further improve photoinduced CS and charge-transporting properties of covalently or noncovalently linked D–A systems, minimum self-assembling units with smaller size should be introduced into either a donor or an acceptor or both, forming a bicontinuous D–A structure in a film state. More sophisticated preprogramed molecules will allow us to achieve such functions without difficulty in terms of synthesis and fabrication.
Regarding the adsorption of porphyrin carboxylic acid on semiconducting surfaces, they tend to adopt tilted geometry on the surfaces. By altering the substituent (i.e. spacer, anchoring group, bulkiness)132,133 and adsorption conditions (i.e. immersion solvent, immersion time, coadsorbent)134 both electron injection efficiency and electron collection efficiency can be optimized. Further optimization of solar cell performance may be possible by developing highly light-harvesting porphyrins (i.e. push–pull π-extension, unsymmetrically π-elongation13) as well as improving device structure and fabrication.135 In either case, novel porphyrinoids exhibiting better self-assembling properties could be excellent candidates for OFETs and OPVs.
Financial support from Grant-in-Aids (MEXT, Japan, No. 21350100 to H.I.), Strategic Japanese-Finnish Cooperative Program (JST), and Advanced Low Carbon Technology Research and Development Program (ALCA, JST) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references

          J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry, VCH, Weinheim,  1995 Search PubMed .

Bottom-up Nanofabrication, ed. K. Ariga and H. S. Nalwa, American Scientific Publishers, CA,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Hagefeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef .
A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pron, P. Gawrys, M. Zagorska, D. Djurado and R. Demadrille, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2577–2632 RSC .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS .

Organic Electronics, ed. H. Klauk, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, I. McCulloch, J. Rivnay and A. Salleo, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3–24 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mitschke and P. Bäuerle, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1471–1507 RSC .

The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2000 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Porphyrin Science, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, World Scientific, Singapore,  2010 Search PubMed .
W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer and K. W. Jolley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1363–1379 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Ito and T. Umeyama, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1809–1818 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, A. B. Rudine and C. C. Wamser, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2010, 14, 759–792 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martínez-Díaz, G. de la Torres and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090–7108 RSC .
J. N. Clifford, E. Martínez-Ferrero, A. Viterisi and E. Palomares, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1635–1646 RSC .
F. Würthner, Z. J. Chen, F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Osswald, C.-C. You, P. Jonkheijm, J. van Herrikhuyzen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, P. P. A. M. van der Schoot, E. W. Meijer, E. H. A. Beckers, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10611–10618 CrossRef .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Fukushima, Y. Suna, N. Ishii, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai and T. Aida, Science, 2006, 314, 1761–1764 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Doval, J. Areephong, E. K. Bang, L. Bertone, P. Charbonnaz, A. Fin, N. T. Lin, M. Lista, S. Matile, J. Montenegro, E. Orentas, N. Sakai, D. H. Tran and A. V. Jentzsch, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9696–9705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hizume, K. Tashiro, R. Charvet, Y. Yamamoto, A. Saeki, S. Seki and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6628–6629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Charvet, Y. Yamamoto, T. Sasaki, J. Kim, K. Kato, M. Takata, A. Saeki, S. Seki and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2012, 134, 2524–2527 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Ballantyne, L. Chen, J. Dane, T. Mammant, F. M. Braun, M. Heeney, W. Duffy, I. McCulloch, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2373–2380 CrossRef CAS .
R. Charvet, S. Acharya, J. P. Hill, M. Akada, M. Liao, S. Seki, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18030–18031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimizu, K. Oikawa, K. Nakayama and D. Guillon, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4223–4229 RSC .
B. M. Rosen, C. J. Wilson, D. A. Wilson, M. Peterca, M. R. Imam and V. Percec, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6275 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laschat, A. Baro, N. Steinke, F. Giesselmann, C. Hägele, G. Scalia, R. Judele, E. Kapatsina, S. Sauer, A. Schreivogel and M. Tosoni, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4832–4887 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kato, T. Yasuda, Y. Kamikawa and M. Yoshio, Chem. Commun., 2009, 729–739 RSC .
V. Percec, M. Gloddle, T. K. Bera, Y. Miura, I. Shiyanovskaya, K. D. Singer, V. S. K. Balagurusamy, P. A. Heiney, I. Schnell, A. Rapp, H.-W. Spiess, S. D. Hudson and H. I. Duan, Nature, 2002, 419, 384–387 CrossRef CAS .
P. Samori, X. Yin, N. Tchebotareva, Z. Wang, T. Pakula, F. Jäckel, M. D. Watson, A. Venturini, K. Müllen and J. P. Rabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3567–3575 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pisula, M. Kastler, D. Wasserfallen, J. W. F. Robertson, F. Nolde, C. Kohl and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 819–823 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tasios, C. Grigoriadis, M. R. Hansen, H. Wonneberger, C. Li, H. W. Spiess, K. Müllen and G. Floudas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7478–7487 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campidelli, P. Bourgun, B. Guintchin, J. Furrer, H. Stoeckli-Evans, I. M. Saez, J. W. Gooby and R. Deschenaux, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3574–3581 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-F. Nierengarten, M. Holler and R. Deschenaux, in Fullerenes, ed. F. Langa and J.-F. Nierengarten, RSC Publishing, Cambridge,  2012, ch. 5, pp. 162–191 Search PubMed .
G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6768–6816 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, J. Barbera and T. Torres, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 1475–1480 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, S.-W. Kang, S. Kumar, R. R. Kulkarni, S. Z. D. Cheng and Q. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3551–3553 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Geerts, O. Debever, C. Amato and S. Sergeyev, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2009, 5, 49 CrossRef .
H. Hayashi, W. Nihashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Seki, Y. Shimizu and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10736–10739 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ichihara, A. Suzuki, K. Hatsusaka and K. Ohta, Liq. Cryst., 2007, 34, 555–567 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ince, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, J. Barberá and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1531–1536 RSC .
C.-L. Wang, W.-B. Zhang, R. M. Van Horn, Y. Tu, X. Gong, S. Z. D. Cheng, Y. Sun, M. Tong, J. Seo, B. B. Y. Hsu and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2951–2956 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Melle-Franco and F. Zerbetto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5075–5080 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vazquez, T. Torres, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5811–5813 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, J. A. Suanzes, O. Trukhina and T. Torres, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 905–913 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, C. Granito and L. Troisi, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 965–968 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, I. Zilbermann, G. A. Anderson, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, R. Tafuro and L. Valli, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 303–309 RSC .
M. Li, S. Ishihara, M. Akada, M. Liao, L. Sang, J. P. Hill, V. Krishnam, Y. Ma and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7348–7351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6130–6143 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 525–536 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 31–41 RSC .
H. Imahori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 80, 621–636 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
S. Fukuzumi and T. Kojima, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1427–1439 RSC .
H. Imahori and T. Umeyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9029–9039 CAS .
H. Imahori and T. Umeyama, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 1063–1068 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 44–57 RSC .
T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12105–12112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, K. Hagiwara, M. Aoki, T. Akiyama, S. Taniguchi, T. Okada, M. Shirakawa and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 11771–11782 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Tkachenko, C. Guenther, H. Imahori, K. Tamaki, Y. Sakata, S. Fukuzumi and H. Lemmetyinen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 326, 344–350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, N. V. Tkachenko, V. Vehmanen, K. Tamaki, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 1750–1756 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vehmanen, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and H. Lemmetyinen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2001, 57, 2229–2244 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, T. Umeyama, M. Ueda, Y. Matano, H. Hotta, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, M. Shiro and H. Imahori, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2549–2552 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, M. Ueda, S. Kang, H. Hayashi, S. Hayashi, H. Kaji, S. Seki, A. Saeki, S. Tagawa, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, M. Shiro, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 10182–10193 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kaji, H. Hayashi, T. Yamada, M. Fukuchi, S. Fujimura, M. Ueda, S. Isoda, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113301 CrossRef .
T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi, S. Hattori and P. V. Kamat, Chem.–Asian J., 2007, 2, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riedel, E. von Hauff, J. Parisi, N. Martín, F. Giacalone and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1979–1987 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kira, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, M. Isosomppi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5497–5503 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1298–1299 RSC .
S. Shimizu, S. Nakano, T. Hosoya and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 316–318 RSC .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5526–5530 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25477–25484 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama and H. Imahori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 120–133 CAS .
G. M. A. Rahman, A. Troeger, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi, N. Jux, D. Balbino, M. N. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, A. Mateo-Alonso and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8837–8846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baba, T. Matsuzawa, S. Sriwichai, Y. Ohdaira, K. Shinbo, K. Kato, S. Phanichphant and F. Kaneko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14716–14721 CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Whiting, H. J. Snaith, S. Khodabakhsh, J. W. Andreasen, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 573–578 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sagawa, S. Yoshikawa and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kira, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda, J. K. Park, D. Kim and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3198–3200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, P. Thamyongkit, I. Schmidt, J. S. Lindsey and D. F. Bocian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12693–12704 CAS .
Y. Matsuo, Y. Sato, T. Niinomi, I. Soga, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16048–16050 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, P. V. Kamat, M. A. Absalom, Y. Kashiwagi, J. Sly, M. J. Crossley, K. Hosomizu, H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12865–12872 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, K. Saito, P. V. Kamat, V. Troiani, H. Qiu, N. Solladié, K. S. Kim, J. K. Park, D. Kim, F. D'Souza and S. Fukuzumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4160–4170 RSC .
T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Fujimoto, T. Hirakawa and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1216–1228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, C. Zhu, S. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Guo, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and Z. Bo, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 6895–6902 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama, T. Takamatsu, N. Tezuka, Y. Matano, Y. Araki, T. Wada, O. Yoshikawa, T. Sagawa, S. Yoshikawa and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10798–10806 CAS .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, F. Kawashima, S. Seki, Y. Matano, Y. Nakao, T. Shishido, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4615–4619 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22–36 RSC .
S. Fukuzumi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 2283–2297 RSC .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, M. Fujita, S. Hayashi, N. Kadota, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4875–4885 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama, N. Tezuka, S. Seki, Y. Matano, M. Nishi, K. Hirao, H. Lehtivuori, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Nakao, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, Adv.
Mater., 2010, 22, 1767–1770 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tezuka, T. Umeyama, S. Seki, Y. Matano, M. Nishi, K. Hirao and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3235–3247 CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Prato, N. Jux, S. Qin and W. Ford, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2015–2018 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama, M. Fujita, N. Tezuka, N. Kadota, Y. Matano, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11484–11493 CAS .
F. D'Souza, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2586–2593 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 86–96 RSC .
G. Bottari, D. Olea, V. López, C. Gomez-Navarro, F. Zamora, J. Gómez-Herrero and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4692–4694 RSC .
G. Bottari, D. Olea, C. Gomez-Navarro, F. Zamora, J. Gómez-Herrero and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2026–2031 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama, J. Mihara, H. Hayashi, N. Kadota, V. Chukharev, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda and H. Imahori, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11781–11783 RSC .
T. J. Kesti, N. V. Tkachenko, V. Vehmanen, H. Yamada, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8067–8077 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, J. Sonoda, K. Ohkubo, T. Sato, H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 8834 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hayashi, I. V. Lightcap, M. Tsujimoto, M. Takano, T. Umeyama, P. V. Kamat and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7684–7687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eu, S. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, Y. Araki and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4396–4405 CAS .
Q. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397–15409 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CAS .
C.-W. Lee, H.-P. Lu, C.-M. Lan, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-R. Liang, W.-N. Yen, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Lin, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1403–1412 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Lu, C.-Y. Tsai, W.-N. Yen, C.-P. Hsieh, C.-W. Lee, C.-Y. Yeh and E.
W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20990–20997 CAS .
T. Bessho, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C.-Y. Yeh, E. W.-G. Diau and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6646–6649 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Wang, Y.-C. Chang, C. M. Lan, C. F. Lo, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1788–1795 CAS .
Y.-C. Chang, C.-L. Wang, T.-Y. Pan, S.-H. Hong, C.-M. Lan, H.-H. Kuo, C.-F. Lo, H.-Y. Hsu, C.-Y. Lin and E. W.-G. Diau, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8910–8912 RSC .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Xiang, X. Feng, P. Shen, W. Zhou, C. Weng, B. Zhaoand and S. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2499–2501 RSC .
C. Y. Lee, C. She, N. C. Jeong and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6090–6092 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Lin, J. T. Dy, K. Tamaki, J. Nakazaki, D. Nakayama, S. Uchida, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4010–4012 RSC .
H. Imahori, Y. Matsubara, H. Iijima, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10656–10665 CAS .
A. Kira, Y. Matsubara, H. Iijima, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11293–11304 CAS .
S. Mathew, H. Iijima, Y. Toude, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, S. Ito, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14415–14424 CAS .
X.-F. Wang, H. Tamiaki, L. Wang, N. Tamai, O. Kitao, H. Zhou and S.-i. Sasaki, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6320–6327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ishida, S. W. Park, D. Hwang, Y. B. Koo, J. L. Sessler, D. Y. Kim and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19343–19354 CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Hayashi, H. Hayashi, A. Oguro, S. Eu, T. Umeyama and Y. Matano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18406–18413 CAS .
H. Imahori, S. Kang, H. Hayashi, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, S. Isoda, S. E. Canton, Y. Infahsaeng, A. Kathiravan, T. Pascher, P. Chábera, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3679–3690 CAS .

          H. Nêmec, E. Galoppini, H. Imahori and V. Sundström, Comprehensive Nanosci. Tech.,  2011, vol. 2, pp. 325–359 Search PubMed .
C.-W. Chang, L. Luo, C.-K. Chou, C.-F. Lo, C.-Y. Lin, C.-S. Hung, Y.-P. Lee and E.-W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11524–11531 CAS .
A. J. Mozer, M. J. Griffith, G. Tsekouras, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, S. Mori, K. Sunahara, M. Miyashita, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, L. Du, R. Katoh, A. Furube and D. Officer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15621–15623 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Griffith, M. James, G. Triani, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace and D. Officer, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12944–12950 CrossRef CAS .
C.-y. Wang, H. Groenzin and M. J. Shultz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
C.-y. Wang, H. Groenzin and M. J. Shultz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9736–9744 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morandeira, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, B. O'Regan, C. Shuttle, N. A. Haji-Zainulabidin, T. Torrres, E. Palomares and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9250–9251 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan, I. López-Duarte, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Forneli, J. Albero, A. Morandeira, E. Palomares, T. Torrres and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2906–2907 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kira, Y. Shibano, S. Kang, H. Hayashi, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Chem. Lett., 2010, 448–450 CrossRef CAS .
I. López-Duarte, M. Wang, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Ince, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Torrres and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1895–1898 CrossRef .
A. Allegrucci, N. A. Lewcenko, A. J. Mozer, L. Dennany, P. Wagner, D. L. Officer, K. Sunahara, S. Mori and L. Soiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1069–1073 CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. V. Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Hiroshi Imahori
	Hiroshi Imahori is Full Professor of the Graduate School of Engineering and Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University. He received JSPS Prize (2006), CSJ Award for Creative Work (2006), Osaka Science Prize (2007), and NISTEP Researcher Award (2007). His current interests involve artificial photosynthesis, molecular photovoltaics, organic functional materials, and drug delivery systems. To date, Hiroshi Imahori has written more than 250 papers and reviews.

Tomokazu Umeyama
	Tomokazu Umeyama was born in 1976 and studied chemistry at Kyoto University. He received his BS (1999), MS (2001), and PhD (2004) in polymer chemistry under the guidance of Prof. Y. Chujo. In 2004 he joined the group of Prof. H. Imahori as an Assistant Professor at Kyoto University. Since 2010 he has also been the researcher of JST-PRESTO. He received Osawa Award for Young Scientists (2010). His current interests involve functionalization of nanocarbon materials and their application to photoelectrochemical devices.

Kei Kurotobi
	Kei Kurotobi is Assistant Professor of Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, and obtained his PhD degree (2003) in Science from Yamaguchi University, with Professor Y. Sugihara on the subject of nonalternant hydrocarbon. He was postdoctoral fellow at the Graduate School of Science in Kyoto University with Professor A. Osuka (Porphyrin Chemistry), and at Institute for Chemical Research in Kyoto University with Y. Murata (Fullerene Chemistry).

Yuta Takano
	Yuta Takano is Assistant Professor of the Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University. He received a PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Takeshi Akasaka from Tsukuba University, Japan in 2010. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Life Science Center of Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance (TARA Center), University of Tsukuba until 2011. His current research interests are structural and physical organic chemistry of carbon nanostructures, mainly fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, and photofunctional molecules for cell biological hybrid materials.

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of 1 and 2 exhibiting top class ambipolar charge-transporting properties.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structures of 3 and 4.	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of 5 and related compounds for BHJ solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of 6 and 7 for supramolecular solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic view of vertically arranged D–A arrays on a flat SnO2 electrode and its photocurrent generation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of 8, 9 and SIMEF for BHJ solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular structures of 10 and 11 for BHJ solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic self-assembly of porphyrin–C60 linked dyad 12 and f-SWNT to yield the corresponding ternary composites that are deposited on a SnO2 electrode.	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular structure of 13.	 

 	Fig. 10  Preparation of C60@SWNT–ZnP ternary composite: (i) 4-iodobenzene diazonium tetrafluoroborate, then p-iodoaniline; (ii) 5-(pinacolboryl)-10,15,20-tris(3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)-porphyrinatozinc(II).	 

 	Fig. 11  Self-assembly of 14–ZnONP–RGO ternary composite on a SnO2 electrode and its photocurrent generation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structures of ruthenium complex N719 and porphyrins 15 and 16 for DSSCs.	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular structures of highly light-harvesting push–pull porphyrins 17 and 18 for DSSCs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
