When MoS 2 meets TiO 2 : facile synthesis strategies, hybrid nanostructures, synergistic properties, and photocatalytic applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01199E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01199E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8466-8482When MoS2 meets TiO2: facile synthesis strategies, hybrid nanostructures, synergistic properties, and photocatalytic applications

        
          
            Jinting 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Fu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qunjiao 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Su
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Polymer Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: suzq@mail.buct.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: weigroup@qdu.edu.cn
Received 
      16th March 2021
    , Accepted 27th May 2021First published on 1st June 2021AbstractAs one of the important photocatalysts for solving the energy crisis and environmental pollution, semiconductor titanium dioxide (TiO2) has attracted widespread attention and been widely studied due to its advantages, including pollution-free nature, nontoxicity, and high photoelectric conversion efficiency. It has essential applications in the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes and clean production of hydrogen. However, due to the wide bandgap of TiO2 and rapid photoinduced electron–hole recombination, the light utilization rate is under expectation. It was demonstrated that molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and TiO2 nanocomposites with excellent photocatalytic performance showed pronounced catalytic synergistic effects. This endows TiO2/MoS2-based nanocomposites with much better performance, expanding their application prospects in the fields of photocatalysis and rechargeable lithium/sodium-ion batteries. In this work, several typical preparation methods of TiO2/MoS2 hybrid materials are introduced in detail, including hydrothermal methods, atomic layer deposition methods and mechanochemical synthesis methods. The enhancement mechanisms of photocatalysts are also discussed. In addition, this work summarizes the new design schemes developed in recent years and provides various comprehensive construction strategies. Finally, the applications of TiO2/MoS2 composites in solar fuels, ion batteries, degradation of organic molecules, reduction of CO2 and multifunctional optical sensors are presented.
Gang Wei
Gang Wei is currently a full professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. From 2007 to 2011, he worked as a Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, and from 2012 to 2019, he worked as a senior researcher and group leader at the University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include nanomaterials, two-dimensional materials, biomaterials, supramolecular self-assembly, and biosensors. He has published 140+ papers in peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 6000 times with an H-index of 47.
Zhiqiang Su
Zhiqiang Su completed his PhD studies in 2005 at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After a postdoctoral stay at the Tsinghua University, he joined the Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2007 and was appointed as a full professor in 2012. In 2011 he studied at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Germany, as an experienced research fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. His research interests include nanohybrids, biomedical materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 130 papers in international peer-reviewed journals. His published papers have been cited more than 5000 times with an H-index of 45.
1. Introduction
With the energy crisis and environmental pollution becoming more and more serious, photocatalytic reactions that can effectively use solar energy to produce hydrogen and degrade pollutants are regarded as a new effective way to solve these problems.1–6 As one of the photocatalysts, TiO2 has been widely applied in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants7–15 and photocatalytic reduction of CO2. It is also applied in renewable hydrocarbon solar fuels,16–19 sensors,20,21 battery electrodes and supercapacitors.22–25 In addition, TiO2 has been widely studied and reported for its high activity, strong photocatalytic effects, non-toxicity, and low cost.26 However, due to its wide bandwidth (3.2 eV),27 a small range of ultraviolet light was absorbed, resulting in low solar energy utilization efficiency.19,27 Moreover, the rapid recombination rate of electrons and holes on the surface of TiO2 leads to low quantum efficiency,28 which makes improving its photocatalytic efficiency a hotspot for researchers at home and abroad.29–33
MoS2 is a typical graphene-type transition metal disulfide with excellent characteristics of great catalytic properties,34,35 which also has the advantages of high photoelectrochemical activity, high stability, low cost and non-toxicity.36 As another semiconductor photocatalytic material, it has gradually become the hotspot of new photocatalytic materials due to its few-layered structure and appropriate bandgap width (1.8 eV).37–40 Besides, a large number of literature studies have reported that TiO2/MoS2 composites showed excellent performance in photocatalysis. As a result, the TiO2/MoS2 system has also become a research hotspot in recent years.41–45 Its heterojunction structure can be formed by combining the TiO2 semiconductor with other matched energy bands. The lifespan of holes and photogenerated electrons was extended to enhance the photocatalytic capacity.45 In addition, hydroxyl radicals and superoxide radicals participate in photocatalytic reactions with high activity and strong oxidation. They can degrade many organic compounds through oxidation until they are entirely mineralized into small inorganic molecules such as CO2 and water.46 In addition to photodegradation, they can also be applied to produce sterilization and self-cleaning materials. By the way, MoS2 is a narrow bandgap (1.8 eV) semiconductor with a working function of 4.52 eV, while anatase TiO2 is a wide bandgap (3.2 eV) semiconductor with a working function of 4.5 eV.36,47 Compared with MoS2, the conduction potential of TiO2 is more negative. The electrons are knocked out of TiO2 and absorbed by MoS2, generating hydrogen using the active edge part. At the same time, the valence band potential of TiO2 is corrected to enable oxidation. Under visible light irradiation, electrons are excited from the valence band of MoS2 to the conduction band, leaving holes in the valence band. The photosensitive electrons in the MoS2 conduction band were transferred to the TiO2 conduction band. TiO2 was used as a photoelectron receiver in this reaction.
Based on previous studies, it is feasible to fabricate TiO2/MoS2 hybrid systems and improve their photocatalytic efficiency. For instance, Sabarinathan et al.48 synthesized 2D-layered MoS2 and MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites at a relatively low temperature (<200 °C). Their visible-light photocatalytic activity was evaluated through the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB). The characterization result showed that the degradation rate was more than three times that of pure MoS2 and TiO2, which indicated that the composites enhanced the photocatalytic degradation activity. Manan et al.49 prepared MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites in which TiO2 nanoparticles were modified with diverse concentrations of MoS2 nanoflakes. Their photocatalytic activity and photoelectrochemical activity were characterized by the photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) and solar water splitting. It was observed that both photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical activities were enhanced compared to those of the pure TiO2 nanoparticles. Moreover, the apparent photocatalytic reaction rate constant was about 17 times higher than that of pure TiO2 nanoparticles.
At present, the main application fields in the energy and environment of TiO2/MoS2 nanocomposites with enhanced photocatalytic activity are photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes and production of hydrogen. These fields can be extended to photocatalytic water-splitting for hydrogen production and conversion of biomass energy into hydrogen energy, and even for carbon dioxide photoreduction to produce carbon-based solar fuels and solar cells.46 Besides, the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes and industrial waste degradation to produce hydrogen, especially using those photocatalysts that remain highly photocatalytically active under visible light, have become hot topics in research and application.
In this work, TiO2/MoS2 hybrid materials are briefly introduced, including the enhancement mechanism and preparation methods for the photocatalytic performance of the hybrid system. Different synthesis routes will lead to different morphologies of photocatalysts as well as distinguishing their photocatalytic activity. Therefore, it is highly necessary to choose a suitable synthesis method to achieve anticipative targets. The preparation methods of composite materials were introduced and the mechanism of photocatalytic enhancement was discussed. Finally, the application development of this unique system in energy science and environmental protection is introduced and discussed.
2. Unique structures of TiO2 and MoS2
TiO2 is generally known as a cheap, non-toxic, highly stable material with the advantages of optimal whiteness and brightness, good photocatalytic performance, and a high UV absorption rate. It became a significant inorganic functional material50,51 and was widely used in coating,52 photocatalysis,53 cosmetics,54 and other fields.55–57 According to previous studies, there are four main polymorphisms of TiO2: rutile, anatase, brookite, and TiO2 bronze (TiO2-B).43,58 As shown in Fig. 1, these structures are composed of distorted TiO6 octahedrons. Six O2 anions surround each Ti4+ cation—the different arrangement of the octahedron in TiO6 results in its polymorphism of the structure. The TiO6 octahedron is contained in rutile, anatase, brookite, and TiO2-B, respectively. It is composed of shared edges, angles, angles and edges, and sheets and edges.16 Anatase can be regarded as a tetrahedral structure, while rutile and brookite can be considered as octahedral structures with lattice distortion. The bandgap of anatase TiO2 is slightly higher than that of rutile TiO2, and its stability is worse than that of rutile TiO2. At present, the most extensive research on TiO2 is still using it as a solar energy conversion material, mainly focusing on anatase and rutile.59,60 It is well known that the crystal structure or phase of TiO2 is one of the crucial factors for determining photocatalytic performance.61,62 The interstitial system and properties of polycrystalline materials directly affect the diffusion and storage of lithium and sodium ions. Different lattice structures also lead to discrepant electrical properties, leading to a discrepant performance in turn. As a typical semiconductor photocatalyst, TiO2 is often used in water cracking, biomass conversion, and industrial waste conversion for hydrogen production and carbon-based solar combustion.63,64 However, TiO2 can only absorb ultraviolet light within 380 nm, and the surface electron–hole recombination efficiency is fast, so its application is limited to a certain extent.
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures of TiO2 polymorphs: (a) anatase, (b) rutile, (c) brookite, and (d) TiO2-B. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
As a typical graphene-like transition metal disulfide, MoS2 has good photoelectric and catalytic properties.47,65 The single or several layers of two-dimensional graphene-like nanomaterials can be obtained by mechanical stripping, chemical stripping, and chemical reactions. The structure of the single-layer MoS2 is composed of three S–Mo–S atomic layers. The intermediate layer is the molybdenum atomic layer, sandwiched between the upper and lower layers of sulfur atomic layers, similar to the sandwich structure. The space between the two adjacent layers is 0.65 nm, and van der Waals force plays a significant role in holding together each layer.65 According to previous studies, MoS2 has three main crystal structure types, 1T-MoS2, 2H-MoS2, and 3R-MoS2, with different layers per repeat unit (the same as the number) and symmetry (shown as in Fig. 2).66 1T-MoS2 is metastable with a tetragonal symmetry and octahedral structure. It shows metal properties. However, stable-type 2H-MoS2 shows semiconductor properties with a hexagonal symmetry and trigonal prismatic structure.65,67 3R-MoS2 is a steady-state material with a rhombohedral symmetry and triangular prism structure. Specifically, 2H-MoS2 is more prevalent in photocatalytic applications.67
 Fig. 2  Polytype structure of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
When MoS2 itself is used as a photocatalyst, its photocatalytic efficiency is not high because its absorption wavelength range is narrow and sunlight cannot be fully utilized.68 When MoS2 is used as a photocatalyst in reactions combined with other semiconductor materials, even as a co-catalyst or carrier, synergistic effects of two or three materials will be generated to improve the photocatalytic efficiency.69 With the study of MoS2, it is found that it has advantages including variable thickness, the regulation of the forbidden bandwidth, and a unique structure, so the main applications of MoS2 are in the field of photocatalysis.69 Mainly due to the nature of the two aspects of MoS2, one is its optical properties and the other is its photoelectric properties, its layers have a close relationship. When the number of layers reduces, the bandgap widens and a blue shift of the absorption peak extended their absorption spectra and fluorescence intensity enhancement. The photocatalytic activity of pure MoS2 was mainly in the edge region because the active sites on the edge contain abundant catalytic sites for hydrogen evolution, accepting transformation of electrons into hydrogen (H2).
3. Synthesis of 3D MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites
The MoS2 catalyst and MoS2/TiO2 composite photocatalyst have been extensively studied. They were compounded via simple and high-temperature hydrothermal methods, mechanochemical methods, and deposition techniques. This section focuses on recent studies on the synthesis of MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites, such as hydrothermal methods, photodeposition, and ball-milling methods. The advantages and disadvantages of these methods will be discussed in this section.
3.1 Hydrothermal methods
Hydrothermal method belongs to the category of liquid chemical methods. The processes are always carried out in sealed pressure vessels, with water as the solvent, under the conditions of high temperature and high pressure. Commonly, after the heat treatment with extended high temperature, sediments are collected, washed and dried to obtain the required sample. These methods have been widely used to modify TiO2 on the MoS2 surface. By controlling the reaction conditions, the morphology, size, and properties of TiO2 can be flexibly adjusted.
Using titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP) as a titanium source, Manan et al.49 synthesized MoS2–TiO2 nanocomposites under certain conditions. TiO2 was loaded with various concentrations of MoS2 nanoflakes via a special two-step hydrothermal synthesis method. Inspired by a wet chemical method, the TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared, while MoS2 nanoflakes were obtained through a hydrothermal process. Based on the degradation experiment of Rhodamine B (RhB), the nanocomposite with 7.5 wt% MoS2 nanoflakes showed the highest photocatalytic and enhanced photoelectrochemical activity, and an excellent photocatalytic reaction rate constant. It was even about 17 times higher than that of pure TiO2 nanoparticles.
Li et al.70 synthesized few-layered MoS2/TiO2 ultrathin nanobelt hybrid composites through hydrothermal treatment, using titanium(IV) butoxide (TB) as a titanium source. Both layered MoS2 nanosheets and ultrafine TiO2 nanobelts were synthesized via hydrothermal treatment. As expected the results indicated that the MoS2/TiO2 nanobelt heterostructures can completely degrade methyl orange (MO) within 15 min and 120 min under UV and visible light irradiation, respectively, while for pure P25, it was about 91.0% under UV irradiation, and for pure MoS2 nanosheets it was about 73.1% under visible light irradiation. The photocatalytic spectrum range of the composite was broadened from UV to visible. The photocatalytic activity was also enhanced. Chen et al.22 prepared 3D mesoporous few-layered (<4 layers) MoS2-coated F-TiO2 core–shell nanocomposites (3D FL-MoS2/TiO2) by a multi-step hydrothermal method. First, fluorinated TiO2 nanosheets (F-TiO2) with smooth surfaces were prepared by the hydrothermal method using tetrabutyl titanate (Ti-(OC4H9)4) as a titanium source under the action of hydrofluoric acid (HF). The smooth TiO2 nanosheets played the role of a template and glucose played the role of the binder, using sodium molybdate and thiourea as the molybdenum and sulfur sources. A black residue was obtained after washing and drying. After the hydrothermal reaction, the as-prepared products were calcined at 800 °C and under an atmosphere of H2 and argon (Ar2), 3D FL-MoS2/TiO2 was finally synthesized. The synthesis process is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Synthesis process of 3D FL-MoS2/TiO2. (a) F-TiO2. (b) C6H12O6-F-TiO2. (c) Adsorbed by MoO42−. (d) Prefabricated products. (e) 3D FL-MoS2/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Used as LIBs harmful electrode material, the material showed excellent cycling performance. The charge capacity changed from 744.3 mA h g−1 to 713.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles and the capacity retention was about 96%, which means a stable cycling performance and high-rate capability of the nanocomposites. Liu et al.71 have reported a nanocomposite of a 3D flower-like black N-TiO2−x/MoS2 core–shell nanostructure.
Using tetrabutyl titanate (TBOT) as a titanium source and urea as a nitrogen source, nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanospheres (N-TiO2) were first prepared by the typical hydrothermal method. Using the hydrothermal method, with molybdenum oxide (MoO2) and potassium thiocyanate, 3D flow-colored TiO2/MoS2 composite materials were prepared. After calcination at 350 °C under an Ar2 atmosphere, N-TiO2 was reduced to TiO2−x. The 3D flower-like N-TiO2−x/MoS2 heterostructure was finally obtained. The schematic diagram of this method is shown in Fig. 4. The results suggested that the co-photocatalyst can effectively utilize visible light and solar energy to degrade MO and photocatalytically produce hydrogen. The photocatalytic hydrogen production rate was about 1.882 mmol h−1 g−1 which was significantly higher than those of TiO2, N-TiO2, and MoS2 materials, while the degradation rate of MO was as high as 91.8%.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis diagram of N-TiO2−x/MoS2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
3.2 Atomic layer deposition
Advanced nanotechnology, the technique of atomic layer deposition (ALD), has been widely used to prepare electrode materials and in nanometer titanium dioxide coating, for example, to control the thickness of interfacial layer deposition.72 Using two precursors, titanium chloride (TiCl4) and water (H2O), as examples, the schematic illustration of a typical ALD process of TiO2 and the detailed procedure are shown in Fig. 5.73
 Fig. 5  A schematic typical ALD process of TiO2 using TiCl4 and H2O as precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
According to the research, Ren et al.74 utilized TiCl4 and H2O as Ti and O sources to prepare ultrathin TiO2-modified MoS2 nanosheets by the atomic layer deposition process. The schematic diagram of the description process is shown in Fig. 6. The thickness of the TiO2 layer could be controlled by controlling the deposition. The method can be used to prepare uniform TiO2 particles. This ALD TiO2 layer enhanced both cycling stability and rate capability according to the result of electrochemical measurements. The highest initial discharge capacity of the composite was up to 1392 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 and after 150 cycles, at 200 mA h g−1, the capacity retention rate remained at 75.8% capacity of the second cycle. Moreover, atomic layer deposition has shown enormous potential in constructing nanostructured materials, for instance, using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques. Mawlong et al.75 have prepared a monolayer MoS2 (1L-MoS2) on the core of TiO2 nanorods (NRs) through hydrothermal treatment with a core–shell heterostructure, in which 1L-MoS2 was grown directly on it by chemical vapor deposition. They also demonstrated a new and simple technique to control the populations of non-radiative trichomes and radiative neutral excitons in MoS2 monolayers to improve the photoluminescence (PL). The heterostructure showed a substantial enhancement even about two orders of magnitude in photoluminescence intensity than that of pristine 1L-MoS2 at room temperature.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of description processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Using this method is beneficial to control the quantum number and thickness of the deposition layer. Du et al.76 have grown few-layered MoS2 nanosheets (3–7 layers) in the 3D mesoporous TiO2 nanoparticles via a chemical bath method. They fabricated a rigid vertical heterostructure with enhanced photovoltaic performance, using solar cells as photoanodes. The photovoltaic performance of the sample was significantly enhanced. As the solar cells of the MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites were annealed at 300 °C, the short circuit current density (Jsc) was improved from 1.2 to 3.6 mA cm−2, compared with the non-annealed one. Besides, a power conversion efficiency of 1.08% was achieved. The increased photovoltaic conversion efficiency was attributed to the enhanced light absorption intensity and suppressed recombination by annealing and reasonable regulation and control of the amount of MoS2 stacking.
3.3 Mechanochemical synthesis
At present, photocatalysts using MoS2 could be obtained in different ways. Besides, the high-temperature calcination method, hydrothermal method, chemical bath deposition, photo-deposition techniques, and mechanochemical synthesis are also energy-saving methods and simple approaches with high efficiency. The above methods have many shortcomings, such as the complexity of reaction processes, severe secondary pollution, high cost and incomplete reduction. For example, as a very common method, the hydrothermal method is simple, but it involves high temperature and high pressure with safety risks to some extent. By comparison, ball-milling as a mechanochemical method is a highly efficient and energy-saving technique. It is used to prepare composite photocatalysts, which can initiate chemical reactions and induce changes in the material structure and performance. This method has obvious advantages such as decreasing the activation energy of reactions, refining crystal particles, enhancing the activity of materials, improving the homogeneity of particles, and strengthening the interfacial bonding within different materials. In recent years, many highly active or wide-absorption range composite photocatalysts have been synthesized via ball-milling. Zhu et al.77 synthesized MoS2-TiO2 composite photocatalysts using ball-milling with disparate ball-milling speeds. The composites exhibited substantial photocatalytic performance in the H2 evolution reaction. The rate of H2 evolution was raised to 150.7 mmol h−1, 48.6 times higher than pure TiO2. Photoelectrochemical measurements demonstrated that the separation and transfer of photo-generated electrons and holes were rapid and the photocatalytic activity was promoted. Furthermore, the photocatalytic stability was also evaluated by H2 evolution experiments for about 18 h, measuring every 6 hours, and the H2 evolution was almost the same, which indicated the good stability of the photocatalyst.
4. TiO2/MoS2 hybrid nanomaterials
The luminescence of hybrid nanomaterials is different from that of conventional materials due to their typical quantum size effect and surface effect.78 As the size of nanoparticles decreases, their quantum size effect and surface effect lead to increased effective bandgaps, leading to the expansion of light absorption of TiO2 semiconductor nanoparticles to a shorter wavelength compared with the TiO2 bulk materials that absorb long-wavelength light. TiO2 nanomaterials with different morphologies and structures led to size effects and interfacial effects. These affected their photocatalytic activity and efficiency.78,79 Therefore, numerous controllable syntheses were designed to fabricate TiO2 nanomaterials with well-defined morphology and size. They include nanoparticles,80,81 hierarchical nanospheres,82 nanotubes,83 nanosheets84 and other morphologies.85 Distinct morphologies resulted in diverse photocatalytic performance. A brief introduction of the preparation methods and differences of TiO2 nanomaterials with different morphologies in photocatalysis applications is given in Table 1.
Table 1 Preparation methods of TiO2 nanomaterials with different morphologies in photocatalysis applications




Composites
Methods
Mo sources/Ti sources
Conditions
Ref.




TiO2 nanoparticles/MoS2 nanoflakes
Two-step hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O (TTIP)
Sintered at 400 °C for 4 h

49



TiO2 nanospheres/MoS2 nanosheets (NSs)
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O titanium isopropoxide (TIP)
Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 4 h

86



N-TiO2-x nanospheres/MoS2 nanosheets core–shell
Hydrothermal reaction and in situ solid-state chemical reduction method
MoO3 TBOT
Magnetic stirring for 1 h, heated at 200 °C for 18 h, then calcined at 350 °C for 2 h

71



Hollow C/TiO2/MoS2 hierarchical nanospheres
Hydrothermal treatment
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O TTIP
Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 6 h and annealed at 700 °C for 2 h

87



Mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres
Targeted etching and low-temperature hydrothermal strategy
Ti(OiPr)4
Hydrothermal reaction at 110 °C for 4 h and calcined at 350 °C for 2 h

88



MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanofibers (NFs)
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OC4H9)4
Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 24 h

89



MoS2/CdS/TiO2/C nanofibers
Electrospinning process and thermal treatment
Ti(OiPr)4
Electrospinning and calcination at 800 °C for 3 h

90



MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanofibers
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OiPr)4
Hydrothermal reaction at 220 °C for 24 h and dried at 80 °C for 12 h

91



TiO2 nanobelts/MoS2 nanosheets
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O TiO2 powder
Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h

92



1L-MoS2/TiO2 nanorods (NRs)
Two-zone furnace CVD system
MoO3 TIP
Heated at 150 °C, 550–600 °C and 700 °C, respectively, and then cooled down

75



CFs/TiO2 nanorods/MoS2 nanosheets
Hydrothermal treatment
Sodium molybdate
Hydrothermal treatment at 160 °C for 18 h

68



TiO2 nanorods/CdS nanocrystals (NCs)/MoS2 nanosheets
Chemical bath deposition technique
Titanium butoxide
1.5 mL MoS2 NS ethanol solution and CdS CBD solution.

93



1T-MoS2 nanosheets on TiO2 nanorod arrays (NAs)
Hydrothermal treatment and drop-casting method
Bulk MoS2 Ti(OBu)4
MoS2 were deposited on the TiO2 NAs and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min

94



MoS2 nanoflower/TiO2(B) nanobelts
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O TiO2 powder
Hydrothermal treatment at 240 °C for 24 h and dried at 50 °C for 12 h

11



Few-layered MoS2/mesoporous TiO2 3D network
Chemical bath method
Na2MoO4·2H2O
The solution was stirred and heated at 90 °C with hydrazine hydrate and then annealed in an Ar atmosphere

76



3 layers TiO2/carbon/MoS2 nanotubes
Step-by-step hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O TIP
Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h

95



MoS2 quantum dots/TiO2 nanotube arrays (NTAs)
Electrodeposition method
H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O
Using TiO2 NTAs/Ti foil, Pt foil and saturated Ag/AgCl electrode as electrodes

96



1T-MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanotube arrays
Electrochemical anodic oxidation and hydrothermal treatment
H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti foil
Hydrothermal treatment at 220 °C for 24 h

97



Pt/VA-MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanotube arrays
Two-step anodization and hydrothermal treatment
H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti foil
Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 6, 12, 24 h

98



MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanosheets/GF
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OBu)4
Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 24 h

99



MoS2 QDs/TiO2 nanosheets
Hydrothermal treatment
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti(OBu)4
Stirred for another 24 hours and dried at 60 °C for 12 hours

100



TiO2 nanodrums coupled with MoS2
Hydrothermal treatment
Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OBu)4
Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h

101





4.1 TiO2 nanospheres
The enhancement of the photocatalytic performance of composites was mainly due to the suppression of the photogenic carrier compound at the heterogeneous junction interface. The effective separation of photocarriers at the heterojunction interface is related to the effective contact area of the heterojunction, so increasing the effective contact area is beneficial to construct an efficient heterojunction.79
The mesoporous structure of nanospheres always provides a large specific surface area and contact area. Zhao et al.86 successfully prepared 1T- and 2H-mixed phase MoS2 nanosheets. They hybridized the nanosheets with hollow mesoporous TiO2 nanospheres via a series of hydrothermal methods and template-based methods. The open mesoporous structure of TiO2 with a larger specific surface area, sufficient transportation, and active reaction sites improved the reaction efficiency. The 1T- and 2H-mixed phase MoS2 nanosheets exhibit more efficient separation of charge carriers and transient photocurrent response than 2H-MoS2 nanosheets. 1T-MoS2 principally played the role of a bridge that was beneficial to photoexcited electron transfer. In addition, the heterojunction of MoS2 and TiO2 played an important role in restraining the recombination in photocatalytic reactions of the photogenerated charge carriers. As a result, the hollow porous TiO2 nanospheres displayed a tremendous photocatalytic activity in degrading RhB. The preparation process diagram is shown in Fig. 7(a).
 Fig. 7  Preparation diagram of (a) hollow mesoporous TiO2/MoS2 nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) TiO2 NR/CdS NC/MoS2 NS composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) TiO2/NC/MoS2 tubular nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (d) MoS2 QD/TiO2 NTA heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
4.2 TiO2 nanorods
In these various morphologies of TiO2, one-dimensional nanorods and nanofibers with a specific aspect ratio do not easily agglomerate typically, providing considerable specific surface area at the same time. Mawlong et al.75 have demonstrated an immediate and straightforward one-step synthesis process for a core–shell heterostructure (HS) of monolayer- to single-layer MoS2 (1L-MoS2) on vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods (NRs). The TiO2 nanorods (NRs) were manufactured on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates via a simple hydrothermal method. Simultaneously, monolayer- to few-layered MoS2 shells were deposited over the TiO2 NRs directly by a two-zone furnace chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to form the heterojunction. The core–shell heterojunction structure of TiO2 NR/1L-MoS2 demonstrated a visible enhancement of PL intensity by nearly two orders of magnitude compared to the pristine monolayer MoS2 at room temperature. First, the appreciable enhancement of excitonic PL emission can be attributed to the p-doping of the bare MoS2 lattice, increasing the neutral exciton emission and restraining the trion emission. What's more, owing to the radiative recombination of excitons dominating over the population of nonradiative trions in the HS, the PL emission was strengthened at room temperature, as confirmed by PL analysis. Bhat et al.93 fabricated a 1D TiO2 nanorod (NR)/0D cadmium sulphide (CdS) nanocrystal (NC)/2D MoS2 nanosheet (NS) heterojunction via a multistep solution process. It could be applied to hydrogen fuel through a photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting reaction. The TiO2 NRs were prepared on an FTO substrate via a simple hydrothermal technique to enhance the electrical conductivity. Simultaneously, the CdS NCs and MoS2 NSs were deposited on the TiO2 NRs step-by-step utilizing the chemical bath deposition (CBD) technique. The preparation process diagram is shown in Fig. 7(b). In this work, the MoS2 NSs functioned as a hole capturing material to speed up the transfer of holes from CdS to the electrolyte. They facilitated faster charge separation in the photoanodes of the TiO2/CdS heterojunction. Furthermore, the photoluminescence lifetime was prolonged according to the time-resolved photoluminescence measurements. Consequently, it acted as a potential anode in PEC water splitting. This TiO2 NR/CdS NC/MoS2 NS heterojunction exhibited remarkable photocurrent density and PEC activity against the TiO2/CdS photoanode.
4.3 TiO2 nanotubes
The hierarchical hollow nanostructures and internal voids benefit from accommodating large volume changes and providing countless bonding sites in electrochemical reactions. Wang et al.95 have rationally designed and prepared three-layered TiO2/nitrogen-doped carbon (NC)/MoS2 tubular nanostructures via a step-by-step method. The multistep synthesis process for the nanomaterial is shown in Fig. 7(c). The first step is to yield the core–shell manganese dioxide (MnO2)/TiO2 nanowires. Then, a layer of polydopamine (PDA) is deposited to produce coaxial MnO2/TiO2/PDA nanowires. The MnO2 templates are removed after being carbonized in a nitrogen (N2) atmosphere and treated with acid. Moreover, the outer PDA layer is converted into the NC shell. In the end, through a convenient hydrothermal reaction and annealing process, a layer of ultrathin MoS2 nanosheets is grown on the surface of the TiO2/NC nanotubes to accomplish the three-layered hierarchical TiO2/NC/MoS2 tubular nanostructures. As expected, the hybrid TiO2/carbon/MoS2 nanomaterial showed remarkable lithium storage performance in terms of high capacity, good rate performance, and long cycle life.
Compared to the “top-down” route that has many limitations, the “bottom-up” method is usually used in more extensive applications due to its pollution-free nature and low cost. Wang et al.96 prepared MoS2 quantum dot (QD)/TiO2 nanotube array (NTA) nanocomposite materials. The TiO2 NTAs were decorated with MoS2 QDs via a convenient and straightforward electrodeposition method as shown in Fig. 7(d).
The composite photocatalysts revealed extended spectrum-driven photocatalysts and enhanced photocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution of solar photocatalysis water splitting under UV-visible-NIR light irradiation without sacrificial agents. These MoS2 QDs, synthesized by the standard hydrothermal method, exhibited particular optical and electrical performance with more significant edge effects and quantum confinement. The influence of the amount and size of MoS2 QDs deposited on TiO2 NTAs has been discussed. The results indicated that the appropriate amount and optimized size of MoS2 QDs accelerated the separation efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs and extended the absorbable spectral range. This led to enhanced photocatalytic activity compared to that of pristine TiO2 NTAs. It is worth mentioning that the localized surface plasmon resonance played a dominant role in solar photocatalysis hydrogen evolution.
4.4 Other hybrids with TiO2/MoS2
For TiO2/MoS2 co-photocatalysts, the number of exposed active edges of MoS2 NSs that provide active sites always plays a significant role in the catalytic activity of MoS2. It is an effective method to place a single layer or several layers of MoS2 nanosheets vertically on the substrate like TiO2 nanofibers to maximize edge position exposure and boost photocatalytic activity. Liu et al.91 have manufactured MoS2/TiO2 nanocomposites with vertical single or fewer layers of MoS2 nanosheets to increase the number of exposed active edges. The TiO2 nanofibers played a role in foundation via a simple hydrothermal reaction. Based on the photocatalytic hydrogen production tests and photoelectrochemical measurements, it was evident that MoS2 nanosheets had a positive synergetic impact on both. The growth mode that MoS2 nanosheets root into the TiO2 nanofibers resulted in a stable adhesion and overlap reduction. It fell off of multiple slices, which is beneficial to effective electron transfer. The higher Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) area and broader absorption in the visible light region than pure TiO2 more significantly enhanced the photocatalytic performance. It achieved high photocatalytic hydrogen production rates and high durability.
In addition to the regulation and control of the dimensionality of hybrid materials, the selection of crystal facets also significantly influences the photocatalytic activity of nanocomposites.102–105 Chen et al.101 have compounded curved surface TiO2 nanodrum/2D MoS2 (CTMS) nanocomposites decorated with anatase structured TiO2 nanodrums with an exposed curved surface which showed greater photocatalytic activity than the {001} and {101} facets. The TiO2 nanodrums (CTO) and few-layered MoS2 were fabricated via a regular hydrothermal process. The MoS2/CTO nanocomposites with heterojunctions were synthesized through a different hydrothermal method. The photocatalytic properties of the heterostructure were investigated using the MB degradation test, indicating that the CTMS photocatalyst shows a substantial improvement in photocatalytic activity as much as 80% of pristine TiO2 nanodrums.
5. Synergistic photocatalysis mechanisms of TiO2 and MoS2
In a nutshell, a photocatalytic reaction is a series of redox reactions of electrons, ions, and free radicals produced by semiconductor materials under light irradiation or excitation.52 For example, when TiO2 is irradiated by incident light with an energy of 380 nm or more, the electrons (e−) in the valence band (VB) with low power will gain energy transition to the conduction band (CB) with a high energy level, corresponding to the photogenerated holes (h+), resulting in the formation of an electric field inside TiO2. The electrons and holes migrate to different active sites of materials, the pollutants degrade, and REDOX reactions will occur according to other photocatalytic reaction systems.
The generation, migration, and recombination of photocarriers, and chemical reactions on the surface of materials play a vital role in the photocatalytic efficiency of semiconductor materials. After being excited by light radiation, the separation, migration, and recombination of holes and electrons always exist in the whole process of the semiconductor photocatalytic reaction. There is a competitive relationship between them, the result of which will affect the efficiency of the photocatalyst. Therefore, it is necessary to enhance the photocatalytic activity of semiconductor materials by improving the utilization ratio of the light source and the electron transport rate and inhibiting the photogenic charge composite.
5.1 Photocatalysis mechanisms of pure TiO2
TiO2 has been used in many semiconductor photocatalysts because of its advantages such as anti-optical corrosion, high catalytic activity, non-toxicity and low price. The forbidden bandwidth of titanium dioxide (anatase) is about 3.2 eV. Its 3d orbital splits into two vacant orbitals, eg and t2g, while the electrons occupy the s and p energy levels. The lowest guide band and the highest valence band are composed of Ti 3d and O 2p. The basic photocatalytic process of titanium dioxide has been generally recognized by researchers, as shown in Fig. 8(a). When the surface of the semiconductor TiO2 by energy is greater than or equal to the TiO2 forbidden bandwidth of light, then the electron transition occurs. Commonly, part of the electron transition to the corresponding conduction band and valence band causes cavitation, leading to the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. After that, the photoelectrons and holes begin to spread. In the transition process, one part of the photoelectrons and holes would recombine before they spread to the surface of TiO2. At the same time, the other part of the light electrons and holes spread to the surface of the TiO2 photocatalyst and composites to produce oxidation and reduction reactions, and finally, release in the form of light energy or heat energy. Only a small part of the charge plays a role, in which the holes interact with H2O or OH− to generate active self-organic groups (HO˙).78,106 Hydroxyl radicals and superoxide radicals are both active species. They participate in photocatalytic reactions with high activity and strong oxidizing properties.61 The electrons interact with oxygen in the water to generate active free radical groups. The holes and hydroxyl radicals have a strong oxidizing capacity. They can degrade many organic compounds through oxidation and directly oxidize the organic matter to CO2 and H2O.52 However, the electron–hole pairs generated by TiO2 can be compounded in a short time when TiO2 is excited by UV light, resulting in low catalytic efficiency of TiO2.105–107
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) the photocatalysis mechanism of TiO2 and (b) the enhanced mechanism of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Degradation mechanism of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
This critical factor leads to low photocatalytic efficiency. Under this condition, the photogenerated electrons and holes can recombine in a short time and inhibit the recombination of electrons and holes. The heterojunction structure of TiO2 semiconductor combined with other matched energy bands could extend the lifespan of the photogenerated electrons and holes so that the photocatalytic capacity could be enhanced.
MoS2 can absorb photons of the visible light frequency with high edge potential of the conduction band and valence band, which is very conducive to the separation of charge carriers. Thus, compared with the traditional TiO2 catalyst, MoS2 shows better theoretical catalytic performance. However, the relatively narrow wavelength range of MoS2 absorption light leads to underutilization of sunlight, so the photocatalytic efficiency is not high when used independently. The wavelength range and photocatalytic efficiency still need to be further improved.
5.2 Enhanced photocatalytic activity of TiO2/MoS2
There are many methods for preparing the photocatalytic materials of titanium dioxide, such as doping of elements,108–110 deposition of noble metals,111–113 and using semiconductor composites.114,115 However, there are still severe photoelectron–hole compounding phenomena in ion doping, and noble metal deposition is expensive, which increase the cost. Compared with these materials, two types of semiconductor materials showed advantages, including the existence of synergistic effects and effective separation of photocarriers. These photocarriers were generated at the interface of the heterojunction, which shows an effective suppression of electron–hole recombination. Thus, matching narrow-band semiconductors could be used to form a heterojunction structure. This structure can generate photogenerated electrons, and the holes could move directionally. The life of electrons and holes could be extended. It is one of the effective methods to enhance the catalytic effect of the photocatalysts of TiO2. MoS2 has attracted much attention because of its richness, low cost, high activity, and excellent chemical stability.36 Besides, the narrow bandgap energy of MoS2 can absorb visible light. Therefore, the MoS2/TiO2 composite shows high efficiency of charge carrier separation and migration and a wide light-harvesting range, resulting in excellent photocatalytic activity.116
Many pieces of literature also reported that the TiO2/MoS2 heterojunction system has good photocatalytic efficiency. Wang et al.117 have fabricated MoS2/TiO2(P25) co-photocatalysts in which TiO2 was modified by MoS2 nanodots. As a working photoelectrode, the photocurrent of the composite was 0.6 mA cm−2, relatively, over twice that of P25 (0.28 mA cm−2). This indicated that more electrons were transferred to the photoelectrode. They promoted the effective charge separation between the photoinduced electrons and holes. This is because of the heterojunction, which could improve the photocatalytic activity. The heterojunction is composed of ultrafine TiO2 nanobelts and MoS2 nanosheets. The synergic effect of this heterojunction promoted the separation of photoinduced carriers and inhibited recombination of charges. This led to an enhanced photocatalytic property in both UV and visible light.
Meanwhile, it exhibited excellent electrical conductivity for the H2 evolution and photocatalytic degradation of organic matter.70 Zhang et al.89 prepared 3D MoS2 nanosheet/TiO2 nanofiber heterostructures via a simple hydrothermal treatment. They exhibited better performance and photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes. The photocatalytic mechanisms were discussed at the same time. Anatase TiO2 with a 3.2 eV bandgap width belongs to comprehensive bandgap semiconductor materials, while that of monolayer MoS2 is 1.8 eV, which belongs to narrow bandgap semiconductor materials. TiO2 absorbs photons and excites electron–hole pairs under UV light irradiation, and light electrons jump from the valence band to the conduction band.92 Due to the lower CB of MoS2 than TiO2, forming an electron trap in MoS2, the electrons (e−) located in the TiO2 conduction band can quickly transfer to the MoS2 conduction valence hole (h+) flow to the MoS2 valence band.32,35 What's more, it will form a built-in electric field between the interface of monolayer MoS2 and TiO2, which would suppress the electron and hole recombination.118 For TiO2/MoS2 nanomaterials, MoS2 can be considered as a sensitizer to provide a sensitization effect and function as an electronic trap agent. The composite photocatalyst can reduce the photogenerated electron–hole pair composite rate and expand the light absorption range, leading to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity. Finally, the separated electrons on the surface of MoS2 can react with water, organic dyes and other reactants. The schematic diagrams of the enhanced mechanism and degradation mechanism of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures are shown in Fig. 8(b and c) respectively as examples.
6. Applications of TiO2/MoS2 composites
6.1 Sustainable solar H2 generation for solar fuels
Facing the issues of environmental pollution and energy shortage, the development of new energy has become urgent. As environment-friendly energy, light energy and hydrogen energy occupy important positions in new energy fields.119,120 So far, TiO2/MoS2 nanocomposites have shown outstanding performances and drawn intensive attention for solving the energy crisis and environmental pollution. In particular, solar H2 generation is an excellent strategy and has become a research hotspot. It can not only enhance photocatalytic activity, but also expand the available spectrum.121 Yuan et al.122 have prepared a copper indium sulfide (CuInS2) QD/TiO2/MoS2 photocatalyst with efficient electron transfer and a reasonable design of energy band differences to generate H2 under light irradiation. In the presence of sodium sulfide (Na2S) and sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) as the sacrificial reagents, the CuInS2 QD/TiO2/MoS2 photocatalyst showed the highest H2 evolution rate of up to 1034 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and 141 μmol h−1 g−1 under long wavelength light (λ > 500 nm) irradiation. They proved that CuInS2 played a vital role in enhancing harvesting light, and MoS2 played the role of a co-photocatalyst to enhance photocatalytic activity and efficiency. Wang et al.97 have synthesized MoS2 QD/TiO2 NTA nanomaterials with obviously enhanced photocatalytic activity and water splitting hydrogen evolution ability via the electro-deposition method. The composite photocatalyst showed excellent H2 evolution rates as high as 65.3, 53.9 and 16.3 μmol cm−2 h−1 under UV (λ < 420 nm), visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm) and near-infrared (λ > 760) illumination, respectively. These results were much higher than those of pure TiO2 NTAs. They were prepared without sacrificial agents or cocatalysts.
Moreover, the composite photocatalyst opens up a greater possibility and new strategy for solar-driven water splitting hydrogen evolution from seawater under light irradiation. Guo et al.123 have prepared MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures through a step-by-step strategy including anodization, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and physical vapor deposition (PVD). In the presence of DI water or sea water, the MoS2/TiO2 heterostructure films showed intensive photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution. The H2 yield rate was up to 181 μmol h−1 cm−2 under simulated solar light.
The influence of the contact facets of MoS2/TiO2 has also been discussed. Wei et al.124 have investigated the influence of TiO2 exposed crystal facets and defects on MoS2/TiO2 composites. Also, the electron-rich characteristic of {101} TiO2 was proved to be beneficial for the Z-scheme recombination of electrons and holes. Due to the synergetic effect of facet engineering and oxygen vacancies, the hydrogen evolution rate was enhanced by more than one order of magnitude. He et al.125 have synthesized TiO2/MoS2(E) and TiO2/MoS2(B) catalysts by controlling the growth process via different methods, as shown in Fig. 9(a and b). The SEM and TEM images are shown in Fig. 9(c and d). The former showed enhanced catalytic hydrogen evolution activity as high as 4300 μmol h−1 g−1 with 3% MoS2 loading as shown in Fig. 9(e). It was 36 times compared to that of pure TiO2 under the conditions of being dispersed in DI water and ethanol and exposed to a 300 W Xe lamp.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of preparation of (a) the TiO2/MoS2(B) composite via a wet chemical method and (b) the TiO2/MoS2(E) composite via a CVD strategy, (c) SEM images and (d) TEM images of TiO2/MoS2(E)3%, and (e) comparison diagram of the H2 evolution rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
6.2 Electrodes of ion batteries
As a type of semiconductor material with excellent performance, TiO2 nanomaterials are always applied in the field of photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry (PEC). To be specific, photocatalytic technology is widely applied for ion batteries and supercapacitors.126 In particular, the synergistic effect of TiO2 and MoS2 nanomaterials, which is beneficial to enhance both photocatalytic activity and efficiency, has attracted a lot of attention of researchers.

6.2.1 Ion batteries. 
According to previous reports, composite materials are mostly used as anode materials in the field of ion batteries, due to their good photoelectrochemical properties. The layered structure of MoS2 is conducive to the insertion and extraction of ions, leading to an improved theoretical specific capacity.127 In addition, the low volume variation of TiO2 is conducive to ameliorate the excessive volume change of MoS2 during the repeated charge–discharge process.128 Thus, TiO2/MoS2 nanomaterials used in ion batteries always demonstrate improved photocatalytic activity and excellent photoelectric performance. Pi et al.94 have fabricated a TiO2 NA/1T(2H)-MoS2 composite with obviously enhanced photocatalytic activity as a 3D photoanode by hydrothermal and drop-casting methods. The synthesis route, mechanism of photoelectrochemical performance and SEM images are shown in Fig. 10. Among them, the TiO2 NA/1T-MoS2 composite showed the highest photoelectric efficiency, which was up to approximately 440% compared to that of pure TiO2 NAs (Fig. 10(e)).
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of (a) the synthesis route and (b) mechanism of photoelectrochemical performance, SEM images of (c) the TiO2 NA/1T-MoS2 composite and (d) TiO2 NAs/2H-MoS2 at high magnification, (e) photo conversion efficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
It is worth mentioning that photocatalytic and photoelectric properties can be further improved by combining the TiO2/MoS2 nanocomposite with graphene and other semiconductor materials to form ternary materials.129 Pei et al.87 have fabricated three-layered carbon(C)/TiO2/MoS2 nanospheres composed of hollow TiO2 with carbon and MoS2 nanosheets as anode materials of high-performance LIBs. The synthesis process and SEM images are shown in Fig. 11(a and b). As an electrode, it displayed excellent electrochemical stability, a coulombic efficiency (CE) of 63.2%, and a high initial discharge capacity of 1696 mA h g−1. After 100 cycles, the C/TiO2/MoS2 battery still retained its high reversible capacity (993.2 mA h g−1), about 2.7 times and 2.4 times that of pure MoS2 and C/TiO2 batteries, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11(c and d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis process for C/TiO2/MoS2 nanospheres, (b) SEM images of C/TiO2/MoS2, (c) cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and (d) rate performance at various current densities of C/TiO2/MoS2, C/TiO2, and MoS2 electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


6.2.2 Supercapacitors. 
Compared with traditional batteries and capacitors, the applications of supercapacitors are limited because of their lower energy density. They draw much attention with a broad prospect due to their great power density, long cycling life, fast charging–discharging rates and safety. The application of transition metal oxides to supercapacitors has been proven.130
It is worth mentioning that TiO2 nanomaterials are widely viewed as greatly promising electrode materials due to their high cycle stability, relatively great photocatalytic performance, low toxicity, low cost, and environmentally friendly nature.131 However, there are disadvantages such as low electrical conductivity and specific capacitance.132 But MoS2 can provide high charge storage because of its special layered structure.133
Thus, TiO2/MoS2 nanocomposites retain the respective advantages of components and obtain synergistic effects at the same time. They exhibit a complementary performance to some degree and also display better photoelectrochemical performance.49 In particular, the specific capacitance of a composite is dozens of times that of a single pure material. Chanda and coworkers134 have fabricated a 3D hierarchical nanoform. The MoS2 flakes anchored on the TiO2 sphere as a portion of working electrodes for supercapacitors (SCs) through a low temperature hydrothermal method. The hybrid material showed significantly enhanced electrochemical behavior and its specific capacitance was up to 152.22 F g−1. This value was about 30 times that of the TiO2 sphere at 0.1 A g−1 current density, which can be attributed to the high surface area of the hybrid material.
It is reported that TiO2 served as a growth substrate of 1T-MoS2 and can prevent the conversion of 1T-MoS2 to 2H-MoS2, which is beneficial to the fast transmission of ions and electrons. Through a facile hydrothermal reaction, Zhou et al.97 have prepared a 1T-MoS2 NS/TiO2 NTA/Ti composite (Fig. 12(a)) with enhanced electrochemical performance and applied in supercapacitors. Specifically, it showed an outstanding specific capacitance of up to 428.1 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1. Its energy density and power density were quite stable even up to 97.5% after 10000 cycles, as shown in Fig. 12(b and c) respectively.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram, (b) gravimetric capacitance vs. current density and (c) capacitance retention of 1T-MoS2/TiO2/Ti. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of Ti/TiO2/MoS2 fiber electrodes, (e) schematic diagram and (f) specific capacitance as a function of the scan rate of Ti/TiO2/MoS2 fiber SC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
In addition to binary hybridization and recombination, there have been many reports of ternary hybrid materials as electrodes for supercapacitors. Similarly, these SCs show significantly improved electrochemical performance. Li et al.132 have fabricated Ti/TiO2/MoS2 coaxial fibers as an electrode of solid-state fiber supercapacitors via a buffer layer assisted growth strategy. The fiber SCs exhibited outstanding processability and significant electrochemical performance. Their specific capacitance was 70.6 F cm−3, and their power density was about 0.98 W cm−3. They showed great promising applications in wearable electronic parts. Wang et al.135 have designed K-doped mixed-phase TiO2 nanowires (K-TNWs) coated by MoS2 NS core–shell structures as an electrode of supercapacitors via a two-step hydrothermal method. At the same time, the Ti plate was used as the substrate and chitosan as the soft template. Attributed to both the chitosan soft template, the agglomeration of MoS2 NSs was prevented. The large surface area was provided by the K-TNW backbone structure. The SCs showed an outstanding specific capacitance of 45.59 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2. In addition, it resulted in excellent cycling stability and capacitance retention characteristics of up to 78.44% after 6000 cycles while the current density was 0.5 mA cm−2.

6.3 Degradation of organic molecules
It is well known that photocatalytic technology can also be used to degrade organic molecules.136–143 The photocatalytic activity and efficiency of photocatalysts can be evaluated by degrading organic dyes like methylene blue (MB), methyl orange (MO), and rhodamine B (RhB).
Compared to pure titanium dioxide, these composite materials exhibit greatly enhanced photocatalytic activity. This leads to higher degradation efficiency, shorter degradation time, and a better degradation effect. Tacchini et al.144 have prepared MoS2 nanocrystals/TiO2 nanoparticles via a simple solvothermal method. It was discussed that nanomaterials with improved catalytic properties had significant potential in the field of photodegradation of organic molecules. Wang and colleagues45 have fabricated MoS2 nanodot/TiO2 composite photocatalysts through the liquid ultrasonic mixing method. The photocatalyst exhibited obviously enhanced photocatalytic degradation activity under simulated sunlight irradiation compared to pure TiO2(P25). The hybrid photocatalysts with 0.01 wt% and 0.1 wt% MoS2 (20 mg) could degrade MB or RhB (40 mL 10 mg L−1) completely within 20 min in aqueous solution under a high-pressure mercury lamp as simulated sunlight, as shown in Fig. 13(a and b). Also, the impact of the loading capacity of MoS2 nanodots on the photocatalytic activity was discussed which is in the order of photocatalytic activities as follows: MoS2/P25 (0.1%) > MoS2/P25 (0.01%) > P25 > MoS2/P25 (1%). Zhang et al.145 have prepared a TiO2/MoS2 composite photocatalyst through a hydrothermal process and evaluated its photocatalytic activity by the photodegradation of methyl orange (MO). Compared to P25, the composite (molar ratio Mo:Ti = 0.8:50, 400 mg L−1) exhibited intensive photocatalytic activity and its degradation rate for MO (20 mg L−1) was up to 90% within 10 min under the irradiation of a 500 W Xe long-arc lamp, which is shown in Fig. 13(c). This synergistic effect in the field of MO degradation, which could improve the photocatalytic activity, is suitable for preparing ternary TiO2/MoS2 composite materials such as TiO2/MoS2/zeolite composite photocatalysts.41
 Fig. 13  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) RhB and (b) MO under photocatalysts with different MoS2 loading capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of MO under photocatalysts: blank, TiO2, TiO2/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145 Copyright 2015, Wiley. Photodegradation efficiencies of (d) MB, (e) MO, and (f) RhB under photocatalysts: TiO2/MoS2, MoS2 nanorods, MoS2 nanoflowers, anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Wiley. 
Similarly, there were reports that combined theoretical research studies and performance characterization to prove the enhanced photocatalytic performance of TiO2/MoS2 composites. For example, Wang et al.146 have synthesized TiO2/MoS2 heterostructures via a hydrothermal process. Moreover, according to the first-principles calculation, they found that the calculated energy gap of TiO2/MoS2 heterostructures was 1.95 eV, which was between the values of pure TiO2 and MoS2. As a result, the heterostructures showed intensive activity through photodegradation. 10 mg TiO2/MoS2 photocatalysts were added to the same 15 mg L−1 organic dyes to form a suspension that was stirred under sunlight. Then, the photodegradation efficiencies of RhB, MB and MO were up to 99.62%, 96.42% and 87.45%, as shown in Fig. 13(d), (e) and (f), respectively.
6.4 Photocatalytic and electrochemical reduction of CO2
With the increasingly serious environmental problems such as global warming and the greenhouse effect, the absorption and reuse of excess carbon dioxide have become a research hotspot.147 In particular, the photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide emission has attracted special attention in recent years. Its photocatalytic properties also reduce carbon dioxide to other organic chemicals such as monoxide (CO), methane (CH4) and methanol (CH3OH) for chemical fuels. For instance, Jia et al.148 have synthesized TiO2/MoS2 composite photocatalysts via one-step hydrothermal methods and calcination treatment. Using photocatalytic reduction of CO2 as an evaluation method, the photocatalysts exhibited outstanding photocatalytic activity and stability. Also, the 10% TiO2/MoS2 heterojunction composite showed the maximum yields of CO2 reduction to CH4 and CO, up to 49.93 μmol gcat−1 and 268.97 μmol gcat−1, about 15.26 times and 4.33 times higher than that of P25, respectively, as shown in Fig. 14(a). Xu et al.149 have fabricated a 1D/2D TiO2/MoS2 nanostructured hybrid via a hydrothermal transformation process. The photocatalyst achieved better photocatalytic activity and enhanced CO2 absorption compared to pure TiO2 as shown in Fig. 14(b).
 Fig. 14  (a) The product after photocatalytic reduction of CO2 for 6h irradiation with TiO2, MoS2, and MoS2/TiO2-10%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Performance of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with TiO2, MoS2, and TiO2/MoS2 nanohybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Schematic diagram of integrated 3D TiO2/MoS2 as an electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Performance of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 and CO2 selectivity of TiO2 nanofibers, TiO2/MoS2, and TiO2/MoS2/g–C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
In addition to the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, it can also be applied in the electrochemical reduction of CO2. Yu et al.150 have designed a 3D TiO2/MoS2 architecture as a stable and efficient catalyst applied in the reduction of CO2 to CO. The schematic diagram of integrated 3D TiO2/MoS2 as an electrode is shown in Fig. 14(c). On the one hand, the enhanced and excellent reduction performance can be attributed to Ti–S bonds, which changed the electrical properties and adsorption characteristics of MoS2 proved by density functional theory calculations. On the other hand, the surface areas were larger and the active sites of the composite were richer.
The TiO2/MoS2 composites are also often studied in the form of ternary composites. There are many research studies that have reported the selective reduction of CO2 by the heterojunction. For instance, Kang et al.151 have reported a TiO2 NF/MoS2 NS/graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) heterojunction without using noble metals via electrospinning and hydrothermal methods. The heterojunction showed excellent CO2 selectivity (SCO2) and SCO2 was more than 90%. Compared to pure g-C3N4, the CO2 conversion of the heterojunction for producing high amounts of CH4 was enhanced to 3.1 times, as shown in Fig. 14(d).
6.5 Multifunctional sensors
Based on the synergistic effect of MoS2 and TiO2, the photocatalytic activity and electrochemical performance of composites are always enhanced, leading to further expanded applications. There are also a wide range of research and applications in the field of sensors, such as gas sensors, ultraviolet detectors, electrochemical sensors, plasmon resonance sensors, and biosensors.23,152–154 For instance, Demir et al.23 have designed a screen printed electrode (SPE) that was modified with a MoS2-TiO2/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite for an electrochemical sensor. The preparation process and oxidation reaction are shown in Fig. 15(a). It showed high-efficiency and electrocatalytic performance in the measurements of the selective detection of paracetamol (acetaminophen, Ac) in a small sample volume. Maurya et al.154 have reported a graphene oxide (GO)–MoS2 structure with TiO2–silicon dioxide (SiO2) as the composite layer for surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensors. In addition, the sensitivity of sensors with GO–MoS2/TiO2–SiO2 composite materials increased by 12.82%, compared to conventional SPR sensors. Zhao et al.155 have synthesized TiO2 nanotubes by hydrothermal methods with MoS2 composites as gas sensors. The TiO2/MoS2 composite with a p–n heterojunction (Fig. 15(b)) and larger specific surface area exhibited significant sensing properties of ethanol vapors. Also, the sensitivity was enhanced about 11 times that of single TiO2 nanotubes as shown in Fig. 15(c).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of MoS2–TiO2/rGO/SPE and oxidation reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of gas-sensing mechanisms. (c) Typical response and recovery curve of TiO2 and TiO2–MoS2 sensors (100 ppm ethanol, 150 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
7. Conclusions
TiO2 and MoS2 have become research hotspots in the field of photocatalysis due to their superior semiconductor properties, such as low cost, non-toxicity, and a synergistic photocatalytic effect. Their hybrids can complement each other to avoid some inherent defects. There are many studies that showed that it was feasible to construct MoS2/TiO2 composite materials to improve the photocatalytic activity and photoelectrochemical performance. However, the preparation methods of composite materials mostly involve high temperature but results in low production. The photocatalytic performance has been improved, but it has not reached the ideal state. Besides, both TiO2 and MoS2 have various morphologies and structures that can be designed with various combination forms. However, the rational design of their morphologies and structures still need to be further explored to improve the regularity and uniformity of morphologies to develop the interface quality on one hand and increase the active catalytic sites to enhance photoelectron capture on the other hand. Therefore, the development of a simple and inexpensive method is the key to further research. Finally, according to the reported work, an in-depth understanding of the photocatalytic enhancement mechanism of composite materials is still limited. It is always necessary to learn and understand these complex charge carriers and reaction processes by building cell models, and performing first-principles calculations, and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. In general, the MoS2/TiO2 composites with enhanced photocatalytic performance are promising photocatalysts. They have broad application prospects such as in rechargeable batteries, solar fuel cells, organic dye degradation, sensors and other fields.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (JD2014), the Taishan Scholars Program of Shandong Province (No. tsqn201909104), and the High-Grade Talents Plan of Qingdao University.
References
Y. Vasseghian, M. Moradi, M. Pirsaheb, A. Khataee, S. Rahimi, M. Y. Badi and A. Mousavi Khaneghah, Food Res. Int., 2020, 137, 109557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moradi, A. Elahinia, Y. Vasseghian, E.-N. Dragoi, F. Omidi and A. Mousavi Khaneghah, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 104330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moradi, Y. Vasseghian, A. Khataee, M. Harati and H. Arfaeinia, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 261, 118274 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Naghan, A. Azari, N. Mirzaei, A. Velayati, F. A. Tapouk, S. Adabi, M. Pirsaheb and K. Sharafi, 2015.
M. Pirsaheb, B. Shahmoradi, M. Beikmohammadi, E. Azizi, H. Hossini and G. Md Ashraf, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1473 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Arfaeinia, H. Sharafi, M. Moradi, M. Ehsanifar and S. Hashemi, Desalin. Water Treat., 2017, 93, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, R. Tian, J. Wang, E. Nie, X. Piao, X. Li and Z. Sun, Chemosphere, 2017, 185, 574–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, H. Li, R. Gao, Q. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Gao, Z. Wang, F. Zhang and W. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 406, 124309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, J. Jia, Y. Zhang, N. Wang, X. Guo and X. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 315, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kang, X. Z. Song, Y. Han, J. Cao and Z. Tan, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5904 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Paul, N. Sreekanth, R. K. Biroju, T. N. Narayanan and P. K. Giri, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 364–374 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata, T. Ochiai, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 103–111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, Z. Chen, K.-Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-Deyab and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772–6801 RSC .
F. Shahrezaei, P. Pakravan, A. H. Azandaryani, M. Pirsaheb and A. M. Mansouri, Desalin. Water Treat, 2016, 57, 14443–14452 CrossRef CAS .
N. Farhadian, R. Akbarzadeh, M. Pirsaheb, T.-C. Jen, Y. Fakhri and A. Asadi, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 132, 360–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Jia, X. Chen, H. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ding, H. Hu, J. Xu, P. Lin, C. Cui, D. Qian, P. Wang, L. Xu, J. Pan and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13190–13199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Yuan, B. Han, L. Jiang and W. Shangguan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7073–7079 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh and S. Dutta, Fuel, 2018, 220, 607–620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Peng, H. Wang, H. Yu, H. Wang and F. Peng, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 40, 24–27 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, S. Wang, H. Yin, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Huang and S. Ai, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1092–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, N. Zhao, L. Guo, F. He, C. Shi, C. He, J. Li and E. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12895–12905 RSC .
N. Demir, K. Atacan, M. Ozmen and S. Z. Bas, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 11759–11767 RSC .
H.-K. Kim, D. Mhamane, M.-S. Kim, H.-K. Roh, V. Aravindan, S. Madhavi, K. C. Roh and K.-B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trenczek-Zajac, A. Kusior and M. Radecka, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7548–7562 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, F. Chen, Y. Shi and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8579–8586 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, Y. Miao, Y. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Liu and P. Yang, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Conceição, D. P. Ferreira, C. A. L. Graça, M. F. Júlio, L. M. Ilharco, A. C. Velosa, P. F. Santos and L. F. Vieira Ferreira, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 418–429 CrossRef .
R. R. Kalantary, M. Rahmatinia and M. Moradi, Data Brief, 2018, 19, 1810–1815 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Osouleddini, L. Tajik and M. Moradi, Desalin. Water Treat., 2019, 153, 392–401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moradi, R. R. Kalantary, A. Esrafili, A. J. Jafari and M. Gholami, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 248, 880–889 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Kalantary, M. Moradi, M. Pirsaheb, A. Esrafili, A. J. Jafari, M. Gholami, Y. Vasseghian, E. Antolini and E.-N. Dragoi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Safari, M. Karimaei, K. Sharafi, H. Arfaeinia, M. Moradi and N. Fattahi, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2018, 98, 2915–2924 CAS .
Y. Jia, H. Wan, L. Chen, H. Zhou and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Lin, P. Zhang, E. Ashalley, M. Shafa, H. Li, J. Wu and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 131, 122–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Meng and Z. Zhang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 35, 39–55 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhang and K.-J. Huang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1602–1620 RSC .
L. Xu, L. Ma, T. Rujiralai, X. Zhou, S. Wu and M. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 33937–33943 RSC .
A. K. Mishra, K. V. Lakshmi and L. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. Su and G. Wei, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18364–18378 RSC .
W. Zhang, X. Xiao, L. Zheng and C. Wan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 468–478 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, T. Lv, C. Zhu, X. Su and Z. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2015, 396, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Y. Meng, J. Sha, C. Zhong, W. Hu and N. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 34–68 RSC .
M. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, S. Sun and Z. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 684, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Xu, F. Sun, Q. Zhang, P. Wang and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 377, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Jia, Y. Hu, G. Fan, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1875–1898 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Z. Ou, S. Balendhran, A. F. Chrimes, M. Mortazavi, D. D. Yao, M. R. Field, K. Latham, V. Bansal, J. R. Friend, S. Zhuiykov, N. V. Medhekar, M. S. Strano and K. Kalantar-zadeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10083–10093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sabarinathan, S. Harish, J. Archana, M. Navaneethan, H. Ikeda and Y. Hayakawa, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 24754–24763 RSC .
M. Mehta, A. P. Singh, S. Kumar, S. Krishnamurthy, B. Wickman and S. Basu, Vacuum, 2018, 155, 675–681 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Tian, X. Tan, X. Li and X. Chen, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 431–441 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vasilaki, I. Georgaki, D. Vernardou, M. Vamvakaki and N. Katsarakis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 353, 865–872 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Haider, R. H. Al-Anbari, G. R. Kadhim and C. T. Salame, Energy Procedia, 2017, 119, 332–345 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. P. D. Savio, J. Fletcher, K. Smith, R. Iyer, J. M. Bao and F. C. Robles Hernández, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 449–455 CrossRef CAS .
E. Maryanti, Elmitra, T. Suharto, E. Widiyati and L. Marlina, Res. J. Pharm., Biol. Chem. Sci., 2019, 8, 274–279 Search PubMed .
V. Kaler, U. Pandel and R. K. Duchaniya, Mater. Today: Proc., 2018, 5, 6279–6287 CAS .
L. Sun, Z. Li, Z. Li, Y. Hu, C. Chen, C. Yang, B. Du, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16183–16192 RSC .
W. Ren, Y. Yan, L. Zeng, Z. Shi, A. Gong, P. Schaaf, D. Wang, J. Zhao, B. Zou, H. Yu, G. Chen, E. M. B. Brown and A. Wu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 1526–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, J. Huang, L. Y. Lim, W. Li, J. Deng, D. Gong, Y. Tang, Y. Lai and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79479–79510 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhao, Q. Zheng and J. Zhao, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 99, 165309 CrossRef CAS .
R. Plugaru, A. Cremades and J. Piqueras, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 16, S261–S268 CrossRef .
A. Kusior, J. Banas, A. Trenczek-Zajac, P. Zubrzycka, A. Micek-Ilnicka and M. Radecka, J. Mol. Struct., 2018, 1157, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, J. Shen, T. Wang, R. Wang, H. Liu, J. Cui and W. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 921–925 CrossRef CAS .
N. Roy, K. T. Leung and D. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19117–19125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Ni, H. Jiu, C. Xie, J. Yan and G. Qi, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 5450–5456 CrossRef CAS .
I. Song, C. Park and H. C. Choi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 7495–7514 RSC .
Q. Ding, B. Song, P. Xu and S. Jin, Chem., 2016, 1, 699–726 CAS .
P. Zhang, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7187–7190 RSC .
Z. Shi, P. Xu, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, L. Luo, G. Duoerkun and L. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 112, 354–362 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Wang, G. Chen, Y. Sang, H. Jiang, J. He, X. Li and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6101–6109 RSC .
X. Liu, Z. Xing, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Wu, S. Tan, X. Yu, Q. Zhu and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 119–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kropp, A. Sharma, W. Zhu, C. Ataca and T. Gougousi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48150–48160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500405 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ren, W. Zhou, H. Zhang and C. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 487–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. L. Mawlong, K. K. Paul and P. K. Giri, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15017–15025 CrossRef CAS .
T. Du, N. Wang, H. Chen, H. He, H. Lin and K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 943–949 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Q. Ling, Y. Liu, H. Wang and Y. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 933–940 RSC .
S. B. Khan, M. Hou, S. Shuang and Z. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, A. Elzatahry, D. Aldhayan and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8203–8237 RSC .
S. Cravanzola, M. Sarro, F. Cesano, P. Calza and D. Scarano, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 207 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Feng, C. T. Liu, W. Y. Yan, J. X. Geng and G. M. Wang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 26487–26494 RSC .
W. Wang, D. Xu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and C. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5020–5029 RSC .
T. Li, Z. Wang, C. Liu, C. Tang, X. Wang, G. Ding, Y. Ding and L. Yang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 666 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, H. Huang, B. Jin, J. Luo and X. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107075–107080 RSC .
Y. Yu, J. Li, D. Geng, J. Wang, L. Zhang, T. L. Andrew, M. S. Arnold and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 564–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, S. Cui, G. Li, N. Li and X. Li, J. Colloid. Interface Sci., 2020, 567, 10–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pei, H. Geng, E. H. Ang, L. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Zheng and H. Gu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17327–17334 RSC .
J. H. Pan, X. Z. Wang, Q. Huang, C. Shen, Z. Y. Koh, Q. Wang, A. Engel and D. W. Bahnemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, F. Miao, K. Wang, N. Lu and Y. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 686, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pant, M. Park and S.-J. Park, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2019, 102, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Tang, S. Luo, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Zeng and Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, W. Liu, Z. Miao and Q. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 7260–7269 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. M. Bhat, S. A. Pawar, D. Potphode, C.-K. Moon, J. M. Suh, C. Kim, S. Choi, D. S. Patil, J.-J. Kim, J. C. Shin and H. W. Jang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118102 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Pi, Z. Li, D. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang, W. Peng and X. Fan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng.,  2017, 5, 5175–5182 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702724 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Huang, H. Sun, Y. H. Ng, K.-Q. Zhang and Y. Lai, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1708–1721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, M. Guo, L. Wang, Y. Ding, Z. Zhang, Y. Tang, C. Liu and S. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, J. Huang, A. Wang, G. V. Biesold-McGee, X. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Wang, Y. Lai and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104579 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, H. Zhao, J. Tian, J. Gao, Y. Li and H. Cui, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhuang, W. Chen, W. Xu and X. Liu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 3224–3230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Jiang, H. Wang, Z. Kong, J. Xi and Z. Ji, Mater. Lett., 2018, 229, 277–280 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Liao, Y. Dou, S. M. Hwang, M.-S. Park, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1946–2008 RSC .
H.-R. An, S. Y. Park, H. Kim, C. Y. Lee, S. Choi, S. C. Lee, S. Seo, E. C. Park, Y.-K. Oh, C.-G. Song, J. Won, Y. J. Kim, J. Lee, H. U. Lee and Y.-C. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29683 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Xiao, F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front, 2017, 1, 231–250 RSC .
B. Liu, L.-M. Liu, X.-F. Lang, H.-Y. Wang, X. W. Lou and E. S. Aydil, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2592–2597 RSC .
J. Lim, Y. Yang and M. R. Hoffmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6972–6980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, J. G. Huang, Y. Su, B. Geng, S. Y. Lei, Y. T. Huang, C. Lyu and X. J. Liu, Photochem. Photobiol., 2016, 92, 651–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. U. Saqib, R. Adnan and I. Shah, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2016, 23, 15941–15951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Y. He, M. Chen, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 1225–1232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shuang, R. Lv, Z. Xie and Z. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 26670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee, D. Lee, J. Yoon, Y. Yin, Y. N. Lee, S. Uprety, Y. S. Yoon and D.-J. Kim, Sensors, 2018, 18, 3334 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Odling and N. Robertson, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 2872–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Wang and W. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 375606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502161 CrossRef .
F. Guo, J. Jia, D. Dai and H. Gao, Phys. E, 2018, 97, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Yuan, D.-Q. Chen, Y.-W. Huang, Z.-T. Yu, J.-S. Zhong, T.-T. Chen, W.-G. Tu, Z.-J. Guan, D.-P. Cao and Z.-G. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Vasseghian, A. Khataee, E.-N. Dragoi, M. Moradi, S. Nabavifard, G. Oliveri Conti and A. Mousavi Khaneghah, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 8458–8480 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Rao, N. L. Reddy, M. M. Kumari, K. K. Cheralathan, P. Ravi, M. Sathish, B. Neppolian, K. R. Reddy, N. P. Shetti, P. Prathap, T. M. Aminabhavi and M. V. Shankar, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 248, 109246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Yuan, G. Fang, D. Chen, Y. Huang, L. X. Yang, D. P. Cao, J. Wang, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5652–5659 RSC .
L. Guo, Z. Yang, K. Marcus, Z. Li, B. Luo, L. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 106–114 RSC .
T. Wei, W. M. Lau, X. An and X. Yu, Molecules, 2019, 24, 1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, J. Lin, W. Fu, X. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zeng, Q. Gu, Y. Li, C. Yan, B. K. Tay, C. Xue, X. Hu, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600464 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, X. Liang, X. Fan and X. Su, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 38119–38124 RSC .
W. Xu, T. Wang, Y. Yu and S. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 689, 460–467 CrossRef CAS .
L. Junfeng, L. Han, X. Zhang, H. Sun, X. Liu, T. Lu, Y. Yao and L. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126873 CrossRef .
A. Trenczek-Zajac, J. Banas and M. Radecka, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 102886–102898 RSC .
R. Lin, Z. Zhu, X. Yu, Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, S. Tan, C. Zhao and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 814–821 RSC .
P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy, V. K. Mariappan and S.-J. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 536, 62–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Li, J. Cheng, D. Yuan, W. Ni, Q. Guan, L. Gao and B. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kesavan, V. K. Mariappan, P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy and S. J. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 714–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chanda, S. Thakur, S. Maiti, A. Acharya, T. Paul, N. Besra, S. Sarkar, A. Das, K. Sardar and K. Chattopadhyay, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1953, 030138 CrossRef .
H. Wang, L. Cao, J. Cui, H. Lin, W. Li, Z. Lin and P. Zhang, Ionics, 2020, 26, 2513–2523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irandost, R. Akbarzadeh, M. Pirsaheb, A. Asadi, P. Mohammadi and M. Sillanpää, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 291, 111342 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pirsaheb, K. Karimi, B. Shahmoradi, M. Moradi, Y. Vasseghian and E. Dragoi, Desalin. Water Treat., 2019, 165, 321–332 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pirsaheb, H. Hossaini, N. Azizi and T. Khosravi, J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng, 2020, 18, 1329–1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pirsaheb, H. Hossaini, S. Nasseri, N. Azizi, B. Shahmoradi and T. Khosravi, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2020, 10, 143–159 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shahmoradi, M. Pordel, M. Pirsaheb, A. Maleki, S. Kohzadi, Y. Gong, D. R. Pawar, S. Lee, H. P. Shivaraju and G. McKay, Desalin. Water Treat., 2017, 88, 200–206 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shahmoradi, M. Pirsaheb, M. A. Pordel, T. Khosravi, D. R. Pawar and S. Lee, Desalin. Water Treat., 2017, 67, 324–331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Salehi, B. Shahmoradi, A. Bahmani, M. Pirsaheb and H. P. Shivaraju, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 25256–25266 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pirsaheb, B. Shahmoradi, T. Khosravi, K. Karimi and Y. Zandsalimi, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 9881–9888 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tacchini, E. Terrado, A. Ansón and M. T. Martínez, Micro Nano Lett., 2011, 6, 932–936 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Xiao, L. Zheng and C. Wan, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2015, 93, 1594–1602 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhan and Z. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 1713–1718 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, T. Peppel, J. Strunk and Z. Sun, Sol. Rrl, 2020, 4, 1900546 CrossRef CAS .
P.-y. Jia, R.-t. Guo, W.-g. Pan, C.-y. Huang, J.-y. Tang, X.-y. Liu, H. Qin and Q.-y. Xu, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 570, 306–316 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800911 CrossRef .
L. Yu, Y. Xie, J. Zhou, Y. Li, Y. Yu and Z. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4706–4713 RSC .
S. Kang, H. Khan and C. S. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 221, 110890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Hao, W. Gao, Z. Wu, Y. Lin, G. Li, W. Guo, L. Yu, H. Zeng, J. Zhu and W. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 211, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. AlShammari, M. M. Halim, F. K. Yam and N. H. M. Kaus, Res. Phys., 2020, 19, 103630 Search PubMed .
J. B. Maurya, Y. K. Prajapati, V. Singh and J. P. Saini, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2015, 121, 525–533 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Zhao, Y. Tang, J. Mao, Y. X. Chen, H. Song, J. W. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Q. Liang and X. M. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 674, 252–258 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Gang Wei
	Gang Wei is currently a full professor at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering of the Qingdao University, China. From 2007 to 2011, he worked as a Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, and from 2012 to 2019, he worked as a senior researcher and group leader at the University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include nanomaterials, two-dimensional materials, biomaterials, supramolecular self-assembly, and biosensors. He has published 140+ papers in peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 6000 times with an H-index of 47.

Zhiqiang Su
	Zhiqiang Su completed his PhD studies in 2005 at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After a postdoctoral stay at the Tsinghua University, he joined the Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2007 and was appointed as a full professor in 2012. In 2011 he studied at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena, Germany, as an experienced research fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. His research interests include nanohybrids, biomedical materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 130 papers in international peer-reviewed journals. His published papers have been cited more than 5000 times with an H-index of 45.

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structures of TiO2 polymorphs: (a) anatase, (b) rutile, (c) brookite, and (d) TiO2-B. Reproduced with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Polytype structure of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis process of 3D FL-MoS2/TiO2. (a) F-TiO2. (b) C6H12O6-F-TiO2. (c) Adsorbed by MoO42−. (d) Prefabricated products. (e) 3D FL-MoS2/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis diagram of N-TiO2−x/MoS2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  A schematic typical ALD process of TiO2 using TiCl4 and H2O as precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of description processes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

TiO2 nanoparticles/MoS2 nanoflakes	Two-step hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O (TTIP)	Sintered at 400 °C for 4 h	
49

TiO2 nanospheres/MoS2 nanosheets (NSs)	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O titanium isopropoxide (TIP)	Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 4 h	
86

N-TiO2-x nanospheres/MoS2 nanosheets core–shell	Hydrothermal reaction and in situ solid-state chemical reduction method	MoO3 TBOT	Magnetic stirring for 1 h, heated at 200 °C for 18 h, then calcined at 350 °C for 2 h	
71

Hollow C/TiO2/MoS2 hierarchical nanospheres	Hydrothermal treatment	(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O TTIP	Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 6 h and annealed at 700 °C for 2 h	
87

Mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres	Targeted etching and low-temperature hydrothermal strategy	Ti(OiPr)4	Hydrothermal reaction at 110 °C for 4 h and calcined at 350 °C for 2 h	
88

MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanofibers (NFs)	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OC4H9)4	Hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 24 h	
89

MoS2/CdS/TiO2/C nanofibers	Electrospinning process and thermal treatment	Ti(OiPr)4	Electrospinning and calcination at 800 °C for 3 h	
90

MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanofibers	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OiPr)4	Hydrothermal reaction at 220 °C for 24 h and dried at 80 °C for 12 h	
91

TiO2 nanobelts/MoS2 nanosheets	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O TiO2 powder	Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h	
92

1L-MoS2/TiO2 nanorods (NRs)	Two-zone furnace CVD system	MoO3 TIP	Heated at 150 °C, 550–600 °C and 700 °C, respectively, and then cooled down	
75

CFs/TiO2 nanorods/MoS2 nanosheets	Hydrothermal treatment	Sodium molybdate	Hydrothermal treatment at 160 °C for 18 h	
68

TiO2 nanorods/CdS nanocrystals (NCs)/MoS2 nanosheets	Chemical bath deposition technique	Titanium butoxide	1.5 mL MoS2 NS ethanol solution and CdS CBD solution.	
93

1T-MoS2 nanosheets on TiO2 nanorod arrays (NAs)	Hydrothermal treatment and drop-casting method	Bulk MoS2 Ti(OBu)4	MoS2 were deposited on the TiO2 NAs and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min	
94

MoS2 nanoflower/TiO2(B) nanobelts	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O TiO2 powder	Hydrothermal treatment at 240 °C for 24 h and dried at 50 °C for 12 h	
11

Few-layered MoS2/mesoporous TiO2 3D network	Chemical bath method	Na2MoO4·2H2O	The solution was stirred and heated at 90 °C with hydrazine hydrate and then annealed in an Ar atmosphere	
76

3 layers TiO2/carbon/MoS2 nanotubes	Step-by-step hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O TIP	Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h	
95

MoS2 quantum dots/TiO2 nanotube arrays (NTAs)	Electrodeposition method	H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O	Using TiO2 NTAs/Ti foil, Pt foil and saturated Ag/AgCl electrode as electrodes	
96

1T-MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanotube arrays	Electrochemical anodic oxidation and hydrothermal treatment	H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti foil	Hydrothermal treatment at 220 °C for 24 h	
97

Pt/VA-MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanotube arrays	Two-step anodization and hydrothermal treatment	H24N6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti foil	Hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 6, 12, 24 h	
98

MoS2 nanosheets/TiO2 nanosheets/GF	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OBu)4	Hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C for 24 h	
99

MoS2 QDs/TiO2 nanosheets	Hydrothermal treatment	(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O Ti(OBu)4	Stirred for another 24 hours and dried at 60 °C for 12 hours	
100

TiO2 nanodrums coupled with MoS2	Hydrothermal treatment	Na2MoO4·2H2O Ti(OBu)4	Hydrothermal reaction at 200 °C for 24 h	
101


 	Fig. 7  Preparation diagram of (a) hollow mesoporous TiO2/MoS2 nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) TiO2 NR/CdS NC/MoS2 NS composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) TiO2/NC/MoS2 tubular nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (d) MoS2 QD/TiO2 NTA heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) the photocatalysis mechanism of TiO2 and (b) the enhanced mechanism of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Degradation mechanism of MoS2/TiO2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagrams of preparation of (a) the TiO2/MoS2(B) composite via a wet chemical method and (b) the TiO2/MoS2(E) composite via a CVD strategy, (c) SEM images and (d) TEM images of TiO2/MoS2(E)3%, and (e) comparison diagram of the H2 evolution rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of (a) the synthesis route and (b) mechanism of photoelectrochemical performance, SEM images of (c) the TiO2 NA/1T-MoS2 composite and (d) TiO2 NAs/2H-MoS2 at high magnification, (e) photo conversion efficiency. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis process for C/TiO2/MoS2 nanospheres, (b) SEM images of C/TiO2/MoS2, (c) cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and (d) rate performance at various current densities of C/TiO2/MoS2, C/TiO2, and MoS2 electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram, (b) gravimetric capacitance vs. current density and (c) capacitance retention of 1T-MoS2/TiO2/Ti. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic diagram of Ti/TiO2/MoS2 fiber electrodes, (e) schematic diagram and (f) specific capacitance as a function of the scan rate of Ti/TiO2/MoS2 fiber SC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) RhB and (b) MO under photocatalysts with different MoS2 loading capacity. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of MO under photocatalysts: blank, TiO2, TiO2/MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145 Copyright 2015, Wiley. Photodegradation efficiencies of (d) MB, (e) MO, and (f) RhB under photocatalysts: TiO2/MoS2, MoS2 nanorods, MoS2 nanoflowers, anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The product after photocatalytic reduction of CO2 for 6h irradiation with TiO2, MoS2, and MoS2/TiO2-10%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Performance of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with TiO2, MoS2, and TiO2/MoS2 nanohybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Schematic diagram of integrated 3D TiO2/MoS2 as an electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Performance of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 and CO2 selectivity of TiO2 nanofibers, TiO2/MoS2, and TiO2/MoS2/g–C3N4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of MoS2–TiO2/rGO/SPE and oxidation reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of gas-sensing mechanisms. (c) Typical response and recovery curve of TiO2 and TiO2–MoS2 sensors (100 ppm ethanol, 150 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
