Low-cost and flexible poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) based counter electrodes for efficient energy conversion in dye-sensitized solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA00563E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA00563E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10938-10944Low-cost and flexible poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) based counter electrodes for efficient energy conversion in dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Wing Chung 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yeru 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            James Robert 
            Jennings
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Huang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Qing 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, NUSNNI-Nanocore, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574. E-mail: msewq@nus.edu.sg;  Fax: +65 6776 3604;   Tel: +65 6516 7118
bSurface Technology Group, Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, 71 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 638075. E-mail: hhuang@simtech.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      31st January 2014
    , Accepted 17th March 2014First published on 18th March 2014AbstractA roll-to-roll slot die coating process was used to deposit PEDOT:PSS on PET and the resulting composite films were evaluated for use as counter electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs). The effect of depositing an additional layer of electropolymerized PEDOT onto the flat PEDOT/PET electrodes was also studied. Counter electrodes and complete DSCs were characterized by steady-state current–voltage, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and IPCE measurements. Evidence that the PEDOT-based counter electrode can modify the electrolyte solution composition, probably by increasing the proton concentration, is presented. The overall cell performance under 1 Sun illumination is improved by addition of an electropolymerized layer of PEDOT to flat PEDOT/PET counter electrodes, but both remain inferior to platinized FTO. Under 0.2 Sun illumination, devices employing counter electrodes with electropolymerized PEDOT on a PEDOT/PET substrate (named as EP/PEDOT/PET) perform almost similarly to those with platinized FTO counter electrodes, suggesting that EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes may be useful in DSCs designed for low light (e.g. indoor) operation, especially considering the low costs of PEDOT and the roll-to-roll and electropolymerization processes.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are promising photovoltaic devices because of their relatively easy and low cost fabrication method. This makes them likely candidates for mass production in the photovoltaic market. They have also been found to be suitable for use under indoor or diffused lighting conditions.1 A typical dye-sensitized solar cell is comprised of a dye-grafted TiO2 film supported on a transparent conductive substrate (e.g. fluorine-doped tin oxide), a redox couple such as iodide/triiodide, and a counter electrode. In operation, the sensitizer absorbs incident light and injects electrons into the TiO2 film, becoming oxidized in the process. The electrons then move through the TiO2 film and into the external circuit before arriving at the counter electrode. Meanwhile, the oxidized dye is reduced by iodide ions in the electrolyte, producing triiodide. The triiodide ions diffuse over to the counter electrode where they are reduced back to iodide, thus completing the circuit. The current challenge in commercializing DSCs is to develop feasible mass production technologies and further push down its cost. The FTO glass used in both electrodes is rather costly. It has been estimated that for commercialization of DSCs, their cost has to be lowered to approximately US$20 per m2 and an FTO-glass itself costs US$8–12 per m2.2 Therefore, it seems unlikely that traditional DSCs which use two pieces of FTO-glass per cell will become viable for commercialization. In addition, the deposition of Pt on the counter electrode requires high temperature or vacuum processes which adds to the cost.3 This calls for efforts to develop efficient FTO-free DSCs for commercialization to become possible.
To push down the costs, DSCs can be fabricated as FTO-free flexible and lightweight devices, usually using plastic substrates.4 Apart from being FTO-free, another advantage of making such flexible devices is the reduction in cost due to lower processing temperatures since the plastic substrate usually cannot withstand high temperatures.5 The flexibility of the substrate means that roll-to-roll processes can also be used for large scale production. Several candidates have been studied as alternatives to make FTO-free counter electrodes. Metal films6 or nanowire networks7 have been studied for use in DSCs but yielded poor performance due to the lack of corrosion resistance when using conventional electrolytes like the iodide/triiodide redox mediator.8 Carbon materials like carbon black, graphene and carbon nanotubes have also been widely studied and tested.9–11 However, the main issue with carbon based counter electrodes is their poor adhesion to the substrate, which may make them unsuitable for long term use in the device.12
The most promising solution as of now is the use of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), a conducting polymer which has long term stability and is highly conductive, making it suitable to be used as the counter electrode of DSCs.13,14 The processibility of this material is also good and does not involve complicated steps.15 The use of this material is able to reduce the cost of the solar cell since it is a cheaper replacement for both the TCO and the Pt. Furthermore, it does not contain any rare elements so mass production is potentially feasible. Currently, PEDOT has been deposited onto transparent conducting oxide coated glass substrates like FTO-glass.16 Unfortunately, this does not solve the main cost issue since the expensive FTO-glass substrate is still used. PEDOT:PSS is commonly used as the PEDOT source due to its water solubility, making it possible to use common coating techniques like spin coating17 to apply PEDOT onto a substrate. Unfortunately, it has been found that PEDOT:PSS forms smooth, small surface area coatings which is not desirable for use as counter electrodes in DSCs.18 To tackle the issue, TiO2 and ITO nanoparticles have been incorporated into the PEDOT:PSS coating to increase its surface area.18,19 Additional conductive materials like silver nanowires or grids are commonly used in conjunction with PEDOT in electrodes to improve their conductivity.20 However, they add to the cost of the electrodes since silver is still relatively expensive. Furthermore, the presence of such metallic components causes long term stability issues and cannot be used with iodide/triiodide electrolytes.
In this study, a pure PEDOT counter electrode was fabricated on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. For ease of fabrication of the PEDOT electrode, water soluble PEDOT:PSS was used in a roll-to-roll slot die coating process. However, as previously mentioned the PEDOT:PSS coating has a smooth morphology and thus has a small surface area.21 Therefore, an additional PEDOT layer was electropolymerised onto the PEDOT:PSS electrode since it has been reported that the electropolymerized PEDOT (EP) shows a porous structure.22–25 This electrode was tested in DSCs using a conventional iodide/triiodide electrolyte in conjunction with a ruthenium sensitizer. Fig. 1 shows the configuration of the device fabricated in this work. The following naming scheme is adopted for the counter electrodes used throughout the article: PEDOT/PET (without electropolymerized PEDOT film) and EP/PEDOT/PET (with electropolymerized PEDOT film).
 Fig. 1  Configuration of dye-sensitized solar cells used in this study. 
Experimental section
Preparation of the PEDOT:PSS coated PET electrode
PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ FE T) was purchased from Heraeus. Before coating with PEDOT:PSS, the PET substrate was first plasma-treated to help with the adhesion of the coating. A roll-to-roll slot die coater (Smartcoater, Coatema) was used to apply the PEDOT:PSS ink on the PET substrate with a gap distance of 50 μm. The coated PET substrate was then baked in a 150 °C oven for approximately 2 minutes to dry the film. The PEDOT:PSS PET electrodes were then cut out for electropolymerization.
Electropolymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT)
EDOT and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMITFSI) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. A porous PEDOT film was prepared by electropolymerization of EDOT solution following a published procedure.23 A 0.1 M EDOT electrolyte solution in the ionic liquid EMITFSI was first prepared. The PEDOT/PET electrodes were working electrodes and were masked before being immersed into the EDOT electrolyte. A platinum wire was used as a counter electrode. A constant DC potential of +1.2 V versus Ag/AgNO3 (0.01 M in acetonitrile) was then applied to the PEDOT/PET working electrode for 15 s for the electropolymerization of EDOT to occur. The EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes were then rinsed with ethanol and left to dry at room temperature.
Preparation of the photoanode
FTO coated glass (Pilkington TEC-15) was first cleaned by sonication in 5% Decon 90 solution followed by deionized water and ethanol. A ca. 8 μm thick transparent layer of nanocrystalline TiO2 was prepared by screen printing using a commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol, DSL 18-NR). A 2 μm scattering layer consisting of larger TiO2 particles (ca. 400 nm, WER-O paste, Dyesol) was then deposited on the transparent TiO2 layer.
The TiO2 thick film electrodes were then heated to 450 °C for 15 minutes before being further heated to 500 °C for another 15 minutes. The electrodes were cooled to room temperature before being immersed in 40 mM TiCl4 solution at 70 °C for 30 minutes. A hole was drilled in the TiO2/FTO working electrode to facilitate the filling of the electrolyte in the later part of cell fabrication. The TiO2/FTO electrodes were then rinsed with deionized water and then heated at 500 °C in a hot air stream for 30 minutes. After cooling to ca. 70 °C, the electrodes were immersed in a 0.25 mM solution of Z907 (cis-diisothiocyanato-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dinonyl) ruthenium(II)) sensitizer in 1:1 acetonitrile–tert-butanol and left for 16 hours. They were rinsed with acetonitrile immediately before cell fabrication.
Fabrication of DSCs
DSCs were fabricated by sandwiching the sensitized TiO2 electrode and a PEDOT/PET or an EP/PEDOT/PET electrode together using 2 layers of a hot-melt polymer (Surlyn, DuPont) as a gasket. The interelectrode space was filled with an iodide/triiodide electrolyte by vacuum backfilling through the pre-drilled hole in the TiO2 electrode. The hole was sealed using a small piece of Surlyn and a microscope coverslip. Reference DSCs were made by replacing the counter electrodes with platinized FTO electrodes, which were prepared by thermal decomposition of hexachloroplatinic acid solution at 400 °C for 20 minutes. Thin-layer sandwich cells for testing the counter electrode performance were fabricated in a similar way using platinized FTO and PEDOT/PET or EP/PEDOT/PET as electrodes. The iodide/triiodide electrolyte contained 0.6 M PMII, 0.03 M I2, 0.1 M guanidine thiocyanate, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine in a mixture of acetonitrile and valeronitrile with a volume ratio of 85:15.
Electrode and DSC characterization
The microstructure of the electrodes was observed using a Philips XL30 field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM). The sheet resistances of the electrodes were tested using a four-point probe. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were performed using a three-electrode cell and an Autolab potentiostat/galvanostat controlled by the Nova 1.6 software package. The working electrode was either a PEDOT/PET or an EP/PEDOT/PET electrode, the auxiliary electrode was a platinum wire, and the reference electrode was Ag/AgNO3 (0.01 M AgNO3 and 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium perchlorate in acetonitrile). The electrolyte consisted of 5 mM iodide/triiodide electrolyte as mentioned above and 0.1 M lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) in acetonitrile. Potential sweep experiments were also performed on thin-layer cells at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.
Current–voltage characteristics under simulated AM 1.5 illumination were measured using a Keithley Source Meter and the PVIV software package (Newport). Simulated AM 1.5 illumination was provided by a Newport class A solar simulator, and the light intensity was measured using a calibrated Si reference cell. Incident photon-to-collected electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were measured with a spectral resolution of ca. 5 nm using a 300 W xenon lamp and a grating monochromator equipped with order sorting filters (Newport/Oriel). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) experiments were performed with cells under illumination with a red LED (center wavelength λ = 625 nm) and biased at the VOC induced by the illumination. A 15 mV RMS voltage perturbation was used, and the frequency range was 105 to 0.1 Hz. Different illumination intensities were achieved using neutral density filters mounted in an automated filter wheel system (Newport), which was controlled by the Nova 1.6 software. EIS spectra were also measured at 0 V bias in the dark for thin-layer cells.
Results and discussion
The PEDOT:PSS electrodes fabricated by roll-to-roll slot die coating achieved a sheet resistance of 50 Ω per square. The PEDOT:PSS coating has good adhesion with the PET substrate and is not easily scratched off. From Fig. 2(a), it can be seen that the PEDOT:PSS forms a rather smooth coating. However, this morphology is not desirable for a counter electrode material due to the limited surface area available for the triiodide reduction reaction, especially considering that PEDOT:PSS is not as electrocatalytic as Pt for this reaction. In this work, to increase the electrode surface area, an additional 1–2 μm thick layer of EP was deposited on the 0.7–1 μm thick conductive PEDOT:PSS coating (Fig. S1†). Since the EP layer is deposited directly onto a PEDOT-based substrate, the adhesion of the EP layer should be better compared to using other substrates.23 The mechanical integrity was tested by repeatedly bending the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode so that a 90 degree angle formed between tangent lines drawn from each end of the electrode. After each bend, the electrode was visually inspected and the sheet resistance was measured. The sheet resistance only increased by 2.8 Ω from 19.19 Ω to 21.99 Ω after 300 bends (Fig. S2†). Fig. 2(b) shows a SEM image of the EP on the PEDOT:PSS coated PET substrate. By comparing these images with Fig. 2(a), we can see the strikingly different morphologies of the PEDOT films coated by using two different methods. EP has a very porous morphology with sub-micrometer pores across the entire surface. This is a desirable morphology for the counter electrode as discussed previously. However, EP reduces the optical transmittance of the electrode, which is not an issue for a typical front-illuminated solar cell.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (c) appearance of a PEDOT:PSS film coated on a PET substrate by roll-to-roll slot die coating; (b) SEM image and (d) appearance of the electropolymerized PEDOT film on the PEDOT:PSS film coated by roll-to-roll slot die coating. 
To test the catalytic properties of the PEDOT electrodes, thin-layer cells containing an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte were fabricated by sandwiching a Pt-coated FTO electrode with either an EP/PEDOT/PET or a PEDOT/PET electrode. For comparison, a symmetric Pt-coated FTO device was also fabricated. Fig. 3(a) shows the Tafel plots obtained from the steady-state potential sweep measurement of the above fabricated devices. FTO/Pt–Pt/FTO devices require a much smaller voltage than PEDOT/PET devices to drive any given current. This indicates that much smaller overpotentials are required for oxidation and reduction of the mediator in FTO/Pt–Pt/FTO devices. Therefore, for FTO/Pt–EP/PEDOT/PET and FTO/Pt–PEDOT/PET devices, the Tafel plots mainly reflect oxidation or reduction reactions at the PEDOT electrode. According to Fig. 3(a), the current due to the reduction of triiodide (negative bias) at the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode is larger than that at the PEDOT/PET electrode at any given bias, which is expected based on its porous morphology (larger surface area). Note that there is no significant difference in the current due to the oxidation of iodide between EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes and PEDOT/PET electrodes, but this is not relevant to solar cell operation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Tafel plots obtained from steady-state potential sweep measurements of thin-layer DSCs containing an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte using Pt coated FTO as working electrodes and different counter electrodes as indicated by the legend; (b) Nyquist plots for the DSCs in (a) obtained in the dark at 0 V bias; (c) equivalent circuit used for fitting the impedance spectra. 
Impedance spectroscopy measurements were also performed on these thin-layer devices to estimate the charge transfer resistance at the electrolyte/counter electrode interface. Nyquist plots for these devices are shown in Fig. 3(b). The insets are the enlarged figures for devices using EP/PEDOT/PET and PEDOT/PET as counter electrodes. The impedance spectra were fitted using an equivalent circuit (Fig. 3(c)) to extract the parameters related to various processes in the devices. In this circuit, RS is the series resistance, RPt is the charge transfer resistance of the working electrode (i.e. Pt/FTO), RCE is the charge transfer resistance of the counter electrode (i.e. Pt/FTO, EP/PEDOT/PET or PEDOT/PET), CPt and CCE are the double layer capacitances at the working electrode/electrolyte interface and the counter electrode/electrolyte interface, and Zd is a Warburg impedance describing the diffusion of triiodide (the minority redox species) in the electrolyte. Values of these parameters obtained by fitting are listed in Table 1. For the symmetric Pt/FTO device, only one RC circuit was used to fit the impedance spectrum and RPt and RCE values were obtained as half of the fitted R value. The device using PEDOT/PET as the counter electrode has a higher series resistance (40.5 Ω) than that using the Pt/FTO electrode (25.8 Ω), which is consistent with the larger sheet resistance of the PEDOT/PET electrode as described previously. The capacitance values of EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes are higher than those of PEDOT/PET and Pt/FTO electrodes, which is due to pseudo-capacitive charging of the high surface area of EP/PEDOT/PET.26 Deposition of the EP film on the PEDOT/PET electrode increases the series resistance (65.3 Ω), possibly due to a lengthened electron transport pathway. The charge transfer resistance at the counter electrode increases in the order of Pt/FTO (2.8 Ω) < EP/PEDOT/PET (15.2 Ω) < PEDOT/PET (75.4 Ω), which is consistent with the potential sweep measurement shown in Fig. 3(a). Overall, adding the EP film reduces the total resistance of the counter electrode, despite the increased series resistance, due to the large reduction in the charge transfer resistance. These results suggest that the EP film is essential when using flexible PEDOT/PET as the counter electrode, in order to fabricate more efficient devices. The low-frequency real part of the Warburg impedance (Rd) due to the diffusion of triiodide is slightly larger for the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode, presumably due to the increased diffusion resistance in the porous EP film. For the PEDOT/PET electrode, determination of Warburg parameters was not attempted due to the lack of obvious features in the Nyquist plot. As a preliminary test of long-term stability, CV and chronopotentiometry experiments were performed on the aforementioned thin-layer cells. The voltammetric response was practically unchanged after 100 CV cycles and the potential required to drive the typical 1 Sun photocurrent was almost constant for a period of 14 hours. In both cases, results for Pt/FTO electrodes were comparable (Fig. S3†).
Table 1 List of parameters obtained by fitting impedance spectra using an equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 3(c). The active area of the electrodes is 0.5 cm2




Counter electrode

R
S/Ω

R
Pt/Ω

C
Pt/F

R
CE/Ω

C
CE/F

R
d/Ω




Pt/FTO
25.8
2.8
1.4 × 10−5
2.8
1.4 × 10−5
1.6


EP/PEDOT/PET
65.3
7.9
1.6 × 10−5
15.2
3.1 × 10−3
4.5


PEDOT/PET
40.5
17.8
2.3 × 10−5
75.4
7.9 × 10−4
—




EP electrodes, along with PEDOT:PSS flat electrodes without the EP film, were fabricated into DSCs and their photovoltaic performances were characterized. Standard DSCs using Pt/FTO counter electrodes were also made and used as reference. Fig. 4(a) shows representative current–voltage characteristics of the devices measured under 1 Sun and 0.2 Sun illumination, and the average values of photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table 2. At 1 Sun, the cell using an EP/PEDOT/PET counter electrode exhibits a short-circuit current density (jSC) of 13.4 mA cm−2, an open-circuit photovoltage (VOC) of 0.67 V, a fill factor (ff) of 0.54 and an overall power conversion efficiency (η) of 4.84%. By comparison, the cell using counter electrodes without the EP film only achieves an overall η of 0.93%, with significantly lower jSC, VOC and ff. This shows that the higher surface area of the EP film is very effective in improving the performance of the counter electrode and therefore the overall power conversion efficiency, which is consistent with the conclusion drawn from Fig. 3. The jSC value of the cell using an EP/PEDOT/PET counter electrode is similar to that of the reference cell using a Pt/FTO electrode, which is also reflected by the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra as shown in Fig. 4(b). Although DSCs using EP/PEDOT/PET counter electrodes show a lower efficiency at 1 Sun illumination compared to those using Pt/FTO electrodes and those reported in the literature for EP/FTO and PEDOT:PSS graphene composite/FTO counter electrodes,27,28 the efficiencies at 0.2 Sun are comparable. Therefore, the EP/PEDOT/PET based devices are more promising for low-light applications such as indoor and clouded areas. The intensity dependent efficiencies are mainly due to the higher sheet resistance of flat PEDOT/PET substrates compared to the FTO glass. However, it is worth reiterating that PEDOT/PET substrates are flexible and inexpensive compared to the FTO glass.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics measured under simulated AM 1.5 1 Sun (solid lines) and 0.2 Sun (dashed lines) illumination and (b) incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra for DSCs using an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte and a ruthenium dye Z907 in conjunction with various counter electrodes. 
Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters for DSCs shown in Fig. 4(a), measured under simulated AM 1.5 1 Sun and 0.2 Sun illumination




Counter electrode
Light intensity

j
SC/mA cm−2

V
OC/V
ff

η/%




Pt/FTO
1 Sun
13.3
0.73
0.69
6.70


0.2 Sun
2.8
0.68
0.73
6.95


EP/PEDOT/PET
1 Sun
13.4
0.67
0.54
4.84


0.2 Sun
3.3
0.61
0.65
6.54


PEDOT/PET
1 Sun
5.4
0.42
0.41
0.93


0.2 Sun
1.3
0.40
0.54
1.40




The use of different counter electrode materials is not usually expected to affect VOC values of DSCs, as differences of counter electrode kinetics need not be considered at the open-circuit voltage where the net current flow is zero. However, if the counter electrode materials somehow alter the electrolyte composition or modify the photoanode surface, the VOC (and jSC) could be affected. In this work, compared to the reference device, VOC decreases when using EP/PEDOT/PET counter electrodes, as also observed by Ahmad et al.23 The IPCE spectrum also showed a slight red shift, indicating moderate surface modification of the photoanode in EP/PEDOT/PET based devices. This was proposed to be caused by the more acidic nature of the PEDOT materials compared to Pt.20
To gain more information about interfacial energetics and recombination in PEDOT-based devices, impedance spectroscopy was utilized to investigate the influence of the PEDOT counter electrode on the TiO2 conduction band position and recombination kinetics. Fig. 5 shows the fitting results for all devices, which were obtained by using an equivalent circuit model described in detail previously.29 To estimate the relative conduction band positions in these devices, the chemical capacitance of the TiO2 films (Cμ) is plotted versus VOC, as the horizontal shifts between plots have been shown to be good indicators for the difference in TiO2 conduction band position.30 As shown in Fig. 5(a), there is a ca. 50 mV shift between Cμ–VOC plots for the two cells, which corresponds to a 50 mV lower conduction band position for the device using EP/PEDOT/PET as the counter electrode. This finding is consistent with that reported by Ahmad and co-workers.20 As discussed above, this is probably due to the acidic nature of the PEDOT materials which slightly modifies the photoanode (i.e. TiO2) surface, as small cations such as H+ and Li+ are well-known to cause a downward conduction band shift in DSCs.29,31–34 Based on Fig. 5(b), the recombination resistance (Rrec), which describes the resistance of recombination of TiO2 electrons with redox acceptor species, is smaller for devices based on the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode at any given VOC compared to devices based on the Pt/FTO electrode. This can explain the lower VOC values in these devices.32 As the Rrec–Cμ plots for the two devices are almost identical (inset of Fig. 5(b)), the lower recombination resistance for the EP/PEDOT/PET device is not caused by a larger recombination rate constant,35,36 it is rather caused by the higher electron density at any given VOC due to a lower conduction band.
 Fig. 5  (a) TiO2 capacitance versus photovoltage plots (Cμ–VOC) and (b) recombination resistance versus photovoltage plots (Rrec–VOC) for devices using a ruthenium dye Z907 and an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte. The inset in (b) is the plot of the recombination resistance versus TiO2 capacitance (Rrec–Cμ) for the same devices. 
Conclusions
PEDOT:PSS was deposited on PET using a roll-to-roll slot die coating process. The resulting composite films were evaluated for use as a counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells. To improve the performance, an additional layer of PEDOT was electropolymerized onto the PEDOT/PET electrodes coated by the roll-to-roll process. The slot die coated PEDOT:PSS on PET formed a smooth, compact layer while the electropolymerized PEDOT formed a porous layer. Electropolymerized PEDOT on the flat PEDOT/PET electrode was more active than PEDOT/PET alone due to higher surface area, but both PEDOT/PET and electropolymerized PEDOT on PEDOT/PET were less active than platinized FTO. The EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes showed good mechanical and electrochemical stability. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and IPCE measurements provide evidence that the PEDOT based counter electrode can modify the electrolyte solution, probably by increasing the proton concentration, resulting in a lower VOC, higher jSC and improved red response in the IPCE spectrum. Impedance spectroscopy measurements reveal that a downward shift of the TiO2 conduction band edge relative to the electrolyte redox level is the cause for the lower VOC, as opposed to an increase in the recombination rate constant. The overall cell performance under 1 Sun illumination is improved by addition of an electropolymerized layer of PEDOT to PEDOT/PET counter electrodes, but both remain inferior to platinized FTO. However, under 0.2 Sun illumination, devices employing electropolymerized PEDOT performed similarly to those with platinized FTO counter electrodes, suggesting that EP/PEDOT/PET electrodes may be useful in DSCs designed for low light (e.g. indoor) operation. This result is particularly promising considering the lower cost of materials (PEDOT and PET substrates) and the processes (roll-to-roll and electropolymerization) compared to platinized FTO based DSCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Education Tier 2 research grant (MOE2011-T2-2-130). We thank Dr Lidong Sun for technical assistance.
Notes and references
H.-J. Kim, Y.-C. Kim, J.-T. Hong, M.-J. Kim, H.-W. Seo, J.-W. Park and J.-Y. Choi, Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology, 2007, 2, 5 Search PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 162 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kijitori, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jean-Claude, S. Renata, B. Artur and G. Thomas, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 045007 CrossRef .
S. K. Balasingam, M. G. Kang and Y. Jun, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11457 RSC .
B. E. Hardin, W. Gaynor, I. K. Ding, S.-B. Rim, P. Peumans and M. D. McGehee, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Okada and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4144 CAS .
T. N. Murakami, S. Ito, Q. Wang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Bessho, I. Cesar, P. Liska, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Gratzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Anwar, A. E. George and I. G. Hill, Sol. Energy, 2013, 88, 129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu and T. Ma, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Winther-Jensen and K. West, React. Funct. Polym., 2006, 66, 479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bay, K. West, B. Winther-Jensen and T. Jacobsen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Sirimanne, B. Winther-Jensen, H. C. Weerasinghe and Y.-B. Cheng, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Maiaugree, S. Pimanpang, M. Towannang, S. Saekow, W. Jarernboon and V. Amornkitbamrung, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Muto, M. Ikegami, K. Kobayashi and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 804 CrossRef CAS .
J. Idigoras, E. Guillen, J. F. Ramos, J. A. Anta, K. N. Mohammad and S. Ahmad, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3175–3181 CAS .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2845 RSC .
S. Ahmad, M. Deepa and S. Singh, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, J.-H. Yum, Z. Xianxi, M. Gratzel, H.-J. Butt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1654 RSC .
H. Tian, Z. Yu, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, V. Brault, S. Ahmad, L. Breau, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6089 CAS .
H. Ellis, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, C. Perruchot, M. Jouini, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yue, J. Wu, Y. Xiao, J. Lin, M. Huang, Z. Lan and L. Fan, Energy, 2013, 54, 315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, Y. Xu, Y. Bai and S. Jin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 289, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18847 CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083 RSC .
J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 1715 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, X. Wang and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6170 RSC .
N. Kopidakis, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11307 CrossRef CAS .
G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1426 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Jennings, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6637 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings and Q. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cross-sectional SEM image, surface profile, dependence of sheet resistance on repeated bending, and electrochemical stability test of the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00563eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Configuration of dye-sensitized solar cells used in this study.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image and (c) appearance of a PEDOT:PSS film coated on a PET substrate by roll-to-roll slot die coating; (b) SEM image and (d) appearance of the electropolymerized PEDOT film on the PEDOT:PSS film coated by roll-to-roll slot die coating.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Tafel plots obtained from steady-state potential sweep measurements of thin-layer DSCs containing an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte using Pt coated FTO as working electrodes and different counter electrodes as indicated by the legend; (b) Nyquist plots for the DSCs in (a) obtained in the dark at 0 V bias; (c) equivalent circuit used for fitting the impedance spectra.	 

Pt/FTO	25.8	2.8	1.4 × 10−5	2.8	1.4 × 10−5	1.6
EP/PEDOT/PET	65.3	7.9	1.6 × 10−5	15.2	3.1 × 10−3	4.5
PEDOT/PET	40.5	17.8	2.3 × 10−5	75.4	7.9 × 10−4	—

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics measured under simulated AM 1.5 1 Sun (solid lines) and 0.2 Sun (dashed lines) illumination and (b) incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra for DSCs using an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte and a ruthenium dye Z907 in conjunction with various counter electrodes.	 

Pt/FTO	1 Sun	13.3	0.73	0.69	6.70
0.2 Sun	2.8	0.68	0.73	6.95
EP/PEDOT/PET	1 Sun	13.4	0.67	0.54	4.84
0.2 Sun	3.3	0.61	0.65	6.54
PEDOT/PET	1 Sun	5.4	0.42	0.41	0.93
0.2 Sun	1.3	0.40	0.54	1.40

 	Fig. 5  (a) TiO2 capacitance versus photovoltage plots (Cμ–VOC) and (b) recombination resistance versus photovoltage plots (Rrec–VOC) for devices using a ruthenium dye Z907 and an iodide/triiodide based electrolyte. The inset in (b) is the plot of the recombination resistance versus TiO2 capacitance (Rrec–Cμ) for the same devices.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cross-sectional SEM image, surface profile, dependence of sheet resistance on repeated bending, and electrochemical stability test of the EP/PEDOT/PET electrode. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta00563e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
