Emerging iongel materials towards applications in energy and bioelectronics  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1MH01263K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1MH01263K
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 3239-3265Emerging iongel materials towards applications in energy and bioelectronics

        
          
            Liliana C. 
            Tomé†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Luca 
            Porcarelli
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jason E. 
            Bara
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Maria 
            Forsyth
          
          
        
      abd and 

        
          
            David 
            Mecerreyes
          
          
        
      *ad
aPOLYMAT, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Avda. Tolosa 72, Donostia-San Sebastian 20018, Gipuzkoa, Spain. E-mail: david.mecerreyes@ehu.es
bInstitute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3217, Australia
cUniversity of Alabama, Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0203, USA
dIkerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 48013 Bilbao, Spain
Received 
      9th August 2021
    , Accepted 8th October 2021First published on 9th October 2021AbstractIn the past two decades, ionic liquids (ILs) have blossomed as versatile task-specific materials with a unique combination of properties, which can be beneficial for a plethora of different applications. The additional need of incorporating ILs into solid devices led to the development of a new class of ionic soft-solid materials, named here iongels. Nowadays, iongels cover a wide range of materials mostly composed of an IL component immobilized within different matrices such as polymers, inorganic networks, biopolymers or inorganic nanoparticles. This review aims at presenting an integrated perspective on the recent progress and advances in this emerging type of material. We provide an analysis of the main families of iongels and highlight the emerging types of these ionic soft materials offering additional properties, such as thermoresponsiveness, self-healing, mixed ionic/electronic properties, and (photo)luminescence, among others. Next, recent trends in additive manufacturing (3D printing) of iongels are presented. Finally, their new applications in the areas of energy, gas separation and (bio)electronics are detailed and discussed in terms of performance, underpinning it to the structural features and processing of iongel materials.
Liliana C. Tomé
Dr Liliana C. Tomé received her MSc in Materials Derived from Renewable Resources (2008) from University of Aveiro and a PhD in Chemical Engineering (2014) ITQB NOVA, Portugal. After a post-doc (2015–2018) at ITQB, she moved to POLYMAT – University of the Basque Country (Spain) with a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship. In 2020, she joined LAQV-REQUIMTE, NOVA School of Science and Technology|FCT NOVA (Lisbon), where she is an Assistant Researcher. She received the L’Oréal Portugal Medal of Honor for Women in Science 2020. Her areas of research are centered on iongels and poly(ionic liquid)-based materials for gas separation and bioelectronics.
Luca Porcarelli
Dr Luca Porcarelli is a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Postdoctoral Fellow at POLYMAT, University of the Basque Country. He received a MS in Chemistry from the University of Bologna and a PhD from the Polytechnic University of Turin. His research interests focus on the design of polymer electrolytes and their application in the field of energy storage and bioelectronics.
Jason E. Bara
Professor Jason Bara received his BS in Chemical Engineering from Virginia Commonwealth University and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Colorado at Boulder. He has authored more than 125 peer-reviewed research publications and 6 book chapters on the following topics: separations, ionic liquids, polymer membranes, nanostructured materials, and chemical process engineering. He has also been awarded 11 U.S. patents for discoveries in these areas. In recognition of his research, he has received major awards from the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and chemical engineering education.
Maria Forsyth
Prof. Maria Forsyth (Fellow Australian Academy of Sciences) is an Alfred Deakin Professorial Fellow at Deakin University and an Ikerbasque Visiting Professorial Fellow at the University of the Basque Country. Professor Forsyth has worked at the forefront of energy materials research and has consistently made breakthrough discoveries, including in polymer electrolytes, ionic liquids and organic plastic crystals. Her research has focused on understanding the phenomenon of charge transport in these materials and at the metal/electrolyte interfaces present in all electrochemical applications.
David Mecerreyes
Prof. David Mecerreyes is an Ikerbasque Research Professor at POLYMAT-University of the Basque Country (Spain). He received his PhD from University of Liege in 1998 and carried out a postdoc (1998–2000) at IBM Almaden Research Center (California). Since 2010 he is at POLYMAT where he is the leader of the Innovative Polymers Group. His area of expertise is polymer synthesis of ionic and electroactive polymers, such as poly(ionic liquid)s, polymer electrolytes, redox polymers and PEDOT type conductive polymers. Current research interests involve the application of innovative polymers in emerging technologies such as organic batteries and bioelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Gels are soft-solid, jelly-like materials that do not flow.1 They can be classified into hydrogels, mostly composed of water,2 or organogels, mostly composed of an organic solvent.3 In the last years, ionogels or ion gels were proposed as an intermediate type of gel in which the main component is an ionic liquid (IL), instead of water or an organic solvent. Ionic liquid-based gels show some similarities to hydrogels because of their ionic nature and to organogels due to their nature and composition. Therefore, ion gels possess a unique combination of properties not seen in hydrogels or organogels.
Since the first report on ion gels by Watanabe and coworkers in 2005,4 plenty of studies have been reported in the literature dealing with these ionic soft solid materials.5–11 The first observation is that there is not a common name in the literature for the gels based on ILs. Many naming systems have been simultaneously adopted, making this a difficult subject to reference. The most common names are ionogel, ion gel, ion-gel, iongel and ionic liquid gels. Throughout this review, we will use the term iongel due the simplicity of its spelling and the pronunciation benefits. The second observation is that the iongel family includes materials with a notable diversity of chemical compositions and combination of components. On the one hand, there are numerous ionic liquids based on the high number of combinations of cations and anions available.12 Novel ILs are designed every day, and new ionic compounds, such as protic ILs13 or deep eutectic solvents (DES),14 continue to be discovered. On the other hand, it is possible to form a three dimensional network using different types of gelators, namely linear or polymer networks, block copolymers, supramolecular compounds, biopolymers, small molecular weight gelators, organosilane networks or inorganic nanoparticles, among others. All the variables regarding different ILs and gelators indicate that under the name of iongels there is a myriad of diverse soft materials with varying composition and properties, such as mechanical, electronic, chemical or electrochemical. The third observation is that iongels have been successfully tested in many applications ranging from batteries,15 supercapacitors,16 fuel cells,17 catalysis,18 analytical chemistry,19 gas separation membranes,20 biosensors,21 transistors22 to electrodes23 in bioelectronics. For each application, the requirements are very different. Thus, the best iongel does not exist and it definitely depends of the properties required for each application.
In this review, we primarily analyse the main soft ionic materials covered under the umbrella of iongels, ionogels or ionic gels. Next, we will focus on the emerging types of iongels that present additional properties to those typically associated with ILs, such as ionic conductivity, thermal stability, gas solubility or electrochemical widow. The emerging iongels present properties such as thermoresponsiveness, self-healing, mixed ionic/electronic conductivity, super elasticity or (photo-electro)luminescence properties. Another important goal of this review is to highlight the emerging trends on advanced processing methods such as additive manufacturing or 3D printing. Finally, the design versatility towards the applications of iongels in areas of energy and (bio)electronics will be highlighted.
2. Chemistry of iongels
2.1 Ionic liquids
In the last two decades, the unique properties of ILs, namely low volatility, thermal stability, ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability, have been advantageously used in a vast number of different applications across all technological fields. However, the greatest feature of ILs is perhaps their designer nature.12 Nowadays, one can find a wide range of functional ILs with completely different properties. For instance, ILs can be acidic or basic, hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Some ILs are very expensive, while some others are commodities with low cost. Some ILs can be biocompatible and some can have toxic tendencies or cause environmental damage,24 while others are made from renewable resources,25 and designed to be biodegradable.26 Some ILs are able to dissolve cellulose27 or kill microbes28 and bacteria,29 and others have functional pharmaceutical therapeutic qualities.30 ILs can be designed as excellent battery electrolytes31 or as alternative solvents for CO2 separation processes.32 It is evident from the literature that the optimum IL chemistry can be vastly different for each application. Some examples of ILs, as well as protic ILs and DES, that have been used to create diverse iongel materials, are presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures and abbreviations of selected ILs (top), protic ILs (middle) and DES (bottom) used to create diverse iongel materials. 
In the last few years, there have already been excellent reviews in the area of ILs for different applications.31–39 For this reason, in this review we will not discuss in detail the IL component of the iongels. Only in the final section, will we highlight the main IL components for each particular application along with the remaining challenges. Herein, we remark on some general trends relating to ILs, which have been observed under the umbrella of iongel materials:
(1) The main driving force behind the development of iongels is to have a material with the properties of an IL and the mechanical properties and processability of a solid. For this reason, iongels are usually designed using the highest performing ILs for each specific application.
(2) Occasionally, the liquid phase of iongels includes an IL and a second (and possibly third) component. For instance, in the case of iongels for batteries, the liquid phase of the iongel is formed by a mixture of IL and a Li+ or Na+ salt. In other cases, the additional component may be a fluorescent, biologically active or electrochromic compound.
(3) Most of the iongels have been designed using the common ILs used in electrochemistry having imidazolium, pyrrolidinium or phosphonium cations combined with fluorine containing anions such as [TFSI]− and [FSI]−. Nevertheless, there are numerous emerging ionic liquids and new ionic compounds, including protic ILs or DES, which are yet to be exploited for the design of iongels.
2.2 Types of gelators
Different types of gelators have been demonstrated to be effective in iongel formation, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. These include polymer networks, block copolymers, biopolymers, small molecular weight gelators, supramolecular gelators, organosilane networks or inorganic nanoparticles. In this sub-section, the main issues, advantages and limitations of each type of gelator will be discussed.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of different types of iongels and chemical structures of gelators. 
Mixing ILs with polymers is the most straightforward strategy to obtain iongels. For instance, Watanabe et al.4 prepared self-standing, flexible and transparent iongels through polymerization of methyl methacrylate (MMA) in [C2mim][TFSI] IL and a small amount of the cross-linker ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA). However, very soon it was realized that the miscibility of ILs with polymers is problematic and dependent on each individual type of IL compound. For this reason, rather than employing commercially available polymers such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA),40,41 poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA),42,43 poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF),44,45 or poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)46,47 as gelators, polymeric versions of the ILs named poly(ionic liquid)s (PILs) were used to develop iongels.48 Among them, poly(imidazolium)49–54 and poly(diallyldimethylammonium)55–58 type PILs have been the most popular in combination with a variety of counter-anions. However, when mixing high IL contents (on average >50 wt% depending on the IL/polymer system), the obtained materials do not behave as gels and are often able to flow. Alternatively, polymer cross-linking methods based on UV-curable resins or thermally curable polymers have been used to develop iongels with high IL contents and low polymer gelator contents.59–62 Again, the main challenge here is to prevent the leaching of the IL in the iongel. Therefore, ionic polymer networks, which can strongly interact with the IL cations and anions, are preferred.63–66
Another gelator type within the synthetic polymer family uses block copolymers as pioneered by Lodge et al.67–69 The ABA type triblock copolymers are known to be good gelators if the ‘A’ block is insoluble in the solvent, while the ‘B’ block is soluble. In the case of iongels, the most used ABA triblock copolymers are based on PS-b-PEO-b-PS,8 since PEO is a relatively IL-philic block and PS is usually IL-phobic. Nonetheless, various ABA type triblock copolymers have recently been synthesized and successfully used to prepare iongels, including polystyrene-b-poly(methyl methacrylate)-b-polystyrene (PSt-b-PMMA-b-PSt),70 poly(phenethyl methacrylate)-b-poly(methyl methacrylate)-b-poly(phenethyl methacrylate) (PPhEtMA-b-PMMA-b-PPhEtMA),71 and polystyrene-b-poly(diallyldimethylammonium)-b-polystyrene (PS-b-PDADMA-b-PS).72 As a drawback, for many types of ILs, the block copolymer has to be specifically designed in terms of the composition and chemical nature of the A–B blocks. This fact limits the use of block copolymers as it requires creating a tailored ABA block copolymer for each type of iongel. Furthermore, the relative amount of IL vs block copolymer is usually limited to a maximum of 80 wt% IL, and over this value, soft materials are typically obtained.
The third type of gelator within the polymer family is biopolymers such as gelatin,73 agarose,74 xanthan gum,75 guar gum,76 starch,77 chitosan,78 or cellulose.79 Biopolymer gelators have been shown to be very effective especially in the case of hydrophilic type of ILs, such as [C4mim][Cl], [amim][Br], [C2mim][Ac], and [C2mim][EtSO4], which interact positively with the biopolymers.80,81 However, biopolymers are usually not a good matrix in the case of iongels based on hydrophobic ILs for specific applications, where the presence of reactive groups such as amine or hydroxyl may interfere, as for instance in batteries.
The fourth type of gelator and one of the most popular ones is organosilane organic/inorganic networks obtained by the sol–gel methods.82,83 Le Bideau et al.,84 who proposed the name “ionogels”, pioneered the preparation of soft solids by incorporating IL in organosilica networks at high IL loadings (97 wt%).85 The main difficulty here is that the sol–gel method is a reactive process, in which the temperature and pH conditions need to be closely monitored and strongly depend on the type of IL. For instance, the sol–gel method should be adapted for each different IL and it is not applicable to some reactive ILs. Furthermore, in order to obtain free-standing and flexible iongels, the combination of organosilane networks with mechanically robust polymer matrices is needed, such as PVDF,86,87 or even a poly(diallyldimethylammonium) type poly(ionic liquid).88
Inorganic nanoparticles are another popular type of gelator. For example, an iongel can be obtained by dispersing 3 wt% silica (SiO2) nanoparticles into [C2mim][TFSI] IL, because of the formation of interconnected particulate silica networks in the IL.89 Nanoparticles are very powerful gelators and can give rise to iongels with many potential applications.90–93 However, the iongel formation strongly depends on the size, shape and surface of the inorganic nanoparticle, as well as the chemical nature of the IL component.94
Probably the least studied type of gelator is low molecular weight molecules, which induce a physical cross-linking due to non-covalent interactions. Among them, supramolecular interactions such as H-bonding,95 host–guest chemistry,96 π–π stacking,97 metal–ligand coordination,98 and electrostatic99 or hydrophobic interactions,100 are commonly used. Although low molecular weight gelators are particularly specific, they are also very interesting as they impart additional properties to the iongels, such as thermoresponsiveness101 or self-healing,102 as will be discussed in a subsequent section. Another advantage of these gelators is the fast preparation and processing of the iongels.
2.3 Conventional properties of iongels
Iongels usually preserve the intrinsic IL properties. As mentioned before, the gelator forms the three-dimensional network within the IL and is responsible for the solid-like gel behaviour. The iongel properties can be tailored by varying the chemical structures of the IL and gelator, the proportions between them, and their interactions (covalent vs non-covalent). Amongst the diverse iongel properties, the main ones are the ionic conductivity, selectivity towards CO2, and the mechanical and rheological properties. It should be pointed out that these properties have been already discussed in previous reviews10,38,103–105 and will be only briefly mentioned here.
The high ionic conductivity is a very attractive property of iongels. Ionic conductivity can be easily controlled by adjusting the composition of the IL and the gelator in the iongel. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, increasing the amount of the ionic liquid electrolyte (ILE) enhances the ionic conductivity of the iongels, close to the value of the neat ILE.106
 Fig. 3  (a) Ionic conductivity and (b) DMTA analysis vs. temperature of iongels containing PEGDA and 90, 80 and 70 wt% ILE ([C3mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI salt). Adapted with permission from Fdz de Añastro et al.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 and N2 solubilities of iongel membranes prepared with poly(DADMA C(CN)3) (PIL) and 20, 40, 60 wt% [C2mim][C(CN)3] (IL). Adapted with permission from Tomé et al.110 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Another attractive property of iongels is their high carbon dioxide (CO2) solubility over light gases such as methane (CH4), hydrogen (H2), or nitrogen (N2) which is illustrated in Fig. 3c. This property is especially important for membrane-based CO2 separation applications.107–109 In this context, iongel materials enable the IL functionality to be used by providing solid structures whilst retaining liquid-like gas transport properties.20 Depending on the chemical nature of the IL and gelator, and their respective contents, it is possible to fabricate iongels with gas separation performances similar to their liquid counterparts.108
The mechanical and rheological properties of iongels are also key features to consider depending on the application. For instance, in lithium batteries, the Young's modulus of the iongels is an important parameter to try to limit the detrimental formation of lithium dendrites. In the case of gas separation membranes, mechanical stability is also a key parameter for long-term operational stability, particularly at high temperatures and pressure gradients, which can limit the practical application of iongel membranes.
Overall, the chemical structures of both IL and gelator, as well as the proportion between them, are key factors that affect the mechanical and rheological properties of iongels. As an example, Fig. 3b displays the dynamic mechanical thermal analysis (DMTA) of iongels consisting of poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) as the polymer network and an ILE containing NaFSI salt dissolved in [C3mpyr][FSI] IL.106 The storage modulus significantly decreases when increasing the amount of ILE and soft materials are obtained. This is mainly due to a decrease in the network density, as the PEGDA content in the iongel decreases from 30 to 10 wt%. From Fig. 3b, it can also be observed that the storage modulus is practically constant between room temperature and 80 °C, indicating that the rubber-like behaviour is preserved and the solid-state structures of the iongels are not destroyed. This demonstrates that cross-linked PEGDA iongels maintain their mechanical properties at different temperatures, which is particularly interesting not only for battery applications,106 but also for gas membrane operation.111
Additionally, the effect of the IL chemical structure on the mechanical and rheological properties of iongels has also been addressed using different types of gelators.112–116 For instance, Tamate et al.117 recently studied the influence of IL cation and anion on the viscoelastic properties of iongels based on jamming and H-bonding of diblock copolymer micelles in IL. The results showed that when the hydrogen bonding ability of the IL becomes very weak, for example, when a methyl group is present at the C(2) position of the imidazolium ring, macroscopic phase separation occurs due to strong H-bonding between the diblock copolymer micelles, resulting in opaque and fragile iongels. Conversely, when the H-bonding ability of the ILs is relatively strong, as in the case of [C2mim][(MeO)HPO2], the H-bonding among the micelles is significantly suppressed, resulting in lower storage and loss moduli values.117 Controlling the competitive H-bonding interaction between polymers and ILs is thus crucial to obtain the desirable mechanical properties. Furthermore, Brogan et al.118 systematically explored the stress–strain relationship of iongels containing cross-linked PEGDA and ILs with different anion basicity (β). The results showed that the strength of iongels is inversely related to the IL anion polarity. The better solvents for PEGDA were the less polar ILs, ensuring iongels with improved strength and toughness.118
Unfortunately, there has not been any study that compares the mechanical properties of different iongels having the same IL component and different gelators at the same ratio. Here, intuitively, it is expected that inorganic particles or aromatic compounds lead to iongels with superior Young's modulus.103
2.4 Iongels with “additional properties”
In the last years, a great amount of work has been devoted to preparation of iongels with additional properties besides those discussed in the previous section. As shown in Fig. 4, a large variety of emerging iongels have been synthesized showing new functionalities in addition to the conventional properties of iongels (ionic conductivity, thermal stability, and electrochemical stability). This has led to a new generation of iongels with unique mechanical properties such as self-healing, stretchability, shape memory or hyperelasticity. Responsive iongels, demonstrating thermo- or photo-responsiveness, have also been very extensively researched. More recently, other attractive properties have also been added to the portfolio of iongel materials, including mixed ionic/electronic conductivity, luminescence, magnetism, biocompatibility and bioactivity. In this section, we will highlight some examples of these emerging iongels showing additional properties or functionalities.
 Fig. 4  Images of emerging iongels with additional properties or functionalities. Adapted with permission from (a) Noro et al.119 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Li et al.120 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) D’Angelo et al.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Tamate et al.102 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Del Água et al.122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Ziółkowski et al.123 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons. 
Iongels can show interesting thermoresponsive behaviour (Fig. 4a). In this case, the mechanical/rheological properties,119 swelling degree or volume124 of an iongel changes reversibly with the temperature. These iongels can be used in different applications, namely reversible water uptake, actuators, or flexible optical devices.125 In a typical example, iongels formed using inorganic nanoparticles and ILs are in the gel state at room temperature, but they can flow at high temperature showing a fluid-like behaviour. In this case, the iongels show a gel–sol transition temperature typical of many types of supramolecular gelators. This property can be advantageously used to process iongel materials by advanced methods, such as 3D printing, as will be discussed in the next section. On the other hand, iongels can also unveil thermo-responsive behaviour as poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogels which swell or collapse reversibly with temperature. Benito-Lopez et al.124 showed that an iongel consisting of [C2mim][EtSO4] and cross-linked PNIPAM can be used as a thermoresponsive valve in microfluidic devices taking advantage of this property. The use of gelators or ILs comprising photosensitive moieties has also been reported as a straightforward strategy to prepare photo-responsive iongels.71,126–128
Luminescent iongels have been prepared by adding a number of organic and inorganic luminescent dyes to iongels. For instance, Lunstroot et al.129 reported an imidazolium-based IL with a europium(III) tetrakis β-diketonate complex confined in a silica network. The resulting materials revealed intense red photoluminescence under UV irradiation. In addition, the same authors have described the first lanthanide-containing luminescent iongels based on a polymer matrix.130 Highly luminescent and flexible iongel films were obtained by incorporating europium(III) complexes in the PMMA/[C6mim][TFSI] matrix. Later on, Xie et al.131 developed iongels with a chromophore of platinum and europium bimetallic complex. The chromophore was combined with PMMA and [C4mim][TFSI], yielding transparent, flexible, ion conductive, and luminescent iongels, which are interesting candidates for soft organic light emitting diodes. More recently, Li et al.120 prepared luminescent iongels (Fig. 4b) by mixing sodium deoxycholate and europium nitrate in a protic IL ([EA][NO3]). In comparison to other lanthanide-iongels, typically obtained by doping lanthanides in ILs, polymer matrices or solid supports, the sodium deoxycholate-based iongels were directly built into nanofibers by metal coordination and hydrogen bonding. These reports demonstrate that luminescent iongels with enhanced mechanical properties hold great potential for applications in the fields of solid electrolytes, biosensors and optical devices.
Iongel materials that exhibit shape-memory and self-healing properties (Fig. 4c and d) are also of particular interest. To illustrate with some recent examples, Li et al.132 reported such behaviours in an iongel supported by a silicone backbone containing [C2mim][TFSI] and tannic acid. Singh et al.133 also observed that an iongel formed from [C2min][EtSO4] and gelatin showed highly stretchable and self-healing behaviour, while an analogous gelatin-based hydrogel did not. Trivedy et al.134 also reported an agarose-based iongel with self-healing properties. On the other hand, synthetic supramolecular polymers have also been explored as gelators in the preparation of iongels with self-healing properties. For instance, the use of gelators based on D-gluconic acetal derivatives97 or PILs having ureido-pyrimidinone (UPy)135 with dynamic cross-linking points resulted in iongels displaying self-healing behaviour. In general, shape memory and self-healing properties are usually boosted through multiple forms of non-covalent supramolecular interactions,136 namely H-bonding and coulombic forces, between the IL and gelator.
Conducting polymer hydrogels are receiving increased attention because of their ability to conduct both electrons and ions.137,138 Nevertheless, conducting polymer hydrogels suffer from water evaporation which results in the loss of mechanical stability and conductive properties. Recently, del Agua et al.122 reported a conducting iongel (Fig. 4e) formed using guar gum, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and [C4mim][Cl] IL. A unique combination of properties was obtained in this iongel material that includes the electronic conductivity of PEDOT, the support and flexibility given by guar gum, and the ionic conductivity and negligible vapour pressure of the IL. Nowadays, the development of conducting polymer type iongels is a very active field of research because of the interesting mixed ionic/electronic conductivity and the potential use of these materials as sensors and electronic skin in bioelectronics.139,140
Iongels presenting magnetic properties can be classified in two types, depending on the material that generates the magnetic properties. First, paramagnetic iongels have been developed based on ILs containing paramagnetic anions such as [FeCl4]−.141 The resulting iongels were transparent, flexible, and combined the paramagnetic functionality of the metal–IL with mechanical properties of the matrix. Second, magnetic iongels have also been prepared using magnetic nanoparticles as the gelator,142 or by introducing iron oxide (Fe2O3) nanoparticles into a typical iongel formulation including ILs and a polymeric gelator.123 These iongels respond to external permanent magnets (Fig. 4f) and thus, they are promising materials for new soft magnetic actuators.
During the past few years, due the increasing demand of soft ionic materials, considerable research efforts have been devoted to developing iongels showing biocompatibility, biodegradability and bioactive properties (Fig. 4g). In the first case, the most investigated iongel types have been those that include biocompatible ILs, such as the ones based on cholinium, and gelators of biocompatible synthetic polymers or natural biopolymers. As an example, Isik et al.143 proposed a series of biocompatible iongels by trapping cholinium lactate ILs into methacrylic polymer networks. Later on, Yuen et al.144 reported the use of polycarbonate networks as gelators to form iongels that were hydrolytically degradable. This function allowed for the possibility of having biodegradable iongels. Furthermore, Jo et al.145 recently suggested a biocompatible and biodegradable iongel composed of cholinium malate and levan polysaccharide. On the other hand, in order to produce soft solid materials with excellent antibacterial properties, bioactive iongels have been prepared by incorporating bioactive cholinium-based ILs having carboxylate29 or amino acid146 anions into polysaccharides, such as chitin, chitosan or cellulose.
3. Advanced processing methods
Because iongels contain ILs (which can have essentially zero vapour pressure), they are not subject to desiccation (i.e., “drying out’) and a change in properties over time and temperature as with hydrogels or organogels. This affords advantages in terms of their ability to be processed using both simplistic and sophisticated methods. In this review, we are highlighting some recent examples of advanced processing methods, such as electrospinning, sol–gel techniques, inkjet printing, transfer stamping and 3D printing of iongels (Fig. 5), each of which has relative advantages and disadvantages depending on the desired form of the iongel and the end-use application.
 Fig. 5  Iongel materials processed using different methods. Adapted with permission from: (a) Ha et al.151 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society, (b) Wang et al.147 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, (c) Kim et al.152 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, (d) Zhong et al.153 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, (e) Wong et al.154 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons and (f) Ye et al.155 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Sol–gel processing methods are typically used to form a network of inorganic oxides such as SiO2 or TiO2 and can result in highly porous solids such as xerogels or aerogels after the liquid is removed from the gel via evaporation.83,84 However, ILs will not evaporate and will be retained within the inorganic component. Sol–gel processing allows for control over shape, thickness and flexibility of the iongel product.83,84,129,147 The good solvation power of ILs allows for the inclusion of functional solutes within the iongel, which would not be possible if the liquid was volatile. Some interesting examples include luminescent lanthanides,83,129 photoluminescent polymers,148 catalysts,149 and carbon dots.147 In the case of carbon dots, control over iongel thickness directly impacted the colour observed.147
Relatively stiff, non-crosslinked iongels containing only organic species, such as those produced by Voss et al.150 from [C6mim][TFSI] and gelators such as 12-hydroxystearic acid (12-HSA) can be manually shaped, molded and spread as thin coatings, although they may be easily deformed under applied stress. Relatively complex and large structures of such iongels could be produced through syringe-based 3D printing. Of course, the durability of such printed iongel structures would need to be enhanced through a curing step. In these non-crosslinked iongels formed around gelators, the cooling rate can have an impact on the nature of the self-assembly and mechanical properties. For example, Takeno and Kozuka found that an iongel formed from [abim][TFSI] showed a twisted structure that resulted when a slow cooling rate (0.4 °C min−1) was applied.156 However, spherical domains and a fibrous structure were observed when rapid quenching was applied, thus the processing conditions may be critical to achieving the desired morphology.
Iongels that are more robustly stabilized through the presence of a polymer or crosslinked networks are desirable in many applications. As previously discussed, the use of photocrosslinking techniques is a straightforward method to produce mechanically stable iongels. While the predominant use of this technique has been to conveniently produce simple two-dimensional thin films in situ for use as polymer-stabilized electrolytes,157 and gas separation membranes,158 iongels can be processed into more complex geometries using several techniques.
Zhong et al.153 demonstrated patterning of an iongel prepared via photocrosslinking of PEGDA and a thiol in the presence of [C2mim][TFSI]. The presence of residual thiol groups resulted in a reactive surface, which could be patterned via photolithography using water as the photoresist developer. This process yields iongels with intricately patterned, three-dimensional microstructures. These processing techniques could enable the production of flexible microdevices for electrochemical applications.
Blade coating and printing are methods that can be used to produce iongel materials with dimensions at small length scales.159,160 Lodge, Frisbie and co-workers have demonstrated that thermoreversible iongels composed of [C2mim][TFSI] and a block copolymer can be printed in the liquid state using aerosol jets at elevated temperatures to produce printed circuits on plastic substrates with features as small as 25 μm.8,151,161 Aerosol jet printing of iongels seems to be more practical than inkjet printing as it tolerates a wide range of “ink” viscosity. Lodge also points out that simple techniques such as spin-coating and solvent casting are very useful for iongel processing, as demonstrated by the formation of thin films comprising 20 wt% of poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP) and 80 wt% [C2mim][TFSI].151 These iongels can then simply be cut and applied to surfaces,162 although the overall dimensions (i.e., length, width) of films produced through solvent casting and especially spin coating will be limited to tens of centimeters.
Transfer stamping has also been employed as a method of applying iongels of specific sizes/areas/thicknesses to surfaces. Lee and co-workers have spin-coated an iongel composed of PVDF–HFP and [C2mim][TFSI] onto poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) stamps of various sizes. These iongel–PDMS stamps were then placed in contact with various flat and curved surfaces and the iongel was partially melted to improve adhesion to the substrate. Upon cooling, the PDMS was peeled away, transferring the iongel to the substrate. This technique was demonstrated with aluminium, polyimide (PI), poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and glass surfaces.152,163 However, this process may require great care and meticulous preparation in order to achieve success.
Electrospinning is a process in which a polymer solution or polymer melt is drawn through a narrow orifice as a response to an applied voltage and electrostatic repulsion. Electrospinning can be used for a wide variety of polymers (both neutral and charged) as well as iongels. Electrospinning of iongels produces non-woven mats of iongel nanofibers in random patterns, resulting in high surface area materials that can be applied to applications such as sensing, catalysis, biomedical and healthcare, to name a few. As a detailed review on electrospinning of iongels was published by Taubert several years ago, the reader is referred to that work for more details on this method.164 As with the other methods previously described, electrospinning is also limited in terms of the overall throughput of an iongel, to perhaps a few grams per hour.
The growth of mask projection stereolithography (SLA) 3D printing will certainly enable iongels to be formed into high-resolution objects of virtually any geometry. Long and co-workers first demonstrated this technique on IL-based substrates through the copolymerization of phosphonium-based IL monomers with poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate (PEGDMA).165 While the resulting material did not meet the definition of an iongel as the cationic components were attached to the polymer backbone and there was no “free” IL present, SLA-based 3D printing has recently been extended to iongels. Furukawa and co-workers demonstrated SLA-based 3D printing of complex, high-resolution objects built from an iongel containing [C4mim][FSI] immobilized by the UV-induced crosslinking of a thiol–ene network.166 As shown in Fig. 6, freestanding objects of various shapes, sizes and complexity could be printed from the pre-gel solution with rapid curing of the iongel. Features with dimensions as small as 200 μm were achieved.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of SLA 3D printing of an iongel, (b–d) free standing iongels printed in the form of three different objects, (e and f) printed features of the order of 200 μm. Reprinted with permission from Ahmed et al.166 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Additionally, Wong et al. used 3D printing and UV curing to produce iongels that were used as strain sensors.154 Very recently, Luque et al. explored 3D printing via direct-ink writing of thermoreversible iongels by extrusion.167 In this case, the iongel material had to flow through a nozzle and needed to undergo rapid regelation just after ejection in order to maintain high shape fidelity of the printed structures, which were integrated in different body sensor devices.167 Amrita et al. also used the direct-ink write 3D printing method to deposit iongel inks and create multimaterial objects that use a single mechanoactivation event to elicit both a mechanochromic response and an autonomous shape change.168
Undoubtedly, 3D printing is a versatile and universally accessible technique for processing iongel materials as researchers can now purchase a range of SLA 3D printers at various price points. The growth in 3D printing as a democratized processing tool will undoubtedly lead to more advances in the production of iongel materials and devices. Current 3D printing techniques are unable to produce features at the 1 μm scale, which may be possible with solvent casting or spin coating. However, 3D printing holds significant advantages in terms of automation of the processing and allows much larger objects and complex designs to be produced than those possible using other techniques described here which yield 1D (i.e., fibers) or 2D materials.
4. Applications
The recent trends on iongels for emerging technological applications are highlighted throughout the next sub-sections. In particular, real progress has been made on iongels for energy conversion and storage, gas separation and (bio)electronics as illustrated in Fig. 7. Specific and selected examples of iongels are detailed and discussed, including an integrated perspective in terms of performance improvements, underpinning it to the structural features of iongel materials.
 Fig. 7  New applications of iongels. (a) Electrodes for cutaneous electrophysiology. Adapted with permission from Isik et al.169 Copyright 2015, Royal Chemistry Society; (b) organic transistors. Adapted with permission from Jo et al.145 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons; (c) all-solid-state rechargeable sodium batteries. Adapted with permission from Fdz De Añastro et al.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) flexible supercapacitors. Adapted with permission from Zhang et al.16 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons; (e) olefin-facilitated transport membranes. Reprinted with permission from Tomé et al.170 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) CO2 separation. Adapted from Martins et al.111 
As discussed before iongels bring some of the properties of IL to soft solid materials and thus, offer a way to further utilise ILs in solid devices. Many technological applications have the need of circumventing drawbacks related to the shaping and risk of leakage of ILs. This makes iongels very popular in final devices/applications, where issues like fabrication and durability are mandatory. Through the next pages, the versatility of iongels will be illustrated showing examples of different iongel materials and their wide range of applications, ranging from solid state batteries (Li, Na), supercapacitors, solar cells, fuel cells, gas separation membranes, bioelectrodes, electronic skin to drug delivery devices.
4.1 Energy conversion and storage
Safety and performance are stringent parameters for electrolytes in energy storage and conversion applications. Conventional liquid electrolytes based on organic solvents, e.g. mixtures of linear and cyclic carbonates in the case of lithium ion batteries, are generally volatile and highly flammable. Therefore, complex thermal management is required to operate devices under safe conditions. In contrast, iongels show high thermal stability that not only increases safety but also simplifies device fabrication. For instance, Le Bideau and co-workers described iongels compatible with the reflow soldering process used in electronic circuit fabrication.171 In addition, the wide electrochemical stability window makes iongels suitable for high voltage applications.10 Hence, iongels rapidly gained attention for application in next-generation solid state energy storage and conversion technologies, namely lithium and sodium metal batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors, and dye sensitized solar cells.
Most of the ILs used in iongels for lithium battery applications are based on quaternary ammonium cations, namely tetraalkylammonium, pyrrolidinium or imidazolium types,5,172 combined with fluorinated anions, such as [TFSI]−, [FSI]−, [BF4]− or [PF6]−. However, in recent years, new families of ILs and ionic compounds are being investigated, such as phosphonium ILs,173 bisoxalatoborate ILs,159,174 solvated ILs,175 and DES.176 A wide variety of gelators have been employed including inorganic ones, such as titania or silicon oxide particles,177 and polymeric ones, such as PVDF–HFP, PEO, PMMA, poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) and poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN).178,179
Among the energy storage devices, solid state batteries with lithium metal electrodes may benefit the most from the unique properties of iongels. ILs are widely recognized as promising candidates for lithium metal electrodes. However, IL electrolytes require a porous separator and are still affected by the risk of leakage. Iongels could overcome these issues and enable solid-state batteries, as long as an appropriate combination of mechanical properties and high IL loading is achieved. PEO mixtures with pyrrolidinium and imidazolium can be readily crosslinked using UV irradiation in the presence of benzophenone.180,181 These studies show that chemical crosslinking can be used to prepare mechanically robust iongels with high IL loadings. Iongels are also prepared by mixing ILs with block copolymers having a hard structural domain and a soft ionic-conducting domain, as shown in the pioneering work of Lodge and co-authors.8 Schulze et al.182 described a nanostructured iongel based on a highly cross-linked PS block PEO matrix [C4mim][TFSI]/LiMTFSI mixture. In this system, PS plays the role of the high modulus block, whereas the PEO plays the role of the ion-conductive block where most of the IL/salt mixture is concentrated (Fig. 8a–c). More recently, Goujon et al.183 proposed a block copolymer having a polystyrene block and an intrinsically conductive PIL block, 1-((2-acryloyloxy)ethyl)-3-butylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide. The block copolymer with [C3mpyr][FSI]/LiFSI showed good ionic conductivity values (7.6 × 10−3 mS cm−1 at 50 °C). Kitazawa et al. described a series of iongels based on ABA-triblock copolymers,175 consisting of PS ‘A’ blocks and PMMA, PEO, and poly(butyl acrylate) (PBA) ‘B’ blocks. The triblock copolymers were mixed with a Li-glyme solvate IL. These iongels reached (at room temperature) a conductivity of 10−4 S cm−1 and their electrochemical stability window exceeded 4 V. This interesting strategy holds tremendous potential for replacing expensive ILs with cheaper alternative ionic compounds in iongels. In recent years, the use of block copolymers has become a viable strategy complementary to chemical crosslinking for achieving iongels with good mechanical properties and high IL loading.
 Fig. 8  Iongel-based electrolytes for lithium metal batteries. (a) Chemical structure, (b) schematic illustration and (c) SEM picture of a bicontinuous nanostructure iongel based on 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMITFSI), lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide). Reprinted and adapted with permission from Schulze et al.182 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a hierarchical poly(ionic liquid)-based iongel electrolyte (HPILSE) and its main components. Reprinted and adapted with permission from Zhou et al.187 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
A common issue with high IL loading is the compatibility with the polymer matrix, since poor compatibility can cause the leakage of IL outside the iongel matrix. Poly(ionic liquid)s are very popular gelators for the preparation of iongels due to their excellent chemical affinity with ILs and intrinsic ionic conductivity. In particular, poly(DADMA) is one of the most studied because of its excellent mechanical properties.184–186 For instance, Zhou et al.187 prepared hierarchical PIL-based iongel electrolyte (HPILSE) based on 1,4-bis[3-(2-acryloyloxyethyl)imidazolium-1-yl]butane bis[-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide], [C2mim][TFSI]-based electrolyte and poly(DADMA TFSI). The iongel membrane provided a tensile strength of 2.4 MPa and a high ionic conductivity up to 1 mS cm−1 at 25 °C. A lithium metal/LiHPILSE/LiFePO4 cell delivered 97.7% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 0.1C with approximately 100% coulombic efficiency (Fig. 8d). Thapaliya et al.188 used a layer-by-layer fabrication method for reinforcing a [C4mpyr][TFSI]-based iongel with lithiated Nafion and poly(DADMA) chloride. The reinforced iongels showed increased tensile strength values and ionic conductivities in the range of 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. In addition to polymer gelators, composite or hybrid iongels were investigated to combine high IL loadings and mechanical properties into iongel membranes. For instance, Na et al.189 prepared hybrid iongels for lithium-ion capacitors based on polysilsesquioxane crosslinkers bearing pendant PEO chains and methacryloxypropyl groups. [C4mpyr][TFSI] IL was mixed with the polysilsesquioxane crosslinkers and thermally cured, resulting in highly conductive hybrid iongels (0.62 mS cm−1 at 30 °C). Interestingly, only 5 wt% polysilsesquioxane crosslinker was used to obtain mechanically stable and leak proof iongels.
Aiming at developing high energy density lithium metal batteries, Chen et al.190 developed an iongel electrolyte by confining [C3mpyr][TFSI] IL and LiTFSI salt within a bioinspired SiO2 scaffold. The biomimetic ant-nest architecture showed high ionic conductivity (1.37 mS cm−1 at 30 °C), exceptional cycling performance in lithium metal cells with LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 and Li4Ti5O12 electrodes and long cycling stability (up to 3000 cycles). Similarly, Wu et al.191 confined [C2mim][TFSI] IL and LiTFSI salt inside a TiO2 inorganic matrix and tested this iongel in lithium metal/LiFePO4 cells for stable cycling at room temperature.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in post lithium technologies. Among various candidates, sodium ion batteries are the closest to marked readiness. However, sodium ion batteries display lower energy densities than their lithium counterparts. The use of sodium metal electrodes could mitigate this issue if suitable electrolytes for sodium metal are found. This need constitutes an opportunity for the development of sodium conducting iongels. Hashmi and co-workers192 studied a ternary sodium iongel comprising PVDF–HFP, [C2mim][CF3SO3] IL and NaCF3SO3 salt, exhibiting ionic conductivities up to 5 mS cm−1 at room temperature. Later, it was demonstrated that the addition of NaAlO2 particles slightly enhanced the ion conductivity of the composite electrolyte, where comparable conductivity values were measured in the case of Al2O3 particles.193 Nevertheless, the stable cycling of sodium metal batteries using iongels was only recently demonstrated.194–196 Mendes et al.197 combined PVDF–HFP, [C2mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI salt into an iongel electrolyte showing excellent performances in a sodium metal/Na3V2(PO4)3 cell operating at room temperature (Fig. 9a–c). Parallelly, Fdz De Añastro et al. studied a sodium metal battery with a NaFePO4 cathode operating at 70 °C, the cell comprised a sodium iongel combining poly(DADMA TFSI), [C3mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI salt.198 The same authors used UV photopolymerization of PEGDA in the presence of [C3mpyr][FSI] and NaFSI to prepare a mechanically robust iongel that showed ionic conductivity values close to those of the liquid counterpart (7.8 × 10−3 S cm−1) and stable cycling in NaFePO4 metal batteries.106
 Fig. 9  Iongel-based on PVDF–HFP, [C2mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI for sodium metal batteries: (a) iongel chemical structure and preparation schematic, (b) charge and discharge profiles of a sodium metal/Na3V2(PO4)3 battery at different current rates, (c) long-term cycling performance of a sodium metal/Na3V2(PO4)3 battery at fixed 1C-rate for 150 cycles. Reprinted with permission from Mendes et al.197 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Photocurrent curves and power conversion efficiency curve for a dye sensitized solar cell based on PEO, [C2mim][TFSI] and NaI. Reprinted with permission from Nair et al.180 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Zinc metal batteries are another interesting post lithium technology that may benefit from the use of iongel electrolytes. Fdz De Añastro et al. used a ternary mixture of [C2mim][N(CN)2], Zn(N(CN)2)2 and poly(DADMA TFSI) showing a high ionic conductivity of 1.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 50 °C and a wider electrochemical window than its liquid counterpart.199 Furthermore, iongels were recently applied to lithium sulphur batteries. Baloch et al. demonstrated that an iongel coating based on a ternary mixture of poly(DADMA TFSI), [C4mpyr][TFSI] and LiTFSI salt can delay polysulfide diffusion into the electrolyte and improve performance in lithium sulphur cells.200
Supercapacitors are the energy storage devices with better power density and longer cycle life compared to batteries. Supercapacitors could benefit from iongels in order to increase safety, as well as energy density. For instance, Negre et al. prepared SiO2 matrices in the presence of an IL mixture containing [C3mpip][FSI] and [C4mpyr][TFSI],201 or simply pure [C2mim][TFSI] IL.202 The latter showed a 3 V voltage window which could increase the energy density of the device and result in high capacitance (between 80 and 90 F g−1 at room temperature) and wide operating temperature ranges (−30 to 80 °C). Pazhamalai et al.203 incorporated PVDF–HFP/[N2222][BF4] iongels into a self-charging supercapacitor based on MoSe2 electrodes and a NaNbO3/PVDF piezoelectric electrospun mat that delivered a specific capacitance of 18.93 mF cm−2 when charged at 0.5 mA. However, low temperature performance of iongels is still an issue for developing solid-state supercapacitors despite the larger voltage windows achievable.
Recent studies extended the range of properties and applications of iongels to the preparation of proton conductive membranes. Thus, Chopade et al.204 studied polymerization-induced microphase separation to prepare a proton conducting iongel for application in high-temperature fuel cells. This polymerization method allowed for the creation of a bi-continuous morphology containing PEO/protic IL conducting pathways and cross-linked polystyrene domains. In fact, this approach revealed to be of great promise for the development of highly conductive (14 mS cm−1 at 180 °C) and mechanically robust membranes (E = 10 MPa at 180 °C). Kim et al.205 prepared nanophase separated iongels by incorporating a neutral aprotic IL into a poly(styrene sulfonate)-b-polymethylbutylene diblock copolymer. The iongels showed high conductivity values of up to 45 mS cm−1 in the temperature range between 115 and 165 °C.
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are attracting considerable attention because of their ease of fabrication and low cost. Traditional electrolytes for DSSCs are based on an I−/I3− redox couple dissolved in volatile organic solvents, which is not practical for long-term operation, due to leakage and evaporation risks. ILs in the form of iongel solid electrolytes could remediate these issues and extend the life span of the device. Imidazolium type ILs have been extensively used because of their low viscosity in combination with polymeric206–210 or inorganic211,212 gelators. Nair et al.180 reported multifunctional iongels comprising [C2mim][TFSI] and crosslinked PEO produced by UV polymerization. The iongels were tested in quasi-solid DSSCs with conversion efficiency exceeding 6% at 1 sun (Fig. 9d). Yu et al.211 proposed a series of iongels based on imidazolium type ILs and different metal oxide nanoparticles. The authors observed increased conversion efficiency produced by the iongels based on TiO2 particles with respect to neat ILs, which was attributed to enhanced charge mobility via a Grotthus type mechanism on the surface of the particles.

Material challenges and perspectives on iongels for energy. 
Although iongels show generally favourable properties, the use of iongels in every day energy devices is still far from market readiness. There are still challenges that the scientific community needs to overcome to turn iongels into a commercial reality. This section aims to highlight these challenges:
(1) Ionic liquids are the most expensive components of iongels due to their limited market demand. At the current stage, iongels are not yet cost-competitive in most cases with respect to currently used organic electrolytes and this aspect limits their commercial implementation.
(2) The conductivity of iongels strongly depends on the IL loading; best performances are obtained when the IL loading is higher than 50 wt%. However, high loading iongels may lead to soft materials with low modulus as previously remarked.
(3) Iongels usually possess low ionic conductivity with respect to traditional organic electrolytes, as illustrated using an Arrhenius plot in Fig. 10. In some cases, this can reduce the efficiency, safety and life-time in high-density energy storage devices. More work is still required to reach higher ionic conductivity. For instance, the use of superconcentrated ILs might help in mitigating these issues.213 However, very few reports exist on the use of superconcentrated ILs in iongels and more studies need to be performed in this direction.
 Fig. 10  Ionic conductivity of various iongel families represented on an Arrhenius plot. The solid line is a guide for the eye that represents the target conductivity of iongel electrolytes. 

4.2 Gas separation
Ionic liquids for gas separation processes have attracted significant attention during the past two decades, mainly due to their high solubility capacity for gases contained in industrial emissions, such as CO2, SO2, H2S, O2, hydrocarbons, etc.214 In fact, CO2 separation from different point sources is the most studied technology.107–109 Amongst the different strategies that have been explored towards iongel-based CO2 separation membranes, the simplest one is the blending of ILs with polymer matrices. Different polymers, such as PVDF,215,216 Nafion,217 Kapton,218 or Pebax copolymers,219,220 have been employed in combination with up to 80 wt% of imidazolium-based ILs bearing [TFSI]−, [CF3SO3]−, [BF4]− or [B(CN)4]− anions.
The development of iongel membranes combining the characteristics of ILs and poly(ionic liquid)s (PIL) has also been carried out,20 taking advantage of their ability to strongly interact through electrostatic interactions. Bara et al. fabricated linear PIL/IL iongels through UV polymerization of imidazolium-based monomers in different type of free ILs.221,222 Later on, Tomé et al.110,223–226 reported another series of linear PIL/IL iongels comprising pyrrolidinium polymer matrices produced by solvent casting. The CO2 permeability and selectivity of these membranes can be adjusted by varying the amount of IL,223 using pyrrolidinium random copolymers having anion mixtures,224 or PIL and IL components bearing different anions,225 and even by changing the polymer molecular weight.226 The best performances were achieved with the PIL/IL membranes bearing cyano-functionalized anions, in particular the one containing 60 wt% of [C2mim][C(CN)3], that surpassed the Robeson 2008 upper bound (CO2 permeability of 440 barrer and CO2/N2 selectivity of 64).110 Pyrrolidinium-based PIL/IL systems have also been successfully tested for CO2/H2 separation in hydrogen purification.227–229
Emphasis should also be given to linear PIL/IL iongels using ionic polyimides,230,231 due to their excellent mechanical strength and thermal stability. For example, Watanabe and co-workers combined different ILs, namely [C4mim][TFSI], [C4mim][PF6] and [C4mpyr][TFSI], and sulfonated polyimides (SPI).232 The highest performance was attained by the [C4mim][TFSI]/SPI iongel (75 wt% IL), with a CO2 permeability of 431 barrer and a CO2/N2 selectivity of 30, while retaining superior mechanical strength (modulus >10 MPa) due to the formation of bicontinuous nanostructures of ionic and non-ionic domains. As illustrated in Fig. 11a, the ionic domain consists of a sulfonate structure where the IL is preferentially incorporated and serves as the gas transport path, while the non-ionic domain comprises an aromatic sulfone structure that presents high rigidity and contributes to the mechanical properties. Protic ILs were also employed and their [N124][TFSI]/SPI iongels exhibited higher CO2 permeabilities, though slightly lower CO2/N2 selectivities, when compared to aprotic IL ([N1123][TFSI]/SPI).233
 Fig. 11  Iongel-based CO2 separation membranes. (a) Formation of a bicontinuous nanostructure consisting of ionic and non-ionic domains in IL/sulfonated polyimide iongels. Reprinted with permission from Ito et al.232 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (b) fixed-site facilitated CO2 transport through epoxide-amine PIL/IL iongels. Reprinted with permission from Cowan et al.20 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) double-network iongel containing an amino acid IL as the CO2 carrier. Reprinted with permission from Moghadam et al.244 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) anionic PIL/IL iongel membranes with cross-linked PEGDA network. Reprinted with permission from Kammakakam et al.245 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Bara and co-workers have also reported on the synthesis of ionic polyimides and polyamides (PI- and PA-ionene derivatives).234–236 Interestingly, the thin films (via melt pressing) of ionic polyimides spontaneously absorb ILs, experiencing an ordering/self-assembly process.234 Although the CO2 separation performance of ionene iongels falls short of the CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4 Robeson 2008 upper bounds, the work developed so far provides a strong foundation to understand the structure–property relationship, and in due course produce high-performance membranes.237,238
Cross-linked iongels based on polymer networks have also been intensively investigated during the last few years, because this strategy allows the preparation of membranes with high IL content. Carlisle et al.239 developed cross-linked PIL/IL iongels (≥80 wt% [C2mim][TFSI] IL) with CO2 permeabilities of 500 barrer and CO2/N2 selectivities of 24. Here, the use of a PIL network showed advantages in the fabrication of thin-film composite (TFC) membranes. MacDanel et al.240 used step-growth polymerization to produce epoxy-amine PIL/IL iongels that enable CO2-facilitated transport (Fig. 11b). Under simulated biogas processing conditions, high CO2 permeabilities (600–700 barrer) and acceptable CO2/CH4 selectivities (25–35) were obtained.241 Matsuyama and co-workers focused on the double-network concept (Fig. 11c) and reported a tough iongel membrane (80 wt% [P4444][Pro] IL) with outstanding performance for low CO2 concentration capture.242 Yin et al.243 fabricated cross-linked PIL/IL iongels via reactions between amino-terminated PILs and glycidyl ether crosslinkers. The membrane with 66 wt% [C2mim][TFSI] IL showed an excellent CO2 permeability (2070 barrer) but modest CO2/N2 selectivity (25). Very recently, Kammakakam et al.245,246 introduced the first examples of anionic PIL/IL iongel membranes. For instance, as shown in Fig. 11d, methacryloxy-based IL monomers (MILs), having highly delocalized anions and mobile [C2mim]+ counter-cations, were successfully synthesized and photopolymerized in the presence of free [C2mim][TFSI] IL (0.5 and 1 eq.) and an appropriate amount of PEGDA crosslinker (20 wt%) to form flexible and free-standing iongel membranes. The membranes showed CO2 permeabilities between 5 and 20 barrer, and superior CO2/N2 (47–87) and CO2/CH4 (56–119) selectivities. Nevertheless, the aforementioned cross-linked iongels involve multi-pot procedures and several organic syntheses/purification steps at the monomer level.
Another relevant and simpler strategy is the preparation of iongels in a single-pot using commercially available non-ionic polymer networks. Kusuma et al.247 combined several ILs with PEO/siloxane networks and showed that imidazolium and pyridinium (aromatic cations with acid protons) combined with a low basicity anion ([TFSI]−) imparted more stable membranes. Deng et al.248 used [C4mim]+ based ILs bearing [TFSI]−, [BF4]−, [PF6]− and [C(CN)3]− anions to prepare PEGDA membranes with interpenetrating networks by aza-Michael addition and acrylate homopolymerization. The membrane with 80 wt% [C4mim][C(CN)]3 IL disclosed 134 barrer of CO2 permeability and 49.5 of CO2/N2 selectivity. Conversely, Martins et al.111 reported an iongel membrane, merely based on PEGDA and 70 wt% [C2mim][C(CN)3], with CO2 permeability of 583 barrer and CO2/N2 selectivity of 66, but future improvements regarding mechanical stability should be addressed to circumvent the use of a porous support.
In order to improve the CO2 separation performance, three-component mixed matrix membranes combining solid fillers, such as zeolites249,250 or metal organic frameworks (MOFs),251,252 have also been investigated. As an example, Nabais et al.251 incorporated MOFs, i.e. MIL-53(Al), Cu3(BTC)2 and ZIF-8, into a pyrrolidinium-based PIL/IL (60/40 wt%) matrix. The membrane loaded with 30 wt% MIL-53(Al) showed a CO2/H2 selectivity of 13, while that with ZIF-8 revealed a CO2 permeability of 97 barrer. These PIL/IL/MOF surpassed the upper bound limit for CO2/H2 separation.
The CO2/N2, CO2/CH4 and CO2/H2 separation performances of the abovementioned iongels are illustrated in the so-called Robeson plots (Fig. 12), which display solid black lines that represent the empirical upper bounds for each gas pair and illustrate the tradeoff between permeability and selectivity. In brief, strategies such as the use of polymer/IL, linear PIL/IL or cross-linked iongel materials with high IL contents (≥60 wt%) have been successfully applied in the preparation of membranes with improved CO2/N2 separation performances (Fig. 12a). Similarly, the recent advances on ionic polyimide/IL and PIL/IL/porous solid iongels have shown promising results regarding CO2/CH4 and CO2/H2 gas pairs, with the advantages of improved thermal and mechanical properties in same cases.
 Fig. 12  CO2 separation efficiencies of iongel membranes represented on (a) CO2/N2, (b) CO2/CH4 and (c) CO2/H2 Robeson plots. Data from ref. 110, 111, 215–218, 220–228, 232–236, 239, 241, 243, 245 and 247–252 are illustrated and the upper bounds were adapted from Robeson253 and Rowe et al.254 Note that the majority of the data points are results of dry single gas studies. 

Material challenges and perspectives on iongels for gas separation. 
Despite the different polymer and IL features used so far, we underline here on some general trends that have been observed:
(1) As the IL content increases, the CO2 separation performance of the iongels approaches that of their parent supported IL membranes SLIMs.
(2) High amounts of IL indicates that the polymer content is rather low and the mechanical stability of the iongels is generally comprised. The need of porous membranes to support the iongels reduces their potential, since the CO2 performance is limited by the thickness of the support used.
(3) Notwithstanding the great advances in permeability and selectivity, larger permeabilities will be obtained if thin films of iongel materials can be fabricated. Although a detailed work on thin active layers of PIL/IL iongels has been summarized by Noble, Gin and coworkers in 2016,20 the fabrication of thin-film iongel defect free membranes (ca. 100 nm thick active layers) still constitutes a real challenge in the application of iongel materials for CO2/light gas separation.
(4) External variables such as temperature, pressure and relative humidity greatly influence the CO2 separation performance. For instance, in the case of epoxy-amine PIL/IL membranes (Fig. 12b), when the CO2 partial pressure decreases and the relative humidity increases, the CO2 permeability and selectivity increase due to facilitated CO2 transport.240 Nevertheless, there still is a lack of data testing the efficiency of iongel membranes under specific target operating conditions, as well as performing long-term experiments.

4.3 (Bio)electronics
The association of electronics and biology is gaining great interest due to the applications of bioelectronic devices in health monitoring and therapeutics.139 Nevertheless, developing the next generation of flexible (bio)electronics needs new materials and tremendous efforts have been made in this direction.255 Organic materials showing ionic/electronic conductivity, flexibility and biocompatibility are urgently needed in this area. Among them, iongels have recently emerged as alternative soft solid materials due to their good ionic conductivity, high mechanical strength, optical transparency and high flexibility.11 Iongels have been investigated in several applications including devices for electrophysiology, artificial skin devices, sensors and organic transistors.
Iongels are an appealing option for cutaneous electrophysiological recordings since they do not leak or dry out. In this case, Malliaras and coworkers reported iongel-assisted electrodes for long-term cutaneous recordings.23 Conformal electrodes made of gold and PEDOT:PSS were fabricated and their performances were compared in a dry state and in conjunction with an iongel based on [C2mim][EtSO4] IL and PEGDA. At the interface with human skin, the iongel decreased impedance to levels similar to those of commercial electrodes (1 kHz). The electrode showed this low impedance for 3 days, which makes them appropriate for long-term monitoring of electrophysiological activity.23
Following the same research line, Isik et al.169 synthesized cholinium-based iongels through photopolymerization of the poly(cholinium lactate methacrylate) network in the presence of [Ch][Lac] IL. These iongels showed good adhesion to the skin and electrocardiography (ECG) signals were recorded with iongel assisted electrodes up to 3 days. The low toxicity of cholinium ILs makes these iongels highly attractive for cutaneous electrophysiology.169 Therefore, Bihar et al.256 used inkjet printing to fabricate PEDOT:PSS electrodes and the contact with the skin was improved using cholinium lactate iongel (Fig. 13a and b). The fully printed electrodes were used to record cardiac activity (Fig. 13c), paving the way for the fabrication of customizable health monitoring devices for cutaneous applications.256 In addition, Yuen et al.144 prepared biodegradable iongels via ring-opening polymerization of cyclic carbonate monomers within [C4mim][Lac]. The recorded electrocardiography signals were similar to those of a standard medical electrode. The main advantage of this iongel material is the fast degradability in water at room temperature, which is particularly interesting for implantable electrodes.144
 Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of the inject printing process and printed electrodes on a commercial textile. (b) Images of pristine textile, textile with 8 layers of PEDOT:PSS, and textile with 8 layers of PEDOT:PSS and 5 layers of cholinium lactate-based iongel. (c) Electrocardiogram (ECG) data acquired under different conditions: static recoding at t0 in the top left corner; static recording at t0 + 40 days in the top right corner; and dynamic recording under repeated hand motion at t0 + 40 days in the bottom center. Reprinted with permission from Bihar et al.256 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
More recently, Luque et al.167 designed 3D printable and biocompatible iongels by taking advantage of polyvinyl alcohol/phenol interactions to gelify cholinium carboxylate ionic liquids. These supramolecular cholinium-based iongels showed excellent performance in electrodes for long-lasting ECG recording, until 2 weeks, and the response was comparable to that of commercial medical electrodes.167 Moreover, Velasco-Bosom et al.257 proposed a new fabrication method to obtain adhesive electrode arrays for cutaneous electrophysiology. The authors developed a 4 × 4 array of 1.5 × 1.5 mm2 electrodes with a center-to-center distance of 3 mm using the PEDOT:PSS composite with [Ch][Lac] IL as the electrode, showing an impedance of 2.7 MΩ at 60 Hz. The mm-sized cutaneous arrays recorded high quality spatiotemporal surface electromyography (EMG) maps, allowing to identify the motions of the index, little, and middle fingers, and to directly visualize the propagation of polarization/depolarization waves in the underlying muscles.257
Considering the increasing interest in artificial skin devices for application in soft robotics and healthcare, the development of iongels operating in response to diverse human movements has also been expanding in recent years. To illustrate with some examples, Ren et al.258 prepared iongels, using thiol–ene click chemistry under mild conditions. Due to the stretchability and flexibility of the click-iongels, the fabricated triboelectric nanogenerator device exhibited high mechanical stability in a wide operating temperature range (−60 to 200 °C).258 Tee and coworkers259 reported a self-healing PVDF-HFP/[C2mim][TFSI] iongel, which endured strains as high as 2000%, for the application of electronic skins operating under water. The authors fabricated a touch, pressure and strain sensor platform to demonstrate the sensory capability of the iongel. Son et al.260 fabricated an iongel based on PVC, [C2mim][TFSI] IL, and dibutyl adipate (DBA). The application of this iongel material in human motion was tested by monitoring sign language and controlling a mouse pointer in the screen (Fig. 14).260 Cao et al.261 synthesized an iongel by entrapping [C2mim][TFSI] into a poly(ethyl acrylate) (PEA)-based elastomer and tested it as a mechanically compliant conductor for a flexible skin sensor. The transparent hydrophobic iongel exhibited an elasticity of 15–484 kPa, an ultrahigh stretchability >5000%, and a fracture toughness of up to 4.7 kJ m−2. The skin-like sensor fabricated using this iongel showed remarkable durability (10000 cycles at 100% strain) and various motion behaviours were monitored at high vacuum (6 × 10−4 Pa), low/high temperatures (−70 and 100 °C), and high relative humidity (99%).261 Furthermore, Luque et al.167 fabricated a pressure sensor, containing a supramolecular iongel based on PVA, tannic acid and [Ch][Lac] IL, which was also capable of detecting human motion, showing high sensitivity (0.1 kPa−1) with excellent reversibility.
 Fig. 14  Application of iongels in wearable devices. (a) Transparent iongel gloves for signaling and monitoring sign language. (b) An iongel glove was used as a mouse controller. Reprinted with permission from Son et al.260 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Aiming at a more sustainable and economically viable approach, Panzer and coworkers73 fabricated DES gel materials with choline chloride (ChCl)/ethylene glycol and gelatin for the fabrication of ionic skin prototype sensor devices to monitor human finger bending and multi-touch stimuli.73 Likewise, Hong et al.262 prepared a gel-based material containing PAAM and ChCl/urea/glycerol. The resulting material displayed the strain-sensitivity of conductive elastomers and exhibited great real-time monitoring ability.
In addition iongels demonstrate huge potential for application in electrolyte-gated organic transistors. For instance, Thiburce et al.263 reported high performance electrolyte-gated organic thin-film transistors employing a PIL/IL iongel, that is, poly(DADMA TFSI)/[C4mpyr][TFSI], as a gate insulator. The devices revealed a high transconductance of 3 mS and a channel current of > 1 mA at operating voltages of only −1.0 V. On the other hand, Kim and coworkers,145 recently proposed biocompatible and biodegradable organic transistors using an iongel as solid-state electrolyte, composed of levan polysaccharide and cholinium-based ILs. Owing to its electrochemical properties, namely large specific capacitance (40 μF cm−2 at 10 Hz), the electrolyte based organic transistors operated at a low voltage range (VDS = −1.0 V and VGS = −2.0). This nontoxic organic transistor was also applied for electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings on human skin and the heart of a rat.145

Material challenges and perspectives on iongels for bioelectronics. 
In summary, the device demonstrations discussed above reinforces that iongels represent a promising non-volatile alternative to hydrogels for (bio)electronics. The main conclusions and perspectives in this section are:
(1) The use of iongels in (bio)electronics is the most recent area of applications and probably the one that offers more possibilities for future research.
(2) Iongels having additional properties such as electronic conductivity, biocompatibility or biodegradability need to be developed to push the different applications and discover new ones.
(3) The use of biologically active iongels in new drug delivery devices such as ion-pumps should become one of the fields of future applications for these materials.

5. Conclusions
Nowadays, iongels cover a wide range of soft solid materials mostly composed of an IL component which can be immobilized within different matrices (polymers, inorganic networks, biopolymers, and inorganic nanoparticles). Although a great number of articles have been published relating to iongels, the emergence of alternatives to the expensive ILs, such as DES,264,265 still offers a lot of room for development. We provided an analysis of the main families of iongels and highlighted the new ionic soft materials offering additional properties, such as thermoresponsiveness, self-healing, mixed ionic/electronic properties, (photo)luminescence or magnetic properties. Furthermore, recent success stories in additive manufacturing (3D printing) of iongels anticipate the future implementation of these soft ionic materials.
The applications of iongels so far were centred through the areas of energy (battery, supercapacitors, and solar cells) and the area of gas separation membranes. However, most of the remaining challenges are related to the robustness of the materials and the cost/performance balance of the different technologies. On the other hand, (bio)electronics has emerged in the last few years as a future field of application of iongels. In this case, iongels having additional properties such as electronic conductivity, biocompatibility, biological activity or biodegradability, need to be developed to push the different application possibilities. All in all, this review presents an integrated perspective on the recent progress and advances in the field of emerging iongel materials.
Abbreviations

ChClCholine chloride
CH4Methane
CO2Carbon dioxide
DBADibutyl adipate
DESDeep eutectic solvents
DMTADynamic mechanical thermal analysis
ECGElectrocardiography
EMGElectromyography
EGDMAEthylene glycol dimethacrylate
H2Hydrogen
H2SHydrogen sulphide
ILsIonic liquids
ILEIonic liquid electrolyte
MILsMethacryloxy-based ionic liquid monomers
MMAMethyl methacrylate
MOFsMetal organic frameworks
N2Nitrogen
O2Oxygen
PAPolyamide
PANPoly(acrylonitrile)
PBAPoly(butyl acrylate)
PDMSPoly(dimethylsiloxane)
PDADMAPoly(diallyldimethylammonium)
PEAPoly(ethyl acrylate)
PEOPoly(ethylene oxide)
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PEGDAPoly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate
PEGDMAPoly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate
PETPoly(ethylene terephthalate)
PIPolyimide
PILsPoly(ionic liquid)s
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PNIPAMPoly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PSPoly(styrene)
PVAPoly(vinyl alcohol)
PVCPoly(vinyl chloride)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVDF–HFPPoly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)
SILMsSupported ionic liquid membranes
SLAStereolithography
TFCThin-film composite

t
Li
Li+ transference number
UPyUreido-pyrimidinone
UVUltraviolet
12-HSA12-hydroxystearic acid
[Rnmim]+1-Alkyl-3-methylimidazolium
[Rnmpyr]+1-Alkyl-3-methylpyrrolidinium
[Rnmpip]+1-Alkyl-3-methylpiperidinium
[Pm.n.o.p]+Tetraalkylphosphonium
[Nm.n.o.p]+Tetraalkylammonium
[Ch]+Cholinium
[Br]−Bromide
[Cl]−Chloride
[TFSI]−Bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide
[FSI]−Bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
[PF6]−Hexafluorophosphate
[BF4]−Tetrafluoroborate
[EtSO4]−Ethyl sulfate
[CF3SO3]−Trifluoromethanesulfonate
[N(CN)2]−Dicyanamide
[C(CN)3]−Tricyanomethanide
[B(CN)4]−Tetracyanoborate
[(MeO)HPO2]−Methylphosphonate
[FeCl4]−Tetrachloroferrate
[Ac]−Acetate
[Lac]−Lactate
[Pro]−Prolinate

Author contributions
Liliana C. Tomé: conceptualization, writing – original draft, and review & editing. Luca Porcarelli: writing – original draft. Jason E. Bara: writing – original draft. Maria Forsyth: review & editing. David Mecerreyes: conceptualization, supervision, writing – original draft, and review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr Juan J. Torres (CONICET, Argentina) for his valuable help in editing the figures of this review. Liliana C. Tomé and Luca Porcarelli have received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreements no. 745734 and 797295, respectively. Liliana C. Tomé is thankful to FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) in Portugal for her research contract under Scientific Employment Stimulus (2020.01555.CEECIND). Associate Laboratory for Green Chemistry – LAQV is financed by FCT/MCTES (UIDB/50006/2020 and UIDP/50006/2020). Jason E. Bara acknowledges support from the United States National Science Foundation (1605411) and the United States Department of Energy (DE-SC0018181). This work was supported by Marie Sklodowska-Curie Research and Innovation Staff Exchanges (RISE) project under the grant agreement no. 823989 “IONBIKE”.
References
J. W. Steed, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1379–1383 RSC .
L. A. Estroff and A. D. Hamilton, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 1201–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Terech and R. G. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 3133–3160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. B. H. Susan, T. Kaneko, A. Noda and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4976–4983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Le Bideau, L. Viau and A. Vioux, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 907–925 RSC .
M. P. Singh, R. K. Singh and S. Chandra, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 64, 73–120 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Salsamendi, L. Rubatat and D. Mecerreyes, in Electrochemistry in Ionic Liquids: Volume 1: Fundamentals, ed. A. A. J. Torriero, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, pp. 283–315 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-13485-7_9 .
T. P. Lodge and T. Ueki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2107–2114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Marr and A. C. Marr, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 105–128 RSC .
N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Li, R. Chen and S. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702675 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yang, C. Xu, Q. Zhang and Z. Peng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800246 CrossRef PubMed .
N. V. Plechkova and K. R. Seddon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 123–150 RSC .
T. L. Greaves and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11379–11448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, K. De Oliveira Vigier, S. Royer and F. Jérôme, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7108–7146 RSC .
M. Forsyth, L. Porcarelli, X. Wang, N. Goujon and D. Mecerreyes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 686–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Kar, T. C. Mendes, Y. Wu and D. R. MacFarlane, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702702 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Lee, A. Ogawa, M. Kanno, H. Nakamoto, T. Yasuda and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9764–9773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bothwell, F. Lorenzini, E. Mathers, P. C. Marr and A. C. Marr, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2686–2690 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pena-Pereira, Ł. Marcinkowski, A. Kloskowski and J. Namieśnik, Analyst, 2015, 140, 7417–7422 RSC .
M. G. Cowan, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 724–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Joshi, K. Rawat, P. R. Solanki and H. B. Bohidar, Sens. Bio-Sens. Res., 2015, 5, 105–111 CrossRef .
D. Khodagholy, V. F. Curto, K. J. Fraser, M. Gurfinkel, R. Byrne, D. Diamond, G. G. Malliaras, F. Benito-Lopez and R. M. Owens, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4440–4443 RSC .
P. Leleux, C. Johnson, X. Strakosas, J. Rivnay, T. Hervé, R. M. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1377–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Petkovic, K.
R. Seddon, L. P. N. Rebelo and C. Silva Pereira, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1383–1403 RSC .
J. Hulsbosch, D. E. De Vos, K. Binnemans and R. Ameloot, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2917–2931 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé, D. J. S. Patinha, R. Ferreira, H. Garcia, C. S. Pereira, C. S. R. Freire, L. P. N. Rebelo and I. M. Marrucho, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 110–113 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, G. Gurau and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1519–1537 RSC .
F. Siopa, T. Figueiredo, R. F. M. Frade, I. Neto, A. Meirinhos, C. P. Reis, R. G. Sobral, C. A. M. Afonso and P. Rijo, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 5909–5916 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé, N. H. C. S. Silva, H. R. Soares, A. S. Coroadinha, P. Sadocco, I. M. Marrucho and C. S. R. Freire, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4291–4299 RSC .
I. M. Marrucho, L. C. Branco and L. P. N. Rebelo, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2014, 5, 527–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watanabe, M. L. Thomas, S. Zhang, K. Ueno, T. Yasuda and K. Dokko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7190–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Bara, T. K. Carlisle, C. J. Gabriel, D. Camper, A. Finotello, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 2739–2751 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brandt, J. Grasvik, J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 550–583 RSC .
T. D. Ho, C. Zhang, L. W. Hantao and J. L. Anderson, Anal. Chem., 2013, 86, 262–285 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Freire, A. F. M. Claudio, J. M. M. Araujo, J. A. P. Coutinho, I. M. Marrucho, J. N. C. Lopes and L. P. N. Rebelo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4966–4995 RSC .
J. Chen, F. Xie, X. Li and L. Chen, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4169–4200 RSC .
Q. Yang, Z. Zhang, X.-G. Sun, Y.-S. Hu, H. Xing and S. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2020–2064 RSC .
J. M. Gomes, S. S. Silva and R. L. Reis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4317–4335 RSC .
K. P. Safna Hussan, M. S. Thayyil, S. K. Deshpande, T. V. Jinitha and J. Kolte, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 310, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Li, H. Na and J. J. Vlassak, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 7993–8000 RSC .
C.-W. Liew, S. Ramesh and A. K. Arof, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2953–2963 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Liew, S. Ramesh and A. K. Arof, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2917–2928 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, X. He, Z. Fan and J. Ouyang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901085 CrossRef .
J. C. Jansen, K. Friess, G. Clarizia, J. Schauer and P. Izák, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 39–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ketabi and K. Lian, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 103, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ri, J. Jin, J. Xu, T. Peng and K. I. Ryu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 201, 251–259 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Shaplov, R. Marcilla and D. Mecerreyes, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 18–34 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, D. R. Paul and T.-S. Chung, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1052–1063 RSC .
T. K. Carlisle, G. D. Nicodemus, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 397–398, 24–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Díaz, A. Ortiz, M. Isik, D. Mecerreyes and I. Ortiz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 11294–11302 CrossRef .
A. J. D'Angelo and M. J. Panzer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801646 CrossRef .
K. Mathieu, C. Jérôme and A. Debuigne, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 428–437 RSC .
P. Nellepalli, L. C. Tomé, K. Vijayakrishna and I. M. Marrucho, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 2017–2026 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Appetecchi, G. T. Kim, M. Montanino, M. Carewska, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes and I. De Meatza, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3668–3675 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Tiruye, D. Muñoz-Torrero, J. Palma, M. Anderson and R. Marcilla, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 560–568 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brinkkötter, E. I. Lozinskaya, D. O. Ponkratov, P. S. Vlasov, M. P. Rosenwinkel, I. A. Malyshkina, Y. Vygodskii, A. S. Shaplov and M. Schönhoff, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 237, 237–247 CrossRef .
X. Wang, G. M. A. Girard, H. Zhu, R. Yunis, D. R. MacFarlane, D. Mecerreyes, A. J. Bhattacharyya, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6237–6245 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Visentin and M. J. Panzer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2836–2839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fujii, H. Asai, T. Ueki, T. Sakai, S. Imaizumi, U.-I. Chung, M. Watanabe and M. Shibayama, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 1756–1759 RSC .
R. Tamate, T. Ueki, A. M. Akimoto, R. Yoshida, T. Oyama, H. Kokubo and M. Watanabe, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3418–3422 RSC .
Y. Zhong, G. T. M. Nguyen, C. Plesse, F. Vidal and E. W. H. Jager, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 256–266 RSC .
M. G. Cowan, A. M. Lopez, M. Masuda, Y. Kohno, W. M. McDanel, R. D. Noble and D. L. Gin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1150–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. Zhang, L. Chang, X. Zhang, H. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704253 CrossRef PubMed .
D. I. Mori and D. L. Gin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 16012–16020 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taghavikish, S. Subianto, Y. Gu, X. Sun, X. S. Zhao and N. R. Choudhury, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 10918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, P. G. Boswell, P. Bühlmann and T. P. Lodge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4645–4652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He and T. P. Lodge, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2732–2734,  10.1039/b704490a .
Y. He and T. P. Lodge, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hashimoto, M. Hirasawa, H. Kokubo, R. Tamate, X. Li, M. Shibayama and M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 8430–8439 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Hashimoto, R. Tamate, H. Kokubo, K. Morishima, X. Li, M. Shibayama, F. Lu, T. Nakanishi and M. Watanabe, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1710–1713 RSC .
J. Demarteau, A. Fernandez de Añastro, A. S. Shaplov and D. Mecerreyes, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1481–1488 RSC .
H. Qin, R. E. Owyeung, S. R. Sonkusale and M. J. Panzer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 601–608 RSC .
T. J. Trivedi, D. N. Srivastava, R. D. Rogers and A. Kumar, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2831–2839 RSC .
C. Yin, X. Liu, J. Wei, R. Tan, J. Zhou, M. Ouyang, H. Wang, S. J. Cooper, B. Wu, C. George and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8826–8831 RSC .
B. Zhang, G. Sudre, G. Quintard, A. Serghei, L. David, J. Bernard, E. Fleury and A. Charlot, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 157, 586–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-I. Kadokawa, M.-A. Murakami, A. Takegawa and Y. Kaneko, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 75, 180–183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guyomard-Lack, N. Buchtová, B. Humbert and J. Le Bideau, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23947–23951 RSC .
S. Thiemann, S. J. Sachnov, F. Pettersson, R. Bollström, R. Österbacka, P. Wasserscheid and J. Zaumseil, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 625–634 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Silva, J. F. Mano and R. L. Reis, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1208–1220 RSC .
A. Takada and J.-i. Kadokawa, Biomolecules, 2015, 5, 244–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, B. Put, A. Sagara, K. Gandrud, M. Murata, J. A. Steele, H. Yabe, T. Hantschel, M. Roeffaers, M. Tomiyama, H. Arase, Y. Kaneko, M. Shimada, M. Mees and P. M. Vereecken, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaav3400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vioux, L. Viau, S. Volland and J. Le Bideau, C.R. Chim., 2010, 13, 242–255 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Néouze, J. Le Bideau, P. Gaveau, S. Bellayer and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3931–3936 CrossRef .
S. A. M. Noor, P. M. Bayley, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khurana and A. Chandra, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 340, 115027 CrossRef .
A. Guyomard-Lack, J. Abusleme, P. Soudan, B. Lestriez, D. Guyomard and J. L. Bideau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301570 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Huang, L. Yang and S.-I. Hirano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13822–13829 RSC .
K. Ueno, K. Hata, T. Katakabe, M. Kondoh and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 9013–9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Watanabe, R. Takahashi and T. Ono, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 1572–1581 RSC .
S. M. Villa, V. M. Mazzola, T. Santaniello, E. Locatelli, M. Maturi, L. Migliorini, I. Monaco, C. Lenardi, M. Comes Franchini and P. Milani, ACS Macro Lett., 2019, 8, 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno and M. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9105–9115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, B. He, Z. Wang, H. Tang, T. Su and Q. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6673 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. He and P. Alexandridis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18238–18261 RSC .
A. Noro, Y. Matsushita and T. P. Lodge, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5839–5844 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wu, F. Lu, P. Sun, X. Qiao, X. Gao and L. Zheng, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 13982–13989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, N. Zhang, B. Zhang, B. Zhang and J. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44706–44715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, X. Gao, F. Lu, N. Sun and L. Zheng, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 1169–1174 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y.-Y. Ren, Q. Li, R.-W. Shi, Y. Hu, J.-N. Guo, Z. Sun and F. Yan, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Wu, D. Li, M. Cai, F. Zhou and W. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 487, 130–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, W. Wu, Q. Wu and W. Yan, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 4242–4249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tamate, K. Hashimoto, T. Horii, M. Hirasawa, X. Li, M. Shibayama and M. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802792 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Shakeel, H. Mahmood, U. Farooq, Z. Ullah, S. Yasin, T. Iqbal, C. Chassagne and M. Moniruzzaman, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13586–13626 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis, M. Watanabe, P. Simon and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 RSC .
P. J. Carvalho, K. A. Kurnia and J. A. P. Coutinho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14757–14771 RSC .
A. Fdz De Anastro, L. Porcarelli, M. Hilder, C. Berlanga, M. Galceran, P. Howlett, M. Forsyth and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6960–6966 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, R. D. Noble, D. L. Gin, X. Zhang and L. Deng, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 497, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2785–2824 RSC .
H. S. Gao, L. Bai, J. L. Han, B. B. Yang, S. J. Zhang and X. P. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12671–12685 RSC .
L. C. Tomé, M. Isik, C. S. R. Freire, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 483, 155–165 CrossRef .
A. P. S. Martins, A. Fdz De Añastro, J. L. Olmedo-Martínez, A. R. Nabais, L. A. Neves, D. Mecerreyes and L. C. Tomé, Membranes, 2020, 10, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qi, N. L. Traulsen, P. Malo de Molina, C. Schlaich, M. Gradzielski and C. A. Schalley, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 503–510 RSC .
B. Ziółkowski, Z. Ates, S. Gallagher, R. Byrne, A. Heise, K. J. Fraser and D. Diamond, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 787–796 CrossRef .
A. F. Visentin, S. Alimena and M. J. Panzer, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 718–721 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hayashi, K. Hashimoto, M. L. Thomas, S. Tsuzuki and M. Watanabe, Membranes, 2019, 9, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Cao, J. Zhou, H. Hao, Y. Liang and J. Hao, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 722–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tamate, K. Hashimoto, X. Li, M. Shibayama and M. Watanabe, Polymer, 2019, 178, 121694 CrossRef .
A. P. S. Brogan, C. J. Clarke, A. Charalambidou, C. N. Loynachan, S. E. Norman, J. Doutch and J. P. Hallett, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 820–826 RSC .
A. Noro, S. Matsushima, X. He, M. Hayashi and Y. Matsushita, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 8304–8310 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Li, N. Lei and X. Chen, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 2437–2444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. D’Angelo and M. J. Panzer, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2913–2922 CrossRef .
I. del Agua, D. Mantione, N. Casado, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, G. G. Malliaras and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 473–478 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ziółkowski, K. Bleek, B. Twamley, K. J. Fraser, R. Byrne, D. Diamond and A. Taubert, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 5245–5251 CrossRef .
F. Benito-Lopez, M. Antoñana-Díez, V. F. Curto, D. Diamond and V. Castro-López, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3530–3538 RSC .
K. Prasad, D. Mondal, M. Sharma, M. G. Freire, C. Mukesh and J. Bhatt, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 180, 328–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tamada, T. Watanabe, K. Horie and H. Ohno, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4050–4052,  10.1039/b705060g .
M. Czugala, C. O’Connell, C. Blin, P. Fischer, K. J. Fraser, F. Benito-Lopez and D. Diamond, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 194, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saruwatari, R. Tamate, H. Kokubo and M. Watanabe, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13371–13374 RSC .
K. Lunstroot, K. Driesen, P. Nockemann, C. Görller-Walrand, K. Binnemans, S. Bellayer, J. Le Bideau and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5711–5715 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lunstroot, K. Driesen, P. Nockemann, L. Viau, P. H. Mutin, A. Vioux and K. Binnemans, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1879–1885 RSC .
Z.-L. Xie, H.-B. Xu, A. Geßner, M. U. Kumke, M. Priebe, K. M. Fromm and A. Taubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8110–8116 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Wang, R. Hu, C. Lv and J. Zheng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800776 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Singh, G. Singh, K. Damarla, P. K. Sharma, A. Kumar and T. S. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6568–6577 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trivedi, D. Bhattacharjya, J.-S. Yu and A. Kumar, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3294–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, A. Su, Y. Wei, X. Liu, Y. Li, F. Guo, J. Li, Z. Hu and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19413–19420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Utrera-Barrios, R. Verdejo, M. A. López-Manchado and M. Hernández Santana, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 2882–2902 RSC .
X. Pei, H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou and J. Fu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1872–1882 RSC .
B. Ying, Q. Wu, J. Li and X. Liu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 477–488 RSC .
T. Someya, Z. Bao and G. G. Malliaras, Nature, 2016, 540, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Zhu, R. Pfattner, H. Yan, L. Jin, S. Chen, F. Molina-Lopez, F. Lissel, J. Liu, N. I. Rabiah, Z. Chen, J. W. Chung, C. Linder, M. F. Toney, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602076 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-L. Xie, A. Jeličić, F.-P. Wang, P. Rabu, A. Friedrich, S. Beuermann and A. Taubert, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9543–9549 RSC .
Z. He and P. Alexandridis, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 244, 54–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Isik, R. Gracia, L. C. Kollnus, L. C. Tomé, I. M. Marrucho and D. Mecerreyes, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 975–979 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Yuen, L. Porcarelli, R. H. Aguirresarobe, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, I. Del Agua, U. Ismailov, G. G. Malliaras, D. Mecerreyes, E. Ismailova and H. Sardon, Polymers, 2018, 10(9), 989 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Jo, H. Kim, J. Ok, Y.-J. Shin, J. H. Shin, T. H. Kim, Y. Jung and T.-I. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909707 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Villar-Chavero, J. C. Domínguez, M. V. Alonso, M. Oliet and F. Rodriguez, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 229, 115569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Kalytchuk, Y. Zhang, H. Shi, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1412–1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Evans and P. C. Marr, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3742–3744 RSC .
A. C. Marr and P. C. Marr, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 20–26 RSC .
B. A. Voss, J. E. Bara, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3027–3029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ha, W. Zhang, D. Braga, M. J. Renn, C. H. Kim and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13198–13206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kim, H. M. Yang, J. Koo, M. S. Kang, K. Hong and K. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42978–42985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, G. T. M. Nguyen, C. Plesse, F. Vidal and E. W. H. Jager, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21601–21611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wong, A. T. Gong, P. A. Defnet, L. Meabe, B. Beauchamp, R. M. Sweet, H. Sardon, C. L. Cobb and A. Nelson, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900452 CrossRef .
B. U. Ye, B.-J. Kim, J. Ryu, J. Y. Lee, J. M. Baik and K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16189–16194 RSC .
H. Takeno and M. Kozuka, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 2017, 4762379 Search PubMed .
H. Nakajima and H. Ohno, Polymer, 2005, 46, 11499–11504 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bara, E. S. Hatakeyama, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 1415–1420 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zimmermann, L. Porcarelli, T. Rödlmeier, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, D. Mecerreyes and G. Hernandez-Sosa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705795 CrossRef .
B. Tang, D. K. Schneiderman, F. Zare Bidoky, C. D. Frisbie and T. P. Lodge, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 1083–1088 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cho, J. Lee, Y. Xia, B. Kim, Y. He, M. J. Renn, T. P. Lodge and C. Daniel Frisbie, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 900–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, M. S. Kang, S. Zhang, Y. Gu, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4457–4462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Cho, H. J. Kim, H. M. Yang, K. H. Seol, S. J. Lee and K. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40672–40680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taubert, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 1148–1159 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Schultz, P. M. Lambert, N. A. Chartrain, D. M. Ruohoniemi, Z. Zhang, C. Jangu, M. Zhang, C. B. Williams and T. E. Long, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 1205–1209 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ahmed, N. Naga, M. Kawakami and H. Furukawa, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219, 1800216 CrossRef .
G. C. Luque, M. L. Picchio, A. P. S. Martins, A. Dominguez-Alfaro, N. Ramos, I. del Agua, B. Marchiori, D. Mecerreyes, R. J. Minari and L. C. Tomé, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2100178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Basu, J. Wong, B. Cao, N. Boechler, A. J. Boydston and A. Nelson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 19263–19270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Isik, T. Lonjaret, H. Sardon, R. Marcilla, T. Herve, G. G. Malliaras, E. Ismailova and D. Mecerreyes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8942–8948 RSC .
L. C. Tomé, D. Mecerreyes, C. S. R. Freire, L. P. N. Rebelo and I. M. Marrucho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5631–5639 RSC .
M. Brachet, D. Gaboriau, P. Gentile, S. Fantini, G. Bidan, S. Sadki, T. Brousse and J. Le Bideau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11835–11843 RSC .
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 050508 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yunis, G. M. A. Girard, X. Wang, H. Zhu, A. J. Bhattacharyya, P. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 327, 83–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zimmermann, S. Schlisske, M. Held, J.-N. Tisserant, L. Porcarelli, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, D. Mecerreyes and G. Hernandez-Sosa, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800641 CrossRef .
Y. Kitazawa, K. Iwata, R. Kido, S. Imaizumi, S. Tsuzuki, W. Shinoda, K. Ueno, T. Mandai, H. Kokubo, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 252–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ruiz-Olles, P. Slavik, N. K. Whitelaw and D. K. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4173–4178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, N. Chen, R. Chen, Q. Zhu, G. Tan and L. Li, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500306 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone, P. Mustarelli, A. Magistris, M. Fagnoni, S. Protti, C. Gerbaldi and A. Spinella, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
L. Balo, Shalu, H. Gupta, V. Kumar Singh and R. Kumar Singh, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Nair, L. Porcarelli, F. Bella and C. Gerbaldi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12961–12971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Kim, G. B. Appetecchi, M. Carewska, M. Joost, A. Balducci, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6130–6137 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Schulze, L. D. McIntosh, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Goujon, T.-V. Huynh, K. J. Barlow, R. Kerr, K. Vezzù, V. Di Noto, L. A. O'Dell, J. Chiefari, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Zhang, S. Li, K. Yang and L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21362–21369 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Zhu, G. M. A. Girard, R. Yunis, D. R. MacFarlane, D. Mecerreyes, A. J. Bhattacharyya, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23844–23852 RSC .
M. Safa, A. Chamaani, N. Chawla and B. El-Zahab, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 587–593 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, R. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Qi, Y.-B. He, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang, Y.-S. Hu and F. Kang, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Thapaliya, I. Popov and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1265–1270 CrossRef CAS .
W. Na, A. S. Lee, J. H. Lee, S. S. Hwang, S. M. Hong, E. Kim and C. M. Koo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 582–588 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. Dai, Y. Xing, L. Wang, C. Guo, R. Chen, S. Guo and F. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1660–1667 RSC .
F. Wu, N. Chen, R. Chen, Q. Zhu, J. Qian and L. Li, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 848–856 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar and S. A. Hashmi, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 416–423 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hashmi, M. Y. Bhat, M. K. Singh, N. T. K. Sundaram, B. P. C. Raghupathy and H. Tanaka, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 2817–2826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, M. Kotobuki, F. Zheng, C. Xu, S. V. Savilov, N. Hu, L. Lu, Y. Wang and W. D. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6424–6431 RSC .
V. K. Singh, Shalu, S. K. Chaurasia and R. K. Singh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40199–40210 RSC .
V. K. Singh, S. K. Singh, H. Gupta, Shalu, L. Balo, A. K. Tripathi, Y. L. Verma and R. K. Singh, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 1909–1919 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Mendes, X. Zhang, Y. Wu, P. C. Howlett, M. Forsyth and D. R. Macfarlane, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3722–3726 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fdz De Anastro, N. Lago, C. Berlanga, M. Galcerán, M. Hilder, M. Forsyth and D. Mecerreyes, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 582, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fdz De Anastro, N. Casado, X. Wang, J. Rehmen, D. Evans, D. Mecerreyes, M. Forsyth and C. Pozo-Gonzalo, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baloch, A. Vizintin, R. K. Chellappan, J. Moskon, D. Shanmukaraj, R. Dedryvere, T. Rojo and R. Dominko, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A2390–A2398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Negre, B. Daffos, V. Turq, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 490–495 CrossRef CAS .
L. Negre, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5037–A5040 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy, V. K. Mariappan, S. Sahoo, S. Manoharan and S.-J. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800055 CrossRef .
S. A. Chopade, S. So, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6200–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kim, K. Kim, U. H. Choi and M. J. Park, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5029 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. Guo, C. Yuan and F. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Shen, F. Yan, L. Qiu, S. Lee and B. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7326–7330 RSC .
O. Winther-Jensen, V. Armel, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 479–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Lin, C.-T. Li, C.-P. Lee, Y.-A. Leu, Y. Ezhumalai, R. Vittal, M.-C. Chen, J.-J. Lin and K.-C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15267–15278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Y. Chang, C.-P. Lee, C.-T. Li, M.-H. Yeh, K.-C. Ho and J.-J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20814–20822 RSC .
W.-C. Yu, L.-Y. Lin, W.-C. Chang, S.-H. Zhong and C.-C. Su, J. Power Sources, 2018, 403, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Q. Li, J. Zhao, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang, B. Sun and F. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 207, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Rakov, F. Chen, S. A. Ferdousi, H. Li, T. Pathirana, A. N. Simonov, P. C. Howlett, R. Atkin and M. Forsyth, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Shiflett and E. J. Maginn, AlChE J., 2017, 63, 4722–4737 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Chen, P. Li and T.-S. Chung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 11796–11804 CrossRef CAS .
K. Friess, J. C. Jansen, F. Bazzarelli, P. Izák, V. Jarmarová, M. Kačírková, J. Schauer, G. Clarizia and P. Bernardo, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 415–416, 801–809 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, L. Ansaloni, J. J. Ryan, R. J. Spontak and L. Deng, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1391–1404 RSC .
L. Liang, Q. Gan and P. Nancarrow, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 450, 407–417 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fam, J. Mansouri, H. Li, J. Hou and V. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7389–7400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fam, J. Mansouri, H. Li and V. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 537, 54–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bara, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 9919–9924 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Bara, R. D. Noble and D. L. Gin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 4607–4610 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé, D. Mecerreyes, C. S. R. Freire, L. P. N. Rebelo and I. M. Marrucho, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 428, 260–266 CrossRef .
L. C. Tomé, M. A. Aboudzadeh, L. P. N. Rebelo, C. S. R. Freire, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10403–10411 RSC .
R. M. Teodoro, L. C. Tomé, D. Mantione, D. Mecerreyes and I. M. Marrucho, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 552, 341–348 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé, D. C. Guerreiro, R. M. Teodoro, V. D. Alves and I. M. Marrucho, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 549, 267–274 CrossRef .
A. S. L. Gouveia, L. Ventaja, L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Membranes, 2018, 8, 124 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. L. Gouveia, E. Malcaitè, E. I. Lozinskaya, A. S. Shaplov, L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 7087–7096 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. L. Gouveia, M. Yáñez, V. D. Alves, J. Palomar, C. Moya, D. Gorri, L. C. Tomé and I. M. Marrucho, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 259, 118113 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Shaplov, S. M. Morozova, E. I. Lozinskaya, P. S. Vlasov, A. S. L. Gouveia, L. C. Tomé, I. M. Marrucho and Y. S. Vygodskii, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 580–591 RSC .
A. Ito, T. Yasuda, X. Ma and M. Watanabe, Polym. J., 2017, 49, 671–676 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ito, T. Yasuda, T. Yoshioka, A. Yoshida, X. Li, K. Hashimoto, K. Nagai, M. Shibayama and M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 7112–7120 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hayashi, M. L. Thomas, K. Hashimoto, S. Tsuzuki, A. Ito and M. Watanabe, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 1579–1589 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Mittenthal, B. S. Flowers, J. E. Bara, J. W. Whitley, S. K. Spear, J. D. Roveda, D. A. Wallace, M. S. Shannon, R. Honee, R. Martens and D. T. Daly, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 5055–5069 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. O’Harra, I. Kammakakam, E. M. Devriese, D. M. Noll, J. E. Bara and E. M. Jackson, Membranes, 2019, 9, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. O’Harra, I. Kammakakam, D. M. Noll, E. M. Turflinger, G. P. Dennis, E. M. Jackson and J. E. Bara, Membranes, 2020, 10, 51 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Abedini, E. Crabtree, J. E. Bara and C. H. Turner, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 11377–11389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Szala-Bilnik, A. Abedini, E. Crabtree, J. E. Bara and C. H. Turner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 7455–7463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Carlisle, W. M. McDanel, M. G. Cowan, R. D. Noble and D. L. Gin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1294–1296 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. McDanel, M. G. Cowan, N. O. Chisholm, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 492, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
K. Friess, M. Lanč, K. Pilnáček, V. Fíla, O. Vopička, Z. Sedláková, M. G. Cowan, W. M. McDanel, R. D. Noble, D. L. Gin and P. Izak, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 528, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Moghadam, E. Kamio and H. Matsuyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 525, 290–297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, C. Zhang, Y. Yu, T. Hao, H. Wang, X. Ding and J. Meng, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 593, 117405 CrossRef CAS .
F. Moghadam, E. Kamio, A. Yoshizumi and H. Matsuyama, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13658–13661 RSC .
I. Kammakakam, J. E. Bara, E. M. Jackson, J. Lertxundi, D. Mecerreyes and L. C. Tomé, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5954–5965 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kammakakam, J. E. Bara and E. M. Jackson, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 5067–5076 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Kusuma, M. K. Macala, J. Liu, A. M. Marti, R. J. Hirsch, L. J. Hill and D. Hopkinson, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 545, 292–300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, J. B. Yu, Z. D. Dai and L. Y. Deng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5261–5268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. V. Singh, M. G. Cowan, W. M. McDanel, Y. Luo, R. Zhou, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 509, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Dunn, Z. X. Shi, R. F. Zhou, D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 4704–4708 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Nabais, A. P. S. Martins, V. D. Alves, J. G. Crespo, I. M. Marrucho, L. C. Tomé and L. A. Neves, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 222, 168–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Sampaio, A. R. Nabais, L. C. Tomé and L. A. Neves, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 308–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Robeson, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 320, 390–400 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Rowe, L. M. Robeson, B. D. Freeman and D. R. Paul, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 58–69 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Ren and C. F. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805924 CrossRef .
E. Bihar, T. Roberts, E. Ismailova, M. Saadaoui, M. Isik, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, D. Mecerreyes, T. Hervé, J. B. De Graaf and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1600251 CrossRef .
S. Velasco-Bosom, N. Karam, A. Carnicer-Lombarte, J. Gurke, N. Casado, L. C. Tomé, D. Mecerreyes and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, J. Guo, Z. Liu, Z. Sun, Y. Wu, L. Liu and F. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax0648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, Y. J. Tan, S. Li, W. W. Lee, H. Guo, Y. Cai, C. Wang and B. C. K. Tee, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 75–82 CrossRef .
Y. J. Son, J. W. Bae, H. J. Lee, S. Bae, S. Baik, K.-Y. Chun and C.-S. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6013–6021 RSC .
Z. Cao, H. Liu and L. Jiang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 912–918 RSC .
S. Hong, Y. Yuan, C. Liu, W. Chen, L. Chen, H. Lian and H. Liimatainen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 550–560 RSC .
Q. Thiburce, L. Porcarelli, D. Mecerreyes and A. J. Campbell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 233302 CrossRef .
J. D. Mota-Morales and E. Morales-Narváez, Matter, 2021, 4, 2141–2162 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Tomé and D. Mecerreyes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 8465–8478 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Present address: LAQV-REQUIMTE, Chemistry Department, NOVA School of Science and Technology, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. Email: liliana.tome@fct.unl.ptThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Liliana C. Tomé
	Dr Liliana C. Tomé received her MSc in Materials Derived from Renewable Resources (2008) from University of Aveiro and a PhD in Chemical Engineering (2014) ITQB NOVA, Portugal. After a post-doc (2015–2018) at ITQB, she moved to POLYMAT – University of the Basque Country (Spain) with a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship. In 2020, she joined LAQV-REQUIMTE, NOVA School of Science and Technology|FCT NOVA (Lisbon), where she is an Assistant Researcher. She received the L’Oréal Portugal Medal of Honor for Women in Science 2020. Her areas of research are centered on iongels and poly(ionic liquid)-based materials for gas separation and bioelectronics.

Luca Porcarelli
	Dr Luca Porcarelli is a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Postdoctoral Fellow at POLYMAT, University of the Basque Country. He received a MS in Chemistry from the University of Bologna and a PhD from the Polytechnic University of Turin. His research interests focus on the design of polymer electrolytes and their application in the field of energy storage and bioelectronics.

Jason E. Bara
	Professor Jason Bara received his BS in Chemical Engineering from Virginia Commonwealth University and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Colorado at Boulder. He has authored more than 125 peer-reviewed research publications and 6 book chapters on the following topics: separations, ionic liquids, polymer membranes, nanostructured materials, and chemical process engineering. He has also been awarded 11 U.S. patents for discoveries in these areas. In recognition of his research, he has received major awards from the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and chemical engineering education.

Maria Forsyth
	Prof. Maria Forsyth (Fellow Australian Academy of Sciences) is an Alfred Deakin Professorial Fellow at Deakin University and an Ikerbasque Visiting Professorial Fellow at the University of the Basque Country. Professor Forsyth has worked at the forefront of energy materials research and has consistently made breakthrough discoveries, including in polymer electrolytes, ionic liquids and organic plastic crystals. Her research has focused on understanding the phenomenon of charge transport in these materials and at the metal/electrolyte interfaces present in all electrochemical applications.

David Mecerreyes
	Prof. David Mecerreyes is an Ikerbasque Research Professor at POLYMAT-University of the Basque Country (Spain). He received his PhD from University of Liege in 1998 and carried out a postdoc (1998–2000) at IBM Almaden Research Center (California). Since 2010 he is at POLYMAT where he is the leader of the Innovative Polymers Group. His area of expertise is polymer synthesis of ionic and electroactive polymers, such as poly(ionic liquid)s, polymer electrolytes, redox polymers and PEDOT type conductive polymers. Current research interests involve the application of innovative polymers in emerging technologies such as organic batteries and bioelectronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures and abbreviations of selected ILs (top), protic ILs (middle) and DES (bottom) used to create diverse iongel materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of different types of iongels and chemical structures of gelators.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Ionic conductivity and (b) DMTA analysis vs. temperature of iongels containing PEGDA and 90, 80 and 70 wt% ILE ([C3mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI salt). Adapted with permission from Fdz de Añastro et al.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) CO2 and N2 solubilities of iongel membranes prepared with poly(DADMA C(CN)3) (PIL) and 20, 40, 60 wt% [C2mim][C(CN)3] (IL). Adapted with permission from Tomé et al.110 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Images of emerging iongels with additional properties or functionalities. Adapted with permission from (a) Noro et al.119 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Li et al.120 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) D’Angelo et al.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Tamate et al.102 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Del Água et al.122 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) Ziółkowski et al.123 Copyright 2012, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  Iongel materials processed using different methods. Adapted with permission from: (a) Ha et al.151 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society, (b) Wang et al.147 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, (c) Kim et al.152 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, (d) Zhong et al.153 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, (e) Wong et al.154 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons and (f) Ye et al.155 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of SLA 3D printing of an iongel, (b–d) free standing iongels printed in the form of three different objects, (e and f) printed features of the order of 200 μm. Reprinted with permission from Ahmed et al.166 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  New applications of iongels. (a) Electrodes for cutaneous electrophysiology. Adapted with permission from Isik et al.169 Copyright 2015, Royal Chemistry Society; (b) organic transistors. Adapted with permission from Jo et al.145 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons; (c) all-solid-state rechargeable sodium batteries. Adapted with permission from Fdz De Añastro et al.106 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) flexible supercapacitors. Adapted with permission from Zhang et al.16 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons; (e) olefin-facilitated transport membranes. Reprinted with permission from Tomé et al.170 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) CO2 separation. Adapted from Martins et al.111	 

 	Fig. 8  Iongel-based electrolytes for lithium metal batteries. (a) Chemical structure, (b) schematic illustration and (c) SEM picture of a bicontinuous nanostructure iongel based on 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMITFSI), lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) and poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide). Reprinted and adapted with permission from Schulze et al.182 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of a hierarchical poly(ionic liquid)-based iongel electrolyte (HPILSE) and its main components. Reprinted and adapted with permission from Zhou et al.187 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Iongel-based on PVDF–HFP, [C2mpyr][FSI] IL and NaFSI for sodium metal batteries: (a) iongel chemical structure and preparation schematic, (b) charge and discharge profiles of a sodium metal/Na3V2(PO4)3 battery at different current rates, (c) long-term cycling performance of a sodium metal/Na3V2(PO4)3 battery at fixed 1C-rate for 150 cycles. Reprinted with permission from Mendes et al.197 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Photocurrent curves and power conversion efficiency curve for a dye sensitized solar cell based on PEO, [C2mim][TFSI] and NaI. Reprinted with permission from Nair et al.180 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Ionic conductivity of various iongel families represented on an Arrhenius plot. The solid line is a guide for the eye that represents the target conductivity of iongel electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 11  Iongel-based CO2 separation membranes. (a) Formation of a bicontinuous nanostructure consisting of ionic and non-ionic domains in IL/sulfonated polyimide iongels. Reprinted with permission from Ito et al.232 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (b) fixed-site facilitated CO2 transport through epoxide-amine PIL/IL iongels. Reprinted with permission from Cowan et al.20 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (c) double-network iongel containing an amino acid IL as the CO2 carrier. Reprinted with permission from Moghadam et al.244 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) anionic PIL/IL iongel membranes with cross-linked PEGDA network. Reprinted with permission from Kammakakam et al.245 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  CO2 separation efficiencies of iongel membranes represented on (a) CO2/N2, (b) CO2/CH4 and (c) CO2/H2 Robeson plots. Data from ref. 110, 111, 215–218, 220–228, 232–236, 239, 241, 243, 245 and 247–252 are illustrated and the upper bounds were adapted from Robeson253 and Rowe et al.254 Note that the majority of the data points are results of dry single gas studies.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of the inject printing process and printed electrodes on a commercial textile. (b) Images of pristine textile, textile with 8 layers of PEDOT:PSS, and textile with 8 layers of PEDOT:PSS and 5 layers of cholinium lactate-based iongel. (c) Electrocardiogram (ECG) data acquired under different conditions: static recoding at t0 in the top left corner; static recording at t0 + 40 days in the top right corner; and dynamic recording under repeated hand motion at t0 + 40 days in the bottom center. Reprinted with permission from Bihar et al.256 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Application of iongels in wearable devices. (a) Transparent iongel gloves for signaling and monitoring sign language. (b) An iongel glove was used as a mouse controller. Reprinted with permission from Son et al.260 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
ChCl	Choline chloride
CH4	Methane
CO2	Carbon dioxide
DBA	Dibutyl adipate
DES	Deep eutectic solvents
DMTA	Dynamic mechanical thermal analysis
ECG	Electrocardiography
EMG	Electromyography
EGDMA	Ethylene glycol dimethacrylate
H2	Hydrogen
H2S	Hydrogen sulphide
ILs	Ionic liquids
ILE	Ionic liquid electrolyte
MILs	Methacryloxy-based ionic liquid monomers
MMA	Methyl methacrylate
MOFs	Metal organic frameworks
N2	Nitrogen
O2	Oxygen
PA	Polyamide
PAN	Poly(acrylonitrile)
PBA	Poly(butyl acrylate)
PDMS	Poly(dimethylsiloxane)
PDADMA	Poly(diallyldimethylammonium)
PEA	Poly(ethyl acrylate)
PEO	Poly(ethylene oxide)
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PEGDA	Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate
PEGDMA	Poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate
PET	Poly(ethylene terephthalate)
PI	Polyimide
PILs	Poly(ionic liquid)s
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PNIPAM	Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PS	Poly(styrene)
PVA	Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
PVDF–HFP	Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)
SILMs	Supported ionic liquid membranes
SLA	Stereolithography
TFC	Thin-film composite

t
Li
	Li+ transference number
UPy	Ureido-pyrimidinone
UV	Ultraviolet
12-HSA	12-hydroxystearic acid
[Rnmim]+	1-Alkyl-3-methylimidazolium
[Rnmpyr]+	1-Alkyl-3-methylpyrrolidinium
[Rnmpip]+	1-Alkyl-3-methylpiperidinium
[Pm.n.o.p]+	Tetraalkylphosphonium
[Nm.n.o.p]+	Tetraalkylammonium
[Ch]+	Cholinium
[Br]−	Bromide
[Cl]−	Chloride
[TFSI]−	Bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide
[FSI]−	Bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide
[PF6]−	Hexafluorophosphate
[BF4]−	Tetrafluoroborate
[EtSO4]−	Ethyl sulfate
[CF3SO3]−	Trifluoromethanesulfonate
[N(CN)2]−	Dicyanamide
[C(CN)3]−	Tricyanomethanide
[B(CN)4]−	Tetracyanoborate
[(MeO)HPO2]−	Methylphosphonate
[FeCl4]−	Tetrachloroferrate
[Ac]−	Acetate
[Lac]−	Lactate
[Pro]−	Prolinate
Footnote
† Present address: LAQV-REQUIMTE, Chemistry Department, NOVA School of Science and Technology, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal. Email: liliana.tome@fct.unl.pt

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
